Dr. CONANT's SERMONS Preached on Several Occasions.

IMPRIMATUR.

Geo. Royse, R.Rmo in Christo Patri ac Dom. Dom. Johanni Archiep. Cant. a
Sacris Domest.
Mart. 14. 1692/3.
SERMONS Preached on Several Occasions.

By JOHN CONANT, D. D.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell, and Tho. Cockerill; At the Rose and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the Three Legs in the Poultrey
over against Stocks-Market. MDCXCIII.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF NORTHAMPTON; AND More especially to those of the Parish
of All Saints there.
Christian Friends and Neighbors,
THough my great Age, and the Infirmities attending it, have lately constrained
me to quit my relation to you, yet I still account my self obliged to endeavor
to promote your spiritual welfare what I may. In order whereunto, I here lay
before you some few of those plain and practical Sermons which I formerly
preached unto you; hoping that they may take better effect, than when you heard
them from the Pulpit; which that they may so do, is the unfeigned desire and
earnest Prayer of

Your truly loving Friend and Servant, JOHN CONANT.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
IT may be expected by those that knew the Reverend Author of these Sermons,
and the public Station he was in for several years in the University of
Oxford, as Divinity Professor there, that he should have gratified the World
with another sort of Work, I mean his Lectures which he there read, and were
composed with great Learning, Accuracy and Judgment. But that it seems is not
so agreeable to his native modesty, who chooses rather to live and die in a kind
of obscurity, than be set as a city upon an hill; and values himself more upon
the relation he had to a Parochial Cure, and the Capacity he was in of doing
good to the Souls of men, than of being in one of the most public Stations in
the Church: And in which, since by the privation of his Sight, and other
Infirmities of Age, he has been no longer able to serve, he thought, by
publishing some Practical Discourses preached in that Auditory, he might,
though he be in a sense dead, yet speak, and be useful among them.

The Discourses are such as he usually composed, plain and practical, and
suited to the meanest Capacity.

And if there be any thing that is not of that nature (as there is very little)
and which the Author, had he had the last perusal, would have revised; the
Error is to be imputed to the Publisher, to whose care and choice they were
committed.

The Discourses sometimes are large, and comprehend several Sermons, though
under the title of one, but it was not well to be prevented; and which the
Reader however may well dispense with.

The Two last Sermons are Occasional, but the occasion such as will render them
profitable to all.

John Williams:

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. JOHN III. 19, 20. AND this is the condemnation, That light is come
into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds
were evil. For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. Page 1.
PART II. Verse 20. Every one that does evil hates the light. page 25. SERMON
II. JER. XIII. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots?
then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil. page 59. SERMON III.
EPHESIANS. V. 15, 16. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, Redeeming the time, because the days are evil. page 89.
SERMON IV. 3 Ep. JOH. Ver. 3. Beloved, thou do faithfully whatsoever thou
do to the brethren, and to strangers. page 183. SERMON V. PROVE. XXII. 2. The
rich and the poor meet together; the Lord is the maker of them all. page 219.
SERMON VI. 2 CHRONICLES. XXXIII. 10, 11, 12, 13. And the Lord spoke to Manasseh, and
to his people: but they would not hearken. Wherefore the Lord brought upon them
the Captains of the Host of the King of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the
thorns, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon. And when he was
in affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and humhled himself greatly before
the God of his Fathers, And prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him, and
heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom.
Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God. page 257.
SERMON VII. 2 CHRONICLES. XXXIII. 10, 11, 12, 13. And the Lord spoke to Manasseh
and his people: but they would not hearken, etc. page 337. SERMON VIII. LAM.
III. 39, 40. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of
his sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. page 403.
SERMON IX. LAM. III. 40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the
Lord. page 463. SERMON X. EZRA IX. 13, 14. After all that is come upon us for
our evil deeds, and for our great trespass; seeing that thou our God have
punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and have given us such a
deliverance as this: Should we again break thy Commandments, and join in
affinity with the people of these abominations? Would not thou be angry with
us till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping.
SERMON XI. HAG. II. 6, 7, 8, 9. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Yet once, it is
a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and
the dry land. And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall
come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of Hosts. The
silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts. The glory of
this latter house shall be greater than of the former, says the Lord of Hosts:
and in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of Hosts.

The First Sermon.
JOHN III. 19, 20. And this is the condemnation, That light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.

For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved.


I May take it for granted, That by light here, we are to understand the light
of the Gospel: And yet hereby Christ is not excluded, who is called (...), the
light, in the seventh and eighth Verses of the first Chapter of this
Evangelist, and (...), the true light, v. 9. Both these lights may well go
together; Christ the Sun of ousness, and the Gospel the Rays which he sends
forth to enlighten the dark World.

Besides, as Christ conveyeth to us the Gospel, so the Gospel conveyeth Christ
unto us, and offers him unto the World; in both which respects it is called the
Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1.7.
Gal. 1.7. he being, as the Author, so the principal subject of it. Now both
these Lights are come into the World; Christ by his Incarnation, and together
with him the Gospel, i. e. a more full and clear discovery of the way of
Salvation by Christ, than before.

That the light in both senses is come into the World, and finds no better
reception; This is The condemnation, (...), the judgment, according to the
proper acception of the word; but here (...) for (...), Judgment, for
Condemnation, by an usual Synechdoche, and so our Translators have rendered it,
looking rather at the sense, than at the immediate propriety of the word.
Again, This is The condemnation, that is, by a Metonymy, the cause of
condemnation, that which deserves, meritoriously procures and brings on
condemnation. Lastly, This is The condemnation, not solely and exclusively as
to all other things, but in the sense that shall be afterward mentioned when I
come to speak to that particular.

The words of my Text (not to spend time in any unnecessary Preface to what I
have to say) we may conveniently resolve into these four Propositions.

1. That light is come into the world. 2. That men love darkness rather than
light. 3. That the reason why men love darkness rather than light, is, because
their deeds are evil. 4. That this is the condemnation, that though light be
come into the world, yet men love darkness rather than light.
Passing by the three former, the last of these Propositions is that which I
intend at present to insist on, as being the chief thing intended in this
portion of holy Scripture. Concerning the sense of which Proposition, a few
words will be necessary to be premised, before I proceed to lay down the
grounds thereof. This is The condemnation, not solely, and exclusively as to
all other things, as if nothing else could condemn a man, but signally and
emphatically, (...), the great meritorious cause of the severest punishment. I
say, the rejection of the light of the Gospel, or not giving it due
entertainment, is not the only thing that condemns men. For,

1. Those Heathens unto whom the light of the Scriptures never came, shall not
therefore be exempted from punishment: The Apostle has taught us, That as many
as have sinned without the law, Romans 2.12.
shall also perish without the law. Their sins against their natural light, and
the Law of Nature written in their hearts, shall condemn them; there shall be
no need of calling in the assistance of the Law externally promulged, and
written in Tables of Stone; much less of the Gospel, to give evidence against
them.

It Is true, if the Gospel were never offered them, and they shut up under a
moral impossibility of being acquainted with it, we cannot apprehend how their
not believing should be charged upon them as their sin. Aquinas has rightly
stated this matter; 22dae Quaest. 10. Artic. 1.
Si infidelitas sumatur secundum negationem puram, si cut in illis qui nihil
audiverunt de fide, non habet rationem peccati: pure negative infidelity, or a
mere not believing in those who never heard any thing of the Gospel, has not
the nature of sin. And this was likewise St. Austin's judgment, as appears by
the Exposition he gives of the words of our Savior, John 15.22. If I had not
come unto them, they had had no sin: Loquitur de peccato quo non crediderunt in
Christum, Our Savior speaks, says he, of the sin of not believing in
Christ. Though they had been guilty of many other sins, yet their not believing
had not been imputed to them. And the reason hereof is evident, because they
had never a power in Adam of believing that which was never made known unto
them; there being a simple incompossibility and repugnancy in the nature of the
thing, that a man should by faith assent to, and embrace that, which he was
never in the least acquainted with, which was never as much as propounded to
him to be the object of his faith. How shall we believe on him of whom we have
not heard? Romans 10.14. It Is a question that cannot be answered. Adam himself,
with all that strength which he received from God, could not have done it; and
therefore neither can that be required of his Posterity, which he himself never
received.

2. As for such as have the Gospel published to them, and finally persevere in
unbelief, neither is their unbelief the only sin for which they are condemned.
What sober man can think that one sin can expunge another? that men's unbelief
should take off and extinguish the guilt of all their other sins, so as none of
them should at all come under consideration, when Christ pronounces the
condemnatory Sentence? They who should entertain so wild a phansy, must have
forgotten the form of the Proceedings at the last day, as Christ himself has
described it, Matthew. 25. where express mention is made of other sins, as the
ground of the Sentence to be then pronounced.

Yet I deny not but that in a limited sense, wicked men living under the light
of the Gospel, may be said to be condemned only for their unbelief; because if
they had believed, none of their other sins should have condemned them. But
now, they not believing, the guilt of all their other sins against the Law
abides on them; and besides, there is an addition of further guilt by their
great sin against the Gospel; and this their sin against the Gospel, is that
which presses them most heavily, and has the sorest influence upon the final
Sentence for the inflaming and heightening of it.

So then, these things being thus premised, we have the sense of the
Proposition before us. This is The condemnation, the matter and meritorious
cause of the most sore and dreadful condemnation, that light being come into
the world, the Gospel being published, and Christ in the Gospel being tendered
to the Sons of men, they slight and refuse this light, preferring darkness
before it, and choosing rather to continue in their sins, though it cost them
dear, than to embrace Christ to their everlasting bliss and happiness.

Now the grounds of the Proposition, together with the equity of that severity
which it imports, will further appear unto us, if we take into consideration
these ensuing particulars.

1. It Is light that is refused, and refused with an affront put upon it,
darkness being preferred before it. Now in this alone there are several things
which do not a little aggravate a man's sin, and by consequence, heighten his
punishment.

1. When a man goes on against light, there is more of the formality of sin,
than where light is wanting: There is a direct and plain opposition against the
Rule, an intentional (...), or irregularity: whereas, in case of ignorance, the
Rule indeed was violated materially, but not formally and wittingly as such.
Our Savior lays much stress upon this for the greatning of a man's sin. Joh.
9.41.
If ye were blind, ye should have no sin; that is, none in comparison of what
now you have. And to the same effect is that of St. James, To him that knows
to do good, Chapter 4.17.
and does it not, to him it is sin; that is, sin to the purpose, sin of no
ordinary complexion.

2. What is done against light, has not only an inconformity to the Rule, but
some degree of contempt thereof. Wherefore in such cases God looks upon himself
as despised. Why have thou despised the commandment of the Lord? said he to
David, when he had knowingly and deliberately sinned, 2 Samuel 12.9.

3. It argues Corruption to have gotten head, and to have grown up to a great
measure of strength and maturity; it argues such a person to be set upon sin,
and wholly bent to gratify himself therein, whatsoever shall come of it. When
the light it self shall stand in a man's way, and flash in his face, and yet he
will go on, he acts as one so resolved to sin, as nothing shall take him off.
This, in the language of the Scipture, is to sin presumptuously, by which a man
under the Law was judged to have reproached the Lord; in regard whereof, no
less punishment was appointed than the utter cutting him off from among his
people, Numb. 15.30, 31.

And thus far I have only insisted on the consideration of light more
generally: It Is light that is refused and contemned; and therefore neither the
sin, nor the punishment of the person so offending, can be small.

2. It Is not any kind of light, but Gospel light, that is so ill treated; and
this has yet much more in it, than all that has been hitherto mentioned.

1. The light of the Gospel is a clearer light. All other light is but darkness
to this. The Heathens had the light of Nature for their guide; but yet they
were still in darkness till the Gospel enlightened them; for the very Errand of
the Gospel to them was, to open their eyes, Acts 26.18.
and to turn them from darkness to light. The Jews under the dispensations of
the Law, had much more light; and yet were heavenly things in great part so
veiled and wrapped up in Types and Shadows, as their condition to that of
Gospel Times seems to have been but as the morning spread upon the Mountains,
to the noon daylight.

2. It Is a light that presents to our view the most excellent and most
desirable things. Pardon of sin, Acts 10.43. Peace with God, Romans 5.1. Eternal
life, John 3.36. A kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. An inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1.4. Such things as
neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor have entered into the heart of
man to conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9.

3. These excellent things which the light of the Gospel sets before us, are
such as were by infinite Wisdom and unspeakable Love designed and contrived for
us before the foundations of the World were laid. The most wise and gracious
God did in nothing more discover the unsearchable Treasures of his Wisdom, and
the Riches of his Grace, than in the Contrivance of our Salvation in such a
way, as in which Mercy and Justice so admirably meet together, and
Righteousness and Peace kiss each other. We cannot therefore refuse or slight
these excellent things, without a manifest disparagement of the Wisdom and Love
of God; as if neither the one, nor the other, were considerable herein; and as
if after all that God has done, the things so wifely designed, and graciously
proffered, were not worth our acceptance.

4. The Gospel presses the entertainment of these excellent things with the
most cogent and forcible Arguments. It Is not laid before us as a matter of
indifferency, whether we will embrace what is tendered, or refuse it. We are
told and assured, that as the acceptance of the things proffered will render us
unspeakably blessed and happy to eternity, so the refusal of them will
certainly make us everlastingly and unconceivably miserable. He that believes,
shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16.16.

5. Besides the external tender of these things in the Gospel, the Spirit of
God usually more or less accompanies the outward Ministration of the Gospel,
inwardly working together with it, treating with us, and soliciting the
matters of our peace by Enlightnings and Convictions, by stirring up good
Motions and Affections, Purposes and Resolutions, which makes our refusal of
mercy after all this, much more worthy of the severest punishment.

6. Add to all this, the consideration of the greatness of the Person who at
first published the Gospel, and made tender of those excellent things to the
World himself, while here on Earth; and also still continues to do it by his
Servants. The Lord of Life and Glory, the Eternal Son of God, who is over all,
God blessed for ever, came in person from Heaven out of the Bosom of his
Father, on this very Errand, that he might make reconciliation for sin, Dan.
9.^4.
and bring in everlasting righteousness. And offer the fruits and benefit of
all to Mankind, making this general Proclamation, Whosoever believes shall be
saved.

If but an Earthly Prince should send his only Son to the remotest Parts of his
Dominions, on purpose to make tender of some great thing to one of his meanest
Subjects, what an indignity, and how intolerable an affront would it be, if
that his tender should be slighted! But here the King Eternal sends his only
Son from Heaven to offer us Everlasting Life, and we entertain him no
otherwise, than as if he came in a needless Embassy; for so much our most
unworthy carriage toward him imports, if we do not accept of his Tenders. This
the Scripture insists on as a circumstance that carries in it no small
aggravation of the sin of our unbelief. If the word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward; how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at
first began to be spoken to us by the Lord! Heb. 2.2, 3. Heb. 12.25.
And again, If they escaped not who refused him who spoke from earth; much more
shall not we escape, if we refuse him who speaks from heaven.

Now put all these things together, and I see not how you can choose but
conclude, That as there is no sin like that which is committed against the
light of the Gospel, so there is no punishment like unto that which will be
inflicted for this sin: or, That this is the condemnation, That light is come
into the world, and men love darkness rather than light. And so I proceed to
the application of what has been spoken.

USE 1.
First then, To speak to the more dissolute Professors of the Christian
Religion; From the Premises we may infer, That it is a most vain and empty Plea
which many loose Christians think to help themselves with at the day of their
account to God. They have had their birth and education where the light of the
Gospel shines; and under the influences of that light they have lived. As soon
as they came into the World, they were in Baptism dedicated to Christ; in that
Ordinance they gave their Names to Christ, and listed themselves among his
Followers and Soldiers; and they never afterward renounced him, but made
profession of him all their days. What reason therefore have they to make any
question but that Christ will own them? They have not been Heathens or
Mahumetans: Wherefore, though Christ should turn those wretched Infidels into
Hell by thousands; yet as for themselves, being Christians, they hope they may
well expect more favor from him. Should he deal with them as with Heathens? as
with those who never wore his Livery? who never made profession of him? who
never knew him, or heard of his Name? This were hard measure, and such as they
think they need not fear at the hands of so merciful a Savior. Who should go
to Heaven, if not such as themselves? whom should Christ save, if not
Christians? Alas poor Souls! You think to plead as those who make account that
Christ is much beholding to you for vouchsafing to be called by his Name. But
forasmuch as professing to know Christ, in your Works you deny him; forasmuch
as while you call him your Savior, you refuse to be ruled by him as your Lord;
forasmuch as notwithstanding all the love you pretend to have for him, and his
Gospel, your Actions are such as proclaim you to be those who love darkness
rather than light, and who hate true Christianity, the reality and power of
that which you make profession of; had not Christ been more beholding to you,
if you had never so much as in external profession owned him? If you had never
been called by that blessed Name, which by your unholy lives you have
reproached and profaned? Many Heathens were never in a capacity of dishonouring
that Name, as having never had the knowledge of it; and your knowledge of
Christ has been of no other advantage to you, than only to enable you
knowingly to slight him, and trample his precious Blood under your feet. Thus
you throw dirt in you Savior's face, while you would seem to honor him. Quid
est aliud sanctum vocabulum sine merito quam ornamentum in luto, says Salvian,
in his 4th Book de Gubernatione Dei; The sacred Name of Christian without faith
and holiness, what is it but an Ornament trodden under foot in the mire, or a
precious Jewel which you have taken and drawn along the Kennel? But you
debaucht and vicious Persons, you wild Ranters, rather than sober Christians,
speak out your inmost thoughts: Do you really make account of claiming special
interest in Christ? and do you in earnest expect to be owned by him? With what
face can you do it, while you continue to be as you are? Caesar being at a
Banquet, where he was but meanly entertained, and no way so as was suitable to
the dignity of so great a Person; when the entertainment was over, instead of
thanking him who had invited him, he only gave him this check in his ear, Non
put abam me tibi tam familiarem; I had not thought that we two had been so
familiar. And will not Christ thank you much in the like manner, for having
been called by his Name, and for reckoning your self among those that belong to
him, and have a special interest in him? Do you not know how he will at the
last day entertain you, and in what manner he will declare the sense he has of
your kindness? Thou lewd and profligate Person, who call me Lord, who
numbrest thy self among my Disciples, and the most intimare of my Retinue; how
long have we been so well acquainted? Thou ^mmon Swearer, thou intemperate and
unclean Person, thou scoffer at Religion, thou nominal Christian, but real
Enemy to the Gospel, and all that sincerely profess it; how durst thou make
mention of my Name, and take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be
reformed, and castest my words behind thy back? Be it known unto thee, thou
have been much mistaken in me, I own no such Friends or Followers as thou art;
Depart from me thou worker of iniquity, I know thee not. Oh most sad and
terrible Disappointment! when you shall be thus condemned, and turned into Hell
by him from whom all your Expectations of Salvation were! But yet this is not
all; you shall not only be adjudged to Hell with the Heathen that know not God,
and all the Families that call not on his Name; but you shall be more severely
handled in that place of Torment, than the very Heathens. The Condition of a
sober and temperate Heathen shall then be more tolerable, than that of a lewd
and vicious Christian. And is it not a most righteous thing with God that it
should be so? The Pagan World never had the light that you have been blessed
with: Pagans never had those many gracious Calls and Invitations to Faith and
Repentance which you have had: Pagans never had the tenders of those glorious
things which have in the Gospel been proffered you: The Terrors of the Law, and
the torments prepared in Hell for all the people of the World that forget God,
were never laid open, and set before their eyes, as they have been before
yours: Pagans never had experience of those strong Convictions, of those inward
Motions and Strivings of the Spirit of God with their Souls, which you have
had: And yet after all this, you are in many respects much worse than many
Heathens. And will you still think to plead, We are Christians, and should
Christ deal with us as with Heathens? I tell you once more, no; he will not
deal with you as with Heathens: As the Aggravations of your Sins have been
incomparably greater, Matthew. 11.22, 23, 24.
so shall your Punishment be; It shall be more tolerable in the day of judgment
for heathens, than for you.

USE 2.
In the second place, I shall speak unto those who know much, and are still in
the pursuit of more knowledge, but make little conscience of practicing what
they know.

From what has been delivered, we may also infer, how much it concerns these,
to add conscientious practice to their knowledge, and to endeavor that all
their Gifts may be seasoned with grace. The more knowledge any graceless Person
has, the greater without repentance will his future Torments be, and the more
intolerable his misery. You whose Spirits are with much fervor and intention
carried out after knowledge, and yet possibly so much slight and undervalue
Grace, as that you grudge to spend one hour in a serious enquiry into your
spiritual Estate; I beseech you consider what you are a-doing: While you are
adding Notion to Notion, and Conclusion to Conclusion, you are but heaping up
matter for your more just and heavy Condemnation; you are but preparing Whips
for your own backs. For he that knows his masters will, Luke. 12.47.
and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. One stripe the more for
every beam of light which was not improved to the ends for which it was
afforded. I speak not this to disparage knowledge, which is an excellent gift
of God, and a principal part of his Image in man; much less to dishearten any
in their pursuit of it; but to provoke them to a joint endeavor after grace
and knowledge, according to the Apostle's Exhortation, 2 Pet. 3.18. It was said
of Galba, who had a fine Wit, but a deformed Body, Ingenium Galbae male
habitat, Galba's good Wit has but an ill habitation. The same may I say of
excellent Gifts in a corrupt mind; It Is a thousand pities that so noble a Guest
should have no better Lodgings. Get your Soul adorned with grace, and then it
will be fitter to entertain Gifts. And to press this a little more upon you,
let me leave with you only these three Considerations.

1. If Knowledge be excellent and desirable, Grace is much more excellent, and
much more worthy to be the Object of our most raised desires. After the Apostle
had been discoursing of those extraordinary and miraculous Gifts, which in the
Primitive times God was pleased to pour out upon Believers, he makes way to his
following Discourse of love and grace by this commendatory Preface; 1 Cor.
12.31.
Yet show I unto you a more excellent way. You are digging and searching after
Knowledge, as after hid Treasure; and why not then much more after Grace, Luke
16.11.
which is the most precious and invaluable Treasure, the only true Riches?
Matthew. 23.23.
This ye ought to have done, and not to have left the other undone; as our
Savior speaks in another case. Yea, this ye ought much rather to have done, in
comparison whereof your pursuit of knowledge is but as the tything of mint and
cummin, compared with the most weighty matters of the law.

2. The more Knowledge you have, the more Grace you need. A little Grace will
not suffice you to manage a large stock of Knowledge. Your Knowledge is one of
your chiefest Talents for which you must be accountable; and it is impossible
you should so employ it, as to be able to give a comfortable account thereof
without a proportionable measure of Grace. The higher any man is lifted up in
parts and gifts, the more is he exposed to the violent assaults of manifold
Temptations; Temptations to Pride, Self-confidence, overvaluing of himself,
contempt of others, wicked abuse of his knowledge and parts to the service of
Satan, and the disservice of God, and his Church: And therefore no man has
more need of grace, of a plentiful measure of grace, than he that is most
accomplished with knowledge. (...), The more knowledge we have, the greater is
our danger, says Clem. Alex. in the 4th Book of his Stromates.

3. Unless you have grace together with your knowledge, the time will come,
when you shall wish that you had been as ignorant, as you are graceless. Quam
nescirem literas! How could I wish that I had never learnt to write or read,
was the mild and compassionate Speech of an Emperor, when he was desired to set
his Hand for the Execution of a Malefactor. What he said out of a tender and
merciful regard to the Life of another man, that shall the graceless and
finally impenitent knowing man one day say, out of the anguish and horror of
his own Soul; Vtinam nescissem literas! Oh that I had never known my Letters,
and that my Parents had never set me to School. Oh that I had been confined all
my days to some poor Cottage, or dark Corner, where I might scarce have known
my right Hand from my left: that I had been the most silly, ignorant,
contemptible Creature in the World, a mere Idiot, or natural Fool, rather than
by my sins against so much knowledge, to have procured to my self this direful
access to my Torments. You may have heard of a poor Idiot, who having never
uttered one serious word before, was heard to utter this short and pertinent
Petition, when he was going out of the World, Lord, require no more of me than
thou have given me. The ungodly knowing man, the profane Wit, the learned
Atheist, will have his mouth stopped; he will not be able to find so good a Plea
for himself, as that poor Idiot had. He has received much from the hand of
God, and much shall be required of him. And so I go on to what follows in the
20th Verse.

PART II.
Verse 20. Every one that does evil hates the light.
THE words are a Proposition so clearly and plainly expressed, that to endeavor
to make it plainer were but to lose time. Seeing therefore I cannot express it
in clearer terms, nor cast it into a better form, I shall even take it as it
lies, and so handle it; Every one that does evil hates the light. The Truth of
which Proposition I know not how I can better demonstrate, than by showing what
influence the light has upon men in reference to sin; and withal, how men
stand affected toward their sin.

1. The light, (I mean principally the light of the Gospel, of which our
Savior here speaks) discovers sin. There is a threefold light which discovers
sin; the light of Nature, the light of the Law, and the light of the Gospel.

(1.) The very light of Nature does in some measure discover sin. The Gentiles
who have not the law, Romans 2.14, 15.
do by nature the things contained in the law, their consciences in the mean
while accusing or excusing them, according as their actions are more or less
conformable to the dictates of the light of nature in them. This light was full
and perfect, as it was at first set up in man by his Creator; but is by the
fall now become weak and imperfect, so that in many things it leaves a man at a
great loss. That first light represented things to man exactly according to
their nature, so as by the help of it he could clearly and perfectly discern
between good and evil; but now that Primitive light being in great part
extinguished, the weak remainders of it represent good and evil in a dark and
obscure manner, so as by this light alone a man sees many times little better
than he who saw Men as Trees; Mar. 8.24.
yea worse a great deal, taking good for evil, and evil for good; light for
darkness, Isa. 5.20.
and darkness for light, as the Prophet speaks.

(2.) The light of the Law of God written, goes further in the discovery of
sin, in which respect the Apostle ascribes the knowledge of sin to the Law.
Romans 3.20.
The Law exceeds the light of Nature as to the discovery of sin, in a double
respect.

1. The Law discovers more sins than the mere light of Nature could. I had not
known sin, says the Apostle, Romans 7.7.
unless the law had said, Thou shall not covet. He had not known the sinfulness
of the inward motions to sin, at least such of them as go before the consent of
the will; the motus primo primi, as the Schools call them.

2. The Law makes a more full and clear discovery of those very sins which were
in some measure known by the light of Nature.

(3.) The light of the Gospel goes yet further in the discovery of sin, and in
some respects as much exceeds the Law herein, as the Law does the light of
Nature. For,

1. The light of the Gospel, as it is far greater and clearer, so it is of a more
piercing and penetrating nature to find out and discover sin, as the Noonday
light looks into many a dark corner, and exposes those things to our view
which before could not be discerned.

2. Gospel Administrations are accompanied with a more full Effusion of the
Spirit than was ordinarily under the Law. Now one special part of the Spirits
work being to convince of sin, John 16.8.
we may well conclude that the Spirit's Discovery and Convictions of sin under
the Gospel are more full and effectual.

3. The Gospel furnishes us with several Glasses in which we may behold sin
represented to us in a more lively manner than by the Law alone; and this,
whether we consider the filthiness or the heinousness of sin. These Glasses are
the Holiness, and the Justice of God.

1. The Holiness of God is so displayed and set forth in the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and in the Life of Christ, as never before. Hence it is that the
Scripture seems so to speak of this matter, as if God were little known until
Christ by his Heavenly Doctrine and Holy Conversation revealed him. No man has
seen God at any time; John 1.18.
the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, John 12.45, 46.
he has declared him. He that sees me, sees him that sent me; I am come as a
light into the world, that whosoever believes in me, should not abide in
darkness. Mat. 11.27
No man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him. 2 Cor. 3.18.
And the Apostle discoursing of the Glory and Excellency of the Evangelical
Administration beyond the Legal, says, That whereas they of old had a vail
upon their Hearts, and saw things but darkly, we all with open face as in a
glass behold the glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. And that he there
chiefly intends the Glory of his Holiness, we may collect from what follows;
and we are changed, says he, into the same image, from glory to glory, even as
by the Spirit of the Lord. Now contraries affording mutual light to one
another, the more we discern of the Holiness of God, the more filthy and
loathsome will sin appear to us. This we see exemplified in the Prophet Isaiah,
Isa. 6.3, 5.
who when he had seen the Lord sitting upon his Throne, and heard his Holiness
proclaimed by one of the Seraphims, crying, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of
Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory; in the sense of his sinfulness, he
cries out, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips.

2. Another Glass to behold sin in, is the Justice and Severity of God against
sin. As the Holiness of God shows us the filthiness of sin, so does his Justice
and Severity show us the Heinousness and abominable nature of it. But now the
Justice and Severity of God against sin was never so much discovered by all the
dreadful Threatenings of the Law, and terrible Judgments that have been
inflicted upon Sinners ever since the Fall of Adam to this day, nor will ever
be so much discovered by all the Sufferings of Millions in Hell to Eternity, as
by what God for our sins has laid upon his own Eternal and most dearly beloved
Son, who is over all God blessed for ever. The reason hereof is manifest and
undeniable; for the Creature will never be able fully to satisfy the Justice
of God by its endless Sufferings in Hell; if it could, why might it not be
released, and let out of Prison? But Christ has made full satisfaction to his
Father's Justice; so that we have in that satisfaction which he has presented
to his Father, in that satisfaction of infinite value, and in that alone, an
exact and adequate measure by which we may take the full dimensions of the
heinousness of Man's sin. Indeed what higher thing is imaginable by which we
might be led to the sight of the heinousness of sin, than that unparalled
severity of the most Righteous Judge of all the Earth against it, which induced
him to lay such a weight of punishment upon his only begotten Son, who is of
the same Divine Essence with himself, when having taken our Nature on him, he
undertook to bear what was due to us for our sins. By what has been said, we
see that the Gospel not only discovers sin, but also does it in a very signal
way, making such lively representations of the filthiness and heinousness
thereof, as neither the light of Nature, nor the Law of God; nor all the
dreadful Examples of God's Justice and Severity that ever have been, or ever
shall be, can make.

Let us now in the next place add hereunto, That men are naturally most
unwilling to see their sins, and to be convinced of them; and then it may be
presumed we will easily grant, that the light must in that respect be very
unacceptable to them. Such is every man's natural Pride and Self-love, that he
has no mind to know how bad he is. He is willing, if it be possible, to shut
his Eyes against his own deformities, that he may be able to hold up a good
Opinion of himself. Besides, as men desire not to know too much of their own
defects, so they would not have them known to others. Seeing therefore the same
light that discovers them to themselves, does also lay them open to others; it
is a thing not at all strange, that men, as long as they are wicked, and
indulge themselves in sin, should be no great Friends to the light. It concerns
those who have bad Wares, to get them into dark Shops, which may not discover
the faultiness of them. And so much of that first thing, The light, especially
that of the Gospel, makes discovery of men's sin, and that is it which they
cannot endure.

2. The light of the Gospel does not only discover men's sin, but calls upon
them to leave it. Mat. 3.2.
Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand, was the substance of his Preaching
who prepared the way for Christ, and ushered in Evangelical light Though God
never in the least approved of sin, yet in former Ages before the coming of his
Son into the World, he much winked at it, at least in the Gentile World; but
now he commands all men every where to repent. He lets the World know, Acts
16.30.
that in times of Gospel Light men must not expect that patience and
forbearance at his hands, which he was pleased to exercise toward those who
lived in darker Ages, and times of Ignorance. Barren Trees might long stand
before, Mat 3.10.
but now the Ax is laid to the root of the tree, and every tree that brings
not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire. The main
Errand and Design of the Gospel is, that men be turned from darkness to light,
Acts 26.18.
and from the power of Satan unto God. To this purpose is that of the Apostle,
Romans 13.12, 13, 14.
The night is far spent, the day is at hand; let us therefore cast off the
works of darkness, and put on the armor of light; let us walk honestly as in
the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not
in strife and envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. And again, Tit. 2.11, 12.
The grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared unto all men, teaching
us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present sent world. 2 Timothy 2 19.
And let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. But
this is that which the corrupt Heart of man can least of all endure. Men are
unwilling to see their sins, but much more unwilling to forsake them. Whence
else are those excuses which many frame when they are invited to come unto
Christ? One is engaged in this business, and it must be dispatched; he must be
dispensed with till it be over. Another is engaged in that Affair, Luke 14.18,
19, 20.
and he is not at leisure. Whence else are those downright and peremptory
Refusals? Joh. 5.40.
Ye will not come to me that ye might have life. Yea, you would not be gained
and prevailed with to come by the largest Proffers, by the most rich and
excellent Promises. The greatest Love and Tenderness, the most Compassionate
Solicitations and Importunities, are not able to overcome them into a
willingness; what to do? To be undone? No, to be made for ever; to be gathered
under the Wings of Christ's most tender Care and Love, that they might be
everlastingly Happy in the Fruition of him. That sin is the cause of this
peremptory refusal, cannot be denied; for nothing but sin could so bewitch and
transport them, that they should with so much obstinacy stand in their own
light, wilfully thrust away from themselves Everlasting Life, and forsake their
own Mercies. It Is agreed on, that all men naturally desire happiness; it is
Nature's Language, Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6.
Could men therefore reject Eternal Happiness and Glory upon any other
Consideration, than that the Terms on which it is offered seem to be too hard?
They must part with their sins if they will be happy; and O how hard a saying
is this to Flesh and Blood! The Friendship which is between the heart of man
and sin, being so strict and entire, can that light of the Gospel be welcome to
him whose Errand from Heaven is to make an everlasting separation between him
and his sins? Most clear it is, that wicked men, while such, cannot abide the
light; and that however they may endeavor to cover over their Enmity against
it with other pretensions, yet the true reason why they hate it, is the
wickedness of their hearts and lives; they therefore hate it because their
deeds are evil, as our Savior gives us an account of the ground of their
hatred thereof.

But it may here be objected, That the Holy Scriptures elsewhere seem to give
other reasons of men's not entertaining the light of the Gospel. Sometimes they
seem to impute it to the sublimity, and to the mysterious Nature of the great
Truths contained in the Gospel. 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Sometimes the Scriptures impute it to the subtilty and malice of
Satan darkening the minds of men. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this
world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious gospel of Christ should shine unto them. And lastly, otherwhile the
Scriptures speak of God's concealing the Mysteries of the Gospel from some men;
so our Savior speaking to his Father, says, Mat. 11.25
Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent. There being also these
other reasons of men's not embracing the light of the Gospel, how is it that our
Savior seems to lay the whole stress of this matter upon this, that men's deeds
are evil? To this I answer,

1. That it is not necessary that we should so understand our Savior, as if he
intended to make man's sin the sole or only cause why he hates the light, but
one principal cause. And that it is a principal cause thereof, has already
appeared from what has been spoken, and will yet more fully appear by what
shall be further spoken in answer to the Objections. Wherefore,

2. Though there may be some other causes of men's hating the light, and
preferring darkness before it; yet they may for the most part be some way or
other resolved into this which our Savior here mentions. Other things may
concur sometimes, but there is scarce any thing that has so general and almost
so perpetual an influence upon men's hating, declining, running away from,
opposing, and rejecting the light, as man's sin. That mostly all other causes
may be resolved into this, I shall endeavor to show, in answer to the
forementioned Objections.

As to the first of them, it is most true, that in Spiritual things there is a
great disproportion between the Intellective Faculty as now it is since the
Fall, and the Object. The Mysteries of the Gospel are high and sublime; our
understanding is dark, weak, and shallow. But,

1. Whence came this disproportion? Was it not very much from the sin of man at
first, who put out his own Eyes, wounded his Intellectuals, and weakened his
natural Powers? It cannot be denied but that Adam in the state of Innocence and
Integrity, though he could not have found out those deep Mysteries of the
Gospel concerning our Redemption by Christ, and the things relating thereunto,
they being things that have no natural cause from whence the highest created
reason might deduce or collect them; and many of them being things above
Nature, and such as depend merely upon the good pleasure of God unknown to us,
until by himself revealed; I say, though Adam could not by the strength of his
Reason and Natural Abilities have found out these deep things, yet it cannot be
denied but that if these things had been propounded to Adam to be assented to,
and believed upon the Authority of God revealing them, he both could and would
most readily have assented to them, because he had both a power and a readiness
of mind to believe whatsoever truth God should reveal. And this is all that in
these matters God requires of us. The deep things of the Gospel are not
propounded to us to be perfectly understood and comprehended by us; but they
being unfathomable by the longest Line of our Reason; all that God expects from
us, is, that we give our assent to them, and believe them; and this only
because he who can neither be deceived nor deceive, has revealed them. But as
the case now stands with us since the Fall, though these things are most
clearly revealed, and as such propounded to us, yet we will not believe them,
they are foolishness to us, as the Apostle speaks. So miserably are our Minds
taken up and prepossessed with a proud and fond Opinion of our selves, of our
own natural Ability to judge of these things, with false Principles, with
inveterate Prejudices, and rank Enmity against the Truth, and what not? that we
shut out the light, and forbid it entertainment with us.

2. Add hereunto, that the perverseness and stubbornness of the Will, the
irregularity, the inordinate propensions, and impetuous motions of the
Affections and sensual Appetite, do not a little hinder the reception of
Spiritual Truths into the Understanding. For as bad Meats, as crude and
inconcocted Humors in the Stomach, send up noisome Vapors into the Head,
clouding the Mind, discomposing the Brain, and disturbing the Fancy; so the
sinful Distempers, the inordinate Passions, the unruly and rebellious disorders
of the inferior Faculties, send up such fumes into the higher Region of the
Soul, as darken the Understanding, as incline and dispose the Mind to embrace
what is most suitable to the corrupt bent of the Will and Affections, and to
reject the contrary. Aristotle's censure of young Men as incompetent Auditors
of the Precepts of Moral Philosophy, has more reason in it than at first
appears. The strength of their Lusts and Passions does not only make them
unwilling to come under the severity of Moral Precepts in their Practice and
Conversation, but likewise much obstruct the passage of those severer Truths
into their Understandings. It Is no easy matter to gain the assent of the
Understanding to those practical Truths which a man has no mind to be ordered
by. Men will be very ingenious to invent, and very facil and easy to be
prevailed with to entertain reasons against that, which, in respect of the
contrary byas of their Wills, they would not have to be truth. As it is most
true on the one side, Quod nimis miseri volumus, hoc facile credimus. A weak
and dark Argument shall have strength and evidence enough to persuade us of the
truth of that which we have a mind to believe: So on the other side, the most
clear and demonstrative Arguments in the World shall not easily persuade us,
where we are unwilling to be persuaded.

Neither is it thus only in matters of Morality, but much more in spiritual
things, as the corrupt Heart of man is naturally at a far greater remoteness
and distance from them. Upon this ground it seems to be that Solomon, who could
best speak to that Argument, tells us, That the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom. Prove. 1.7.
When a man's heart is seasoned with the fear of God, and in some measure
purged from corrupt Affections; when it is subdued unto God, and made yielding
and pliable to his Will, then is a man fit to receive the Law from his mouth,
and then is the Heart a meet Vessel to receive the rich and invaluable treasure
of heavenly Wisdom. And so much in answer to the first Objection.

I go on to the second, That our not entertaining the light, seems to be put
upon Satan's score. And here, though Satan's malice and guilt be nothing the
less, it is apparent that this cause may also in great part be resolved into
man's sin and wickedness. How comes it to pass, that Satan has such advantage
against man in this matter? whence is it that he can so easily befool men,
prejudice them against the light of the Gospel, keep them in darkness, and lead
them blindfold to Hell, as the Prophet led the Army of the Syrians into
Samaria? Is it not because he finds them preingaged in sinful Courses, from
which they cannot endure to be taken off? Is it not because he finds them
resolved to comply with their Lusts, and corrupt Affections, the gratifying of
which is not to be gainsayed, they cannot bear it? were it not that he finds in
men's hearts such fit matter to work upon, laid in before, and prepared to his
hands, he could not so easily delude and blind them to their ruin. Satan had
as much malice against Christ, and did with the greatest rage and violence
assault him, and endeavor to break in upon him: but he could not do it, as
finding nothing within to bid him welcome. The Prince of this world comes,
Joh. 14.31.
says he, and finds nothing in me. Nihil sui operis suique vestigii, says
St. Hierom, in his Epistle to Algasia; nothing of his own Work, no impressions
which he himself has made, no footsteps which he himself has left behind him;
nothing at all on which to ground an Accusation, or to fasten a Temptation. The
words may comprehend both, tho indeed the former seems to be in that place
chiefly intended. Let Satan come to any of us when he will, he is sure to find
something of his own, something of his own work, something of his own image
which he has stamped upon us, something that he may lay claim to as his,
something of his party that will own him, and side with him. Hence the
different issue of Christ's Temptations and ours. When Satan came to assault
him, he found his Soul as an impregnable Castle, well fortified on every
quarter: clear and heavenly light without any mixture of darkness in the
Understanding, perfect holiness in the Will, exact regularity and composedness
in the Affections; all of one accord within, to make resistance, so as it was
impossible for him to get possession. When he comes to us, he finds the Soul as
a city that is broken down, Prove. 25.28.
and without walls, as Solomon speaks. And he finds a treacherous party within,
that is ready to invite him, that would gladly set open the Gates to him, and
betray all into his hands, were the Soul otherwise never so well fortified. And
thus we see how far all the mischief that Satan does us, may be resolved into
our own sin. It Is true, he blinds us, but it is because we have no mind to see;
he closes our eyes against the light of the Gospel, but he finds us
endeavoring to close our own eyes, and glad of any assistance from him to do
it more effectually. In a word, he shuts out the light, that it shine not in
upon us to our conviction, humiliation and conversion, but he makes him
shuttings to do it, of our own darkness, prejudices, false Principles, and
corrupt Affections.

I now proceed to the third Objection taken from Matthew. 11.25. where God
himself is said to hide the Mysteries of his Gospel from the wise and prudent.
Before I say any thing to this Objection, I must premise, That God in this
matter (as in other things) has a Prerogative which he makes use of, and
according to which he acts, where, and when he sees good. He being the Supreme
Lord of Heaven and Earth, as our Savior styles him in the place whence this
Objection is taken, may dispose of the knowledge of the Mysteries of his
Kingdom as he pleases, freely vouchsafing it to some, and withholding it from
others. For what can restrain him, but that he may do with his own as he
pleases? Matthew. 20.15.
as in the person of the Householder he argues. This good pleasure of God is it
into which our Savior expressly resolves his hiding the Mysteries of the
Gospel from the wise and prudent. Matthew. 11.26.
Thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto
babes; even so father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

So then, reserving unto God his Prerogative, I answer, That yet however God's
hiding the Mysteries of the Gospel from men, may very much, and in many cases,
though not universally, be resolved into the sins of men. For whereas there are
chiefly three ways by which God may be said to hide the Mysteries of the Gospel
from men; namely, by denying to them, or removing from them the means of
knowledge; or by withholding the effectual influences and operation of his
Spirit to accompany the means; or by permitting Satan to blind them: upon
consideration of the matter we shall find, That the sins of men have frequently
very much to do therein, and contribute much toward it; though even here the
good pleasure of God must also be acknowlegded, who permits it so to be, and
does not powerfully interpose to hinder it, as he might do if he saw good.

1. If God deny the Gospel to men, it is often through their thrusting it away,
and keeping it off from themselves, when it is approaching toward them. How
often do men oppose themselves against it! How often do men decline the light,
and choose to live in places of darkness, where there are no means, or as good
as no means of knowledge! So if God remove the Gospel from a People, is it not
most commonly not only for their own sin, but by their sin that it is removed?
God for their unfruitfulness and unthankfulness, for their manifold sins
against the Gospel, most righteously gives them up to be active and
instrumental themselves in putting out the light, and sending the Gospel far
away from themselves.

2. If God, continuing the Gospel, and the means of grace to a People,
withold the powerful influences and cooperation of his Spirit, what is this
in effect, but a leaving them to themselves, suffering their lusts, prejudices,
love of sin, and hatred of holiness, so far to prevail in them, as to shut and
bar up the Soul, and forcibly to keep out the light, or so far to weaken the
influences and impressions of it, as nothing to purpose is done upon them.

3. If God hide the Mysteries of his Kingdom from them by giving them up to
Satan to be blinded and deluded by him, the thing is still upon the matter one
and the same; for as has been at large showed, Satan effects his purpose much
by their own sin, and makes use of their Corruptions as the Weapons of his
warfare against the Soul, to keep it under the power of darkness.

Now to apply what has been spoken.

USE 1.
This gives us a true account of the reason of several Practices of the Church
of Rome.

As 1st. Of their vilifying and disparaging the Holy Scriptures as defective
and imperfect, as obscure and uncertain, and no better than a Nose of wax that
may be turned any way at pleasure, that may be molded and shaped to every
man's fancy, as one of that Party wickedly and and profanely reproacheth it. In
short; Their making the word written, insufficient to inform us touching the
matters of our belief and practice, and to lead us in the way to Heaven,
without the help and supplement of Human Traditions.

2. Of their refusing to bring their Doctrines, Worship and Practices, to the
Test and Touchstone of the Holy Scriptures alone; and of their setting up
another pretended Infallible Judge of Controversies, not admitting the
Scriptures to be the common Umpire and Determiner of them.

3. Of their shutting up the Book of the Holy Scriptures, and forbidding it to
be read by the People, so taking away from them the key of Knowledge. What Is
the reason of these their ungodly and abominable Practices, but this, He that
does evil, hates the light, and comes not to it, lest his deeds should be
reproved? Their Principles are unsound and rotten, wicked and abominable, their
Doctrine false, their Worship Idolatrous, their Usages vain and superstitious,
and therefore they hate the light of the Scriptures that discovers their
Errors, Cheats and Juglings; therefore they decline the light, and run away
from it; they defame and reproach it, they shut it up, and imprison it; they do
what they can to extinguish it, and keep men in darkness wheresoever they have
power to do it. But blessed be God that we are not yet brought into bondage by
them; they have not yet prevailed to deprive us of the light of the Gospel; we
have free access to the Holy Scriptures; the Bible lies open before us in our
Mother Tongue. O! may we never by our unthankfulness, our not improving the
mercies we enjoy, and our other sins, so far provoke God, as that he should
suffer the Land of our Nativity to be again overspread with that worse than
Egyptian darkness.

USE 2.
This discovers the true reason why many that frequent Public Ordinances, love
and affect such Preaching only as comes not too near the Conscience, meddles
not with their spiritual estate, touches not their own particular darling and
beloved sins. A smooth and general Discourse, that descends not to the
concernments of their own Souls; or it may be, a serious and smart Sermon, that
reproves the sins of the Age, or the sins of some particular Persons known to
them, those sins which they thomselves are not guilty of; all this they can
hear with much patience, and perhaps with some delight, Mar. 6.20.
as Herod is said to have heard John Baptist gladly. But if any man shall lay
open, and set before them the great evil of their own sins, the unsoundness of
their spiritual Estate, while they continue in them, the extreme danger of
their present condition, the absolute and indispensable necessity of
Regeneration, of sincere and universal Repentance, of sound Conversion, in
order to Salvation; if a man shall discourse of our natural proneness to
flatter and deceive our selves in these important matters, of our utter
unwillingness to know the worst of our selves, and to be truly acquainted with
the state of our Souls; of the small number of such as shall be saved, in
comparison of them that perish; of the great multitude of them that rest in the
outward for malities of Religion, and never go further, and of such as have a
name to live, but are dead; I say, if any man shall discourse of these things,
how unacceptable and displeasing, how irksome and tedious would it be to many
of his Hearers! How would they long to be rid of such a man! hardly forbearing
to say of him, as Ahab did of Michaiah, I have this man; because he never
prophesied good of me, but evil. For such plain dealing, a man perhaps might be
treated as kindly by some, as the Prophet Amos was by Amaziah, Go, flee away,
says he, into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy there; but
prophesy no more at Bethel. Amos 7.12, 13.
Now whence is all this, and what other account can be given of it, but that in
my Text, Every one that does evil, hates the light, and comes not to it, lest
his deeds should be reproved?

USE 3.
This may also acquaint us with the reason why many vicious and ungodly People
come so seldom to this place. Their Deeds are evil, their Works are the Works
of darkness, and therefore they hate the light. A woeful Snare, a sad
Intanglement it is in which they are! They hate the light, and come not to it,
because their deeds are evil; and yet as long as they come not to the light,
they are never likely to be better. But do these People think all is well,
while withdrawing themselves from the light, they can make a shift to avoid the
sight of their sin and misery, and keep their Consciences asleep? Let them not
deceive themselves; the time is coming, when the light will break in upon them,
do they what they can to keep it out; When God will open their eyes, and set
their sins in order before them, as he threatens the wicked man, Psalm. 50.21.
the obstinate and impenitent sinner. What shall I say to persuade these Sons
of Japhet, or rather Sons of Belial, to dwell in the Tents of Shem, to come to
the House of God, and join themselves to the Assemblies of his People? Though I
have small hopes that I shall be able to say any thing that may work upon
people so much estranged from God, and so miserably hardened in their sins; yet
over, and above what has been said, I shall recommend these two things to the
serious consideration of such persons, if any of them be at present here; for
tho we have little of their company here, yet I know not, but that some of them
may now and then have the curiosity, though not the Religion, to look within
these Doors, and drop in amongst us.

1. Let them consider, That the longer they shall shun the light, and hide
their eyes from their sins, the more frightful and formidable will the view of
them be, when God shall open their eyes. Such Armies of their Sins, and such
fearful Aggravations of them, will then appear, as will fill them with horror
and amazement, and without God's infinite mercy hurry them into the Gulf of
utter despair. But if this be not enough to fright them out of their
profaneness; Let them consider,

1dly, That they who will not come to the light here, must never expect to be
partakers of the inheritance among the saints in light hereafter. Genesis 28.17.
The house of God is the gate of heaven, as Jacob called it. Through this is
the entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven; and therefore all they who out of
Profaneness and Irreligion shut themselves out of the Church here, shut
themselves out of Heaven; and they who wickedly and profanely exclude
themselves from the Assemblies of God's People here, must not look to be
admitted into the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, the general
Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn which are written in Heaven. A fearful
thing! consider it all ye that shun the Word and Ordinances of God, that in
your hearts say to the Almighty, Job 21.14.
Depart from us, me desire not the knowledge of thy ways, as the wicked man is
described. If you will not acquaint your selves with God here, you must never
look to enjoy him hereafter; if in effect you bid him depart from you, what
else can you expect from him, but to hear that dreadful and confounding
Sentence, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels. Tremble at the thoughts of that Sentence, and do not by
your obstinate Profaneness and Irreligion, by your contempt of the House, Word,
and Ordinances of God, wilfully bring it upon your selves.

USE 4.
If the light be so unacceptable to wicked men, if they hate it, and cannot
endure it; then may They hence inform themselves what measure they may expect
from the wicked World, whose Office and Calling it is to hold forth the light
to others. If indeed they study to comply with men in their sins, if they
resolve to say nothing but what wicked men would have them; if they flatter
them, and build them up in a good opinion of themselves to their ruin, and
cry, Peace, peace to them, unto whom no peace belongs; then will the World like
them well, be very friendly to them, and let them have its good word upon all
occasions. But if in the discharge of the Duties of their place, they be
faithful to Christ who intrusts them, and faithful to the Souls of men, with
which they are entrusted, then must they make account to meet with little
kindness from wicked men. If such men hate the light, they can have no great
love ordinarily for them that bring it to them. When therefore we are but
coursely treated by some of them, whose good we most desired and endeavored,
we must not think it strange. It Is a necessary and inseparable appendant of our
Calling. It Is no other than what befell the Prophets in the Old Testament, the
Apostles in the New, and Christ himself. It is impossible that we should do our
duty faithfully, and not incur the displeasure of some thereby. There is no
greater evidence of unfaithfulness, than when no man is offended. If that seem
a Paradox, then what think you of that of our Savior; Luke 6.26.
Woe be unto you when all men speak well of you?

To conclude. Seeing thus it is; seeing we cannot please wicked men, unless we
will displease God, let the Conscience of having sincerely endeavored to
approve our heart to God, and to give no just offense to men, bear us up, and
support, arm and fortify us against all the harsh Censures, and all the
causeless and unjust Clamours of the World.

The Second Sermon.
JER. XIII. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots?
then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil.


IN these words we have a short, but very satisfactory account of the Ground of
God's severe proceedings against the Jews for their sins. God had long born
with them, he had used all sorts of means to reclaim them: He had sometimes
been drawing them by the Cords of a Man, with Bands of Love; he had been trying
to win them by kindness; Hos. 11.4.
he was to them as they that take off the yoke on their Jaws, and he laid meat
unto them. He had treated them with that gentleness and kindness which is wont
to work upon Irrational Creatures, and make the very brute Beasts, tame,
gentle, and tractable; Isa. 1.3.
For even the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib. Otherwhile he
had been trying whether severity might take any better effect upon them; he had
been correcting them first more favorably, and with much lenity, afterward
more sharply and severely; and together with other means, he had been still
warning, admonishing, exhorting, reproving, threatening them by his Prophets,
and setting before them the Comforts and Rewards of Repentance and Obedience,
and the sad consequents and issues of their disobedience, in case they should
still go on in their Sin and Impenitency. But none of these things would work
upon them; through long custom and continuance in sin, they were now become
incorrigible; 'twas in vain to expect that they should be reformed: All means
and endeavors were but lost upon them. Wherefore seeing their Disease appeared
to be incurable, God was resolved to be rid of them, and to ease himself of
them once for all. They should dwell in his Land no longer, away they must into
Captivity, and such a Captivity as should not only remove them far from the
Land of their Nativity, but scatter them up and down, and disperse them from
one another. So we have their Sin and Punishment set forth in the words of the
Text, and the following Verse; Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.
Therefore will I scatter them as the stubble that passes away by the wind of
the wilderness.

Before I come to the words, we may by the way observe, That it is a most woeful
condition to be still incorrigible under all means applied to humble and reform
us. The misery of such a people lies in these two things.

1. That God is wont to give up such a people to themselves, to walk in the way
of their own Hearts. He says of them, as of the Jews, Isa. 1.5.
Why should ye be stricken any more? Ye will revolt more and more; and as of
Ephraim, Hos. 4.17.
Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone; he is so nearly joined, and
entirely united to them in his Affections, that nothing will withdraw him from
them; therefore let him alone, let him take his course, and see what will come
of it in the end. And though this may seem to be no great evil, but rather an
advantage, and a very desirable liberty in the Judgment of the Sinner, who
cannot endure to be curbed or restrained; yet it is a very heavy Judgment, and
so much worse than any Affliction whatsoever, as the evil of sin is worse than
the evil of punishment. And so God speaks of this his Dispensation in words
full of high Indignation and Displeasure: Psalm. 81.11, 12.
My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me; so I
gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels.
As if he had said, I met with them, and was avenged of them for their wretched
contempt of me; I let them go on, and suffered them to be as vicious and
profligate, as filthy and abominable, as they had a mind to be.

2. Another thing in which lies the Misery of an incorrigible people is, that
they are now ripe for Ruin, or for some terrible Judgment. Because I have
purged thee, and thou wast not purged, (said God to Jerusalem) that is, Because
I used all fit means to purge and reform thee, and yet still thou wallowest in
thy filthiness and lewdness, thou art incorrigible; Ezekiel. 24.13. Prove. 29.1
therefore thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness till I have caused my
fury to rest upon thee. Prove. 29.1
He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy. An incorrigible Person, whom no reproofs will work
upon, is next door to destruction, to unavoidable destruction, if still he go
on; he shall suddenly be destroyed without remedy; nothing shall plead for him,
or interpose in his behalf to rescue him from destruction. In the 2 Chronicles.
36.14, 15, 16, 17. God by the Penman of that Book sets forth the great sins of
Judah and Jerusalem, the means he was pleased to make use of to reduce them to
obedience, their incorrigibleness under those means; and lastly, the terrible
Judgments which thereupon he brought upon them. All the chief of the Priests
and the People transgressed very much, after the Abominations of the Heathen,
and polluted the House of the Lord which he had hallowed in Jerusalem: And the
Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes,
and sending, because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dewlling place; but they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words,
and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of God arose against his people, till
there was no remedy; and what was at length the issue of this their
incorrigibleness and stubbornness? That follows in the next words; therefore he
brought upon them the king of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the
sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or
maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age. And as the incorrigibleness of
this stubborn and stiff-necked people brought the Chaldees upon them; so
afterward the like incorrigibleness brought the Romans upon their Posterity,
to their utter ruin and final desolation; for it is their incorrigibleness that
our Savior makes the forerunner and cause of their destruction by the Romans.
Matthew. 23.37, 38.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy children together
within thee, even as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not; therefore your house is left unto you desolate. Take notice of this,
and lay it to heart all you that have been often reproved for your sins, and
yet you still harden your Necks; unto whom many seasonable Admonitions, and
wholesome Counsels and Advices have been tendered, but you have stopped your Ears
against them; who have often smarted for your sins, and yet you love them
still, and delight in them as much as ever you did; you that have been often in
the Furnace of Affliction, and yet your Dross is not separated from you; I say,
take notice of the woeful condition of incorrigible Sinners, and consider what
awaits you, and will certainly be your portion, unless by Repentance you
speedily prevent it.

You unteachable and incorrigible Children, whom no Admonitions or
Chastisements will reduce to that Dutifulness, humble Submission and Obedience
which you owe to your Parents; tremble at the thoughts of what may be coming
upon you for your sin. You who tread in the steps of Hophni and Phineas, both
in respect of your other sins, and in respect of your obstinate carriage when
you are reproved for them, can you without horror read or hear what the Spirit
of God says concerning them? 1 Samuel 2.25.
They hearkened not to the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay
them. You whose lewd and ungodly Conversation has been often reproved and
condemned in the Ministry of the Word, and yet you are still insensible of your
danger, and proceed still in your old ways, and walk in the imagination of your
heart, to add drunkenness to thirst; consider what befell such as you are. Zech.
7.11, 12.
They refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears
that they should not hear. Yea, they made their heart as an adamant stone, lest
they should hear the law, and the word which the Lord sent by his Prophets:
therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts. Therefore it is come to
pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear; so they cried, and I would not
hear, says the Lord of Hosts.

You whom no Counsels or Persuasions can prevail with to leave your lewd and
graceless Companions.

You, that notwithstanding all that can be said or done to keep you in, and
withhold you from your wicked Associates, say still with that lewd and
ungovernable generation, There is no hope. Jer. 2.25.
No, I have loved strangers, and after them will I go: Consider with fear and
trembling what the Prophet said to Amaziah, who stopped his Ears against good
advice. 2 Chronicles. 25.16.
By this I know that God has determined to destroy thee, because thou have not
hearkened to my counsel. I do not say God has determined to destroy you also,
I take not upon me to be so well acquainted with God's secret purposes; but
this I say, you are at present in the highway to destruction, and you have
great cause to fear lest God destroy you, as he has done by other such
incorrigible persons as you are. If you still continue to be like others who
have been destroyed for the same sins, what reason have you to expect more
favor than they had? God is not changed, he is still the same, his hatred of
sin, his justice and severity against Sin, is still as great as ever it was.

And so much concerning that Observation. I come now to that which I chiefly
intended. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? That is,
they cannot; no Art or Labor can effect it. Wash and rub the Skin of the
Ethiopian while you will, it will retain its natural hew; you may sooner rub
away the Skin, than alter the color of it: and so for those spots with which
Nature has marked the Leopard, you may by much tampering destroy the subject
of them, but the subject remaining, you can never get out the spots. And little
less difficulty there is in removing those habitual Inclinations to sin, which
long custom has produced: The case is much alike, to wash a Blackamoor white,
and to get him to do good that is accustomed to do evil. So then it is a
Proverbial comparison, by which is signified the extreme difficulty of
delivering a Man from those vicious impressions which custom in sin has made
upon him. And that is the thing which I purpose to treat of.

Custom in sin makes it very difficult to leave sin. There needs little other
proof hereof than our own Experience. Though some vicious Persons, who are
taken in hand, and dealt with betimes, may be more easily drawn off from their
sinful courses, yet how rare a thing is it to see any man recovered, who has
long been exercised in a trade of sin! Shall you easily prevail with the
intemperate, or lustful, or ambitious, or covetous person, to leave those paths
of sin which have been long trodden by them? So great is the force of custom in
sin, that men will by no Arguments be persuaded to forsake those long-continued
sinful practices, which are continually attended with so many visible and great
inconveniences, as one would think were sufficient to make any man weary of
such courses.

Take for an instance but a wandering Beggar, that necessarily undergoes many
hardships, and runs many hazards in that irregular and wicked course of life
which he has been wonted to, and you shall in vain tempt him to leave it by
the best provisions and accommodations which you can proffer him in any settled
way of honest Employment.

Or take a nearer instance in the same kind; When almost do you ever see one of
our poor people whose hands refuse to labor, and who make a trade of begging
from Door to Door; I say, when almost do you see any such Person reclaimed, and
brought to endeavor to get his Living in any honest and laborious Calling? I
deny not, but it is possible there maybe instances of some such that have been
reduced to an orderly course of life; but I believe such instances are very
rare, especially of those who have from their Childhood been addicted to that
disorderly course, as too many are; the only Breeding and Education which their
Parents give them, being to teach them how to eat the Bread of idleness, and
live upon the Charity of others, if that may be called Charity which is
bestowed upon such people.

The grounds of this point are these.

1. Custom begets a strong, fixed and habitual Inclination to sin. Hence a Man
is ever in a readiness to yield to, and comply with any Temptation to that sin
unto which he has been accustomed. No sooner is occasion offered, but it meets
with a preparation of heart to embrace it. Instead of preparing to resist
Temptations when they begin to approach, and offer themselves, he that has
been accustomed to sin, will meet them half way, invite them to come on, and
bid them welcome; instead of declining Temptations, he will seek after them,
and studiously make provision for his Lusts. For custom is now become another
Nature to him, and he seems to enjoy himself no longer than he is complying
with it. To be divorced and separated from such sins, is a most grievous thing;
it is as the pulling out of a right Eye, or the cutting off of a right Hand.

2. Custom in sin brings on delight in sin; the actions that are natural, are
mostly accompanied with some pleasure: And so are sinful actions, when custom
has made them familiar to us, and given them, as it were, the stamp of Nature.
It Is strange that a Man should be sensible of any pleasure or delight at all in
some sins; and yet through custom there is that content and complacency in
them, that it is as death to forsake them. To sit in an obscure Alehouse, and
to be continually pouring in that which to a sober Man would be little better
than a Potion; to spend days and nights in a dark hole amidst the stink of
Vomits and Spewings round about, to the blasting of a Man's Reputation, the
impairing of his Health, the mis-spending of his time, and the wasting away of
that which it may be Wife and Children want at home; who would think there
should be any content in such a Life? And yet there are, who by custom have
made it so pleasurable to them, that they prefer it before all the contents and
satisfactions that a fair House, a Table richly spread, and the Society of
their nearest Relations can afford them, and whatever other advantages and
accommodations might render their converse at home comfortable and delightsom.
If custom has once made such base and dirty ways of sin pleasant, you shall in
vain tempt them out of them, or endeavor to draw them off from them by the
fairest and most taking proffers that you can make them.

3. Custom in sin blinds the mind, and corrupts the judgment, so that a man
cease to be a competent judge of the nature of things, and of the differences
between good and evil. By degrees he is besotted, and comes to be in great
measure deprived of the reason of a man; so far has sin darkened his
understanding, and weakened his Intellectuals for judging of Spiritual things.
He is given up to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28.
as the Apostle speaks; he puts good for evil, and evil for good; light for
darkness, and darkness for light. And when the light of reason is darkened, and
the Eye of the Soul is put out; when the leading and governing Faculty of the
Soul is thus depraved, it must needs be a difficult thing to draw a man off
from those ways, the evil whereof he cannot discern, nor will be apprehensive
of.

4. Custom in sin seareth the Conscience, and draws such a callus or brawniness
over it, as it becomes insensible. At first there is some tenderness of
Conscience, some reluctance, and shrinking back from those sins which after a
frequent repetition and customary practice of them, a man makes no bones of,
but smoothly swallows down. He that at first durst not tell a Lie, or if he
were at any time overtaken, was wont to be much troubled afterward; yet upon a
customary practice of that sin, will add Lies to Lies, and stand to them most
impudently and obstinately: He that seemed to fear an Oath, will through
customary Swearing arrive at that degree of insensibleness, that he will not
stick to multiply Oaths, and Perjuries also, if need be, and all this without
any touch of remorse, any gainsayings or grudgings of his Conscience. Now when
a Man through custom in sin comes to that pass, that his Conscience is quiet,
and does not either interpose before the commission of sin to hinder him, or
molest him, and disturb his peace afterward, 'twill be no easy matter to
disengage him from that sin.

5. Custom in sin does consequently harden the heart against all means by which
the Sinner should be reclaimed.

1. It hardens the heart against the Word. The threatenings thereof, and all the
most dreadful denunciations of Judgments, make no impression upon such a Man's
heart; it is as Steel or Adamant that will not yield or relent.

2. Neither will the wholesome Counsels, Advices or Admonitions of Friends and
Christian Acquaintance work upon it. He has no sense of any thing which in
that way is offered him for his good: His Ears are stopped against the voice of
the Charmer, Charm he never so wisely.

3. He is fortified with Armor of proof against all Providence, by which he
might be stopped in his course of sin, or reduced from the Error of his ways.
Let God oppose him in his sinful course, let him hedge up his ways with Thorns,
or stand before him with a drawn Sword, all is one, on he will fearlesly and
presumptuously, and adventure himself upon the thick Bosses of his Buckler, in
Job's phrase.

6. Custom in Sin emboldens Satan to tempt. Where the Conscience is tender, and
the Heart is sensible of the evil, and danger of Sin, and where he has been
formerly resisted and repelled, there if he tempt, yet he does it with less
confidence of prevailing, and with some degree of Cowardly Expectation of being
worsted; but where he has to do with those who have been long accustomed to
the Sin he would again draw them into, he makes little question of prevailing,
as knowing well the searedness of their Consciences, the hardness of their
Hearts, and their strong propensions to the sin unto which he is about to tempt
them; as also remembering how often his Temptations in the same kind have
already been successful.

7. By Custom in sin God is provoked to leave a Man to himself, to the power of
Satan, and the efficacy of Temptation; and in way of his righteous Judgment to
give him up to a further degree of impenitency and hardness of heart.

USE 1.
Then let such as have been long accustomed to any ways of Sin, take heed that
they make not account it will be an easy matter to leave those ways. You may
be apt to think that you can come off from those your sinful courses at
pleasure; that it is but take up Resolutions against them, and you shall be
disengaged and freed from them presently: But herein you would much deceive
your self. It Is not so easy a matter to deliver your self from the power of
that sin which you have been so long accustomed unto: When you address your
self to endeavor to leave it, you will find other work of it. You may take up
Resolutions upon Resolutions, and yet you may be still where you were at first,
as much enslaved to your Sin as ever, and as unable to resist any Temptation to
it. They must be strong and firm Resolutions, and those frequently renewed,
that will stand you in stead where Sin has by custom gotten such possession of
you: And besides, you must look higher than your own Resolutions, you must
earnestly implore God's help against your self, so miserably brought under and
subjected to the power of Sin. Never think to prevail against those Sins which
Custom has strengthened and confirmed in you, without much Prayer to God,
great watchfulness over your self, and diligence in the use of all other means,
whereby the power of Sin may be weakened.

USE 2.
You must therefore acknowledge it to be a great Mercy, if you meet with
Crosses and Afflictions in your sinful ways early, and before longer Custom in
Sin has produced those confirmed, radicated, and obstinate habits of Sin which
cannot easily be removed. God is very gracious to some this way; he takes them
up sharply, and chastens them severely betimes: They no sooner enter upon the
ways of Sin, but he opposes himself against them, and hedgeth up their way
with Thorns. This is very grievous and afflicting to our corrupt Nature, which
can endure no restraint: But we little consider or understand how much we are
obliged to God for his Care of us herein. How many others are there whom he
suffers to go on in their Sins without check or control, till they contract
those strong habits of Sin which they are never rid of as long as they live. Do
you think your self hardly dealt with, that God does not suffer you also to
take your course, and make your self as vile here, and as miserable hereafter,
as others? It Is God's exceeding great kindness to you, that he imbitters unto
you the beginnings of Sin, and strews the first entrance into sinful ways with
Briars and Prickles, so that you cannot go on, but you must hurt your self. It
seems you would have liked it better, if the way to Hell had been strewed with
Roses for you. Beware you do not misinterpret God's Providence: If he be
pleased to use seasonable means to make you weary of the ways of Sin, before
you are more hardened in them, count it a singular favor, and an effect of
that his gracious care of you, for which you can never be enough thankful.

USE 3.
This discovers the folly and danger of deferring Repentance, and especially of
putting it off till the time of Sickness, or till our Deathbed. The longer we
defer Repentance, the more difficult will the business be, through so long
custom in Sin. If you find it hard at present to think of leaving your Sins,
what will it be hereafter when they will have taken deeper root in you, and
when your habitual Inclinations to them will be stronger? And as for putting
off Repentance till the time of Sickness or Death; what wise Man would put off
a work of the greatest Importance, and the most difficult work, and a work that
will be still more difficult every day the longer it is put off; I say, what
wise Man would put off such a work till that time, when he will be weakest and
most unable to undertake it, and go thorough with it? Are the infirmities of
Sickness, are the pains and languishings of a Deathbed likely to make you
stronger and abler for this work? Is that a fit season to be chosen beforehand
for beginning to break and subdue those inveterate Corruptions in you that have
been gathering strength all your days? Your greatest and most implacable Enemy,
the Devil himself, could not direct you to the choice of a more unfit season
for that business. And yet besides, who knows whether or no you shall then have
any opportunity of endeavoring to do any thing in that great work which you
put off till then, as if it were of all other the fittest season for it? Who
can tell you but you may be so suddenly and violently surprised with Sickness,
and cut off, that you may have no time to bestow one serious Thought upon that
Business, which is of no less Concernment to you than your Souls Eternal
Happiness or Misery? Or if you should not be so quickly taken away, yet who can
tell but you may then be deprived of the use of Reason; and what then will
become of this great business, which being put off till that time, must be then
dispatched, or never?

USE 4.
This should admonish the younger sort to remember their Creator in the days of
their youth, Eccl. 12.1.
as Solomon counsels them. To consecrate their tender years to God, before
custom of sin has strengthened vicious Inclinations in them, and hardened
their hearts against God. As it is much more acceptable to God, when we give him
the First Fruits, when we offer up to him the flower of our age, so it is much
more easy and comfortable for us: For hereby we prevent those habits of sin,
which time and custom would beget, to our far greater trouble afterward. Those
Vices which in younger years discover themselves, are more easily plucked up,
as young Weeds out of the Soil in which they have not as yet taken any deep
root. Old habits of sin, so close do they stick to us, so deeply are they
rooted in us, and so strongly and intricately are their Roots twisted together
with our Nature, that the plucking of them up, is as the rooting up of a great
Oak that has the advantage of many years growth to settle it self in the
ground. You who are young, if you be wise, create not so much trouble to your
selves, as to let sin grow old and strong in you, before you break it off, or
pluck it up by repentance.

USE 5.
This should also prevail with Parents to be very careful of their Childrens
Education, beginning to restrain and beat down sin in them in season, that so
custom in sin, and all the sad effects thereof may be prevented. How happy had
it been, both for many Parents and Children, if seasonable Restraints and
Chastisements had been applied, before the customary practice of sin had made
them obstinate and incorrigible! The neglect whereof, how much sorrow and
heartbreaking does it occasion to Parents, and how much sin and misery to
Children! Nothing is more ordinary, than to hear the sad Complaints that
Parents make of the stubbornness and untractableness of their Children, and of
those sinful courses which they addict themselves unto, and cannot be drawn off
from by all the means they can think of to reclaim them: But whom may too many
Parents thank for it, rather than themselves, whose indulgence to them, or
neglect of them in their tender years has been the cause? They would not begin
with them in season, while they were tender and pliable; and now they are by
long practice of sin become stubborn and refractory: then they would not
restrain them, and now they cannot do it. And what greater mischief can Parents
do their Children, than by giving them the head, and laying the Reins on their
neck when they are young, whereby they come to be irreclaimably and desperately
hardened in sin when they grow up? While Parents complain of Children, may not
Children as justly complain of Parents, that have by their neglect of them
betrayed them to sin and Satan. Many such Children, when by their sins they
have come to shameful ends, have most passionately cried out against their
Parents, whose ill Example, or neglect to correct them, had brought them to
that misery: and could we listen to the Language of those who are in Hell,
there is no doubt but our ears would tingle to hear the lamentable Outcries and
curses of the Souls of undone Children, against those whose Parental Relation
should have engaged them to have left no means untried for keeping them from
that place of torment.

USE 6.
Let no Children think it any part of their misery or unhappiness, that by
God's Providence they are under the government and discipline of those Parents
who keep them in, and restrain them; who endeavor to nip the first buddings
and blossomings of sin in them; who will not suffer them to run with others to
that excess of riot which their corrupt Natures would be gratified with; in a
word, who use the best means they can for preventing of those evil Customs and
Habits of sin, which would be the misery of both Parents and Children. Let them
think themselves well at ease under the Discipline of such Parents, and
willingly submit their Necks to that Yoke which is laid upon them for their
good. If they understand themselves, and their highest concernment, they will
think themselves happier, a thousand times happier under that restraint, than
if they had all that sinful liberty which man's corrupt Nature reaches out
after, and eagerly pursues.

USE 7.
Hence moreover we may learn, how great a benefit it is to live under
Magistracy, where good Laws are duly executed, and Sin is severely punished.
This through God's blessing is a means of the timely stopping of that course of
sin in many, which without this help would end in obstinacy and
incorrigibleness. The wholesome severity of good Laws put in execution, prevents
the growth of sin, and the ripening of it into those habits, which making the
Sinner's condition incurable, ripens him for his ruin. It Is no privilege, but a
great misery, to live in a place where evey man may do what is good in his own
eyes, and where there is no Magistrate to put any man to shame. This was the
condition of Laish before its destruction. Judges 18.7.


USE 8.
This shows how much thankfulness is due unto God from those unto whom God has
been pleased to give converting grace after a long course of sin, by which they
were so woefully hardened, as nothing would work upon them. When God converts
old and obdurate Sinners, when he cures these Spiritual Diseases that seemed
now to be past all cure, how does he hereby magnify the power of his Grace, and
how does he exalt the riches of his Mercy! When God converts a young Sinner, he
quickens the dead; but when he converts old Sinners, he quickens those who
are as it were twice dead, V. 12.
as St. Jude speaks; dead by nature, and dead by long custom in sin, which had
made them twofold more the Children of Hell, than they were by nature. If
converting Grace, wherever God is mercifully pleased to vouchsafe it, calls for
thankfulness; surely when it is vouchsafed to old sinners, it calls for double
thankfulness. And so I have done with the Uses of this Point. It remains that I
answer one Objection, and so conclude.

Obj. If custom in sin, make it so extremely difficult to leave sin; if to
endeavor to reclaim such a one, be as it were to attempt to wash a Blackmore
white, this may seem to be a great discouragement to any man's endeavors for
reforming old Sinners.

Ans. It Is certainly a great discouragement, and one of the greatest that is;
but yet should it not take a man off from seeking the Conversion even of such.
For,

1. It Is a Duty; and so the difficulty and doubtfulness of success does not
discharge a man from it.

2. Though it be extremely difficult, yet it is not impossible. Old Sinners have
sometimes obtained mercy, and God has no where declared his purpose of denying
converting Grace to such, absolutely and universally.

3. The more inveterate the habits of sin by long custom contracted, are grown,
the sadder is the Condition of such, and the louder does it call upon us to
lend them our best help for rescuing them out of the Snare of the Devil.

4. Whatsoever the issue of our Endeavor may be, God will be thereby
glorified, 2 Cor. 2.15.
and we shall be unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved, and
in them that perish.

5. Though our Endeavors should prove succesless, yet shall they be
nevertheless accepted of God, and rewarded. Isa. 49.4.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain; yet
surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work is with my God.

The Third Sermon.
EPHESIANS. V. 15, 16. See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil.


THESE Words, though containing in themselves an entire sense, have some
coherence with what went before, as the Particle (...), then (as we render it)
or therefore, implies. (...), See then that ye walk circumspectly. Which
Particle seems to look back upon what the Apostle had said, v. 8. touching
their translation from darkness to light; from the darkness of Gentilism, to
the light of the Gospel. Ye were sometimes darkness, says he, but now are ye
light in the Lord. Whence he presently infers in the same verse, walk as
children of the light. And again, v. 11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Seeing they were enlightened, he
exhorts them to a conversation suitable to their present state. And this yet
once more he presses them unto in the words of my Text; See then that ye walk
circumspectly: that is, Being now no longer in darkness, but in the light, Take
heed that you indulge not your selves in those sins, and in that sinful liberty
which formerly you did, when as yet the light of the Gospel had not been
afforded you. Then you led your lives as you pleased, following the dictates of
your dark Understandings, and the corrupt inclinations of your sinful Natures;
but now better things are expected from you. This seems to be the connection of
the words with the Apostle's former discourse; but I shall not take any notice
of what might be observed from the coherence, but keep my self to the words
absolutely considered, without any reflection upon the dependence of them. In
the words we have,

1. A great and weighty Duty strictly enjoined; See that ye walk circumspectly.

2. An Argument by which the Duty is enforced; an Argument at least implied in
those words, not as fools, but as wise. As if he had said, See that ye walk
circumspectly, because it is our wisdom so to walk, and our folly if we do not.

3. We have one special instance of our circumspect walking, or in which our
circumspection should be showed; redeeming the time. And,

4. An Argument, or Reason, to enforce that also; because the days are evil.

Of all these in order.

The first thing to be spoken to, is, The Duty enjoined; See that ye walk
circumspectly. So then, the point to be treated of, is, That it is our duty to
walk circumspectly.

In discoursing of this point, I shall

1. Show what it is to walk circumspectly.

2. I shall further confirm the point by other parallel Scriptures.

3. I shall give the Reasons of it.

4. I shall make some Application of it.

Concerning the first of these, what it is to walk circumspectly, I shall speak
1st, Negatively. 2dly, Affirmatively.


I shall first show what it is not, and then what it is. Negatively then,

1. The circumspect walking here enjoined, does not lie in an affected
singularity; as when a man walks contrary to other men, with no other design,
nor to no other end, than that he may not be like them, but be a person alone,
and one by himself. God never calls us to this separation from the World:
Neither has this been the practice of holy men, whose Example is in Scripture
set before us for our imitation. S. Paul professes his condescension to men,
and compliance with them in all lawful things, that he might win them to
Christ. Unto the Jews I became as a Jew, 1 Cor 9.20, 21, 22.
says he, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the law as under
the law, that I might gain them that are under the law; To the weak became I as
weak, that I might gain the weak; I am made all things to all men, that I might
by all means save some. How far was he from studying to be unlike to other men,
who thus studied to apply himself to all men, and conform himself to them, so
far as without sin he might do it! Yet here, let no man abuse this Example of
the Apostle, and plead it for justifying his conforming himself to the sinful
practices of every Company he lights on. The Apostle never gave any man such
Example. This had been contrary to his own Doctrine, who charge us not to
conform our selves to this world. that is, Romans 12.2.
to this wicked and sinful World, so far as such; And to abhor that which is
evil; Yea, Romans 12.9. 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
to abstain from all appearance of evil. But however, to go as far away from
other men as we can, and to study to be opposite to them in those things in
which we may lawfully conform to them, and especially where we may hope to do
any good by our innocent compliance with them, is a singularity which God
neither requires of us, nor approves of. The root of this affected
singularity, as we have most reason to fear, is Pride. It Is a manifest conceit,
and good opinion of his own wisdom, that makes him choose a way different from
other men. And as the root, so the fruit of it is pride: For being now in this
singular way which his self-conceit has put him into, he pleases himself
therein, and values himself accordingly, making account that he is so much
better than other men, by how much his practice is different from them.

2. Circumspect walking does not lie in a superstitious singularity, whereby a
man places Duty and Religion in those things in which God has placed none.
This was the sin of the old Pharisees, who taught for doctrines the
commandments of men; that is, for Divine Doctrines, for the Precepts and
Injunctions of God. And this is the sin of the Modern Pharisees, Matthew. 15.9.
those of the Church of Rome, who tread in their steps: And such, I fear, is
the singularity of those among our selves, whom we call Quakers. Though these
Pharisaical Singularities may gain men a great reputation for Religion and
Sanctity among men of their own Party, as do the different Habits, Diet, course
of life, usages, and practices of the several Religious Orders in the Church of
Rome; yet can they never commend them to God. Of all these superstitious
Singularities by which they would separate and distinguish themselves from the
Secular and Irreligious World, in which they pride themselves as matters highly
acceptable and meritorious in the sight of God, and for which others of their
own way admire, and even adore them; I say of all these things God says, Who
has required them at your hands? That Is all the thanks they must expect of him
for them. Neither is this all; he looks upon their placing Religion and
Sanctity in those things in which he has placed none, as a bold and saucy
entrenchment upon his own Authority and Prerogative. And indeed, what is it
better, when Men shall take upon them to be Legislators in God's room, making
those things to be Sins and Duties which he never made so? Most severe is the
threatening against such as add to the Word of God, which in effect these Men
do; Rev. 22.18.
God will add unto them the plagues that are written therein.

3. Circumspect walking does not consist in a scrupulous singularity. I
distinguish this from the former; that is the singularity of bold and
presumptuous Persons; this of weak, and not sufficiently-informed tender
Consciences, that call for our Pity and Compassions, rather than our
Indignation, forasmuch as they would be glad to be better informed, and differ
from the lawful practice of other Men conscientiously, and to no other end than
that they might not offend God, as they groundlesly and erroneously apprehend
they might. Though no Man's Error commends him unto God, yet his Carriage under
an Error may; and this is the case of these Persons. And it was the very case
of those Conscientious, though mistaken, Jewish Believers at Rome, who not out
of perverseness or turbulent opposition, but out of pure dissatisfaction in
point of Conscience, did still observe those days, the observation whereof God
then no longer required; and still forbear to eat those Meats which God then
permitted to be eaten. Of those weak and mistaken Believers the Apostle says,
Romans 14.6.
He that regards a day, regards it to the Lord; and he that eats not, to
the Lord he eats not. His meaning is, That doing what they did out of
Conscience, though misinformed, they (as their present condition was) did well,
and so far had acceptance with God. But still I say, though there may be
something that is good in a Man's not adventuring to go against the dictates of
an Erroneous Conscience, namely, a fear of offending God if he should do
otherwise than he does, yet the circumspect walking here enjoined consists not
in such a singularity; which being grounded on a mistake, a Man is bound to
endeavor to be rid of it, and to be delivered from it as soon as he can. And
the rather, because as the Circumstances may be in which a Man is, it may be
most dangerous and pernicious to lie under his mistake, and continue in his
Error but one day or hour: For the Error may be such as may put him upon
desperate Attempts, or horrid Sins. Our Savior says, there would be those who
would think they did God service by killing his Servants. Joh. 16.2.
A Man's Error may be such as may not only deprive him of some of those
Liberties which he might lawfully take, but they may engage him in a constant
neglect of his Duty, or opposition to that lawful Authority which God has set
over him. In these and the like cases a Man's mistake or misinformation will not
excuse him before God, when he shall call him to an account.

And so much may suffice to have been spoken of circumspect walking negatively;
it now follows that I speak of it affirmatively. To walk circumspectly, is a
large and comprehensive thing. Walking takes in the whole course of a Man's
Life, our whole carriage and deportment both with relation to God and Man. 2
King 20.3.
I beseech thee, O Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart. Isa. 33.^5, 16.
He that walks righteously shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be
the munition of rocks. 2 These. 3.6.
Withdraw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly; that is, from
every Professor of the Christian Religion, that is of an irregular and
disorderly Conversation. And on the contrary, to walk circumspectly, is to
order our Conversation, and regulate our Lives with the greatest care,
solicitude, and heedfulness. The word (...) here used, may be rendered,
accurately or exactly; and so to walk requires great heed and diligence. So the
same word is taken, Mat. 2.8.
(...), search diligently after the young child, said Herod to the Wise Men;
and so in the Verse before, (...), he diligently or exactly enquired the time
when the Star appeared. Briefly therefore, to walk circumspectly is to use our
utmost care and diligence to please God in all things, and to yield obedience
to all his Commandments; to perform every known Duty, and to avoid every known
sin; it is with the Apostle, Act. 24.16
Herein to exercise our selves to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God and toward men. It Is to make this our daily work, and the great and
constant business of our Lives.

From what has been said, it is manifest that circumspect walking implies,

1. An heeding and observing all our ways with relation to the Rule; and,

2. A careful endeavor in all things to conform our selves to the Rule; so
that he, and he only walks circumspectly, who has the Rule always before him,
ponders and considers all his paths with relation to it, and orders all his
steps accordingly, at least who sincerely endeavors so to do.

Now in the second place, That it is our Duty to walk circumspectly, may be
confirmed from diverse other Scriptures enjoining it, though not in the same
terms, yet in other words and expressions to the same effect. When God had
given the Israelites the Ten Commandments, and many other particular Laws, he
adds this strict charge for the due observance of them, In all things that I
have said unto you be circumspect; Exodus 23.13.
which charge though it did in a special manner concern that people, yet it
reaches us also in reference to whatever God has enjoined us, there being
every way as much reason that we should be circumspect, and in some respects
more, we having greater light, and clearer revelations of the Will of God under
the Gospel than they had under the Law; as also greater Encouragements to
obedience by the more full discoveries of the Rewards of obedience in the other
World. So again, Take diligent heed to do the commandments and the law. Josh.
22.5. Josh. 23.11
Take good heed unto your selves that ye love the Lord your God; which love was
to be showed by cleaving to him, and obeying him, as there afterward it
follows. Psa. 119.9.
Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according
to thy word. Let thine eyes look right on, Prove. 4.25, 26, 27.
let thine eyelids look straight before thee. Ponder the path of thy feet, and
let all thy ways be established. Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left:
remove thy foot from evil. By all which variety of expressions we are required
to be wary and circumspect in all our ways, Mat 24.42 Mat. 25 13. 1 Cor. 16.13.
1 These 5.6. Rev. 3.2.
that we may not in any thing swerve from the Rule. And this is that which in
the New Testament is so often enjoined under the Metaphorical expressions of
watching and watchfulness.

And so I come to the third thing propounded, which was to give the reasons why
we are to walk circumspectly; and they are many.

1. In regard of Gods Presence and Eye. He compasses our path, Psa. 139.3.
and our lying down, and is acquainied with all our ways. His eyes are in every
place, Prove. 15 3
beholding the evil and the good. He accurately and narrowly observes us: Job
33.11.
He marketh all our paths. He considers and thoroughly weighs all our
actions, and every step we take; Prove 5.21.
He pondereth all our goings. And not only our ways and outward actions, but
our hearts and the secret frame of them; Prove. 21.2.
He pondereth the hearts; and he weighs the spirits. Prove. 16.2.
Add hereunto the infinite holiness of that God who thus observes us, and whose
Eye is continually upon us; Hab. 1.13.
He is of purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look on iniquity. Now what
heedfulness and circumspection can be too much in all our actions, where there
is such an observer and witness of every thing we do?

2. We must walk circumspectly in regard of Satan the Enemy of Souls, who is
ever lying in wait for us to entrap us, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and as a roaring Lion is still walking about seeking whom he may devour. He
has his wiles and devices to overreach us. 2 Cor. 2.11 ^ Tim. 3.7.
He has his grins and snares laid in all places to catch us. Now if a Man had
a malicious Enemy always following him, ever eying and observing him, and ready
to catch at any thing to be made use of for his ruin, he would think it highly
concerned him to be circumspect, and that he could not be too wary to prevent
and cut off all advantages against himself.

3. It concerns us to be circumspect in regard of the World that observes our
actions, and is ready to make the worst construction of them; such is the
injustice and malignity of this evil World, that many times your best actions
shall be most harshly censured; how much more those passages of your Life that
are of a doubtful nature, and may be well or ill interpreted, as Men stand
affected toward you. Upon this account it is that the Apostle exhorts us to
walk in wisdom toward them that are without; Col. 4.5.
and our Savior cautions us to be wise as serpents, but harmless as doves.
Mat. 10.16


4. It concerns us to be circumspect in respect of our selves, and the
corruption of our Nature, in respect of the great danger we are in from within,
though we had no Enemy without us. Our hearts are false and treacherous,
strongly inclined to evil, and ready to comply with all Temptations: Jer. 17.9.
The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. Having
such a dangerous Inmate within our own Bosoms, it stands us upon to walk
circumspectly, and to think our selves no longer safe than we keep a strict
guard over our selves, and carefully heed all our goings, that we may never
tread beside that narrow path which we are required to walk in.

5. It concerns us to walk circumspectly in regard of the strict account we
must hereafter give of all our ways. Eccles 12.14.
God will bring every work to judgment, with every secret thing whether it be
good, or whether it be evil. 2 Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. Mat. 12.36.
Of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof at
the day of judgment: When they shall be accountable to God for their Omissions
as well as for their Commissions. Mat. 25.41, 42, 43.
They who verily believe they must be called to so strict an account, how can
they think they can ever walk strictly and circumspectly enough? Believing and
expecting this great day of reckoning, 2 Pet. 3.11
what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness?
As the Apostle speaks.

6. It behooves us to walk circumspectly in regard of the high and everlasting
concernment of our ways, and walking while we are here. Ab hoc momento pendet
eternitas. As we demean our selves, so we must fare hereafter for ever; As a
Man sows here, so shall he reap hereafter. Gal. 6.7, 8.
He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; and he that
sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. A short time
is here allotted us to be improved for our everlasting happiness in another
World. If this time be neglected, it will not be long e're the things belonging
to our peace will be hid from our Eyes. There will thenceforth be no more
offers of Mercies, no more opportunities of making our peace with God. There
will be no more place to Eternity for redeeming time, and correcting the
Errors and Miscarriages of our heedless and uncircumspect walking. O then how
great should our care, how exact should our circumspection be, while the day of
grace lasts, and while opportunity is afforded us of laying up a good
Foundation for the time to come, that we may lay hold of Eternal Life!

I come now to the uses of this point. Is it the Duty of every Christian to
walk circumspectly?

USE 1.
Then let no Man take offense at the strictness and circumspection of any who
endeavor to conform themselves to the Rule as exactly as they can; Let no Man
judge so much Care and Circumspection to be needless. Can any Man be too
careful where the injunctions of care, heedfulness, circumspection, and
watchfulness, are so many, so peremptory, and absolute, and where our
Concernment is so high and important, and that upon so many accounts? If any
cannot bring their own Hearts to be willing to live by the Rule, and to conform
to it, yet let them not condemn or censure others; especially seeing the Holy
Ghost has noted it as a chief point of true Wisdom thus to walk, and branded
the neglect thereof with folly, as we shall see afterward. But if any will yet
be wise in their own Eyes, and reproach the wisdom of God as foolishness, let
them hear what God says concerning such; Jer. 8.9.
They have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Whatever
for the present they may judge of the strictness of such as endeavor to keep
in the narrow way that leads to Life, the time is coming when they will be of
another mind. When they come to stand before the Tribunal of Christ to be
accountable not only for all the more notorious Irregularities and
Extravagancies of their Life, but for every idle word, O then they will
acknowledge that the circumspection and watchfulness which they now deride and
laugh at, and look upon as folly, would have stood them in some stead. Then
they will be convinced that the most circumspect Man is the wisest Man: Then
they will say of the sincerely pious and strictly conscientious person whom
they now contemn, as the Author of the Book of Wisdom brings them in speaking;
Wisd: 5.3, 4, 5.
They shall change their minds, says he, and sigh for grief of mind, and say
within themselves, This is he whom we sometime had in derision, and in a
parable of reproach. We fools thought his life madness, and his end without
honor. How is he counted among the children of God, and his portion is among
the saints!

USE 2.
Is it the Duty of every Christian to walk circumspectly? Then how much do they
fail and come short of their Duty who walk at all adventures, and live by no
Rule! Who regard not at all how they walk, or where they tread! This is that
despising of our ways, which Solomon makes to be so dangerous and destructive.
Pro. 19.16.
He that despises his ways shall die; that is, he that is of so loose,
careless, and heedless a temper, that he rambles up and down like a drunken
man, or a madman, without any consideration or regard of his way; that minds
not, considers not his way; whether it be safe or dangerous, but on he posts
with full speed, through Dirt and Stones, over Bogs and Quagmires, upon Pits
and Precipices, all is alike to him: He that thus lives hand over head, takes
the ready course to destroy his own Soul. This is noted concerning Jehu, 2 Kin.
10.31.
a man of a rash and precipitant Spirit, that he took no heed to walk-in the
Law of the Lord God of Israel with all his Heart. And this is a part of the
Character of the ungodly man, Psa 50.17.
that he casts God's Words behind him, where it might be sure to be out of his
Eye, as not caring to look upon it, or regard it, for the regulating of his
Life, and the due ordering of his Conversation thereby. Whithersoever the
impetuous violence of such men's corrupt nature hurries them, thither speed
they without any regard either of their Duty, or of the issues of their sinful
courses. Eccl. 5.1.
They consider not that they do evil, says Solomon, but rush into sin as the
horse rusheth into the battle. Jer. 8.6.
Though God be in a readiness to meet them in their ways of sin, and to
withstand them as an armed man, yet they go on daringly and presumptuously,
even running upon the thick bosses of his buckler, as the foolhardiness of such
rash and bold Sinners is described Job 15.26.

USE 3.
Let us all be persuaded to walk more circumspectly; to keep a more narrow and
constant watch over our selves, and to take better heed to our ways than we
have done. Now though all are concerned, highly concerned to walk
circumspectly, yet are some in a special manner concerned to do it above
others. As,

1. They who in respect of their Rank and Quality, their Acquaintance and
Alliances, their Callings and Employments, are exposed to most Temptations.
They who necessarily meet with many Temptations, cannot but often offend,
unless they be very circumspect.

2. It concerns them above others to be circumspect who have formerly most
offended through their carelessness, their heedlesness, and their want of more
circumspection. How often have you been overtaken with sin in one kind or
other, which you might easily have avoided, if you had been circumspect? It Is
high time for you to resolve to be more circumspect for the future, who have
already contracted so much guilt through your carelessness, and especially if
you have also smarted for your careless and regardless walking.

3. It concerns them above others to be circumspect, who in respect of their
Places and Stations ought to be Examples to others. These are so much the more
obliged to walk circumspectly, because else they become ill patterns to those
whose Eyes are upon them, and occasions of much sin and guilt to them.

4. It behooves them above others to walk circumspectly who are drawing near the
end of their walk; who are not far from their long home, and have little time
left them to correct the manifold Errors of their Life past.

5. It behooves them above others to walk circumspectly, who after more
strictness formerly have for some time now last past taken more liberty, and
walked more loosly and carelessly. For,

(1.) If these give not all dilgence to recover themselves, and regain what
they have lost, they will still grow more remiss and careless.

(2.) It would be a very sad thing if their last ways should be their worst,
and if death should surprise them in a declining condition.

6. It behooves them above others to walk circumspectly, who having been often
convinced of the necessity and comforts of circumspect walking, and having
often resolved on it, could never yet put their Resolutions in practice, or at
least with any constancy go on therein. The Convictions and Resolutions of
these Persons, as they do much aggravate and heighten their sin, so they will
much heighten and inflame their reckoning when God shall call them to an
account.

Now in the further prosecution of this Use, I shall offer some Directions for
walking circumspectly; give some Cautions about it; and lastly, answer such
Objections as may be made against it. By way of Direction for walking
circumspectly, I shall only mention these few things:

1. Keep your heart with all diligence. As the frame of your heart is, so for
the most part are your actions: Prove. 4.23.
From the heart are the issues of life. Your circumspection in the course of
your Life has its rise from your keeping your heart. He that neglects his
heart will never be able to order and frame his words and actions according to
the rule. Wherefore be sure that you lay the Foundation of all your
circumspection, in the heeding of your heart, and in keeping it under
Government. Govern your heart well, and you govern your Tongue, and rule your
hand, and the whole Man. Let the heart be once out of order, and the effects of
it will soon appear in the unruliness of the Tongue, and the irregularity of
your Actions. Whatsoever else is out of order, to be sure the heart was first
out of order. O how easy a task would it be to order all the rest, if the
heart were well ordered! O let us begin there, keeping a strict and constant
guard over it.

2. Set God always before your Eyes, and labor to keep up lively Apprehensions
of his Presence and Omniscience. How awful and circumspect would this make you!
How solicitous would you be of pleasing him, and how much afraid of offending
him! This constant sense of God's presence, and awe of his All-seeing Eye upon
our hearts; no man that has not had some Experience of it, can easily conceive
what an influence it would have upon us to beget in us this holy
circumspection. It Is our unmindfulness of God's Eye and Presence that makes us
so heedless and unwatchful.

3. Consider all your ways, and ponder your paths, as Solomon's counsel is,
Weigh your words and actions in the balance of the sanctuary, Prove. 4.26.
examine them by the rule. But let this be done most carefully and exactly when
any matter of great and weighty consequence lies before you. Then be sure that
you do nothing but upon sound and mature deliberation; and upon clear
satisfaction, that what you do, is agreeable to the rule, and suitable to the
principles of good conscience. How often does men's precipitancy and rashness
hurry them into those sins, which afterward occasion much anguish and horror
of Conscience to them. So what is rashly done in a quarter of an hour, lies
grating upon their Consciences many years after; it may be they are never fully
eased of the burden of it as long as they live.

4. Take heed of being swayed and overruled by the judgment and practice of
others to a compliance with them in what your own Conscience is not satisfied
to do. The Opinion and Practice of the multitude is a deceitful and crooked
Rule. What the generality cry up, approve of, and applaud, concur and agree in,
may be extremely evil; what is highly esteemed among men, may be abomination in
the sight of God. Luke 16.15.
And again, What men cry down, and vilify, what they make to be matter of
reproach and contumely, that may be in such account with God, as it may be
highly accepted and rewarded. And yet so it is, that we are apt to place very
much in the opinion and example of a multitude. What many or most do, what the
generality of Town and Country do, that we stick not to do. Weak Arguments
shall be strong enough to prevail with us to be of the stronger side, and to
concur with the multitude. Wherefore it was not without great cause that God
gave his People a special caution against this weak and sinful compliance.
Exodus 23.2.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, neither shall thou speak in a
cause to decline after many to wrest judgment. God saw our proneness to be
influenced and swayed by the multitude, and to go, non qua eundum, sed qua
itur, not in that path in which we should go, but in which the greater part go.
If in any thing therefore our circumspection be necessary, it is when we are
assaulted with the temptation to warp and turn aside out of the right way.

5. Be careful to keep at a distance from all temptations to sin, as far as you
are able. Where you foresee they are making toward you, avoid them, run away
from them: Herein lies a great part of your circumspection. If you heedlesly
and carelessly run upon temptations, and much more if you wilfully and
presumptuously cast your self upon them, it is no hard matter to foretell what
the issue will be. No man can expect to be strengthened against temptations,
and to be secured against the malignant influences of them, that is not careful
to avoid them as far as he is able; and much less may he expect it, that
wittingly and deliberately ventures on them. This man does indeed highly
provoke God to leave him to the power of temptation, that he may smart for his
presumptuous folly in the end. He, and he only walks safely, that walks so
circumspectly as not to come too near the borders of sin and temptations.

6. Above all, take heed of sinful intanglements. By sinful intanglements, I
mean any rash Lies or Engagements to do what may not be done with a good
conscience. When any man is by Oath, or Promise, or any other way under an
Engagement to do what is sinful, he is in the Snare of the Devil, out of which
'twill be very difficult to disintangle himself. That were a fearful case; and
therefore he that loves his own Soul, and consults his innocence, and the peace
of his Conscience, will be so circumspect as to beware of such intanglements.

So having done with the Directions for walking circumspectly; I now come in
the next place to the Caution relating thereunto; and they are these.

1. Let not your circumspection and conscientiousness degenerate into vain
scrupulosity, and needless singularity: Neither make more sins, nor more
duties, than the Law of God has made. That a Person of a tender Conscience may
offend this way, both Experience shows, and the Caveat of Solomon against it;
Be not righteous overmuch. Eccles. 7.16.
It Is certain that no man can be too strict or conscientious, too exact or
punctual in performance of what is really matter of duty: the Wiseman's meaning
therefore is, Be not over-scrupulous, placing sin or duty in those things in
which they are not. This groundless scrupulousness is attended with several
mischiefs.

1. It often exposes men to dangers causlesly, and brings those evils upon
them, which if they were better informed, they might without sin avoid.

2. It straitents them, and ties them up more than need is, and deprives them
of those lawful Liberties which they might with a good conscience make use of,
and enjoy.

3. It makes them apt to judge and censure those causlesly and uncharitably,
who lawfully, and with a good conscience, do those things, which they through
misinformation judge ought not to be done.

4. If circumspection should degenerate into vain and needless scrupulousness,
it would bring a reproach upon truly conscientious strictness, and that holy
circumspection which God requires of us Upon these Considerations, let not, I
say, your circumspection degenerate into vain and needless scrupulosity, which
is the first Caution.

2. In your circumspect walking, be sure that you ever lay the greatest stress
upon the greatest matters. Take care that you be not like the Scribes and
Pharisees, Matthew. 23.24.
who would strain at a gnat, but swallow a camel. Make conscience of all known
Duties, even of the least, of tithing mint and cummin; but let your chief care,
and most solicitous circumspection be exercised about the weightier matters of
the law. For if while you would seem to be very circumspect about smaller
matters, and to make much conscience of little things, you make no conscience
at all of far greater matters; You hereby

1. Make evident proof of your Hypocrisy unto all that observe your
Conversation.

2. You throw dirt upon circumspect walking, and cause the strict and holy ways
of God to be misjudged, and evilspoken of.

So much concerning the 2d Caution.

3. Notwithstanding your own personal strictness and circumspection, be not
forward to condemn others, who in some things may be satisfied to do what you
cannot. I say, be not forward to condemn their Persons, much less their Estate;
provided that

1. They be such as otherwise walk unblamably as to the general course of their
lives.

2. Provided also, that the things in which you are not satisfied to do as they
do, be not clearly and undeniably against the Rule. I say, these things
provided, be not forward to condemn them in respect of those things in which
their practice is different from your own.

4. When you have done all that you can, and framed your life with the greatest
circumspection and exactness that you can possibly attain unto, look for your
acceptance with God, through Christ only, and count all things, your best
things, loss and dung in comparison of Christ.

So from the Cautions, I pass on to the Objections that may be made against
circumspect walking. Men generally are so much for liberty, that this
circumspect walking is not very acceptable to them. Many things they have to
say against it; and indeed it were strange, if a course of life so contrary to
our corrupt Inclinations, should not be encountered with many Objections. I
shall endeavor to say something to the chief of them, that so the Prejudices
that fright men away from circumspect walking, or possess their minds with
misprisions or mistakes concerning it, being removed, men may be reconciled to
it, or at least be persuaded to make trial of it. If they would make trial of
it, their own experience would quickly undeceive them, and induce them to
entertain a better opinion of it. The Objections which I shall speak to, are
these that follow:

Object. 1. Such a strict course of life, so severe and circumspect a
conversation, would deprive men of all the comforts of this life, and plunge
them in the depths of sadness and melancholy. God in all his dealings and
Providence designs our good and comfort; who then can imagine that he should
call us unto, and engage us in so mopish and monkish a way?

Answ. It Is a great mistake, and a very groundless prejudice against the ways
of God, to conceive them to be so dark and uncomfortable, because there is such
circumspection required of those that will walk in them.

1. It must be here granted, that they do indeed call us off from carnal
pleasures, and from those sinful delights, concerning which, Solomon says,
Eccles. 2.2.
that they are madness; and a kind of mirth, Prove. 14.13.
the end whereof is heaviness. But is it to be accounted so great a misery to
be taken off, and disingaged from these deceitful Pleasures, from these
dangerous and pernicious baits of sin? Is it so desirable a thing to go to Hell
laughing; to be permitted to run on jollily and merrily to the Pit of Eternal
Destruction, as the silly Bird, that being overjoyed at the sight of the
alluring and killing Bait, gladly hasteneth to the Snare? Is there so much
happiness in being at liberty, to be joyfully speeding down to the Chambers of
death, Prove. 5.7.
as the fool runs on singing and dancing to the correction of the stocks? If
God be pleased to take us off from running on heedlesly and securely upon these
dangerous Precipices, should we not look upon it as our happiness? Has he
reason to think himself hardly dealt with, or injured by me, from whose lips I
snatch away a cup of sweet and delicious Poison, which he is endeavoring to
swallow down as greedily, as if it were a Cordial?

2. Yet is not this all. God calls us off from these killing Pleasures, that we
may exchange them for better; for safe, sound and substantial Pleasures, true
Delights, satisfying Contentments, durable and lasting Joys. Such are to be
found in the ways of God; and the more any man denies himself, as to all sinful
Delights; the more strictly, heedfully, and circumspectly he walks, the more of
these spiritual Comforts and Refreshings may he hope to enjoy.

Obj. 2. Many of those who seem to walk circumspectly, and to be of a very
strict and severe conversation, seem to lead but heavy and uncomfortable lives.
For who are more full of sad Complaints, and inward Troubles? Who are more
subject to doubtings and dissatisfactions about their spiritual Estate? Who are
more held under bondage through the fears of their Eternal miscarrying, than
many of these?

Ans. Though all this be true, yet is this no prejudice, no just prejudice to
circumspect walking.

For 1st, The cause hereof is mostly in themselves, and not in the ways of God;
neither is it in the least to be attributed to their circumspect walking, but
rather to their not walking more circumspectly. Their own carelessness, and want
of due heed and circumspection in their ways; their venturing on sin, or
inconstancy and slothfulness in holy Duties, or some other miscarriage, is
often the true cause of all their troubles. Were they more circumspect, they
would be freer from troubles.

2. Sometimes their troubles arise from their darkness, and misapprehensions of
the Covenant of Grace, and the Terms on which God offers mercy unto Sinners.

3. Sometimes their troubles arise from their unbelief, and from their refusing
to be comforted, and their putting off, and thrusting away from themselves
those Comforts which God reaches forth unto them.

4. Sometimes their troubles are much from the temptations of Satan; God for
diverse wise and gracious Ends permitting them to be so exercised. But however
it be, and from what cause soever their troubles proceed, while they are in
God's ways, they are in the ways of peace, and all shall at length end in peace.

5. In the mean time, their condition at present, with all its disadvantages,
is a thousand times better than the condition of those who spend their days in
sinful Frolicks, and even glut themselves with carnal Pleasures, and sensual
Delights, and suddenly go down to Hell, and there meet with so much the more
torment and sorrow, by how much they lived more voluptuously and deliciously
here. O thrice miserable is their condition, who go from their heaven of
sensual Delights and Satisfactions here, to an eternity of Misery and torment
in the other World! And thrice happy they, who having made choice of the narrow
way that leads unto life, through many inward troubles and fears, and much
outward tribulation also, if need be, enter at last into the Kingdom of God;
That blessed and glorious Kingdom, where all tears are wiped from their eyes,
where sorrow and sighing shall flee away, and everlasting joy shall be upon
their heads. And so much in answer to that Objection.

Obj. 3. The God whom we serve is a God of mercy; Mich. 7.18. Psalm. 145.9.
He delights in mercy: And his tender mercies are over all his works. There
is no Attribute of God which the Holy Scriptures do more exalt and magnify,
than his Mercy. His Mercies being so great, why may we not hope to find mercy
with him, although we take some liberty, and be not so strict and circumspect?
Can we apprehend that a God of so great mercy, will be so severe as to condemn
us, cast us into Hell, and expose us to everlasting Torments for want of this
circumspection?

Ans. Though the Mercies of God be exceeding great, yet saving mercy is not
extended to all, but reserved for those that fear him; Psalm. 103.17, 18.
for such as keep his covenant, and remember his commandments to do them. It Is
for the truly humbled, penitent, and reformed Sinner. He that confesses his
sin, Prove. 28.13.
and forsakes it, shall have mercy God shows mercy to them that love him,
Exodus 20.6
and keep his commandments. But as for such as plead God's mercy, to justify
themselves in their careless and loose conversation, these must expect no mercy
from him. God never promised saving mercy to any that are not so strict as to
make conscience of the least sin, and so circumspect as to keep a watch over
themselves, that they be not overtaken with sin. Without some measure of this
circumspection, no man can satisfy himself touching the truth of his
Repentance, without which there is no forgiveness, no mercy to be looked for at
the hands of God. For true repentance necessarily includes a sincere desire and
serious endeavor to relinquish all sin: Now how can this serious and earnest
endeavor to leave all sin, be without such an holy wariness and circumspection
as that which has been treated of? Can an uncircumspect and careless person,
that heeds not what he does, or how he walks, that takes liberty to please
himself, that sticks not to run upon any temptations to sin that lie in his
way; can this person be thought to be one that seriously and earnestly
endeavors to forsake all sin? Nothing less; he that truly desires, and
seriously endeavors to forsake Sin, will be circumspect and watchful; if he be
not, it is apparent that he has no great edge against his Sin; there is as yet
no such deadly feud between him and his Sin, as is required in every true
Penitent.

Obj. 4. Christ has freed us from the Law, and Believers now under the Gospel
are more at liberty than formerly they were. What necessity therefore is there
of so much strictness and circumspection? How does such a severe course of Life
consist with the liberty that Christ has purchased for us?

Ans. Christ has indeed freed us from any Obligation to the Ceremonial Law,
and from the Moral Law as a Covenant of Works that requires perfect and
unerring obedience; we are not to be justified by the works of the Law, but by
Faith in Christ. But however the Moral Law is still in force as the Rule of
Life, and we are still under the commanding power thereof. And that we are so,
is manifest several ways.

1. Mat. 5.17.
Christ himself expressly declares, that he came not to destroy the law, but to
fulfill it. And the Apostle, even when he disputes against justification by the
works of the Law, is so far from asserting that we are freed from the
obligation of the Law, that he does with much vehemence affirm the contrary;
Romans 3.31.
Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid, says he; yea we
establish the law.

2. Our Savior in his preaching every where presses Obedience to the Moral
Law, and urges the Duties thereof: And in particular his most Divine and
Excellent Sermon on the Mount does in great part consist of that subject.

3. In that Sermon he does not only press the Duties of the Moral Law, but
vindicate the Law it self in many particulars, and more strictly enforces
Obedience thereunto, and severely threatens the Disobedient.

4 He declares, Mat. 5.20.
that if our righteousness exceed not the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, (who yet went very far in many things) we shall never enter into the
kingdom of God. Promising Mercy to no Sinners but such as take his yoke upon
them; Mat. 11.29
And letting all workers of Iniquity, and wilful Transgressors of the Law know,
that he will never acknowledge them for his, but utterly disclaim them, and
cast them off at the great day of their appearance before him, notwithstanding
all their pleas and pretensions for being owned by him. Mat. 7.23.


5. As Christ himself ever called for Obedience to the Moral Law, and urged the
Duties thereof, so did the Apostles after him. St. Paul in his discourse with
Felix, Act 24.25
reasoned of righteousness, and temperance, and judgment to come. And writing
to the Corinthians, he says, 1 Cor. 69, 10.
Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
All which being Sins against the Moral Law, exclude Men out of Heaven; so
strictly does God still even now under the Gospel insist on and require
Obedience to the Moral Law. Romans 13.1, 2.
And thus the Apostle presses the Duty of Subjects to Magistrates, the Duty of
Parents to Children, and of Children to Parents; Col. 3.18, 19, etc. Col. 4.1.
as also the respective Duties of Husbands and Wives, Masters and Servants. He
that peruseth these Scriptures, how can he think that the Moral Law is now out
of date, and no longer in force to them that have embraced the Gospel, and by
Faith received Christ?

6. The Gospel is so far from discharging the Professors thereof from Obedience
to the Law, that it more strongly enforces Obedience, and lays an higher
Obligation thereunto upon Christians than was laid upon the Jews; in regard
that greater Light, and more powerful Motives and Inducements to Obedience are
now afforded. Hence those severe and terrible threatenings in case of
Disobedience. This is the condemnation, Joh. 3.19.
that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light,
because their deeds were evil. Mat. 3.10.
Now is the Ax laid to the root of the trees; therefore every tree which
brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire. Christ
comes with his fan in his hand, Luke 3.17.
and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather the wheat into his garner;
but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable. The Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, 2 These. 1.7, 8.
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel. Tit. 2.11, 12.
And what does the grace of God revealed in this Gospel teach us, but to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present world?

7. Did Christ ever intend by his death to purchase for us a liberty of
sinning? Did he not therefore give himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works?
And lastly, on whom was the injunction of walking circumspectly here in the
Text imposed? Was it not on Believers?

And this may suffice to have been spoken to that Objection.

Obj. 5. If so much heedfulness and circumspection be required of Christians,
what will become of many that profess the Christian Religion? We see no great
numbers of them that are so strict and circumspect; shall they all perish
notwithstanding all the Privileges which they enjoy in the visible Church, who
attain not to this circumspection?

A. Our Savior has plainly declared, Mat. 20.16 Mat. 22.14.
that many are called, but few are chosen. And again, That wide is the gate,
and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in
thereat; and that strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto
life, Mat. 7.13, 14.
and few there be that find it. What can we say against such plain, express,
and absolute passages of Scripture delivered by the mouth of him that is Truth
it self, and can neither deceive nor be deceived? A very weighty and dreadful
Truth it is, that calls upon us all to give all diligence that we may be found
in that small number, which we are never likely to be, unless we walk
circumspectly. If to walk circumspectly be a Duty incumbent on all Christians,
who is there amongst us all that may think himself exempted from it? Who can
plead for himself that he has a particular Dispensation to lead his Life in
another manner, and to go to Heaven upon easier terms than others may?

But perhaps you will say, though we are all enjoined to walk circumspectly,
and though it be a Duty incumbent on all, yet it is not enjoined as absolutely
necessary to Salvation. We may hope God intends not to shut all out of Heaven
that have not walked circumspectly. This were very hard.

A. I answer briefly, If it be a Duty to walk circumspectly, then it is a Sin
not so to walk; and every Sin unrepented of, excludes a man out of Heaven. If
any Man think this to be hard, he must know, that as hard as it is, God will
never alter the terms on which Eternal Life is offered men, and frame more
favorable and cheap terms to gratify men's corrupt Affections.

Obj. 6. Many who never walked with so much circumspection, die peaceably. When
they are going out of the World, we hear of no complaints, no discovery of
fears, no trouble of conscience. A man would not wish to leave the World with
more peace and quiet than many of these do.

A. To die without dread and horror, or free from inward troubles and
conflicts, is no certain and infallible Argument of a good Estate. Their Estate
is never the better, or the more safe, because they die quietly. Their
Consciences may be seared, and their Hearts may be so hardened as they may have
no sense of their Spiritual condition. We find by Experience, that this is the
case of many a wicked man that has led a very lewd and ungodly life. Ask many
such when they lie a dying, how it is with them, whether there be any thing that
troubles them, or lies heavy upon their Consciences? And they will readily
answer, There is nothing that troubles them, nothing that disturbs their peace.
Ask them, if they be willing to die, and whether they be not afraid of death?
Their answer is, they are very willing to die; and as for death, they fear it
not. Now call you this a dying peaceably and comfortably, when men of very bad
or careless Lives go out of the World fast asleep in carnal security? When they
die without any sense of their Spiritual and Everlasting Estate? O be not
deceived! it is certainly a very sad and fearful thing, when a careless or
wicked Life, without any evidence of after-repentance, is shut up in a quiet
and undisturbed death. How much better grounds of comfortable hopes concerning
the Everlasting Estate of such men were there, if they died under many fears
and troubles from a sound conviction and thorough sense of the sins of their
Life! It Is very true, you will say, if they have been very wicked Men, great
and notorious Sinners; But if the worst that can be said of them, is, that they
have been careless and uncircumspect in their Lives, the matter is not much.

A. Considering the corruption of our Nature, our strong proneness to Evil, the
many Temptations we meet with, and the malice and restlesness of Satan ever
watching to take hold of all advantages against us to hurry us into Sin; it is
impossible but that a man of a careless and uncircumspect Life, should have led
a very sinful Life, and have contracted and heaped up a great deal of guilt;
and therefore if such a one without discovery of any After-repentance and
Humiliation, and without any trouble upon account of his Sins, go quietly out
of the World, it is a sad and uncomfortable thing; and though we may not rashly
and peremptorily pass our Judgment concerning the Eternal Estate of particular
Persons, yet have we just cause to fear, and all things considered, we cannot
but greatly fear how it may be with such a one in the other World. Sure we are,
without Repentance, whereof there was no evidence or appearance, he must
everlastingly miscarry.

So from the Duty of walking circumspectly, I come to the Argument by which it
is enforced, implied in the next words, Not as fools, but as wise. It Is every
man's wisdom to walk circumspectly, but his folly to be careless, uncircumspect
and heedless in the course of his Life. Prove. 17.24.
Wisdom is before him that has understanding. That is, He that has
understanding, the man that is truly wise, his wisdom is before him to look
right on, to ponder the path of his feet, as Solomon speaks, Prove. 4.25, 26.
to spy out and consider his way, to direct and govern his steps. And so is
this Proverb expounded by that other to the same purpose, Prove. 14.8
The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way; that is the use which he
makes of his wisdom; he is, as to that matter, wise for himself, in Solomon's
Language still: Prove. 9.12
But the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth; he exercises that little
reason which he has, about remoter things, about any thing else rather than
what most nearly concerns him, the observing and making choice of his way. As
if a Man should fix his Eyes on the Hills at a great distance, where the Earth
and the Heavens seem to meet, and in the mean time neglect to heed his way, to
observe where he treads, and what dangers he runs upon; as the Philosopher who
fell into a Pit whilst his Eyes were taken up with the Contemplation of the
Celestial Bodies. Thus we see it is our wisdom to walk circumspectly; and it is
so in several respects.

1. We hereby shun and avoid the greatest Evils.

1. The displeasure of God, whose wrath is so terrible, that it made the
Prophet cry out, Hab. 1.6.
Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of
his anger?

2. The sting of an evil and guilty Conscience, the Torment whereof is
intolerable; Prove. 18.14.
A wounded spirit who can bear?

3. The loss of a man's Soul, which nothing can compensate or make up. What
shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world, Mat. 16 26
and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? He
that walks circumspectly, avoideth these three great and formidable Evils,
greater than which none can be; the displeasure of God, the sting of a guilty
Conscience, and the loss of his Soul.

2. On the contrary, by walking circumspectly, we secure to our selves the
greatest, the most desirable good things.

1. The favor of God; for while we are with God in a course of Obedience, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
he is with us It Is only sin that deprives us of God's favor. Now the favor
of God is better than life. Psalm. 63.3.
What is there in all the World that is comparable to it?

2. It secures to us peace of Conscience. Gal. 6.16.
As many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them, and upon the
Israel of God. And this also is a thing of invaluable worth. Prove. 14.13.
A good conscience is a continual feast. The comfort of which is so great, as
none can tell what it is, but he that has had experience of it in himself. It
passes knowledge. Ephesians. 4.7.


3. By walking Circumspectly, we secure to our selves the Everlasting wellbeing
of our Souls, which even in Satan's valuation of them are more worth than the
whole World. Mat. 4.9. Psa. 50.23.
To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.

There being these singular advantages of walking circumspectly, you need not
be much troubled at the Censures of the World. They who are strangers to the
ways of God, and were never acquainted with the Comforts of them, may count
them little better than Fools that run not with them to the same excess of
Riot: But this is more than enough to satisfy and quiet you, that what they
count foolishness, the Holy Ghost honors with the Elogy of Wisdom.

So I have done with the great Duty of circumspect walking, together with the
reason by which it is enforced. I come now to speak of the particular instance
in which our circumspection should be exercised; Redeeming the time. To redeem,
properly is by laying down a price to purchase again, or recover that which
another has gotten possession of: So a Captive or a Slave is redeemed out of
the hand of an Enemy: So a Man redeems his Goods which have been pawned or sold
to another. Now in this very sense to redeem time that is gone is impossible:
For time is of that nature, that it can never be recovered when once it is lost.
All the Gold and Silver, all the Pearls and Richest Treasures in the World,
were not a price sufficient to purchase again, and recover one quarter of an
hour when it is past: Wherefore by redeeming time, nothing else can be
understood, but a wise and holy improvement of the present time (to speak
vulgarly, for if we speak properly and acurately, no part of time is present;
the present being only an instant which is indivisible.) This wise improvement
of our time with double care and diligence, may however in an improper sense be
said to be a redeeming of misspent time that is past; namely, as it makes
amends for that loss. As for Example, if a Man having played away, and vainly
lost an hour, shall by extraordinary industry so improve the next hour as to
dispatch the work of two hours therein, he may be said to have redeemed the
hour that was lost. And seeing the Apostle in this place intends the redeeming
of time for heavenly things, (at least principally, if not solely) as the whole
series of his discourse shows, and not the redeeming it for the things of the
World; if time be sometimes gained and improved for heavenly things with some
inconvenience or prejudice to our selves in Temporals, then we redeem it in a
sense not very improper; for the inconvenience or prejudice that we sustain in
Temporal things, is as it were the price that we lay down to redeem it. But we
need not be too Critical or Accurate in explaining a phrase where the Apostles
sense and meaning is obvious and easy to be understood. Without all question
his intention in the expression of redeeming time, is only this, that we should
so wisely and carefully husband and employ it for our Spiritual advantage, as
we may make the most of it toward the furthering of our Salvation; and suffer
as little of it as is possible to be so laid out as no benefit may thence
accrue to our Souls. And in regard it is no easy matter thus to improve our
time for Spiritual things, there being so many things of an inferior nature
that will be continually putting in for a share in our time, and rob us of it;
therefore the Apostle makes the redeeming of time for Spiritual ends and
purposes, one main thing in which our Circumspection should be exercised; See
that ye walk circumspectly, redeeming the time. Thus we have the Scope of the
Apostle before us. They are not Temporal, but Spiritual and Heavenly things
chiefly, of which the Apostle is here discoursing; for these better and more
excellent things we are exhorted to redeem the time, that is, to make the best
improvement of it which by our greatest Care and Circumspection we can, and
this sometimes even by undergoing some loss and prejudice in other things. In
discoursing of this Subject, keeping as near the phrase in the Text as I can, I
shall show,

1. From what we must redeem the time.

2. For what we must redeem it.

3. How time is to be redeemed.

4. Why it is to be redeemed.

And then make Application of what shall have been delivered.

I begin with the first of these; from what must we redeem time?

I answer, we must redeem it from all those things that would seize it, and rob
us of it. I shall mention some of them.

1. We must redeem time from the World. The World, if we affect it
immoderately, and pursue the things thereof eagerly, will ingross to it self,
and swallow up all our time, leaving us none for better things, and things of
higher Concernment to us.

2. We must redeem time from the Flesh. The Flesh is also craving as well as
the World; it would have all our time if it might, to be spent in what may
gratify Corrupt Nature; in sleep, and ease, and pastimes, and idleness; in
pleasing the Senses, and pampering the Body, and giving satisfaction to Men's
Lusts.

3. We must redeem the time from Satan, who will likewise cheat us of it, and
find out such employment for it, as no part of it may be gained for our Souls,
if he can hinder it. Under these three, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,
may be comprehended all those things which so take up and steal away our time,
as that our greatest and most important work has the least part of it, if any
part at all.

And so much concerning the first particular, from what we must redeem the time.

2. For what must time be redeemed? I answer, we must redeem the time for all
those great ends and purposes for which our time here is allotted us.

As 1st. To attend upon the business of our lawful Callings, and to serve God
and our Generation in the respective places and stations in which God has set
us. And here every man is to consider what that work is which God has assigned
him; what his proper business and employment is about which God has set him;
and he must be very circumspect and careful that he do not suffer needless
divertisements, and impertinent things to take him off from that work. And he
must know, that he does serve God in that work, as well as in Prayer, or any
other spiritual Duty whatsoever. Only, great care must be taken

1. That in those his employments he do what he does in obedience to God, and
with respect to his command who has enjoined him to be diligent and
industrious in his Calling; and that he eye God therein, and aim at pleasing
him, and at being accepted with him; Coloss. 3.23.
doing every thing as unto the Lord, and not unto men, as the Apostle exhorts.

2. He must also be careful that he be not so intent upon the World, or any
worldly thing, as to neglect his Soul, and the Duties that pertain to God's
immediate Worship.

Neither may it here be thought needless, that men should be called upon to
redeem time for the duties of their particular Callings. For though many are
too busy that way devoting their whole time to the World; yet many others
shamefully neglect their Callings, and suffer themselves to be drawn off from
their business by every divertisement that comes in their way, and offers it
self. How well were it for many, if they could be persuaded to redeem time from
the Alchouse, from the Tavern, from the Coffee-house, for the duties of their
Calling; to redeem time from their lewd Acquaintance, and idle Companions; from
their wicked Accomplices and Associates in sin! Through their neglect to redeem
and improve their time better, their poor Families may be half starved at home,
while they waste their time in excess and lewdness abroad. I am apt to hope the
Magistrates will do what they can to prevent or redress these lamentable
Disorders, unto which there were never more temptations than in these our days
there are.

2. Time must be redeemed for prayer, reading the Scriptures, meditation on
heavenly things, self-examination, communing with your heart, and taking an
account of your life. These are the things, and others of like nature, for
which especially we are to redeem time, and which the Apostle chiefly aims at
in this place, as has been said.

3. Time must be redeemed for performance of the duties and offices of love to
our Neighbors, whether they be such as concern their Souls, or their Bodies.

1. With relation to their Souls, time must be redeemed for teaching,
instructing, counselling, advising, comforting, admonishing and reproving them,
as there shall be cause for it, and as their conditions shall require it.

2. With relation to their Bodies, time must be redeemed for looking after
them, providing for them, and ministering such reliefs and succors to them as
they shall stand in need of. But above all, time must be redeemed for our own
Souls, and for the things that refer to our spiritual and everlasting welfare.

3. How is the time to be redeemed?

A. By using our utmost diligence to make the best improvement of it that we
can. And for our help and furtherance therein, it will concern us

1. To be careful that we rightly divide and distribute our time; allotting
such a proportion of it for attending the duties of our particular Callings, so
much for necessary refreshings, so much for holy duties, and so for the rest of
those things which necessarily require some part of our time.

2. To be ever watchful against all Incroachers upon our time, and the
principal Thieves of our time, which will be every day attempting to steal away
some part of it. What these Thieves of time are, every one best knows, who is
best acquainted with his own Temptations, and the circumstances of his
Condition.

3. He should daily call himself to an account, and enquire how he has
employed his time, and what use he has made of it. And where he finds he has
misspent any part of it, he should be humbled for it, and resolve to make amends
by greater care in husbanding his time for the future. And this he should
especially be careful to do, where through his carelessness he has misimployed,
or vainly squandred away that time which should have been spent in the Service
of God, and in the Duties that more immediately refer to his Soul, and more
directly tend to the promoting of the good thereof.

But you will say, If a man should every day thus reckon with himself, and call
himself to an account concerning the employing of every part of his time, this
would be a very irksome and tedious course. Who would endure to be so strict
and severe to himself, as to be accountable to himself for every hour in the
day? This were an intolerable burden, a yoke too heavy to be born. To this I
answer,

1. That whether we be willing to be accountable to our selves for our time
daily, or no, we must be accountable to God for it, for every hour of it. And
the best way to render our Account to God more easy, is to be daily calling
our selves to an account. He that does this, and does it as he ought, makes
even Reckonings between God and his own Soul every day.

2. We may not think to get to Heaven so easily, as to undergo nothing in our
way thither that may be tedious and unacceptable to our corrupt Nature. They
who may hope to go to Heaven, must deny themselves, and cross the sinful
Inclinations of their Nature; they must ever and anon be rigid and severe to
themselves; they must be willing to take pains, Luke 13.14 ^ Pet. 1.^0. Pail.
3.13, 14.
and to strive to enter in at the strait gate. They must give all diligence to
make their calling and election sure. Forgetting the things that are behind,
and reaching forth unto those things which are before, they must press toward
the mark for the prize of the high calling of God. If men dream of getting to
Heaven without labor and difficulty, without offering some violence to their
depraved and sinful Natures, they are not likely to come thither. Undoubtedly
it is not for nothing that our Savior has declared, Matthew. 7.14.
That narrow is the way, and strait is the gate that leads unto life. It Is a
severe passage that we have; and deserving to be seriously considered by all
slothful Christians, that would go to Heaven so as it might cost them nothing;
If the righteous scarcely be saved, 1 Pet. 4.18.
where shall the ungodly and sinner appear? If the most righteous man after all
the care and diligence which he has used, and the pains which he has taken to
secure his Soul, be scarce saved at last; if all that he could do, be but just
enough to bring him to Heaven, shall any man think to loiter away his time
here, and wast it as he pleases, and yet make account to get to Heaven as well
as those who have been most careful and sollicitous, most diligent and
industrious in the use of all good means, to prevent the everlasting
miscarrying of their Souls? Let no man so deceive himself; whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he reap: As men have been sollicitous and diligent, or
careless and slothful, about the concernments of their Souls here, so must they
expect to fare hereafter. They that sow to the flesh, Gal. 6.7.8.
shall of the flesh reap corruption; And they that sow to the spirit, shall of
the spirit reap life everlasting.

But you will say, My Condition is such, that how careful soever I be about
what concerns my Soul, I can redeem but a very little time for things of that
nature. My particular Calling so continually takes me up, that I can hardly
gain one quarter of an hour in a day from it to be spent upon any thing else. I
answer,

1. This may sometimes be through a man's own fault. Perhaps he takes more upon
him, and incumbers himself with more business than he ought. No man should so
entangle himself with the Affairs of this World, as to shut out better things.
Better let part of the World go, than endanger the loss of your Soul. By so
grasping the World, as to lose your Soul, you would be a sorry gainer in the
end.

2. But supposing a man's Calling to be such, as very little time can be
redeemed from it for heavenly things; yet he must remember, Luke 10.42.
that one thing is needful; absolutely and indispensably necessary, and
therefore he must find time for that one great thing, whatever else he omitted.
Earthly things must so far give way to heavenly things, as that our Souls and
eternal concernments be not neglected.

3. But yet however it must be considered, That God does not require the same
portion of time from all men. Persons whose Condition is low and strait, as to
outward things; and some others also, whose time is necessarily and unavoidably
taken up with the duties of their particular Calling, may satisfy themselves in
allowing much less time for spiritual things, than others who are less
straightened, and more at liberty. But as for such as have more leisure, they may
not think that no more is expected of them, than of the other; Luke 12, 48.
For to whom much is given, of them much shall be required.

And if any have so much time to spare, as they know not how to employ it, they
must know that God will take it ill at their hands, unless they measure to him
in some proportion according to what they have. If they who so abound in time,
should think to put off God with a small pittance of it, this were,

1. A great slighting of God, and would be so interpreted by him. Mal. 1.14.
He is a great king, and will accordingly be treated by his Subjects.

2. It were a great undervaluing of his Grace, as if it were either so cheap a
commodity, as that it might be obtained at any rate, and with less pains than
any thing else that is of any value; or so vile and worthless a thing, as that
time were ill bestowed in laboring after it.

3. It were a great undervaluing of our own Souls; as if we thought so meanly
of them, that we grudged any time that is bestowed on them.

4. As for those, who in respect of their Callings, and the employments in
which the Providence of God has engaged them, are much straightened in time, and
cannot help it; I shall recommend these three things to them.

1. The less time they can redeem from their Callings for holy Duties, the more
heavenly-minded let them labor to be while they follow their Employments;
setting God much before their eyes in the duties of their Calling; endeavoring
to keep a good Conscience, and to carry themselves justly and uprightly in all
their dealings; and upon all occasions throughout the day sending up many
short, but fervent, Prayers, and holy Ejaculations unto God. So doing, they may
rest assured, that they serve God acceptably in the Duties of their Calling,
and shall accordingly be both accepted and rewarded. An instance hereof we may
see, Coloss. 3.24. Ephesians. 6.8.

2. The less time they have for holy Duties, the more careful must they be,
that the little time they have be not lost in a slight, careless, formal and
heartless performance of holy Duties. Having but little time for such things,
let them be sure they make the most of it by a truly spiritual improvement of
it.

3. The less time they can redeem from their Callings in the week time, the
more careful let them be to spend the Lord's Day in a due manner, and so as may
best conduce to their spiritual advantage. To be able to gain very little time
from their Callings throughout the week, and also to spend the Lord's Day
either in idleness or pastimes, or in the mere outward formalities of Worship,
void of all spiritual life and power, were the ready way to starve your Souls.
Such as do this, if they had any true grace, must needs be sensible of the
continual decays and declinings thereof, unless they be those that never
reflect upon themselves, and take any account of the state of their Souls.

And so much touching the third particular, how time is to be redeemed.

4. Why is time to be redeemed? There are many reasons for it, but I shall here
mention only some of them, reserving the rest to be after mentioned in the
Application. We must redeem the time,

1. Because it is a Talent for which we must give an account. Time is lent us,
and put into our hands not to be wasted and trifled away as we please, but to
be managed and employed, to be laid out and expended according to the pleasure
of him who has entrusted us with it. Wherefore our Account will be sad, if
when we shall be called to give it in, it shall appear that we have neglected
the Work, for the dispatching whereof time was allotted us, and spent our time
in that which was no part of our business.

2. We must redeem the time, because our chief and most necessary work is
limited to a certain time, the time of this our temporal life here. Our most
necessary and important work here, is to make our peace with God, and get a
title through Christ to a better life when this shall be at an end. Now this
work must be done here, or never; the other World is no place for it. Now is
the accepted time, 2 Cor. 6.2.
now is the day of salvation. Mercy is here offered, and we are called on, and
importuned to accept of it; but after this life, the door of mercy will be for
ever shut.

3. The continuance and duration of the time allotted us for this great work,
is in sundry respects very uncertain.

1. The life of man is uncertain. No man knows how near he may be to his long
home. This may be the last day, this the last hour that he has to live, for
ought that he can tell. Who can give him any security for the lengthening out
of his life one hour more? Psalm. 31.15. Psalm. 104.29.
Our times are in God's hand. When he pleases he takes away our breath, and we
return to the dust. And he has not thought fit to reveal or declare when, or
how he will do it; he has given us no assurance that he will not put an end to
our days before we go out of this place.

2. If life be continued, it is uncertain whether or no the means of grace shall
be continued. Though God lengthen out men's lives, yet he often withdraws the
means of grace from them; and he has threatened to do it, where means are not
improved, and where men walk unsuitably to them. Thus he threatened the Jews for
their sins, Matthew. 21.43.
to take away his kingdom from them, and to give it to a notion bringing forth
the fruits thereof. And to the same effect Christ threatened the Church of
Ephesus, Rev. 2.5.
saying, Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first
works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick
out of his place.

3. Though life and outward means of grace should be continued, yet God may in
wrath suspend or withdraw the cooperation of his Spirit. Though the Jews
enjoyed the ministry of the Prophet Isaiah, and he must prophecy to them, yet
God tells him beforehand, that the issue of all his Labors among them would
be no other than the hardening of them in their sins. Isa. 6.9, 10.
Go, says he, tell this people, hear ye indeed, but understand not; see ye
indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their
ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. The
meaning is, Though God gave his Servant a command to prophesy to them, yet for
their former sins and provocations he would so give them up to the wickedness
of their own hearts, that they would be never the better, but the worse, for
having had a Prophet among them. A fearful thing, when those means that should
open men's eyes, shall shut them; and when those means that should soften men's
hearts, shall harden them. Let us take heed that this be not the case of any of
us. If what should convince, humble and reform us, take no other effect upon
us, but that we are so much the worse, the more remote from repentance, the
more obstinately and resolutely bent after our sinful courses, the more
incorrigible and irreclaimable, our Charge would be heavy when the day of
reckoning comes. How dreadful and intolerable would the Sentence of
Condemnation to be pronounced against us be, when the means we have enjoyed
shall rise up in judgment against us, and our mercies shall condemn us!

4. As the most necessary and important work that we have to dispatch, is
limited to a certain time, and the duration of that time is in diverse respects
very uncertain; so not to have improved that time, but to have left our
greatest business undone, till it be too late, and till the only season in
which it was to be done, be now over, and irrecoverably gone, is a most
deplorable and dismal thing. How affectionately did our Savior weep over
Jerusalem in this respect; Luke 19.41, 42.
saying, If thou had known, even thou in this thy day, the things that belong
to thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. When mercy was offered her,
and she was earnestly importuned to accept of it, she did not know the day of
her visitation, as it follows, v. 44. She slighted mercy, and refused the
gracious tenders thereof.

But wherein does the misery of such a condition lie?

I answer, in these three things.

1. Having finally refused mercy, having obstinately persisted in the refusal
of it to the end, they shall never have the like offers any more. The day of
grace with them is run out once for all, and shall never, never be recalled; no
more opportunities of making their peace with God to eternity. The united
Prayers of all the Saints in the Church Militant and Triumphant, if they should
all join together in such a Suit, could not obtain the offer of mercy for the
space of one hour for any finally impenitent Sinner. He has sinned away his
mercies, and it is utterly impossible that he should recover what he has
wilfully deprived himself of: Lament his loss he may, and rue it he shall to
eternity, but retrieve it he never shall.

2. Another thing in which the misery of this condition lies, is, that the
punishment of such persons shall be dreadfully heightened upon the account of
the mercy that has been offered them, which they have so wretchedly slighted
and rejected. The Gospel it self fully and clearly represents to us what a
direful aggravation of their punishment this will be. We have three severe and
most remarkable Scriptures to this purpose. This is the condemnation, that is,
Joh. 3.19.
the most sore and dreadful condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. Mat.
11.21, 22, 23, 24.
Woe unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; It shall be more tolerable for
Tire and Sidon in the day of judgment, than for you. And thou Capernaum that
art lifted up to heaven (namely in the means of grace which she enjoyed, but
improved not) Thou Capernaum which art lifted up to heaven, shall be brought
down to hell; it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day
judgment, than for thee. How shall we escape, Heb. 2.3.
if we neglect so great salvation?

3. The last aggravation of their misery, is this, That the thoughts of mercy
once offered and rejected, and of their having wilfully made themselves
eternally miserable, when they were in a capacity of being eternally happy, if
they had not stood in their own light, and been wanting to themselves; I say,
the thoughts hereof will be in their Consciences a never-dying Worm to torment
them with unspeakable anguish to eternity. So dismal and deplorable a thing it
is not to have improved the time and opportunities afforded us for making our
peace with God.

And so much concerning the Reasons why we must redeem the time.

I now proceed to the Application, which was the last thing to be spoken to.
And here,

USE 1.
1. If Time be upon so many accounts to be redeemed, to be redeemed
(especially) for heavenly things, and to be improved for the good of our Souls;
what may they think of themselves, who make little other use of their time,
than to dishonor God, debauch their Acquaintance and Companions in sin, and to
bring swift ruin and destruction upon their own Souls? who redeem time indeed,
but it is for the satisfaction of their Lusts, for gratifying their Corruptions,
for glutting themselves with sinful Pleasures, and sensual Delights, for
heaping up sin upon sin, for filling up the measure of their Provocations, and
making themselves ripe for judgment. That spend their time in excess and
intemperance, in riot and drunkenness, in chambering and wantonness; in setting
their mouths against Heaven, in belching out horrid Oaths and Blasphemies, in
scoffing at Religion, and deriding Piety; that make it their business to sow
the Principles of Atheism, and to scatter the Seeds of Irreligion and
Profaneness in all Places and Companies where they come; to seduce, poison and
corrupt all they meet with, and to make them twofold more the children of hell
than themselves. O how many such wicked Instruments, such Agitators for Hell,
and Factors for the Devil, have our times produced! How does City and Country
abound with them! and what swarms of them are there to be found in all Quarters
of the Land!

Though such as these come seldom to the House of God, yet in regard they
sometimes drop in amongst others; and in regard that no Congregation (if
numerous at least) can be presumed to be without many lewd and vicious Persons,
though perhaps there may not be many that have arrived at the same height and
excess of wickedness with those beforementioned:

I shall propose these three Questions to all those who spend their precious
time in lewd and ungodly Practices, of what kind soever; or rather, I shall
desire they would propose them to themselves.

1. Let them ask themselves, put the question to their own Hearts and
Consciences, Whether they think, or can think, that God made them, and gave
them excellent and immortal Souls to these ends? If they think he did, then it
seems they are of opinion, that God gave them a being, to the end they might
renounce their homage, and disclaim their subjection to him, and serve the
Devil: And that he still preserves them, upholds them in their being, to no
other purpose, than that they may still go on in the same ways of open
rebellion against himself, and defiance against Heaven. Certainly it were an
high disparagement, and an horrid derogation to the wisdom and holiness of God,
for any man to imagine that God should make men, give them a being, continue
being to them, and lengthen out their lives, that they might thus run out their
time, and spend their days in a course of constant opposition and defiance
against him that made them. Well then, you must be enforced to acknowledge, if
you consider the matter, that God gave you being, and allots you time here for
other purposes than those to which you apply it.

2. Ask your selves also whether you think there is no account to be given unto
God of your time? If you allow your Servant time for dispatching the work which
you have injoined him, and you find the work undone when you come to view it,
you call him to account for the time you gave him, and will know how he has
employed it; whether he has spent it in dileness, or what is worse; and do you
think that God will not have an account from you of your time? Will he be less
severe and exact in reckoning with you for your time, than you are in reckoning
with your Servant for it?

3. Ask your self one question more, to wit, Whether you think that still going
on at this rate as you do, you shall be able with comfort to give up your
account hereafter to God of the use you have made of your time? A true and just
account must be given in whether you will or no; and how then will your account
run, and what will the style of it be? So much of your time spent in Drinking,
and Carousing, and Swearing; so much in Chambering and Wantonness, and in
whatever is not to be named; so much in Profane and Atheistical Drolleries, and
in making a mock of Sin, yea, of Piety, Religion, and Sobriety; so much in
traducing and reproaching others, in impairing their Reputation, and wounding
their good Name; so much in railing, fomenting and spreading evil Reports; so
much in speaking against your Brother, and slandering your own Mothers Son; so
much in laboring to Infect, Poison, and seduce your Friends and Acquaintance,
and to engage them in the same vicious and ungodly practices with your self:
What think you of such a Bill as this? Do you not even tremble at the thought
of giving in to God such an account of your time? If Jezebel was severely
threatened because space being given her to repent, she repented not; What shall
be their doom, who having space given them to repent, do not only neglect to
repent, but consume, and lavishly mis-spend the whole time allotted them for
that Duty, in all manner of wicked and abominable practices? And so much of
that first Use.

USE 2.
If time be upon so many accounts to be redeemed, and if it must be redeemed
(especially) for heavenly things, then what may they think of themselves who
trifle away their time vainly and fruitlesly? Who, instead of redeeming the
time, study and contrive how they may be rid of it upon any terms. Time is a
burden to them, they know not what to do with it. They are at some pains in
devising and inventing Arts to pass it away. As if time stayed too long with
them, and did not run out fast enough of it self. Now as for you that have so
much time to spare, that are so much troubled with it, and know not how to
bestow it, or dispose of it; let me put these questions to you also.

1. Have you done your great work? Have you made your peace with God? Have you
gotten the pardon of your Sins? It Is very much to be feared, that such as are
thus troubled to know how to pass away their time, and spend it so vainly, have
done little toward that great and weighty business.

2. Do you know the greatness and difficulty of this work? Do you know how much
time it may require? Though you should begin to set about it immediately, and use
your utmost diligence about it, yet seeing you have so long delayed it, and put
it off; seeing you have undervalued and slighted the offers of Mercy, God may
justly make you wait long before you be upon good grounds fatisfied touching
your peace with him.

3. Do you know how short the remainder of your time may be? Do you know how
soon death may surprise you, and how few steps there may be between you and the
Grave? You cannot tell but that this may be the last day that you have to live,
and that to morrow your Soul may be in another World, and so beyond all
possibility of making your peace with God.

4. Do you consider how different your Thoughts and valuation of Time may be
when you come to die, from what they now are? Then you may so value it, as you
may be willing to give the whole World, if you had it, to purchase one day, to
purchase a few hours, to obtain, if it be possible, the forgiveness of your
sins before you go hence and be seen no more, before your Soul bid an
everlasting farewell to all things under the Sun, and enter upon Eternity.

5. Do you consider the high and everlasting consequence of your employing your
time while you are here? Do you consider that your endless and unspeakable
happiness or misery depends on the improving or not improving of this Moment of
your abode here? For a Moment it is, and no other in comparison of Eternity.
Assuredly if these things were thoroughly pondered, you would not count time so
cheap and inconsiderable a thing, that you should contrive and cast about how
to send it going as fast as you can.

USE 3.
If we must redeem the time, and if we must redeem it especially for heavenly
things, then how much are they to be blamed, who devote all their time to the
World, the World they wholly mind, the World they pursue, the World so fills
their hands and their heads thas there is no room left for heavenly things. But
how is it, that Men who know they have Immorral Souls, should act so
irrationally, and steer their course so directly contrary to their highest
Interest? A Man would think it were easy to convince men of their Folly
herein, and to reason them out of it. For,

1. Is men's Temporal welfare to be preferred before their Eternal well-being?
Is the World more to them than their Souls? What comparison is there between
them? Mark 8.36
What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?
or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

2. What are the things of the World in pursuit whereof you are so much taken
up? Are they any better than so much thick Clay, Hab. 2.6.
if compared with heavenly things? Are they not vile, worthless, contemptible
things in comparison of the pardon of your sins, the favor of God, Grace,
Holiness, an Interest in Christ, and through him a Title to Eternal Happiness
in the other World? Are not these things, Luke 16.11.
and these only the true Riches?

3. Are not the best, the surest, 1 Timothy 6.17. Prove. 23.5
the most stable of all earthly things uncertain? Do they not suddenly make
them wings, and flee away as an Eagle toward heaven?

4. Though there were the richest confluence of them, and though a man did even
wallow in them, would they ever be able to make his Life comfortable, truly
comfortable, without the favor of God, and peace of Conscience? Has not
Solomon, who knew how to estimate them, Eccl. 1.2. Ver. 14.
pronounced them all Vanity, vanity of vanities, yea vanity and vexation of
spirit? Instead of making men truly happy, do they not wound and pierce them
through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10.
who greedily covet after them, and set their hearts upon them?

5. Can they stand you in any stead in an evil day? Solomon again tells you,
Riches profit not in the day of wrath. Prove. 11.4


6. However it be, though these things should still continue with you, yet you
cannot always continue with them to enjoy them; though they should not leave
you, yet you must shortly leave them, be rent away from them all, Job 1.20.
and go naked out of the world.

And so much may suffice to have been spoken to these three sorts of people
that so ill bestow their time, which ought to have been redeemed for better
purposes; such as spend their time wickedly, such as spend it vainly, and such
as suffer the World to swallow it up, and devour it.

USE 4.
Now in the last place, let us all labor to be humbled for the loss of our
time, and be careful to husband it better for the future.

1. Let us labor to be humbled for the loss of our time. And O how much time
have we all lost, even those of us who seem to have been most careful to
improve it!

1. How much time has been spent idly! How much has run out fruitlesly
while we yielded to, and gratified our lazy and slothful Nature!

2. How much in impertinent and unprofitable Visits, that signified nothing,
that were not in the least improved to the benefit of our own or other men's
Souls, or to any other real advantage of our selves or them!

3. How much in dressing and adorning the Body, in decking and beautifying that
corruptible part which must shortly be Meat for Worms!

4. How much has been spent in vain thoughts, idle phansies, fruitless
projectings, distrustful cares! How much of our time by day and by night have
these impertinencies eaten up and devoured!

5. How much of our time has passed away in unprofitable talk, in empty and
frothy discourses, and too often in unsavory and corrupt communication!

6. How much has been spent in Gaming and Pastimes, in needless Recreations
and Divertisements!

7. How much in pampering the Body, and gratifying the Flesh with sensual
Pleasures!

8. How much of that part of our time which we think to have been best
employed, I say, how much of that has been laid out on things of less
concernment to us, while our highest concernments have been shamefully
neglected! How careful have many of us been about our worldly business, that no
time or opportunities for temporal advantages might be lost, while the one
thing needful has been least minded! O how few hours in a Week, or perhaps in
a Month have we redeemed for secret Prayer, Self-examination, and communing
with our own hearts, for stating matters aright between God and our own Souls!
How few hours have we redeemed for seeking God, and making Intercession for a
sinful Nation! How few for turning away the wrath of God that hangs over our
heads, and for averting of those heavy Judgments which our horrid provocations
deserve, and daily threaten us with! I say, we have all very much cause to be
humbled, that while we have suffered poor and inconsiderable things to steal
away, and to inhance so much of our time, these great and important matters
have had so small a share of it.

2. Let us all be stirred up to improve our time better for the future,
redeeming as much of it as we can for the purposes beforementioned relating to
the good of our own and other men's Souls, and to the present sad condition of
the Kingdom. And the more effectually to provoke us hereunto; let us,

1. Lay before us that which has been last spoken of; let us consider how much
time we have already misspent, some in one kind, and some in another. I scarce
know what stronger motive can be made use of to prevail with us to redeem the
time than this. Having misspent and lost so much time already, does it not
highly concern us to make better use of what remains? Especially if we likewise
consider, that as we have misspent much time already, so we know not how
little remains to be better employed.

2. Consider, that when you have been as good an husband of your time as it is
possible, yet it cannot be but that much of it must have been lost,
notwithstanding all the care that has been taken to prevent the loss of it.
Much of our time runs out in sleep, much in eating and drinking, and other ways
of necessary refreshing; much in those unavoidable divertisements which every
day we meet with. How much of our time do these things take up! Certainly the
far greater part of every four and twenty hours is thus employed, unless we be
more provident than most men are, yea unless we be extraordinary husbands of
time, and rare patterns of the well-managing and improving thereof.

3. Hereunto add the motive in the Text; Let us redeem the time, because the
days are evil. And evil they are both in respect of the evil of Sin, and the
many Temptations thereunto; and in respect of the evil of Affliction and
Punishment which our Sins either have already brought upon us, or threaten us
with.

1. The days are evil in respect of Sin, and the many Temptations thereunto.
Never did, as I think, Sin more abound, than in these our days; never was it
more shameless and impudent; never was there, I think, a greater deluge of
wickedness in City and Country, considering what means there are to prevent it:
And never were there so many temptations to Sin, what by Seducers that compass
Sea and Land to make Proselytes, Proselytes to Rome, and Proselytes to I know
not how many pernicious Sects, in great part created and fomented by Factors
for Rome, and set a work and employed by them; and what by other Instruments
which the Devil has in all places to debauch men, and make them Atheists in
Opinion, or in Life and Conversation; either practical or speculative Atheists,
or both. Was there ever such an Atheistical Age as ours is, when so many
espouse and avow Atheism, when they blush not openly to profess it, when they
plead for it, when they dispute for it, when they do all they can to spread and
propagate it; and when so many more live like perfect Atheists, frame their
lives no otherwise than they would or could do, if they verily believed that
there is neither God nor Devil, neither Heaven nor Hell? O the sad condition of
our Age! that a Nation that has had the light of the Gospel so long, and so
clearly shining amongst them; that has been, as it were, lifted up to Heaven
in the means of Grace, and that has been honored and dignified with so many
signal Deliverances, by which God has from Heaven born witness, and given
testimony to the Truth which we profess, should, after all this, so wretchedly
apostatize and decline both in Opinion and Practice, in Doctrine and Manners!
In respect of Sin and Temptations our days are evil with a witness; so evil,
that it is not easy to conceive how they can be much worse, or what further
degrees of wickedness men can arrive at.

2. The days are evil in respect of the evil of Affliction and Punishments
which our Sins have brought upon us, and further threaten us with.

1. They are evil days in respect of the Afflictions and Punishments which our
Sins have brought upon us. What Effusion of Blood at home and abroad, by Sea
and by Land! What vast expense of Treasure! What weakening and impairing of men's
Estates! What Mortality in our memory by a most grievous and terrible
Pestilence raging in the Metropolis, and in diverse other parts of the Kingdom!
What dreadful Fires in the Head City, and in many other places, beyond all that
any of our Histories make any report to have been in this Land! Heretofore, as
far as I have heard or read of, so many, and such terrible Fires within the
like space of time to have been in this Kingdom, no Memorials of former Times,
(for ought I know) give us any account of.

2. As the days are evil, in respect of the sore Afflictions and heavy
Judgments which our Sins have already brought upon us, so are they evil also in
respect of the Judgments which they further threaten us with. The Apostle long
since foretold, 2 Timothy 3.1.
that in the last days perilous times should come. Such are our times. There
was never a time since the Reformation, when our just fears and dangers were
greater than of late they have been. Neither the Spanish Invasion of Eighty
Eight, nor the Gunpowder Plot, (though horrid Attempts both of them) exceeded
the Bloody and Fatal designs of the Enemies of Church and State in our days.

O then, how much does it concern us to redeem the time, because the days are
evil! To redeem it, for giving all diligence to make our calling and election
sure, and for settling matters right between God and our own Souls; to redeem
time for getting strength to keep our selves untainted with the Corruptions of
the Times, and strength against the Assaults of the many dangerous and powerful
Temptations which we meet with; to redeem time for seeking God, and for
offering up to him our most fervent and uncessant Supplications for confounding
the wicked Devices, for defeating the Bloody Counsels and Barbarous Designs,
and for breaking in pieces the Diabolical Combinations and Traitorous
Conspiracies of unreasonable men, that are skilful to destroy!

To redeem time, for seeking God in behalf of the Reformed Churches abroad,
groaning under the sad Miseries and Calamities of War and Persecution; to
redeem time, to humble our selves for our manifold Sins and Provocations here
at home, and for averting those heavy Judgments, which we may fear are hanging
over our heads, and hastening to come upon us, and may speedily overtake us,
and surprise us, if by our timely Humiliation and sincere Repentance we prevent
it not.

These are sufficient Reasons to dispose of our time in such order, as
Religion, the Concernments of our own Souls, and the Public Welfare may have a
good proportion of it applied that way. And the worse the times are we live in,
the more careful should we be to redeem it.

The Fourth Sermon.
3 Ep. JOH. V. 3. Beloved, thou do faithfully whatsoever thou do to the
brethren, and to strangers.


THIS short Epistle of St. John was written to Gaius, a sincere and zealous
Christian. Where he lived, and to what Church he belongod, is uncertain. But
wheresoever his abode was, whether at Corinth, Derbe, or at Ephesus, or
some-where else, it is evident that he was a man eminent for Religion, and
greatly useful in his place. The chief intention of St. John in writing this
Epistle to him, seems to have been, that he might let him know how much he
rejoiced to hear of the grace of God in him, and that he might encourage him to
go on and persevere in the profession and practice of the truth which he had
entertained.

In the words which I have made choice of, we have the principal thing which
the Apostle here takes notice of in him, commends him for, and encourages
him in; and that is, his charity and hospitality to the Saints, in relieving
them, and giving entertainment to them, or rather his uprightness and sincerity
therein; Thou do faithfully whatsoever thou do to the brethren, and to
strangers. Which words, that they are to be understood of his Charity in
relieving, and of his Hospitality in entertaining the Saints, is manifest from
what follows concerning the same Subject, in the 8th, 9th and 10th Verses. Thou
do faithfully whatsoever thou do to the brethren, and to strangers. By the
Brethren, we may understand those who were of the same Church with Gaius, or at
least of the same City where his Habitation was; and by Strangers, those other
Christians, who either through persecution were constrained to come thither for
shelter, or whose necessary business and secular affairs drew them thither; or
lastly, who came to preach the Gospel, as it seems they did, who are intended
in the 7th and 8th Verses, concerning whom the Apostle says, that for his
Name's sake, that is, for Christ's sake, they went forth, taking nothing of the
Gentiles; and that therefore Christians who were of ability ought to receive
them, that they might thereby be Fellow helpers to the Truth, and promote the
propagation of the Gospel. And though these also were Brethren in a more
general sense; yet being Strangers, those other at home might in a stricter
sense be so called, as being Brethren, not only in respect of their common
Faith and profession of the same Christian Religion, but also in respect of
their more particular relation to one another, as fellow members of the same
same Church, or Inhabitants of the same City.

Now whereas among many other good things, which without all question were to
be found in Gaius, the Apostle singles out this particular, That he did
faithfully whatsoever he did in way of charity and kindness, both to the
brethren, and to strangers; And whereas he does not so much commend him for the
thing done, how good soever in it self considered, as for the manner of doing
it; We may hence observe,

That it is a great duty of a Christian to do every thing faithfully. In
treating of which point, I shall

1. Show what it is to do all things faithfully; or wherein this faithfulness
lies, and what the ingredients of it are.

2. Why it is so great a Duty, and what Reasons there are why so much stress
should be laid upon it. And

3. I shall apply what shall have been spoken.

I begin with the first of these, which was, to show what it is to do every
thing faithfully. In the general, to do any thing faithfully, is nothing else
but to do it sincerely, and in singleness of heart, as looking unto God
therein. This Hezekiah expresses, 2 Kings 20.3.
by walking before God in truth, and with a perfect heart. And the Apostle
expresses it, by doing every thing heartily as unto the Lord, Coloss. 3.23.
and not unto men. Now herein there are these things comprehended.

1. That we be careful to look to it, that whatsoever we do, is agreeable to
our Master's will; that his pleasure be the Rule by which we are guided in our
Actions; that we do nothing but what we know he commands or allows: And that we
do not in any thing prefer our own will before his; for that is one point of
faithfulness in every Servant, to keep close to his Commission, and the
pleasure of his Master. This God much insists on. Whatsoever thing I command
you, observe to do it; thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it, Deuteronomy.
12.32. Ye shall observe to do as the Lord your God has commanded you; ye shall
not turn aside to the right hand, or to the left, Deuteronomy. 5.32. And this exact
observation of the Rule, and strict adherence thereunto, is required even in
those cases wherein our Reason, perhaps, may present and dictate somewhat else
to be done, rather than what God commands. We must hearken to no suggestions
of carnal Reason, where the pleasure of God, for the contrary, is clearly
revealed to us. This God often cautions his People against; Ye shall not do
after all that ye do this day, every man what is good in his eyes, Deuteronomy. 12.8.
So Numb 15.39. God would have his People of Israel look upon the fringe which
he had enjoined should be upon the borders of their garments, that they might
remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them; and not seek after
their own heart, and their own eyes; that is, that they might not do that which
they had a mind to do, and which their own depraved reason and sense dictated
to them, and led them unto, contrary to the Word of God. So then, that is the
first thing required in faithfulness, that we do what we have God's command or
allowance for, not preferring our will before his in any thing; nor so leaning
to our own understanding, as to be thereby drawn aside to the one hand, or the
other.

2. In matters of duty, he that would do what he does faithfully, must not only
do what is commanded him, but do it in obedience to God, and with respect to
his Command. A Servant is not to be reputed faithful merely because he does
what is agreeable to his Master's will, unless he do it in obedience, and
because he is commanded; unless he eye his Master's Command, and do what he
does with respect thereunto. A man may do many things that are commanded, for
his own bye ends, and with respect to somewhat else, rather than his Master's
command; yea, though he do what is commanded, yet perhaps his Master's command
had no influence upon him at all, and he would never have done it, unless there
had been somewhat else to induce him thereunto, besides his Master's pleasure.
Your Servant has a mind to go to such a place, and thither he would have gone
although you should have forbidden him: You command him to go thither, and he
goes; but does he not go in his own Errand more than yours, who would have gone
thither, though you had sent him a contrary way? So God commands us many things
which suit well with a man's worldly Interests and Designs, and thereupon a man
does what is commanded, but not so much because it is commanded, as because it
furthers his own secular Advantages, and worldly Ends. Does he herein what he
does faithfully? Does he sincerely serve his Master, or rather does he not
serve himself? Instances in this kind are easily to be found. To be diligent in
a man's Calling, to be as good as a man's word, and as we say, to keep touch
punctually with every one with whom a man has any thing to do; to deal justly
and fairly with all men; these are things which God strictly enjoins, and which
he lays much weight on; but they are also things which make much for a man's
Reputation in the World, which make others willing to employ him, to deal with
him, and trust him, and consequently which much conduce to the advancing of a
man's worldly Estate. Now how many are there who do all those external things
which God has commanded, but without any respect at all to his command, and
purely with respect to their worldly Interest, that they may preserve their
Reputation, have much trading, or be much trusted and employed some other way,
and thereby improve their Estates, and raise their Families. Now though such
men may truly be said to deal faithfully with men, yet can they never be said
to do what they do faithfully in reference to God, because doing nothing of all
this with respect to him, and in obedience to his command, they are not in
truth so much his Servants in what they do, as their own. To do such things as
these, and all other things faithfully, in reference to God; to do them as
Gaius did, is to do them with an eye on God, and with respect to his command.
This was David's care, Psalm. 119.6.
to have respect unto all God's commandments. To look at the Command of God,
and to do every thing as designing and aiming at a conformity thereunto: This
is to do things in singleness of heart, as unto Christ, Ephesians. 6.5. And heartily
as unto the Lord, and not unto men, as before, Coloss. 3.23.

3. To do any thing faithfully, is to do it from due motives, and to right
ends, when the motives and ends of our Actions, which set us a work, and put us
on, are such as God requires and approves of: Such as are

1. His Glory; This ought to be the principal end in all our Actions. 1 Cor.
10.31.
Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And
to be sure, there is no lawful Action, but is some way or other referrible to
God's Glory; for otherwise, how could we be enjoined to do every thing to God's
Glory? If there were any good Action incapable of being referred to that end,
it had been in vain to require that of us.

2. Another end which we are to propound to our selves, and aim at in our
Actions, is, That we may thereby please God, and have acceptance with him. Heb.
13.16.
The Apostle, exhorting to a charitable relieving of those who are in want,
draws an Argument to persuade thereunto, from the acceptance that it has with
God; thereby giving us to understand, that God's being pleased with what we do,
and his acceptance of us, ought to be one great thing in our eye whatsoever we
do; To do good, and to communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased. The same Argument he uses, exhorting Children to be obedient to
their Parents; Coloss. 3.20.
Children, obey your parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing to the
Lord. It was therefore David's earnest prayer unto God, that all his thoughts
and words might be pleasing to God; Psa. 19.14.
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart be acceptable in
thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my redeemer. And this was St. Paul's great
care and endeavor; 2 Cor. 5.9.
We labor (says he) that whether absent or present, we may be accepted of
him. And his Prayer in behalf of the Colossians was, that they might walk
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing. Col. 1.10.


3. Another end that we should propound to our selves in our Actions, is the
good of others, according to the nature and tendency of the Action, and so far
as it is referrible to the good of our Brethren. 1 Cor. 16.14.
Let all things be done with charity, says the Apostle. Now Charity has a
respect, not only to our own benefit, but also to the benefit of others. And
again, Let no man seek his own, 1 Cor. 10.24.
but every man another's wealth. Let him not seek his own wealth, his own
profit or advantage alone, his own to the detriment, prejudice or hinderance of
his Brother, but his Brother's as well as his own, and together with it.

And thus we have seen what it is to do whatsoever a man does faithfully: He
does every thing faithfully, who is carefully solicitous in all things to have
his warrant or allowance from the Word of God; who in matters of duty has an
eye at God's Command, and does not only what is commanded, but because it is
commanded; and lastly, who does all things from due motives, and to right ends.

Now in the second place, why is it so great a thing, a Duty of that importance
to a Christian, to do whatsoever he does faithfully? There are diverse reasons
hereof.

1. Without this faithfulness no service is valued or accepted of God, who
looks more after this, than any thing else; and where it is wanting, there the
most specious, the most splendid and glorious Services in his account signify
little or nothing, whatever esteem men may have of them. Whence is it that that
the very Sacrifices of the wicked, the best things they do, are so far from
being pleasing unto God, that they are an abomination to him? Prove. 15.8.
Is it not because they do nothing faithfully? Is it not because their hearts
being rotten and unsound, they do nothing sincerely in obedience to God,
nothing from due motives and principles, nothing to right ends? Certainly this
is one thing, and not the least, that makes all their performances stink in the
nostrils of God. Though the sinfulness of their persons otherwise, and the
wickedness of their lives make God abhor their Services, as he often declares;
yet this very thing, That they do nothing faithfully, as unto God, in that
manner, with that frame of heart, and to those ends which he requires, is that
which makes their best Actions yet more abominable to him, as they come from
them, and are performed by them. This is that which Solomon seems to intend,
and the account which he seems to give of this matter. The sacrifice of the
wicked, Prove. 21.27.
says he, is abomination to the Lord; how much more when he brings it with a
wicked mind? As if he had said, Tho the wickedness of his life be enough to
make God loath every thing he does, even his very Sacrifice; yet that he
brings it with a wicked mind, that pretending to worship God his heart is
false and deceitful, that he has base ends and designs of his own in what he
would be thought to do for God, and to God; this is that which makes his
Services much more odious and abominable unto him.

2. There is no Service so mean, contemptible and worthless in man's account,
but is both accepted and rewarded of God; if it be done faithfully. Mark 9.42.
Whosoever shall give to any one but a cup of cold water to drink in Christ's
name, and because he belongs to him, Matthew. 10.42.
to a disciple in the name of a disciple, as such, and upon that account, he
shall in no-wise lose his reward. A man may give far greater things than a Cup
of cold water, and that to a Disciple too, and yet shall he have no reward from
God, if he give it upon some other undue consideration, and for some bye ends
of his own; but let him do what he does faithfully and sincerely, to a Disciple
in the name of a Disciple, and he shall not lose his reward, though he give him
but a Cup of cold water to drink. He may be apt to think that so poor a thing
as that is shall never be so far regarded, or taken notice of, as to be
rewarded; but Christ with much earnestness has declared so much, and assured
him, that so mean a thing as that is, so done, shall not go unrewarded. Our
Savior, to ratify his Promise so much the more, and to make it the stronger,
uses such a manner of speech as has a double emphasis in it: He does not
barely affirm it, but he does it with a serious and solemn Asseveration, (...),
verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward; and again, (...), he shall
in no-wise lose his reward. The poor Widow's two Mites which made but a
Farthing, were but a poor matter, a slender gift to be cast into the Treasury;
but yet doing what in that kind she was able, faithfully and sincerely no
doubt, what gracious acceptance had it with Christ, and what honorable mention
does he make of it? Verily I say unto you (said he to his Disciples) that this
poor widow has cast more in, Mark 12.42, 43.
than all they which have cast into the treasury. It Is true, others cast in out
of their abundance, but she of her want did cast in all that she had, even all
her living, as Christ there adds; and this indeed was a great thing; but unless
she had done it sincerely and faithfully, her action had never had that high
acceptance with Christ; if pride and vainglory, or any other base aim had been
at bottom, Christ the searcher of the heart, would have discerned it, and
instead of commending the action, would have abhorred it. In the 6th Chapter of
the Epistle to the Ephesians, v. 5, 6, 7, 8. the Apostle exhorting poor
Servants to discharge their duty to their masters according to the flesh,
faithfully, and faithfully also to their Master in Heaven, in singleness of
heart, as unto Christ; and again, Not with eye service, as men pleasers, but as
the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart; and yet once
more, with good will doing service as to the Lord, and not to men; he
encourages them thereunto from the consideration of the reward of this their
service which they may expect from God; Knowing, says he, that whatsoever good
thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond
or free. What? tho he be not only a Servant, but a Bondsman, wholly at the
command, and under the power of his Master, and by him employed in the meanest
services, and put to the basest drudgery, and enforced to bestow all his time,
and lay out all his strength that way; may this poor Bondman, this
contemptible and miserable Slave, expect any reward of these his Services from
God? Yes that he may, and he shall be sure not to lose his reward, if he do
what he does sincerely and faithfully, if he obey his Master, and serve him
faithfully in obedience to God, and do even his basest drudgery in singleness
of heart as to Christ, and as to the Lord, and not to man: Be he a freeman, or
a bond man; be his services and employments honorable or base, all is one with
God, faithfulness is that which God looks after; whatsoever is done faithfully,
and by whomsoever, it shall be accepted and rewarded.

3. Where this faithfulness is wanting, there the better our Services are for
substance, the more notoriously and grossly do we play the Hypocrites. For in
such Services we do in special manner pretend to honor God, and seek his
Glory, which when it is only pretended, and we really mind nothing less than
what we make show of, how odious and abominable is this in the sight of God,
who is a Spirit, and will be served in Spirit and in Truth! Gal. 6.7.
God is not mocked; that is, he is not deluded, and put off with outward shows
and appearances instead of realities, as men may be who look upon the outward
appearance, but cannot look into the heart.

So I have done with the two former things propounded, having showed what it is
to do every thing faithfully; and why this is so great and so important a Duty.

I now come to make Application, which was the third thing propounded.

USE.
This presents just matter of Humiliation to us all, even to the best amongst
us, in regard there is so little, so very little of this faithfulness to be
found in our Actions and Services. We may be apt to think we have done a great
deal of good several ways, and so please our selves in the expectation of our
reward; but if things be well examined, how little shall we be found to have
done, that will be approved of, and further our account hereafter? How much
Pride, Vainglory and Hypocrisy, how much seeking of our selves, and our own
things, instead of seeking the Glory of God, and the Things of Christ! How many
of the good things which we have done, have been done by us upon other lower
Considerations than the command of God; from other Motives, and to other Ends,
than that we might thereby honor and please him, and be accepted with him!
Instances of our miscarriages this way might be endless almost, if the time
would permit, and it were expedient to enlarge so much. I shall touch at some
few instances, that by our fairings in them we may be the better able to
understand our selves, and know how we ought to judge of our selves in
reference to the rest of our Life, and the various passages thereof.

My first instance shall be that in which many here present are concerned, and
it is that of men's Employment in the way of their Trade and Commerce with others
among whom their dealing is. This is the main business of their Life, and takes
up the most considerable part of their time; to which I may also add, that it is
the business on which their parts and strength are mostly laid out. Great pity
therefore it were that little of what they do in this way should turn to their
account hereafter, as undoubtedly it will not, unless it be done faithfully and
sincerely, as unto God, and not to men. And yet here, how common a thing is it
with most men in their Trading to look no further than their own outward
Advantage, and the procuring a competent, or a fair and comfortable Livelihood
and Subsistence for themselves and theirs? Where almost is the Person to be
found, who does everything in the way of that his Calling, as unto God, and not
to men, who sets God before his Eyes as much as may be all the day long; who
treats with every man he deals with, or has to do with throughout the day, as
in Gods sight; who seeks and consults the good of others as well as his own, in
every Bargain be makes, in every parcel of Ware he sells or buys; in a word,
who discharges all the Duties of his particular Calling with a respect to
God's command, with an eye at pleasing him, and being accepted of him. Lay your
hands upon your Breasts, and ask your own hearts, whether this be your daily
practice, and what experimental acquaintance you have with these things. If you
reflect upon your self impartially, and search narrowly, it is to be feared that
you will find too much cause to be humbled for your failings.

A second instance, I shall give in those who are entrusted with the managing
of other men's Businesses and Affairs in any kind, in which their Industry,
Skill, Ability, and Faithfulness is required; They are diligent and industrious
in the ways of their Employment, they have a care so to manage the Businesses
put into their hands, and committed to their trust, as they may be able to give
a good account of them, and to approve themselves faithful to those by whom
they are entrusted, as it concerns them to be with respect to their Reputation,
and their worldly Advantage also; for if they should be slack, careless, and
unfaithful, who would make use of them, or employ them? Who would care to
entrust them with any business of Concernment? But in the mean time, while for
their own ends they are thus careful to approve themselves faithful to men,
where is their faithfulness to God? Are they as careful and solicitous how they
may approve themselves to him in every business they manage, how they may
please him, and be accepted of him? That some are so, far be it from me to
question; but Oh how few are these men? And how rarely to be found among many
who scarce mind God at all, and who is hardly in all their Thoughts.

A third instance may be in the poorer sort, who are very painful and
industrious in their way; for such many of the poorer sort are, (though many
others of them eat the Bread of idleness, and will do it, for their hands
refuse to labor, and they will not have honest Employment when they may); but
I say those before spoken of, are diligent and industrious, they rise betimes
in the morning, they follow their work closely all the day, and go late to bed
at night; a very commendable thing in them, and greatly to be encouraged; but
yet alas! What Is their great end in all this? What do they aim at? Nothing else
but that they may eat a piece of Bread, that they may have wherewithal to keep
themselves and their Relations alive, if any they have? Do they mind God in
their Employment? Are they diligent in their Calling, because he commands them
so to be? And do they in that way of their Employment intend the serving of his
Providence? And do they seek his Glory in that their low condition of Life? Do
they humbly and contentedly submit to his Providence in thus disposing of
things, and in allotting them so slender a portion of the things of this Life,
and putting them to get their Livelihood in so painful and laborious a way? And
lastly, as low as their condition is, do they seek to honor God in it as much
as they can? If they do so, then they do faithfully what they do in their mean
condition; and they may assure themselves, that as their eye is on God, so
God's Eye is on them, he takes notice of their faithfulness, and will assuredly
reward it. But how few are they who look so high as to mind God at all, or in
the least study to approve themselves to him?

A fourth instance shall be in Servants. Though there were never more
complaints of the carelessness and unfaithfulness of Servants, and perhaps never
more cause for such complaints; yet there are those who are diligent and
faithful, and cannot justly be charged with idleness or unfaithfulness, or with
any of those other usual faults for which Servants are blamed. And yet even
amongst these who are the best, and most careful to please those whom they
serve, and who do all they can to give them content, how few are there whose
eyes are upon their Master in Heaven, and whose greatest care it is so to
discharge the Duty of their places, as to please him! Who according to the
Apostles injunction beforementioned do service with singleness of heart as to
the Lord, and not unto men! Who do all the service which they owe to man, as
unto Christ, studying to please him therein, and expecting their Wages and
Reward from him! For the most part, even the better sort of Servants, look no
further than their Masters here on Earth; as for God, their Master in Heaven,
it is scarce in all their thoughts to please him; and yet without a care and
study to please him, they are but menpleasers, Ephesians. 6.6.
as the Apostle calls them, and must never expect either reward or acceptance
from God.

5. Another instance may be in Parents and Children; to put them together. As
for many Parents, they are not without natural Love, Affection and Tenderness
for their Children in their younger years; they are willing to take any pains
with them, they can cheerfully undergo much trouble for them; and when they are
grown up, they are full of careful thoughts about them, and so studious of
their temporal welfare, that they think they can never do enough to promote it.
And yet it is possible that very little of all this may be done in obedience to
God, and with respect to his Authority and Command, who as he has furnished
them with natural Affections to put them on to do for their Children; so he
has by his command made it their Duty; without regard of which command, they
do these things no otherwise than the brute Beasts feed, tender, and protect
their young by natural Instinct, and from that (...), or inbred Affection,
which both strongly inclines them to do it, and enables them to do it with
delight and pleasure. That many Parents are led to all that careful and
solicitous travel and labor of Love which they undergo for Children, by no
higher Principles or Inducements, is manifest, because if the command of God
did prevail with them, it would also make them conscientiously Industrious in
discharging their Duty to their Souls, which God has as strictly enjoined, and
which he looks after as much, yea much more, as the Soul is more worth, and the
everlasting miscarrying thereof of higher consequence than that of their
temporal welfare. But here how miserably do they neglect them, and betray their
Souls to Sin, Satan and Hell! While they neither bestow any pains upon them to
instruct them in the Principles of Religion, and their Duty to God; nor use any
effectual means for preventing and restraining Sin in them. But neither is this
the only evidence of their performing no part of their Duty to them in
obedience to God; for if they did, then would the same command and authority of
God also engage them to reform their own Lives, and frame their Conversations
according to the Rule; then would they not, as many of them do, allow
themselves in sinful ways, slighting God's Authority, and casting his Word
behind their back.

And what has been spoken of Parents, the same likewise may be said of
Children. I speak of Children grown up to years of some discretion, and able to
put a difference between good and evil. They obey their Parents, (some of them,
I mean, though many others are undutiful, headstrong, and rebellious) I say,
the better sort of Children obey their Parents, are unwilling to offend them,
or incur their displeasure; but yet it is not the command of God that sways
them, or prevails with them. It Is because they stand in some awe of their
Parents, but not because they stand in awe of God, who has threatened to punish
stubborn and disobedient Children, and has promised to reward such of them as
are dutiful, tractable and obedient, as is implied in the Motive annexed to the
Fifth Commandment. It Is because of their dependence on them, and in regard they
live in expectation of further kindnesses from them; but not with respect to
God's command, who has said, Honor thy father and thy mother; and, Children
obey your parents, for this is well-pleasing unto God. Alas! This
consideration, that it is well-pleasing unto God, has not the least influence
upon that obedience which many Children yield unto their Parents, nor are they
at all moved or stirred up to the performance of their Duty to them thereby.

And so I have showed in these few instances, unto which many more might be
added, that though men may do many good things, yet very little of what they
do, may upon examination appear to have been done faithfully; so far are they
from being capable of the Testimony and Commendation given to Gaius, to whom
the Apostle says, Thou do faithfully whatsoever thou do, both to the
brethren, and to strangers.

All that I shall further add by way of Application, shall be to show, how this
faithfulness may be known, and how it may be attained. A man may know himself
to be faithful;

1. If he be universally Conscientious, if he make Conscience of one thing, as
well as of another. Faithfulness will cause a man to have respect to his whole
Duty, to all God's Commandments. If any known Duty be willingly and constantly
neglected, it is a shrewd Argument, that little else is done faithfully, or at
least, so faithfully, as it ought to have been done. For those Principles which
would engage a man to faithfulness in one thing, would also do it in all other
things. Luke 16.10
He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much; and he
that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. Upon this ground it is
that St. Jam 2.10.
James says, Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point,
is guilty of all. The reason whereof he adds in the next Verse; because the
same Authority of God is despised and violated in the breach of any one Law,
which should prevail with us to yield obedience to all. And he, who cares so
little for God's Authority, as that notwithstanding it he is bold to venture on
Sin in one thing, would do it in other things, if there were the like
opportunity and temptation offered. Wherefore God, who sees the inward frame of
his heart, and how it stands affected, looks upon him as guilty of the breach
of the whole Law in effect.

2. If you have a sight of your unfaithfulness; and if moreover you heartily
bewail it, and sincerely mourn over it; if you discern how apt you are to have
by and low ends, to have base and unworthy ends in your best actions; to have
your Eyes on man more than on God; to seek your Self, your own Advantage,
Credit, Reputation, more than your Master's Honor; and furthermore, if these
things be also grievous and burdensome to you; if you be humbled for them, if
you hate them, if you constantly pray against them, vigorously oppose them, and
strive against them; if it be thus with you, it is hence manifest that you would
be faithful, and consequently that God mercifully looks upon you as faithful,
in some good measure through his Son, and will for his sake accordingly treat
you, and deal with you. But it is much to be feared, that there is little or no
faithfulness, where there is no discerning of a man's unfaithfulness; no
bewailing it, or striving against it. As it is a sign that there is little or no
Faith, where there is not a sight and a sense of the weakness of a man's Faith,
and of his Unbelief; and consequently where there is no bewailing it, no
striving against it; where there are no serious endeavors to subdue the
remainders of a man's unbelief, and to strengthen his Faith.

3. You may warrantably conclude, that you are, in some measure, faithful unto
God in managing the Services and Employments in which his Providence engages
you; if, when you have done your Duty in some weak measure as you are able,
nothing else can satisfy you, but God's acceptance of your ministration. Is
acceptance with men, good repute, commendation and applause from the World,
nothing to you, unless God be pleased to discover his acceptance of you? Are
you restless and unsatisfied, unless he be pleased some way or other to let you
know that he is well-pleased with what you have done? And does his acceptance
quiet your mind, and satisfy your soul, whatever men judge of you, yea, though
all the world should dislike, and censure your actions? This is a great
Argument, and a solid ground of satisfaction to you, that your aim was to
please God, and to approve your self to him; that you did what you did
sincerely and faithfully as unto him, and not unto men. But if men's acceptance
of you, if their good thoughts of you, and good words do satisfy you, and you
look no further; if having this, you are quiet, and at rest; you have great
cause to suspect your self, or rather to conclude against your self, that you
have what you aimed at, and that your main design was to please men rather than
God. Had your eye been upon God, and had your chief aim and desire been to
please him, and to be accepted of him, nothing else besides his acceptance
would have satisfied you.

Now if you ask how you may attain to do every thing faithfully; I answer,

1. You must remember God's Presence and Omniscience. That Servant will think
it concerns him to be faithful, who knows his Master's eye is upon him, and
that he narrowly looks after him, and observes how he carries himself in the
Services in which he is employed. How much more would the consideration of
God's Eye make us faithful? for he sees not as man sees, he looks upon the
Heart, observes not only what is done, but how it is done; what the desire,
intent, and design of the heart is in every thing that is done. Yea, the inward
disposition and frame of the heart in all our actions, is that which, above all
things, he looks after and observes. Now he that shall believe, remember, and
seriously mind this, how can he choose but do his best endeavor to do every
thing faithfully as in his sight, who searches the heart, and tries the reins?

2. Watch your hearts in all things, which you set about, take in hand, or
apply your self unto; and observe the inward Principles, Motives and Ends of
all your Actions. Though you know the things which you do to be lawful, and to
be, perhaps, not only lawful, but your Duty; and though there be in you general
Intentions and Resolutions to do every thing faithfully; yet such is the
corruption of your heart, that you will find it often interposeth and mingleth
it self with your best actions, vitiating and depraving them, by putting you
upon them from undue Motives, and to base and unworthy ends. Wherefore, besides
your general Resolutions to endeavor in all things to act faithfully, it will
be of great concernment to you, that you often put the question to your Soul,
and ask, or interrogate your self, saying, Why do I, or say I, this or that?
What is it which at this time moves me thereunto? What Is my present end or
design therein? If we frequently thus reflected on our selves, and examined the
Principles of our words and actions, as we should thereby often discover the
falseness of our hearts, and our unfaithfulness in what we do; so it would be a
great means to make us faithful, and to keep us that we act not from those
undue and sinister motives, and to those by and unworthy ends, which too often
prevail in us, and have too great an influence upon our Actions.

3. Remember always and consider, that it is your great interest to do every
thing faithfully, because otherwise all that which you do is lost, and your
labor is laid out to no purpose; for you can neither look for acceptance nor
reward thereof, nor comfort therein.

1. You can never expect acceptance with God. When you never aimed at pleasing
him, nor looked after acceptance with him, how should you be accepted? Can
those your actions please him, which were never done with any such intent, to
the undertaking whereof you were wholly swayed by other Considerations, and
which you would never have set your self about, had not other Motives induced
you thereunto?

2. Much less can you expect any reward at the hands of God, of what is not
done faithfully. Why should God reward you for that service, which was not
intended to be done for him, but for your self, or for some other Master? For
that service in which his glory was not aimed at, but your own reputation and
advantage, or your worldly interest one way or other? When the Scribes and
Pharisees were vainglorious and hypocritical in their Duties; Praying, and
giving Alms only to be seen of men, Christ said of them, Mat 6.2.
They have their reward. They sought only praise, and commendation from men;
and they have what they sought after. Men applaud them, and speak well of them,
and that is all the reward they must look for. As for God, they must expect no
reward from him, whom they never intended to please, or honor by their
services.

3. Neither can they have any sound comfort in what is not done faithfully. If
the most excellent and glorious services, and which are most highly esteemed,
valued and magnified by men, should be so done, as God would neither accept nor
reward them, what true comfort could any man have in them? If God frown upon a
man, what good will the smiles of all the World do him? In his favor, and
gracious acceptance, Psalm. 30.5.
is life; but his frowns and displeasure are as death. Psalm. 76.7.
Who may stand in his sight when once he is angry? Happy is the man whose
constant study and endeavor it is in all things so to order his Conversation,
as to please him, whoever be thereby displeased.

The Fifth Sermon.
PROVE. XXII. 2. The rich and the poor meet together; the Lord is the maker of
them all.


THESE words, as we see, contain two Propositions; the former of which is,

That the rich and the poor meet together:

The latter,

That the Lord is the maker of them all.

Both these Propositions may be understood several ways; I shall speak of them
in order; and first of the former Proposition,

The rich and the poor meet together.

Which words are capable of many Interpretations, and it is not easy to judge
which of them Solomon chiefly intended. It Is possible that he might purposely
express himself in such terms, as that we might not be able to restrain the
words to any one sense, excluding all other Interpretations. In such Scriptures
where diverse Expositions carry equal probability, so that we know not well
which to embrace, or which to reject, the safest way for the most part is to
take in all those senses which the words will naturally and fairly admit of; so
among them all we shall be sure to have that which was aimed at. As to our
present business, The rich and the poor may be said to meet together,

1. In respect of the common nature of Mankind in which they agree, whatsoever
other difference there may be between them.

As for their Bodies, there is the same rare composure and admirable artifice
in both, the same infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness of God discovered in
framing the Bodies of the one, as of the other; there is not a Limb, nor a
Joint, nor a Bone, nor a Sinew, nor a Vein, nor an Artery, nor a Muscle, nor a
Nerve, nor a Gristle, nor the least string or little instrument of vital or
animal operation or motions, but is alike to be found in the one as in the
other, and all alike exquisitely framed and fitted for the respective uses and
services in the Body. In a word; The Body of the poor man is in all respects as
wonderfully made, as that of the rich.

Then as to their better part, the Spirit, the poor man is endowed with as
excellent a Soul as the rich man. Has the rich man a Soul endowed with the
admired faculties of reason, and liberty of will? so has the poor man. Have
the rich an immortal Soul that shall have a Being to eternity? so have the
poor. Has the rich man the Image of God stamped upon his Soul? so has the
poor. Does the Soul of the one owe its original immediately and solely to God?
and so does the Soul of the other. Is God the Father of the Spirits of the
rich? so is he of the Spirits of the poor. Is the Soul of the rich capable of
unspeakable and endless happiness in the immediate vision and fruition of God,
in whose prefence is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore? so is the Soul of the poorest, every way as capable
thereof.

2. The rich and the poor meet together in respect of the mutual dependence
they have upon each other, and the need the one has of the other. As the poor
man cannot live without the rich man, so neither can the rich live without the
poor. The poor cannot live without the charity and assistance of the rich, and
the rich cannot live without the Service of the poor. How many poor men's
Service is necessary toward the making of the rich man's Clothing, and the
furnishing of his Table! Does he wear one Suit of Apparel, or make one Meal,
unto which the labor of the poor man's hands does not some way or other
contribute, either immediately or mediately, Eccles. 5.9.
and more remotely? The king himself is served by the field. And how many poor
men's labor does the Field require in manuring, and plowing, and harrowing, and
sowing, and fencing, and weeding, and reaping, and inning the Fruits of the
Earth! And yet after that all this is done, the Corn that is thus housed, is
not presently without any more ado made food; there must be threshing, and
winnowing, and grinding, and baking, in which the service of many poor men's
hands is necessary, before the King himself can eat a bit of Bread. And as for
the Pride and Luxury of many rich men, it were endless to reckon up how many
poor men's hands in several ways of employment are made use of to supply and
furnish them with materials by which these their Vices are fed and maintained.

3. The rich and the poor meet together in respect of their joint abode,
neighborhood, and cohabitation here in this World. There is no place where
they are not both to be found. In all places where men live together for the
mutual help and defense of one another, God's wise Providence has mingled the
rich and the poor together. Show me a rich man's stately and well-furnished
House, and I shall not need to go far to show you a poor man's Cottage: and so
on the contrary. And indeed it is needful it should so be, for as I have just
now showed, neither of them could be without the other.

4. The rich and the poor meet together in respect of the care and good
Providence of God, that is alike extended to both. They are both under the same
gracious Providence that looks after, provides for, preserves, safeguards and
protects them both, though in ways somewhat different. The rich cannot say that
God only regards them, and fixes the eye of his Providence on them alone;
neither can the poor complain that God disregards or neglects them. The Lord is
good to all, Psalm. 145.9.
his mercy is over all his works. And so far is he from having denied the poor
the benefit of his gracious Providence, that in consideration of their
destitute, disconsolate, and helpless condition, he has many ways expressed
his particular and tender care of them above others, as may elsewhere be
showed. Many Laws he has made in behalf of them, many promises he has made to
them; he has laid many charges on the rich to be helpful to them, and made
many promises also to encourage them thereunto.

5. The rich and the poor meet together in the same possibility and capacity of
exchanging Conditions with one another. As the rich is capable of becoming
poor, so the poor is capable of being made rich. The high Possessor of Heaven
and Earth dispenceth outward things as he sees good, and to whom he pleases.
He can fill the hand of the poor, and empty the hand of the rich, whenever he
will: He can reduce the rich to such a condition, as that the same hand that
was wont to give relief, shall receive it; and he can advance the poor to such
a condition, as that the same hand which received relief, shall give it: Such
strange turns of God's Providence we often see. God, according to his good
pleasure, puts down one, and sets up another, Psalm. 75.7. He raises the
poor out of the dust, and lifts up the needy out of the dunghill; that he may
set him with princes, even the princes of his people, Psalm. 113.7, 8. And he
makes those that were brought up in scarlet, to embrace dunghills, Lam. 4.5.

And this leads me to the second Proposition,

The Lord is the maker of them all.

Which, when I shall also have spoken unto, I shall then make application of
both together.

This latter Proposition may also be diversely understood. The rich and the poor
may be considered, either as men, or as distinguished from one another by the
different adjuncts of Riches and Poverty. Now take them under which of these
two Considerations you please, the Lord is the maker of them both.

1. If you consider them both as men, so God is the maker of them all. And
this, whether we look back to the first origin of Mankind, or whether we
consider them as taking their beginning from their more immediate Parents.

If we look unto the Rock whence we were all hewn, and to the Pit whence we
were dug; if we look back to our first Parents, Adam and Eve, in them we all
came out of the hands of God by creation; he framed the first man out of the
dust of the Earth, and the first Woman out of the Rib of Man, and breathed into
them the breath of life, endued them both with an immortal Soul. In this Divine
Original, in the honor of this miraculous beginning, the poor man has an
equal interest with the rich man; the rich cannot claim nearer kindred to Adam
and Eve, than the poor; the poor can call Adam Grandfather, and Eve
Grandmother, by as good right as the rich.

Again, if we consider them with relation to their more immediate Parents, as
they derive their beginning from them, setting aside for the present the
external and accidental considerations of Riches and Poverty, Honor and
Dishonor, and the like, which will come to be spoken of afterward; so God is
the maker of them both; neither has the Rich and Noble, considered merely as a
Man, any preeminence in his birth above the poor and ignoble. They both are
alike fearfully made, Psalm. 139.14, 15, 16.
and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth, that is, in their
Mother's Womb: In God's book were all the members of them both written; which
in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. And when the
Body was by the concurrence of admirable Wisdom and Power fitted to receive and
entertain the Soul, and made a meet Receptacle and Instrument for so excellent
a Being, God infused the Soul into the Body, by his immediate Almighty Power,
giving it a being out of nothing, and in a wonderful manner, far transcending
our apprehension, united the one to the other. And all this expense of Wisdom
and Power he equally bestows upon the Rich and the Poor. And then they both
endure the same confinement and imprisonment in the Womb; the Infant of the
rich and Noble has no more room there, nor is it sooner at liberty than the
Infant of the Beggar. And so at the length the same Wisdom, Power, and Goodness
sends them both alike into the World; the Infant of the meanest, the lowest,
does not put the Mother to more pains in the birth, than the Infant of the
highest, it may be to a great deal less. And how different soever their
entertainment is when they are come into the World, yet God sends them both
into it alike; the Infant of the Prince, that sits upon the Throne, is as naked
and shiftless as the Infant of the poorest that imbraceth Dunghills. And thus
we have seen, that God is the maker of them both, considered as men; and that
as such, God makes the rich and the poor alike, putting no disserence between
them, nor being at any greater expense of Wisdom and Power in making of the
one, than he is in making of the other.

2. If the rich and the poor be considered as they are distinguished by those
adjuncts of Riches and Poverty, so likewise God is the maker of them both. It Is
God's Providence that puts these external Differences between men. The Lord
makes poor, 1 Samuel 2.7.
and makes rich; he brings low, and lifts up, as Hannah sings. It Is
neither by chance, nor by man's skill or industry alone, that men become rich,
but by the blessing of God upon skill and industry, and his overruling
Providence, that gives out, and distributes these things by no other rule than
the good pleasure of him, who works all things according to the counsel of
his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong; neither yet bread to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor
favor to men of skill; Eccles. 9.11. It is God that gives men power to get
wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.18.

This we see by experience. Men of great skill and abilities, that understand
the World, and know how to manage there Affairs to the best advantage; that lay
many wise Plots, and have many ingenious Designs for raising themselves, and
advancing their Estates; that by their wit and forecast put themselves into
many very probable ways of attaining Riches; yet they do but labor in the
fire, lay out their wit, and spend their strength for naught. All their
Projects and Contrivances are but as the Spider's Web, finely and curiously
spun indeed, and drawn out of the very bowels of the Creature; but instantly
broken to pieces, and swept away with one little brush of the Besome. If God do
but blow upon men's wisest Counsels for advantaging themselves, they are
presently blasted, they wither, fade away, and come to nothing. And so we may
observe on the other side, That men of far weaker parts, less skill, less
forecast and contrivance, less ability for managing their Affairs, yet many
times, through the blessing of God, who gives power to get wealth, attain unto
great Estates. In these, as in all other things, God's blessing and overruling
Providence are all in all. The Psalmist discoursing of the inconstancy and
instability of all earthly things, cries out, Surely men of low degree are
vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: To be laid in the balance, they are
altogether lighter than vanity. And hereupon he counsels men not to rely on any
of these things, nor to suffer their Affections to be fastened to them; If
riches increase, Psalm. 62.9, 10.
set not your heart upon them: And then presently he adds in the next Verse,
God has spoken once, twice have I heard this, That power belongs to God. As
if he had said, It Is a Divine Oracle worthy to be believed, which I have heard
from the mouth of God more than once, That power belongs to God; it is in the
hand of his Providence to dispose of these things, to give them, and take them
away again at pleasure; and therefore he, and he only is to be trusted in, and
relied on. And as for Riches, so again for Poverty, it is an effect of God's
Providence also; though many times as a just punishment of men's wastfulness,
prodigality, unthriftiness, idleness, and many other sins. But many there are,
who though they be industrious and unblameable, yet the most wise Providence of
God keeps them low still; and whenever they begin to get something about
them, and to put up their heads a little, God provides somewhat to pull them
down again, that meaner Condition being that which his Wisdom judges to be
meetest for them. We use to say, Some are born to be poor. There is somewhat of
truth in it, if we understand it aright. As God has, as it were, destined and
ordained some to be rich, so he has destined some to poverty. Poor they are,
and poor they shall be; do they what they can to shake of their poverty, they
shall never be rid of it. Neither yet ought any man to be offended at this
dispensation of God; much less to charge God foolishly, as if he had not done
herein what is best. Foolish man may be apt to think how much better it had
been if God had made all men rich, and Poverty had been a thing which the World
never knew. But let no man oppose his own foolishness to God's Wisdom. Who has
been his counselor? Romans 11.34. Shall any teach God knowledge? Job 21.22. It
becomes us, weak, blind, and shallow Creatures that we are, ever-more to think
well of what God does, whether we can discern the grounds and reasons of his
Providence or no; and to have a holy veneration even for those his Works, the
causes whereof we do not understand, nor are able to give an account of. But as
to the matter in hand, though perhaps it may not be needful nor expedient that
we should know all the reasons which God had for putting such a difference
between men, making some of them to be rich, and others poor; yet some
imperfect account of some of the reasons of this Dispensation we can give. That
God does no man any wrong in withholding the things of this World from him,
while he is pleased to load others with his benefits, giving them as much as
heart can wish, will be readily granted by all who acknowledge God's
Sovereignty, and allow him to have a rightful power to do as he pleases with
his own. Besides, who can challenge any thing, a crumb of Bread, or a drop of
Water at the hands of God? He that has least, must he not confess that he has
more than he has deserved? Who has first given unto him? says the Apostle,
Romans 11.35. In him we live, and move, and have our being: And seeing he has
given us our being, and all our Powers and Abilities, we can render nothing to
him in way of service, or otherwise, but what we have received from him. Can we
deserve any thing at his hands by rendering him that which was his own before,
that which we owed him? Again, besides all this, we have all, by our manifold
sins, and continual provocations, deserved to be deprived of whatever mercy we
enjoy. We should long ago have been turned into Hell, if we had had our due,
and been dealt with according to our sins: And how much more then have we
deserved to be stripped of all our Comforts? Be it never so little and so mean
that you have, you had not now had it, if God had been extreme to mark what you
had done amiss. It had been all gone, it had been snatched away from you in
displeasure, if God's patience and long-sufferance had not stood you in more
stead than any deferts of your own.

Well then, this I take for granted, that he who is in the poorest, the most
destitute, the most forlorn, the most desolate and despicable condition among
you all, is convinced that God has done him no wrong, nor can do any man
wrong, by denying him that which he is not bound to give him.

Now moreover, that God in putting such a difference between men, is not only
just, but most wise and good, may appear to any man that shall duly consider
this dispensation.

1. It Is for the Order and Beauty of the Universe, that there should be variety
in the World, and interchangeable Vicissitudes of things; Winter and Summer,
Spring and Autumn, Sickness and Health, Prosperity and Adversity, Light and
Darkness, do all contribute, though in several ways, to adorn and beautify the
Creation, and set forth the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of the Creator. And
even those things which in some men's eyes may seem to be the spots and
blemishes of the Creation, (for so men of profane spirits may be too prone to
judge of them) do as well contribute to the beauty and luster of the whole, as
those things that are of eminent beauty and perfection. Even Monsters serve to
set forth and commend the Wisdom and Goodness of God, in the exact frame, due
lineaments, right proportions and features, strength and beauty of perfect
Creatures. So the poor, strait, and indigent condition of some, so much the
more commends the Bounty and Goodness of God to others; and provokes them, at
least should provoke them to so much the greater love and thankfulness to that
God who has been so bountiful to them, and has been pleased to put such a
difference between them and others, and this albeit they have deserved at the
hands of God no more than those their inferiors who are in the most
necessitous condition.

2. This difference which God has put between men, affords the Rich
opportunities of exercising their Charity, Pity, and Compassion toward the
Poor; and gives the Poor occasion of exercising their Faith and Trust in God
for supplies of Necessaries; Patience, Humility, Contentment with their mean
condition, quiet submission to the good pleasure of God in thus dealing with
them, and thankfulness to God for those helps and assistances which he is
pleased to reach forth to them by the hands of those with whom he deposited
more of the things of this World, on purpose that they might be helpful to
those who have less.

3. God has been pleased to put this difference between men in regard of the
necessity there is of different Stations and Conditions, different Services and
Employments for procuring and carrying on the good and welfare of the Community
of Mankind. Some must govern, and others must be governed; or else we shall
quickly be ruined, and all things will run into confusion. Some must labor in
the Field, others must grind at the Mill, others handle the Distaff; some must
be employed in meaner, other in higher Services, in order whereunto it was fit
that men's conditions should be suited to those Employments in which they are
to be serviceable to God and their Generation.

Now the Application of what has been spoken, follows; and this will concern
all. I shall first speak to the Rich, and then to the Poor. As for the Rich, or
those whom God has been pleased to entrust with a larger portion of Temporal
things, they may hence be minded of their Duty several ways. If the Rich and
the Poor meet together in all those respects before mentioned, and God be the
Maker of them all, both as men, and as considered under the different Adjuncts
of Riches and Poverty; then may the Rich hence be cautioned and admonished.

1. Not to despise the Poor. This is that which men who even wallow in plenty,
and abound with the good things of this Life, are very subject to. A poor man
is many times a contemptible thing in their eyes; and as he has occasion to
come near them, he scarce meets with those civilities from them that are due to
Mankind. And usually none are more faulty this way, than such as have the
greatest obligation to civility and condescension; I mean such as were not long
since in a mean condition themselves, and have but newly been advanced to an
higher Station. But these, and whosoever else may be blameworthy in this
respect, should consider what has above been discoursed of.

(1.) That the poorest and most forlorn Creature who is most despicable in
their eyes, has as noble and excellent a Soul as they have themselves, or as
the greatest Potentate in the World has; and as for his very Body, though
clothed with nasty Rags, the exquisite Workmanship thereof is no less
admirable than that of his that is clothed with Scarlet, and adorned with Gold
and Pearls, and whatever Nature or Art could contribute to make it beautiful
and lovely.

(2.) That the poorest man in the World is as dear to God as they are, and as
much under the Care and gracious Providence of God; for fine Clothes, and
Riches, and Honors, commend no man to God; high and low, rich and poor are
alike to him; for he is no respecter of persons; Act 10.34.
neither does he rate or value any man according to these things. It Is grace
and holiness that he looks after, and accordingly proportions his esteem for
men. The Lord sees not as man sees; man looks upon the outward appearance,
but the Lord looks upon the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7* The eyes of the Lord are upon
the righteous, Psalm. 34.15. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in
those that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11. But as for wicked and ungodly men,
of what rank or quality soever they may be in this World, the Lord hates and
abhors them. Psalm. 5.5.


(3.) They should consider, that the poorest man in all the World is as capable
of being admitted to the blisful Vision and Fruition of God in the World to
come, is as capable of glory and eternal happiness, as the richest. As God has
given the same Rational and Immortal Soul to Rich and Poor, whereby they are
both capable of the sight and enjoyment of God; so has Christ died for both,
and paid the same invaluable price for the Redemption of both; and so he has
commanded his Gospel to be published alike to both, and therein the same terms
of Salvation to be indifferently propounded to the one and the other. There is
not one Gospel for the Rich, and another for the Poor; nor are the terms of
peace with God, and reconciliation to him, more easy and favorable for the one
than for the other. The Gospel puts no difference between men with reference to
those different circumstances as to outward things, under which they may be. It
speaks the same Language to all; Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature; He that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not
shall be damned, Mark 16.15, 16. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord,
Heb. 12.14. Except ye repent ye shall all perish, Luke 13.3. Except ye be
converted ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 18.3.

Now if God values the Souls of Rich and Poor alike, has taken the same care
of, and made the same provision for the Salvation of both; if Rich and Poor
meet together, stand both upon even ground, and are upon equal terms, as to the
matters that are of highest importance and everlasting concernment to the one
and the other; should any man despise his poor Brother upon the account of
these temporal things, these poor and worthless trifles that signify as good as
nothing?

2. The Rich may hence be cautioned, Not to count the Poor a grievance or heavy
burden to them; I mean the honest, sober, humble, modest and industrious Poor.
As for wicked, loose, idle, and unprofitable Persons, whether they be Poor or
Rich, they are not only a grievance, but the very Pests of the places where
they live, as exposing them to God's wrath, and drawing down his Judgments upon
themselves and others.

1. While you count the Poor a grievance, and think how much happier the World
would be if all men were Rich as you are, you forget that the Rich stand in
need of the Poor, and could not subsist without them. Though you had such a
Mass of Treasure as you could wallow in Gold and Silver, yet these Metals could
not clothe you; neither could you feed and live upon them; Gold and Silver
would neither quench your thirst, nor satisfy your hunger. You are beholding
to the labor of the Poor man's hands for your Raiment and your Diet, as I have
showed before.

2. It Is a great advantage that you have the Poor among you, and continually
before your eyes, to make you the more thankful for that plenty that God has
blessed you withal (as has also been said), 1 Cor. 4.7.
Who makes thee to differ from another? as the Apostle puts the question in
another case. Why had not he that last craved a Bit of Bread at your Door, been
the Rich man, and you the Beggar? Why had not he been in your room, and you in
his? Why had not he been Arrayed in your Silk and Purple, and you clad in his
Rags? Can you look upon him, and reflect on your self without a deep sense of
his most free and undeserved Bounty to you, who is the Maker of Rich and Poor,
and of his own good pleasure alone has put this difference between you and
your Poor Neighbor? The advantage of this kindly Incentive and Spur to
thankfulness, you owe to the Poverty of your Brother. Besides, as the beholding
of his Poverty makes you more thankful for your abundance, so it helps you to
relish your good things the better, and puts a sweetness into them which you
would not have tasted, unless your Neighbors wants had been as sauce to your
full Dishes to make them savoury to you. So you are beholding to him not only
for your Meat, but for your Sauce also.

3. The Poor that live among you, afford you a rich opportunity of laying out
and employing that which God has put into your hand to the best advantage.
Were it not for the Poor, you would want an object on which to exercise your
Charity and Compassions, and so you would lose much of your comfort here, and a
great part of your reward hereafter. What comforts, what inward satisfactions
and contents there are in doing good to the distressed, he only knows who has
with humility and sincerity much exercised himself that way. He who has been
much in that Duty, can upon his own experience subscribe to that of our
Savior, that it is a more blessed thing to give than to receive. Act. 20.35
But besides the present comforts that are to be enjoyed in the right
performance of this Duty, there is moreover the reward hereafter, which God
has graciously promised, and will not fail to bestow. As a man sows here, so
shall he reap hereafter; 2 Cor. 96.
He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. He shall be fully
recompensed for whatsoever he has done of this nature at the Resurrection of
the just. Luke 14.14.
And this so exactly and punctually, that not so much as a Cup of cold Water
given to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, shall be unrewarded.

What other improvement of your Riches comparable with this, can you possibly
make? Employ them how you will any other way for your Temporal Advantage, they
will no longer stand you in stead than while your abode shall be here; when
Death comes, all is gone; you must then leave whatsoever you have laid together
and heaped up; and you must go as naked out of this World as you came into it,
excepting only your Winding Sheet and Coffin; that is all you can carry hence,
and that also to moulder into dust together with your self. But now the Poor
give you an opportunity of making that use of Riches that shall abound to your
account another day, and so in effect you carry them along with you into the
other World.

3. Seeing the Rich and Poor meet together in so many respects; and seeing God
is the Maker of them both; and seeing it is by his most wise and gracious
Providence that there should be such different Ranks and Conditions of men,
that some should be full, and others empty, some should abound, and others be
in want; let the Rich be hence cautioned not to oppress the Poor.

(1.) This were a foul and wretched abuse of those Advantages in Power and
Wealth, which God has graciously afforded them above their Brethren.

(2.) This were horrid unthankfulness to God, who has been pleased out of his
free Goodness and Bounty to put such a difference between them and others.

(3.) This were directly contrary to the design of God, in bestowing upon one a
larger Portion of these Temporals than another, which was, that he that has
much, might be helpful and beneficial to him that has little, and not that he
might thereby be the better enabled to keep under and crush his needy and
distressed Brother. God has made no man strong, that he might push at those
that are weaker; nor has he made any man Rich, that he might by his Wealth and
Riches imperiously domineer over and trample on his Poor Neighbor. Neither may
the Rich man be emboldened to oppress his poor Brother, because he is weak and
unable to make resistance. The weaker he is, and the more unable to defend or
right himself, the more unsafe it is to meddle with him: For God himself has
undertaken to stand by, and help those who have no power to help themselves.
Take heed what you do in taking Advantage of the Poor man's weakness to injure
and oppress him. Are you not aware, that while you abuse your Wealth and Power
to the oppressing of your weak Brother, and think you may do as you list with
him that has no might to oppose you, or defend himself against you; you have
to do with God, and enter the Lists with him, who has said, For the oppression
of the poor, and for the sighing of the needy will I arise to set him in safety
from him that puffs at him, Psalm. 12.5. Who delivers the poor from him that
is too strong for him, yea the poor and needy from him that spoileth him, Psalm.
35.10? If you love your self, and would consult your own peace and safety,
meddle not with God, which certainly you do in oppressing your poor and
impotent Brother. Take Solomon's Counsel, who says, Rob not the poor because
he is poor, neither oppress the afflicted in the gate; for the Lord will plead
their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them, Prove. 22.22, 23.

Now the Poor may be oppressed many ways; I shall only at present give two
instances thereof.

1. The Rich may oppress the Poor by denying them those helps which of right
belong to them, or by diverting to other uses than that which was originally by
the Bounty of Benefactors intended and designed for their relief. This were an
horrible and crying Sin; this were no better than removing the old Landmark,
and entering into the Field of the Fatherless, which Solomon would have no man
so hardy as to attempt, because their redeemer is mighty, Prove. 23.10, 11.
and he will plead their cause. You who have the disposing of the Poors-money,
take heed you derive not upon you the guilt of this sin; a sin of that heinous
nature, as that it were enough to set a whole Town on Fire, and turn it into
Ashes; look to it therefore, and see that the Charity of Benefactors run in its
own proper Channel.

2. The Poor may be oppressed by the Rich, in dealing rigorously and
unmercifully with them, and using them hardly in those things in which they
make use of their labor. To enforce them to do their work upon such pitiful
terms, as that all which they can get by their utmost diligence will hardly buy
them Bread to keep them alive, while you raise your selves, and grow Rich upon
their uncessant Labors, is certainly in God's account no better than
Oppression, a sin which may justly bring the Curse of God upon your Estates. If
there should be any here that are concerned, I would earnestly request them to
consider seriously of it. If upon enquiry you should find you have been guilty
of this kind of Oppression, you may well look upon it as one of those things
for which God has had a Controversy with you, and punished you, by snatching
away from you what had been so heaped together. And let me further lay these
things before you to be pondered.

1. To take advantage of poor Peoples Necessities, and make them part with
their Work at any rate, because they must have Bread for themselves and theirs,
or starve, is that measure which you would not should be made you, if you were
in their Circumstances. Suppose your self to be in their condition, and they in
yours; would you not then think it very hard measure to be so dealt with?

2. Though allowing them for their Labor so much as might make their
Livelihood a little better, you would gain so much the less, yet you would have
much more comfort in what is so gotten, were it never so little. It Is but an
uncomfortable thing for any man to grow Rich by pinching the Poor.

3. You would be sure to have the Blessing of God, and not his Curse, upon what
is so gotten, be it more or less. I beseech you let this be written upon the
Table of your Heart, let it be deeply engraven there as a certain Truth, an
unquestionable Principle which can never fail you, That in the Conclusion you
shall be never the poorer for using Poor people well; and you shall be never
the Richer for having used them hardly.

Having hitherto spoken to the Rich, I come now to speak a few words to the
Poor, who may also from what has been said, be minded of their Duty several
ways.

Do the Rich and Poor meet together, and do they both stand upon even ground,
and are they upon equal terms, as in many other respects before mentioned? So
more especially as to their highest Concernments are the Poor, the Lowest, the
Meanest, and the most Contemptible amongst them, as much the Objects of God's
Care, and of his gracious Providence, as the Rich; even as those among the
Rich, the height and splendour of whose condition in the World have made them
Objects of the Envy of all their Inferiors. Are the poorest, even such as are
clothed in Rags, in as fair a way for Heaven, and as capable of Grace here, and
Glory hereafter, as the greatest Princes, as the most Illustrious and Renowned
Potentates in the World; Then let the Poor hence learn, not to be discouraged,
much less give way to murmuring and repining at the Providence of God, that has
put such a difference between them and their Superiors, as to the things of
this World. It has seemed good to the Wisdom of God to place them below, while
others are seated above; to make their condition mean and despicable, while the
conditions of others has rendered them honorable, and even adorable in the
eyes of the inferior World. But seeing the Poor and the Rich meet together, and
are in equal condition as to the best, the most excellent, and the most
desirable things; What good reason is there why they should not be well
contented with their condition, and be most thankful unto God for it? What
reason have they to justify their envying at the Rich and Honorable, seeing
they themselves are no way inferior to them, and come no way short of them as
to those things which are of greatest value, and of highest importance?

USE 2.
Seeing the Poor are as capable of Heaven and Eternal Happiness in the World to
come, as the Rich; Let them give all diligence to be duly qualified for it;
let their constant and earnest endeavors be to labor after a meetness to be
made partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light. Seeing God has put
them in as fair a way for Heaven as any else, let them take heed that they fall
not short of Heaven through their sloth and carelessness, and through their
neglect of the great Salvation which God in the Gospel reveals, and as freely
offers to them as he does to the Rich, and which, if they be not wanting to
themselves, they may be made partakers of upon the same terms on which the Rich
are capable thereof; yea in some respects upon easier terms; forasmuch as the
Riches, Honors, Preferments, and high Places of their Superiors so load,
incumber and clog them, as they are thereby much retarded and hindered in their
way to Heaven. Both conditions have their difficulties, both their advantages;
both have the like end to respect, both have the like capacity of attaining it;
herein they both meet together, but the happiness of all are, That God is the
maker and disposer of both.

The Sixth Sermon.
2 CHRONICLES. 33.10, 11, 12, 13. And the Lord spoke to Manasseh, and to his People:
but they would not hearken.

Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the Captains of the Host of the King of
Assyria, which took Manasseh among the Thorns, and bound him with Fetters, and
carried him to Babylon.

And when he was in Affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly before the God of his Fathers,

And prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him, and heard his Supplication,
and brought him again to Jerusalem into his Kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that
the Lord he was God.


IN this Chapter we have a brief History of the Reign of Manasseh, from the
Beginning of the Chapter to the 20th Verse. This Manasseh was the Son of
Hezekiah, a most wicked Son, though descending from a most pious and religious
Father. I say, a most wicked Son, for such he was till God was pleased to
humble him, and work a Change in him. He that shall read the Account that is
here, and in 2 Kings 21. given of the former Part of his Reign, and compare it
with the worst of all the Kings that went before him, shall find that in all
manner of abominable Wickedness he exceeded them all: His Sins were of a most
horrid Nature; Idolatry, Witchcraft, consulting with Wizards, and such as had
familiar Spirits; his causing his own Son to be burnt in way of Sacrifice to
his Idols; his barbarous Cruelty in shedding innocent Blood in that abundance,
that he filled Jerusalem with it from one End to the other. Moreover, as these
his Sins were heinous and abominable in their own Nature, so were the
Aggravations of them such, as greater or higher could not easily be. These
Aggravations has the Spirit of God in the History mentioned, and in a special
manner insisted on.

1. That he wrought all this Wickedness, notwithstanding the good Example that
his Father Hezekiah had given him, 2 Kings 21.3. 2 Chronicles. 33.3. 2 Kings 21.4.
by his Zeal against Idolatry; That he built up again the high Places which his
Father had destroyed.

2. That he built Altars in the House of the Lord, of which the Lord had said,
In Jerusalem will I put my Name. Ver. 7.
That he set a graven Image of the Grove that he had made in the House which
God has chosen to place his Name therein for ever. It had been an horrible
Sin, if he had only built his Altars, and set his Images any where else; how
much more to set them up in the House of God, the Place which God made such
account of, and so highly esteemed; that he should set up his Idols in that
Place, as it were in Defiance of God, and of his Worship there?

3. That he should not content himself to have offered other Sacrifices to his
Idols, unless he had also offered his own Son in Sacrifice, and caused him to
pass through the Fire.

3. That he did worse than those Nations which God destroyed, and cast out
before them for their Sins; that the fearful Examples of God's Severity against
them should not deter him from committing the same and greater Abominations.

If you demand how this could be; how it was possible that Manasseh should do
worse than those Heathen Nations that were cast out and destroyed for their
Sins?

I answer; (1.) Manasseh and his People had those Means of Grace which those
Heathen Nations never enjoyed. Manasseh and his People sinned against that
Light which was never vouchsafed the Amorites; and this did not a little
heighten their Sins.

(2.) Manasseh erected more Images and Idols than the Amorites had. The several
Nations in Canaan generally kept themselves to those particular Gods which they
called their own; but Manasseh multiplied his Idols.

(3.) Those Nations were not wont to change their supposed Gods, but strictly
adhered to them: Thus did not Manasseh and his People; and in this Respect
their Idolatry was worse than that of the Heathen, as God by the Prophet
Jeremiah sets it forth, and aggravates it; Has a Nation changed their Gods,
Jer. 2.11.
which are yet no Gods? But my People have changed their Glory for that which
does not profit. The Gods of those Heathenish Nations were no Gods, and yet
those Nations would not cast them off, and take up other Gods; they stuck and
adhered to them steadfastly and resolutely, and would not exchange them for the
true God: but Manasseh and his People forsook the only true and living God that
made the Heavens, and betook themselves to the Worship and Service of false
Gods; they changed their Glory (for such was the true God to them, while they
owned him alone, and cleaved to him) they changed their Glory for them that
were no Gods, but the Work of Men's Hands. In these Respects Manasseh did worse
than the Heathen.

4. Another Aggravation of his Sin was, that whereas the shedding the Blood of
one innocent Person had been a crying Sin, he shed it at such a rate, that he
filled Jerusalem with innocent Blood from one End to the other; there was no
Part of that great City where the Blood of innocent Persons that had been
causlesly spilt, was not to be seen, and where the Cry of it might not be
heard: So great and so heinous were this Man's Sins, and so high were the
Aggravations of them.

Now in the Words which I have read, we are informed how God was pleased to
deal with him; what Courses he took to reclaim him and his People; and what was
the Effect thereof upon him and them. This in the General.

More particularly in the Words following.

In the Words we have;

1st. God's great Mercy to him and his People, in calling them to Repentance,
and in giving them warning of approaching Judgments in case they should still
persevere in their Sins and Impenitency. The Lord spoke unto Manasseh and to
his People, as it is here briefly expressed, but more fully in 2 Kings 21.10,
11, 12, 13. The Lord spoke by his Servants the Prophets, saying, Because
Manasseh King of Judah has done these Abominations, and has done wickedly
above all that the Amorites did, which were before him, and had made Judah also
to sin with his Idols: Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel, Behold, I
am bringing such Evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever hears of it,
both his Ears shall tingle. And I will stretch over Jerusalem the Line of
Samaria, and the Plummet of the House of Aliab; and I will wipe Jerusalem, as a
Man wipeth a Dish, wiping it, and turning it upside down.

2dly. We have the Obstinacy and Impenitency of Manasseh and his People; they
would not hearken.

3dly. We have an Account of that further Course which God took with Manasseh,
in order to his reclaiming, when gracious Calls and Invitations to Repentance,
and Warnings of approaching Judgments, would not prevail: The Lord brought upon
them the Captains of the Host of the King of Assyria, which took Manasseh among
the Thorns, and bound him with Fetters, and carried him to Babylon.

4thly. We have an Account of the Effect which this severe Course had upon
Manasseh: When he was in Affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and humbled
himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto him.

5thly. We have the Issue of his humbling himself, seeking God, and praying to
him: God was entreated of him, and heard his Supplication, and brought him
again to Jerusalem into his Kingdom.

6thly. We are informed what Manasseh gained, or what he learned by all this;
Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God.

To speak of these Particulars in order.

1. We have in the Words God's great Mercy to Manasseh and his People, in
calling them to Repentance, and giving them Warning of approaching Judgments,
in case they should still persist obstinately and impenitently in their sinful
Courses. This gracious and merciful Dealing of God with Manasseh and his People
may afford us these two Observations.

I. That God is graciously pleased to call and invite Sinners to Repentance,
and to give them Warnings of the Judgments that are hanging over their Heads,
before he brings his Judgments upon them. This is the usual Course of God's
Providence; he is not wont to surprise Men with his Judgments before he gives
them any notice of the Danger they are in; but he first warns them, calls them
to Repentance, and threatens them if they shall still continue in their
Impenitency; and when all his Warnings are slighted, then he strikes. Thus he
warned the old World, and called them to Repentance by the Preaching of Noah,
all the while the Ark was a building. Thus by the Prophets he called the Jews
to Repentance, and threatened them with the Captivity, if they repented not.
Thus Christ himself called them to Repentance; and in case of their Impenitency
still persisted in, threatened the utter Desolation and Destruction of the
Temple and City of Jerusalem by the Romans.

Now the Reasons why God is pleased thus to deal with Sinners; why he thus
calls them to Repentance, and gives them warning before he strikes, are
principally these two.

1st. That by their timely Repentance and Reformation they may prevent his
Judgments; and that he may have no Occasion of using that Severity against
them, which if they repent not, will be necessary both for the Vindication of
his Honor, and in order to their Humiliation and Reformation: God does not
afflict willingly, Lam. 3.33.
nor grieve the Children of Men. He takes no Delight in severe Courses, unless
where there is a Necessity of them, in regard that gentler Means do no Good.

2dly. He gives Warning, calls to Repentance, and promises Mercy upon
Repentance, before he strikes; to the End, that if Men will take no Warning, if
sin they will, and persevere still in their Sins, whatever it costs them, the
Justice of his Proceedings against them may be cleared, that the Sinners
themselves may be rendered inexcusable, and every Mouth may be stopped, or be
enforced to acknowledge that he is righteous, even when he punishes them most
severely.

Use 1. If God be so gracious as to call to Repentance, and give Warnings
before he strikes, let us not be unconcerned at such Warnings, let us not
flight them or contemn them; neither let our Hearts fret or rise against them,
but humbly, patiently, and thankfully entertain them, and carefully improve
them. If God's Design in them be to prevent Punishments, let not us by our
slighting and disregarding them, draw those Evils upon our selves which they
are designed to keep off. It Is a dangerous thing not to take Warning when it is
given us, when God gives it that he may bring us to Repentance by it. The
Admonition that Ely gave his Sons, and the Representation that he made to them
of the Danger of their sinful Practices, was in effect a Warning from God: but
they regarded it not; and what was the Issue but their Ruin? The Spirit of God
says, 1 Samuel 2.25.
That they hearkened not to the Voice of their Father, because the Lord would
slay them. Psalm. 68.21.
God shall wound the Head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of every one that
goes on still in his Trespasses. And the making good of this Threatening may
They above others expect, that still go on in their Trespasses against
Warnings; and especially if they still go on against many Warnings. Prove. 29.1.
He that being often reproved hardneth his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without Remedy. Do we believe this? If we do, how should we hasten to
make our Peace with God; especially such of us as have long gone on in our Sins
against all Warnings and Calls to Repentance? We may think perhaps that because
we have been long warned and threatened, and yet still God holds his Hand, and
forbears to strike, we are in no Danger; it may be the long Patience which God
has exercised toward us, makes us regardless of his Warnings: and now at
length we begin to make account that we may safely enough go on in our old
Ways, there is no such Danger as has been pretended. But let us take heed how
we thus abuse the Patience and Long-sufferance of God. Whatever our present
Thoughts are, or how much soever we may now flatter our selves, these two
things we shall certainly find in the end.

1. That how long soever God may bear with us, yet he will fulfill his
Threatenings in the end, unless by our Repentance we prevent them. Heaven and
Earth shall rather pass away, Mat. 24.35
than any one Word that he has spoken, shall fall to the Ground.

2. The longer God is pleased to bear with us, and wait for our Repentance, the
more severely will he handle us at last, if still we refuse to be reclaimed.
Long-continued and abused Patience usually ends in Fury. I kept silence, said
God to the wicked Man, the obstinate Sinner that would not be reclaimed; I had
long Patience with him: And thou thoughtest that I was such a one as thy self;
My Forbearance of thee made thee think that I was much of thy mind, and had no
great dislike of thy evil Ways: Psalm. 50.21, 22.
But I will reprove thee, and set thy Sins in order before thee. Consider this,
ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver
you. As if he had said, Though I have born long with thee, yet thou art much
mistaken if thou think that I will always bear with thee: The longer I stay,
the more terrible and irresistible will my Judgments be when I reckon with
thee, and come upon thee at last.

Use 2. If God be pleased to call Sinners to Repentance, and to give them
Warning before he punishes them; then let all such as are punished, justify
God, and acknowledge that they suffer justly, and that they have no reason to
complain of God, but of themselves: For having offended, and deserved
Punishment, God gave them Warning before he would correct them; but they would
not take Warning. If they be punished, they may thank themselves; they might by
their Repentance have prevented it, but they would not.

Use 3. The same Consideration should also persuade Sufferers to bear with
Patience what God is pleased to lay upon them for their Sins. They have
wilfully made themselves Sufferers, and drawn those Evils upon themselves,
which God would never have inflicted on them, if any Warnings would have made
them sensible of their Danger, and have reclaimed them; if any Calls and
Invitations to Repentance, and Offers of Mercy would have prevailed with them,
taken them off from their sinful Courses, and gained them. Is there not all the
reason in the World, that they should undergo with Patience those Evils which
they would bring upon themselves, notwithstanding all the Means which God made
use of to keep them off? Hab. 2.10.
Thou have consulted Shame to thy House, said God to the King of Babylon. When
impenitent Sinners will take no Warnings, when they will not be persuaded to
take that Course by which alone Punishments may be prevented, they consult
Punishments to themselves. Whatever a Man suffers, he may say to himself as God
said to his People, Jer. 4.18.
Thy Way and thy Doings have procured these things unto thee. He that shall
consider this, cannot but acknowledge that his Impatience under God's afflicting
Hand is most unreasonable.

II. Another Observation from God's speaking to Manasseh and his People, from
his forewarning them of approaching Judgments, and calling them to Repentance,
is, That God is pleased to give warning to the greatest Sinners before he
punishes them, and to call them to Repentance, that they may use the Means for
escaping those his Judgments, which without Repentance will inevitably overtake
them, and come upon them. Such a Sinner was Manasseh, whose monstrous
Wickedness and horrid Abominations we have in part been acquainted with before.
And as for his People, we may well suppose that they also were prodigiously
wicked, and ripe for the Sickle, for the Sickle of the Wrath of God, seeing
many of them must needs concur with Manasseh in those his Sins, and were
together with him jointly threatened with those terrible Judgments that are
mentioned, 2 Kings 21. So then both Manasseh and his People had arrived at a
fearful pitch of Wickedness: and yet as wicked as they were, God gives them
fair Quarter; he warns them before he will pour out the Vials of his Wrath upon
them, and calls them to Repentance, that they might not say when his Judgments
should take hold of them, that they would have repented if they had known the
Danger they were in, and sufficient Warning had been given them in season. The
Age before the Flood was desperately wicked, insomuch that it is said, it
repented the Lord that he had made Man on the Earth, Genesis 6.6.
and that it grieved him at the Heart: So is God pleased to set forth the
Wickedness of Mankind in those Times, speaking after the manner of Men. So
again it is afterward said, that all Flesh had corrupted his Way upon the
Earth, Ver. 12, 13
and that the Earth was filled with Violence. And yet tho Mankind had so
woefully degenerated, and the World was so fearfully corrupted, and so
universally depraved, that only eight Persons, Noah and his Family, were
preserved; yet God did not presently sweep them all away with the Beesom of
Destruction, but gave them warning of the Flood 120 Years before it came, Ver.
3.
and waited for their Repentance all the while that the Ark was a preparing. 1
Pet. 3.20.
The Jews were desperately wicked before the Captivity, as by the Descriptions
of their grievous Sins, and universal Corruption, which we meet with in the
Prophets, may be seen; and yet God did not immediately call for their Enemies
to fall upon them, and carry them away Captives, but raised up and sent them
many Prophets to forewarn them of the Captivity, and call upon them for
Humiliation and Reformation, that the Miseries threatened might not come upon
them. The Wickedness of the Ninivites was great, Jonah 1.2.
and came up before God; and yet God would not presently destroy them, but gave
them Warning by the Prophet Jonah, sent to them on purpose, who cried and
solemnly proclaimed in the City, saying, Jonah 3.^.
Yet forty Days and Niniveh shall be overthrown. How extremely wicked and
universally corrupt the Jewish State was immediately before the coming of
Christ, is evident from the Prophecy of Malachi, the last of the Prophets; and
yet the fatal Day of their Visitation did not presently come upon them and
surprise them; but our Savior by his Preaching called them to Repentance, and
forewarned them of the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the Miseries attending it.
Now the Reasons of this Point are the same with those of the former; he calls
the greater Sinners to Repentance, and forewarns them of the dangerous and
fearful Consequents of their continued and final Impenitency, that he may
thereby bring them to Repentance, and prevent their Punishment, if it may be;
or that in case they repent not, they may be rendered inexcusable, and that the
Righteousness of his Severity against them when he reckons with them, may be
justified and cleared.

But you may here object against what has been said; Does not God often
surprise wicked Men with his Judgments? Does not his Wrath fall upon them on a
sudden many times, and when they least fear it? Does it not often take hold of
them in the height of their carnal Security, and when they do not so much as
dream of any Danger they are in? And is not this to be suddenly and
unexpectedly surprised by his terrible Judgments? So the Destruction of wicked
Men comes as a Whirlwind; Prove. 1.27.
that is, both suddenly and irresistibly. So Christ, speaking of the last
Judgment at the End of the World, says, that as a Snare it shall come on all
them that dwell on the Face of the whole Earth. Luke 21; 35.
It should suddenly and unexpectedly surprise them, as the Bird is surprised
that is taken in the Snare. So again, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3. -- The Day of the Lord
so comes as a Thief in the Night. For when they shall say, Peace and Safety,
then sudden Destruction comes upon them, as Travail upon a Woman with Child;
and they shall not escape.

To this I answer, That these, and diverse other Scriptures to the same purpose,
are no way contrary to what has been said concerning God's giving Warning to
the greatest Sinners, and his calling to Repentance before he punishes. For,

1. That wicked Men are often suddenly overtaken and surprised with God's
terrible Judgments, is not for want of being warned, but because they will not
take Warning: Though they be told from Day to Day of the Judgments of God that
seem to be even at the Door, and ready to light upon them, yet they will not
believe it; and so whenever the Judgments of God come upon them, they are
surprised; and they come when they think not of them, when they look not for
them.

2. It Is most just with God that they who have contemned many former Warnings,
and would take no Warnings, should at last have no Warning. And this is that
which is expressly threatened, Rev. 3.2, 3. where Christ speaking to the Angel of
the Church in Sardis, says, Be watchful, and strengthen the things that are
ready to die, for I have not found thy Works perfect before God: Remember
therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast and repent. Here is
Warning sufficient: If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a
Thief, and thou shall not know what Hour I will come upon thee. That is in
Effect, If thou will take no Warning, when I at length come upon thee to punish
thee, thou shall have no Warning. And so much by way of Answer to that
Objection.

Now to apply very briefly what has been said concerning this Observation.

Use 1. If God be graciously pleased to call the greatest Sinners to
Repentance, and to give them Warning before he punishes them, then have the
greatest Sinners abundant Encouragement to come in to God, and to endeavor to
make their Peace with him, how long soever they have stood out against him:
They may be sure God would never call them to repent, and invite them to come
in to him, unless he were most willing to entertain them, and bid them welcome
when they come. Far be it from you to harbor such unworthy and dishonorable
Thoughts of God, as if he would invite you to come in to him, and then reject
you and cast you off when you do come. Whatever your Sins have been, they shall
not hinder your being reconciled to him, and your making your Peace with him,
if at length you lay down your Arms that you have taken up against him, and
cast your self upon his Mercy. But then,

1st. You must do it sincerely and cordially; you may not dally with God,
pretending to lay down your Arms to Day, and taking them up again to Morrow. If
you expect to find Mercy with him, you must return to him with your whole
Heart, and not feignedly.

2dly. You must come in to him speedily, you must do it immediately. He that
says he will repent hereafter, he will repent to Morrow, does not repent to
Day; and for ought he knows may be in another World before the Morrow comes.

Use 2. If God be graciously pleased to call the greatest Sinners to
Repentance; then let us not utterly despair of any whom God calls; let us not
be discouraged from using Means for the Conversion of any, for whose Conversion
God is still using Means; let us not be weary of waiting for the Conversion of
any, for whose Conversion God is still waiting.

There are two things that in this Case usually discourage us, and make us
weary of using Means for the reclaiming of Sinners.

1st. If Means have been long used, and no Good has been done upon them, no
Change for the better has appeared in them.

2dly. If, as sometimes it is, the Means that have been made use of for
reclaiming them, and reducing them from the Error of their ways, have made them
worse, more obdurate, more obstinate, more opposite to what is offered them,
and laid before them for their Good. When thus it is, we are very apt to say,
To what Purpose should any further Endeavors be used for gaining them who will
not be gained, and on whom all Labor that is bestowed is lost? But
notwithstanding all this, if God be still pleased to call upon them to return,
though they turn the deaf Ear to all his Calls, why should we think it much to
be still calling on them? Though they hitherto stop their Ears, yet God can
bore and open their Ears when he pleases; and we know not but that he may yet
show Mercy to them in conquering them and subduing them to himself by his
Grace, how long soever and how obstinately soever they have persisted in their
Impenitency: wherefore let us go on to do our Duty in order to their
reclaiming, and let God do what seems good in his Eyes.

So I have done with the first Particular in the Text; God's great Mercy to
Manasseh and his People that had so highly provoked him; he was graciously
pleased to call them to Repentance, and to give them Warning of those Evils
that were approaching, and would certainly overtake them, and come upon them if
they should still persevere in their sinful Courses. How much soever they had
provoked him, he would not bring his Judgments upon them till he had first
dealt with them by his Prophets, to make them sensible of their Danger, and to
bring them to Repentance.

Now follows the second Particular, the Impenitency and Obstinacy of Manasseh
and his People; They would not hearken. It Is not said, They did not hearken,
but they would not hearken. Which Words imply a wilful disregarding and
rejecting of those Admonitions, Reproofs and Warnings that were given them by
the Prophets.

Whence we may observe;

That wicked Men that have long gone on in a Course of Sin, come sometimes to
that Degree of Obstinacy and Hardness of Heart, that no Calls or Invitations to
Repentance, no Warnings of impending and approaching Judgments will work upon
them.

This their Obstinacy is many ways set forth and represented to us in the holy
Scriptures. The Psalmist compares such wicked Men to the deaf Adder, that
stops her Ears, Psalm. 58.4, 5.
and will not hearken to the Voice of the Charmer, charming never so wisely:
The meaning is, nothing can be so fitly spoken, but that they refuse to hearken
to it. And as they stop their Ears, so they close their Eyes; When thy Hand is
lifted up, Isa. 26.11.
they will not see. So of the perverse and obstinate Jews that lived in the
Prophet Zechariah's time, it is said, Zech. 7.11, 12.
that they refused to hearken, and pulled away the Shoulder, and stopped their
Ears, that they should not hear: Yea, they made their Hearts as an Adamant
Stone. Of this Unteachableness and Obstinacy of Spirit God complains, saying,
Psalm. 81.11
My People would not hearken to my Voice, and Israel would none of me. To the
same Effect is that most affectionate Speech of our Savior, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.37.
how often would I have gathered thy Children together, even as a Hen gathers
her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not? Yea sometimes so far are wicked
Men from harkening to those gracious Calls and merciful Invitations to
Repentance which God vouchsafes them, that they cannot endure any Man that
shall endeavor to make them sensible of their evil Ways, and to withdraw them
from their Sins. Upon this Account it was that Ahab counted Elijah his Enemy: 2
Kings 21.20.
Have thou found me, O mine Enemy? said he, when the Prophet came to reprove
him, and to denounce the Judgments of God against him and his Family for their
Sins. And so impatient were ungodly Men of being reproved in the Prophet
Isaiah's time, that they studied to do what Mischief they could to such as
should attempt to reprove them: They make a Man an Offender for a Word, and lay
a Snare for him that reproves in the Gate, Isa. 29.21.
says that Prophet. The like Complaint we have, Amos 5.10. They hate him that
rebukes in the Gate, and abhor him that speaks uprightly. Now there are
several things that make wicked Men the more obstinate, and that are, if not
Causes, yet Occasions of their turning the deaf Ear to all those Calls and
Invitations to Repentance, which God vouchsafes them. Such as are,

1st. Outward Prosperity. When the World smiles upon them, when they live at
Ease, and enjoy whatever Heart can wish; this through the Corruption of their
Hearts puffs them up with Pride, and makes them slight whatever is offered
them, or laid before them for the Good of their Souls. This ill Effect had
outward Prosperity upon Jehojachin; Jer. 22.21.
I spoke unto thee in thy Prosperity, and thou said, I will not hear. To the
same Purpose is that of the Psalmist, who speaking of wicked Men, says,
Because they have no Changes, Psalm. 55.19
therefore they fear not God. Because they are not harassed with Afflictions,
nor emptied from Vessel to Vessel, therefore they regard not God's Calls to
Repentance, nor his Threatenings: He may say what he pleases, he may threaten
them as severely as he will, they are not moved at it, nor concern themselves
with it.

2dly. Another thing that makes them the more obstinate, is, their not
believing the Threatenings and Denunciations of Judgments against them for their
Sins. Thus the old World not believing what God had threatened concerning the
Destruction of the World by the Flood, still continued in their Sins, and
repented not, till at length the Flood came upon them, and took them all away,
excepting only those few Persons that found Grace in the Eyes of God to be
exempted from that dreadful Judgment. So though God had often by his Prophets
threatened the Captivity, yet the profane and obstinate Jews putting far off the
evil Day, and giving no Credit to the Threatenings, would not be brought to
Repentance. Such were they whom the Prophet Zephany described, who being settled
on their Lees, Zeph. 1.12.
said in their Hearts, The Lord will not do Good, neither will he do Evil: that
is, he would neither fulfill his Promises, nor make good his Threatenings; they
believed neither the one nor the other.

3dly. Another thing that makes wicked Men the more obstinate, and that hardens
them against all Invitations and Calls to Repentance, is the abused Patience
and Long-sufferance of God toward them: Because God has long born with them,
therefore they think he will always bear with them; because waiting for their
Repentance, he does not speedily put his Threatenings in Execution, therefore
they make account he will never put them in Execution. Eccles. 8.11.
Because Sentence against an evil Work is not executed speedily; therefore the
Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do Evil. If Punishment be but
deferred and respited for a time, to see if Offenders will not bethink
themselves, and by their Repentance prevent that Severity which else must be
used against them, even this makes them think they are now in no Danger of
being punished, and so they are encouraged to go on in their Sins. Thus the
wicked Jews encouraged themselves in their sinful Courses, and in their carnal
Security, saying, Ezekiel. 12.22.
The Days are prolonged, and every Vision fails. As if they had said, the
Prophets terrify us with sad Visions, and severe Threatenings and Denunciations
of approaching Judgments; but nothing comes of it, all their Visions fail, and
we are still in Safety, and so we trust we shall be, notwithstanding all the
Frights they would put us into.

4thly. Another thing, and indeed the chief thing that makes wicked Men so
obstinate as that they stop their Ears against all Solicitations and Calls to
Repentance, is the most entire League that there is between them and their
Sins: So dearly do they love their Sins, that they cannot endure to think of
parting with them. Whatever can be said to take them off from their Sins, is of
no Account, signifies nothing with them; enjoy their Sins they will, whatever
comes of it: They are perfectly deaf to all Charmings that tend to the making a
Separation between them and their Lusts. Thus were the Jews so sondly in love
with the idolatrous Services of foreign Nations, that after them they would,
nothing should withhold them: I have loved Strangers, Jer. 2.25.
says Judah, and after them will I go. Now to apply very briefly what has
been said concerning this Point.

Use 1. If wicked Men that have long gone on in a Course of Sin, may and do
sometimes come to such a Degree of Obstinacy and Hardness of Heart, that no
Admonitions, no Reproofs, no Invitations or Calls to Repentance, no Warnings of
approaching Judgments will work upon them, then let no Man that treats with Men
about the Concernments of their Souls, think it strange if he sometimes meet
with such Men. The World is full of such Men, and ever has been. The Prophets
and Apostles, and our Savior Christ himself, had to do with such Men: And
these later Ages of the World are not better.

But you will say, What Is to be done when we meet with such Men? Must we let
them alone, because as far as we can see, they are such as hate Instruction,
and cast the Words of God behind their back, as the wicked Man is described,
Psalm. 50.17.

I answer, No. For,

1. We know not Men's Hearts; and therefore though they seem to be obstinate and
incorrigible, yet there may be some Convictions within, and some secret
Relentings that we cannot discern.

2. If they should really be as obstinate and incorrigible as they seem to be,
and much worse, yet God can work upon them, and change their Hearts, if he
please. No Heart is so hard but he can soften it; no Heart is so obstinate but
he can subdue it. Wherefore God laid an express Charge upon Ezekiel to speak to
a perverse and obstinate People, though in all Probability his Labor would be
lost upon them: Thou Son of Man shall speak my Words unto them, whether they
will hear, Ezekiel. 2.7.
or whether they will forbear, for they are a rebellious House. And this he is
enjoined to do with all Freedom and Boldness, notwithstanding all the Enmity
and fierce Opposition which he might thereby procure from such wicked and
unreasonable Men as they were with whom he had to do. Ezekiel. 2.6.
Thou Son of Man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their Words,
though Briars and Thorns be with thee, and thou do dwell among Scorpions; be
not afraid of their Words, nor be dismayed at their Looks, though they be a
rebellious House. And so the Prophet Isaiah, who had to do with the same
perverse and obstinate People, must deliver his Message, though God in effect
told him beforehand, That no Good was to be done upon them, they would rather
be worse than better by all that he should say to them: Go and tell this
People, Isa. 6.9, 10.
says he, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive
not. Make the Heart of this People fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut
their Eyes; lest they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and
understand with their Heart, and convert and be healed. Speak he must unto
them, though God foreshewed that this would be the Effect of all his Endeavors
with them for their Good.

Use 2. If wicked Men that have long gone on in a Course of Sin, may come at
length to that degree of Obstinacy and hardness of Heart, that no Admonitions,
no Reproofs, no Calls or Invitations to Repentance, no Warnings of approaching
Judgments will work upon them; how great a Mercy then is it, and ought it to be
acknowledged, if God be pleased to give any Man a soft and tender Heart, an
humble and teachable Spirit; if there be a Willingness to attend to wholesome
Counsels, a Willingness to be instructed, to be admonished, and when need is to
be reproved; if God be pleased so to frame a Man's Heart, and so to break and
take down his Spirit, as that he can take Admonitions and Reproofs in good
part, as that he can receive them patiently and thankfully, as that he can say
with David, Psalm. 141.5
Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a Kindness; let him reprove me, it
shall be an excellent Oil which shall not break my Head? It Is certainly matter
of great Thankfulness, if God be pleased to give any Man such a Frame of Heart,
such a Temper of Spirit: If it be thus with you, if Counsels, Admonitions and
Reproofs upon just Occasions are welcome and acceptable to you; if you cannot
only submit to them patiently, but gladly and thankfully entertain them, and
bless God for them. Consider, God might have given you up to as great a measure
of Obstinacy and Perverseness as that of the most obdurate and refractory
Person in the World, that scorns to be admonished, that hates Instruction, and
is ready to fly in the Face of any Man that shall reprove him. Your Spirit
might have risen, and tumultuated within you as impetuously; your Corruption
might have boiled up, and run over as violently against any Man that should
endeavor to make you sensible of your Sin, as his that is most impatient of
Reproof, or of whatever else might conduce to the Good of his Soul. Say
therefore to your self, Who makes thee to differ from another? Have thou not
the same natural Corruption that the very worst, the most obstinate Sinners
have? And who is it that restrains that Corruption in thee, and keeps it from
breaking out in the most fierce and violent Opposition against Reproof and
Christian Admonition, but he that has placed the Sand for the bound of the
Sea, by a perpetual Decree that it cannot pass it? and though the Waves thereof
toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, Jer. 5.22.
yet can they not pass over it, as the Prophet speaks.

Use 3. If wicked Men that have long gone on in a Course of Sin, may come at
length to that degree of Obstinacy and hardness of Heart, as that no
Admonitions or Reproofs, no Calls or Invitations to Repentance, no Warnings of
approaching Judgments will work upon them; then let all impenitent Sinners take
heed how they still persevere in their evil Ways, lest by degrees they come to
this woeful Estate, that nothing that can be said to them will move them at all,
or do them any Good, will rouse them up, or awaken them to Repentance. This is
a most lamentable Condition, a most fearful Estate, an Estate to be trembled
at: And yet in this fearful Estate will your Perseverance in your evil Ways at
length end. Wherefore let me entreat you to endeavor to break off your Sins by
Righteousness, as Daniel counseled Nebuchadnezzar to do, Dan. 4.27.
to break off your Sins speedily while there is any sense of Sin, any little
Tenderness of Conscience yet remaining; before your Heart be so hardened, as
that you be past feeling; before your Conscience comes to be seared as with an
hot Iron, 2 Timothy 4.2.
as the Apostle speaks; before you be given up to a reprobate Mind, Romans 1.28.
as again the same Apostle speaks.

Now to the end we may never be thus given up, let us endeavor to be always
ready and willing to hear whatsoever God shall be pleased to speak, whoever be
the Instruments by whom he speaks to us: Let us endeavor to have both our Ears
and our Hearts open to take in and receive whatsoever Counsels, Admonitions,
Reproofs or Warnings shall be given us from him. And here let us consider;

1. That it is a thing most pleasing and acceptable to God, when a Man is not
regardless of what he speaks, but seriously minds it, takes it to Heart, and is
affected with it. To this Man will I look, Isa. 66.2.
says he, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit, and that
trembles at my Word. A most remarkable Instance of the gracious Respect that
God has to this Frame of Spirit, is that which is recorded in 2 Kings 22.
There we find that when Shaphan the Scribe had read the Book of the Law, that
had been found in the House of the Lord, before Josiah the King, and all the
Curses and Threatenings contained therein, as we may suppose; Josiah took it so
to Heart, that he rent his Clothes, and sent immediately to enquire of the Lord
for himself, for the People, and for all Judah, concerning the Words of the
Book: For, said he, Ver. 11, 12, 13.
great is the Wrath of the Lord that is kindled against us, because our Fathers
have not hearkened to the Words of this Book, to do according to all that is
written therein concerning us. So deeply was Josiah affected with what God had
threatened against that People for their Sins. But now how did God take it at
his Hands, that he was thus affected? This you may see in the Answer which
Huldah the Prophetess, of whom he enquired, returned him at ver. 18, 19, 20.
where she having assured that People, that whatsoever Evils God had threatened
should certainly come upon them, she adds, with reference to Josiah, a very
gracious Answer from the Lord: But to the King of Judah which sent you to
enquire of the Lord, thus shall ye say to him, says she; Thus says the Lord
God of Israel, As touching the Words which thou have heard; because thine
Heart was tender, and thou have humbled thy self before the Lord, when thou
heardest what I spoke against this Place, and against the Inhabitants thereof,
that they should become a Desolation and a Curse; and have rent thy Clothes,
and wept before me; I also have heard thee, says the Lord: Behold therefore I
will gather thee unto thy Fathers, and thou shall be gathered into thy Grave in
Peace, and thine Eyes shall not see all the Evil which I will bring upon this
Place.

2. Consider, that to stop a Man's Ears, and to harden a Man's Heart against
such Counsels, Admonitions and Warnings, as God is pleased to give him, is a
thing highly displeasing to him, as from the Scriptures afore-cited appears.

I now go on to the third Particular in my Text, the Course which God was
further pleased to take with Manasseh in order to his reclaiming, when gracious
Calls and Invitations to Repentance, and Warnings of approaching Judgments
would not prevail. The Lord brought upon them the Captains of the Host of the
King of Assyria, which took Manasseh among the Thorns, and bound him with
Fetters, and carried him to Babylon.

Whence we may observe,

That when other Means prove ineffectual for the reclaiming of impenitent and
obstinate Sinners, God is pleased to make use of Afflictions.

It Is true, God can effectually reclaim and convert the most stubborn and
obstinate, the most obdurate and hardhearted Sinners without Afflictions. He
needs not take the Rod in hand to do his Work upon them. He that made Hearts,
can remake them; he can change and renew them when he pleases, and how he
pleases. He can do it by Means, and he can do it without Means. He can create
and infuse Grace in an Instant; he can in the twinkling of an Eye, without the
Intervention or Service of any created Instrument, transform the filthiest, the
most loathsome and abominable Sinner into a Saint, a Devil into an Angel of
Light. There is nothing too hard for him, who being Omnipotent, can do
whatsoever he pleases. But yet however, ordinarily he makes use of Afflictions
for humbling and reclaiming obstinate Sinners, when other Means prevail not.
And seeing he does make use of Afflictions, we must conclude that he judges
that the best and fittest Course, for otherwise he would not make choice of it.
We may perhaps in favor to our selves, be apt to think this great Work might
be much better effected without Afflictions. Our carnal Wisdom may apprehend
that it would more conduce to the exalting and magnifying of God's Power and
Goodness, if this great Work of changing and renewing the Hearts of obstinate
Sinners were effected by the immediate Hand of God, and the powerful Operation
of his Spirit on the Heart, without the Suffering, the Smart, or Durance of the
Sinner. But alas! who are we that we should presume to oppose our foolish
Reasonings against his Infinite Wisdom? Whatever our dark, selfish and partial
Reason may suggest to the contrary, that must needs be the best and fittest
Course that could be taken which God has pitched on: no better Course could be
thought on, no wiser Method could be devised for bringing Sinners to
Repentance, and for working a Change in them, than that which he has made
choice of. When we have considered the Matter, this we must of necessity grant,
unless we will make our selves wiser than God, unless we will take upon us to
dictate and prescribe to him a better way than he has contrived.

Now for the Proof and Confirmation of this Point, that God is pleased to make
use of Afflictions for the reclaiming of obstinate Sinners, when other Means
prevail not, I need not say much; our own Experience is a sufficient
Confirmation thereof. There is no Man that has observed God's Dealings with
the Sons of Men, but must have taken notice that nothing is more ordinary in
the Course of God's Providence, than to bring them home to himself by
Afflictions, who will not otherwise be reduced from the Error of their ways.
And as he takes this Course with wicked Men to convert them, so he takes the
same Course with his Children to recall them, and to bring them into the right
way again when they have gone astray. This was the Course which he took with
David, as he himself acknowledges: Psalm. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I keep thy Word. And again; Ver.
71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes.
He means, that he might so learn God's Statutes as to practice them, and frame
his Life and Conversation according to them.

Now to apply this Truth briefly.

Use 1. If God be pleased to make use of Afflictions for reclaiming and
reducing Sinners, when other Means will not prevail; then if Men be wise, and
if they would prevent and keep off Afflictions, it concerns them to improve
those other Means which God makes use of; I mean, Instructions, Admonitions,
Reproofs and Warnings, humbling themselves for their Sins, and reforming their
Lives, that so God may not bring those Afflictions upon them which will be
grievous to them. What Folly and Madness is it when Men will put God to lay
sore and grievous things upon them, because they will not be wrought upon by
gentler Means? Solomon says, Prove. 17.10.
A Reproof enters more into a wise Man, than an hundred Stripes into a Fool.
So then in the Judgment of Solomon, he is a wise Man into whom a Reproof
enters; that is, on whom it makes Impressions, and by whom it is entertained
and improved: Prove. 12.1.
but he that hates Reproof is brutish. He is so far from being a wise Man,
that he is scarce a Man; he is more like a Brute than a Man; he understands not
his own Interest, which is to take Reproofs to Heart, to be affected with them,
and to make a good Use of them, and not by rejecting them to draw those Evils
upon himself which he might avoid if he would. Consider this, you that are now
admonished, reproved and warned, but will not hearken: Do you know what you do?
As much as in you lies, you put the Rod into God's Hand to correct you
severely, and to make you smart sorely, to try if that Course may not take
better Effect upon you than those milder Courses which he has hitherto taken
with you. Why should you consult and procure Sorrow, Sufferings and Smart to
your self? How much better had it been for Manasseh to have hearkened to the
Message of the Lord, brought to him by the Prophets, and not by his
Disobedience and Obstinacy to have procured the Captains of the Host of the
King of Assyria to be sent against him, to bind him with Fetters, and carry him
to Babylon? When we suffer for our Sins, then we condemn and cry out against
our selves, that we should be so foolishly obstinate as not to hearken to good
Counsel when time was, whereby we might have prevented our Sufferings. But so
it is, that in things of this Nature we seldom learn Wit till we have bought
it, and paid dearly for it.

Use 2. If God be pleased to make use of Afflictions to reclaim and reduce
Sinners when other Means will not prevail, then let such as are afflicted be
careful that they do not impatiently murmur, and fret against the Lord who
corrects them. For,

1. They may thank themselves that they are corrected; they have been the
Authors and Procurers of their own Sufferings. If they would have been humbled
and reformed by gentler Means, there would have been no need of those severer
Courses which now are taken with them. God is not forward to correct; he takes
no such Delight in correcting, as to take the Rod in Hand when there is no need
of it. He does not afflict willingly; he never does it but when there is great
Cause for it, and our obstinate Perseverance in our Sins against all other
Means makes Correction necessary.

2. They have so little Reason to fret and murmur against God for correcting
them, that they have great Cause to be thankful to God for his Care of them,
and that he does not leave them now to themselves, and suffer them to go on in
their Sins to their Ruin, seeing they refuse to hearken to him, and harden
their Hearts against all good Counsels, Admonitions, Reproofs and Warnings by
which he has solicited and provoked them to Repentance. Having found them so
perverse and refractory, how justly might he now rid his Hands of them, look no
more after them, but give them up to their own Hearts Lust; Psalm. 81.12
and let them alone to walk in their own Counsels; as in the like Case he dealt
with Israel? It Is an Argument of his great Love to them, that he will make
Trial of all sorts of Means whereby they may be brought to Repentance, before
he will utterly cast them off, and meddle no more with them, or concern himself
any further about their Good.

Use 3. If God be pleased to make use of Afflictions for reclaiming and
reducing of Sinners, when other Means prevail not, then let such as are
afflicted endeavor to comply with God's Design in afflicting them. They would
not be won by gentler Means, and therefore now God is trying whether his Rod
may not effect that Good in them which his Word alone would not. Be not so
obstinate and refractory as to render all Means ineffectual which God makes use
of for reclaiming you, as to defeat and frustrate the Design of all those
Methods of his Wisdom and Goodness by which you might be gained, and be brought
home to him. Labor to answer God's End in correcting you, and be persuaded to
hear the Rod, as God by the Prophet enjoins. Mich. 6.9.
Although you have stopped your Ears against the Word; let not the same
Complaint be taken up against you that was taken up by the Prophet against the
Jews: O Lord, Jer. 5.3.
are not thine Eyes upon the Truth? thou have stricken them, but they have not
grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive Correction^
they have made their Faces harder than a Rock, they have refused to return.
Search after, and endeavor to find out the Sins for which God has a
Controversy with you; be truly humbled for them, earnestly seek unto God for
the Pardon of them; cast them off, and forsake them. If God's Chastisements
take you not off from your Sins; if no Severities will imbitter them to you,
and make you willing to leave them, then what remains but that God should look
upon you as an incorrigible Person, as one whose Disease is incurable, and so
leave you to perish in your Iniquity? Thus God left Ephraim to take the Course
which pleased him, when it appeared that his Heart was so set upon his Idols,
that nothing would bring him out of love with them: Hos. 4.17.
Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. To be thus let alone, is that
indeed which wicked Men would have; they would still gratify their Lusts, go on
in their Sins quietly, and not be disturbed in the Enjoyment of them. This is
in their Account the greatest Happiness: but it is indeed the most dreadful
Effect of God's highest Indignation against them. It were a thousand times
better, and more eligible, that all the Calamities and Miseries in the World
should light upon a Man, than that God should say of him, He is an obstinate
and incorrigible Sinner, he is one that will not be reformed by any thing that
I have said or done; wherefore let him alone, let him take his Fill of Sin, he
shall have no more Disturbance from me till I come to reckon with him once for
all. Do you not tremble at the fearful State of such a Man? If you do not, you
justly may. O take heed lest by your stubborn and obstinate Perseverance in
your Sins against all Means for reclaiming you, you at length bring your self
into it.

And this may suffice to have been spoken concerning that Point. The Point
which I have now last spoken to, was but general, as arising from the
Consideration of the Course, in general, which God took with Manasseh for
humbling and reclaiming him: when gentler Means did no Good upon him, God made
use of Afflictions.

I come to a more particular Consideration of that Affliction which God was
pleased to lay upon him; The Lord brought upon them, upon him and his People,
the Captains of the Host of the King of Assyria, and they took Manasseh among
the Thorns, and bound him with Fetters, and carried him to Babylon. And here;

1st. Whereas it is said, that the Lord brought upon them the Captains of the
Host of the King of Assyria,

We may observe, That it is of God that one Nation makes War against another;
that one Country invades another, and subjects it to all the Miseries and
Calamities of the Sword. This is frequently in the holy Scriptures ascribed to
the overruling Providence of God, and that not only in way of mere Permission,
but so as God is made in some Sense the Author and Procurer of Wars and
Invasions, and the Inflicter of all the Miseries that attend them. Here the
Lord is said to have brought upon Manasseh and his People the Captains of the
Host of the King of Assyria. Thus in 2 Kings 24.2, 3, 4. we read, that the Lord
sent against Jehoiakim Bands of the Chaldees, and Bands of the Syrians, and
Bands of the Moabites, and Bands of the Children of Ammon; and that he sent
them against Judah to destroy it, according to the Word that he had spoken by
his Servants the Prophets. And by way of further Confirmation that all this was
of God, it follows in the next Words, Surely at the Commandment of the Lord
came this upon Judah, to remove them out of his Sight, for the Sins of
Manasseh. And thus is God said to have stirred up Hadad the Edomite against
Solomon: 1 Kings 11.14.
and to have stirred up another Adversary against him, Ver. 23.
Rezon the Son of Eliadah. So God, speaking of the Executioners of his Justice
whom he would make use of to punish his People, Isa. 5.26.
says, he would lift up an Ensign to the Nations from far, and that he would
hiss unto them from the Ends of the Earth, that they might come with Speed
swiftly. So again, speaking of his calling for other Nations to invade the
Land, Isa. 7.18, 19.
he says, The Lord shall hiss for the Fly that is in the uttermost part of
the River of Egypt, and for the Be that is in the Land of Assyria; and they
shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate Valleys. So describing a
cruel and implacable Enemy which he would cause to invade them, he says,
Behold, I will send Serpents, Jer. 8.17.
Cockatrices among you, which will not be charmed, and they shall bite you.
Jer. 16.16.
Behold, I will send for many Fishers, and they shall fish them: and after that
I will send for many Hunters, and they shall hunt them from every Mountain, and
from every Hill, and out of the Holes of the Rocks. Behold, I will send and
take all the Families of the North, says the Lord, Jer. 25.9.
and Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my Servant, and will bring them against
this Land, and against the Inhabitants thereof. O Assyrian, Isa. 10.5, 6.
the Rod of mine Anger, and the Staff in their Hand is mine Indignation. I will
send him against an Hypocritical Nation, and against the People of my Wrath
will I give him a Charge to take the Spoil, and to take the Prey, and to tread
them down like the Mire in the Streets. Isa. 13.3, 4.
I have commanded my sanctified Ones, I have also called my mighty Ones for
mine Anger. The Voice of a Multitude in the Mountains, as of a great People; a
tumultuous Noise of the Kingdoms of Nations gathered together: the Lord of
Hosts mustereth the Host of the Battle. This is to be understood of the Medes
whom God would employ for the Destruction of Babylon under the Conduct of
Cyrus, as is afterward more plainly expressed, ver. 17. where God says,
Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not regard Silver;
and as for Gold, they shall not delight in it. Thus we see that God is said to
stir up Adversaries, to hiss for Enemies, to send and employ them against a
sinful People that is to be punished, to call them the Rod of his Anger, to
style them his sanctified Ones. Such Instruments as he has made choice of, and
set apart for the Service of being Executioners of his Wrath, he calls them
his Servants, he is said to command them, and to give them a Charge to perform
the Work which he sets them about; he is said to lift up an Ensign for them,
and to muster their Armies. By all which Expressions it is evident that it is not
only by his Permission, but by his Order and Appointment, that one Nation takes
up Arms against, and invades another. But here however we must take heed that
we make not God the Author or Abettor of the Sins of Men. He neither infuseth
any Malice or Wickedness into their Hearts, nor stirs them up by any sinful
Motives to act as they do. As his Ends and Designs are most just and holy, so
are all the Means and Expedients which he makes use of for compassing those
Ends. How and in what manner his most wise, powerful, holy and righteous
Providence influenceth and over-ruleth, directs and orders, moderates and
governs the very worst Actions of the very worst Men, is one of those deep
things of God which are rather to be adored in Silence, than rashly to be
discoursed of and determined. Most sure we are that God makes use of wicked
Men, and serves himself of them even in those things by which they most highly
provoke him; and yet as sure we are that he does all this most righteously, he
being just in all his Ways, and holy in all his Works. Psalm. 145.17.
In this therefore let us acquiesce and rest satisfied; and instead of
attempting to dive into those profound Counsels of God, which while we are here
we shall never be able fully and comprehensively to understand our selves, much
less to unfold and explain them to others; let us see what Use and Improvement
may be made of what has been spoken.

Use. Is it of God that one Nation makes War with, and invades another? Then
let us acknowledge God, and take notice of his Hand in all Dispensations of this
nature.

1. Are other Nations infested with War? Have they been harassed, laid
desolate, and even ruined by the Sword, while we in this Land have been at
rest, sitting quietly under our own Vines and Fig Trees, and drinking the
Waters of our own Cisterns? Let us be sensible of the unspeakable Goodness,
Patience, and Long-sufferance of God toward us in this merciful Dispensation.
Surely it cannot be denied but that our Sins have been as great as the Sins of
those our Neighbors abroad, that have most suffered by the Sword. Yea rather,
if the Aggravations of our Sins be well considered, it must be acknowledged
that our Sins have not only equalled, but exceeded theirs. For our Mercies and
Deliverances have not been common and ordinary, but signal and eminent; and
these have not a little heightened our Provocations. What other Account
therefore can be given of God's Forbearance toward us in a time when he has
showed so much Severity against other Nations, but that he is gracious to whom
he will be gracious, Exodus 33.19.
and shows Mercy to whom he will show Mercy, as he himself has declared? Let
us all be duly affected with this his admirable Patience toward a most sinful
People, and give him the Glory of it.

2. Are we at present full of many just Fears that it may e're long be our Lot
to drink of the same Cup that our Neighbors beyond the Sea have drank of? Do
our own intestine Rents and Divisions which were never more sad than at
present, and the bloody Machinations of those many Enemies which we have within
our own Bowels, threaten us at home? And do our Enemies abroad lie at the Catch
to take the Advantages against us which our Divisions give them, and to make
the utmost Improvement of them? Do these things, together with the Thoughts of
our crying Sins, afright us, and make us question whether the Dregs of that Cup
of trembling which has been put into the Hands of others, may not be reserved
for us? Amidst our Fears,

1st. Let us look up to God who thus shakes his Rod over the Land, and by sound
Repentance and Reformation, personal Reformation, let us make our Peace with
him who rules over all the Kingdoms of the World, and has the Hearts of all
Men, even of Kings, in his Hand, Prove. 21.1.
and turns them as the Rivers of Water, whither-soever he will. This is the
best way to be secured against all Adversaries so far as it shall be for God's
Glory and our Good. When a Man's Ways please the Lord, Prove. 16.7.
he will make his Enemies to be at Peace with him.

2dly. Having made our own Peace with God, let us be truly humbled for the Sins
of the Land, and more especially for those Sins which most threaten us with the
Invasion of a foreign Enemy; such as are, our Imitation of the Vices of other
Nations, our Compliance with them, or our Approaches to them in any of their
Superstitions; our aping them, and conforming to them in their vain and
fantastical Garbs and Fashions. In respect of these things the Jews doted upon
the Babylonians, and were fondly in love with them; for which Sins God
threatened to give them up into their Hands, Ezekiel. 16.
as we may see. If we can be thoroughly humbled for our own Sins, and be
reformed; and if we can be sincerely humbled for, and heartily mourn over the
Sins of the Land, we shall hereby take the most effectual Course for securing
our selves against whatsoever may be coming on the Nation. We read Ezekiel. 9.
that God commanded a Mark to be set upon the Foreheads of the Men that sighed
and cried for all the Abominations that were done in the midst of Jerusalem,
that the Executioners of his Wrath might pass them by, and spare them. And it is
also the best Course that we can take for obtaining Mercy for the Land, and for
averting those Judgments which the Sins thereof cry aloud to Heaven for. By the
Intercessions of a few, thus humbling themselves for their own Sins, and
mourning for the Sins of others, the Wrath of God is sometimes turned away from
the Places where they live. But however, they are sure to deliver their own
Souls, though they cannot obtain Mercy for others, as we may gather from Ezekiel.
14.14.

And this may suffice to have been spoken concerning the Lord's bringing upon
Manasseh and his People the Captains of the Host of the King of Assyria. What
these Captains did, and with what Success they managed their Business, is
expressed in the Words following; They took Manasseh in the Thorns, and bound
him with Fetters, and carried him to Babylon. They took Manasseh in the Thorns;
it was, as it seems, a Place of Thorns or Thickets, whither Manasseh in the
Dread and Consternation of Spirit under which he was, had fled to hide and
shelter himself from the Enemy. So we read in 1 Samuel 13.6. that the Israelites
being greatly distressed by the Philistines that oppressed them, did hide
themselves in Caves, and in Thiekets, and in Rocks, and in high Places, and in
Pits. Now whereas Manasseh, though a King, was brought into that Distress, that
he was constrained to hide himself in the Thorns from his Enemies, we may
observe,

That great Men and Persons of high Places, and great Dignity, may sometimes be
reduced to great Extremities, and be put to make use of hard Shifts to preserve
themselves. Sisera the Captain General and Commander in chief of the Army of
Jabin King of Canaan, Judge. 4.15, 16, 17.
was forced to light off his Chariot, and on his Feet to betake himself to the
House of Heber the Kenite, to save his Life, which yet he could not do, but
lost it there by the Hand of a Woman. Zedekiah King of Judah, and his Nobles,
were constrained to dig through a Wall, to make way for their Flight in the
Night, Ezekiel. 12. Jer. 39.
that they might not fall into the Hands of the Chaldees; and yet was Zedekiah
taken by them, and being bound with Fetters, saw his Sons slain before his
Eyes; and then after that lamentable Spectacle, the last that ever he saw, had
his Eyes put out. All Ages, and even our own times, have been full of the like
Instances of the Mutability and Uncertainty of all earthly things. The
Consideration hereof may be useful to us several ways.

1. Hence may such as are in Places of Eminency above others, or enjoy more of
the things of this World than others do, learn not to trust in their Riches,
Honor, Power, Greatness, or whatever else it is in which they excel others.
All these things are fading and transitory, they are inconstant and unstable,
they have their Turns and Revolutions; he that is full to Day, may be empty to
Morrow; he that is now uppermost, may e're long be nethermost. How high soever
any Man be, God can bring him low enough before he dies: Obad. 4.
Although thou exalt thy self as the Eagle; and though thou set thy Nest among
the Stars, yet thence will I bring thee down, said the Lord to Edom. Of this
sad Change Jeremiah complains, and laments over it; Lam. 4.5.
They that did feed delicately, are desolate in the Streets: they that were
brought up in Scarlet, embrace Dunghills. A remarkable Instance we have of the
Instability and Uncertainty of these temporal things, in Belisarius, a great
and famous Commander of the Forces of Justinian the Emperor. This renowned and
victorious General, after that he had subdued the Persians, overcome the Goths,
and vanquished the Vandalls; and by these his Victories raised himself so high
as that he became the Object both of the Fear and Envy of Equals and
Inferiors, was at length reduced to that Want and Misery, that he was
constrained to beg by the Highway-side, crying out to Travelers that passed
by, Date Obolum Belisario, give a Halfpenny to Belisarius. Let no Man
therefore make Account that he stands so fast and firm, but that his Feet may
slip, and he may take a Fall; and the higher he is, the more dangerous will his
Fall be. Neither is there any thing that threatens a Man more with a Fall than
carnal Security, and a vain Confidence of the Firmness and Stability of his
present Station, and the Unchangeableness of that prosperous Condition in which
he is. When David said, Psalm. 30.6, 7.
In his Prosperity I shall never be moved; Lord, by thy Favor thou have made
my Mountain to stand strong: God did but hide his Face, and he was troubled. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
When Men shall say, Peace and Safety; then sudden Destruction comes upon
them, as Travail upon a Woman with Child; and they shall not escape. Rev. 18.7,
8.
When Mystical Babylon says, I sit as a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see
no Sorrow: Then shall her Plagues come in one Day, Death, and Mourning, and
Famine; and she shall be utterly burnt with Fire: for strong is the Lord God
who judges her.

2. Hence you may also learn, not to insult over those who having formerly been
in a better Condition, are now brought low; their present Condition may be your
own; you have no absolute Security against being emptied from Vessel to Vessel,
as they have been, or against being subjected to the same Changes which they
have undergone. The Consideration hereof should beget in you Moderation toward
Sufferers, and such a compassionate Sense of their Adversities, as becomes them
who remember that they themselves are still in the Body, Heb. 13.3.
as the Apostle speaks.

3. Seeing the Highest may be brought low, and none are exempted from being
obnoxious to Changes and Adversities, it concerns all to prepare for Changes,
and to be always in a readiness to entertain them. And those whose Condition
has elevated them above the common Sort, and set them on high, have so much
the greater reason to be prepared for Changes, because they are most in danger
of them, they being more exposed to Concussions and Shakings; as the tall Oaks
and lofty Cedars are more exposed to the Violence of Storms and Tempests, than
the lower Shrubs are. Again, it concerns these above others to labor to be
prepared for Changes, because they are so apt to think themselves to be above
the reach of them: For this fond Conceit is attended with two great Mischiefs.

(1.) Their fancying themselves above the reach of Changes, exposes them to
Changes so much the sooner; for the evil Day is so much the nearer unto Men, by
how much they put it farther off from themselves.

(2.) When Changes come upon Men that had no expectation of them, and that made
sure account they were in no danger, they are surprised with them, and the
Surprizal makes them the more grievous to them.

Quest. But you will say, Though none, no not the highest, be exempted from
being subject to Changes, yet may not something be done toward the preventing
of Changes, and securing our selves against them?

Answ. I answer, Though nothing that can be done, can absolutely secure the
highest against Changes, yet there are some things that do very much conduce
toward Men's Safety and Security; and they are these that follow.

1. Humility. To have a low and humble Heart in a high Condition, is both a
great Ornament, and a great Security to a Man. Solomon says, Prove. 29.23.
A Man's Pride shall bring him low; but Honor shall uphold the humble in
Spirit. And St. James says out of Solomon also, though with some little
Alteration, Jam. 4.6. Prove. 16.18.
God resists the Proud, but gives Grace unto the Humble. Pride goes before
Destruction, and an haughty Spirit before a Fall. And again, Before Destruction
the Heart of Man is haughty, Prove. 18.12.
and before Honor is Humility. I shall add but one Place more, which shall be
Job 40.10, 11, 12. where God himself speaking to Job, and setting before him
for his Humiliation, God's incomparable Greatness and transcendent
Excellencies, manifested in the Effects of his Power, Wisdom and Goodness,
says, Deck thy self now with Majesty and Excellency, and array thy self with
Glory and Beauty; cast abroad the Rage of thy Wrath, and behold every one that
is proud, and abase him: Look on every one that is proud, and bring him low. In
which Words God tells Job what he is wont to do, and bids him do the like if he
be able; thereby to convince him of the infinite Distance between God and him.
But that which is to my present Purpose, is, that God here makes his casting
abroad the Rage of his Wrath, and his beholding every one that is proud that he
may abase him, and his looking upon every one that is proud that he may bring
him low, an Instance of the great Works of God's most wise, powerful and
righteous Providence. So then this is the constant Course of his Providence to
behold and abase whoever is proud; and he is said to cast abroad the Rage of
his Fury when he does it, to note the high Indignation that he has against
that Sin, Prove. 6.16, 17.
which therefore is said to be an Abomination to him. These six things does the
Lord hate; yea seven are an Abomination to him: A proud Look, a lying Tongue,
and Hands that shed innocent Blood, etc. So then a proud Look is in Solomon's
Catalogue the first of those Sins that are an Abomination to the Lord. By these
Scriptures it is apparent that the Sin of Pride is most hateful and abominable
in the sight of God; that he casts his Eyes about, and beholds every one that
is proud, that he may abase him and bring him low; that he resists the Proud,
and sets himself against him, but supports and upholds the humble in Spirit.
Wherefore, I say, if such as are high would prevent a Fall, they must be humble.

2. They must acknowledge the free Bounty and Goodness of God in what they are
or have above others, and give him the Glory of it. They must not think that
they shine in a higher Orb, and have more of the World than others have,
because they are better, and have deserved more at the Hands of God than
others, but reckon that they owe all to the pure and undeserved Mercy of God,
which alone has distinguished them from him that is clothed with Rags, and
begs his Bread from Door to Door. Thus Jacob professed himself unworthy of all
that God had done for him, and conserred on him: I am not worthy of the least
of all the Mercy, Genesis 32.10
and of all the Truth which thou have showed unto thy Servant. And so David, in
an humble sense of his utter Unworthiness of what God had done for him, cries
out, 1 Chronicles. 17.16.
Who am I, O Lord God? and what is my House that thou have brought me hitherto?
Your acknowledging God in what you are and have, and your giving him the Glory
of it, is one good Mean for obtaining the continuance of what you enjoy; for
God delights to do good to them that humbly and thankfully acknowledge his
Goodness. But when you take no notice of God in what you enjoy, when you give
him not your humble and thankful Acknowledgments thereof, and ascribe all to
his his free Mercy, then are you in the ready way to be deprived of whatever
you have received at his Hands. Thus when God's People did not know, that is,
did not thankfully acknowledge that God gave them Corn and Wine and Oil, and
multiplied their Silver and Gold, then he threatened to take away his Corn in
the time thereof, Hos. 2.8, 9.
and to recover from them his Wool and his Flax, which he had given them to
cover their Nakedness. Our humble and thankful Acknowledgment of God in what we
have, is the Tribute and Homage, the high Rent, as it were, which he expects
from us; and when this is not duly paid him, we forfeit all into his Hands.

3. If such as are in Place of Eminency above their Brethren, and are entrusted
with a larger Portion of the good things of this World than others have, would
prevent a Fall, and obtain at the Hands of God the continuance of these his
Mercies to them, they must make a good use of what they excel others in, and of
what they are entrusted with above their Brethren. Has God placed them in a
higher Sphere above their Brethren? Has he made them the Head, and not the
Tail? Let them use their Power, not to crush and oppress their Inferiors, but
to strengthen, support and uphold them. Has God richly furnished them with a
plentiful Portion of outward Things? Let them make a sober and temperate use of
them themselves, and be helpful to others out of that Abundance which God has
blessed them with. This is the way to secure to themselves what through the
Bounty and Goodness of God they are at present possessed of. The liberal Man
devises liberal things, Isa. 32.8.
and by liberal things he shall stand. This is one special Duty properly
belonging to those whose Cup God has made to overflow. Charge them that are
rich in this World, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.
that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches, but in the living
God, who gives us all things richly to enjoy; that they do good, that they be
rich in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in
Store for themselves a good Foundation against the time to come, that they may
lay hold on eternal Life. But when Persons of higher Place shall make use of
their Power to the wronging and trampling under their feet such as have no
power to resist them; and when they shall abuse their Abundance to Drunkenness,
Gluttony and Excess, and to the accommodating and furnishing themselves with
what may supply and feed their Pride and Vanity, they take the ready Course to
be despoiled and stripped of all those Blessings which they so horribly
dishonor God by, making them the Instruments of their Sin, and turning them
into Fuel for their Lusts.

And so I have done with that Observation.

In the next place; Whereas Manasseh's hiding himself in the Thorns did him no
service, stood him in no stead at all; whereas even in the Thorns, where it was
not likely that a Prince should have hid himself, he was found out, seized on,
bound with Fetters, and thence carried to Babylon; we may observe,

That when God will punish Men for their Sins, no Means which they can make use
of, shall secure them from his Judgments.

This is a Truth that no Man can question who believes and acknowledges the
Infinite Power and Wisdom of God, and the Absolute Dominion and Sovereignty
that he has over all his Creatures.

1. He being Infinite in Power, can do whatsoever he pleases. If he will work,
Isa. 43.13.
who can let him? as he himself speaks. Isa. 46.10.
My Counsel shall stand, says he, and I will do all my Pleasure.

2. He being Infinite in Wisdom as well as in Power, knows how to contrive and
order, to dispose of and direct, overruled and govern all the Means conducing
to their Punishment, so as all the Wisdom of Men and Angels shall not be able
to devise or contrive any thing that may counterwork his Counsels, or hinder
the Accomplishment of his Designs.

3. He moreover having an Absolute Dominion and Sovereignty over all Creatures,
and they being all at his Command, he can either employ them as he pleases for
punishing such as he will punish, or forbid them to be helpful to them, and
restrain them from doing any thing whereby they may be rescued from Punishment.
Wherefore,

(1.) When God will punish Men, when he will have them suffer for their Sins,
he will sometimes disenable them to make use of any Means whereby they may help
themselves. When they should run away from Danger, they have no Power to do it,
but stand still as Men confounded and astonished, till their Fears overtake
them, and come upon them: when they should act to secure themselves against the
Evils which threaten them, they cannot find their Hands, as the Psalmist
speaks. Psalm. 76.5.
When they should be casting about and contriving what may be for their Safety
and Security, they are at their Wits End, and cannot make use of their Reason
to relieve themselves in their Distresses: Their Wisdom fails them, Eccl.
10.3.
as Solomon speaks.

(2.) Sometimes again when they contrive and consult for their Safety, God
blasteth their Counsels, and turns them into Foolishness; when they make use of
Means, God makes the very Means which they made use of for their Preservation,
an occasion of their Ruin: As Sisera betaking himself to the House of Heber
the Kenite, to save his Life, Judge. 4.15, 16, 17.
lost it, and met with that Destruction there, which by running thither he
sought to avoid; while he flies from the Sword, he meets with a Nail that
pierced through his Temples. If they escape one Judgment, they are overtaken by
another. Thus Sennacherib having escaped the Peril of the Sword abroad, 2 Chronicles. 32.21.
is slain at home in the House of Nisroch his God, by those that came out of
his own Bowels. Thus God threatening wicked Men, says, it shall be with them,
Amos 5.19
as if a Man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him; or went into the House,
and laid his Hand on the Wall, and a Serpent bit him. Much to the same Effect
God threatening Moah, says, Jer. 48.43, 44.
Fear, and the Pit, and the Snare shall be unto thee. He that flees from the
Fear, shall fall into the Pit; and he that gets out of the Pit, shall be
taken in the Snare. When once a Man has by his Sins made himself obnoxious to
the Justice of God, whither can he flee from his revenging Hand? Whithersoever
he goes, he is sure to meet with an incensed God: Whithersoever he withdraws
himself, he cannot run away from him who is omnipresent. Can any hide himself
in secret Places, says the Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the
Lord? Jer. 23.24. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? and whither shall I flee
from thy Presence? Psalm. 139.5, 8, 9, 10.
says the Psalmist: If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: if I make my
Bed in Hell, behold thou art there: If I take the Wings of the Morning, and
dwell in the uttermost Parts of the Sea; even there shall thy Hand lead me, and
thy right Hand shall hold me. If a Man be your Enemy, and seeks to do you a
Mischief, you may possibly get you away from him, and retire you to some Place
or other, where he shall not be able to find you, or where he may not reach
you. Though Kings have long Arms, as we say, and can by themselves and by their
Ministers and Instruments reach a great way, yet they cannot reach so far, but
that sometimes such as have offended them make^ shift to get them out of their
reach. But if a Man shall have offended God, if he shall by his Provocations
have made God his Enemy, whither can he betake himself where he may be without
the reach of his Justice? Surely he must go out of the World that would go away
from God: And if he should so do, yet would he meet with God in the other
World, and even there would he fall under his Sin-revenging Justice. Hence it
is that God often speaks of himself, as of one that has such a powerful Arm,
and such irresistible Might, that no created Power can rescue any out of his
Hand, when he has determined to make them Instances of his Justice, and of his
fierce Indignation against Sin, by inflicting exemplary Punishments on them.
Having threatened, severely threatened to reckon with the wicked, the obstinate
and impenitent Sinner, that in the height of his carnal Security, thinks God to
be altogether such an one as himself; he at length concludes, Consider this, ye
that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you,
Psalm. 50.22. Ye are my Witnesses, says the Lord, that I am God. Yea, before
the Day was, I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of my Hand, Isa.
43.12, 13. See now, that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me: I kill,
and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver
out of my Hand. For I lift up my Hand to Heaven, and say, I live for ever. If I
whet my Sword, and my Hand take hold on Judgment, I will render Vengeance to
mine Enemies, and reward them that hate me. I will make mine Arrows drunk with
Blood, and my Sword shall devour Flesh, Deuteronomy. 32.39, 40, 41, 42. Thus I have
showed that when God will punish Men for their Sins, no Means they can make use
of, shall secure them against his Judgments. Neither their high Quality in the
World, nor the Eminency of their Rank and Condition, nor their Honors, nor
their Power, nor their Policy, nor their Riches, nor their Interests, nor their
Friends, nor any thing else that can be named, shall do them any Good, or stand
them in any stead, to interpose between them and the Wrath of God, and skreen
off his Judgments from them. I come now to apply this Point briefly.

Use 1. Let no Man therefore, let no impenitent Sinner be encouraged to go on
in his evil Ways by the vain Hopes of going unpunished, and of escaping the
Judgments of God. A Man that shall thus flatter himself, that makes account he
shall be able to find Means to escape the Judgments of God whoever be punished;
such an one above all others shall be sure to be punished most severely.
Consider how dreadfully God has threatened such hardened, secure, and fearless
Sinners: He that blesses himself in his Heart, saying, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
I shall have Peace, though I walk in the Imagination of my Heart, to add
Drunkenness to Thirst: The Lord will not spare him, but the Anger of the Lord,
and his Jealousy shall smoke against that Man; and all the Curses that are
written in the Law shall lie upon him: and the Lord shall blot out his Name
from under Heaven. Such secure Sinners were those whom God threatened: It shall
come to pass that I will search Jerusalem with Candles, Zeph. 1.12
and will punish them that are settled on their Lees, and that say is their
Hearts, The Lord will not do Good, neither will he do Evil. As if they had
said, The Lord is in Heaven, and regards not what is done by us here below; he
will neither reward us if we do well, nor punish us if we do ill. Such obdurate
and secure Sinners as these, God would find out wheresoever they should be; he
would search Jerusalem with Candles for them, that he might punish them. Not
one of them that upon the narrowest Search could be found out, should escape
his righteous Judgments. So again, God threatened that such as did put far away
the evil Day, Amos 6.3, 4, 5, 7.
did make account that the Day of Visitation, when God would reckon with them
for their Sins, would never come, or that it would be long enough before it
would come; and that thereupon caused the Seat of Violence to come near; gave
themselves to Rapine, Oppression and Injustice; and moreover glutted themselves
with sinful Pleasures and Delights, addicting themselves to all manner of Riot
and Excess; I say, God threatened these secure Sinners, that they should go
captive with the first that should go captive. So then, none are more sure to
be punished, and to be punished severely and speedily, than they who least fear
it, and who are most confident of their Safety and Security.

Use 2. Let all impenitent Sinners therefore be persuaded and exhorted to
labor to make their Peace with God, and to do it speedily, lest the Judgments
of God overtake them, and come upon them, before they have done it. Let them
not be slack herein, and put it off from Day to Day, as if there were no Danger
in delaying it. They may, perhaps, think there is very little in those.
Threatenings and Denunciations of Judgments which they often hear; and that such
an evil Day as they have been frighted with, shall never come; or if it do
come, that they shall be able to make a shift to secure themselves well enough:
They have such and such Advantages above other Men; and therefore whoever
suffer, they hope they may find Means to be exempted from suffering. But let
none deceive themselves; these are but idle Dreams and vain Fancies. When God
comes to visit Men's Sins upon them, he comes irresistibly. All the Means in the
World for keeping off God's Judgments, all their Advantages for securing
themselves will signify nothing. Whatever they may seem to have to safeguard
and protect themselves against the Wrath of God, their Sins have made them
naked, Exodus 32.25.
as Moses said of the Israelites. They lie as open, and as much exposed to the
Judgments of God, as if they were perfectly stripped of whatever might promise
them any Protection or Security in an evil Day. It Is true, Men's Riches, and
Power, and Policy, and Interests, may help them to withstand many a Shock, and
to weather out many a Storm: But when the Day comes which God has set, and
appointed for reckoning with them, then all these things in which they trust,
shall afford them no Relief at all. It may be instead of relieving and
protecting them, they may contribute to their Ruin. So we know God often
curses Men's Policies, Job 5.13.
and causes the Wise to be taken in their own Craftiness, as Eliphaz speaks:
And their Riches do them no other Service than only to make them a more
desirable Prey to the Enemy. When the time comes that they are to be punished,
in vain shall they hope to escape, whatever they have to protect and defend
themselves withal, and to ward off those Evils that are coming upon them. The
Prophet Jeremiah foretelling, and prophetically describing the Overthrow of
Pharaoh's Army, and all his hired Forces, by the Army of Nebuchadnezzar, and
the sore Distress of Egypt attending that Overthrow, says, Jer. 46.21.
Her hired Men in the midst of her, are like fatted Bullocks; for they are
turned back, and are fled away together: they did not stand, because the Day of
their Calamity was come upon them, and the time of their Visitation. When the
time of Men's Calamity, and the Day of Men's Visitation is come, nothing shall
help them or deliver them out of the Hands of God. This Insignificancy and
Unavailableness of all Means for affording of Relief, God emphatically sets
forth, when speaking to Egypt, Ver. 11.
he says, Go up to Gilead, and take Balm, O Virgin, the Daughter of Egypt; in
vain shall thou use many Medicines, for thou shall not be healed. I say
therefore, make your Peace with God, and do it speedily before it be too late.
Isa. 55.6.
Seek the Lord while he may be found; call upon him while he is near; as the
Prophet exhorts. Seek him for the Pardon of your Sins; seek him for the
averting of those Judgments, which by your Sins you have deserved, and which
are hanging over your Heads. To the same Effect is that Exhortation of the
Prophet Zephaniah; Zeph. 2.1, 2, 3.
Gather your selves together; yea, gather together, O Nation not desired:
before the Decree bring forth, before the Day pass as the Chaff; before the
fierce Anger of the Lord come upon you, before the Day of the Lord's Anger come
upon you. Seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the Earth, which have wrought his
Judgments, seek Righteousness, seek Meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the
Day of the Lord's Anger. If you be so hardy and obstinate as to resolve to go
on in your Sins, whatever comes of it, then know that you will find in the End,
Heb. 10.31
that it is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the living God, as the
Apostle speaks. And fall into his Hands you will, if you still go on to provoke
him: Though he may have born long with you, though he may have exercised great
Patience toward you, yet there will be an end of his Patience.

The Seventh Sermon.
2 Chronicles. 33.10, 11, 12, 13. And the Lord spoke to Manasseh and his People: but
they would not hearken, etc.


HItherto of the Course which God took with Manasseh in order to his
reclaiming, when gentler Means would do him no good; which was the third
Particular in the Text.

Now follows the fourth Particular, namely, the Effect which this severer
Course had upon Manasseh; When he was in Affliction, he besought the Lord his
God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto
him.

When he was in Affliction. A sore and heavy Affliction it was for a King to
fall into the Hands of his Enemies that thirsted after his Blood, to be bound
with Fetters, to be carried away captive into a strange Land, to be there a
Prisoner standing in fear of his Life every day and every hour: This was such
an Affliction as could not but deeply affect him, and go near his Heart. Now
questionless he bitterly recounts and calls to mind what he enjoyed at home in
his own Land, where he sat upon the Throne and swayed the Scepter, and how
lamentable a Change of his Condition he had lived to see. At length he looks
beyond his Enemies, and takes notice of the Hand of God in all that had come
upon him; and this brings to his Mind those his grievous Sins and horrid
Crimes, by which in the time of his Prosperity he had provoked God to give him
up into the Hands of his Enemies, and to bring upon him all that Misery under
which he now smarted. Now he calls to mind how often God had by his Servants
the Prophets called him to Repentance; how often he had been forewarned of all
the Misery that he would bring upon himself, if he did not by timely Repentance
prevent it. Now he sadly remembers how wretchedly he had stopped his Ears, and
hardened his Heart against good Counsels and Admonitions: And this at length
sets him a praying, and humbling himself before God, which till this time he
could never be persuaded to do. When God was pleased to correct and chasten him
in this severe and extraordinary manner, then, and not till then, he began to
think of returning unto God, from whom he had revolted. When he was in
Affliction, he besought the Lord his God.

Hence we may observe,

That Afflictions will work upon Men, and prevail with them to return to God
from whom they have gone astray, when all other Means are ineffectual.

For the right understanding of this Point, we must know that Afflictions of
themselves cannot effect this gracious Change in any Man. It Is not so much from
any natural Property or inherent Virtue in Afflictions that they thus work, as
it is from God who sanctifies Afflictions, and makes them Means of spiritual
Good to as many as he is pleased to work upon by them. If God be not pleased to
sanctify Afflictions, and to accompany them with the effectual Operation of his
Spirit upon the Hearts of Men, they are never the better for them, it may be
they are much the worse; instead of being reduced from the Error of their Ways,
and of being reclaimed and brought home to God, they are driven farther away
from him. So we read concerning Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
that in the time of his Distress he trespassed yet more against the Lord. Thus
Saul, when in his Distress he should have had recourse unto God for Relief, 1 Samuel 28.7, 8.
betook himself to the Devil, and consulted with the Witch of Endor. The like
did Ahaziah, who in his Sickness, 2 King. 1.2
as if there had been no God in Israel, sent unto Baalzebub the God of Ekron,
to enquire whether he should recover. Thus though the Judgments of God that had
been inflicted on the Votaries and Adherents of Antichrist, Rev. 16.10, 11.
were so terrible, that they gnawed their Tongues for Pain, yet they blasphemed
the God of Heaven because of their Pains and their Sores, and repented not of
their Deeds. And this is that which is confirmed by every Day's Experience: We
see many wicked Men that are emptied from Vessel to Vessel, and harassed with
all sorts of Afflictions; and yet they are as bad as ever they were; yea
perhaps the more they are afflicted, the more are their Hearts estranged from
God, and the more are they hardened in their Sins. How little Good is done upon
wicked Men by Afflictions unless they be sanctified to them, Solomon informs
us, saying, Prove. 27.22.
Though thou should bray a Fool in a Mortar among Wheat with a Pestle, yet
will not his Foolishness depart from him. Solomon's Fool is a wicked Man, whose
Foolishness is his Wickedness: This his Wickedness will not depart from him,
though you bray him with a Pestle in a Mortar; though you beat him, and bruise
him, and even pound him to pieces, yet will he still be the same, every way as
bad and as wicked as he was when you first took him in hand. Afflictions may
batter him, bruise him, and break him; but without God's sanctifying Grace
concurring and cooperating with them, they will never change a Man's Nature, or
purge away his Corruption.

And here by the way, we may learn two things from hence.

1. In all our Afflictions to look up to God, and beg of him that he would
vouchsafe to sanctify them to us, without which we cannot expect to receive any
Good by them. They may do us Hurr, but they can do us no Good; they may make us
worse, but they cannot make us better without his Blessing. It Is easy to
observe what sad Work Afflictions, through the Corruption of Man's Nature,
make, when they light upon wicked Men, and are not sanctified to them; how they
repine, and fret, and murmur; how in the height of their Impatience they toss
themselves like a wild Bull in a Net, as the Prophet expresses it; how they
oft-times blaspheme God, and fall foul upon Men who have been in God's Hand the
Instruments of their Sufferings. Whosoever considers this, cannot but think himself
highly concerned to be an earnest Suitor unto God, that his Afflictions may be
so sanctified to him, as that he may be enabled to make a holy Use and
Improvement of them, and not be transported by them into those sinful Excesses,
into which the Corruption of our Nature would hurry us.

2. We may also learn humbly and thankfully to acknowledge the Goodness of God
to us; if we have received any Benefit by our Afflictions, to bless God for it,
and to give him the Glory of it. Have our Afflictions brought us to the sight
of our Sins? Have they humbled us? Have they reduced us from the Error of our
Ways, and led us home to God? Let us not think these things to be the natural
Issues and Fruits of Affliction. No such matter: it is God, and he alone that
puts Efficacy into Afflictions for the production of these great and excellent
things. Wherefore let us ascribe them not to the Means, but to God, and
accordingly bless him for them.

But to return to the Point to be insisted on. Afflictions will work upon Men,
and prevail with them to return to God from whom they have gone astray, when
all other Means are ineffectual. Afflictions, if God be pleased to sanctify
them, will do Men good when no other Means will. This Truth may be confirmed
both from Scripture and Experience.

(1.) From Scripture it may be confirmed. David, when he was out of the way,
wanted not other Means to reduce him, and to set him right again; but yet he
acknowledges that Afflictions were the Means by which he was recalled from his
Wanderings: Psalm. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy Word. And again,
It is good for me that I was afflicted, Ver. 71.
that I might learn thy Statutes. But next to the great Instance of the
Efficacy of Afflictions this way in Manasseh, there is none other so full and
pertinent, as that of the Prodigal Son. Luke 15.11, 12, etc.
This wild young Man could not be restrained, and kept in good Order by his
Father's Instructions and Counsels. His Father's Discipline was too severe for
him; his Father's House was little better than a Prison to him, a strait
Confinement not to be endured, and such an Abridgment of his Liberty as was
intolerable: Abroad he must, and take his Portion along with him also. Having
withdrawn himself from under his Father's Government, and being at liberty, he
prodigally and riotously spends all that he had, and reduces himself to
extreme Want and Misery. At length when he was ready to perish, and knew not
what to do, he considers how much better it was with him while he was at home
with his Father, and takes up Resolutions of returning to him, and of humbling
himself before him. Here we see Affliction and Misery works upon this Prodigal,
and brings him home to his Father's House, when nothing else would reclaim him.
And all this, what is it else but a lively Emblem of the Condition of a Sinner
that is gone astray from God, and is reduced by Affliction, when nothing else
will reclaim him?

(2.) This Truth may also be confirmed from Experience. We may observe, and
it is no difficult matter to observe it, that when Men could not be reclaimed
and taken off from their vicious Courses by any other Means, Afflictions have
done it. Sometimes the Sense of God's Wrath, and Terrors of Conscience;
sometimes a severe Fit of Sickness that has brought them near the Grave, or
some other sharp Affliction, has imbittered that Sin to them, and taken off
their Hearts from it, which before they could never be persuaded to part with.
And there is no Man that has any good Acquaintance with himself, and with his
own Heart, and has made any observation of God's Dealings with his Soul, but
must have taken notice that Afflictions have been of that use to him, and have
done him that Good in making a Separation between him and his Sins, which
nothing else could ever do, neither the Word, nor all the Threatenings against
Sin therein contained, nor the good Counsels and Admonitions of Friends, nor
the Examples of the Judgments of God inflicted on others for the same Sins.
When none of all these things will make a Man willing to leave his Sins, a
Man's own proper Smart and personal Afflictions will do it.

Now if you ask, how God is pleased to make Afflictions the Means of reclaiming
Sinners, and of bringing them home to himself when other Means will not do it?

I answer; Afflictions, when God is pleased to sanctify them, do many ways
contribute toward the reclaiming of Sinners.

1. They make Men serious; they call in Men's Minds from the things of the
World, from the Honors, the Profits, the Pleasures, the Divertisements and
Vanities thereof, and make them reflect and consider how it is with them as to
their spiritual Estate, and in what Condition their Souls are, and how Matters
stand between God and them. These things are little minded while Men are in
Prosperity, and they have no Changes; Men have other things to entertain
themselves with, and to take up their Time and their Thoughts; they have things
which they are better pleased with, and which they take more Content in. But in
time of Affliction they retire into themselves, and are more conversant at
home. The time of Adversity is a time of thinking, and of Consideration; Eccl.
7.14.
In the Day of Adversity consider, says Solomon. Consideration is the proper
Duty of that Time, and then a Man is fittest for it. Now Consideration, and
serious Reflection on our selves, are the first Step toward our returning to
God, and into the way of Obedience, when we have gone astray. David thought on
his Ways, Psalm. 119.59.
and then turned his Feet unto God's Testimonies. And it is said of the Prodigal
when he was in Distress, that he came to himself, and said, Luke 15.17.
How many hired Servants of my Father's have Bread enough and to spare, and I
perish for Hunger? He came to himself; before he was beside himself, he was
abroad before: while his Portion and his Money lasted, he had other things to
mind; but when all was spent, and when by his profuse, prodigal and luxurious
Courses he had brought himself to those Extremities that he was ready to be
famished, then he began to reflect upon himself, and to consider how foolishly
he had done in forsaking his Father's House; what Misery he had thereby brought
himself into; and how much happier he might have been if he had still kept at
home with his Father, and never thought of rambling away from him. These and
the like serious Reflections and Considerations at length produce the
Resolutions which he takes up, saying with himself, I will arise and go to my
Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son; make me as one of thy hired
Servants. And so much concerning the first thing that Affliction does toward
the reclaiming of Sinners; it makes Men serious, it calls in their Minds from
the World and the things thereof, and makes them reflect upon themselves and
consider.

2. Afflictions bring Men to the Sight of their Sins, which is a further Step
toward their reclaiming. The Affliction which God lays upon a Man is oft-times
such as to its Kind, Nature and Circumstances, that it evidently points at a
Man's Sin, and plainly shows the Sinner what the Sin is which God corrects him
for. To make Men see and discern their Sins, and the better to convince them of
their Sins, God often as it were writes the Sin upon the Punishment, and that
in such fair and legible Characters as that all may read it, especially the
Sinner himself, who is best acquainted with his own Sin, and so can best
discern how exactly God suits the Punishment thereunto. A most famous and
remarkable Instance hereof we have in Adonibezek; Judge. 1.6, 7.
who having cut off the Thumbs and great Toes of threescore and ten Kings, had
at length his own Thumbs and great Toes cut off, which made him acknowledge the
righteous Judgment of God herein, saying, As I have done, so God has requited
me. But though Afflictions be not such as evidently point at the Sin, and
presently make Men see it, and acknowledge it, whether they will or no; yet do
they conduce to the bringing of us to the Sight of our Sins diverse ways.

1st. Afflictions make Men sensible of God's Displeasure: When they are
afflicted, they apprehend God to be angry with them, though perhaps they cannot
see what it is by which they have provoked him: They say within themselves,
Surely God is much displeased with us, or else such or such an Affliction had
never befallen us.

2dly. This makes them search and inquire after the Cause of their Afflictions,
the Sins by which God has been so much provoked to Displeasure against them.
This is a Work that Men take little Content in; it is a Work which they are most
averse from. Men care not how little and how seldom they look into themselves;
they had much rather be abroad than at home. But however Afflictions put them
upon this unacceptable Work. Search after their Sins they will, rather than
still smart under the Hand of God that afflicts them.

3dly. Afflictions make Men willing to find out their Sins, and they make them
search after their Sins as those that have a Mind to find them. Men feeling the
Smart of the Rod, and earnestly desiring to be freed from it, and to be at
Ease, will search after their Sins narrowly and diligently, they will search
after them with all their Hearts, as the Prophet speaks in another Case; they
will search after them with an earnest Desire to find them, and never be at
rest till they do find them, because they know till then they may not hope to
be freed from their Afflictions.

4thly. Afflictions do also open Men's Eyes to see that which before they could
not or would not see. Men are not willing to see their Sins; they willingly
overlook them, or close their Eyes that they may not see them: But Afflictions
make them see and acknowledge those their Errors and Miscarriages which they
would never be convinced of or acknowledge till the Hand of God was upon them.
The Child that is corrected, will confess and acknowledge his Faults under the
Rod, which he would never own or acknowledge before. 2 Samuel 24.4.
When David commanded the People to be numbered, he saw not, or would not see
the Evil of that Action, though Joab and the Captains of the Host saw it, and
utterly disliked the thing: And as for Joab, though he was none of the best Men
otherwise, yet it is said of him, 1 Chronicles. 21.6.
that the Word of the King was abominable to him. But whatever Joab and the
Captains of the Host thought of this Action, David was resolute, and would have
it done, and his Word prevailed against Joab, and against the Captains of the
Host, as we read in the Place beforementioned. Thus far David would not be
convinced of the Sinfulness of his commanding the People to be numbered: But
afterward when his Heart had smitten him, and especially after that seventy
thousand of his People had been swept away by the Pestilence, Ver. 10.
then he saw his Miscarriage, and cried out, I have sinned, and I have done
wickedly; Ver. 17.
but these Sheep, what have they done? Let thy Hand be against me, and against
my Father's House. Thus we have seen how Afflictions are Means of bringing Men
to the Sight of their Sins, and how many ways they conduce thereunto.

3. By Afflictions Men come to be acquainted with the Evil, the heinous Nature
and Danger of Sin. Before the Sinner is afflicted, he makes light of Sin, he
thinks there is no great Evil or Danger in those Sins which he indulgeth
himself in. But when God severely corrects him for those things which he looked
upon as small Matters, and very pardonable Offenses, such venial Sins as he
thinks, no Man need question but that they are pardoned in Course, and remitted
as often and as easily as committed; I say, when God severely corrects him for
those things, then he begins to have other Thoughts of them; then he
understands that there is much more Evil and Malignity in them than he was
aware of; then he begins to be sensible of the Danger of allowing himself in
them. Thus by Afflictions God rectifies his Judgment, and corrects his Errors
and Mistakes about the Nature and Danger of Sin.

The unclean Person as long as he escapes unpunished, is apt to think he may
safely enough gratify his Lust by addicting himself to that abominable Sin: But
when he feels that his Bones are full of the Sins of his Youth, when he has
brought upon himself those Infirmities and Diseases, those exquisite and
tormenting Pains which are the natural Attendants and proper Fruits of that
Sin; then he begins to understand that there is much more Evil and Danger in
that Sin than he was apprehensive of.

So the Drunkard is apt to think there is little Evil or Danger in that Excess
which he often indulgeth himself in; but when he finds that he has thereby
ruined himself and his distressed Family, that he has brought both himself,
and such as depend on him, to a Morsel of Bread; and moreover, that he has
overthrown the State of his Body, impaired his Health, wasted his Strength,
treasured up in his declining and half-rotten Carcass, Matter for all manner of
Diseases, almost extinguished natural Heat, and even drowned Nature by the
continual Droppings of his Excess; and by all this brought himself to the brink
of the Pit; then at length he becomes sensible of the great Evil, and the woeful
Consequents of his intemperate Courses; then he cries out against himself, that
he should ever be such a Beast as he has been; that he should by his Excess
ruin his Family, and destroy himself both Soul and Body. In short, Afflictions
are a kind of spiritual Eye Salve whereby our Sight is cleared, and we are
enabled to see what we saw not before we were afflicted; and to see those
things more clearly and distinctly, which before we saw darkly and confusedly.
Afflictions help us to see those Sins in our selves which before we discerned
not; or if we had some obscure and imperfect Sight of them, if we had a dark
and confused View of them before we were afflicted, our Afflictions help us to
see them, and to discern the Evil and Danger of them more clearly.

4. Afflictions put us upon the great and necessary Duties of Humiliation and
Prayer. Afflictions make us humble our selves for our Sins, by which we have
brought our Afflictions upon us; and they make us earnest Suitors to God in
Prayer for the Pardon of our Sins, and for the Removal of those our Afflictions
which have been the bitter Fruit of our Sins. Afflictions have often taught Men
to humble themselves and pray, who were mere Strangers to those Duties before,
and never had any Acquaintance with them till God's afflicting Hand was upon
them. Even the Mariners, a Generation of Men that for the most part do not much
addict themselves to Devotion, will pray, and call upon God in a Tempest, as we
may see, Psalm. 107. where both their Danger and their Carriage therein is thus
described; Psalm. 107.25, 26, 27, 28.
He commands and raises the stormy Winds, which lift up the Waves: they
mount up to the Heavens, they go down again to the deep; their Soul is melted
because of Trouble; they reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken Man, and
are at their Wits and: Then they cry unto the Lord in their Trouble, and he
brings them out of their Distresses. So Jonah 1.5. The Mariners being afraid,
by reason of a mighty Tempest, cried every Man unto his God. So the Prophet
says of the Jews; Isa. 26.16.
Lord, in Trouble have they visited thee; they poured out a Prayer when thy
Chastning was upon them. And this is that which God aims at in afflicting his
People; I will go and return to my Place, Hos. 5.15.
that is, I will withdraw from them, says he, till they acknowledge their
Offense, and seek my Face. This here in my Text was the Effect which Affliction
took upon Manasseh; When he was in Affliction, he besought the Lord his God,
and humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto him.
This Course St. James directs the Afflicted unto: Is any among you afflicted?
let him pray. Jam. 5.13.
To the like Purpose is the Exhortation of St. Peter to such as are cast down
under the afflicting Hand of God; 1 Pet. 5.6.
Humble your selves under the mighty Hand of God, that he may exalt you in due
time.

5. Afflictions make Men willing to forsake their Sins, and induce them to take
up Resolutions to forsake them, and cast them off. The beloved Sins of Men are
sweet to them, and they are most unwilling to leave them as long as they can
enjoy them without Trouble or Molestation, as long as they suffer nothing, and
as they smart not upon the account of their Sins: But when they are chastned
and afflicted for their Sins, this makes Sin bitter to them, and makes them
resolve to part with it, to cast it off, and abandon it; this makes them bind
and oblige themselves by the most solemn and sacred Bonds never to return to it
any more. This is that which God's People were to do in the time of their
Affliction; they must resolve upon other Courses, they must promise and vow to
renounce and forsake those Sins by which they had drawn down the Judgments of
God upon them; they must return to the Lord, and say unto him, Asher shall not
save us; Hos. 14.3.
we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the Works of our
hands, Ye are our Gods. These Resolutions their Afflictions should produce, and
such Resolutions they would produce, when their Sufferings, being sanctified to
them, should effectually reduce them, and bring them home to God. And the like
Resolutions did David's Afflictions produce in him, as we may gather from the
frequent mention there is of the Vows which he then made unto God: Thy Vows are
upon me, O God: I will render Praise unto thee, Psalm. 56.12. Thou, O God, have
heard my Vows, Psalm. 61.5. Prepare Mercy and Truth which may preserve me: So
will I sing Praise unto thee for ever, that I may daily perform my Vows, ver.
7, 8. I will pay thee my Vows which my Lips have uttered, and my Mouth has
spoken when I was in Trouble, Psalm. 66.13, 14. Now by these his Vows no doubt
but he obliged himself to testify his Thankfulness unto God when he should
deliver him out of his Troubles, not only by offering Sacrifices, which were
the usual Testifications of Thankfulness in those times, but also by a more
careful Endeavor to forsake all Sin, and to give up himself to God more
entirely in a way of constant and universal Obedience, without which all their
Sacrifices and Oblations had in God's Account signified little.

The Sum of all that has been spoken, is this: Afflictions will work upon Men,
and prevail with them to return to God from whom they have gone astray, when
all other Means are ineffectual. That it is not from any natural Property or
inherent Virtue in Afflictions themselves that they produce this Effect, but
from the Grace of God, and the Operation of his Spirit accompanying
Afflictions, and sanctifying them to us. That Afflictions, sanctified
Afflictions, contribute toward the reclaiming of Sinners. (1.) By making them
more serious, and by causing them to reflect upon themselves, and consider.
(2.) By bringing them to the sight of their Sins, which they do several ways.
(3.) By acquainting them with the great Evil and Hainousness of Sin, and with
the Danger thereof. (4.) By putting the Sinner upon Humiliation and Prayer.
(5.) By making him willing to forsake his Sins, and by causing him to take up
Resolutions to forsake his Sins, and never to return to them any more.

Now I come to apply what has been spoken.

Use 1. If Afflictions will work upon Men, and prevail with them to return to
God, when all other-Means are ineffectual; this may inform us how entremely bad
we are, what sinful Natures we have; how disingenuous we are, how much our
Hearts are set upon Sin, and how fondly in love with it we are. It Is a very bad
Child, that will be wrought upon and be made better by nothing but the Rod: if
no Persuasions, no wholesome Counsels, no Admonitions, no Promises, no
Threatenings will do him any good; if he must be beaten and smart soundly, or he
will miscarry and undo himself. This is our natural Temper, this is the very
Case of us all by Nature; nothing but Blows, and the Smart of the Rod will take
off our Hearts from Sin, and make us willing to leave it. How should it humble
and abase us, and cause us even to loath our selves, that we should have such
wicked and vile Natures, that we should be so disingenuous; and that there
should be such a cursed League between us and Sin; that we should have so much
Kindness and entire Friendship and Affection for Sin, which is most odious to
God, and most destructive to our own Souls!

Use 2. If Afflictions will work upon Men, and prevail, with them to return to
God from whom they have gone astray, when all other Means are ineffectual; this
should reconcile us to Afflictions, and make us willing to submit to that
spiritual Discipline which the most wise God thinks fit to train us up under
for our Good. Why should you murmur and fret against the Lord, when his
chastning: Hand is upon you? Why should your Heart rise against that wholesome
and necessary. Severity, which he makes use of for reclaiming you? Is there not
a Cause? Does he not see that nothing else will prevail with you? What would
you have him do? Would you have him let you alone, and suffer you to perish in
your Sins? Be not so in love with your present East; as to be unwilling to
suffer a little here, to prevent your suffering eternally in another World. Be
not so fondly, foolishly, irrationally, and madly in love with Sin, as to be
averse from undergoing any thing whereby you may be delivered from the Power
and Dominion of it. Have not such mean, low and unworthy Thoughts of the great
and inestimable Mercy of being reduced from the Error of your Ways, and brought
home unto God, as to think much of any Severity by which it may be effected.
Certainly if you judge Sin to be the greatest Evil, and if you be really of the
mind that it is the greatest Happiness to be freed from it, and to be at Peace
with God, and to be reconciled to him, you will not think any Course harsh,
grievous and intolerable, whereby it may be attained.

I now come to a more particular Consideration of what Manasseh did in his
Affliction; He besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before
the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto him.

In which Words we are informed what Manasseh did: First, in general Terms, He
besought the Lord his God; and then we are more particularly informed how he
sought him, namely, by Humiliation and Prayer; He humbled himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers, and he prayed unto him.

Concerning the Account in general of what Manasseh did, in those words, He
besought the Lord his God, I shall say nothing, because there is nothing in
those general Terms, but what is comprehended in the following Particulars,
namely, that he humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, and
prayed unto him.

First, He humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers. In which
Words there are three things considerable; That he humbled himself; That he
humbled himself greatly; and that he humbled himself greatly before the God of
his Fathers.

1st. He humbled himself: But when was it that he humbled himself? It was when
God had first humbled him, and not till then; when God had delivered him into
the Hands of his Enemies; when God had caused him to be carried away captive to
Babylon, made him a Prisoner, and put him in durance there, from whence he knew
not whether he should ever be released, and set at liberty again. Whence we may
observe, That proud, stubborn and incorrigible Sinners will not humble
themselves till God has humbled them, till by Afflictions he has taken down
their haughty Spirits and laid them low. Wherefore you who turn the deaf Ear to
all God's gracious Calls and Invitations to Repentance, and to all his severe
Denunciations of Judgments, would you prevent God's humbling you by those sharp
and heavy Afflictions which would be very grievous to you; then humble your
selves betimes, before he takes you in hand to humble you. This is the best
Course, or rather the only Course that you can take for preventing God's
humbling you: 1 Cor. 11.31.
for if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. When Manasseh lay
under God's afflicting Hand, then he humbled himself. The Time of Affliction is
the most proper Season for Humiliation. For,

1. Then, if ever, we see our Sins; our Afflictions open our Eyes, make us look
about us, and help us to discover those our Miscarriages, which before we would
not own nor take notice of.

2. Then the Heart is softened, and touched with the sense of our Sins.

3. Then also the Sinner begins to have a sense of God's Displeasure against
him for his Sins: By the Afflictions which the Hand of God has laid upon him,
he perceives that God is angry with him, which he was not in the least sensible
of before he was afflicted. Now all these things do not a little further our
Humiliation.

Use. Let us therefore when Afflictions come upon us, improve that Season for
our Humiliation; else all those Advantages will be lost.

Now if you ask how we are to be active in humbling our selves? I answer,

1. By making diligent search after our Sins, by laboring to find them out,
and acquaint our selves with them: And this is no easy Work, considering our
natural Blindness in spiritual things, our Unwillingness to know the worst of
our selves, our Partiality to our selves, and our Aptness to overlook our Sins.

2. By using our best Endeavors to affect our Hearts with our Sins, which is
to be done by a serious Consideration of the Nature, Quality and Aggravations
of our Sins; as also of the extreme Danger attending them, and of the dismal
Consequents of Sin unrepented of, and the most fearful and eternal Wrath of God
which it unavoidably exposes the Sinner unto.

3. By humble and affectionate Confession of our Sins unto God, with our most
earnest and importunate Supplications to him for the pardon and forgiveness of
them.

4. By judging our selves for them, and by passing Sentence against our selves,
as those who have by our Provocations deserved to be disowned and cast off for
ever, and to be made the miserable Objects of God's fierce Indignation to
Eternity.

5. By taking up the most firm and steadfast Resolutions to cast off all our
Transgressions for the time to come, and as far as God shall be pleased by his
Grace to enable us, never to return to Folly any more.

Now follows the second Particular, He humbled himself greatly, as he had
been a very great and most heinous Sinner. And hence we may farther observe,

That our Humiliation must be proportionable to the Nature and Quality of our
Sins.

A little slight Humiliation for great and grievous Sins, is in God's account
next to no Humiliation at all. Let not therefore such as have been guilty of
great and horrid Sins, think it is enough for them to have hanged down their
Heads as a Bulrush for a day or two; as those Hypocrites whose Carriage the
Prophet describes, Jer. 58.5. or to have made some slight and formal Confession
of their Sins, when they are now just ready to go out of the World. This forced
and half-Humiliation cannot be acceptable to God; for it argues that such a Man
has neither any true sense of the Hainousness of his Sins, nor of the high
Displeasure of God against him for his Sins, much less any sincere and firm
Resolutions to forsake his Sins, if God should raise him up again, and lengthen
out his Life for some longer time. That you may be duly and soundly humbled for
your Sins,

1. Give your self no Rest until you be fully convinced of the heinous Nature
of your Sins, and the various Aggravations of them by which they have been
heightened: As,

(1.) That your Sins have been so often repeated, renewed, and acted over again
and again.

(2.) That they have been committed against so many Cautions against them as
you have had, against so many Warnings, so many Admonitions and Reproofs.

(3.) Against so many Chastisements, and so much Experience of the bitter
Fruits of Sin.

(4.) Against so many Mercies which should have led you to Repentance.

(5.) That they have been committed against so many Purposes and Resolutions,
against so many Promises and serious Engagements to the contrary, and perhaps
against so many solemn Vows and Covenants.

2. Acquaint your self with the Threatenings of God against those your Sins, and
the high Displeasure of God therein manifested against you for them.

3. Be an humble Suitor unto God, that he would be pleased to break your Heart,
and according to his Promise, to take away your stony Heart, Ezekiel. 36.26.
and give you a Heart of Flesh. But be sure that you be in good earnest when
you offer up this Suit unto God; beg this Mercy with the greatest Importunity,
or other ways never expect to obtain it; then, and then only shall you seek God
and find him, Jer. 29.13.
when you shall search for him with all your Heart. And though you should not
presently obtain what you seek unto God for, yet give not over seeking him; if
you seek him with Constancy and Perseverance, you shall be sure to speed in the
End: Gal. 6.9.
In due time you shall reap, if you faint not.

But you will say, How may a Man know that he is truly and soundly humbled,
that his Humiliation bears some Proportion with the Quality and Degree of his
Sins?

Answ. 1. He that is truly, effectually and soundly humbled, will loath and
abhor himself for his Sins; so did Job: Behold, I am vile, says he, Job 40.4.
what shall I answer thee? I will lay my Hand upon my Mouth. And again; I abhor
my self, Chapter 42.6.
says he, and repent in Dust and Ashes. This is that Frame of Spirit which God
expects should be found in a sincerely penitent, truly humbled, and effectually
reformed People; they should remember and be confounded, Ezekiel. 16.63.
and never open their Mouth any more: that is, they should remember all their
Abominations, be confounded in the serious Thoughts and Remembrance of them,
and never open their Mouth any more to justify themselves.

2. He that is truly, effectually and soundly humbled, will freely acknowledge
and aggravate his Sins; he will be so far from extenuating and lessening his
Sins, that he will lay them open and represent them as fully as he can, and in
his Confessions of them lay all the load on himself that he is able; he will
not spare himself, or in the least favor himself in the Charge and Indictment
which he brings in against himself. Thus David making Acknowledgment of his
Sin, gives it its full Aggravations, 2 Samuel 24.10.
saying, I have sinned greatly, and I have done very foolishly. And afterward,
when he saw the Angel of the Lord stretching out his Hand against the People,
Ver. 17.
Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but as for these Sheep what have
they done? Let thy Hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my Father's
House. An unhumbled Sinner would have shifted off all the Blame upon others, as
did Saul, 1 Samuel 15.15. excusing himself, he pleaded, that the People had
spared the best of the Sheep, and the Oxen, to sacrifice unto the Lord: But
David took all the Blame upon himself, and wholly exempts his People from it.

3. The Sinner that is truly, effectually, and soundly humbled, will justify
God in all that is come upon him for his Sins: So Daniel acknowledging his own
Sins, and the Sins of the People, says, To thee, O Lord, Dan. 9.7, 8.
belongs Righteousness; but to us Confusion of Face, to our Kings, to our
Princes, and to our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee. This
Acknowledgment he makes after a long Recital of those heavy Judgments which for
their Sins God had inflicted on them, thereby clearing him from any unjust
Severity which he had exercised upon them. To the same purpose it is that Ezra
making Confession of his own Sins, and of the Sins of that People, freely
acknowledged, that though they had suffered grievous things, yet they had been
punished less than their Iniquities deserved. Ezra 9.13.
God had in Wrath remembered Mercy, even when he treated them with most Severity.

4. The Sinner that is truly, effectually and soundly humbled, will meekly and
patiently submit to God's Corrections, and lay himself at the Feet of God while
he is chastning him. He will accept of the Punishment of his Sin, as the Phrase
is, Lev. 26.41. He will cordially say with the Church; Micah 7.9.
I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. He
will humbly say with Eli, whatsoever his Sufferings are, It is the Lord that
thus handles me; 1 Samuel 3.18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. In like manner David
expresses his humble Submission to the good Pleasure of God, when he lay under
his correcting Hand; when he fled from Absalom, he ordered the Ark to be by
Zabok carried back into the City, ^ Sam. 15.25, 26.
saying, If I shall find favor in the Eyes of the Lord, he will bring me
again, and show me both it, and his Habitation: But if he thus say, I have no
Delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him.

5. The Sinner that is truly, effectually and soundly troubled, will take a
holy Revenge upon himself, in reference to those things, to those particular
Instances of his Life, in which he has most provoked God and incurred his
Displeasure. Cor. 7.11
To manifest his Indignation against himself for the Sins by which he has most
highly dishonored God, he will deny himself some of those lawful and innocent
Liberties which he might other ways without Sin make use of.

It now follows in the Text, that he humbled himself greatly before the God of
his Fathers. Which Words may imply either an Aggravation of his Sins, or an
Encouragement to seek unto God for the Pardon of his Sins.

1. The Words may imply an Aggravation of his Sins, which had been committed
against so many Considerations as might and should have effectually refrained
him from sinning against God in such a fearful manner as he had done.

As, 1st. That he had sinned against so many good Instructions and Cautions
against Sin, as his Father had given him; and against the pious Education which
under the Care and Inspection of so religious and conscientious a Father he had
enjoyed.

2dly. That he had sinned against all the good Examples which his Father and
other religious Progenitors had given him, and against all the Patterns of
sincere Godliness and true Piety which they had laid before him, and either
were or should have been still in his Eye.

3dly. That he had sinned at such a fearful rate, and indulged himself in such
vile and profligate Courses, against all the Advantages, for better things,
which all the Prayers of his Father and other godly Ancestors had afforded him.

Use. Let all wicked and graceless Children of pious and religious Parents,
consider seriously how sad their Account must needs be another Day, if they
shall still go on and persevere in those wicked and ungodly ways unto which
they addict themselves; they must not think to plead the Piety of their
religious Parents and other Ancestors; this shall be so far from being any
Advantage to them, that it will be found to be the greatest Aggravation of
their Sins, and accordingly procure the most fearful Aggravation and Heightning
of their Punishment. The most wicked Children are apt to please and flatter
themselves with this fond Imagination, that being descended from such good
Parents and Ancestors, they shall for their sakes find Favor with God at the
Great Day of their Account; and that the Children of such Parents and
Ancestors, though they should have lived irregularly, cannot easily miscarry
and perish everlastingly. Let not wicked Children of good Parents deceive
themselves; if they continue and persevere still in their evil ways, they must
know (and I desire all such to ponder it seriously) that the Piety of their
Parents will be of no other Advantage to them, than only to rise up in Judgment
against them, and to condemn them with a more sore and dreadful Condemnation.
John the Baptist calling upon the Ungodly to break off their wicked Practices,
and to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, tells them, that they must not
think to say within themselves, Mat. 3.9.
We have Abraham to our Father; for God was able even of Stones to raise up
Children unto Abraham. Abraham wanted no such Children as they were, Children
that were a Dishonor and a Reproach to their godly Ancestors: Abraham would
never own such a wicked Posterity for his Children, much less would he open his
Mouth to speak one Word in their Behalf when they should stand before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to be accountable to him for all their Wickedness. The
true and genuine Children of Abraham are only those who imitate Abraham, and
tread in his Steps; as for others he will utterly disown and disclaim them. And
the same Treatment must all wicked Children, still continuing so to be, expect
from their godly Parents and Ancestors; they must not think to shelter
themselves from the Judgments of God under the Piety of their Progenitors.

2. The Words may imply an Encouragement to seek unto God for the Pardon of his
Sins, and a great Encouragement thereunto it is upon several Accounts. For,

1st. The Children of good Men are, together with their Parents, within the
Compass of the Covenant which God makes and establishes with his People: Thus
runs the Tenor of that Covenant; Genesis 17.7.
I will establish my Covenant (says the Lord to Abraham) betwixt me and thee,
and thy Seed after thee in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to
be a God to thee, and to thy Seed after thee. By this St. Peter incourageth the
wicked Jews that had stained their Hands with the horrid Guilt of crucifying
the Lord of Life: I say, by this he encouraged them to Repentance for the
Remission of their Sins; Acts 2.39.
For the Promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.

2dly. Godly Parents make Conscience of praying for their Children, that God
would be pleased to pardon their Sins, to strengthen them against their
Temptations, and to bestow his Grace and holy Spirit upon them. This
Consideration, if duly weighed, must needs be a singular Encouragement, even to
the most wicked and ungodly Children, to become humble and earnest Suitors unto
God for the Pardon of their Sins: they may upon good Grounds hope, that all the
Prayers and Supplications which their Parents have offered up unto God for
them, shall not utterly miscarry and be lost.

Use 1. This may inform us how great a Mercy it is for Children to have been
descended from pious and religious Parents, and how thankful unto God they
ought to be for this singular Favor, a Favor that cannot be sufficiently
valued, and which has its rise purely from the free Grace of God, which alone
makes one Man to differ from another, especially in Matters of this Nature,
wherein the eternal Welfare of our Souls is so nearly concerned.

Use 2. Let all such Children who have been favored with this inestimable
Privilege of being descended from religious Parents, improve this Mercy to
their spiritual Advantage, giving all Diligence to become Followers of their
Parents, and Imitators of their Piety; to write after that Copy, and to work
after that Pattern which their Parents have set them: And let them pray unto
God fervently and incessantly, that they may by a holy and unblamable
Conversation, approve themselves to be the true Offspring of such Parents, and
be accordingly owned and acknowledged by them; and above all, that they may be
owned and acknowledged of God for such, when they shall give up their Accounts
to him, and receive their final Sentence according to what they have done, 2
Cor. 5.10
in the Flesh, whether it be Good or Evil. And thus I have done with that
Observation.

The next thing to be considered, is, what Manasseh joined with his Humiliation
under the afflicting Hand of God, namely, Prayer; He humbled himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers, and prayed unto him.

Whence we may observe, in the next Place, that Prayer is a seasonable and
necessary Duty in the time of Affliction. Is any among you afflicted? Jam. 5.13.
let him pray. Psalm. 50.15
Call upon me in the Day of Trouble. This God aims at in afflicting us, and
hiding his Face from us: This is his Design in withdrawing his gracious
Presence from us: Hos. 5.15.
I will go and return to my Place, says he, till they acknowledge their
Offense, and seek my Face: in their Affliction they will seek me early. Thus
did God's People in the time of their Afflictions: Isa. 26.16.
Lord (says the Prophet) in Trouble they have visited thee: they poured out a
Prayer, when thy Chastning was upon them.

And diverse Reasons there are why all God's People should in their Afflictions
betake themselves to God by Prayer. As,

1. All Afflictions come from God; I form Light, says he, Isa. 45.7.
and create Darkness: I make Peace, and create Evil; I the Lord do all these
things. Shall there be Evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos
3.6. Which Words must be understood of the Evil of Affliction and Punishment,
not of the Evil of Sin, that is an Evil whereof God who is perfectly and
infinitely Good, can never be the Author. Men may be Instruments in our
Sufferings, they may be Actors in subjecting us to Afflictions, and in bringing
such Evils upon us; but it is God that imploys them, and makes use of them to
chasten his People for their Sins. This is that which the Psalmist intends when
he calls wicked Men God's Sword; Psalm. 17.13
Deliver my Soul from the Wicked, (says he) which is thy Sword: The Sword
wherewith he thrusts at, wounds and pierces, chastens and corrects his People,
when they have by their Provocations incurred his Displeasure. To the same
Purpose it is that he calls Assyria the Rod of his Anger, Isa. 10.5.
and the Staff in their Hand his Indignation; that is, the Instrument of his
Indignation which he makes use of to punish them for their Sins. Hence also it
is that he calls the Babylonians his Battel-Axe, Jer. 51.20.
and Weapons of War, with which he breaks in pieces the Nations, and destroys
Kingdoms.

2. Because God only can remove those Afflictions from his People, which his
Hand has laid upon them: This God assumes to himself as his own Prerogative;
Deuteronomy. 32.39.
I kill (says he) and I make alive; I wound, and I heal; neither is there any
that can deliver out of my Hand. To the same Effect is that Passage in the Song
of Hannah, where she says, 1 Samuel 2.6.
The Lord kills and makes alive; he brings down to the Grave, and brings
up. And that of Psalm. 68.20. Unto God the Lord belong the Issues from Death.
Hence God himself complains of Men's neglecting to have Recourse to him by
Prayer in their Afflictions, who alone can relieve them by removing his
afflicting Hand from them; saying, Jer. 9.13
The People turns not to him that smites them; neither do they seek the Lord
of Hosts.

3. Our Neglect to have Recourse to God by Prayer in our Afflictions, blasteth
all other Means which we make use of for our Relief. No Question can be made of
it, but that Ahaziah having taken a dangerous Fall from a Lattice, made use of
all the best Means that could be had for his Cure; but because in that his
Affliction he sought not unto the true God, the God of Israel, for healing, but
unto the God of Ekron, the Prophet in the Name of God tells him, that he should
not come down from that Bed on which he had gone up, 2 King. 1.4
but should furely die, as accordingly it fell out in the Issue. Wherefore this
is noted as a great Miscarriage in Asa (though otherwise a good Man) that in
his Disease, 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
even when it was very grievous, he sought unto the Physicians, and not unto
God.

4. It concerns us in our Afflictions to seek unto God by Prayer, in regard of
the great need we have of his Help and Assistance many other ways in the time
of our Afflictions. As,

1st. To teach us his meaning in those Afflictions with which he exercises us;
what he designs in them; and what at such a time he expects from us.

2dly. To sanctify Afflictions to us, and to enable us to improve them to our
spiritual Advantage.

3dly. To support us under our Afflictions.

4thly. To give us Patience under his afflicting Hand, and to keep us from
murmuring, repining, discontent, fretting against God, and all other sinful
Distempers, which in regard of the Corruption of our Nature, and the evil Frame
of our Hearts, we are subject unto in our Afflictions.

These Particulars I have only mentioned, leaving it to every Man to enlarge on
them in his private Meditations, as he shall see cause.

Use. Seeing we are upon so many Considerations obliged and highly concerned to
seek unto God in our Afflictions, let us all be cautioned to take heed that we
neglect not the Duty of Prayer while God's afflicting Hand is upon us, and
when, if ever, this Duty is both most seasonable and most necessary. As soon as
ever any Affliction from the Hand of God begins to light on us, let us
immediately betake our selves unto God by Prayer; let this be the first thing
we do, and let us never think of making use of any other means in order to our
Relief, till this be done: neither let us rest here, but let us continue to
pray without ceasing, as long as God thinks good to continue his afflicting
Hand upon us and ours. Thus doing with Constancy and Perseverance, we need not
question but that we shall see a good Issue out of our Afflictions, whatever
they be, in God's appointed time; but in all our Afflictions let us not only
pray, but labor to be soundly humbled for our Sins, which have been the
meritorious Cause of all our Sufferings; let us earnestly beg the Pardon of
them, and Strength against them for the future. This is the best Course that we
can take in our Afflictions, and the only Course that can give us any Security,
that we shall be in due time delivered out of our Afflictions, and be delivered
with such Advantages to our Souls, as shall give us just Cause to acknowledge
that it has been good for us to have been afflicted; and that God has in
Faithfulness chastned us, as David, after his Afflictions, professed and
acknowledged; Psalm. 119.75.

Now follows the fifth Particular, namely, the Issue of Manasseh's Prayer; God
was entreated of him, and heard his Supplication, and brought him again to
Jerusalem into his Kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God. Most
sad and doleful was the Condition of Manasseh, while he was a Captive in
Babylon; he was bound with Chains, and fettered with Irons; he was confined to
the dark and uncomfortable Vaults and Cloisters of a Prison; and though perhaps
in regard that he was not of the common sort of Prisoners, but a King, he might
have better Accommodations than many others; yet which was worst of all, he had
small or no Hopes of being ever released or set at Liberty again; and which was
the Height of his Misery, he had no Security for his Life, but was perpetually
in Danger, and upon that Account under Fears of being drawn out of Prison, and
brought to Execution every Day and every Hour. This was his dismal and
desperate Condition, than which nothing could easily be more sad and rueful;
but notwithstanding all this God wonderfully appeared for him, and rescued him
out of his Misery.

And hence we may observe;

That there is no Condition so sad, so disconsolate, and so dismal, but that
God can afford a Man Relief therein, and will do it if he be duly sought unto.

Jonah upon Prayer was delivered out of the Belly of Hell, as he calls it;
Jonah (...).
dark Prison, or rather a Dungeon. When the Israelites should by their Sins
have so far provoked God as to be made the Objects of his fiercest Indignation,
and to be punished seven times and seven times, and seven times more for their
Iniquities; yet after all this, God promised them Mercy upon their sound
Humiliation, Lev. 26.40, 41, 42.
and sincere Repentance. So again, when all the Curses of the Law should have
overtaken and seized on that sinful People; and when for their monstrous
Provocations God should have dispersed them, and scattered them amongst the
Nations, and driven them even to the uttermost Parts of the Earth; yet if after
all this they should return to the Lord, and obey his Voice, Deuteronomy. 30.2, 3, 4.
he promises to turn their Captivity, and to gather them out of all Places
whither he had scattered them. He is graciously pleased to assure them, that if
any of theirs should be driven out to the uttermost Parts of Heaven, from
thence would the Lord their God gather them, and from thence would he fetch
them.

There are two Branches of this Point.

1. He can afford Relief in the most deplorable and desperate Cases, for he is
all-sufficient; Genesis 17.1.
He wants neither Wisdom nor Power to compass and work out the Deliverance of
his People, how forlorn or deplorable soever their Condition may seem to be.

1st. As for Wisdom; He is the only wise God, 1 Timothy 1.17. His Understanding is
infinite, Psalm. 147.5. He knows how to deliver the Godly, 2 Pet. 2.9.

2dly. His Power is equal to his Wisdom. Nothing is impossible with God, Luke
1.37. Nothing is too hard for him, Genesis 18.14. He is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. He is never at a
Loss, though we be.

2. As he can, so he will afford Relief in all Cases, if he be duly sought
unto, at least so far as shall be most for his own Glory, and our real Benefit
and Advantage. For,

1st. The more sad any Man's Condition is, the more ready is he to relieve him,
Psalm, 103.13.
and the greater Compassion has he for him: Like as a Father pitieth his
Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.

2dly. The more sad any Man's Condition is, the more Glory will redound to God
from relieving him.

Now to apply this in a Word. The proper Use of this Point is to encourage us
to look up to God, and to be humble Petitioners to him for Relief in all our
Distresses, never despairing of obtaining Succor as long as we have such an
one to have recourse unto.

But to go on with the Text, which informs us, that God was entreated of him,
and heard his Supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his
Kingdom. He was entreated of him, not only so as to release him out of Prison,
and to bring him back again into Jerusalem into his Kingdom, but so as to
pardon his great and heinous Provocations, by which he had drawn that Misery
upon himself: for that Manasseh was a true Penitent, we have all the reason to
believe, not only in regard that it is said of him, that he humbled himself
greatly, but also that upon his Return to Jerusalem; he took away the strange
Gods and the Idol out of the House of the Lord, and all the Altars that he had
built, and cast them out of the City, and commanded Judah to serve the Lord God
of Israel. These were Fruits and Evidences of the Truth of his Repentance.

Now whereas such an one as Manasseh obtained the Pardon of his Sins; we may
observe, That the greatest Sinners may find Mercy with God if they duly seek it.

This great Truth (for such it will be deemed by all that are truly sensible of
their Sins) may be confirmed several ways.

1. From Instances of such notorious Sinners as have upon their Repentance
obtained the pardon of their Sins. Instances whereof are,

(1.) Manasseh, here in the Text, whose most heinous and abominable
Provocations are at large described, 2 Kings 21. 2 Chronicles. 33.

(2.) The Woman mentioned, Luke 7.37, 38. and so on to the end of the Chapter.
This Woman is there said to have been a Sinner, that is, a notorious and
infamous Sinner; one that was known to be a lewd and vicious Woman all the Town
over; insomuch that Simon the Pharisee, who had invited Christ to his House,
took great offense at it, that he should suffer a Woman of such ill Report to
come near him, as we may see, ver. 39. and yet this lewd and vicious Woman,
upon her sincere Repentance, obtained the forgiveness of her Sins, whereof our
Savior assures her, ver. 48. saying unto her, Thy Sins are forgiven thee.

(3.) The Thief on the Cross, is another Instance of Mercy obtained at the
Hands of God by a great Sinner, upon his sound Humiliation and unfeigned
Repentance; Luke 23.40, 41, 42, 43.

(4.) Another Instance hereof may be in those who are said to have used curious
Arts, Act. 19.19
that is, who addicted themselves unto Magic and Judicial Astrology. Many of
these are said to have brought their Books together, (that is, their Books of
Magic and Judicial Astrology) and to have burned them before all Men, thereby
testifying the truth of their Repentance; upon which, without all question,
they obtained the pardon of those their great and horrible Offenses.

(5.) Another Instance may be in those notorious Sinners, a black Catalogue
whereof we have, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. namely, Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers,
Effeminate, Abusers of themselves with Mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards,
Revilers, Extortioners. Concerning which monstrous and prodigious Offenders the
Apostle adds, v. 11. And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. The Sum of all is, That as bad as they were, and as
notoriously wicked as they had been, they obtained converting, pardoning and
sanctifying Grace.

(6.) S. Paul may be another Instance hereof, who though (according to his own
acknowledgment) he had been a Blasphemer, a Persecuter, 1 Timothy 1.13, 15.
an injurious Person, and the chief of Sinners; yet upon his Repentance he
obtained Mercy.

(7.) Another Instance may be in those wicked Jews that crucified the Lord of
Life; three thousand whereof being converted by St. Peter's Sermon, Acts 2.36,
-- 41.
obtained the forgiveness of that horrid Sin.

2. That great Sinners may upon sound and sincere Repentance obtain the pardon
and forgiveness of their Sins, may be confirmed several other ways: As,

(1.) Because Mercy is promised to the greatest Sinners, upon their Repentance;
Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. and 55.7. Ezekiel. 18.27, 28. and 30.31, 32. Mat. 12.31.

(2.) Promises of Pardon made unto penitent and believing Sinners, run in
general Terms; John 3.16. Mark 16.15, 16. Acts 10.43.

(3.) Christ invites all that feel the Burden of their Sins, to come unto him,
promising them Ease and Refreshing if they come; Mat. 11.28. John 7.37, 38,
Rev. 22.17.

(4.) Christ expostulates with Sinners, and complains that they come not to him
for Mercy; John 5.40. Mat. 23.37.

(5.) He declares and professes that he will reject and put off none that
shall come unto him; John 6.37.

Use 1. This Truth is Matter of very great Encouragement to the chief of
Sinners to come to Christ, and to be humble Suitors to him for the pardon of
their Sins. They see that pardoning Mercy has been obtained by many of the
greatest Sinners, that the Promises of finding Mercy with God upon condition of
Faith and Repentance, run in general Terms, excluding none that are so
qualified: they see that Christ most graciously invites all sorts of laboring
and heavy-laden Sinners, without exception, to come unto him; that he
expostulates with Sinners, and complains that they will not come unto him that
they may have Life: and lastly, that he declares and professes that he will
cast out none that come unto him, that come unto him in a due manner, and as
they ought to come; that is to say, with unfeigned and sincere Repentance for
their Sins past, and with firm Resolutions and sincere Endeavors to cast off
and forsake their Sins for the time to come. Now what more can the greatest
Sinners wish or desire, to encourage them to seek Mercy at the Hands of God,
than that they may rest assured that they shall not lose their labor, that
they shall not seek him in vain, but certainly obtain what they are Suitors to
him for? But here however, they must be careful to seek him, (1.) Seasonably;
Isa. 55.6. 2 Cor. 6.2. Heb. 3.15. (2.) Earnestly and importunately; this manner
of seeking God is that which prevails with him, especially when we seek unto
him for so great a thing as is the forgiveness of our Sins; Jer. 29.13. (3.)
Abandoning, forsaking and casting off all their Transgressions, Ezekiel. 18.30.
that Iniquity may not be their Ruin. If thus they come unto Christ, and seek
Mercy at his Hands, (as has been said before) Christ will in no wise turn them
off with a Repulse, but assuredly and without fail entertain them graciously,
and give them to find Mercy with him in the pardon and forgiveness of their
Sins.

But here desponding and discouraged Sinners be apt to object several things.

Object. 1. Says the Sinner that is deeply affected and sadly cast down with
the sense of his Sins, None ever obtained Mercy, that sinned as I have done.

Answ. (1.) That is a very rash and unadvised Speech, (as I have elsewhere
showed at large:) Do you know all the Sins which all the penitent Sinners that
ever found Mercy with God, have been guilty of?

(2.) Consider and ponder a little better the Instances beforementioned. Are
your Sins greater than the Sins of Manasseh? Are your Sins greater than the
Sins of that Woman, Luke 7.37, 38.
who was notorious for her Lewdness all the City over? Are your Sins greater
than the Sins of all those foul and abominable Sinners, which the Apostle
reckons up, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10?

(3.) If your Sins have been really greater than the Sins of any of these, or
all of them together; yet are they greater than the boundless Mercies of God,
and the Merits of Christ? Take heed how you entertain such a Thought.

(4.) Are your Sins so great, as that they are without the compass of all the
Promises made to believing and penitent Sinners? Far be it from you to harbor
such black Thoughts concerning your Condition. If you had upon you the Guilt of
all the Sins that ever have been committed since the Fall of Adam to this day,
yet if you could sincerely repent of them all, cast them all off, and truly
believe in Christ, you might be sure of the pardon of them: for so universal
and unlimited, of so large a compass and extent are the Promises of Mercy which
are made to all believing and penitent Sinners, that they would extend to them
all, and take them in. This is so clear and evident, that no Exception can be
made against it, unless by one that will be satisfied with nothing that can be
laid before him, or offered him for his Satisfaction.

Object. 2. But I have run on so long impenitently, and rejected so many Offers
of Mercy, that I fear there is no Mercy, there can be none for me.

Answ. (1.) Does not God call and invite such as well as others? Are not his
gracious Calls and Invitations to Repentance general? Are they any where
restrained, or clogged with any Limitations? Are they any where narrowed and
straightened with the exception of any sorts of Sinners whatsoever?

(2.) How many of those in the Old Testament and in the New, that had long gone
on in a sinful Course impenitently, obtained Mercy at length, notwithstanding
the long-continued Perseverance in their evil Ways?

(3.) Do not the Promises of Mercy to be obtained by penitent and believing
Sinners, extend to such as well as unto others? Where are they by any Scripture
excluded from Mercy? And if the holy Scriptures exclude them not, why should
they exclude themselves?

(4.) Does not our Savior assure us, that all manner of Sin and Blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto Men upon their Repentance? Mat. 12.31
(for that is ever in this matter supposed, though not expressed.) Now if all
manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall upon Repentance be forgiven unto Men, then
undoubtedly no truly humbled and sincerely penitent Sinners shall be denied the
Forgiveness of their Sins, how long soever and how obstinately soever they have
gone on in their sinful Practices.

Object. 3. But I fear I may not belong to the Election of Grace; and if so,
then all my Endeavors to find Mercy with God would be fruitless.

Answ. 1. You ought not to neglect your known Duty, because you cannot dive
into God's secret Decrees: though you know not what God's secret Counsels and
Purposes may be concerning you, yet he has plainly and sufficiently revealed
what your Duty is, and what he requires of you, in order to your Salvation. It
concerns you therefore not to trouble your Mind about God's secret Purposes
concerning you, but to apply your self with all holy Diligence to the
conscientious Performance of your Duty; and so doing, to cast your self upon
the free Grace and Mercy of God in Christ: Secret things belong unto the Lord
our God; Deuteronomy. 29.29.
but things revealed belong to us, and to our Children, that we may do them.

2. If you perform your Duty as you ought, God will be sure to perform his
Promises; you may depend and build upon it, that if you be not wanting to your
Duty, he will never fail to deal with you according to his Word: Heaven and
Earth shall pass away, Mark 13.31.
but his Word shall not pass away. What God has spoken, shall certainly take
Effect.

3. This is the best Course, indeed the only Course which you can take to be
satisfied concerning your Election. When you find in your self the Work of
Grace, and the Fruits of true Faith and sincere Repentance, true Holiness and
universal Obedience, a studious and holy Care, and endeavor to please God in
all things, and to decline and avoid whatsoever is displeasing unto him; when
you find these things in your self, you may thence certainly and infallibly
conclude, that you are one of those who belong to the Election of Grace: for
these things wrought in the Heart, are Fruits and Effects of God's electing
Grace, and can be found in none but such as are his Children, his Elect,
ordained to eternal Life, Acts 13.48. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
Romans 8.29, 30. Col. 3.12. So then the Graces of the Spirit, and that holy
Change which is wrought in the Hearts of all sound and sincere Converts, are
Evidences of their eternal Election, as may be gathered from the Scriptures
last mentioned; and therefore he that shall lay aside and neglect his known
Duty, and resolve to do nothing toward his Salvation until he knows his own
Election, must unavoidably perish, because his Election cannot be known, but by
the Fruits and Effects thereof, appearing in the Holiness of Men's Lives and
Conversations.

4. How many thousands, perhaps Millions, of glorified Saints may there be in
Heaven, who never made this Scruple, or at least never suffered it so far to
prevail with them, as to hinder and withhold them from giving all Diligence to
make their Calling and Election sure, by an earnest Endeavor after Faith,
Repentance, Holiness, and all other Graces accompanying Salvation?

And so I come to the 6th and last thing in the Words, namely, What Manasseh
gained, or what he learned by all this: Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was
God. We may not think that Manasseh was wholly ignorant of God before; some
kind of Knowledge of God he had, but he had no such experimental and effectual
Knowledge of God, as by these God's Dealings with him he attained. That Knowledge
of God which neither works upon the Heart, nor reforms the Life and
Conversation, is little better than perfect Ignorance of God. It is said of the
Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.12.
that they were Sons of Belial, and knew not the Lord: They knew not the Lord
to any purpose; they knew him not in such a manner as they ought to have known
him* and this was Manasseh's Case; while he went on in his sinful Courses, and
would not be reclaimed, he knew not the Lord. Whatever Knowledge of God he might
have, it signified nothing in God's Account. But Manasseh by those sore
Afflictions which God brought upon him, gained an experimental Knowledge of
God's Power to subdue and humble the most stout and obstinate Sinners, of his
Justice and Holiness in punishing Sin, of the Truth of his Threatenings and
Denunciations of Judgments against Sinners; of his gracious and merciful
Disposition to pardon Sin, and to be reconciled to the greatest Sinners upon
their sound Humiliation and sincere Repentance; of God's absolute Dominion and
uncontrolable Sovereignty over the highest among Men, pulling them down, laying
them low, and raising them up again, as it seems good in his Eyes. The
experimental Knowledge of all these things in God, and relating to him, did
Manasseh gain by that severe Course which God took with him, for bringing him
home to himself, when gentler Means would not prevail. All this may be implied
in those Words, Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God.

Now to apply this very briefly.

Use 1. This should reconcile us to Afflictions, and make us willing to come
under that severe Course of Discipline which is so beneficial to us, and by
which we gain so much.

Use 2. It should also teach us to improve our Afflictions, so as we may profit
by them, and to observe what we gain by our Sufferings; for Gainers we shall
be, if we be not wanting to our selves.

This is apparently God's End in bringing them upon us, who as a wise and
careful Inspecter, and a gracious Father, orders all things to our Advantage.
And it becomes us to observe the same Method, and accordingly to improve what
he so graciously intends for our Good; to be humble and patient to submit to
his fatherly Chastisements, and to repent of those Sins he chastises us for.

The Eighth Sermon.
LAM. 3.39, 40. Wherefore does a living Man complain, a Man for the Punishment
of his Sins?

Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.


THE main Scope of these Words is to direct us how we should carry our selves
in time of Affliction. The Direction which is here given us, consists of two
Parts.

1. We are informed what we must not do; we must not complain: it is most
unreasonable and unlawful to complain, whatever our Afflictions be. So much is
at least implied in that interrogatory Form of Speech, Wherefore does a living
Man complain, a Man for the Punishment of his Sins?

2. We are taught what is to be done, and what Course we ought to take when we
are afflicted; We must search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. So
then the former part of the Direction is negative, the latter affirmative.

As to the former of these, some apprehend there is a special Emphasis in those
Words, Wherefore does a living Man complain? But all do not understand and
explain that Emphasis in the same manner. Wherefore does a living Man complain?
that is, as some conceive, why does any Man living complain of his Troubles and
Afflictions, seeing it is the common Lot and Condition of all Men while they
live here, to be subject to Afflictions, Man being born unto Trouble, Job 5.7.
as the Sparks fly upward, as Eliphaz sets forth the Calamitous Condition of
Man in this World? Why should any Man living complain of that which befalls all
others as well as himself, and which none may ever hope to be exempted from as
long as they live upon this Earth? Others explain the Emphasis thus; Why does a
living Man complain, say they; forasmuch as while he is alive, whatever his
Sufferings be, he is mercifully and favorably dealt with? If he were treated
according to the Desert of his Sins, he should no longer be a living Man; he
should be cut off from the Land of the Living, and cast into Hell. Either of
these Senses is agreeable enough to the Analogy of Faith; but of the two the
latter best suits with the principal Intendment of this Place, and with what
follows in the latter Clause of the Verse; Why does a living Man complain, a
Man for the Punishment of his Sins? So long as there is no Evil that in this
World befalls a Man, but what has Relation to Sin, and must be looked upon as a
just Punishment thereof; what reason has any Man living to complain, as if he
were hardly dealt with? But then to the end we may not mistake the meaning of
the Words, we must consider what kind of Complaint is here condemned. In our
Afflictions some sorts of complaining are allowed us; yea some Complaining is
so far from being unlawful, that it is our Duty.

1st. It is lawful to express what we feel and suffer in those ways which
Nature it self (I speak not now of sinful and depraved Nature) prompts unto us.
So Groanings and Sighings, and louder Outcries, sometimes in Extremity of
tormenting Pain, are but as it were the Voice of Nature thus making Discovery
of its Pressures, and as it were endeavoring to ease it self. And no doubt but
there is some little Relief in that kind of Complaint: for Nature would be more
oppressed if it always stifled and suppressed its Inclinations to give Vent to
its Anguish by complaining. And moreover, the Strength of Nature would be
sooner wasted and spent, if so much of it must be always exerted and put forth
to the utmost to keep in and imprison its Sorrows. We see God has furnished
unreasonable living Creatures, at least many of them, with some kind of natural
Language whereby the Creature is able to complain when it suffers. And as for
Man, what is purely natural to him, cannot be any part of his Sin: for the
Creator never infused Sin or any Principle of sinful Depravation and
Irregularity into any of his Creatures. What I have now said, may be of use to
some who in Extremity of Anguish and bodily Pain are troubled at those
Complaints which they cannot but give way to, and are apt to charge them on
themselves as their Sin. There may be Complaints, and such as have a special
Accent upon them; there may be loud Cries, and yet no Sin in all this. David
speaks of his roaring, Psalm. 22.1. and so again, Psalm. 32.3. But though he
roared all the day long, as in the Place last mentioned, yet we cannot thence
necessarily infer that he was impatient. He was a holy and a patient Man, who
being often enforced to cry out through the Sharpness of his exquisite Pain,
said, Though I roar, yet I do not murmur. You may cry out, and it may be roar
also, from the Anguish of your Pain, and yet it is possible there may not be the
least sinful Discomposure of your Spirit, or rising of your Heart against God
so laying his Hand upon you.

2dly. We may lawfully and freely complain to those that are about us, to our
Friends, Relations and Acquaintance; we may lay open our Griefs, and represent
our Sufferings to the full, with all the Circumstances of them, when and where
there is just Occasion. And this may be very necessary and beneficial, both in
reference to them and our selves: For besides the present easing of our Hearts
by this Discovery of our Troubles, we hereby make them sensible of our
Condition, and kindle in them those Compassions toward us, which our present
Condition calls for: we stir them up to Prayer for us, and give them occasion
of exercising all those Graces which the Afflictions of others call forth and
employ. But here we must take heed that in our Complaints we make not our
Afflictions greater than they are; that we aggravate them not beyond the just
Measures and true Weight of them; a thing too ordinary with the Afflicted,
especially in some Cases.

3dly. We may in our Afflictions complain to God also as well as to Men. It Is
our Duty to spread our Condition before him, imploring that Relief from him,
which his Hand alone is able to reach forth unto us. Not as if he were ignorant
of our Estate or Concernments, but he would have us so to manifest that we are
sensible of his Hand upon us, and that we have no Expectation of Relief from
any else but him.

4thly. The Servants of God have not only a Liberty of making their Complaints
to God in their Afflictions, but also of humbly expostulating with him about
them, provided that it be done in a due manner, and so as the Distance between
God and his Creature be observed. We have frequent Examples hereof in
Scripture. Sometimes holy Men expostulate with God concerning the Grievousness
and Severity of their Afflictions: Sometimes concerning the Length and Duration
of them; sometimes concerning the Instruments which God makes use of to correct
them; sometimes concerning his seeming to cast off all Care of them in their
Afflictions, neither minding their Sufferings, nor regarding their Prayers: Is
my Strength the Strength of Stones, and is my Flesh of Brass? says Job, chap.
6.12. Why have thou set me as a Mark against thee, so that I am a Burden to my
self? Job 7.20. How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy Face from me? says David, Psalm. 13.1. O Lord God of Hosts, how
long will thou be angry against the Prayer of thy People? Psalm. 80.4. Where is
thy Zeal and thy Strength, the Sounding of thy Bowels, and of thy Mercies
toward me? Are they restrained? So expostulated the Church with God, Isa.
63.15. Wherefore does the way of the Wicked prosper? and wherefore are all
they happy that deal very treacherously? said the Prophet Jeremiah, chap. 12.1.
But though the Servants of God take the Boldness thus to expostulate with God,
yet they do not charge him foolishly, or lay any Imputation of Unjustice or
inequitable Rigor on his Providence, unless when they are under some present
Distemper, as sometimes it may seem to have been with Job and the Prophet
Jeremiah. They evermore, when in their proper and right Frame, ascribe
Righteousness to their Maker, and the meritorious Cause of all their Sufferings
to themselves. And so in those darker Providence in which they could not
discern the Reasons of God's Dispensations, or the Equity of his Proceedings,
yet they still adhered to this as a Principle not to be questioned, that God
was Righteous. This the Prophet Jeremiah, when about to expostulate with God,
addresseth himself thereunto with this Preface, Righteous art thou, O Lord,
when I plead with thee; yet let me talk with thee of thy Judgments: And then he
goes on with the Expostulation beforementioned; Wherefore does the way of the
Wicked prosper? and wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?
So the Prophet Habakkuk also makes the like Preface to his Expostulation; Hab.
1.13.
Thou art of purer Eyes (says he) than to behold Evil, and can not look upon
Iniquity: Wherefore look thou on them that deal treacherously, and hold
thy Tongue when the Wicked devoureth the Man that is more righteous than he?
And the same holy Frame of Spirit should there be in us: Though we may in some
Cases take the Liberty of humble and reverent Expostulation with God, yet we
must take heed of any unmeet Reflections upon his Justice or Goodness, and
still remember our Distance from him, that God is in Heaven, and we are upon
Earth, as Solomon speaks, Eccles. 5.2. And that he gives not account of any of
his Matters, as Elihu excellently represents him to Job, chap. 33.13.

So then all these sorts of Complaints being allowed us, the Complaint
condemned in the Text, is that which either proceeds from, or is joined with
Impatience under God's Hand, and Discontent with his Providence; it is the
Complaint of an unquiet and sinfully disturbed Spirit, which the Scripture
sometimes expresses by murmuring: so here the Word in the Original may
properly enough be translated, and so the same Word is rendered, Numb. 11.1. Now
the Evil and Unreasonableness of this kind of Complaint under the Hand of God,
may appear several ways.

1. It Is long before God takes the Rod in Hand to correct: he bears long even
with the vilest of Sinners, and exercises much Patience toward them; He is
slow to Anger, and of great Mercy, Psalm. 145.8. He is merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness, Exodus 34.6. He takes no Delight in
Severity, further than we provoke him thereunto: He does no^ afflict willingly,
nor grieve the Children of Men, Lam. 3.33. And should no^ this Consideration be
of Force to suppress all our discontented Complainings and Murmurings, that God
is so unwilling to use Severity against us; that he is so hardly drawn on to
chaster us, and that he never does it till we have given him much Cause so to
handle us?

2. When we by our many Provocations have put the Rod into his Hand, he is soon
prevailed with to lay it aside again: He is not of that implacable Temper, that
he can never be reconciled to those against whom he has once taken up any
Displeasure. Upon our humble Submission to his Corrections, and sincere
Resolutions and Endeavors to reform what has been amiss, he is graciously
inclined to lay aside his Displeasure: He is ready to forgive: Psalm. 86.5.
most ready to show Mercy as soon as we are in any measure fit for Mercy. He
does not always chide, Psalm. 103.9
nor keep his Anger for ever. Was this only David's particular Experience? and
is it not ours also? Do not we find how easy he is to be entreated, and how
ready to pardon? Have we not had manifold Experiments thereof in the Course of
our Lives? And should not this persuade us quietly and patiently to submit to
his Corrections, while he is pleased to keep us under his chastning Hand?

3. While he judges it fit to correct us, he lays no more upon us than our
Sins deserve. When we are most severely handled, and are apt to complain we
have hard measure, yet even then do not his Severities in the least exceed the
Demerits of our Sins: God does us no wrong; nor is it possible that he should,
for his Will is the Rule and Measure of Righteousness: The Lord is righteous in
all his ways, and holy in all his Works, Psalm. 145.17. The just Lord will not
do Iniquity, Zeph. 3.5. What Cause then is there, or can there be of
complaining where no Wrong is done? With this the Church of God silenceth her
self, and stops her own Mouth when under the most dreadful Effects of God's
Displeasure: Lam. 1.18.
The Lord is righteous, says she, for I have rebelled against his
Commandments. And with this God stops the Mouth of his People; Why criest
thou for thine Afflictions? Jer. 30.15.
Because thy Sins were increased, have I done these things unto thee.

4. When God afflicts most grievously, his Severities are far short of what our
Sins deserve. Under the heaviest Weight of Punishment Ezra's Acknowledgment in
the Name of the Church must be ours; Ezra 9.13.
We are punished less than our Iniquities deserve. Our Sins deserve not only
all the temporal Plagues and Judgments which we are capable of undergoing, but
Hell, the unutterable and endless Torments of the Lake, that burns with Fire
and Brimstone. Wherefore whatever our Sufferings be in this World, so long as
we are on this side Hell, so little Cause have we to complain, that we have
great Cause to be thankful that it is not far worse with us than it is.

5. How much soever God is pleased to afflict us, yet still we enjoy many
Mercies in the mean time, by which the Bitterness of our Afflictions is much
allayed, and the Smart of them much abated. For one or two Crosses we are
compassed about with Variety of Blessings: In Sickness we have the Pity and
Compassion of Friends and Acquaintance; we have all that Service and Assistance
that many Hands about us can afford us; we have all those Means of Relief that
either Love or Art can supply us with: And all this, besides those inward and
powerful Supports which we have more immediately from God. Again, if it so be
that God afflicts us in one of our Relations, we have Matter of Comfort in
diverse others of them. If we have Losses in our temporal Estate, yet our
spiritual and better Concernments are safe and untouched. If Man be at Variance
with us, yet we have Peace with God. How sadly soever we may in our Afflictions
represent things to our selves, God never stirs up all his Wrath against us at
once, nor suffers his whole Displeasure to arise. God never so mingles the Cup
which he puts into our Hands, but that there are some Ingredients of a benign
and friendly Nature to qualify the Malignity of the rest. The Malignity did I
say? There is indeed no real Malignity in any of the Ingredients of that
spiritual Physic which God administers to his. All things have a kind and
beneficial Influence for promoting our Good, and furthering our highest
Interest. And where now is there any Place left for complaining? Amidst so many
Mercies, can we yet find in our Hearts to complain? Be it so, that some things
are not only unacceptable, but very grievous to us; Shall we receive Good at
the Hands of God, and shall we not receive Evil? Shall we bear nothing at the
Hands of him who is so good and gracious, so kind and bountiful to us many
other ways? Let us not suffer two or three Afflictions so to imbitter our
Spirits, and vitiate our Palats, as that we should not relish the Sweetness of
any of those Mercies, which in our most afflicted Condition we still enjoy.

6. Add to all this, that God has a Sovereignty of Power and Dominion over his
Creatures, by virtue whereof he may deal with them as he pleases. According to
this his absolute Power, though the Creature had never sinned, yet God might
expose it to such Miseries as exceed not the Benefit of that Being he has given
it. He that made the Creature out of nothing, as he might turn it into nothing
again if he pleased; so continuing it in being, he might lay any such Pain or
Anguish upon it without relation to Sin. We see what Anguish the unreasonable
Creatures endure, which yet are not capable of Sin: And why might not God
inflict the like on any rational Creature, though no Sin had occasioned it, or
made way for it? It is not easy to give a Reason why he might not: for even an
innocent Creature, being a Creature however, must of necessity be in Subjection
to the Power and Dominion of the Creator, from whom it received its Being. It Is
true, such Evils could not then have the Nature of Punishment, because
Punishment, properly so called, has relation to Sin; but yet there could be no
Injustice in such a Dispensation, no more than when by many tormenting and
lingering Pains God takes away the Lives of brute Beasts, whose Nature is not a
Subject capable of Sin or moral Evil.

Now in such a Case the Creature would have no just Cause to complain or
murmur, because no Injury could possibly be done it by God's using that just
and rightful Power and Dominion which he has over the Work of his Hands.
Whence we may thus argue to our present Purpose: If God's absolute Power over
the Work of his Hands be such as calls for humble Submission to his Providence,
and silent bearing of whatever he inflicts; how much more should his Justice
strike us dumb, and effectually restrain us from all murmuring or muttering
against him? If we ought not to complain or murmur though we had no Sin, how
much less reason have we to do it when we have so much? Upon this Consideration
it was that the Church took up her Resolutions of patient Submission to the
Hand of God; Micah 7.9.
I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him.

Now I come to apply what has been spoken.

Use 1. Let us in all our Afflictions observe the Frame of our Hearts, and be
humbled for all the secret Grudgings and Risings of our Spirits against the
Providence of God: And especially if the inward Distempers of our Souls should
be at any time so great as to break forth and vent themselves in any unmeet
Language; if our inward Discontents and Heart-burnings should discover
themselves by complaining and murmuring against God, and by making such
Representations of him to others, as if he had dealt hardly with us, and as if
we might have expected other measure at his Hands.

This is a Miscarriage which we are very apt to run into when our Afflictions
are severe and lasting, when they smart much and continue long. But however it
fare with us, the Sinfulness of our murmuring against God is so great, that no
Circumstance of our Sufferings can render it excusable; and therefore we cannot
be sufficiently humbled for it.

To the end we may the better discover the Evil of it, and see what reason
there is why we should be humbled for it, let us first look upon it in its
Cause, and the Root whence it springs; then let us behold it as it is in it
self, and consider it in its formal Nature: And lastly let us view it in its
Effects and Consequents.

1. Let us look upon it in its Root. We loath and abhor some things the more
when we know whence they are, and what gave Birth to them; the wicked Offspring
for the cursed Mother that bare it and brought it forth.

Now the Root of our murmuring is our Pride; we have entertained too good an
Opinion of our selves; we think we have deserved better things at the Hands of
God, and therefore we murmur and complain as if we were injured. Were we
thoroughly sensible of our Sinfulness; were we convinced that we are worthy of
far sorer Evils than those which we groan under, instead of murmuring, we would
not only accept of the Punishment of our Sins, as the Phrase is, Levit. 26.41.
take in good part, meekly and patiently bear whatsoever God lays on us, but
from our Hearts acknowledge that we are mercifully and kindly dealt with in that
no more is inflicted on us.

2. If we behold it as it is in it self, and consider the formal Nature of it,
our murmuring is in effect nothing else but a Degree of Insurrection and
Rebellion against God. As discontented Subjects, or mutinous Soldiers sharpen
their Tongues against their Prince or General, and thereby heighten their own
and other Men's Discontents, to dispose them to make Resistance: So when we
murmur against God, we set our Mouths against Heaven, doing what in us lies to
strengthen in our selves, and instill into others Principles of Disaffection
against the highest Majesty, and to withdraw them with whom we converse from
their Obedience and Loyalty.

3. Let us view it in the Effects and Consequents of it. We are so far from
easing our selves by murmuring, that it both increases and prolongeth our
Afflictions.

1st. It increases them; for our Unquietness and Stubborness under God's Hand
provokes him to lay more Load upon us; that is all we gain by our Untowardness;
as the Child that struggles, swells and murmurs when he is corrected, does but
thereby procure to himself the more Stripes.

Besides, our fretting and murmuring does of it self make those our Afflictions
much more grievous, which might be undergone with Ease, if with humble Silence
and Patience we submitted our selves to the Chastisement of our heavenly Father.

2dly. It also prolongs our Afflictions; for our murmuring diverts us, and
takes us off from applying our selves to that Course, which, if any thing,
would put a speedy End to our Troubles. And that is the Course which we are put
upon in the Text, namely, a serious Reflection upon our selves, and a diligent
Search and Enquiry after the Sins which have procured our Afflictions, and a
turning from them unto God whom we have forsaken.

As long as we are taken up in murmuring, this Work is not minded, and so our
Afflictions are protracted and drawn out to a greater length than they should
have been, if in stead of murmuring against God we had seasonably and narrowly
searched into our Hearts and Ways, found out our Sins, judged our selves for
them, and forsaken them.

Thus we see what Reason we have to be humbled for this Sin.

But though in these Respects all that are guilty of it have Cause to be
humbled; yet have they most reason to be humbled for murmuring, who have least
reason to murmur: such as are,

1. Great and notorious Sinners, whose Offenses and Enormities have been such,
that whatsoever they suffer, unless they be wilfully blind, or strangely
partial to themselves, they must be enforced to confess that they suffer
justly. Should they complain of hard measure, who are so bad that no Punishment
is severe enough for them? And yet these are oft-times as ready to complain as
any else.

2. Those who have drawn such Afflictions upon themselves, as in which they may
plainly read their Sin written in legible Characters. The unclean Person who
has by his lewd Courses brought those Evils upon himself, which are the proper
Effects and Punishments of that Sin: The great Oppressor of others, that is
through God's righteous Judgment fallen into the merciless Hands of Oppressors
himself: The Extortioner, that having raised an Estate by Rapine and Violence,
has lived to see the Extortioner catch all that he has: The false Accuser,
who having by Lies and Slanders robbed others of their good Name and Estates,
is now fallen under the Lash of those false Tongues that spare him no more than
he has spared others. Have any of these reason to murmur against God's
Providence? Should not their own Guilt stifle their Complaints, and stop their
Mouths? Or, if they will open them, should it not be to give Glory to God's
Justice, by whose overruling and most righteous Providence it has come to
pass, that they suffer either in the same kind in which they have offended, or
in that which corresponds, and bears a visible Proportion with it?

3. When Men suffer that which they have often been forewarned of; when they
have met with many Caveats and Cautions; when it has been often foretold them
what the certain Consequents and unavoidable Issues of such Courses would be,
and yet they would presumptuously go on, and rush into Danger, as the Horse
rusheth into the Battle. Have these Men Reason to complain of any but
themselves? If Men will run into the Briars, and none can withhold them, have
they any cause to complain that they are scratched and torn? And yet even in
such Cases as this, the Circumstances whereof a Man would think are such as
leave a Man no color of complaining; yet will Men find out Matter of Complaint
even against God himself, their Hearts rising against his Providence, that he
should thus leave them to themselves, and suffer them to go on so wilfully and
sool-hardily upon Danger. As if God were bound to cure all Man's Perverseness,
and to subdue his Obstinacy; and as if it were God's Fault that Man will not
hearken to good Counsel.

If obstinate and refractory Sinners will run upon their own Ruin
notwithstanding all Warnings, they must know their Destruction is of
themselves, and they have none to thank for it but themselves.

4. When the Evils under which Men lie, are the direct and proper Issues and
Products of their own impatient Desires and most importunate Prayers: when Men
beg things of God, and pursue them with restless Importunities, and will take
no Denial whether the things be good for them or no; if having obtained them,
they relish nothing but Gall and Wormwood in them, instead of the Content and
Satisfaction they promised themselves; where can they justly lay the Blame but
on themselves? Have they any Plea to justify their murmuring against God, who
indeed gave them their Desires in Anger, and gratified them to their Smart,
because nothing else would satisfy them? They would be their own Carvers, and
take upon themselves to understand what was good for them better than God. If
Rachel's longing for Children be so impatient that she must have them or she
will die, if God give her a Child that shall cost her her Life, what reason
has she to complain of any but her self, and the impetuous Irregularity of her
own Desires, that she purchased it at so dear a rate? If the Israelites must
have Quails, and no other Food will please their inordinate Palate; if they eat
till they surfeit of them, till they come out of their Nostrils, and the next
News be that the Plague is among them, shall they yet charge God foolishly, and
lay the Blame upon him? If the boundless Desires of the ambitious Man aspire to
a Crown, and nothing else will satisfy him: when he has gotten it, if he find
it lined with Thorns, can he murmur at Providence that has set it on his Head?

If murmuring be any where unreasonable and unjust, then certainly it is when
Men suffer in those very things which were the Objects of their most passionate
Desires and unwearied Importunities. But yet,

5. After all that has been said, they have least Reason to complain, and of
all others have least to justify their Murmurings, who have the best and most
effectual Arguments to quiet their Spirits under every Providence, and to keep
down all the inordinate Workings of their Hearts. And such are all they who
having obtained the Pardon of their Sins, have an Interest in God's special
Love and Favor through Christ. For,

1st. They may know that whatever befalls them, Sin being pardoned, the Curse
and Sting of every Affliction is taken out: Though their Afflictions may be
bitter and grievous to Nature, yet there is no Poison in them, nothing of a
hurtful or destructive Nature: Christ has removed the Curse, Gal. 3.13.
being made a Curse for us.

2dly. They may know that all their Sufferings are intended for their
Advantage, not for their Prejudice, and shall undoubtedly be advantageous to
them in the End, however for the present they may not so clearly discern God's
particular Design and Intendment in them. Romans 8.28.
God has assured them, that all things work together for Good to them that
love God, to those that are called according to his Purpose.

3dly. They are sure to be supported under all their Pressures. They may
sometimes be hardly put to it, but yet they shall never want Supplies of
Strength proportionable to their Burdens. God will mercifully consider their
Weakness, and lay no more upon them than he will enable them to bear. He is
faithful, 1 Cor. 10.13.
and will not suffer them to be tempted above what they are able.

4thly. They are sure to be eased of their Afflictions in God's due time: The
Rod of the Wicked shall not rest upon the Lot of the Righteous; it shall not
always rest there, Psalm. 125.3. Many are the Afflictions of the Righteous, but
the Lord delivers them out of them all, Psalm. 34.19.

5thly. Tho their Afflictions should run parallel with their Lives, and have no
other End than by Death, yet the endless and unspeakable Happiness of the World
to come will be an abundant Compensation for all their Afflictions here, Romans
8.18.
The Sufferings of this present time being not worthy to be compared with the
Glory that shall be revealed in us.

Now, I say, if such as have these excellent and sovereign Cordials, these
solid Grounds of Consolation, these efficacious Means of quieting their Hearts,
and suppressing all their sinful Distempers, should yet murmur under the Hand
of God, their Murmuring of all others would be most inexcusable. If such should
murmur, what might be expected from them who have none of these things to charm
and compose their Spirits? Well might they gnaw their Tongues, and blaspheme
the God of Heaven for Anguish, because of their Pains; as the Carriage of some
of the Wicked in their Afflictions is described, Rev. 16.10, 11.

But let not us by our unquiet and impatient Demeanure under the Hand of God,
dishonor our Profession, and disparage those excellent Grounds of Tranquillity
and Calmness of Spirit under every Dispensation of Divine Providence, which our
Religion supplies and furnishes us with. Let it appear that we are above all
those things which a^ wont to disturb the Minds, and discompose the Spirits of
them that know not God, and are Strangers to the Covenant of Grace, and have no
Acquaintance with the Privileges thereof.

Use 2. In the second Place, let us all especially such of us as have these
Grounds of inward Peace, Quiet, silent Contentment, and humble Submission to
the good Pleasure of God in all our Troubles; I say, let us be exhorted (...)
keep our Hearts in an even, quiet and undisturbed Temper under all Providence.
Such a Frame, how comfortable would it render every Condition (...) us! How
light and easy would it mak^ every Burden and Pressure to us! An^ how much Sin
would it prevent, which the fretting of our Hearts against (...) Lord, as
Solomon expresses it, Pro^^ 19.3. and the tumultuous Fermentings of our
Spirits against his Providence, would hurry us into.

In the further Prosecution of this Use, I shall first propound a few things
for the quieting of our Hearts in Afflictions; and then I shall answer some of
those Pleas or Objections which unbroken and unruly Spirits, not sufficiently
subdued to God, make use of to justify their Excesses.

In order to the quieting of our Hearts amidst all our Trials, and to the
taming of our rebellious Spirits,

1. Let us get our Hearts fully possessed of the absolute Sovereignty and
Dominion which God has over us. Such is his Power over us, that we and all the
Nations of the World are in his Hands but as the Clay in the Hand of the
Potter, as God makes the Comparison, Jer. 18.6. He may form us and fashion us,
do with us and dispose of us as he sees good: Neither need he render any other
Reason or Account of what he does, than that of his own good Pleasure. Now as
the Apostle argues, Romans 9.20, 21. Shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter Power over the Clay,
to make one Vessel unto Honor, and another unto Dishonor; one for a baser
Use, another for a more honorable Service? Let this rest and abide upon your
Heart, that God has this Power over you; and you will judge it no less
unreasonable and intolerably saucy, that you should murmur or contest with God
about his Dealings with you, than that the Clay should rise up and contest with
the Potter.

2. Keep alive in your Heart a Sense of God's Love in every Dispensation. Black
Thoughts of God, and our representing him to our selves as our Enemy, and every
of his Chastisements as Fruits of his Hatred, cannot but leaven our Hearts with
such a sullen Morosity and Sowrness, as will make us seek all Opportunities of
quarrelling with him. We take nothing well at the Hands of him whom we take to
be our Enemy, because we look upon all his Actions through the Glass of that
Image which we have framed of him in our Minds. So while we look upon God as
our Enemy, it is not to be wondered at that we should be ready to pick Matter of
complaining against him, and contesting with him, out of all the Passages of
his Providence.

But on the other hand, good Thoughts of God, and a lively Sense of his Love
upon our Hearts, would make whatsoever he does to look of another Color.
Viewing his Providence through these Spectacles, we should read his Kindness
in whatsoever he does to us or about us; and we should be inclined to make the
best Construction of every thing that seems to be of a doubtful Aspect. And how
powerfully would this subdue our Spirits, sweeten our Affections, and make us
willing to bear with Silence and Quietness those things which to another would
be intolerable?

3. Labor to have always a fresh Remembrance of your Sins. To this purpose it
might be of good Use to us, to single out some of our chief Sins, by which we
have most dishonored God, and wounded our Consciences, and to have them always
in a Readiness by us, that they may presently occur to our Thoughts, when at
any time our Hearts begin to rise against God in respect of any of his Dealings.

This would furnish us with Matter of Arguments to reason down the rebellious
Insurrections of our Spirits, as soon as ever they begin to take Distaste at
any thing that God has done. Should such as we, so vile, so sinful, so
unworthy, as in such and such Instances of our Provocations we have appeared to
be, take pet at any thing that God does? Have we done as bad things as we could
against him, and is it for us to be complaining of any thing that he does?

4. Add to all this the Consideration of the extreme Danger of quarrelling with
God, and opposing our selves against him. Dare we provoke the Lord? Are we
stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22.
says the Apostle. Dare we challenge him into the Field, and run upon the
thick Bosses of his Buckler? Let us remember the Battle, Job 41.8.
and do no more, as God cautioned Job in the like Case. Woe unto him that
striveth with his Maker: Isa. 45.9.
let the Potsherd strive with Potsherds of the Earth. Let not us frail
Creatures contend with God who can dash us in pieces; yea turn us into nothing
in a Moment.

And so I come to speak to those Pleas whereby some endeavor to justify their
complaining.

Object. 1. My Afflictions, says one, are such as never any Man was exercised
with the like, all things considered: I could, I hope, with some Degree of
Quietness and Silence bear any other Crosses; but here I must be allowed to
give way to some Distemper when my Cross is singular.

Answ. 1. Whereas you say, never any Man was afflicted as you are, you speak
rashly and unadvisedly. Are you so well acquainted with the several Afflictions
of all the Afflicted that at present are, or ever were in the World, that you
should pronounce so peremptorily, that never any was afflicted as you are?
Alas! your Knowledge reaches but a little way. How many are there within the
Compass of a few Miles, it may be within the Limits of the same Town or Parish
where you live, whose particular Cases, and the various Circumstances of whose
Afflictions you are perfectly ignorant of?

2. How many have had the very same Thoughts of their Afflictions besides your
self? It Is indeed every Man's Temper in great Afflictions, and under dark
Providence, to say with the Church, Lam. 1.12. Behold and see if there be any
Sorrow like unto my Sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the Day of his fierce Anger.

In sore Afflictions we are not competent Judges of the Matters that concern
our Sufferings; no more than a sick Man is a competent Judge of the Estate of
his Body, when his Disease has gotten Possession of his Head, and disturbed
his Fancy.

Again, whereas you say you should bear any other Cross with more Calmness and
Silence; you speak as one neither acquainted with your own Weakness, nor with
the Deceitfulness of your Heart.

1st. Your Language bewrays your small Acquaintance with your Weakness: You
know not what Frailty you might discover if God should try you some other way,
though it should be with a far lighter and more favorable Affliction. We are
never thoroughly acquainted with our Weakness till we be tried. All our Strength
lies in God; if he be pleased to stand by us, to support and strengthen us, we
may bear, we may easily and comfortably bear the greatest Affliction; if he
withdraw the Influences of his Supports, and the Supplies of his Grace, the
smallest Affliction will worst us.

Do we not observe how strong we are sometimes to conflict with great Trials,
and how weak other-while, when far smaller and less considerable. Afflictions
encounter us? Who ma^^^h us thus to differ from our selves, (...) God, as he
either vouchsafes us his Presence and powerful Assistances, or withholdeth
them?

2dly. You speak as one too much a Stranger to the Deceitfulness of your Heart:
You think you could bear any other Affliction better, and that no other thing
could have so discomposed you, and put you out of order; but herein your false
and guileful Heart deludes you. If you were afflicted in some other kind, your
Heart would then be as likely to tell you that you could bear any other
Affliction better than that: Your present Affliction would still be judged the
most difficult to be born.

You are like a sick Man who complains of the Bed on which he lies, and thinks
he should be better at ease if he lay any where else: but when he makes trial
of another Bed, he still finds himself as restless and uneasy as he was before:
He now finds it is the Distemper of his Body, not the Uneasiness of his Bed,
that makes him restless.

You think you should bear another Affliction better, and more like a
Christian; but as long as your Heart is unsubdued to God, and the unquiet and
rebellious Distempers of your Spirit remain and stick close to you, it is not
to be questioned but that you would be as unquiet, and as apt to complain and
murmur under any other sharp Affliction as under this. It Is the Change of your
Heart, and not the Change of your Affliction, that must dispose you to a
patient Undergoing of your Burden.

Object. 2. But, says another, I see others as bad as my self, not so severely
chastned: God seems to single me out, and to set me up as a Mark to shoot at,
and to direct all his Arrows against me: He makes me a Spectacle of his severe
Wrath, and the only Instance of his fierce Indignation. Why should I be so
grievously punished while others escape?

Answ. 1. You do not well understand your self, nor remember the Distance
between God and you. While you thus complain, what is this but to contend with
the Almighty, and to quarrel with him as if he were your Equal or Inferior? Is
he to be accountable to you for his Actions? Must he treat you and other Men as
you shall judge fitting? Must he manage the Government of the World as you would
have him? And will you be angry and fall out with him if he does not?

This is not a Deportment becoming the Creature toward its Creator. An humble
Acknowledgment of your Sin, and a Profession of your Resolution to reform, were
more agreeable to your Condition, and the Circumstances under which you stand
toward God. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born Chastisement, I
will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done
Iniquity, I will do no more. So Elihu judged, Job 34.31, 32.

2. Are you the only Instance of God's Severity? Are there not many more to be
seen, if you look abroad and cast your Eyes up and down the World? Though God's
Patience and long-Sufferance be admirable for the present, and though he has
thought fit to put over the Punishment of the greater part of Offenses to the
Judgment of the great Day; yet in the mean time he so consults the Honor of
his Justice here, as not to leave the World without many signal Instances of
his Severity against Sin. And if it seem good to him to make you one of those
Instances, what have you to object against it? Is he not at liberty to make use
of what Instances he pleases? If he had thought fit to let you pass
unpunished, and instead of you had pitched on any other, might not that other
Person have had as good a Plea for complaining as you now think you have?

It seems by your Exceptions against God's Providence, that he must either
punish all Offenders here, or none. This is the Rule which you would set him
for the Exercise of this Part of his Government of the World: and if he do not
observe it, you will contest with him about it, and have from him an Account
thereof.

3. If God make choice of you to vindicate the Honor of his Justice and
Holiness before the World, and to take off some part of that Imputation, which,
in the Judgment of carnal Wisdom, from his Patience, seems to lie upon his
Justice: if in you, as in one remarkable Instance, he will let the World see
how much he hates Sin, and with what exact and severe Righteousness he intends
to judge the World hereafter, should you murmur at it? Should you not rather be
well contented that God might have any Honor by your Sufferings? that you who
have by your Sins so much dishonored him, should be capable of suffering any
thing whereby any slender Reparations might be made to his Honor? Were you not
made for his Glory? and if you would not be persuaded to promote it by doing,
were it not better you should contribute to it by suffering, than that you
should wholly lose the End of your Creation?

4. Consider whether your complaining of God's Severity against you, while he
deals more favorably with many others, be not a clear Evidence that your Heart
is not thoroughly humbled for Sin. The Apostle, among other Fruits and Evidences
of true Repentance and godly Sorrow for Sin, 2 Cor. 7.11.
makes mention of Indignation and Revenge. An holy Indignation which the truly
humbled Sinner, the true Penitent, has against himself, for having so
grievously offended God, and an holy Revenge which he takes upon himself on
that Account. How widely different are complaining and murmuring from that holy
Frame of the penitent Sinner which the Apostle describes? When you suffer your
Heart to rise, and give your Tongue liberty to murmur against God, you seem to
direct the Edg of your Indignation and Revenge against him, rather than against
your self.

A due Sense of your Sin, and of the Dishonor you have done to God thereby,
would make you even out of an holy Indignation and Revenge against your self,
humbly and patiently to submit to the utmost of that Severity which God is
pleased to exercise toward you.

5. Remember how ill God took it from his People the Jews, that they complained
the Way of the Lord was not equal; which is in effect your Complaint:
Concerning this he complains and expostulates with them; Ye say, Ezekiel. 18.25.
The Way of the Lord is not equal? Hear now, O House of Israel, Is not my Way
equal? Are not your VVays unequal? And so again, ver. 29. And then he adds,
ver. 30. Therefore will I judge you, O House of Israel, every one according to
his VVays, says the Lord God: repent and turn your selves from all your
Transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. As if he had said, Whereas
ye complain of the Inequality of my Dealings with you, unless you repent I will
destroy you all; and then you will have little Cause to complain of my inequal
Dealings. They who complain of the Inequality of God's dealing with them, had
need take heed lest God lay Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the
Plummet, as he threatens, Isa. 28.17. Lest he lay heavier things upon them;
lest he bring such Judgments on them as shall come up more nearly to the
Measures, the Proportion and Demerits of their Sins. How much soever they have
suffered, God may yet lay much more upon them, and yet still punish them much
less than their Iniquities deserve.

6. Whereas you complain that God deals more severely with you than with many
others, think with your self,

1st. That it is possible your Sins may have been greater than the Sins of such
as you have in your Eye; greater in respect of the Circumstances and
Aggravations of them: It may be they never sinned against so much Light, and so
many clear Convictions; against such Mercies, and so many Discoveries of God's
Love; against so many Warnings and gentler Chastisements; against so many
severer Strokes, when milder Courses would not prevail. Can you wonder at it
that God deals more severely with you than with others, if upon Examination it
should be found that your Sins have been greater than theirs?

2dly. It may be God intends you more Good than many others. By sorer
Afflictions he means to make you better, and so much the better as your
Afflictions have been and are greater. His Chastnings, though severe, are no
Evidences of his Hatred, but Fruits of his Love, and of his Purpose to do your
Soul much Good by them; for whom the Lord loves he corrects, Prove. 3.12
even as a Father does the Son in whom he delights.

3dly. What if the time for correcting some others be not yet come? even they
who have been hitherto spared, or been dealt very gently with, may hereafter,
if milder Remedies do no good, be as severely dealt with as you have been. God
takes his own Time, and makes use of his own Methods for disciplining all his;
and some he sees good to handle after one manner, some after another, as to his
Wisdom seems best.

4thly. What if some of those, who are for the present spared, should be
reserved to the Judgment of the last Day, while you are chastned here, that you
may not be condemned with the World hereafter. God may spare some others in
Anger, and correct you in Mercy; for his forbearing to punish is sometimes no
Fruit of his Favor, but an Effect of his highest Displeasure, according to
that, Psalm. 81.11, 12. My People would not hearken to my Voice, and Israel
would none of me: So I gave them up to their own Hearts Lust.

Object. 3. But my Troubles are long and tedious, says another; there is no
End of them. I have been waiting and waiting for Deliverance, but it comes not.
I see others in Trouble, and I see them come well out of it; but my Feet stick
fast in the Mire.

Answ. To this I answer, 1. That it is not your Case alone: Did not the People
of God take up the like Complaint? The Harvest is past, Jer. 8.20.
the Summer is ended, and we are not saved. The time when we expected
Deliverance is over, and yet we are still where we were; our Afflictions are
still lengthened out. Was there not a time when Zion said, Isa. 49.14.
The Lord has forsaken me, my Lord has forgotten me? Was there not a time
when David, after he had been long praying for Deliverance, and waiting, Psalm.
69.3.
said, I am weary of my crying, my Throat is dried, mine Eyes fail, while I
wait for my God? Wherefore have no hard Thoughts of God, much less give way to
murmuring against him, who deals no otherwise with you, than he often deals
with many of his own.

2. Is not the Cause of God's respiting your Deliverance in your self? Are not
you still unfit for Mercy? and is not that the true reason why you have it not?
God delights in Mercy, Mich. 7.18. He waits to be gracious, Isa. 30.18. How
ready God is to show Mercy to us, when we are ready and prepared to receive it,
he has declared in the most pathetical way of Expression; Psalm. 81.13, -- 16.
O that my People had hearkened unto me, and that Israel had walked in my VVays;
I should soon have subdued their Enemies, and turned my Hand against their
Adversaries: The Haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him;
but their time should have endured for ever. He should have fed them with the
finest of the Wheat, and with Honey out of the Rock should I have satisfied
thee. And to the same Purpose is that, Isa. 48.18. O that thou had hearkened
to my Commandments; then had thy Peace been as a River, and thy Righteousness
as the Waves of the Sea.

So then we may thank our selves that in our Afflictions we wait so long for
Deliverance. Our Mercies never meet with any Obstructions in God, but in our
selves. We by our Continuance in Sin, by our Remisness and Slackness in the
Work of sound Humiliation and Reformation, retard and set back our Mercies; and
then we complain and murmur, as if God were slack and unmindful of his
Promises; as if he were hardly drawn to show Mercy.

3. Deliverance out of Trouble is of God's free Grace; we cannot challenge it
at his Hands. We bring our selves into Trouble by our Sins, and he may justly
leave us to perish in our Troubles. He therefore who does all that he does for
us out of free Mercy, may take his own time to do it, when he pleases. Is it
fit that we who are unworthy of any good thing, who can demand nothing of him,
should prescribe Times and Seasons to him; and as if we required a Debt of him,
set him a Day when he should show Mercy?

4. His own Time is the best Time. It may seem long to us that we wait, and
still our Expectations are frustrated; but our long waiting shall turn to our
greater Advantage in the end; and we shall then see, that if we had obtained
our Mercies sooner, we should have had less Mercy in them. God's Mercies are
then most sweet, and yield most full Content and Satisfaction, when they are
fully ripe, and come in their proper Season. It Is with them as with Fruit, if
it be plucked before it be ripe, it is either wholly unsavory, or much less
acceptable. We lose much of the Comfort of our Mercies, unless we can be
contented to wait for them till they come to Maturity.

Object. 4. Though my Afflictions be very sharp, says another, and such as
would try the Patience of any Man, yet I think I could bear them without much
complaining, if the Instruments of my Sufferings were any other than such as
they are. To suffer by the Hands of such base and unworthy Persons, is a
Circumstance which I cannot think of without Indignation.

Answ. But 1. This has oft-times been the Lot of the best Men. No worse Man
than David complained that he was the Song of the Drunkards, Psalm. 69.12. and
that the Abjects gathered themselves together against him, Psalm. 35.15. And Job
said, that those had him in derision, whose Fathers he would have disdained to
have set with the Dogs of his Flock, chap. 30.1. We are not better than these
holy Men who met with this Measure in the World.

2. God may take what Instruments he pleases to correct you with. Is it meet
the Child should choose the Rod with which the Father should chasten him?

3. It Is not to be doubted but that he makes use of the fittest Instruments.
Should the Vessel that needs scouring, complain against him that scoureth it,
that he uses such filthy, rough and grating Materials, rather than some clean,
near, smooth and gentle thing? If he should make use of such Materials as
these, they would do no good: He knows those other are fittest to get off the
Dirt and Filth, which stick so fast that gentle Means will not remove them. So
God on purpose makes use of foul and rugged Instruments, as fittest to rub off
that sinful Corruption and Filth that cleaves so fast unto our Nature.

To be short; if we might be allowed to choose the Instruments by which God
should chasten us, we would be sure to choose those from whose Hands we might
smart least, and who would consequently do us least Good. It Is well for us, if
we can think it so, that when God sees cause to correct us, he has a right to
choose his Rod.

But here some might say, The Baseness of the abject and contemptible Condition
of the Persons from whom I suffer, does not so much trouble me, as that they
are those from whom I deserved better things: I have obliged them by whatever
Kindnesses I was capable of conferring on them; and when they have served
themselves of me, they kick at me. It Is not what I suffer from them, but their
Ingratitude that I am impatient of enduring.

Answ. Ingratitude indeed is an odious Sin in whomsoever it is found; and
usually God some time or other meets with the ungrateful Person, and pays him
in his own Coin. Whosoever rewards Evil for Good, Pro. 17.13
Evil shall not depart from his House. It Is seldom seen but that first or last,
he that has been notoriously ungrateful to his Benefactors, has the same
Measure returned into his Bosom by those who have received Kindnesses from him.

But however, such odious Persons as these God makes use of; and many times he
makes them the Instruments of his Corrections rather than others, because he
sees no other so fit for his Purpose.

1. It may be sometimes in the good Offices we do others, we look more upon Man
than upon God; we look more after Men's due Resentment of our Kindnesses, and
their thankful Acknowledgments of them, and the answerable Returns they should
make us, than after God's Acceptance of us therein. Were our Eyes more upon
God, and less upon Men; did we show Kindness, and perform Offices of Love to
Man in obedience to God, and satisfy our selves with his Acceptance for the
present, and encourage our selves with the Expectation of those Rewards of our
sincere Obedience which he has promised hereafter, we should neither be so
often disappointed of those Returns which we expect from Men, neither should we
be so much troubled at Disappointments in that kind when we meet with them. If
Men prove thankful, we should take it well, and bless God for it; if they prove
unthankful, we should quiet our selves in God's Acceptance of what we have
done, as the chief thing which we looked after.

2. God may sometimes correct us by the Ingratitude of Men, that he may thereby
mind us of our Ingratitude toward himself. Wherefore when Man's Ingratitude is
so grievous and afflicting to us, let us reflect upon our selves, and think how
much more displeasing our Ingratitude must needs be unto God, who has done a
thousand times more for us than ever we did for any Person living, whom we look
upon as most obliged by us. If we therefore think we have just cause to
complain of Man's Ingratitude toward us, how much greater cause has God to
complain of our Ingratitude toward him! in whom we live and move, and have our
being, and from whose sole Bounty we have received whatever good thing we have
at any time enjoyed, or do enjoy. And yet notwithstanding all these
Obligations, what has our whole Life been but one continued Course of
Provocations, and an uninterrupted Series of those many ill Requitals which we
have made him?

If we justify our selves, and say we cannot be justly charged with
Unthankfulness toward God, we hereby plainly discover that we have never taken
a just Account either of our Receipts from him, or of the Returns which he has
had from us.

Object. 5. But I have a continual Succession and Series of Afflictions: God
follows me with one Trial after another: When one Affliction is but just
over, presently another is in a readiness to seize upon me. I have no sooner
obtained a little time to recover Breath, but I am again alarmed to prepare my
self for a new Conflict. This is that which tireth out my Patience, and makes
me even weary of my self.

Answ. 1. It Is possible that former Afflictions, tho many and great, have not
sufficiently humbled you, nor mortified Sin in you. Tho something may have been
done upon you, yet God has not accomplished his whole Work upon you; so that
what has been begun by former Trials, he sees good to carry on yet further by
what he still further exercises you with.

2. It Is possible that by your unmeet and sinful Carriage, and the stirrings
and breaking forth of Corruption in your Afflictions, you may have given God
just occasion of bringing other Afflictions upon you. When being under God's
Hand, he expects we should be humbled and reformed, then many times we discover
more of the Pride, Stubbornness and Incorrigibleness of our Hearts, than ever
we did before. Thus it was with Ephraim, when God in order to his Humiliation
and Reformation laid his Hand upon him; When I would have healed Israel, Hosea
7.1.
then the Iniquity of Ephraim was discovered.

3. Though God's Corrections had for the present put some little Stop to your
Sins, yet it may be afterward you quickly returned to them again. And if we
return to Sin, we need not count it strange that God should return to afflict
us.

4. Though there should be no new Provocation, yet God may afflict us again for
Prevention. He sees the secret Frame and Disposition of your Heart. If there be
but a Readiness and Preparation of Heart to return to Sin again upon any
Occasion or Temptation offered; God who searches the Heart, discerns this
evil Frame thereof, and judges it necessary to stop the breaking forth thereof
by some Affliction or other. To be sure God never returns to chasten, and
renews his Witnesses against us but when there is need; and therefore this we
may certainly conclude, that whenever he takes the Rod again into his Hand,
there is a Cause, whether we discern it or no. Wherefore if we must needs
complain, let us complain against our selves: Let us complain of the desperate
Wickedness of our Hearts, and the Stubbornness of corrupt Nature, that calls
for so many Blows. Let us complain of the Strength of Sin within us, that needs
so many Afflictions to break the Power of it; and subdue it. Let us complain,
that after we have suffered so much we should still be so bad; that so many
Rods must be worn out upon us, and yet we are little the better.

Object. 6. But my Afflictions are such as I see not how they can ever do me
any Good. If I saw any probable Grounds of Hope that they might prove
beneficial to my Soul, and that I might be a Gainer by them in the end, then I
think I could bear them more quietly. But when I can discern no Tendency that
they have to my Good, how can I shuse but complain of my hard Lot, that I
should be more grievously afflicted than many others, in such ways as from
which no Advantage can redound unto me?

Answ. 1. If it should so be as you apprehend, that no Benefit could accrue to
you, or was ever intended you by your Afflictions; if God should lay his Hand
on you merely because it pleases him so to deal with you; if he had no other
end in afflicting you than only to use his Sovereignty and absolute Dominion
over you; yet in that Case ought you quietly to submit. You are his Creature,
the Work of his Hands, and he made you for himself. Prove. 16.4. Rev. 4.11.
For his Pleasure you are and were created. And having made you for himself,
and for his own Pleasure, have you any reason to complain of Wrong done you, if
he deal with you as he pleases? What are you that you should think to be
exempted from the common Condition of all Creatures, which is to be in
Subjection to their Creator, and to be absolutely at his Disposal?

2. But yet this is not the Case; God is not wont to afflict us merely to
exercise his Dominion over us. He chastens us for our Profit, Heb. 12.10
that he may make us Partakers of his Holiness. This we are sure is his Design
in his Chastisements. And the Assurance which he has given us hereof in the
general, should quiet us even when we cannot discover the particular end of his
Corrections for the present, much less perceive wherein our Afflictions are
advantageous to us.

3. Whereas you say, you see not how you can receive any Benefit by your
Afflictions; Why should you make your self wiser than God? Does not he much
better understand what Course is fittest to do you good, than you do? Will you
so disparage his Wisdom as to say, he takes a wrong Course; and that unless he
shall think of dealing with you in another manner, you shall never be the
better for his Chastisements? If you grant that God is infinitely wise and
good, you must believe that the Course which he takes with you is best, and
shall not fail in the Issue to procure unto you all that Good which he intended
you thereby.

4. What if it should so be that your Afflictions should already have done you
much Good, though you discern it not? This is a thing that often is; we are in
the dark, and the Benefit which we have received, and are still receiving by
our Afflictions, is hid from our Eyes. Even they who most complain of the
Fruitlesness of their Afflictions, yea that they are the worse for them rather
than the better, do many times by their very Complaints discover the Benefit
which by their Afflictions they have received. Their Complaints show that since
they have been afflicted, they have had a deeper Sense of the Power and
Prevalency of Sin in themselves, and of the Hardness of their Hearts, and of
the Obstinacy and Rebellion of their corrupt Nature. They had never so clear a
Sight, or so lively a Sense of these things; neither did they ever so much take
them to Heart, as since the Hand of God has lain heavy on them. Now these are
such evident and signal Fruits and Benefits of Affliction, as ought to be
acknowledged with all Thankfulness.

5. So it is that oft-times it seems good to the most wise God for a while to
conceal from us his Intentions in afflicting us, to the end that he may thereby
make us the more solicitous about his meaning therein, and that he may quicken
us to a more diligent Enquiry and Search after the Cause of our Afflictions;
and that we may the more earnestly and importunately seek unto him, and beg of
him that he would be pleased to show us why he contendeth with us, and lays his
afflicting Hand on us; as also to help us to profit by our Afflictions.
Wherefore if at any time we cannot discern God's End in afflicting us, much
less see that we profit by our Afflictions, this should awaken us, and affect
us so much the more; this should stir us up to make a more narrow Search after
those Sins by which we have incurred God's Displeasure against us; it should
incite us to pray the more, that God would enable us to improve our Afflictions
to those Ends for which God lays them on us. This is the Use that we should
make of it, when we can neither perceive that our Afflictions do us any Good,
nor understand why God afflicts us, and not presently conclude that we shall
never be the better for our Afflictions.

6. The chief Benefit to be attained by Afflictions is to be expected
afterward, rather than in the time of our lying under the Chastnings of God.
So much the Apostle has given us to understand, Heb. 12.11. No chastning for
the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; nevertheless afterward it
yields the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness to them that are exercised
thereby. Afflictions are spiritual Physic: Now Physic we know at present
often discomposeth and disturbs Nature, and puts the whole Body out of Frame;
it makes the Patient sick before it cures him: And so it is with the Physic of
the Soul; you cannot discern the Benefit of it till it has done working: It
makes you sick for the present, but afterward you come to see it was a good
Sickness that made way for Health, and ended therein.

7. In the mean time, that you see not that you in some measure profit by your
Afflictions, and that they are by degrees doing you good, is very much your own
Fault.

(1.) You have a Prejudice against your Afflictions, you have an ill Opinion of
those Courses which God takes with you for your Good; and this much hinders the
kindly Operation of them upon you; as an ill Opinion of your Physician, or his
Prescriptions, hinders the working of your Physic, and deprives you of much of
the Benefit thereof.

(2.) While you are under these Prejudices and perverse Misapprehensions, you
do not apply your self to endeavor to profit by your Afflictions, improving
God's Providence, and doing what in you lies to further the Success of the
Means which he applies and makes use of for the Cure of your Soul. While your
Prejudices continue, and you are thereupon still sluggish and unactive, how can
you expect to be sensible of the Benefit of your Afflictions? Cast off your
Prejudices, have good Thoughts of God's Methods of Cure; firmly believe that
the Course which he takes with you is the best and fittest to do you good;
arise, and be doing what you can toward the promoting of God's Design in
afflicting you; search your Heart, try your Ways, endeavor to get a Sight of
your Sins, a true Hatred of them, serious and firm Resolutions to forsake them;
renew these your Resolutions often, still endeavor to confirm and strengthen
them more and more; and above all, be earnest and uncessant in Prayer to God
that he would be pleased to bless your Endeavors; and then say if you see any
Cause of complaining, that your Afflictions are such as can never do you any
Good.

The Ninth Sermon.
LAM. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.


I Am now fallen upon the second part of the Text, setting before us our Duty
in time of Affliction; Let us search and try our VVays, and turn again to the
Lord.

The Duty is twofold: First, That we search and try our VVays: And secondly,
That we turn unto the Lord.

The former of these Duties, as it is first in the Order of the Text, so it is in
Nature. We must search after our Sins, find them out and discover them, and
then turn away from them. It Is impossible that we should forsake them, until we
have a sight of them. He who sees not his Sins, what should he else do but
still go on boldly and fearlesly in the practice of them? What has he to
hinder him or reduce him? I shall speak something of both these Duties; and
first of that which has the first place in the Text.

But before I come to speak of the Duty it self, of searching and trying our
Ways in time of Affliction, in order to the finding out of those our Sins, for
which God has laid his Hand upon us; I shall speak a little in a more general
way, of that which is near of kin unto the Duty of the Text; I mean, of
Self-reflection, or a looking back upon our selves, and a reviewing and
consideration of our Thoughts, Words and Ways. And that which I shall say
concerning it, shall be touching the Excellency and great Usefulness thereof,
and touching the Mischiefs of the neglect of it.

I. As touching the Excellency of Self-reflection, or reviewing of our
Thoughts, Words and Actions, I need say no more, than that it is a Perfection
which only Men and Angels are capable of. All other Creatures, even those of
them which are most perfect in their Kind, and seem to have, as it were, some
Shadow and Resemblance of Reason in them; yet fall short of this excellent
Perfection. They cannot review what they have done, or take into consideration
the Quality of their past Actions; they cannot reckon with themselves, and call
themselves to an account of them: And indeed they need not do it, for they are
under no other Rule or Law beside that of their Nature, and those natural
Instincts which God has put into them; by these they are ruled and swayed, and
according to these they act: They are under the Command of no moral Law, and
consequently their Actions are not capable of moral Good or Evil. But Man being
under a moral Law, and accountable to his Creator for the Breaches thereof, for
the better regulating and ordering of his Thoughts, Words and Actions,
according to the Prescriptions of that Law, God has endowed him with a Faculty
of reviewing his Actions, and of considering them with relation to the Rule; to
the end that where he finds he has done well, he may be comforted and
encouraged; and where he has done ill, he may be humbled and reformed.

Thus has he a Tribunal within his own Breast, before which he can, as often
as he pleases, summon himself to appear, demand an account of all that has
been done by himself whether good or evil. At this Tribunal he can judge and
pass Sentence, acquit or condemn himself according to the moral Nature and
Quality of his Actions. Here he can rebuke and admonish as there shall be
cause, recall and reduce himself where he has gone astray, and lay stricter and
severer Charges and Injunctions on himself of greater Care and Watchfulness for
the future, as in respect of his former Negligence and Remissness shall be
necessary.

A most excellent and never-sufficiently-admired Faculty of Man's Soul! What a
rich Treasure have we herein, if we knew how to value it and make use of it!
But alas, how little Improvement do we make to our selves of this noble Faculty!

And this brings me to the second thing, the great Usefulness of
Self-reflection. I have already, in what has been spoken on the former Head,
said something of the Usefulness of it in general. I shall now descend to some
Particulars, and speak briefly to them.

1st. By reflecting on our selves, and taking a view of our past Actions, we
come to know our selves: We understand the State and Condition of our Souls;
what Case we are in, and what Opinion we ought to have of our selves. Hereby we
come to be acquainted with our spiritual Concernments; whether we be in the
State of Nature, or in the State of Grace; whether we be in the Way to Heaven,
or in the Way to Hell. Hereby we come to know what our Declinings and Decays,
what our Advances and Improvements in Grace are; whether we go forward or
backward; whether it be better with us to day than 'twas yesterday, and this
Week than 'twas last Week, or worse. Hereby we come to know the Sins that most
prevail in us, and where our Weakness principally lies: Hereby we come to know
our Wants and Defects, our Emptiness and Poverty in spiritual Things. And of
how great Concernment and Advantage is it to know our selves! And how little
will it avail us to know much abroad, while we are Strangers at home! To
understand the World, and to be thoroughly conversant in all the Matters of it,
perfectly acquainted with all the Affairs and Transactions thereof! To know all
the Secrets of Nature; and to have exactly dived into, and found out all the
hidden Causes of Things! To have made such successful Inquiries into Divine
Truths, as to be able to discourse of them to Admiration, and to give an
account of all the profound and deep Mysteries of our Religion! What would all
this signify, if after a Man has attained to know all other things, he should
be ignorant of himself? unacquainted with the spiritual Affairs of his own
Soul, which he is infinitely more concerned to understand? Surely whatsoever
else a Man has attained to know, if he knows not himself, he knows nothing to
any purpose. And he that knows himself as he ought to know, need not be much
troubled at it though he know but little else.

2dly. By reflection on our selves we come to have the Comfort of our Estate,
and of all our good Actions.

1. We hereby come to have the Comfort of our spiritual Estate. Tho we should
be in the State of Grace and Salvation, in the Favor of God, and in the Way
that will undoubtedly bring us to Heaven; yet if we know it not, how can we
take Comfort in it? And how can we ever know it, without Reflection on our
selves, and a narrow Inspection into our Hearts and Ways? Some doubtful
Conjectures we may make, some dark Guesses there may be concerning our Estate;
but we can never come to attain any certain Knowledge, any clear, distinct and
well-grounded Satisfaction touching our Condition, without a serious Reflection
on our Souls, and a due search into, and consideration of our Hearts and Ways.

And indeed this is one great Cause, among others, of the small Comfort that
many true Believers have in their Estate: They seldom reflect to any purpose on
themselves; they seldom take any pains by diligent search and inquiry to
satisfy themselves touching their Condition. hence it comes to pass, that tho
they be sound for the main, tho they be in the right Way to Heaven, and are
still going on in it slowly and leisurely; yet they are full of Fears,
Doubtings and Dissatisfactions; and if they have sometimes a little Comfort in
their Estate, yet they presently lose it again.

But now frequent and serious Reflections on themselves, and an exact Inquiry
into their Estate, and a reviewing of Matters as they stand within them, and a
taking an account of themselves, how would it after some time by degrees so
clear up their Condition to them, as all their Fears would be banished, all the
Cloudiness and Darkness of their Minds would be scattered, and their Doubtings
and Dissatisfactions vanish! For we must take it for granted, that though there
may be many great Weaknesses in Believers, and frequent Relapses into Sin; yet
the constant Bent, unfeigned Desires, and serious Endeavors of the Soul are in
all things to please God.

Now wheresoever this is, (and indeed without this there is no true Grace) I
say, wheresoever this is, a diligent and frequent Inquiry into our selves will
discover it, and discover it so clearly, as a Man cannot but own it, and
readily acknowledge, that amid many and great Weaknesses, there has been all
along some sincere and unfeigned Desire and Endeavor to please God in all
things. Whence we may conclude, that as it cannot easily be, but that a sound
and sincere Christian, who makes frequent Reflections on, and Inquiries into
himself, should evidently discern his own Sincerity; so having discerned it, he
cannot but have Comfort in it, at least according to the measure of the
clearness of his discovery of it. Wherefore I say it again, one great Cause why
many true Believers have so little Comfort in their Estates, is this, That they
so seldom have any serious Reflections on themselves, or apply themselves to
make a diligent Inquiry into their Estate. This, this is a great Reason why
they walk so heavily and uncomfortably, why they are so often overwhelmed with
Fears and Perplexities, why instead of continual Thanksgivings unto God for his
rich Grace and unspeakable Mercy vouchsafed them, their Mouths are full of
Complaints, and their Discourses made up of little else than sad discoveries of
their inward Troubles and Dissatisfactions, and the Conflicts they continually
have with Doubting and Unbelief. How much sound Comforts and Refreshings do we
lose by being such Strangers at home? What Peace and Joy in believing! what
increases of Faith, and further degrees of Establishment might we attain, if we
were better acquainted with, and more conversant in this Self-reflection?

2. We hereby come to have the Comfort of all our good Actions. There is an
inward Peace, Joy, Content and Satisfaction which usually attends sincere
Obedience, notwithstanding the Infirmities accompanying us in the Performance
thereof, and the manifold Imperfections of it: But much of this Comfort is lost
for want of looking back and reviewing what we have done, and in what manner;
with what sincere Desires to be accepted with God therein; with what Sense of
and mourning over the Corruption cleaving to our best Actions, though we cannot
be rid of it: With what Watchfulness and Opposition made against the Sin that
dwells in us, which would interpose and mingle it self with every good thing
we take in hand, with every Duty we perform. These things more or less are to
be found, and may be observed in every sound Christian: and Matter of very
great Comfort they are to him who can discover them in himself. But alas!
neglecting to review our Actions, when they are over, instead of the Comforts
we might have in ways of Obedience, too often nothing but Trouble and inward
Regret follows. When we have done our best, we question our Sincerity in all
that we have done, for the Workings of our corrupt Nature, and the sinful
Imperfections of our Services come to our Remembrance, and are fresh in our
Memories; but the Opposition we made against them is either hid from our Eyes,
or forgotten: And all this for want of a serious Reflection on what has past,
and a careful reviewing of our Actions, together with the manner of them, and
all their concomitant Circumstances. As reflecting on our Ways and reviewing
our Actions, we never want Matter of Humiliation; so the upright and sound
Christian never wants Matter of Comfort also in the Sincerity of his Heart.
These two go together, and very well agree; a sight and sense of our Failings,
with true Humiliation for them, and Comfort in the Uprightness of our Hearts
amidst those Failings. The Truth is, these two are so far from being
inconsistent, that we never have sounder Comfort in our Obedience, than when we
most clearly discern and most heartily bewail our Failings. To see and mourn
over our Defects, and yet even then to believe that God accepts of our weak but
sincere Endeavors, through Christ: how does this fill our Hearts not only with
Joy, but humble Admiration, that God should have such Respect unto, and so
kindly accept of such poor and worthless Services as we present him with, and
that notwithstanding all the Stains and Blemishes that are upon them, for which
he might most justly loath both us and them.

3. By Reflection on our selves we come to discover our Sins, and have a Sight
of the Errors and Miscarriages of our Life. He who never reviews his Actions,
nor considers what he has done, how many Sins may he cherish, how many
Abominations may he take Pleasure in, what Filthiness and Pollutions may he
even wallow in, and take no notice of them, much less lay them to Heart? How
quietly may he sleep in those Sins which without timely and sound Repentance
will inevitably ruin him? How confidently and fool-hardily may such an one he
hastening on in the way that leads to Destruction, and never come to have his
Eyes open to discern his fearful Condition till he find himself to be in Hell?
But now Reflection on our Hearts and Ways being a Means of opening our Eyes,
and of bringing us to the Knowledge of our Sins, is attended with three
unvaluable Benefits.

(1.) It quickens us to the Use of Means for obtaining the Pardon of those
Sins, which without Pardon obtained, would eternally condemn us.

(2.) It Is a Means of keeping off many temporal Evils which those Sins
unrepented of might bring upon us in this World, or of mitigating those
Afflictions which light upon us for them: For when we are soundly humbled for
our Sins, and have obtained the Pardon of them, either God forbears to chasten
us for them, according to that of the Apostle; If we would judge our selves, 1
Cor. 11.31.
we should not be judged of the Lord: or the Sting of those his Chastisements
being plucked out by Repentance, and Forgiveness obtained, they are much less
bitter and grievous unto us; and we bear them more quietly and comfortably.

(3.) It prevents our running on in those Sins, and our heaping up still more
and more Guilt upon our own Heads.

(4.) He that inureth himself to this Course of reflecting on himself, and
communing with his own Heart daily, shall never want either good Company, or
comfortable Employment.

1st. He shall never want good Company. In his most secret Retirements and
greatest Solitariness, he will be good Company for himself. What Solomon says
of the Commandments of God; Prove. 6.22
When thou go, they shall lead thee; when thou sleep, they shall keep
thee; and when thou awakest, they shall talk with thee. That may be said of a
Man who is much in reflecting upon himself, and communing with his own Heart;
when he walks, he is a Companion to himself; when he lies him down to take his
Rest, he sleeps with himself, he is his own Bedfellow, he needs no other
Company; and when he awakes, he talks with himself. If all others should
withdraw and estrange themselves from him, yet he would not much complain as
long as he has such good Company within his own Breast. Pro. 14.14.
A good Man, says Soloman, shall be satisfied from himself. He never enjoys
himself better than while he is at home, and conversant with himself. It Is not
so with wicked Men, they hate to be at home, they cannot endure to be
acquainted with themselves, they shun their own Company; the Conscience they
have of their own Guilt, makes them afraid to look into their own Hearts. They
run away from themselves as they would from an Enemy.

2dly. He never wants comfortable Employment: He could find Work enough within
himself, though he had nothing to do abroad: He could with greatest Content and
Satisfaction take up and entertain himself in communing with his own Heart; he
is not afraid to look inward, or to know too much of himself: it is not an
unpleasing and irksom thing to him to examine himself, and to take an Account
of his own Actions; he is used to these things, and his Soul looks for them;
and without them it can no more enjoy it self than a Man can live comfortably
without the daily Recruits of Strength and Spirits, by moderate Sleep and
wholesome Diet. If through any Avocation or Divertisement he be a Stranger to
himself for a little time, he is as a Fish out of its proper Element. And that
which will not easily be believed by those who have little Acquaintance with
these things, even those Parts of this Work which seem to be most unacceptable,
most troublesome and grievous, are pleasant and delightful to him. He is glad
not only when he can discern and read his Evidences of true Grace and
Sincerity, but when by Search into himself he can find out the secret
Hypocrisies that lurk in his Heart; when he can make Discovery of any Sin
within him, which before he took no notice of. A Man would not have a Moth in
his Clothes, or a Thief in his Family, if he could choose; but if they be there,
he is glad when he finds them out, that he may be rid of them. So he that truly
hates Sin, is glad when he can make Discovery of it in himself, that he may set
himself against it, and subdue it, though indeed he should be more glad if it
were not there to be discovered.

II. I come now to the Mischiefs of the Neglect of Self-reflection, and they
are many and great; I shall mention some of them.

1. It is a Cause of hardening the Heart. There is scarce any thing that more
conduces to the keeping of the Heart soft and tender, than a frequent
reviewing of our Actions, and calling our selves to an Account of what we have
done. He who constantly observes this Course, who looks back and considers his
Ways, reviews his Thoughts, Words and Actions, and reckons with himself for
them daily, shall find that he is both more afraid of yielding to Temptations,
and venturing upon Sin when it presents it self, and more troubled after the
commission thereof: He can neither be so easily prevailed with to give way to
Sin, nor be so quiet, so senseless and secure after he has given way to it, or
been overtaken with it: He usually closes not with Sin freely and readily, but
with some Reluctance, and after some inward Conflicts with himself, and
Resistance made against it: and having been worsted in the Conflict, and
overcome, his awakened Conscience gives him no Rest until he has been humbled
for his Sin, and made his Peace with God. But he who seldom or never reflects
on himself, or takes any account of his Ways, gives his Consent to the
commission of Sin freely and readily, yea swallows it down greedily; and having
so done, he also sleeps in it as soundly and securely for the most part: No
Remorse, no inward Trouble takes hold of him to quicken him to Repentance, and
hasten his Return to God. Thus I mean ordinarily it is with him, unless where
some horrid Guilt awakens his Conscience, or God makes extraordinary
Impressions of his Wrath upon the Soul.

2. Another Mischief of neglecting to reflect on our selves, is a daily
Increase of Sin, and a treasuring up of Wrath against the Day of Wrath. This is
an unavoidable Consequent of the former Mischief. When the Heart is once
hardened, and a Brawniness grown over the Conscience, what should put a Stop to
Sin? What should hold in corrupt Nature, or set any Bounds to the impetuous
Workings, to the Excesses and Extravagancies of it? To an hardened Heart and a
seared Conscience, neither the Evil of Sin in it self considered, nor the
Danger and dismal Consequents of it, nor the Threatenings of God, nor the
Examples of his terrible Judgments upon others for Sin, will signify any thing.
The Hardness of a Man's Heart, and the brawny Insensibleness of his Conscience,
are as Armor of Proof against all these things. This woeful Consequent of not
reflecting on our selves, and requiring an Account of our Actions, we may
gather from the Prophets Complaint concerning the obstinate and incorrigible
Jews of his time: Jer. 8.6.
No Man repented him of his Wickedness, saying, What have I done? Every one
turned to his Course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle. That Men ran on so
desperately upon Sin, was because no Man said, What have I done? None
reflected, called himself to an Account of his Doings, or took into serious
Consideration the woeful Issues and Consequents of his sinful Courses.

3. Another Mischief hereof is, that the longer any Man neglects to look into
his spiritual Estate, and consider his Doings, the more unwilling still he will
be to reckon with himself. It Is with the Sinner in this Case as it is with a
careless Merchant, who has long neglected to sum up his Books, and to enquire
in what Condition he is, whether he goes forward or backward in his Estate,
whether he be a Loser or a Gainer by his Trading. If he has long gone on in
this careless way, and especially if he has withal been lavish and prodigal in
his Expenses, he will be very unwilling to acquaint himself with the true State
of his Accounts. He is afraid he shall find himself in a bad Condition, and
therefore he still goes on in his old careless way. So the longer the Sinner
has neglected to reckon with himself, the more unwelcome to him are the
Thoughts of coming to an Account: His Conscience tells him he has run far in
Arrears with God, and therefore he shuns the Thoughts of looking over his Debts.

4. And yet without coming to a Reckoning, which is a further Mischief, and the
greatest of all, he can never hope to have his Debts cancelled or remitted. The
Pardon of his many and grievous Sins will never be obtained, unless he judge
himself for them, unless he be truly humbled for them, and forsake them. There
is no Promise of Forgiveness upon any other Terms. But how far is be from this,
who cannot endure to think of taking a View of his Sins, who hates the Knowledge
of his Sins, and carefully shuns and avoids whatever might bring him to the
Sight of them? Never dream of obtaining the Forgiveness of your Sins as long as
it is thus with you. And if your Sins be not forgiven you, everlasting Misery
will be your Portion, and it had been better for you if you had never been born.

To apply this briefly.

All you then who could never yet be persuaded to spend any Time, or take any
Pains in looking into your selves, and reviewing your Actions, and the various
Passages of your Life, what is it that makes you so unwilling to be acquainted
with your selves, and so carefully to decline whatsoever might bring you to a
right Understanding of the Estate of your Souls? Are you therefore better,
because you do not know how bad you are? Is either your Sin or your Danger the
less, because you do not see it? Is it any Security to you against the
Judgments of God, that you turn away your Eyes from your Sins, and will not
look upon them? If you were running on upon a Precipice, or a steep Place where
you might break your Neck, would the blindfolding of your self, or the shutting
of your Eyes preserve you? Would not your Danger be the same whether you see it
or no? Is not your Danger so much the greater, and your Destruction, if you
still go on, so much the more certain and inevitable, because you wilfully
close your Eyes, that you may not be sensible of it? Remember your selves, and
consider in what Rank God has placed you. You are rational Creatures; Why then
should you act so irrationally? God has made you Men; Why should you make your
selves like the Beasts that perish?

To take you off from this Folly, or rather Madness, I shall recommend only two
things to your serious Consideration; and they are these.

1. God has given you that excellent Faculty of Self-reflection, whereof I
have been discoursing, that looking in upon your selves, and making discovery
of your Sin and Danger, you might prevent your Ruin. Now if you wilfully
refuse to make use of it, and on purpose either shut your Eyes, or turn them
another way that you may not see your self, nor discover your Sin and Danger,
how just will your Ruin be, and to whom can you impute the cause of your
Destruction but to your selves, who would wilfully run upon it? This may,
perhaps, seem to have but little in it now; but time will come when it shall be
an Heart-piercing Consideration, that you should have procured all your Misery
to your self, by obstinately refusing to make use of that Faculty of your Soul
bestowed upon you on purpose, that reviewing your Sins, you might be sensible
of the Misery that attends them, and use Means to escape it. We read of the
Ostrich, Job 39.14, 15, 17.
that she leaves her Eggs in the Earth, and warmeth them in the Dust; and
forgets that the Foot may crush them, or that the wild Beast may break them;
because God has deprived her of Wisdom, neither has he imparted to her
Understanding. God has not endued her with a Faculty of foreseeing and
providing against Danger. But it cannot be said of you, that God has not
imparted to you Understanding; he has given you Reason and Understanding
enough to use Means for providing against your own Destruction, but however you
will run headlong upon it.

2. How averse soever you be now from reflecting on your self, hereafter you
must reflect whether you will or no: Though you do what you can to close your
Eyes for the present, yet the time is coming when you shall be enforced to open
them. When God awakens your Conscience, and sets all your Sins in order before
you, then it will not be in your Power to refuse, to reflect; then you will not
be able to seek it your self: your horrid Guilt and hideous Provocations,
whithersoever you look, will still be full in your Eyes. This will certainly be
either in this World, or in that which is to come: And O with what Horror and
Consternation of Spirit will that Reflection be! David's Condition was sad,
Psalm. 51.3.
when he complained that his Sin was ever before him. His Thoughts were always
upon it; it was continually in his Eye, and he could not be rid of it. What
think you then of the Damned in Hell! How fearful will their Condition be, when
all their Sins shall be laid before them, and be represented to them in their
full Magnitude, and with all their Aggravations: and when their Minds shall be
so intent upon them, and their Thoughts so continually taken up with them, as
that there shall be no Intermission or Diversion for ever to give the least
Mitigation of their Torments? When those dreadful and uncessant Reflections
shall be, what would a Man then give to purchase a few Hours for Self-humbling
and penitential Reflection in order to the attaining of Forgiveness? If you
have any sense of your Eternal Concernments, be persuaded to reflect now, and
to do it seriously, that you may never have experience of the Horror and
Dreadfulness of those After-reflections in another World.

And thus much of Self-reflection in the general. I now come to speak of it
with relation to the time of Affliction; for to that Season has the
Exhortation in the Text reference, Let us search and try our Ways. These two
words, search and try, import the same thing; and the Prophet uses two words
to the same purpose, to note with what Diligence and Industry we must search,
as I have before, in the Explication of the Words, observed. It Is indeed a
diligent Search that each of the Words, taken severally, imports, and much more
being joined together.

Which Diligence is in this Work requisite, and necessary in several respects:
and there is great reason why we should be urged to it.

1. It Is a Business we have no great mind to meddle with. It Is no easy matter
to draw us on and engage us to set upon this Work of searching into our Hearts
and Ways; we could more willingly be doing any thing else: And when we set
about it, we are very apt to do it slightly and carelessly. For proof hereof, I
need do no more than appeal to every Man's Conscience. How many are there who
are so averse from it, that they could never yet be gotten to set about it? And
as for others, that are not wholly Strangers to it, yet how seldom is it done
by them, and how overly and slackly for the most part! Yea, though Affliction
be the proper Season for it, and though then we are more concerned to do it,
and our present Exigences should put us upon it; yet even then how often is it
neglected, when no other Means from whence we think we may expect any Relief,
are omitted?

2. Many of our Sins are not easily discerned; and therefore unless we search
diligently, we are not likely to find them. There are diverse Grounds of the
difficulty of finding out our Sins.

(1.) Our Ignorance in many things, and the false Notions and Principles
concerning Good and Evil, which we have taken up and entertained. We are
subject to many Mistakes, and are apt to call Evil Good, and Good Evil; to put
Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 5.20.
And the Principles and Opinions which have once gotten possession of us, are
not easily relinquished or quitted, how unsound soever. From the Influence and
Force of such false Principles and Misprisions, it is that many live and die in
some Sins, never coming to the sight of them: For if at any time they would
look into their Estate, and search out their Sins, these their false Principles
cast a Mist before their Eyes, and hinder them from making discovery of them.
Though there may be some true desire to find out their Sins, yet as long as
their Errors and Mistakes remain with them, they search after them in vain.

(2.) The natural Self-love that is in every Man, is another thing that makes
it difficult to find out our Sins. We are partial to our selves, and so
favorable and indulgent in our own Case, that we are not competent Judges.
Self-love blinds us, and makes us willing to overlook those Evils in our
selves, which it may be we should not only observe, but severely censure in
others.

(3.) Our Affection to Sin, and the Kindness we have for it, does also increase
the difficulty of finding it out. We love our Sins, and are unwilling to part
with them; and this makes us unwilling to discover them. So though we search
after them, yet it is but as an Officer searches after an Offender that is his
Friend, or for whom he has some Favor: He searches for him indeed, but as
one who would not willingly light on him whom he searches for: He makes a
diligent and narrow search where he knows he is not; but if he come near any
place where he suspects he may lie hid, he is careful not to search that Place
too narrowly. Much after this manner do we search after our Sins, especially
our beloved Sins, which in regard of the entire Affection we bear them, we
would still retain, whatever other Sins we part with.

(4.) Another Reason of the difficulty of discovering our sins, is the
Deceitfulness of Sin. Sin disguiseth it self, and puts on the Dresses and Habit
of some other thing, that it may not be known. As Cheaters that wander up and
down from Place to Place, shift their Clothes, and call themselves by other
Names, that they may not be discovered; so does Sin often so dress it self up,
as it counterfeits some Grace, and Vice calls it self by the Name of some
Virtue. A strong Fancy, which is no better than Self-delusion, may be mistaken
for true Faith; Lukewarmness and sinful Compliance may have the Appearance of
Moderation and Christian Prudence; Stupidity and Unsensibleness under the Hand
of God may pass for Patience; and the voluntary Hardships of Monkish Severities
may be dressed up like Repentance, though they never reach the Change of the
Heart and inner Man, in which true Repentance chiefly consists. And how often
do Passion, Bitterness and Evil-speaking, put on the Attire and Disguise of
Zeal! Many more such Instances might be given of Sin appearing in such Colors,
and hiding it self under such Dresses, as it deceives not only others, but even
the Sinner himself. Wherefore though in a Man's search into himself, he should
meet his Sin fullbut, as they say; yet meeting it so disguised, he takes no
notice of it, but lets it pass, as a Man does the Malefactor he is looking
after, when he finds him not in that Apparel by which he was described. In all
these Respects a diligent and narrow Search is necessary, if we be in earnest
and truly desirous to find out our Sins.

From what has been spoken touching the difficulty of discovering our Sins, we
may infer,

1. That some convenient Time must be set apart for this Work, when a Man may
wholly apply himself thereunto, and when he may have nothing to distract or
hinder him. If a Man will find out his Sins, he must search narrowly and
carefully, as has been said; he must look into every Corner of his Heart, he
must survey and consider all his Ways, his Thoughts, Words and Actions; how he
has carried himself in his general or particular Calling; how he has
discharged every Trust; how he has performed the Duties of every Relation in
which he stands. Such a through Search as this will not easily be made; a few
slight Thoughts or overly Reflections on himself while he is in a Crowd of
Businesses, while his Heart and Head are full of the World, will do little
toward the discovery of all his Sins, many of which do not appear in open
view, but so withdraw and hide themselves, as it will cost a Man some time and
pains to get a sight of them.

2. That he who would so search after his Sins as to find them, must get his
Heart affected with a true hatred of Sin, and a sincere willingness to forsake
it. For though Sin must be found out before it can be forsaken, yet a Man must
be willing to forsake it before he can readily find it out. The reason is,
because so long as a Man is unwilling to leave his Sin, he will be unwilling to
find it, and so will never seek narrowly and strictly after it. When once we
are fully convinced of the Evil and Danger of Sin; when once we hate it
unfeignedly, and are resolved to do our utmost to be rid of it, then shall we
search after it with a Mind to find it; then shall we make the most diligent
and impartial Inquiry into our selves, that it may not escape our Eye.

3. We may also further infer, that when we address our selves to this Work, we
must be suspicious and jealous of our selves. We are too willing to favor our
selves, and to indulge our selves in some particular Sins which have gotten an
Interest in our Affections; and we are furnished with many Colors and
Artifices to cover them over, and hide the Evil of them from our Eyes. It Is
therefore fafe and needful that we should suspect our false and deceitful
Hearts, and preserve a continual Jealousy of our selves, lest we should be too
favorable and kind to those Sins which lie nearest our Hearts, whether they be
profitable or pleasurable Sins, or of what other Nature or Quality soever.

4. We may likewise hence be informed how much it concerns us to implore God's
Assistance in this Business; that while we apply our selves to search and (...)
ways, he would be pleased to search and try us, as David's Prayer was, Psalm.
139.23. that he would discover our Si^^ to us, and give us a Sight of them;
than he would help us against the Deceitfulness of our Hearts, and against our
Self-love; that he would enable us to search so narrowly and impartially as we
may not overlook our Sins: and more especially, that he would be pleased to
discover to us those particular Sins for which he does afflict us. Without this
our Recourse to God in Prayer, and his Assistance obtained, all our searching
will be to little purpose.

Now in the next Place, the time of Affliction is a proper Season for this
Duty. For,

1. Then God by his Chastisements does as it were summon us to reflect and
enquire after the Cause within our selves. The Rod of God has a Voice, Micah
6.9.
and it calls upon us for this Duty. Every Providence of God has its proper
Language, by which it remembers us of something that is expected from us;
Mercies call for Joy and Thankfulness, and Afflictions for Reflection and
Consideration: Eccl. 7.14.
In the Day of Prosperity be joyful, but in the Day of Adversity consider. We
must then consider what God's Meaning and Intentions may be in laying such
Afflictions on us, and what those our Sins may be for which he so corrects us.

2. It Is then seasonable to search and try our Ways, because that is the
readiest and most effectual Course we can take for obtaining the Removal of our
Afflictions; I mean, if we search and try our ways, in order to the finding out
of our Sins, that we may forsake them, and accordingly forsake them when we
have found them out: For the end of God's Chastisements being the taking away
of our Sins, Isa. 27.9. and the cleansing and purifying of us from the
Defilements thereof, Dan. 12.10. When God has his End, we being turned from
our evil Ways, he has by many Promises assured us, that he will be at Peace
with us. So Jer. 3.12. Return O backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will
not cause mine Anger to fall upon you. When thou art in Tribulation, if thou
turn to the Lord thy God, and shall be obedient to his Voice, he will not
forsake thee, neither destroy thee, Deuteronomy. 4.30, 31. Let the Wicked forsake his
Way, and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord,
and he will have Mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon,
Isa. 55.7. Neither particular Persons only, but even whole Nations returning to
the Lord, find Mercy with him for the averting or removing of his Judgments:
Jer. 18.7, 8:
At what Instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom,
to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; If that Nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will repent me of the Evil that I
thought to do unto them. Hereupon the People of God sorely smitten and wounded,
are encouraged to return to him, in Confidence of Healing if they return: Hosea
6.1.
Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; he
has smitten, and he will bind us up. How sad and deplorable soever their
present Condition were, they made no question but all their Wounds should be
healed, and all their Breaches should be made up, if they returned to God. But
now what must lay the Foundation of their Return? or what must be the first
step toward it, but a diligent Search after their Sins, by which they had
departed from him? The Neglect hereof is that which continues and prolongs our
Afflictions, whatever other Means we make use of to relieve our selves thereby.
But of this more hereafter, when I come to speak of the second Duty in time of
Affliction.

3. In time of Affliction we have some special Advantage toward the searching
after and finding out of our Sins, which at other times we are destitute of.

1st. Afflictions abate the Vanity and Lightness of our Spirits, and make us
serious, and so more fit to reflect on our selves, and consider our Ways. At
other times our Minds will not be so easily fixed, and our Thoughts held in and
kept close, to a Work which is not very pleasing to us, and which we are apt to
recoil from.

2dly. Affliction makes our Hearts soft, as Job speaks; it makes Impressions of
God's Displeasure upon our Hearts, and makes us sensible of his Anger. When God
several ways lays his Hand upon you, then you say with them, Deuteronomy. 31.17. Are
not these things come upon us, because God is not amongst us? Because he in
Displeasure has withdrawn from us?

3dly. Affliction makes us teachable, and willing to be informed of what is
amiss; it makes us desirous to understand what it is for which God has a
Controversy with us: God speaks to Men in their Prosperity, and they will not
hear, as he complained, Jer. 22.21. But Affliction, as God sanctifies it to
them, makes them willing to hear and learn wherein they have offended. Then
they beg of God that he would teach them, as Job did in his Affliction, saying,
Make me to know my Transgression, and my Sin, chap. 13.23. Then God shows them
their Work and their Transgressions that they have exceeded, and opens their
Ear to Discipline, chapter 36.9, 10.

4thly. God in his Wisdom oft-times makes choice of such Afflictions to correct
Men with, by which he, as it were, points at their Sin. When Absalom and
Adonijah, both of them their Father's Darlings, rose up against their Father,
it was no hard Matter for David to discern what Sin of his God thereby intended
to correct. He too fondly treated both the one and the other, and used much
more Lenity and Indulgence toward them than was meet; and by God's wise and
just Permission they requite him accordingly. This his Miscarriage David could
not so well see before; for inordinate Affection and fond Love are blind; but
now no doubt he saw and was made sensible of his Error in the Education of his
Children. That God's Judgments and Chastisements are often such as the Sin
which he punishes or corrects for, may be known by them, is most agreeable
both unto Scriptures and Experience. How frequently may we observe, that such
Children as have been stubborn and undutiful to their Parents, have afterward
been punished themselves with undutiful and rebellious Children: that false and
unfaithful Servants have met with such themselves, when afterward they have
had Families of their own: that unthankful Persons have met with as ill
Requitals from those who have received Kindnesses from them: that false and
treacherous Friends have been betrayed by those on whose Friendship and
Faithfulness they most depended? It seems good to the Wisdom of God so to order
and dispose of the Circumstances of his Judgments or Chastisements, that either
the Time, or the Place, or the Instrument, or the Manner, or the Matter and
Object of them, have often some Correspondence with, and Relation to the Sin
which he chiefly aims at.

(1.) God sometimes points out Men's Sin by the time he takes to punish them. A
Man has, it may be, often offended in the same kind; and God has for the most
part still discovered his Displeasure more or less, by somewhat that the Sinner
has met with, or has befallen him, either at or presently upon the renewed
commission of that Sin. At length he offends in the same kind more notoriously;
and immediately thereupon some more severe Stroke lights upon him from the Hand
of God, than ever at any time before. When thus it is, what other Construction
can a Man make of God's dealing with him, but that he is chastned for such a
Sin? And as for Chastisements, so for the Judgments of God, they often light on
Men either in the Act, or presently upon the commission of their Sins. When
Nebuchadnezzar was saying in the Pride of his Heart, Dan. 4.30, 31, 32, 33.
Is not this great Babylon which I have built for the House of my Kingdom, and
by the Might of my Power, and for the Honor of my Majesty? While the Word was
yet in the King's Mouth, there fell a Voice from Heaven, saying, O King
Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken, The Kingdom is departed from thee: They
shall drive thee from Men, and thy Dwelling shall be with the Beasts of the
Field, and they shall make thee eat Grass as Oxen. And the same Hour was the
thing fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar. So afterward when Belshazzar was
profanely carouzing and drinking Wine in the Golden Vessels of the Temple, and
praising his Gods of Gold and Silver, Dan. 5.3, 4, 5, 30.
of Brass and of Iron, and of Wood and of Stone: In the same Hour came forth
Fingers of a Man's Hand, and wrote upon the Plaster of the Wall that Judgment
which God had decreed should light upon the King; and which accordingly that
same Night was put in Execution. And thus Herod, as soon as he had finished his
Oration, and received the Applauses of the People, crying out, It is the Voice
of a God, Acts 12.21, 22, 23.
and not of a Man: Immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave
not God the Glory: and he was eaten of Worms, and gave up the Ghost.

(2.) Sometimes the Judgments or Chastisements of God light upon Men in the
very Place where they formerly had offended. So God threatened to requite Ahab
in that Plat, 2 Kings 9.26.
in that very Plat of Ground where he had sinned. So whereas the Israelites had
highly provoked God to Anger, by building high Places in Tophet for their
Idolatrous Worship, and by burning their Sons and their Daughters in the Fire
there; God threatened there to punish them for their Idolatry and Cruelty: Thus
says the Lord, Jer. 7.31, 32, 33.
The Days come that it shall no more be called Tophet, or the Valley of the Son
of Hinnom, but the Valley of Slaughter: for they shall bury in Tophet, till
there be no Place: and the Carcases of the People shall be Meat for the Fowls
of the Heaven, and for the Beasts of the Earth, and none shall fray them away.

(3.) The Instruments by which God punishes Men, are sometimes the same which
were the Instruments of their Sin. Judge. 7.
Thus the Sichemites whom Abimelech made use of as his Instruments and
Assistants in slaying his Brethren, were afterward through God's righteous
Judgment a Means of the Destruction of Abimelech himself.

(4.) God often punishes Men in such a manner as bears some Resemblance with
their Sin. The Scripture is full of Instances hereof. If Jacob deceive his aged
Father, and make him believe he is his eldest Son Esau, and so steal away the
Blessing from his Brother, Genesis 29.23
Laban shall deceive him much in the like manner, giving him Leah to Wife
instead of Rachel. If David first commit Adultery with Bathshebah, 2 Samuel
12.10, 11, 12.
and then contrive the murdering of Vriah for the concealing thereof, his Son
Absalom shall be permitted to lie with his Father's Concubines, as he had done
with the Wife of Vriah; and as he had slain Vriah by the Sword of the Children
of Ammon, so the Sword shall never depart from his House. If Ahab and Jezebel
take away the Life of Naboth, because he would not part with his Vineyard, and
the Dogs do lick his Blood; the Sentence of Ahab from the Mouth of the Lord
shall be, In the Place where Dogs licked the Blood of Naboth, shall Dogs lick
thy Blood, even thine, 1 Kings 21.19. And the Dogs shall eat Jezebel by the
Wall of Jezreel: and him that dies of Ahab in the City, Dogs shall eat: and
him that dies in the Field shall the Fowls of the Air eat, ver. 23, 24. If
Nadab and Abihu; Levit. 10.1, 2.
If the two hundred and fifty Men which were the Accomplices of Corah, Dathan and
Abyram, Numb. 16.35.
presume to offer strange Fire before the Lord; by strange Fire, by a Fire
coming out from before the Lord shall they be consumed. If the Israelites burn
Incense to the Queen of Heaven upon the Tops of their Houses, Jer. 19.13.
their Houses shall be set on fire, and burnt down by the Enemy. As the Sword
of Agag the King of the Amalekites had made many Women childless, so must his
Mother be childless among Women, 1 Samuel 15.33.

(5.) God punishes Men in the Matter or Object in which they have sinned. If
David be proud of the Multitude of his People, and out of the Pride of his
Heart will have them numbered, God will chasten him by diminishing his People; 2 Samuel 24.15.
threescore and ten thousand of them shall die by the Pestilence. If
Jehoshaphat join himself with wicked Ahaziah King of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 20.35,
36, 37.
and in compliance with him builds Ships that they may go to Tarshish, his
Ships shall be broken, and his Purposes shall be disappointed. Thus we have in
many Instances seen the Truth of what was spoken, That God often makes choice
of such Punishments as point at the Sin for which they were inflicted.

This God does for several Reasons.

1. To convince those who are obstinately blind, and will not see their Sins,
nor own the Evils that light on them, to be the Punishments of those Sins. Men
are naturally so unwilling to acknowledge their own Guilt, and that they suffer
for their Sins, that they endeavor to make any other Construction of those
Evils which befall them, rather than to yield that God thereby intended to
punish them for their Transgressions. Sometimes they will impute all to the
Malice of second Causes and the Instruments of their Sufferings, never looking
so high as God, without whom no Creature could touch them: Sometimes they will
fancy that such Evils light upon them by chance, and not by Divine Providence
ordering them for their Punishment or Correction. But now when God's Dealings
bear such a Resemblance of, and Correspondence with their Sins, they are forced
to see and acknowledge their Sins, and the exact Justice of God in their
Punishment. A remarkable Example hereof we have in Adonibezek, who when his
Thumbs and great Toes were cut off, was thereby enforced to give Glory to God's
Justice, saying, Judge. 1.7.
Threescore and ten Kings having their Thumbs and great Toes cut off, gathered
their Meat under my Table: as I have done, so God has requited me.

2. To help the Weakness of those who are in some measure willing to see their
Sins, and to discern God's End in his Corrections, but cannot do it so easily,
unless something in the Correction it self lead them to the Sight of their Sin.
Thus when a Man suffers in the same kind in which he has been injurious to
others, or when a Man loses by those unlawful Artifices by which he made
account to increase his Gain, he cannot but take notice of his Sin in the
Punishment, which otherwise perhaps he would have overlooked.

3. God hereby makes the Chastisement work more kindly and effectually. For
these Circumstances pointing at a Man's Sin so evidently, do add much to the
smarting of the Rod with which God corrects, and makes Men take his
Chastisements the more to Heart. And all this stirs up more earnest Desires and
Endeavors to answer the end of his Corrections. Physicians when they give
gentle Physic, or have to do either with obstinate or sluggish Bodies, put in
somewhat to animate and quicken the Operation of their Prescriptions: So God by
these Circumstances so directly pointing at a Man's Sin, quickens the Operation
of his spiritual Physic, which without these Circumstances would little affect
the Patient, or stir those bad Humors which are to be carried off.

4. God hereby sometimes intends also the Vindication of his Justice and
Holiness before the World, When Men have sinned grievously and ^^enly, so as
the World has taken notice of it, God will have the World also (...) notice of
his Severity against such Sins: and to that end he writes the Sin in fair and
legible Characters upon the Punishment, so as all that pass by may say, Verily
there is a God that judges in the Earth. But now if God should not thus point
at the Sin by the Punishment, many who took notice of the Sin would never take
notice of the Punishment thereof; and consequently God's Hatred of Sin, and his
Severity against it would not so manifestly appear. For though God should
inflict as severe a Punishment on the Sinner in some other kind, yet few would
understand what Sin God thereby intended to punish; and so his Justice and
Holiness would be as little vindicated in the Judgment of the greatest part of
those who had taken notice of the Sin, as if he had not punished the Sin at all.

5. God thus points at the Sin by the Punishment, to give warning to others,
that they may take heed how they venture upon those Sins which they see are so
odious unto God, and so severely and remarkably punished by him; that others
may see and fear, Deuteronomy. 13.11.
and do no more any such Wickedness, as God speaks touching the end of the
Execution of Vindictive Justice by the Magistrate. So then to return to that
which gave occasion of all that has been said concerning the several Ways of
God's pointing at the Sin by the Punishment; by what has been said it appears
that our Afflictions are a special help to lead us to the sight of our Sins;
and therefore in that respect as well as in others, the time of Affliction is
the meetest Season for searching and trying our ways. By the help that our
Afflictions then afford us, we may then find out those Sins which at another
time we should not so easily discover.

Now to apply what has been spoken in a Word or two.

Use 1. If this searching and trying of our Ways in order to the finding out
and forsaking of our Sins, be the special Duty, the great Work required of us
in time of Affliction, how is it that this Work is for the most part least
thought of? How is it that there is so much complaining among us, but so little
Searching? so much enquiring after Remedies, and whatsoever other means may
afford us Relief, but so little Enquiry after our Sins that obstruct the
Operation, and blast the Success of all other Means? How is it that this
searching and trying our Ways, which should be the first thing we do in time of
Affliction, is commonly the last? The last did I say? Yea rather, how is it
that it is for the most part wholly omitted, even when no other Means that can
be thought of are omitted? How is it that many Afflictions succeeding one after
another, do so hardly bring us to this searching and trying our Ways at last?
Surely if there were nothing else to prove the Excellency and Usefulness of
this Work, yet this were enough, that our corrupt Nature is so extremely averse
from it. Such untoward Hearts and Natures have we, that the best things are
most unacceptable, and most against the hair to us. Could we be persuaded to
make this our first Business when any Affliction first arrests us, how many
Trials might we avoid? And how much might we either shorten or sweeten those
which God sees good to exercise us with? Consider the evil Consequents of our
Neglect of this Duty.

1st. By Neglect hereof we do what in us lies that God may lose the end of his
Corrections.

2dly. We lose the Benefit of them.

3dly. We either lengthen out present Afflictions, or make way for others to
succeed, if these should be removed. Now what extreme Folly is it to run upon
these great Evils, rather than put our selves to the Trouble of taking that
Course which God puts us upon for our speedy and effectual Relief! What is it
that makes us so unwilling? Is it the Unpleasingness of the Work? But all good
things are so to our sinful Nature.

Use 2. What is displeasing at first, will become pleasant and delightful after
you shall have been inured to it.

Is it your Love to some particular Sin, and your Unwillingness to leave it? If
that be at the bottom, take heed of it; you do but harbor a Snake in your
Bosom, that will sting you to Death if you still cherish it: that Sin as dearly
as you love it, will certainly be your Ruin, unless you find it out and
forsake it.

Is it your Sloth and Unwillingness to be at the Cost of so much Pains, as a
narrow Search into your Heart and Ways would require? But,

(1.) Can you take Pains to better Purpose? Is there any thing in the World
that better deserves your Pains?

(2.) Do you not take a great deal more Pains about Matters of small
Consequence, in comparison of what concerns your Soul, and your Peace with God?
Can you be content to lay out your Strength and spend your Spirits in pursuit
of the things of the World, and yet stick at a little Pains to be taken about
your spiritual Estate? Have you not some time heretofore taken a great deal
more Pains in pursuit of Sin and sinful Vanities, than the searching into your
Heart and Ways need cost you? Have you not often tired your self in the Ways of
Sin with greatest Delight; and yet are you so nice and tender, so indulgent and
favorable to your self, as you cannot now be persuaded to be at the Expense of
a little Pains to enquire how Matters stand between God and your Soul? If this
be your Temper, you must not think of going to Heaven upon these Terms: You
must resolve to take Pains, or you shall never get thither. There must be
striving to enter in at the strait Gate; and working out your Salvation with
Fear and Trembling; and a taking the Kingdom of Heaven by Violence, or you will
fall short of it. What say you to these things? Are you at length persuaded and
resolved to take some Pains to make a strict Search into your self? And is it
the full Purpose of your Heart to overlook no Sin that by your most diligent
and impartial Enquiry you can discover? Then for your Direction herein,

1. Make use of that Help which the Circumstances of God's Chastisements offer
you. Try what you may thence gain toward the Discovery of the Sin whereby you
have provoked God to afflict you.

1st. Consider the Circumstance of time when God was first pleased to lay his
Hand upon you. Enquire what you had been then doing, and whether your
Affliction did not arrest you even while you were acting Sin in one kind or
other, or whether it did not follow some Sin at the Heels.

2dly. Enquire whether the Place where your Affliction seized on you, were not
that in which you had sinned. It may be it seized on you in your Shop, where
you had been cheating some Body; in the Alehouse, where you had been
mispending your time, and abusing your self by Intemperance; or it may be in
some other Place as bad or worse.

3dly. Consider the Instruments of your Affliction. Does not God punish you by
those who were your Companions in Sin? or whose Assistance you made use of for
the commission of your Sin? Does he not take those very things with which you
sinned, and make them the Instruments of your Suffering?

4thly. Enquire whether there be nothing in the manner of God's chastening you,
that may lead you to the Sight of your Sin. He has chastened you with the
Scourge of the Tongue; have not you abused your Tongue to the defaming and
injuring of others in the same kind? You have met with false and deceitful
Dealings from those whom you thought you might have trusted: Have not you been
as false and deceitful your self? And does not God measure to you according to
the Measure that others have received from you? God lays bodily Weaknesses and
Infirmities on you: Are they not the proper Effects of your Intemperance, and
other lewd and debauched Courses, by which you have brought those Distempers
and Weaknesses upon you? God afflicts you in your Children: Have not you set
your Affections too much upon them? Or have you not neglected them in their
Education? Or have you not given them ill Example?

5thly. Consider the Matter and Object of your Affliction, and see if that may
not help you to see your Sin. God has taken away part of your Estate from you:
When you had more than now you have, did you not abuse it? God has blasted
your Beauty: Were you not proud of it? God has poured Reproach and Contempt
upon you: Did you not forfeit your good Name and Reputation, and make your self
vile by your Sins? Have you not dishonored God, for which he has justly made
you to be lightly esteemed?

2. Compare your self with the Rule: lay the Law of God before you, and try
your self thereby in reference to all the several Branches thereof. By the Law
comes the Knowledge of Sin. Romans 3.20.
And here rest not in Generalities, but descend to Particulars. Take an Account
of your self, and make Enquiry wherein you have declined or swerved from any
part of that Duty which God requires of you. He that lays any one of God's Laws
before him, taking only the general Letter of it as it is expressed in the
Commandment, may think he has not much failed of the Performance of what the
Law requires; yea perhaps he may be ready to justify himself, saying with the
young Man in the Gospel, Mat. 19.20.
All this have I kept from my Youth: And yet when he comes to look more
narrowly into the several Parts of his Duty contained under that Law, he may
find he has offended many Ways, and that he has not only come far short of
exact Conformity to the Rule, but failed more or less in almost every thing
that the Law requires, excepting only those fouler Acts of Sin which in the
Letter of some of the Commandments are by Name forbidden.

3. In this Search be sure that you avoid that common Error of heeding and
looking after Sins of Commission only, little or not at all regarding Sins of
Omission. Though we make light of our Omissions, yet they may be such as God
may be highly provoked by them.

To neglect Prayer in your Family, and the Instruction of those that are under
your Charge, may be small Sins in your Account, and scarce worth the taking
notice of. But they are not so in God's Account: He sees that the Omission of
these Duties is the ready way to bring upon us a Deluge of Profaneness,
Irreligion and Atheism: and that they who make no Conscience of these Duties,
do in effect say unto God, Depart from us; they do what in them lies to banish
God, not only out of their Families, but out of the Land: For if these Duties
should be as shamefully neglected by all as they are by some, and those too
many, what would become of our Posterity in the next Generation? Would not the
whole Face of the Land be covered with Darkness as thick as that of Egypt? And
what would attend that Darkness, but all manner of Ungodliness and Debauchery,
the inseparable Consequents of Ignorance?

The total Omission of secret Prayer you may think is no great Matter, so long
as you sometimes in public or private join with others in that Duty: but God
has other Thoughts of it; he knows that all your other Services, as by you
performed, are little better than mere Formalities, as long as you neglect
secret Duties. He knows the great Consequence of keeping up a constant Course
of secret Prayer, and that without it it is impossible that either your Heart or
Conversation should be ordered aright. He knows that the very Life and Vigor
of all other Duties depends on this.

The Neglect of showing Mercy to those that are afflicted, you may think is no
great Matter, so long as you do no Man any Wrong; but God lays more Stress upon
such Omissions than you do; his righteous Sentence is, He that has no Pity for
others, Pro. 21.13 Jam. 2.13.
shall have none himself; He shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has
showed no Mercy.

The Neglect of some one public Ordinance, as the Lord's Supper for example,
you may think is a thing that God takes little notice of, so long as you give
your constant Attendance on other Ordinances: but you consider not how much
Evil and Danger there is in the deliberate and wilful Omission of any known
Duty, and such is this. For such an Omission as this was Moses in Danger of
losing his Life; Exodus 4.24, 25, 26.
for neglecting to circumcise his Son, the Lord met him, took hold of him, and
sought to kill him: neither would he let him go, till Zipporah his Wife had
taken a sharp Stone, and cut off the Foreskin of her Son. Neither may you think
that any colorable Excuse that you may pretend you have for Neglect of a Duty
or an Ordinance, will bear you out. Moses in Probability might have pleaded
something for his Excuse: his Wife Zipporah, as it seems by her Carriage, was
extremely averse from having her Son circumcised, so that Moses could not do
it, but there would be a Breach between them; there would be no Quiet in the
Family. This Consideration had been somewhat, if the thing had been of an
indifferent Nature, and not a Matter of Duty: but where God's express Command
was, That every Male-child should be Circumcised, this Excuse could not justify
Moses his Neglect. Look well to it that your Excuses be good, by which you
would defend your absenting your self from any Ordinance of God. It had need be
a strong and a clear Ground on which you go, when you shall willingly and upon
Deliberation wave an express Ordinance of God. But this by the way.

4. Think not you have done enough if you have been searching within, and round
about you near at hand; if you have with some Diligence enquired how Matters
are with you at present, or have been of late; but look farther off, and survey
the former part of your past Life: God may call to remembrance Sins long since
committed, and chasten you for them. Thus God brought a Famine of three Years
continuance upon the Israelites, 2 Samuel 21.1
for Readiness Cruelty against the Gibeonites, though Saul had then been dead many
Years. Yea, God may chasten you for old Sins, though you have long since left
them; and this for several Reasons.

1st. Though you have left them, yet it may be that you never truly repented of
them. A Man may break off the Practice of some Sins, because they consist not
with his temporal Advantage, or his Credit, or his worldly Designs and
Interest. Upon such Considerations as these a Man may have forsaken some
particular Sins, though he never hated them, nor was truly humbled for them.

2dly. A Man may have truly repented of his Sin, he may have been truly humbled
for it, and forsaken it, and yet he may still want some Degrees of that through
Humiliation which God expects.

3dly. Former Sins long since committed and forsaken, may now be almost
forgotten; at least they may not be remembered with that fresh and lively Sense
of the great Evil and Hainousness of them, with that mourning over them, and
loathing of our selves for them, as heretofore.

4thly. God may see that you are in Danger of returning to those Sins again,
that you have long since forsaken, and verily thought your self at so great a
distance from them, as you should never have any Inclination to commit them
again. So then it is possible that God may afflict you for old Sins, long since
forsaken upon some worldly Consideration, that he may bring you to sound
Repentance for them; or that he may more thoroughly humble you for the Sins that
you have truly repented of; or that he may thereby rub up and renew the
Remembrance of former Sins, and therewith also renew your former Sorrow, and
loathing of your self for those Sins, which Time and Forgetfulness, and carnal
Security, have almost worn out; and lastly, that he may prevent your Relapses
into the same Sins. Thus you see that God may have many Reasons to correct you
for former Sins; and therefore that if you will find out the Sin for which he
chastens you, it will sometimes concern you to cast your Eye far back, and take
a View of those your former Sins, which you have long ago quitted and
relinquished.

5thly. This searching and trying your Ways is a Work that must be often
repeated; and that not only in regard that you every Day contract new Guilt,
and run afresh in Arrears with God, but because your former Sins may not be
discovered presently, though you search after them with some good measure of
Care and Diligence. When we search after a thing which much concerns us to
find, though we light not on it at first, yet we search a second and a third
time, and will not easily give over searching until we have found it. You have
been making Search after the Sin for which God afflicts you, and you cannot
find it; you are still in the dark, and cannot understand God's Intentions in
laying his Hand upon you: But search yet once more, yea a third and a fourth
time, if need be; you may light on that at last which you have often
overlooked. Whatever the Issue of your Enquiry be, you will not lose your
Labor. He who dug up all his Vineyard, in hope to find the Treasure which
he had been told was hid there, though he found not the Treasure he looked
after, yet he had it in another kind which he expected not: the loosening and
mellowing of the Earth brought him in a more plentiful Vintage the next Year.
If by your Search you should not at last discover any one particular Sin, which
you can think God aimed at in the Affliction which he has laid upon you, yet
you may light on somewhat else which may requite your Pains. If no other
Benefit accrue to you, yet the Satisfaction you have in having used so much
Diligence in reviewing the former Passages of your Life, will be a sufficient
Recompense of the Trouble you have been at therein. But yet this is not all;
there are diverse other certain Advantages which redound to us from taking a
view of our former Sins, and which, if it be done in a due manner, we never
fail of attaining, though we find not the particular Sin which we looked after.
It makes us more humble; it raises our Esteem and Valuation of Christ; it
fills us with Admiration of the free Grace and rich Mercy of God in pardoning
so many and so great Sins; it inflames our Love, and increases our
Thankfulness to God; and it quickens us to more Care and Watchfulness, to a
more constant and serious Endeavor of sincere and universal Obedience for the
time to come.

Now though it be most seasonable to search and try our Ways in time of
Affliction, yet there are also some other special Seasons for this Duty. As,

1. At any time when we are in any great Fear or Danger; then though God does
not yet strike us, yet he shakes his Rod over us; and therefore to prevent what
may be coming upon us, and to avert those Evils which we fear, there can be no^
better Course than that we make a through Search after those our Sins, for
which God seems to threaten us.

2. After a Man has fallen into any great Sin: Such Falls do for the most part
fore-run some Affliction, and make for the present a Breach between God and us:
For the closing up of which Breach, and renewing of our Peace with God, it will
concern us not only to be humbled for that particular Sin, but to make diligent
Enquiry after such other Sins as may interpose between God and us, and deprive
us of the Light of his Countenance, and the Sense of his Love.

3. When we are in Expectation of, or Suitors unto God for any special Mercy.
For considering that our Sins separate between God and us, and withhold good
things from us, nothing can be more seasonable or necessary, than that when we
are waiting on God for any special Favor, we carefully search and try our
Ways, that no Sin may hinder our Mercies, obstruct the Passage of them to us,
or blast the Means which we make use of for obtaining them.

4. Before our more solemn and extraordinary Approaches unto God; as namely,
before our drawing near unto the Table of the Lord. God will be sanctified in
all our Approaches unto him; but especially in our most solemn Approaches. And
in particular, as concerning our drawing near unto the Table of the Lord, a
more than ordinary Search into our selves at that time, is in several Respects
seasonable.

(1.) In regard of the express Command of God: 1 Cor. 11.28.
Let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that
Cup.

(2.) In regard of the great Danger of coming unworthily: He that eats and
drinks unworthily, Ver. 29.
eats and drinks Damnation to himself. Now unless a Man search and try his
Heart and Ways, how can he know whether he be an unworthy Receiver or no? He
must needs run a great Hazard who comes Hand over Head, before he has enquired
into himself, whether he be a meet Guest for the Table of the Lord or not. Yea,
it is very much to be feared, that he who is so careless as that he never
enquires into his Fitness, comes unpreparedly, and eats and drinks unworthily.

(3.) In regard of the great Benefits which we shall reap thereby, and the
Usefulness thereof, in relation to the Sacrament.

1st. In that Ordinance we are to bewail and mourn over our Sins; we must come
to it with godly Sorrow for them: And how can that be unless we know them? And
how can we come to know them, unless we search after them? It Is the reviewing
of our Actions that sets before us the Sins for which we are to be humbled, and
affects our hearts with them.

2dly. We are at that Ordinance to renew our Covenant with God, and to take up
fresh Resolutions of cleaving to him with full purpose of Heart for the future.
And what is more conducing hereunto, than that we by a narrow Search into our
selves, be informed how and wherein we have departed from God, and broken
Covenant with him?

3dly. We are there to act Faith on Christ for the Pardon of our Sins; and we
there expect to have the Pardon of them sealed unto us: in both which Respects
it is then most seasonable and requisite that we should look back and take a
Survey of our former Sins. For,

1. Hereby we shall come to know what, and how many and great those Sins are,
for the Pardon whereof we are to act Faith on Christ.

2. We shall be the better able to value that Pardon of so many and so great
Sins which he is pleased in that Ordinance to seal to us; and consequently we
shall the better understand how much Love and Thankfulness is due from us, both
unto Christ who has with his Blood purchased the Pardon of our Sins for us,
and to God the Father, who for Christ's sake has bestowed it on us.

4thly. If this Search and Trial of our selves were constantly and duly made
before the Sacrament, of how great Advantage would it be toward our Growth and
Increase in Grace? By this Course we should,

(1.) Discover whether we thrive in Grace or no; we should evidently perceive
whether it be better or worse with us since our last appearing before the Lord
at his Table.

(2.) We should with Thankfulness acknowledge any further Degrees of Grace or
Strength against Corruption that we have attained.

(3.) We should be humbled for our Backslidings and Declinings after our solemn
Engagements to the contrary, at our last partaking at the Table of the Lord.

(4.) We should renew and strengthen our Resolutions against our Sins, and
engage our selves to a more conscientious Performance of whatsoever Duties God
requires of us.

If any Man think there is small Benefit to be expected from such a Course, he
is certainly one who has been little acquainted with it, or has not observed
it with Care and Constancy. Many of those who come to that Ordinance, make no
Conscience at all of preparing them selves, but as it is to be feared, oush upon
it inconsiderately and profanely. Others prepare themselves out overly and
carelessly; or if sometimes they take more Pairs than ordinary in searching and
trying their Ways, and in other Parts of that Preparation which is requisite
for a due (...) God in that Ordinance, yet it is but very seldom that they are
at this Bains. For the most part they suffer one thing or other to divert them,
and take (...) off from bestowing time that way; and so the great Business of
preparing themselves being put off to the last, is but half done, or as good as
wholly omitted. Reflect and ask your own Conscience how it has been with you*
and if you find this to have been your very Case, then never object that there
is little Advantage from such a Course, until you have practiced it better and
with more Constancy.

But to return to the Business of the Text, the searching and trying of our
Ways in time of any extraordinary Affliction.

You will say, perhaps, you have searched and done it with all the Seriousness
and Diligence you could, and earnestly implored God's Assistance therein; and
this you have done often, and yet you cannot understand what particular Sin or
Sins God aims at in the Afflictions which it has pleased him to lay upon you.
You discover Multitudes of Sins that you have been guilty of; but among them
all to discern which they are which God at present corrects you for above
others, is that which by all your Enquiry you cannot attain.

Answ. I answer, It may so be, that you cannot single out any one particular
Sin; neither, it may be, did God ever intend it: He sometimes by Afflictions
intends to humble you for Sin in general; to correct your general Carelessness
and Slackness in the whole Course of your Life; and to engage you to walk every
way more strictly and humbly before him.

He intends also perhaps to mind you of old Sins which you have almost
forgotten, and to provoke you to renew your Repentance and Humiliation for them.

Wherefore when at any time you cannot find out any particular Sin, for which
above others God should at present have a Controversy with you, fall upon Sin
in the general, and improve your Affliction toward the attaining of greater
Measures of Humiliation and Reformation: judge and humble your self for old Sins
as if they had been lately committed; and let the Sight of all your other Sins
lead you up to the Fountain of all Actual Sin, to your Original Corruption; and
bewail that, and loath your self for it.

Moreover, you must remember, that God has other Ends in afflicting his,
besides the chastening of them for Sin; he also by Afflictions tries,
exercises, and improveth Faith, Patience, and other Graces. He by Afflictions
stirs you up to Prayer, weans your Heart from the World, helps you the better
to relish and savor Heavenly things, the Sweetness whereof you taste not when
you are glutted with outward Prosperity. If you be any way a Gainer by your
Affliction, you have reason to take Comfort therein, and to be thankful.

Thus I have done with the former Duty in time of Affliction, namely, the
searching and trying of our Ways. I come now to the latter Duty, in those
Words. And let us turn unto the Lord: Of which I shall speak briefly, because I
have in good part prevented my self in what has been spoken concerning the
former Duty.

From the manner of Expression or Phrase, of turning to the Lord, we learn the
true Nature both of Sin and Repentance. Sin is an Aversion and turning away
from God, and Repentance consequently is a returning to him. This is manifest
from the usual Language of the Scriptures, which call Sin a forsaking God, a
departing from God, a revolting from him, and the like. The Scriptures thus
expressing Sin are so frequent, that I need not stand to mention them: And the
Scriptures setting forth the Nature of Repentance by returning unto God, are as
frequent. That the Nature of Sin lies in an Aversion from God, and Conversion
to the Creature, will better appear if we descend to some particular Instances.
Worldly Joy, what is it but a Joy in the Creature instead of the Creator, who
is the proper Object of spiritual Joy? Carnal Confidence, what is it but a
confiding in, and reliance on the Creature instead of God? And so it is no other
than a leaving of God, to betake our selves to the Creature for those Supplies
and Assistances which we stand in need of. So the Prophet sets forth the Nature
of that Sin; Cursed be the Man that trusts in Man, Jer. 17.5.
and makes Flesh his Arm, and whose Heart departs from the Lord. And
although this our departing from God, and betaking our selves to the Creature,
be not so apparent in diverse other Sins, yet if we consider the Matter
thoroughly, we shall find the thing is still the same: For in all Sin it is some
kind of Profit or Pleasure, or Content or Satisfaction in one kind or other,
that we look after. Now we sin when we seek these things in the Creature,
turning aside from God in whom there is most eminently whatsoever the Creature
can afford us toward our Satisfaction, and infinitely more. Hence may be
inferred several things.

1. The great Evil of Sin. In every Sin God is set at naught and undervalued,
and the Creature is preferred before him. Yea the Creature is upon the matter
made our God, while that Trust and Confidence is put in it, that is only due to
God; or that Satisfaction and Happiness is expected from it, that is to be
expected only from God. The Apostle says, The covetous Man is an Idolater,
Ephesians. 5.5. because he makes an Idol of his Riches, setting them up in the room
of God, and making them the Object of his Trust and Reliance instead of God.
The same is in some degree done in every Sin, when a Man makes the Creature the
Object of that Joy and Delight, of that Satisfaction and Complacency that he
ought to take in God only. Now this is an high Affront to God. What viler
Indignity can be offered him, than that his Creatures should be preferred
before him?

2. We may hence also infer the extreme Folly that there is in Sin; for therein
we forsake the Fountain of living Waters, and hew us out broken Cisterns that
can hold no Water, as God complains of his People, Jer. 2.13. We forsake God
in whom is all Fullness, and betake our selves to the Creature which is mere
Vanity and Emptiness.

3. Hence also we may infer the singular Goodness of God to us in our
Afflictions, the Design and End whereof is to reduce us from our Wanderings, and
to bring us back again to God from whom we have gone astray; to recall us from
following the smaller Streams and empty Rivulets of Dissatisfaction and
Vexation of Spirit, to the full and overflowing Fountain of all true Bliss and
Happiness.

4. We may also hence infer, that the Duty of Repentance ought not to be so
displeasing and unacceptable to us as usually it is: For as sour and
distasteful a Work as it seems to be, it is but a returning to him who is the
Well of Life, and a renewing our Acquaintance and Peace with him in whom our
true Comforts are lodged, in whose Favor is Life, Psalm. 63.3.
and whose Loving Kindness is better than Life.

And so much of that Observation, from the Phrase or manner of Expression, by
which our true Repentance and Reformation are signified.

Now that our Return unto God is the thing that God expects from us in our
Afflictions, and which will assuredly prove the most effectual Means for
removing God's afflicting Hand from us, I have already showed in handling the
former Duty. And all that I shall here add, shall be to show very briefly, how
we must return unto God, that his chastising Hand may be taken off from us, and
by what Means we may be kept from leaving him again; and then answer one
Objection that may be made against what shall have been spoken. Now as to the
manner how we must return unto God if we will be freed from our Pressures.

(1.) We must return speedily. I thought on my VVays, and turned my Feet unto
thy Testimonies: I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments, said
David, Psalm. 119.59, 60. What through our Sluggishness, and what through our
Unwillingness to forget our Sins, we are long a deliberating to return, and
many Attempts and Essays we make at returning before we return indeed; and God
in his Providence deals with us accordingly: he also seems to attempt to
deliver us, but proceeds no further because we are so backward, and our Motions
are so slow and inconstant. Were our Returns to God speedy, we might hope they
would speed our Deliverance.

(2.) We must return thoroughly. We many times take some Steps toward God, and
having gone half way, we sit down. Our Reformation is imperfect and partial.
Hosea 7.8.
We are like Ephraim, a Cake not turned; half Dough, and baked on one side
only: and we fare accordingly. Though we have some Deliverance, as God speaks,
2 Chronicles. 12.7. yet God does not go through with his Work, because we go not
through with our Work.

(3.) We must return resolutely and steadfastly, as I may so speak; I mean with
a resolute, fixed and steadfast Purpose of Heart, not to forsake God again, but
to cleave unto him. When we return, God is most ready to entertain us, and be
at Peace with us; but it is ever on condition that we turn not again unto Folly.
Psalm. 85.8.
The Defect hereof was that which God complained of in his People; their Spirit
was not steadfast with God. Psalm. 78.8.
Their Goodness was as the Morning Cloud, and like the early Dew that goes
away. Hosea 6.4.


To prevent this our Return to Sin, and to enable us to cleave steadfastly unto
God, (which was the second thing) these things would be done.

1st. Be ever sensible of your Proneness to revolt and depart from God. We are
naturally bent to Backsliding, as God speaks, Hos. 11.7. The Sense of our
Weakness is one good Preservative against it.

2dly. Every Day acknowledge all your Strength to adhere unto God, to be from
God, and give him the Glory of it: Say with David, Psalm. 41.12
Thou upholdest me in mine Integrity. This your thankful Acknowledgment of God
in your Stedfastness and Perseverance, is the way still to engage him to uphold
and establish you.

3dly. Earnestly beg of God that he would keep you close to himself, and
preserve you from declining. Beg with David, that God would unite your Heart to
him, to fear his Name, Psalm. 86.11. And that according to his Promise, Jer.
32.40. he would be pleased to put his Fear in your Heart, that you may not
depart from him.

4thly. Frequently set before your Eyes in your most serious Meditations, the
Happiness of adhering constantly to God, and the extreme Folly and Misery of
departing from him. Recount the Comforts you have found in cleaving to him, and
how often and sorely you have smarted for departing from him.

5thly. Be ever watchful over your self; especially keep your Heart with all
Diligence, observing and opposing the first Motions to Sin.

6thly. Daily renew your purpose of cleaving to God, and of resisting those
particular Sins by which you have heretofore most frequently departed from him.

And so I come to speak to the Objection which may be made, which was the last
thing to be spoken to.

Object. I have, say you, both found out my Sin for which God afflicted me, and
also forsaken it; and yet my Affliction still continues. How is this consistent
with God's Promises of Deliverance out of Trouble upon our Return to him?

Answ. 1. You have found out and forsaken one Sin, but it may be you have not
found out all: there may be other Sins not yet discovered, for which God's Hand
is still stretched out against you. It may be the Sin which God principally
intended, is still hid from your Eyes.

2. It may be though you have for the present left your Sin, yet you have not
left it out of a true Hatred of it, but only that you might be eased from the
present Smart of your Affliction. God sees that you still retain an Affection
for your Sin, and that though you have left it, yet you look back on it with a
secret Desire after it, as Lot's Wife looked back upon Sodom.

3. God has also other Designs in afflicting you, as has been said; it is
probable your Faith has not yet been sufficiently tried, and Patience has not
had its perfect Work; and for these and other such Ends, God sees good yet
still to keep you in the Furnace of Affliction, though your Dross be in some
good measure purged away.

4. However it be, or whatever other secret Reasons God may have for his
Dealings with you, it is fit that you should patiently expect God's own Season
of Deliverance, as he has waited for you. Of the two there is infinitely more
reason that you should be willing to wait for him.

The Tenth Sermon.
EZRA 9.13, 14. After all that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and for our
great Trespass; seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our
Iniquities deserve, and have given us such a Deliverance as this:

Should we again break thy Commandments, and join in Affinity with the People
of these Abominations? Would not thou be angry with us till thou had
consumed us, so that there should be no Remnant nor Escaping?


THIS Chapter contains Ezra's Address unto God, A Sermon preached the Day the
Fire began at Northampton.
in which he confesses and bewaileth the Sins of the Jews after their Return
from the Captivity of Babylon, and more especially their having joined
themselves in Affinity with Strangers, and married Wives of those idolatrous
Nations round about them, which was directly contrary to the Law of God,
forbidding all such Affinities and Alliances. Now this their Sin was so much
the greaten, and so much the more difficult an Undertaking it was to put a stop
to it, upon a threefold Account.

1. In regard of the general spreading of this Sin among them, and the great
Multitude of such as had contracted this Guilt. We find, Ezra 10.16, 17. that
they who undertook the rolling away of this Reproach, and the reducing of the
People to the Observation of the Law, were three full Months employed in
examining Offenders in this kind, and in taking Security from them that they
would put away their unlawful Wives: Had not the number of them been very
great, much less time would have sufficed for transacting that Business.

2. In regard that they were not only the common, and the ordinary and
inferior sort of People that had thus transgressed the Law, but the Princes
and the Rulers had been chief in this Trespass: And the Priests and Levites,
Ver. 2. Chap. 10.18, 19, etc.
as well as the Princes, had been deeply involved in this Guilt. Yea, so far
had this Corruption prevailed among them, that there were found even of the
Sons of Joshua the Son of Jozadak the high Priest, that had taken strange
Wives, as in the same Place we are informed.

3. In regard that some of them that were in this Trespass, had been so long
married to Strangers, that they had Children by them. Ver. 44.
In all these respects, I say, as their Sin was exceeding great, so it was a
Business full of Difficulty to attempt the Reformation of a People in these
Circumstances, and so far engaged in illegal Practices. But however Ezra being
a Man full of Zeal for the Glory of God, and for the Good of that People, is
not discouraged by all this. Notwithstanding all the Opposition that he was
like to meet with in this hard Service, he courageously sets about it, and
through the Presence of God with him, and the Blessing of God upon his
Endeavors, he is successful in his Enterprise, and sees a desirable Issue
thereof.

You who have Opportunities put into your Hands of doing any thing for God, and
for the Good of the Place where God has cast your Lot, suffer not the
Apprehension of Difficulties to dismay you: Arise and be doing what lies in
you, and leave the Success to God; Zech. 4.7.
he that once said, Who art thou O great Mountain? before Zerubbabel thou
shall become a Plain; can go before you, and make the crooked Places straight,
and the rough Ways plain: he can most easily either remove all those
Difficulties that dishearten you, or lift you above them: he often gives that
Success to zealous and sincere Endeavors which not only answers, but far
exceeds all our Desires and Expectations. But then let us be sure we take holy
Ezra for our Pattern, and observe his Method. Being to undertake a great and
difficult Business, he begins with Humiliation: he most affectionately
confesses, mourns over, and bewails the Sins of that People, the Reformation
whereof he designed to attempt. The more deeply you can be affected with, and
take to Heart the Sins, Disorders, and Abuses that you would remove; the more
sincerely, cordially and affectionately you can mourn over them, and lament
them; the more Tears you can shed for them in your Confessions of them before
God, the better Success may you hope your Endeavors of Reformation will be
attended withal. How passionately did Ezra lay to Heart the Sins of that
People? As soon as he had heard how they had by illegal Affinities mingled
themselves with their idolatrous neighboring Nations, how did he behave
himself, and what deep Sense of the Hainousness of their Sin, and Greatness of
their Provocation did he express? When I heard the thing, says he, I rent my
Garment, and my Mantle, and plucked off the Hair of my Head, and of my Beard,
and sat down astonished: And at the Evening-Sacrifice I arose up from my
Heaviness; and having rent my Garment, and my Mantle, I fell upon my Knees, and
spread out my Hands unto the Lord my God, and said, O my God, I am ashamed, and
blush to lift up my Face to thee, my God; for our Iniquities are increased over
our Head, and our Trespass is grown up unto the Heavens. And then he goes on in
the same Ecstasy of Affection, laying open God's unspeakable Goodness to them,
and the horrid Nature of their Provocation. And what is the Issue hereof, but
such a Reformation as a Man would wonder how it could ever be effected and
brought about, considering how many the Offenders were, how great and
considerable the Persons of many of them were, and what strong Temptations and
Engagements they had to make them unwilling to abandon their Sin. But upon
Ezra's strange and almost unexampled Humiliation, God was pleased to exert and
put forth his Power in a strange and extraordinary manner upon the Hearts of
the Offenders, to prevail with them to disclaim and renounce their Sin,
notwithstanding whatever carnal Motives and Considerations there were to endear
it to them. If we could once attain to take Sin to Heart as he did, we might
then expect to see better Fruits of our Endeavors after Reformation than yet
we can. But this by the way.

In the Words that I have read, which are a part of Ezra's Address unto God by
humble and affectionate Confession of their Sin, he spreads and lays open the
Aggravations of it, together with the Danger and sad Issues of it, if they
should still continue in it. The Aggravations thereof are these three.

(1.) The great Severity that God had formerly showed against them for their
Sins, which is set forth and expressed in the first Words; After all that is
come upon us for our evil Deeds, and for our great Trespass.

(2.) The merciful Tenderness and Compassion that God however even in that
Severity was pleased to manifest toward them, in the next Words, Seeing that
thou our God have punished us less than our Iniquities deserve.

(3.) The singular Favor God had showed them in rescuing them from under those
Calamities which their Sins had brought upon them in the Clause following; And
have given us such a Deliverance as this. These were the things by which their
Sin would be greatly heightened: after so much Severity, Compassion and
Kindness, to have returned to Folly, and to have broken God's Commandments
again, was to have done as bad as they could, as the Prophet speaks, and to
have given their Sins all the Aggravations that they were capable of.

Then as for the Danger they exposed themselves to, that was no less than utter
Ruin and Destruction. After this Mixture of severe and merciful Providence,
should we again break thy Commandments? would thou not be angry with us till
thou had consumed us, so that there should be no Remnant nor Escaping? They
had indeed already broken God's Commandment in a grievous manner, and sinned
against him with an high Hand by those unlawful Marriages. His meaning
therefore is, should we again break thy Commandment as we have done? Should we
still continue in our Sin, and obstinately refuse to be reduced to Obedience?
If we should still perversely and irreclaimably go on in our Trespasses,
would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us? Of these
Particulars in order as they lie in the Text.

I begin with the Aggravations of their Sin, the first of which is the great
Severity God had formerly showed against them for their past Transgressions:
After all that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and for our great Trespass;
should we again break thy Commandments? Here diverse things are observable.

1. That Ezra and all those who joined with him in this Confession of their
Sins, did endeavor to aggravate their Sins by calling in and laying together
all those Circumstances by which the Hainousness of them might the better
appear. And this they did to the end their Hearts might be the more affected
with them, and the more soundly humbled for them; as also that they might be
the more willing to forsake them. And this is the Property of all true
Penitents, they ever desire to be thoroughly apprehensive of the Evil of their
Sins; and therefore they aggravate them to the utmost; in their Confessions
charging themselves fully with them, and laying as much Load upon themselves as
they can. They think they can never speak enough against themselves, nor
sufficiently discover and represent the Evil of their Ways, insomuch that
sometimes they rather exceed than come short herein, charging themselves more
heavily than there was cause for.

But Hypocrites, unhumbled and impenitent Sinners, are of a different temper;
these instead of aggravating their Sins, are wont to extenuate and palliate
them. If they be forced to confess them, it is for the most part but by halves
that they do it. If they cannot but acknowledge they have offended, yet they
will do it with an Apology, or with an Addition of something that may qualify
and lessen their Sin: They are indeed sometimes overtaken, but it is very
rarely; it is when they are drawn aside by ill Company, or overpowered by the
Strength of Temptation; that they are not the only Persons that are faulty in
that kind; that some others that would be esteemed much better than themselves,
are much more blameworthy; that there is no Man but must have his Allowances,
and that it would go hard with us all if all our Actions should be narrowly
scanned; and the like. These and such like are the Excuses which they plead,
and the Defenses they make for themselves, when they should take shame to
themselves, and own their Excesses and Exorbitances in their full Magnitude,
judging themselves that they might not be judged of the Lord. These partial and
favorable, lame and imperfect Confessions of Sin, when some little Part is
owned, but much more is denied; when Fig Leaves and specious Pretenses are
studiously sought out to cover as much of a Man's Shame as is possible, are
ever an infallible Argument that the Sinner was never duly humbled for that Sin
for which he has still so much Kindness and Affection.

2. Another thing observable is, that Ezra, and those other holy Men, that
together with him made this Confession, did impute all those Miseries and
Calamities which they had suffered in the Captivity, unto their Sins: they did
own their Sufferings as the Fruit of their Sins, and acknowledge their
Transgressions to have been the meritorious Cause and Procurers of their
Afflictions: After all, say they, that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, and
for our great Trespass. They were convinced, and did yield and assent that
God's Intentions in bringing those Evils upon them, were to punish them for
their Sins. This Conviction and Acknowledgment was necessary for them, and is
for us all in reference to our Afflictions; and yet it is very difficult to
attain it. It Is necessary, because without it we can neither be patient under
our Afflictions, nor profit by them, nor rationally expect a good Issue out of
them.

1st. Unless we be convinced that our Sufferings have relation to our Sins, and
own them as the Fruits of our Sins, we shall hardly be able to undergo with
Patience what is inflicted on us. To be sure we shall want one of the most
effectual Arguments to work Patience in us. It Is the Sense of our Sins
deserving whatsoever is come upon us, and an Acknowledgment of the righteous
Hand of God in bringing such Afflictions on us for our Sins, that humbles and
subdues our Hearts to God, composeth and quieteth our tumultuous Spirits, and
gives check to all the Risings of our rebellious Nature against God's
Providence. It was the Sense that Eli had of his own Guilt, and of the just
Desert of his own Sin, and the Sins of his Family, that made him so patient,
quiet and silent, when that heavy Sentence was by Samuel pronounced against him
and his, as that he had not a Word to say more, than only to profess his humble
and meek Submission to the good Pleasure of God; It is the Lord, says he, 1 Samuel 3.18.
let him do what seems him good. And this is that which the Spirit of God
calls the accepting of the Punishment of our Sins. Lev. 26.41.
But if the Sinner be not convinced that he suffers for his Sins, and that his
Transgressions have been the Procurers of his Afflictions, it cannot easily be
but that his corrupt Nature should rebel against God, and impatiently rise up
against his Providence as unequal, too rigorous and severe.

2dly. Neither can a Man profit by his Afflictions, unless he be convinced that
his Sins have been the Cause of them, and that God strikes at them in his
Sufferings. Who can think himself concerned to amend and reform that, upon the
account of his Afflictions, which he never discerned to be the Cause of them,
nor can be convinced that they have any relation to it? But let a Man once be
thoroughly apprehensive of the Displeasure of God against him for his particular
Sins, and see the Hand of God in his Afflictions striking at those Sins, and
then he will soon think himself highly concerned to rectify or remove out of
the way that which has done him so much Mischief: He will think he cannot make
too much haste to quit and be rid of that for which he sorely smarts already,
and may yet smart more, unless by his speedy Reformation he prevent it. When
God had sent a Plague among the Israelites for their murmuring, Moses being
deeply sensible of the fierce Wrath of God against them for that Sin, says to
Aaron, Numb. 16.46.
Take a Censer, and put Fire therein from off the Altar, and put on Incense,
and go quickly unto the Congregation, and make an Atonement for them; for there
is Wrath gone out from the Lord, the Plague is begun. Go quickly, says he, for
Wrath is gone out from the Lord. A lively Sense of the Anger and Displeasure of
God in your Afflictions for your Sins, will speed and quicken your Endeavors
to make your Peace with God, by answering the End of his Corrections.

3dly. Neither can you rationally expect to be freed from your Afflictions in a
way of Mercy, until they bring you to the Sight of your Sins, and you look upon
them as the Punishment of Sin: For till that be done upon you, your Afflictions
are wholly fruitless, as having done no part of that Work, for effecting of
which God sent them. To understand why you are afflicted, and to see the Sins
which God strikes at in your Afflictions, is the first Step toward God's
attaining his End in afflicting you. If this be not done upon you, nothing is
done. And therefore you have no Reason to expect the Removal of them, unless it
be to make way for some other more smarting Rod, which may effectually work
that in you which God intended. But though in these Respects it be most
necessary to see and own our Sins as the Cause and Procurers of our Sufferings,
yet to do it is as difficult as it is necessary. For such is the Pride and
Stubbornness of our Hearts, that we are not easily brought to take Shame to our
selves, and to acknowledge our own particular Sins to have been the Cause of our
Sufferings, saying to our selves as God says to Jerusalem, Jer. 4.18.
Thy Way and thy Doings have procured these things unto thee. We are very
unwilling to acknowledge our own Guilt, and would much rather lay the Cause of
our Sufferings at any other Door than our own. And this we are especially apt
to do in public and common Calamities. These we ascribe:

(1.) To Chance or common Providence, in which we do not think our selves
particularly touched or concerned.

(2.) To the Wickedness of some malicious and mischievous Instruments, that
were the Contrivers and Causers of our Sufferings.

(3.) To the Sins of others: The Provocations of such and such profligate and
abominable Persons drew down the Judgments of God upon the Place, and not our
own Offenses. As for our selves, we suffered only in the Crowd, and because we
were found among those who were to be punished. Or,

(4.) If we acknowledge our Sins in the general to have been the meritorious
Cause of our Sufferings, yet we descend not to Particulars, we charge not our
selves with such and such Sins for which God has been angry with us. And so
our owning our Sin only in general as the Cause of our Sufferings, is but a
formal thing, with which we are little affected. It Is little better than if we
had said, We believe indeed that we have deserved all that is come upon us, but
we know not how nor wherein. Ezra no doubt went a great deal further; it is not
to be questioned but that he had in his most passionate Confessions, an Eye
upon the particular Sins for which they suffered in Babylon. We may be sure
they were not Generalities only that so deeply affected him: he had upon his
Heart the particular Instances of their vile Provocations, together with the
Circumstances of them; and so must we if we desire to be affected with God's
terrible Providence as we ought, and to take them to Heart in a right manner.
Though what I am now speaking concerns us all, yet there may be those amongst
us who may think themselves very little concerned therein.

1. Those who though they have been Sufferers together with others, yet have
been free from all those foul and enormous Offenses and high Provocations which
many others have been guilty of; and possibly over and above their being free
from the Guilt and Stain of fouler Sins, they have been such as have made a
stricter Profession of Religion than most others. These Persons may be very
inclinable to think that God did not particularly intend the correcting of them
for their Sins, in the common Judgment that lighted upon the Place, but that
they suffer rather upon their Neighbors Account than their own.

2. Of the same Opinion perhaps may they be tempted to be, who seem even as to
outward things, to have gained by their Afflictions, and to be in a better
Condition, as to Trade, than they were in before. It Is easy for such, if any
such be, to entertain themselves with a pleasant Dream, that God only emptied
them to the end he might fill them fuller than they were before; and that he
had no other Design in pulling down their Houses, than that he might build them
up fairer. But let neither the one nor the other deceive themselves. They would
but flatter themselves, if they should think that God did not aim at their Sins
in his severe Providence, as well as at the Sins of their Neighbors.

As for the former of these, though they may have been free from the fouler
Abominations and crying Sins of the Place; and though they may have made a
strict and high Profession of Religion, yet even such may have been tainted
with the Pollution of many Sins which may have had no small Influence in
procuring the heavy Judgments of God upon the Town. And their Sins, in respect
of their nearer relation to God, and stricter Profession, may have reflected
more Dishonor upon the Name of God, than many of those Sins in others, which
have otherwise had much more Flagitiousness and Enormity in them.

And as for the latter sort, who may seem to have gained by their Losses: If
that be the Condition of any amongst us, let them not be too forward thence to
conclude their Innocence. God may pull down in Anger, and wound in highest
Displeasure; and yet such is his admirable Goodness and Compassion, that he may
anon repent him of the Evils which he has for our Sins most justly brought
upon us, and with Advantage rebuild what he had pulled down, and so fully heal
the Wounds that he had made, as to leave us in a better Condition of Health and
Strength than he found us in. God by the Prophet Ezekiel foretelling the Return
of the Israelites from Babylon, and their Re-establishment in their own Land,
promised to settle them after their old Estates, and to do better unto them
than at their beginning. Ezekiel. 36.11.
Now what think you? Might they when God had made good this Promise, thence
infer, that God was never angry with them for their Sins, and that their
Sufferings in Babylon were never intended as their Punishment? Their Case may
be yours: God has, it may be, since the Fire, dealt better with you than at
the beginning; you are in some Respects perhaps in a better Condition than
formerly, perhaps your Trade is doubled: Will you therefore now wipe your
Mouths, and say you were innocent; you never offended God so as to have had any
Hand in procuring his Judgments to be poured out upon this Place? Far be it
from you to draw such a proud Conclusion from God's gracious Providence toward
you. Though God has not only built you up again, but adorned and beautified
you, and advanced you to a more splendid Condition than before, yet cease not
you still to acknowledge and give glory to the righteous hand of God in pulling
you down, and emptying you. Amid all your present Mercies and Advantages, be
you still found putting your mouths in the dust, loathing and abhorring your
selves for your evil ways, and from your hearts professing, That as you were
most justly plucked down, so you might still as justly have lain in Ruins and
Ashes, and have been made perpetual Desolations, as God once threatened the Land
of the Chaldaeans, Jer. 25.12.
a place never to be inhabited any more.

And so much concerning the second thing observable from this first aggravation
of their sins.

The Third Particular thence observable, is, That to return to sin after we
have been severely punished for it, and grievously smarted for it, does much
heighten our sin, and render it much more provoking in the sight of God. This
is clearly implied in the form of speech which Ezra uses; After all that is
come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, should we again
break thy commandments? As if he had said, This were a provocation of an high
nature; far be it from any of us to be guilty of it.

There are these three things that greaten and aggravate our sins committed
against God; and notwithstanding former great Severities against those our sins.

1. To sin again in the same kind, after that we had grievously smarted for
sin, argues a great degree of hardness of heart. The scalled Child dreads the
fire; and the very bruit Beasts are afraid of meddling with that for which they
have been soundly beaten. And were there any tenderness upon the heart of man,
he would not again easily be drawn to venture on that which he has already
paid so dearly for.

2. It argues an heart strongly engaged to sin, and desperately bent after it,
which no former Severities will restrain, or hold in It shows a man is mad in
love with sin, that will out after it whatever it cost him. It Is as much as if
he said, It Is true, I have already tasted of the bitter fruits of sin; I can
tell by experience what 'twill cost me. But however, I must please my self, I
must gratify my sinful desires, my sensual and brutish Lusts, and I will, I am
resolved to do it, come what will of it.

3. It argues a slighting of the Anger and Displeasure of the Almighty, and a
contempt of his Rod. Herein a man's carriage toward God, is like that of a
stubborn and incorrigible Child against him that chastens him. Though you make
him smart, he cares not; correct him as long as you will, he is still the same,
and will do what he pleases, do you what you will, or can, to reclaim him.
Take heed of this aggravation of your sins, you who have been Sufferers by the
Fire, and all you who have any other way been severely handled for your sins.
Beware how you have any more to do with those sins against which the fierce
indignation of the Lord has been so discovered, and his Word, as it were,
revealed from Heaven. Keep at the greatest distance from those Sins; come not
near the Borders or Confines of them; run away from all temptations to them.
And that you may be preserved from them,

1. Labor to know what they be. It Is now a good while since the dreadful Fire;
though you were then in a miserable hurry, full of dread, distractions, and
confusions, so as you had scarce the command of your own thoughts; though then
you had not so much sedateness and composedness of spirit, nor so much freedom
and liberty as to sit down and consider, as to reflect and enquire into your
self, as to call your self to an account, and find out the causes of God's
fierce Indignation, yet since you have had time enough to do it. Have you done
it? Have you gotten a sight of all those your particular Sins, by which the
Wrath of God had been so highly incensed against you? If you have not, if this
work has so long been neglected, if to this day you have never set about it;
if still you be strangers to the reasons of God's contending with you, yet be
now at length persuaded to make a narrow search after all those Sins which have
been the procurers of so much misery to your selves, and this place.

2. Having found out those sins, have them often in your thoughts; and if it be
possible, carry always upon your heart the impressions of that terrible
Judgment, at least be sure that you often call it to mind, and renew the lively
remembrance of it, and labor to preserve the images and representations of all
the dismal circumstances of it in your mind; and then say with Ezra here in the
Text, After all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great
trespass, shall we again break thy commandments? So say in reference to all
your particular sins; your filthiness and uncleanness, your drunkenness and
swearing, your profanation of the Lord's Day and Ordinances, your pride and
gallantry, your covetousness and earthly-mindedness, your unconscionable
dealing, and your dishonest methods and artifices in the managing of your
Trades and particular Callings; your scant Measures, and deceitful Balances;
your mingling, adulterating and embasing your Commodities to impose upon the
Buyer, and inhance your gain; your allowing your selves in dissimulation, and
lying, and falsehood, for your advantage; your laying aside the golden Rule of
our Savior, and making no conscience of dealing with others, as you desire to
be dealt with your selves; your seeking your selves, and your own things, with
the disregard of your Neighbors, and the neglect of the Public good; your
lukewarmness, coldness and indifferency in the things that concern the glory of
God, and the common and great interests of this place; your not using your
power, and the authority you are entrusted and armed with, for the due
punishment of sin, and the beating down and suppressing of vice; your unequal
and partial dealing in the administration of Justice; your mutual animosities,
variances, envyings, emulations, and heart-burnings; I say, in reference to all
these, so far as any of you may have been guilty of them, and in reference to
all other sins whatsoever which any of you may be convinced of as your own sins
by which you have contributed toward the drawing down of the late terrible
Judgment of God upon this place; Say with Ezra in the Text, After all that is
come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, should we again
break thy commandments? Should we again return to those our sinful practices
that have laid this place in ashes, and made it a ruinous heap? That have made
it a byword, and a Proverb, a gazing-stock, and an hissing, and an
astonishment to all that pass by, and that have caused the ears of all to
tingle that have heard but the rumor and report of what the righteous hand of
God has brought upon us? O let us never think of taking up our former sins, and
closing with them again, after that God has thus declared his anger against us
for them, and by such terrible effects of highest displeasure, done almost
whatsoever could be done to imbitter them to us, and disingage us from them.

But besides all this, to set our hearts at a greater remoteness from those
sins, let us also make use of those other Considerations which this Scripture
affords us.

2 Therefore though God has severely handled us, yet he has in wrath
remembered mercy, and punished us less than our iniquities deserve. If we take a
true estimate of his dealings with us, we cannot choose but discern much lenity
and moderation, much tenderness and compassion to have been mingled with his
severity; and that in many respects.

1. He that turned your Houses into ashes and rubbish, and took away a great
part of your substance, might have taken away all, and left you nothing.

2. He might by the same terrible Fire that deprived you of your Estate, have
also deprived you of your Children and dearest Relations. The loss of one Child
in such a way of terrible Providence, would have troubled you more, and have
gone nearer your heart than the loss of all your Estate.

3. It might have been your own lot to have perished in the flames. God that
mercifully spared you, and rescued you from the violence of the fire, might by
it have hurried you out of this World into Hell, and sent you from one fire to
another. This fire was terrible, but the unquenchable fire of Hell had been
much more terrible.

4. Though you had escaped the fire, and been as a Brand plucked out of the
burning, yet such impressions might the fright and danger you were in, have
left upon you, that you might have lost the use of your Reason, and have been
as a Child, or Idiot, all your days.

5. God might have made such impressions of his Wrath upon your spirit by that
terrible Judgment, as you might never have been rid of them, but have carried
them to your Grave. You might have been not only a terror to your self, but
Magor Missabib, a terror to all about you, as long as you had lived. How
mercifully and favorably has God treated you amid his greatest Severities,
seeing none of these things have befallen you, or any of yours! O then go one
step further with Ezra in the Text, and say, After all that is come upon us for
our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, and seeing thou have punished us
less than our iniquities deserve, should we again break thy commandments?

3. God was not only pleased to deal mercifully and compassionately with you in
that heavy stroke, punishing you less than your iniquities deserved; not
stirring up all his wrath, nor suffering his whole displeasure to arise; but he
has also since been very gracious and favorable, kind and bountiful to you
many ways.

1. Immediately upon that dreadful stroke, what rowlings of Bowels, and tender
Compassions, did he cause in all the Country round about! What speedy and
plentiful Supplies in that difficult Season, in that hour of your extreme
necessities, did God move the hearts of people to send you in from every
quarter! Nobility, and Gentry, and Commonalty, Towns, and Villages in all the
circuit round, striving who should do most for you, and whose Charity should
come most speedily in for your present succor and relief. What Moses says of
that signal night in which God brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt,
Exodus 12.4^.
It is a night much to be observed to the Lord, for bringing them out of the
land of Egypt; this is that night of the Lord to be observed of all the
children of Israel in their generations: The same, or the like, may I say of
that day of your distress, when God in such a strange manner touched the hearts
of all sorts of People with a tender sense of your sad and deplorable
Condition, and so enlarged their hearts and hands toward you for your relief
and supplies; it is a day much to be observed to the Lord to give him the glory
of that mercy; it is that day which deserves never to be forgotten by you, or
yours.

2. How kind and gracious was God to you in the mild and favorable
Winter-season that followed, when many of the poorer sort were even housless
and harbourless, and when generally the Fuel that People had laid in for the
Winter, had been consumed by the fire. What a gracious Providence of God
toward you was it, That when you had neither warm Houses, nor provision of
Fuel to defend you from the injuries of an hard Winter, the Weather should be
so mild and temperate as the like had seldom been known; and that through his
goodness to you, you should less need those helps and defenses against the cold
which God had then deprived you of! Should a severe and sharp Winter have
followed the Fire, it could scarce have been possible but that many must have
perished before the Winter had been over.

3. What Assistances and large Contributions have you had throughout the
Kingdom toward the recruiting of your Losses, and the re-building of the Town!
Though some miscarriages and loss there may have been in managing the
Collections, and though all that you have received, bears not that proportion
to your Sufferings and Losses which some have conceived it did; yet, I believe,
there was never any instance of any Town in England burnt, or ruined, for which
so large Collections have been made. So exceedingly, and almost universally
throughout the Kingdom did God stir up, and open the hearts of people to
commiserate your Condition. God, who has the hearts of all men in his hand,
and turns them as the rivers of water whithersoever he pleases, has so
touched the hearts of Prince and People, City and Country, that all have
contributed their assistances in an extraordinary and eminent manner toward
your restoration. And as for the King's favor and bounty toward you, it has
been very signal several ways; the Instances whereof are very well known, and
must for ever be remembered, setting aside London the Metropolis of the Kingdom,
I think he never did so much for any distressed Town in his Dominions, as for
this. In all which you must look to God, and acknowledge him as your great
Benefactor.

4. Through the favor of God, and the great helps you have had from those
instruments of your good which he has raised up, the Town is now in a fair way
of being rebuilt, and of being improved and advanced to a greater degree of
luster and beauty, than ever it had before the fire: And moreover many of you,
I hope, most of you, are in a good way of employment, and livelihood, the Trade
of the Town beginning to recover together with the Building.

5. It has also pleased God to add another Blessing that sweetens all your
other Mercies, and gives you the comfortable enjoyment of them, and that is
Health. There were great and just fears lest the straitness and inconvenience
of poor Houses, and narrow Rooms, into which, for want of better
Accommodations, several Families were sometimes enforced to crowd, might have
occasioned some Epidemical Disease in the Town; but in this also the wonderful
goodness of God to the Town has appeared, there having hardly ever been known
so long a Season of so much health in the Town as since the Fire.

6. There is yet one thing more that crowns all your Mercies, and that is, That
God affords you his Gospel; a Mercy, which of it self alone were enough to make
you ample amends for all your Sufferings, though God should strip you of all
other Comforts, and give you only the bread of adversity, Isa. 30.20.
and the water of affliction.

Now then, God having done all this for you; having raised you out of the dust,
and set you upon your feet once more, and loaded you with so many Favors; what
remains but that now you add what Ezra further adds in the Text, and say full
out with him, After all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our
great trespass; seeing thou our God have punished us less than our iniquities
deserve, and have given us such a deliverance as this, should we again break
thy commandments? Would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed
us, so that there should be no remnant, nor escaping? I beseech you let us all
labor to say so from our very hearts, and with the same holy indignation
against our sins, and strength of resolution to forsake them, as he did; and
then he that has begun to do us good, and carried on his work of mercy thus
far, will no doubt perfect it to his own glory, and our comfort.

But seeing our danger is so great, if we return to our folly after such
terrible Judgments, and signal Mercies, give me leave to caution you against
some of those sins which we are most in danger of.

1. Now that your Town begins to rise again with greater beauty and luster,
take heed of being lifted up. Be not high-minded, but fear, lest for your sins
God lay you low, and level you with the ground once more. You know what Solomon
says, Prove. 16 18.
Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall. The
odious sin of Pride has formerly been imputed to this place. And does it not
begin to bud again, as the Prophet speaks, notwithstanding all that God has
done to humble us? If it do not, what means our apparrelling our selves above
our rank and quality? what means our forwardness to come as near as we can to
every vain Fashion, and immodest Dress, which our loose times have taken up?
How is it that we cannot content our selves with such comely Apparel, and
modest Dresses, as become a People that have not long since been among the
pots, and lain in the ashes; and whereby we might be Patterns of modesty and
sobriety to others?

2. Take heed of making too much haste to recover and repair your Losses by any
unlawful Artifices, or unjustifiable Methods of gain. Solomon again has taught
us, Prove. 28.20.
That he who makes have to be rich, shall not be innocent.

(1.) Take heed of setting unreasonable Prizes upon your Commodities. Do not so
far deceive your selves, as to think your Losses now justify you in demanding
what Rates you please. That were a very ill use of that heavy Judgment that
has been upon you. Content your selves with moderate gain; so shall you rise
again more surely, though more slowly.

(2.) Take heed of dealing hardly with the Poor, and oppressing them in those
ways in which you make use of them. Let them have what is fit, and pay them
well for their labor. Though your own gain for the present may be somewhat the
less, yet both your Comfort and the Blessing of God upon what you have, will be
so much the greater. Never think your self a loser by using a poor man well,
and giving him with the most, rather than with the least, for the service he
does you.

3. As for you, whose Calling lies in giving entertainment to others.

1. Take heed that you for your advantage make not your selves partakers of
other men's sins, by entertaining idle and intemperate persons at unseasonable
hours, or by giving them more drink than is fit. This were the ready way to
debauch the Town, and draw upon you the Curses of those Families that may be
ready to starve at home, while bad Husbands lose their time, and mispend their
Money in your Houses, by which their Relations should be supported. Can you
think that what is thus gained, will ever prosper with you? Would it not bring
the Curse of God upon all that you have?

2. Above all, take heed of making your Houses, the harbor and rendezvous of
lewd and filthy Persons. Has God for the sins of Sodom inflicted the Judgment
of Sodom upon you; and dare any set up, and carry on the same trade again in
contempt of God, and in open defiance of his Judgments? If such impudent and
daring Sinners should be still found amongst us, it were enough to set the Town
on a light flame once more. Let such persons tremble to think what awaits them,
if nothing will reform them.

Lastly, Be you all in general persuaded to lay aside your mutual Animosities
and Contentions, which have been, and still are, the great reproach of this
place; Be kindly affectionate one toward another, with brotherly love, as the
Apostle exhorts. Be all of one mind, study peace, and the things that make for
peace. Live in peace, and the God of peace and love shall be with you.

The Eleventh Sermon.
HAG. II. 6, 7, 8, 9. Thus says the Lord of Hosts Yet once, it is a little
while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry
land: And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come,
and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of Hosts. The silver is
mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of Hosts. The glory of this latter
house shall be greater than of the former, says the Lord of Hosts: and in this
place will I give peace, says the Lord of Hosts.


WHen God turned the Captivity of his People, The First Sermon Preached in the
New Church at Northampton Rebuilt after the Fire.
brought them out of Babylon, and once more settled them in the Promised Land,
they for a time wholly minded their own private Interests and Concernments; but
the public Worship of God, as if that had been no man's concern, was no man's
care. The settling of their own Affairs, and the building and beautifying of
their own Houses so took them up, that the building of the House of God was
little regarded. It was long before this work was begun; and after it was
begun, and some progress had been made therein, it met with several
difficulties and interruptions, and went on very slowly, as for the most part
Church-work does. Two great obstructions there were that did not a little
retard and set back this work, the one from without, the other from within.

1. The Enemies from without, omitted no endeavors, left no Stone unturned,
whereby they might hinder the building of the Temple. And what by their own
Power, what by their Interest in the Persian Court, they so far prevailed as to
put diverse stops to the work.

2. The obstruction from within, was their lukewarmness and indifferency, their
want of Zeal and forwardness for promoting and carrying on the work. Now as
well for their encouragement against the Enemy, as for rousing them up and
exciting them to more Zeal and Activity in promoting a work in which the honor
of God and the happiness of that people were so much concerned, God was pleased
to raise up and employ two extraordinary Persons, the Prophet Haggai and the
Prophet Zechary. The Prophet Haggai having reproved them for their slackness
and negligence, for their minding their own private Interests and Affairs with
the neglect of what referred to the honor and public worship of God; and
having laid before them the several Judgments which for this their Sin God had
inflicted on them, does assure them of God's gracious presence, assistance, and
blessing in this weighty undertaking, if they should in good earnest engage
therein, and pursue it with that Zeal, Vigor, and Industry, which in the
managing and carrying on of so important an Affair was requisite. Now to the
end that all objections against it might be answered, and whatsoever was or
could be matter of discouragement might be removed, the Prophet in the words
that I have read, does meet with the principal things which carnal Reason might
pitch upon, and make use of for the cooling of their Zeal, the rebating of
their Industry, and the slackning of their Endeavors. Were the Adversaries and
Opposers of this work numerous and potent? How many and how potent soever they
were, the Lord of Hosts would be with his People, and stand by them. He would
exert and put forth his Almighty Power in the behalf of them; he would shake
the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry Land. He would make all
things give way to, yield, and stoop to his design; and rather than any thing
should hinder the accomplishment of what he had undertaken to do for his
People, he would turn the World upside down. Now upon their late return from
Seventy years Captivity in Babylon, was their outward condition strait, poor
and low? Were they altogether unfurnished with those rich supplies which were
necessary for carrying on so costly a work? That this might not trouble or
dishearten them, God tells them the Silver is his, and the Gold is his. He had
all the Riches of the World at command, and could plentifully furnish and
supply them, if he saw good. Now that the platform of the House was drawn out,
and the Foundations of it were laid, did the meanness of it discourage rhem?
Did it seem a poor and contemptible thing in comparison of Solomon's Temple?
How mean and despicable soever it might be in the eyes of any of them, and how
far short soever it was likely to be of the Splendour and Magnificence of
Solomon's Temple, yet God promises to fill that House with Glory, and that the
Glory of that latter House should be greater than the Glory of the former. Were
the frequent commotions and changes of the World, and the inconstant and
variable state of things in those parts of the World such as promised them
little quiet and satisfaction in the enjoyment of God's public worship when
the Temple should be finished? For allaying of these their fears, as the close
of all that God had promised, he tells them, that he would give peace in that
place. And in regard that these were great things, and such as an oppressed
people that had been long under hatches, and had but of late begun to put up
their Heads, could not easily belive; God ingageth his Omnipotency and
Faithfulness for the performance of them, within the compass of four verses
five times repeating that solemn form of words, Thus says the Lord of Hosts.

So I have given you the main Intendment and Scope of these words. In the
handling of them, I must take them in order as they lie. And because there are
many things contained in them, which might take up some Hours if they were
treated of at large, I must with all convenient brevity speak to Particulars,
and pass on from one thing to another as lightly and speedily as I can. But as
I go on, where the matter will admit of it, and as far as it shall be capable
thereof, I shall endeavor to bring it as near the present occasion as I may.

Though the words will scarce admit of any genuine, proper, and convenient
division, yet such a division as they are capable of, you may thus take.

1. We have a prediction of great concussions and shakings in the World before
the coming of the Messiah: Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the
heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land, and will shake all
nations.

2. We have a Prediction of his coming: And the desire of all nations shall
come.

3. A Promise of the Glory of the second Temple, together with an answer to an
objection against it: And I will fill this house with glory: the silver is
mine, and the gold is mine.

4. An Amplification of that Promise concerning the glory of the second Temple:
The glory of this latter house shall be greater than the glory of the former.

5. An additional Promise of Peace, as an Appendix to all other Mercies
promised: And in this place will I give peace.

6. The Ratification or Confirmation of the whole, in those last words, says
the Lord of Hosts, so often mentioned before, and with which all that was
before promised, is at last shut up and sealed.

To begin with the first of these, the Prediction of great concussions and
shakings in the World before the coming of the Messiah; It is yet a little
while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry
land, and will shake all nations. By these Metaphorical Expressions, according
to the usual Language and Style of the Prophets, we are to understand great
Troubles, Commotions, Changes and Alterations in the World, in which high and
low, Persons of all Conditions, Ranks and Qualities, represented by the Heavens
and the Earth, should take their turns, and have their share. So God speaking
of his terrible Judgments on the World, says, Isa. 13.13.
I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of its place in the
wrath of the Lord of Hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger. But now all the
difficulty is, what shakings should be here intended. Some understand the words
of the great things which the Evangelists report to have been done at and upon
the Birth of Christ, the Miracles wrought by him in his Life, the strange and
miraculous Providence at his Death and Resurrection; and of the shaking of the
World afterward by the preaching of the Gospel, whereby Idols were thrown
down, Heathenish Idolatry and Superstitions were abolished; the Christian
Religion, and the Worship of the true God coming in place thereof. These were
great and wonderful things; but how they should be here by the Prophet
intended, is not easy to conceive. For he seems to speak of such concussions
and shakings as should be antecedent to the coming of Christ, and go before it,
not concur with it, much less follow after it. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I
will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land: and I
will shake all nations, and the Desire of all nations shall come; that is,
after God should thus have shaken the World, Christ should come. And indeed
very great and dreadful shakings there were between the time of this Prophecy,
and the coming of the Messiah; in which shakings the people of God, the Jewish
Nation, were not a little concerned. The Persian Empire, under which they now
were, was not only shaken, but shaken in pieces, dissolved and ruined by the
Grecians under the Conduct of Alexander the Great. Then presently after
Alexander's Death, who died in the flower of his Age, the Empire which he had
but just then acquired and been possessed of, was in effect once more rent in
pieces, and divided amongst his Chieftains and Principal Commanders. While this
state of things continued, the Jews were miserably shaken, oppressed, and
harassed by the Tyranny and Cruelty of Antiochus Epiphanes, besides many other
grievous pressures and sufferings, which during the Government of the
Seleucides they underwent. After some time the Romans came upon them all, and
subdued all to themselves; in which Revolution the distressed Jews fell under
the power of the Romans, and were at their Mercy. After all these terrible
shakings, nearer the coming of Christ, the Civil Wars under Augustus Caesar,
caused horrible shakings and convulsions in the Empire; after which the Temple
of Janus was shut up, and a peaceable time ensued, all Swords being sheathed,
and all Arms laid aside throughout the whole Empire; and then was Christ the
Prince of Peace born in the Forty first, or as some will have it, in the Forty
second year of the Reign of Augustus Caesar.

Now whereas all these shakings were to go before the coming of Christ, which
was the greatest Mercy that ever was vouchsafed the World, we may observe,

That great Troubles and Afflictions sometimes go before and make way for great
and signal Mercies. This is indeed the ordinary and usual method of God's most
wise and gracious Providence.

Thus Joseph is sold to the Midianites, carried into Egypt, and there again
sold to Potiphar, falsely accused, cast into Prison, and laid in Irons, that by
this Series of long-continued Afflictions way might be made for his Advancement
to the highest Honor in Pharaoh's Court, and for his being made Ruler over all
the Land of Egypt.

Thus seventy years Captivity and Bondage in Babylon goes before the joyful and
triumphant Return of God's people into their own Land, of which the Psalmist
thus speaks, Psalm. 126.1, 2.
When the Lord turned the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream: then
was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then said they
among the heathen, The Lord has done great things for them. Which Psalm,
though placed among the Psalms of David, yet is by Learned men, upon good
grounds, supposed to have been penned by some other Person after the return
from Babylon; as also Psalm. 137. that is to say, 460 years at least after that
David had been gathered to his Fathers; and perhaps much more, for we know not
how long after the return from Babylon it might be penned.

Thus the Ten most Cruel and Bloody Persecutions of the Christian Church in the
first Ages thereof, went before that quiet and tranquillity which the Church
enjoyed under Constantine and the succeeding Christian Emperors, when, to use
the expressions of the Prophet, God made the peace of his Church as a river,
and the righteousness thereof as the waves of the sea.

Thus that wicked Usurpation and Tyranny of Antichrist, making havoc of the
Church, which has been drawn out to so great a length already, and yet we know
not how much longer it may last, goes before that happy estate of the Church,
and of the World, when those joyful Acclamations shall be heard, The kingdoms
of the world are become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, Rev.
11.15. And when they who shall have gotten the victory over the beast and over
his image, shall sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb, saying, Great and
mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou
king of saints, Rev. 15.1, 2. And to add but one instance more here at home;
thus after the sharp and bitter Persecutions under the Reign of Queen Mary,
followed that blessed Sunshine of the Gospel, and the peaceable and undisturbed
Enjoyment thereof throughout all the long and prosperous, or rather glorious
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and the continuance of it to us ever since, even to
this day, notwithstanding all the destructive Machinations, wicked Plots, and
restless Attempts of the Enemy to deprive us of it, and to put out our light in
obscure darkness.

Now some of the reasons of this method of Divine Providence are these.

1. It conduces very much to the displaying and illustrating of the glory of
God's Wisdom, Power and Goodness, who can so wonderfully change the most dark
and dismal state of things, who creates darkness, and forms light, Isa. 45.7.
Who turns the shadow of death into the morning, as the Prophet speaks, Amos
5.8. Who turns a Town into Ashes and Rubbish in the space of few Hours, making
it a place meet for Zim and Okim to take up their abode in the merciless
Element where it raged scarce leaving a Lintel for the Cormorant or Bittern to
lodge in, or the remainders of a scorched Window to sing in: And then again
within the space of few years, out of the Dust and Ashes to raise up a Town for
the Accommodation of men, and a Church for the Service of God, and both with
the addition of that beauty and luster which had never been, unless God had
laid the Foundations of that change for the better in ruin and desolation. All
Beholders must needs acknowledge such admirable turns and vicissitudes of
things, to be the operation of his Hands, who is wonderful in counsel, and
excellent in working.

2. By dark Providence, by Troubles and Afflictions, God fits and prepares us
for Mercies. Our Afflictions when sanctified, humble us, lay us low, make us
reflect upon our selves, and consider our ways; make us repent, reform, and
turn to him that smites us; and all this tends to the rendering us meet to be
partakers of the Mercies which God has in store for us. For while we go on
impenitently in a course of Sin, blessings would be cursed to us, and abuse of
Mercies would increase our misery.

3. Afflictions commend God's aftermercies, and make them more sweet and
acceptable to us, as the darkness of the Night commends the light of the
Morning. A quiet and calm Season after a Storm, how welcome, how pleasant and
delightsome is it! Such is the unspeakable goodness of God, that he so much
consults our comfort, as to order and dispose of the circumstances of our
Mercies, so as they may afford us most content and satisfaction.

4. Great Troubles and Afflictions going before great Mercies, dispose our
Hearts to greater thankfulness for them. When Mercies come in upon us in such a
season, and with such circumstances, they greatly affect us, and make deep
impressions on our Hearts, so as we think we can never be thankful enough, we
can never bless God sufficiently for them.

Now to apply this briefly; The consideration of what has been said concerning
this method of God's Providence, and the Reasons of it, should persuade us, and
prevail with us to bear Afflictions meekly, quietly, and patiently, and with
that composedness, calmness, and evenness of Spirit which becomes Christians,
who are no strangers to the usual ways of God's Providence, neither fretting
against the Lord, nor desponding, or casting away our confidence in him. Though
it be night with you at present, yet you may hope it will not be so always, the
day will return. There is an interchangeable vicissitude of these Providence;
after darkness light breaks forth, and the longer your night has been, the
nearer are the approaches of the day; wherefore in the most dark and
disconsolate condition say with the Church of God, Mic. 7.7, 8, 9.
I will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my salvation. Rejoice
not against me, O mine enemy, when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute
judgment for me; he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness.

So I have done with the first thing, the Prediction of great concussions and
shakings in the World before the coming of the Messiah.

2. I come now to the second Particular, The Promise of his coming, And the
desire of all nations shall come. The Desire of all Nations, that is Christ the
object of the desire of all Nations, or whom all Nations shall desire. But then
this must be understood of some of all Nations, of as many out of all Nations
as are disposed to receive him; though others, perhaps the generality of some
Nations, may be so far from desiring him, that they may hate him, blaspheme his
Name, and persecute to the Death all that acknowledge him for their Savior.
But if this sense be judged too strait, then by the desire of all Nations we
may understand the desirable of all Nations, or he who has that in him which
should render him lovely and desirable to all Nations, and in respect whereof
all Nations may and should desire him; and so far as they know him, and
understand their own interest, will desire him. This description or character
of Christ is agreeable to what the Scriptures elsewhere say concerning him. The
Spouse having described him, and set forth his Perfections and Excellencies,
says, He is the thiefest among ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. And altogether
lovely, ver. 16. And Jacob Prophetically speaking of him under the Name of
Shiloh; says, To him shall the gathering of the people be, Genesis 49.10. That
is, all People and Nations out of an high esteem of him, and an earnest desire
after him, shall flow in to him. So God speaking of the coming in of the
Gentiles to the Church in the Times of the Gospel, and under the Kingdom of the
Messiah, says, Behold, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my
standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy
daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders, Isa. 49.22. In that day there
shall be a root of Jesse^, which shall stand for an ensign to the people; to it
shall the Gentiles seek, Isa. 11.10. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine
elect in whom my soul delights; I have put my spirit upon him, he shall bring
forth judgment to the Gentiles. I will give him for a Covenant of the people,
for a light of the Gentiles, Isa. 42.1. It is a light thing that thou should
be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of
Israel; I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be
my salvation to the ends of the earth, Isa. 49.6. Hence it is that the Church
gathered out of all Nations, is represented to St. John in a Vision as giving
glory to Christ. I beheld, says he, and lo a great multitude which no man
could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood
before the Lamb, clothed in white robes, and palms in their hands, and cried
with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sits upon the throne,
and to the Lamb, Rev. 7.9, 10.

Now if you ask in what respects, and upon what account Christ is the desire of
all Nations? I answer, this is a subject which would take up much time if I
should enlarge on it. Briefly therefore, he is the desire of all Nations,
because he is the promised seed in whom all the nations of the earth were to be
blessed, Genesis 22.18. Because he is the Savior of all Nations, the savior of
the w rld, John 4.42. The propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 John
2.2. There being no other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be
saved, Acts 4.12. In short, he it is that satisfies the Justice of God for
Sinners, and delivers them from the wrath to come, that purchases for them
pardon of sin, peace with God, Grace here, and Glory hereafter. In a word, this
is he who is of God made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Now let us all reflect upon our selves, and consider
whether he who is the desire of all Nations, be the desire of our Souls; and
whether he be in our esteem the chiefest among ten thousand. Do we count all
things loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ? Do we
entirely love him? Do we earnestly long after him? Are our Affections toward
him such as we can never be satisfied until we can say that he is ours, and we
are his? Could we be content to purchase him at any rate? And is there nothing
in all the World so dear unto us, but that we could freely part with it for his
sake? O let us never be at rest until we find that our Hearts stand thus
affected toward him. What say you to this, all ye that have the Name of Christ
frequently in your Mouths, and by an external Profession own him as your
Savior, but say of him in your Hearts, We will not have this man to reign over
us? Ye that give him good words, but refuse to take his Yoke upon you, and
submit to his Government; who profess you know him, love him, desire him, and
give him the chief room in your Hearts, but in your works deny him, being
abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate Deceive not your
selves, Christ will never own such as you are. Without timely and sincere
Repentance, the sentence which you must expect from him is, Depart from me, ye
that work iniquity, I never knew you, Mat. 7.23.

Hitherto of the Character of Christ. Now as to the Promise of his coming; all
that I shall therein take notice of, is the circumstance of time, when he was
to come, namely, while the second Temple should be yet standing; for he was by
his presence to fill that House with Glory, and to make the Glory of the latter
House greater than that of the former, as we shall presently see. And this
circumstance of his coming, is that which also the Prophet Malachy, who
prophesied immediately before his coming, foretold. Behold, says the Messiah
himself, I send my messenger, (that is, John the Baptist, the forerunner of
Christ) and he shall prepare the way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek
(namely the Lord Christ) shall suddenly come to his temple, Mal. 3.1.
even the messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in. This, as it confutes
the unbelieving and blasphemous Jews, and argues the wilful blindness of their
minds, and the miserable obstinacy and hardness of their hearts in denying the
Messiah to be come, and still fixing new periods of time for his coming, as
they find still that he comes not at the times by them assigned him for his
coming; so it greatly confirms our Faith in Christ as the true Messiah. For as
all other things prophesied and foretold concerning the Messiah exactly agree
to him and none else; so does this remarkable circumstance of the time of his
coming.

Wherefore the Apostle says, When the fullness of time was come, God sent his
Son into the world, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that
were under the law, Gal. 4.4, 5. When the fullness of time was come, that is,
when the time which God had predetermined and foretold was fully come. This is
that which Jacob prophesied of, Genesis 49.10. The scepter shall not depart from
Judah; nor a lawgiver from between his feet until Shiloh come. Though the Jews
had now ever since the Conquest of Judea by Pompey, been under the Power of the
Romans; and by them been deprived of all power to judge, determine, and punish
in Capital Matters; yet in other matters they had still a power allowed them,
so as all Government was not wholly wrested away from them, and taken out of
their hands. But now the time was drawing near when their City and Temple were
to be utterly destroyed; their Polity, Civil State, and Commonwealth to be
abolished, the remainders of them, after the fatal slaughters of that miserable
people at the destruction of Jerusalem, to be dispersed and scattered into
several Countries, and not as much as the face or shadow of any Government to
be left among them. At this signal and critical time, when the day of these
their Calamities hastened, was Christ born. The sum of all is this, The Messiah
was to come while the second Temple was yet standing, and while the Scepter was
not yet wholly departed from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet; while
at least somewhat of Civil Power and Government still remained among them; and
so accordingly he came. But it is now above sixteen hundred years since the
Temple was destroyed, and all Civil Government among them, into what quarters
of the World soever scattered, perfectly abolished. In vain therefore do the
Jews expect any other Messiah; and as for us Christians, we have all imaginable
evidence that Jesus, the Son of the Blessed Virgin Mary, is the Christ, the
promised Messiah. To him therefore let us betake our selves for the pardon of
our Sins, and the salvation of our Souls; on him let us rest, to him let us
securely commit the Everlasting Concernments of our Souls. Other foundation can
no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1. If an
angel from heaven preach any other gospel, take upon him to hold forth any
other Messiah, or to declare any other way of salvation, let him be accursed,
Gal. 1.8.

3. Now follows the third Particular, A Promise of the glory of the second
Temple, together with the answer of an objection against it; I will fill this
house with glory; the silver is mine, and the gold is mine. I will fill this
house with glory, that is the Promise. In which words there seems to be a double
Allusion; partly an Allusion to the external glory of Solomon's Temple that was
so magnificently built, and so richly beautified and adorned; and partly to the
glorious appearance of God in that Temple, at the dedication thereof,
concerning which we read, 1 Kings 8.10, 11. That a cloud filled the house of
the Lord, so that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud,
for the glory of the Lord had filled the house. So then, as the first Temple
was filled with glory, so God promised the second should also be. But now what
glory is here meant, and how this Promise was fulfilled, I shall presently show
when I come to speak of the Amplification of the Promise. For the present it is
enough to know that God undertakes it, who can do whatsoever he pleases, and
will do whatsoever he has promised. But however carnal reason objects, How can
these things be? Where is the Silver and the Gold? Where are the rich materials
wherewith this House shall be so splendidly rebuilt? To this tacit objection
that might be in the minds of that oppressed and indigent people, God answers,
The silver is mine, and the gold is mine. As if he had said, If I undertake to
fill this House with glory, make you no question but that I shall find means
for effecting it.

And was there not a time when the objection of this people was, or might have
been ours? He that had seen this Town, and the place in which now we are
assembled, the next morning after the dreadful Fire, would have despaired of
living to see it rebuilt as now it is; he would rather have thought that the
sentence pronounced against Moab had belonged to it, that it should be for the
breeding of nettles and salt pits, Zeph. 2.9.
and a perpetual desolation. If there had been any Prophet then among us that
could have said, Out of these Ashes and ruinous heaps shall a Town and a Church
be raised within the space of a few years, and you shall see it more beautiful
and splendid than ever it was before the Fire, the reply would have been, Where
is the Silver, and where is the Gold wherewith it shall be done? Whence shall
the distressed and impoverished Inhabitants have wherewithal to compass it? But
blessed be God, who has found out means, and afforded helps to bring it to
pass. He who says, The silver is mine, and the gold is mine; he who has the
treasures of darkness, Isa. 45.3.
and the hidden riches of secret places at his disposal, as he speaks, has
inclined the Hearts of Prince and People, of Nobility and Gentry, of City and
Country, to lend their assistance toward it in such a full stream of bounty,
as scarce admits of any parallel. But to the King's Bounty and Munificence do
we in a more eminent and singular manner under God owe the Rebuilding of the
Town and the Church, and more especially of the Church, which as long as it
continues in being, will be a standing Monument thereof. As we must with all
thankfulness acknowledge our deep obligations to all from the highest to the
lowest that have been Instruments of our good, and particularly to the
Gentlemen, the Commissioners, by whose care and industry this place for the
public Worship and Service of God has at length been perfected; so must we
give God all the glory, who sets all Instruments a work, who has the hearts of
all men in his hand as the rivers of water, and turns them whither soever ^e
w^ll. Prove. 21.1.
Who said of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure; even
saying to serusalem; Thou shall be built; Isa. 44.28.
and to the temple, thy foundations shall be laid.

4. So I go on to the fourth Particular, the Amplification of the Promise; And
the glory of this latter house shall be greater than the glory of the former.
If these words should be understood of outward glory, it would be hard to show
how the Promise was fulfilled. We read that when the Priests and Levites, Ezr.
3.12.
and the chief of the Fathers, who were ancient men that had seen the former
House, saw the Foundation of the second Temple laid before their eyes, they
wept with a loud voice, considering how short the latter House came of the
former. Who is there among you, Hag 2.3.
said the Lord, that saw this house in her first glory? And how do you see it
now? Is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing? So then clear it
is, that Zerobabel's Temple as to the Structure and outward Ornaments thereof,
was no way comparable to Solomon's Temple. Some indeed say, that this Temple
was so far enlarged and beautified by Herod, that it did not only equal, but
exceed Solomon's Temple That Herod enlarged and beautified it, is granted, but
that he so improved it as it excelled Solomon's Temple, may very well be
questioned. It Is therefore another kind of glory than that which consists in
external luster and magnificence, a spiritual glory that God intended when he
promised, that the glory of the latter house should be greater than the glory
of the former. And that spiritual glory lay especially in this, that the
promised Messiah, the Eternal Son of God Incarnate, should honor and dignify
this second Temple by his being presented there, by his frequent access unto
it, by his corporal presence, and by his teaching in it. Hereby was made a far
greater accession of glory to that Temple, than all Solomon's Gold and Silver,
Riches and Magnificence could put upon the former Temple.

Now whereas God in effect promised, that what was wanting as to external glory
in the second Temple, should be made up with advantage in spiritual glory; we
may hence observe,

That spiritual glory is the chief glory; and where this is, it abundantly
makes up and supplies the defects of other glory. This is a truth, the
consideration whereof is not unseasonable at present. We have here a fine and
beautiful Church which draws many eyes upon it; and if there be nothing
undecently pompous or gaudy in it, I would hope the beauty of a Church would be
an eye-fore to no man. If we adorn our own Houses without offense, why should
not some Ornament be allowed the House of God, provided that such moderation
and decency be therein observed, as becomes a place dedicated to the Service of
God.

Besides, I know not but the decent, chaste, and modest Ornature of a place in
which God is to be worshipped, may be a means of drawing some people thither
who would not much care to assemble themselves in an undecent and sordid place.

Aspicis ut veniant ad candida tecta col^mbie;
Accipie^ nullas sordida turris aves.
But yet however, we must take heed that we place not too much in these
external things; that we please not our selves too much in them. When all is
done, Spiritual Ornaments are the only Ornaments, and Spiritual Glory the true
Glory: If that be wanting to this place, all other glory will signify little.
Sin marrs the beauty, and stains the glory of any place or people. Sound
Doctrine, pure Ordinances, spiritual Worship, the holiness and unblameableness
of our Lives, the conversion of Sinners, the turning of many to righteousness;
these are the things that will more beautify and adorn this place, that will
reflect more true and substantial Glory on it, than all the Cost and Art that
has been expended and laid out upon it to adorn and beautify it.

These are the things that would make the glory of this latter house greater
than the glory of the former.

FINIS.

