THE Bishop of LONDON's Ninth CONFERENCE With his CLERGY Upon the Fifth and
Tenth INJUNCTIONS, Given by the KING February the 15th. 1694/5 Held in the
Years 1695. and 1696.

LONDON: Printed by Benj. Motte, 1699.

THE Bishop of LONDON's Ninth CONFERENCE With his CLERGY, etc.
HAving at several times formerly taken notice of so many of the Subjects of
these Injunctions as concern the Clergy in general, except these two: I thought
it might not be amiss to desire your advice upon them; especially since the
Vanity of being thought Good natured, too often tempts Men to forget the
discharge of a good Conscience, and the easiness of Complaisance draws them
into those things which are not Convenient, but sometimes Scandalous.

I. The Words of the Fifth Injunction run thus. That that part of the 34th.
Canon, which relates to the giving Injunct. 5.
of Certificates, concerning the Lives and Manners of those who are to be
Ordained, be strictly looked to. And that the Bishops lay it on the Consciences
of the Clergy, that they sign no Certificates, unless, upon their own knowledge,
they judge the Persons to be duly Qualified.

The words of the Canon, so far as this Injunction is Can. 34.
grafted upon it, are these: Except he shall then exhibit Letters Testimonial
of his good Life and Conversation, under the Seal of some College in Cambridge
or Oxford, where before he remained, or of three or four grave Ministers,
together with the Subscription and Testimony of other Credible Persons, who
have known his Life and Behavior by the space of Three Years next before.

The Church had several occasions for Letters recommendatory and Testimonials
for the Security and Preservation of her Discipline, according to the exigence
of different Ages, as well for the brotherly and hospitable Reception of those
that traveled into Forain Jurisdictions, as for the satisfaction of those
Churches they went to, that they might not be Imposed upon by False Brethren.
These were called (...) by St. Paul. They 2. Cor 3. 1. Romans 16. 1. Can.
Apostolorum. 33.
were afterward called Literae Canonicae, and sometimes Formatae. Of which you
have a learned discourse written by Priorius Philippi Priorii de literis
Canonicis dissertatio. Paris. 1675 8o
But I believe you would be more satisfied in the reason and authority of this
sort of Credentials from the Canons of the Catholic Church, Canones Ecclesiae
Universae Iustelli. Paris. Ed. 8o
under the four first General Councils. Which gave ground to those so many and
diverse directions afterward in the following particular Councils of several
Nations. But this were too large a Work, and too much beside our purpose to be
treated of at this time.

We will therefore confine our selves to the consideration of those Letters
Dimissory and Testimonials only, as relate to such as seek to enter into holy
Orders. And this I conceive will appear in the best light, if we proceed by
these Three steps.

I. To look into the Appointment of them. II. To examine the Reason of that
Appointment. III. To apply that Reason to our Behavior in this particular.
I. As to the Appointment, it is so obvious a method to come to the knowledge
of any thing otherwise out of our reach: that without question it must have
been the universal Practice of all Ages. But it will suffice us to keep within
the compass of our own Profession.

When Moses directed the People to find out fit Men to be Rulers over them,
amongst other Enquiries, he would have them expect good Testimonials from their
Neighbors Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
and Acquaintance. Take ye wise men and understanding, and known among your
Tribes. When the Apostles instituted Deacons, they gave this charge to the
Disciples, Look ye Act. 6. 3.
out among ye seven men of honest report. We see the reason given, why St. Paul
took Timothy forth with him, because Act. 6. 2. 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1.
he was well reported of by the Brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium. The
Characters St. Paul requires of such as are to be admitted to the Orders of
Bishops, Priests or Deacons, shows the necessity of good Testimonials: because
many of those Particulars upon which that Character depended, could not
otherwise be so well made out. And therefore 1. Tim 3. 7. v. 10.
he says, A Bishop must have a good report of them which are without. And of
Deacons, Let these also first (...).
be proved.

In conformity to this necessary Method of proceeding has the Church practiced
ever since. So it was in St. Cyprian's Epist. 38. Edit. Oxon. In Ordinationibus
Clericorum, Fratres charissimi, solemus vos ante considere, and mores ac merita
singulorum communi consilio ponderare.
time. In the Ordination of Clergymen, most dearly beloved Brethren, we are
used to consult you beforehand, and by common consent examine both the Manners
and Merits of each Person. For this reason it is, that the Council of Nice
(...) Con. Nie. Can. 16.
would have every one Ordained in their own Diocese, where they are known. If
any Bishop shall presume to take one out of another Diocese and Ordain him in
his Church, without the consent of his proper Bishop, from whom he has
departed, such Ordination shall be void. To the same purpose is that of
Chalcedon (...). Council. Chal^ed. Can. 13.
. Strange and unknown Clergymen are by no means to Officiate in another City
without commendatory Letters from their own Bishop. But these primitive
Councils had the Apostolic practice too fresh before them, to need such
particular directions as were given by later Councils. Among which you have one
that says, Quia conti^gere potest, ut qui (...) Ordines ^^^^^qui velit,
ae^arem, (...) and morum probita^em, (...) genus mentiatur: ut omnis via f^audi
doloque praecludatur, literas secum deferat promovendus a judice ordinario*
(...) consulibu^ (...) unde originem duxerit, sive quem incolere consueverit,
quibus testetur se idon^^ a aetate bonisque moribus praeditum, and legitimo
sanguine seu matrimonio ortum: qu^ nisi Episcopo obtulerit, ordine non donetur,
nisi haec ei a^^ter perspicua sint, etc. Council. Narbon. Can 7.
. Because it may so fall out that they who desire to get into Holy Orders, may
give a false account of their Lives and Conversation, as likewise of their
Pedigree: to the end that every way to Fraud and Deceit may be stopped: let him
that is to be promoted to any Degree bring with him Letters from his Ordinary,
or the chief Men of the Place where he was born or wont to inhabit, by which he
may be attested to be of full Age, of a good Conversation, etc. which unless he
bring to the Bishop, let him not be Ordained, unless it appear evident to him
some other way, etc. There is likewise another remarkable Passage in the same
Council, Quibut hanc inseret clausulam, Quem idoneum and dignum reperimus: aut
nulla literis fides habebitur. Can. 12.
Wherein shall be contained this Clause, whom we find to be fit and worthy; or
else no credit shall be given to the Letters. To the same purpose it is
expressed in another Council. Non prius promoveant Dioecesani suos ad aliquem
sacrum Ordinem, quam viderint literas Testimoniales presbyteri parechialis,
quae contineant duorum aut trium testium probatorum, non suspectorum
depositiones juramento solenni firmatas de sufficientia aetatis promovendi, and
de probata and inculpata illius vita. Concil-Senonense. Can. 3.
Diocesans are not to promote any to Holy Orders, before they have seen
Testimonials from the Minister of their Parish, wherein are contained the
Depositions of two or three approved unsuspected Witnesses, given upon Oath, of
the sufficiency of their Age, and of their commendable and unblamed Life. Thus
we see, or may easily gather from what has been quoted, that the Church was
careful in all Ages to admit of none but approved Persons to the Ministry.

II. Therefore it may be convenient in the second place to look into the
Reasons of this cautious Proceeding. And truly they are so natural, that it is
impossible they should bear any Debate. For common Reason tells us, we must
take our Information from others in those things, the notice whereof we cannot
attain to by our selves: and Experience teaches us to have a care whom we
believe. So that where a Testimony is required, we are to receive it with great
Wariness. Now that part of satisfaction relating to Life and Conversation,
which ought to be had before Persons are admitted into Holy Orders, generally
cannot be come by without sufficient Testimonials. Which how cautiously they
should be admitted, appears plainly from the ill consequences of a Mistake in
this kind. For

1. What a grievous Offense would it be to good Men to meet with such spots in
their Feasts! 2. How would it make the Sacrifices of God to be loathed and
abhorred especially of the weaker and more undistinguishing sort of People! 3.
How every way would God be provoked and his Honor blasphemed! 4. What a
provocation would it be to despise the Ordinances of God, to uncharitableness,
and to entertain ill thoughts of Religion itself for the sake of him that
ministers in it! 5. As Example is the great director in the Lives and Decipit
exemplar vitiis vnitabile. Horat.
Conversation of men: what a fatal Misguidance must it be, when they who are
set up for Lights to the World, turn ignes fatui, and lead people out of the
way by their evil Practices! The Eye has a much quicker sense than the Ear, and
makes a stronger impression upon the Mind. For Imitation of what we see, as it
is more easy, so it is more natural than to learn by Precepts. Lib. 4. de ve^a
sapientia.
Men, therefore says Lactantius, choose Examples before words, because it is
much easur to say than to do. Words are but speculative Expressions, and may
please the Fancy: but Deeds make the deepest Impressions on the Heart. We may
admire a man for his Ingenuity, that sets excellent Rules: but if he Practice
by other measures, we are apter to follow his Life, than his Doctrine.
If then we put all Considerations together, and consider how abominable in the
sight of God and how pernicious to men the disorderly walking of those who are
admitted into Holy Orders, would be: what care has or can the Church take,
which may prove too much to prevent so great an Evil!

III. Therefore ye see of how weighty a Concern it is, that ye behave
yourselves uprightly in giving Testimonials to those who are to serve at the
Altar, that neither Fear, Favor, Affection, nor Indifference prevail with you
to give a rash, much less a false Certificate.

If any Man should recommend an Officer to the State at all Adventures or out
of Partiality, and this Man should prove any ways unfit for his Employment:
would it not bring Shame upon the Voucher, and a public Curse for his
unadvised Officiousness? What an unneighbourly part is it to put a Servant upon
another Man, whose Faults we know, or at least are ignorant of his Virtues? It
is unkind and unjust at the best, and may prove barbarous. What Name then can
we give that Action which imposes an unfaithful Servant upon the Church of God,
where his Honor and the eternal Concern of his Creature's Soul is engaged, and
endanger the Death of so many as he would save alive.

I will charitably hope, that no Man is wilfully guilty of a Transgression of
this Nature. But we are apt to be of too easy a Disposition in this Case: and
either out of an unwillingness to disoblige a Friend, or a desire to please
him, or for some particular Kindness, or through an inconsiderate Easiness, to
flatter ourselves with a General Presumption, that all is well; and so yield to
a blind Compliance.

Indeed if such sort of Frailties might plead Prescription by being common; I
know not any may bid fairer for it, than this: but the ill Consequences are
such, as admit of no Excuse. For the Fitness of the Person to be admitted, as
to his Morals, depends so entirely for the most part upon the Integrity of the
Testimonial: that a Failure on this side renders the Certifier partaker of
another Man's Sins, by loading the Ordinance of God with so heavy and so
mischievous a Scandal. In effect it is a lying to God, if unadvisedly we
recommend an ill Man to his Service.

Ye ought therefore not only for Reputation, but for Conscience sake, to be
very wary whom ye witness for: that ye have a competent intimacy in the
knowledge of them, as having to answer before God as well as Men for what ye do
in this kind.

II. The Injunction we have hither to conferred upon, is to keep safe the Door
of the Church; that none be admitted to enter into it, but such as are fit for
the Ministry: this other is to admonish such as are already entered; that they
walk as in the sight of God, and do not by an unwary Behavior bring reproach
upon his Service. The Injunction is this. That the Bishops shall look to the
Lives and Injunction 10.
Manners of their Clergy, that they may be in all things regular and exemplary
according to the 75th. Canon. The Canon upon which this is grafted runs thus.
No Can. 75.
Ecclesiastical Persons shall at any time, other than for Injunctions given by
the Queen, in the Year 1559. Article 7.
their honest Necessities, resort to any Taverns or Alehouses, neither shall
they board or lodge in any such places. Furthermore they shall not give
themselves to any base or servile Labor, or to Drinking or Riot, spending
their Time idly by Day or by Night, playing at Dice, Cards, or Tables, or any
other unlawful Game: but at all times convenient, they shall hear or read
somewhat of the Holy Scriptures, or shall occupy themselves with some other
Honest Study or Exercise, always doing the things which shall appertain to
Honesty, and endeavoring to profit the Church of God, having always in Mind
that they ought to excel all others in Purity of Life, and should be Examples
to the People to live well and Christianly, under pain of Ecclesiastical
Censures to be inflicted with severity, according to the Qualities of their
Offenses.

Whenever ye read over, as I hope sometimes ye do, the Exhortation that goes
before the Questions in the Form for Ordaining Priests; ye will there find the
Matter of this Canon treated in a fuller and more Pathetick Style. Not at all
to derogate from the Expression of the Canon. For Laws we know, ought to be in
as few and plain Words as may be: whereas Advices upon those Laws, have a
Privilege to enforce the Reasonableness of them by the most powerful Arguments
that can be sound out, and to apply the most prevailing Inducements for their
Observation.

The main Scope of this Canon seems to be a negative Direction to the Clergy,
that they should not be guilty of such and such Irregularities, which are of
the most noisy sort and give the most Public Scandal. For however there may be
others, as Covetousness, Ill nature or the like, that may cry as loud against
us at the last day: yet those Luke 16. 15
enumerated in the Canon are of a more clamourous kind in this World. But these
are not all of the same nature. For some are absolutely unlawful as Drunkenness
and all sorts of Riot: others are so only by accident, as Cards, Dice, Taverns
and Alehouses.

The former seems not fitting to be taken notice of upon this occasion. For we
are not to imagine, that any of our Brethren can be guilty of such gross
Misdemeanors, as would render them the most unfortunate of Mankind. The
wretched State such Ill Habits bring both upon Body and Mind is the least to be
considered. Were it barely the disreputation of such courses, which to an
Ingenuous Man is more grievous, than the loss of Life; it were but a light
matter, in comparison of those dismal Consequences, which attend such
disorders. Nay the Scandal, take it alone, is nothing when compared with the
effects of it. Hinc illae lachryme; here lies the Transcendency of the
Mischief, besides the Dishonor to God and his Worship, it staggers the
Believer, it drives the weak Brother out of the Congregation, giving great
occasion for Schism, confirms the Dissolute, and makes the Atheist triumph.
Therefore I say, we ought rather to presume, that such destructive Vices can
never take Root amongst us: than by Dehortations from what may be, cause Unwary
and Malicious Men to conclude, that the Plague is already begun, and so bring a
present Obloquy upon the Function. I wish therefore I have not said too much
upon this point. I will say no more: but proceed to those other Irregularities,
which are so by Accident.

These we find to be of Two sorts.

I. Such as relate to matters absolutely Prohibited. II* Such as are only so
Conditionally.
I. The things absolutely prohibited in this Case are Cards, Dice and Tables:
not as merely unlawful in themselves, but of such a nature as for good reasons
may be forbidden. For at the best they can no way turn to any profitable
account, only serve to amuse at very Idle Hours. And then they are apt to draw
on such Mischievous and Wicked Consequences; that if from the experience of
such ill Effects, our Governors should not have power to Restrain the Cause,
they would be hindered from answering one of the greatest ends of their
Appointment. And therefore it is absolutely necessary, that they have a Power,
in Prudence to withold us from what is Dangerous: as in Justice to forbid
what is simply Evil. An Army otherwise would be in a desperate condition,
especially when near an Enemy, where the Loss or Gain of an opportunity is so
ticklish, and for the most part so irrecoverable: if we should allow such
Privileges to be disputed. And tho in the Civil Administration commonly the
mischief of such a Licentiousness would not so quickly be felt: yet, like a
lingering Disease, it would grow more and more uneasy to the State, till the
one concluded in the ruin of the other.

In the things therefore that pertain unto Godliness, where the loss is not
Transitory and Finite, but Eternal; how much more ready ought we to be, in
owning that Authority, which would keep us out of Harms-way! For as I said
before, Gaming is a Diversion that can do no Good, it is at best but an Idle
Amusement, it may do much Harm. The temptations it carries with it are many and
dangerous. If it proceed not at first from a covetous inclination, it seldom
fails of concluding in it ( Whoever would read at large the shameful
consequence of this loose sort of entertainment, with the just characters of
Theft, Robbery and the like that it is stigmatized with; let him consult
Tractat. Tractar. Paridis de Puteo and aliorum de ludo. Number. 1. etc. fol. 151
etc. Tom. 7.
). And this frequently upon ill fortune causes great Passion, which often
breaks out into Cursing and Swearing, sometimes attended with such horrid
Blasphemies as would be dreadful to name. Besiyes it creates Quarrels, that are
too often found guilty of Murder. And after all this, we see so clearly from
constant experience, how natural it is to run into these Inconveniences: that
we may safely say, whoever ventures upon this Liberty, runs himself into such
Temptations, as he knows not where they will end.

No wonder then if we meet with restrictive Laws in those places, where these
Idle Divertisements have been followed. Our own Laws are an Instance, where in
( 33. H. 8. c: 9.
) one of them notice is taken of the many precedent Laws against them: and
particularly they are forbid, not only as unprofitable, but as effeminating the
persons engaged in them. For they are observed to hinder those Manly and useful
exercises of Arching and the like, which prepare Men's Bodies for Agility in
War, and Vigor in other Employments for the Public Good. Another 23. Ph. and
m. c. 9.
is very short, but yet complains of the mischievous effects of such prohibited
Games, whereby Idle and Dissolute Persons are drawn together, and take that
occasion to contrive Robberies and other Villainies. The last 16. Car. 2. c. 5.
is to prevent the fatal consequences which fall often upon whole Families,
whose Fortunes are fairly or fowly Impaired, if not Ruined, by the
Extravagancies and Folly of a Young Heir, and many times by those that should
have more Wit. And to show that it is no new thing, we may find the like
caution taken in former days, see the Roman Senatusconsultum vetuit in
pecuniam ludere, praeterquam siquis certet hasta, vel pilo jaciendo, etc. quod
virtutis causa fiat. ff. 11. 6.
Laws. Nay it goes further in another place, Cod. 3. tt. 43. 44. Vid. Alex. ab
Alex. l. 3. c. 21.
and not only makes the Debt contracted by Gaming void, but likewise the ready
Money laid down by the Looser recoverable by Law: alleging, amongst other
reasons for this discouragement, the Profaneness and horrid Blasphemies, which
are occasioned by the passionate prosecution of such Gaming.

Attalus King of Asia at his leisure hours recreated himself in his Gardens,
and sometimes diverted himself in Casting of Statues. It is said of Demetrius
Poliorcetes, that his Pastime was spent in making Warlike Engines: and of
Europus King of Macedon, that at his spare hours he made Lights. It is reported
that the Kings of Parthia were used to spend their idle hours in Sharpning of
Spears. And Dionysius the younger, when he was at Peace, would contrive little
Wains, Seats and Tables with wonderful Art. I suppose the custom of the Ottomon
Emperors, who always take some Handicraft Employment upon them, is upon the
same ground, to invite their Subjects by such examples to spend their spare
time in something that may be Profitable. To this end the Romans encouraged
none but such Games as consisted in manly and robust Exercise, which for the
number were called Pentathlum: that no time might be lost, but their very
Sports might make them Active and Hardy for time of War. And if that purpose
failed, they were sure to get Health and Vigor by it, besides the avoiding the
many inconveniences of Idleness, or the other effeminate Divertisements.

Now of all Men it most behooves us of the Clergy to walk Circumspectly in these
matters, as appears by the Apostolic (...). 24.
Canon. For we are set up as Lights to Guide the People: and where Laws are
made upon such weighty Motives, as those abovementioned, we ought very
carefully to set a good Example, by paying our utmost Obedience to them. If the
Blood of him, who Ezekiel. 33. 8.
Dses in his Wickedness, and whom we have not forwarned, shall be required at
our Hands: how much more 1. Tim. 5. 22.
shall we be answerable for his Transgressions, whom we our selves have misled
by our unwary Behavior! Of which St. Paul has warned us in his advice to
Timothy, Be not partaker of other Men's Sins. But after all it seems to be
superfluous, and I hope it is (tho ahundans cautela non nocet) to warn those
that serve at the Altar, to be cautious in having to do with such things, as
oftentimes causes so great Offense and Scandal. Especially since the duty of
our Abstinence should carry us far beyond these considerations: even by denying
ourselves, upon occasion, those things which may be both Lawful and Useful for
us. Thus we find S. Paul governing himself, 1: Cor. 10. 23. Non omne, quod
licet, honestum est.
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: all things are
lawful for me, but all things edify not. And what he prescribes to himself, in
the following part of the Chapter, he gives as a Rule to all Christians under
the particular case of Meats offered to Idols.

If what has been said, seems to bear too hard upon Deteriores omnes sumus
licentia Ter. Heaut.
this point: to be sure it is an Error on the safest-side; and will easily be
pardoned by all, that are worthy to have it asked at their hands. For Liberty,
especially in things of this kind, is like an edged tool: which if not
skilfully managed, cuts the Fingers, if not the Throat of him that uses it.

II. The other Prohibition is conditional: because the thing forbid is only so
occasionally. For Publick-Houses are necessary for Travelers and Wayfaring
People, and convenient many times for meeting upon common Business. But, as
many things appointed for good Ends are abused, so none more shamefully than
these. That which was appointed for Refreshment, is made the receptacle of
Idleness and Debauchery: and that which is allowed for honest Purposes, is too
frequently made use of to contrive Mischief. However, the design of the Canon
in this particular is to warn us of two Dangers; the one relating to our
Selves, and the other to our Neighbor. Both nicely to be observed, and
subjected to that caution of Tully, Est aliquid quod non oportet, etiamsi
licet. Cic. Orat. 3. pro Corn. Balbo.
There are some things which ought not to be done, tho they be Lawful.

I. In relation to our Selves we should consider very well, what sort of
Company we are like to meet with in those Publick-Houses, before we go to them.
Whether we may not be drawn into a complaisance that may go beyond Discretion.
For if your Company be given to Excess, it is the Interest of those places to
promote it, and by consequence they will be sure to do it. Besides there is
another reason should make us wary, how we comply with invitations to such
Houses; lest by an overeasiness in yielding to importunities of this kind, we
insensibly steal into an Idle Habit; and instead of a Modest Compliance, when
we are asked the question, become at last forward to attack others. Nemo
repent fit turpissimus: but it is so natural to advance in Folly, that, unless
a Man keep a strict hand upon himself, the Clowd which seemed but as a Hand at
first, may in a little time draw such a Storm after it, as may Overwhelm those
that come in its way. Now the ready course for a Man to avoid the Danger of
these Temptations, is to take up a firm Resolution never to go into any of
those Houses, when it may reasonably be avoided. For such a Resolution once
well fixed, will keep him always upon his Guard; and he will never do the
thing, till he sees a very good or necessary reason for it.

II. The care we ought to have upon this account in respect to our Neighbor,
is neither to set him an ill Example, nor give him Offense by abusing our
Liberty. It gives too just a cause of suspicion to be seen in disorderly
Company, though we be ever so Sober our selves: and it is never to be excused
from setting a very Ill Example, if we unduly or too frequently haunt these
places. Indeed the Abuses committed in them are so Scandalous and Infamous;
that I should think no consideration likelier to make us wise in this regard.

For it must be confessed, that Idleness and Tippling are Faults, wherever they
are found: but in Publick-Houses they are doubly Scandalous and Shameful,
because they are liable so much more to expose to the View and Censure of all
the World. Therefore it is no new thing to see such matters animadverted upon.
Claudius Caesar Tradit historicus Dion, Claudium Caesarem Cauponas, inquas
poturi diverrerent, solvisse. Cael. Rhod. l. 27. Col. 1492.
put down all Tipling-Houses. And if our Ancient Laws take no notice of these
matters; it is, because England, generally speaking, was a Sober Nation, till
the Fashion was brought over from Foreign Parts, where better things might have
been learnt. But when once this evil Practice took place amongst us, the
Inconveniences were so many, the Scandals so gross and the Mischief, to the
Public so apparent, that you will find from that date nothing more strictly
directed to be looked after, nor attended with quicker Penalties upon the
Offender, nor oftener repeated than the Laws which animadvert upon those that
unnecessarily haunt such Publick-Houses or that are the keepers of them; as
well as those that are taken in actual disorder. 1. Iac. c. 9 4. Iac. c. 4. 7.
Iac c. 10. 2. Iac. c. 7. 1. Car. c. 4. 3* Car. c. 3.. 2.


The Sum of all is this. It is justly expected, that the Honor of God, the
Service of his Church and Good of Men's Souls should be always upon our Minds,
when we give Testimonials for those that are to serve in Gods House: that
neither for Fear nor Favor, but as in Conscience we may answer before God and
Man for the Truth of what we certify. As being well assured, if through
Negligence or Easiness we Subscribe to what we are not well apprised of from
our own experience; whatever harm comes by the unfitness or Scandal of the
Persons so recommended, we shall be deeply partakers of the Guilt of it,
besides the great blame of Rashness in a matter of that Importance. And as for
avoiding offense we are to abstain from all appearance of Evil: so especially
are we obliged not to engage our selves in those things, which are of Ill
Report. For it would be inexcusable in us to abuse our Liberty in those things,
which are of ill Fame: when it is our Duty to Abstain even from things of
common use and convenience, so often as it may give offense. All things indeed
are pure; but it is Evil for that Man who Romans 14. 20.
eats with offense. The pretense of giving a greater luster to Chastity by
taking in Young Women to cohabit purely for Religious Conversation, would not
pass upon the World. The Can. 3. by the name of (...).
Council of Nice; ye know, as did afterward several Imperial Laws and
Provincial Councils, forbid all such practice, as Scandalous, because it has an
ill Aspect; and would therefore make him have so too, that should take it upon
him. For as it is a Datum in Mathematics, that if you put unequal things to
equal, the whole will be unequal: so it is in Morality likewise, if a Virtuous
Man will be so unequally yoaked as to venture upon an action that gives
Scandal, himself shall thereby become scandalous. For the prevention of which
these words of St. Paul may most fitly be applied, That no Romans 14. 13.
Man put a Stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way.

Thus have I endeavored to set down the substance of our Conference upon these
two important Injunctions. Which when I weigh, with the Charge that lies upon
us for their due Execution, I Tremble to think of the account we are to give.
We are Messengers sent to deliver the Oracles of God; and Woe be to us, if we
keep them back. We are Stewards of the manifold Mysteries of the Gospel, and
Deplorable is our Case if we be not found Faithful. We are Watchmen to Watch
for the Souls of Men: (...) through our fault they miscarry, our Souls are to
ans^^^ it. Knowing therefore the terrors of the Lord, be Vig^^^^^ that whenever
he shall come ye may be found prepare^^^^ that comfortable Applause, Well done,
good and (...) Servant. Amen.

Your Affectionate Brother, H. (...)

FINIS.

