A Congratulatory Poem Dedicated to His MAJESTY, On the Late Gracious
Declaration.
By a Person of Quality.
THe Gallick King to whom his Subjects raise
Admired Trophe's of their awful Praise,
His highest Epithet must now resign,
Since, of all Monarchs, Ours is most Divine.
His Sep'ratists he would compel by Arms,
Whilst You win Yours by Force of Pious Charms.
This rigid Sects do sev'rally Confess
And, Calmed their Temper, your Indulgence Bless.
These who before did Kingship disallow,
Your powerful Grace has changed to Converts Now.
Their restless Souls so Sacredly you ease,
As they are Obliged to blame their past Disease:
And Tax their Hearts, and the Secluding Bill,
Because against your Conscience chiefly Ill.
Who Will not expect that next their Souls should pay,
Homage unto their King the nearest Way:
And Judge the Liberty that he has Given,
Ought to Invite their Union unto Heaven.
The Atheist who would Providence Distrust,
Or that Heavens Care Preserves, and aids the Just,
Must, for your sake, his stupid Sin disown,
And see how Wonders raised You to a Throne.
Through Seas and Perils, and worst Storms of State,
Heaven was your Guide to Vanquish Total Fate:
And but such Temp'ral Sufferings did Convey,
That you might Merit an Immortal Way.
Your Sacred Gifts stupendiously Improve
At once your Subjects Piety and Love:
Who now their former Tenants so Subdue,
As they Judge (more then ever) Your Faith True.
The Factious Patrons that Pretensions draw
From hardest Sense of the disputed Law;
Must soon concede, that by a kinder Claim,
Prerogative deserves a Legal Fame.
This Test, Great Sir, so heartily has past,
As it is hoped to'ther 'twill revoke at Last;
For who will not obsequiously Undo,
An Inconvenience when Condemned by You.
Well may this Powerful Motive Votes abate,
Whose Fervors else must needs Perplex the State.
Nor ever did Just Soveragin Law Restrain,
But for Redress which Subjects thence Obtain:
And tells how safe Our King we might Obey,
Had we no other Law than what He Would Say.
LONDON, Printed, 1687.


