A Concurrent Declaration of the Inhabitants of the City and Liberty Of
Westminster, with the Declaration of the People of ENGLAND for a FREE
PARLIAMENT.
WHereas by a wonderful Revolution of the Divine Providence, those Members of
the long Parliament which were strangely brought in by the Army May the 7.
1659) and as strangely outed by them ( October. the 13. 1659. are now strangely
returned to sit in the House as before, we judge it our concernment to call to
mind the Act by them made and published, immediately before their forcible
Interruption, entitled, An Act against raising of money upon the people
without their consent in Parliament: which Act of theirs proceeds in these
words, And be it further enacted, that no Person or Persons shall after the 11
of October 1659 Assess, Lew, Collect, Gather or Receive, any Custom, Imposts,
Excise, Assesment, Contribution, Tax, Tallage, or any sum or sums of money, or
other Impositions whatsoever, upon the people of this Common wealth, without
their consent in Parliament, or as by Law might have been done before the 3 of
November, 1640. And be it further enacted and declared, that every person
offending against this Act shall be, and is hereby adjudged to be guilty of
High Treason, and shall forfeit and suffer as in ease of High Treason Hereupon
we judged it meet and equitable to make this following Declaration.

We do therefore declare that we do freely, cordially, and unanimously assent
to the equity of this Act, as consonant to the fundamental Laws of our Nation,
the benefit whereof we doubt not but we may justly claim, as our
birth-priviledge in all such cases and concernments.

And accordingly we do hereby declare that we are ready and willing, as soon as
an opportunity is given us, to make choice of such Persons as may Declare our
consent in Parliament, for the raising of such sums of money, as by them shall
be thought necessary to defray the public charges, and manage the public
concerns of the Nation, seeing most of those persons that were formerly chosen
by us for this purpose, are either taken away by death, or by seclusion
debarred from sitting in the House.

And we do hereby further declare that we neither do nor shall ever give our
consent, that any Assesment should be made, or imposition laid upon us by any
person or persons whatsoever, until our consent be so declared by persons thus
chosen and entrusted by us for this end and purpose.

And therefore if any person or persons whatsoever shall contrary to the
forementioned Act, and the Fundamental Laws of this Nation, lay any Assesment
or Imposition upon us before our consent is thus declared, under what pretense
or color soever of authority or necessity it shall be done, we do hereby
declare to the World, that we are under manifest constraint and force, and our
Goods and Estates are violently extorted from us, contrary to Law and Justice,
which injuries we shall no longer bear then an opportunity shall be offered us
to right our selves, and repossess those privileges that pertain to us by the
Laws of our Nation.

And hereunto so universal and unanimous is our Concurrence, that it would be
endless for us to subscribe our Names (which neither this nor many such papers
could contain) but yet in any doubt or mistrust of the truth of the matter
hereby declared should be conceived or pretended by any, and the Members of
Parliament now sitting (whom we conceive it does in a special manner concern)
shall desire a visible Testimony hereunto, for their further satisfaction and
more full assurance of the truth and realty hereof, we shall be ready upon the
least intimation thereof by them given us, in the several Cities and Counties
of the Land, to own and subscribe to what is hereby declalred, and act
accordingly.

For some proof of the premises we the inhabitants of the City and Liberty of
Westminster, capable of the choice of two Burgesses to serve in Parliament,
have to this present Declaration subscribed our hands; and so much the rather
that we might hereby take occasion to signify to the whole Nation our cordial
concurrence with the Common-Councill of London, in what was done by that
Honorable Court, in the (...) of the City of London in their Declaration of 20
December. for a free Parliament.

Tho. Father. The Smith (...) Parker. (...) Smith. John Haget. Tho. Fishor.
John Hall. John Breaden Edward Clerlee Robert Brough Francis Barnebey Ralph
Halsell, Thomas Kirk. Lort Stallings Jeremy Clerk John Sibley William Green
William Brewer James Morgan Anthony Hall Edward Boyton Robert Hill Phil.
Henbury William Stalle Thomas Hamond Rice Hamond Henry Kemm Edmund Bowers James
Naylor Thomas Tailor.
William Clerk William Hill Peter Gardener Grectan Lynch Francis Wanedrake Tho.
Hatton Joh. Baber Jo^ Dunn Francis Blake, Ralph Hall James Halpeny Ralph
Halsall Timothy Tailor George Andrewos John Martin John Rogers William Dunken
Tho. Franklin Sam. Smith John Bert William Cooper Jo. Yeale Henry Klener John
Hall Elias Smith Rich. Dobs William Whealer Charles Whealer William Symons
Godfrey Mobury Tho. Low Che Walley Tho. Thorneton William Cunstable Robert
Noris Gabriel Sideiuck John Emery Edmund Harvey
John Green Hugh Dr^^et John Baker Law Newington John Luck John Cooper John
Stone Thomas Stone John Bird Thomas Price Solomon More Richard Stirkey Richard
Blake John Weson James Suells Tho. Stone Richard Bird Jo Prige Robert Blayden
Tho mer^ce William Hakins William Haregrrves William Hill John Wade Edward Hood
Ribhard Newton Sam. Juell William Watkins William Peterson Emery Hill Jo Tongue
Rich Ddrlina Tho Stevens. John Landbidge John Breden Edward Bew Lion Emps Henry
Ludgould
George Oldfield John trevers Robert Burrows Edm. Watters Phillip Lylel Ni^.
Edlyn Jo Keling George Crose David Archer, James Teige Hen. Marson Edw. Bell
Rob Nokes Jo Dow William Clyfton Edward Matthew John Merideth John West John
Ireland John Lyle Tho. Kirbey William Canning James Barnres Edward Glerke
Edward Wilson Tho. Brumptsted John Edlin John Bradbury John Oxton Edm. Parr
Hugh Roberts George Smith John Horse-pool George green George Braford Tho
Vessey Tho. Gybons Edward Heart John weson Humphery Groves Hugh Roberts Tho.
Fisher Jo Clendon Robert Carry Tho. Webster John dixson. Robert Burows John
Vincent Edmund Heart John Tilley John Allen John Edwards Tho. Plant Fran.
Jefferis George Old-field Gregory Kent Edward Wallings John Day John Rayd John
Barington John Smith John Anderton William Cox Francis Wain John Miller John
Tailor Edward Tailor William Ardrewes Mich. oldwrth Nem. Arnoll John Watts John
Perkins William Bell John Hull John Benning John Tailor John Frances John
Sherwood John Lemont John Pepett John Green John Harris John Stone Thomas
Brown. Tho. Halsepenny Tho. Layton Robert Balard, Hugh Gamlynson Rich. Rider
John Holland John Pepet John Jones Edward Pipps Edward Martin William Hugh
Ambrose Henbury Tho. Smith Edward Gravener Edward Hailles Not. ffines John
Wilson John Tey John Pery Rich. Hill To. Watson Ben. Hill Chr. Robinson Tho.
Stone Tho. Baker Luke Andrew John Robinson Peter Smith Tho. Jones Jo. Cooper
G^. Drem William Smith Peter Clerk Edm. Harvey William Batts Tho. Tailor Mich.
Clerk. Rich. Hill John Horsepool John Bland John Smith, Anro. Bulin To.
Blacher William Wells William Amblier Tho. Huett John Scot William Playtor
Anto. Erbey Raud Crew Roger Sindery Tho. Parr Charles Gibon Io. Lams George
Guliams Rich. Filkins Io. Jones. Evan Jones John Coumes Edmund ^oumes Peter
Gray Co. Salaway Tho. Salaway Roger Clerk, Robert Blake Henry Howard John Ianes
Edward wilson George Smith Ambrose Clerk Io. Usher Tho. West. Tho. Mazine Sam.
Nicholas Tho. Price. William Briter Io. Benson Rob. Ioyner Richard Scot John
Rude William Waller John Gabet John Thorn Gabriel Clerk Tho. Kerk John Towes
Edw. Bowleworth Adam Kent Hugh gamlyn Gregory Sands Gregory Harbert John
Francis Edw. Miller Fran. Drake Tho. Harahe Peter Lake Edmund Sanders George
Peal John Webl Robert Blackbourne John Hatten Tho. Whisen Stephen Beder Matt.
Celley John Hugh Henr. Lawrance Tho. Moore Edm^ Hernig John Flock

