THE CONFESSION OF THE FAITH and DOCTRINE, Believed and Professed be the
PROTESTANTS Of SCOTLAND, Exhibited to the Estatis of the same in Parliament,
and be their public votis authorized, as a Doctrine grounded upon the
infallible Word of GOD.

Published by Authority.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred MAJESTY, 1681.

First Parliament xv. of December. 1567.
THE CONFESSION OF THE FAITH and DOCTRINE, Believed and Professed be the
Protestants of Scotland, exhibited to the Estatis of the same in Parliament,
and be their public votis authorized, as a Doctrine grounded upon the
infallible Word of GOD.
1. Of God.
Deuteronomy. 6.4. 1 Cor. 8.6. Esaias 44.5, 6. Tim. 1.27. 1 Kin. 8.17. 2 Chro. 8.18.
Psalm. 139.7, 8. Genesis 17.1. 1 Timothy 6.15, 16. Ex. 3.14, 15 Mat. 28.19 1 Ioh. 5.7.
Genesis 1.1. He: 11.3. Act. 17.28. Pro. 16.4.
WE confess and acknawledge ane only GOD, to whom only we must cleave, whom
only we must serve, whom only we must worship, and in whom only we must
put our trust. Who is Eternal, Infinite, Unmeasurable, Incomprehensible,
Omnipotent, Invisible, ane in substance, and yet distinct in three personnis,
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. Be whom we confess and believe all
thing is in heaven and earth, as well Visible as Invisible, to have been created,
to be retained in their being, and to be ruled and guyded be his inscrutable
Providence, to sik end, as his Eternal Wisdom, Goodness, and Justice hes
appointed them, to the manifestatioun of his awin glory.

2. Of the Creatioun of man.
WE confess and acknawledge, this our GOD to have created man, Genesis 1.26, 27,
28, etc. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. Genesis 3.6. Genesis 2.17.
to wit, our first father Adam, to his awin Image and similitude, to whom he
gave wisdom, Lordship, Justice, Free Will, and cleir knowledge of him self,
sa that in the haill nature of man, there culd be noted no imperfectioun. Fra
quhilk honor and perfectioun, man and woman did both fall: the woman being
deceived be the Serpent, and man obeying the voice of the woman, both
conspyring against the Sovereign Majesty of GOD, who in expressed words had
before threatened death, gif they presumed to eat of the forbidden tree.

3. Of Original sin.
BE quhilk transgressioun, commonly called Original sin, Psalm. 51.7. Romans
5.10. Romans 7.5. 2 Tit. 2.26. Ep. 2.1, 2, 3 Romans 5.14 21. Romans 6, 23
was the Image of GOD utterly defaced in man, and he and his posterity of
nature become Enemies to GOD, slaves to Satan, and servandis unto sin. In
samekle that death everlasting hes had, and sall have power and dominioun, over
all that have not been, are not, or sal not be regenerated from above, quhilk
regeneratioun is wrocht be the power of the holy Ghost, working in the hearts
of the elect of God, John 3.5. Romans 5.1. Phil. 1.29.
ane assured faith in the promise of God, reveiled to us in his word, be quhilk
Faith we apprehend Christ Jesus, with the graces and benefits promised in him.

4 Of the Revelatioun of the promise.
FOR this we constantly believe, that God, after the feirfull and horrible
defectioun of man fra his obedience, did seek Adam again, call upon him, Genesis
3.9. Genesis 3.15. Genesis 12.3. Gen 15.5.6 2 Samuel 7.14. Esaias 7.14. Esaias 9.6. Hag.
2.6. ^oh. 8.56.
rebuke his sin, convict him of the same, and in the end made unto him ane most
joyful promise, to wit, that the seed of the woman should break down the Serpents
head, that is, he should destroy the works of the devil. Quhilk promise, as it
was repeated, and made mair clear from time to time: so was it embraced with
joy, and may constantly received of all the faithful, from Adam to Noe, from
Noe to Abraham, from Abraham to David, and so forth to the incarnatioun of
Christ Jesus, all (we mean the faithful Fathers under the Law) did see the
joyful day of Christ Jesus, and did rejoice.

5 The continuance, increase and preservatioun of the Kirk.
Ezech. 6.6 8.9, etc. Genesis 12.1. Genesis 13.1. Exodus 1.1. Exodus 1.20 Josh. 1.3.
and 23.4. 1 Sa. 10.1. 1 Sa. 16.13 2 Sa. 7.12. 2 King. 17 13 2 King. 17 15 16,
etc. 2 King. 24 3, 4 etc. Deuteronomy. 28.36.48 2 King. 25 1, etc. Dan: 9:2: Ezr 1:
etc: Hag: 1:14: Zach: 3:1:
WE may constantly believe, that God preserved, instructed, multiplied,
honored, decored, and from death called to life, his Kirk in all ages fra
Adam, till the cumming of Christ Jesus in the flesh. For Abraham he called from
his Fathers cuntry, him he instructed, his seed he multiplied, the same he
marveilouslie preserved, and mair marveilouslie delivered, from the bondage and
tyranny of Pharaoh, to them he gave his Laws, constitutions and ceremonies,
them he possessed in the Land of Canaan, to them after Judges and after Saul,
he gave David to be King, to whom he made promise, that of the fruit of his
loins should anesit for ever upon his Regal seat. To this same people from time
to time he sent Prophets, to reduce them to the right way of their God: from
the quhilk oftentimes they declined, be Idolatry. And albeit that for their
stubborn contempt of Justice, he was compelled to give them in the hands of
their enemies, as befoir was threatened be the mouth of Moses, in sa meikle that
the haly City was destroyed, the Temple burnt with fire, and the hail Land
left desolate the space of lxx ears: it of mercy did he reduce them again to
Jerusalem, where the City and Temple were reedified, and they against all
temptations and assaults of Satan did abide, till the Messiah come, according
to the promise.

6 Of the Incarnation of Christ Jesus.
QVHEN the fulness of time came, God sent his Son, his eternal Wisdom, the
substance of his awin glory in this world, quha tuke the nature of man-head of
the substance of woman, Gal: 4:4: Luk: 1:31: Mat: 1:18. Mat: 2:1: Romans 1:3:
Mat: 1:23: Ioh: 1:1. 4, 5: 1 Timothy: 2:5:
to wit, of a Virgin, and that be operatioun of the holy Ghost: And so was
born the just seed of David, the Angel of the great counsel of God, the very
Messiah promised, whom we confess and acknawledge Emmanuel, very God and very
man, two perfect natures united, and joined in one persoun. Be quhilk our
Confessioun we condemn the damnable and pestilent heresies of Arrius, Marcion,
Eutyches, Nestorius, and sik vthers, as either did deny the eternity of his
godhead or the verity of his humane nature, or confounded them, or et divided
them.

7. Why it behooued the Mediator to be very God and very man.
WE acknawledge and confess, Ephesians: 1:3, 4, 5, 6:
that this may wondrous conjunction betwixt the Godhead and the man-head in
Christ Jesus, did proceed from the eternal and immutable decree of God, from
quhilk all our Salvation springs and depends.

8. Electioun.
FOr that same eternal God and Father, Ephesians: 1:11: Mat: 25:34 Ephesians: 1:21, 2^:
Heb: 2.7, 8: psalm: 22:11: Heb: 13:20: 1 pet: 2:24: psalm: 130:3: psalm: 143:3: 1 Timothy: 2:5: Joh: 1:12: Joh: 20:17 Rom: 5:17, 18, 19: Rom: 8:15: Gal: 4:5, 6: Act:
17:26: Heb: 2:11, 12: 1 pet: 3:18: Esaias 53:8: Act: 2:24: 1 John: 1.2: Act:
20:28: 1 Timothy: 3:16 Joh. 3:16:
who of mere grace elected us in Christ Jesus his son, before the foundation
of the world was laid; appointed him to be our head, our brother, our pastor,
and great Bishop of our saul's. But because that the enimitie betwixt the
justice of God and our sins was sik, that na flesh be it self culd, or might
have attained unto God, It behooved that the Son of God should descend unto us,
and tak himself a body of our body, flesh of our flesh; and bone of our bones;
and so become the Mediator betwixt God and man, giving power to so many as
believe in him to be the sons of God, as himself dois witness. I pass up to my
father, and unto our father; to my God, and unto our God. Be quhilk may holy
fraternity, quhatsaever we have tynt in Adam, is restored unto us again. And
for this cause, ar we not affrayed to call God our father, not sa meikle
because he hes created us (quhilk we have common with the reprobate) as for
that, that he hes given to us his only son, to be our brother, and given unto
us grace, to acknawledge and embrace him for our only Mediator as before is
said. It behooved farther the Messiah and Redemer to be very God, and very man;
because he was to underlie the punishment due for our transgressiouns; and to
present himself in the presence of his fathers judgment, as in our person,
to suffer for our transgression and inobedience, be death to overcome him that
was author of death. Bot because the only godhead culd not suffer death,
neither it culd the only man-head overcome the samin, he joined both together
in one person, that the imbecillitie of the ane, should suffer and be subject to
death, (quhilk we had deserved) and the infinite and invincible power of the
other, to wit, of the Godhead; should triumph and purchesse to us life, liberty
and perpetual victory: and so we confess, and may undoubtedly believe.

9. Christ's Death, passion and Burial.
Heb: 10:1, etc: 12: Esaias 53:5: Heb: 12:3: Joh: 1:29: Mat: 26:11 Deu: 21:33:
Mar: 15:1, 2 Gal: 3:13 Luk: 23:1, 2: Mat: 26:38: 2 Cor: 5. Heb: 9:12: Heb: 10:5:
THat our Lord Jesus offered himself a voluntary sacrifice unto his father for
us, that he suffered contradiction of sinners, that he was wounded and plagued
for our transgressions, that he being the clean innocent lamb of God, was
damned in the presence of ane earthly Judge, that we should be absolved befoir
the tribunal seat of our God. That he suffered not only the cruel death of the
cross (quhilk was accursed be the sentence of God) but also that he suffered
for a season the wrath of his father, quhilk sinners had deserved. Bot it we
avow that he remained the only well beloved and blessed son of his father, even
in the midst of his anguish and torment, quhilk he suffered in body and
saul, to make the full satisfaction for the sins of the people. After the
quhilk we confess and avow, that there remains na other sacrifice for sin,
quhilk gif any affirm, we nathing doubt to avow, that they are blasphemous
against Christ's death, and the everlasting purgatioun and satisfactioun,
purchased to us by the same.

10. Resurrectioun.
Act: 2:23 Act: 3:26 Rom: 6:5, 9 Act: 2:24: Rom: 4:25: Heb 2:14, 15 Mat: 28:4:
Ma: 27:25, 53: Mat: 28:5: Joh: 20:27, and 21:7: Luke 24:41, 42, 43: Jos. 21:12,
13:
We undoubtedly believe, that in samekle as it was impossible, that the dolours
of death should retain in bondage the author of life, that our Lord Jesus
crucified, dead and buried, quha descended into hell, did rise again for
justificatioun, and destroying of him quha was the author of death, brocht life
again to us, that were subject to death, and to the bondage of the same. We know
that his resurrectioun, was confirmed be the testimony of his very enemies, be
the resurrectioun of the dead, quhais Sepultures did oppen, and they did rise,
and appeared to money, within the City of Jerusalem. It was also confirmed be
the testimony of his angels, and be the senses and judgments of his Apostles,
and of vthers, quha had conversatioun, and did eat and drink with him after
his resurrection.

11. Ascension.
Luke 24:51 Act: 1:9: Mat: 28:6: Mat: 16:5: Luke 24:6 Joh: 20:9: Mat: 28.18 1 John: 2:1: 1 Timothy: 2:3: Psalm: ^10:1 Mat: 22.44 Mar: 12:36 Luke: 20, 42, 43: Act:
1:1: Act: 3:19: 2 These: 1:4, 5, 6, 7, 8: Mat: 25:34 Rev: 21:27 Esaias 66: 24 Mat:
25:41: Mar: 9 44, 46, 48: Mat: 22:13 2 pet: 3:11: ^ Cor: 5:11 Luke 21:28 Joh:
5: etc Esaias 7:14. Ephesians: 1.22: Col: 1:18: Heb: 9:11, 15: Heb: 10:21 1 John: 2:1: 1 Timothy: 2:5:
WE nathing doubt, but the self same body, quhilk was born of the Virgin, was
crucified, dead, and buried, and quhilk did rise again, did ascend into the
heavens, for the accomplishment of all things: quhere in our names, and for our
comfort, he hes received all power in heaven and earth, quhere he sittes at the
right hand of the father inaugurate in his Kingdom, Advocate and only Mediator
for us. Quhilk glory, honor, and prerogative, he alone among the brethren
sal posses, till that all his enemies be made his futestule, as that we
undoubtedly believe, they fall be in the final judgment: To the execution
whereof we certainly believe, that the same our Lord Jesus sall visibly
return, as that he was seen to ascend. And then we firmly believe, that the
time of refreshing and restitutioun of all things sall cum, in sa mekle that
their, that fra the beginning have suffered violence, injury, and wrong, for
righteousness sake, sall inherit that blessed immortality promised fra the
beginning. Bot contrariwise the stubborn, inobedient, cruel oppressors,
filthy personis, idolaters, and all such sorts of unfaithful, sall be cast in
the dungeoun of utter darkness, where the worm sall not die, neither it their
fire sall be extinguished. The remembrance of quhilk day, and of the judgment
to be executed in the same, is not only to us ane bridle, quhereby our carnal
lusts are refrained, bot alswa sik inestimable comfort, that nether may the
threatening of worldly Princes, nether it the fear of temporal death and present
danger, move us to renunce and forsake that blessed society, quhilk we the
members have with our head and only Mediator Christ Jesus, whom we confess and
avow to be the Messiah promised, the only head of his Kirk, our just Lawgiuer,
our only hie Priest, Advocate, and Mediator. In quhilk honors and offices,
gif man or angel presume to intruse themself, we utterly detest and abhor
them, as blasphemous to our Sovereign and supreme Governor Christ Jesus.

12 Faith in the holy Ghost.
THIS our Faith, and the assurance of the same, proceeds not fra flesh and
blude, that is to say, fra na natural powers within us, Mat. 16.17 Ioh. 14 26
Ioh. 15.26. Ioh. 14.11. Act. 5 4. Ioh 16.113 Col. 2.13 Ephesians 2.1 Ioh 9.39.
Revel. 3.17 Mat. 17.17 Mat. 9.19. Luke 9.41 Ioh. 6.6^ Mic. 7.^ 1 King ^ 58 Psa.
100 3 Romans 5.10 Ioh. 3.5 Titus 3 5 Romans 5 8 Phil. 3 9 Phil 1.6 2 Cor. 3.5 Ephesians.
1.6
bot is the inspiration of the holy Ghost: whom we confess GOD equal with
the Father, and with his Son, quha sanctify is us, and brings us in all
verity be his awin operation, without whom we sulde remain for ever enemies
to GOD, and ignorant of his Son Christ Jesus. For of nature we are so dead,
so blind, and so perverse, that nether can we feil when we are pricked, see the
licht when it shines, nor assent to the will of God when it is reueiled, unless
the Spirit of the Lord Jesus quicken that quhilk is dead, remove the darkness
from our minds, and bow our stubburne hearts to the obedience of his blessed
will. And so as we confess, that God the Father created us, when we were not:
as his Son our LORD JESUS redeemed us, when we were enemies to him: so also
do we confess that the holy Ghost does sanctify and regenerat us, without all
respect of any merit proceeding from us: be it before, or be it after our
regeneration. To speak this ane thing it in mair plain words: As we willingly
spoil our selves of all honor, and gloir of our a win creation, and
redemption: so do we also of our Regeneration and Sanctification for of our
selves we are not sufficient to think one good, thocht, bot he quha hes begun
the wark in us, is only he that continewis us in the same, to the praise and
glory of his undeserved grace.

14 The cause of good warkes.
SA that the cause of good warks, we confess to be not our free will, Ephesians. 2.10
Phil. 2.13 John 15.5 Romans 8.9
bot the Spirit of the LORD JESUS, who dwelling in our hearts be true faith,
bringis forth sik warkes, as God has prepared for us to walk in. For this we
may boldly affirm, that blasphemy it is to say, that Christ abydes in the
hearts of sik, as in whom there is no Spirit of sanctification. And
therefore we feir not to affirm, that murderers, oppressers, cruel
persecuters, adulterers, huremongers, filthy persouns, Idolaters, drunkards,
thieues, and all workers of iniquity, have nether true faith, nether any
portion of the Spirit of the LORD JESUS: so long as obstinatlie they continue
in their wickedness. For how soon that ever the Spirit of the Lord Jesus
(quhilk Gods elect children receive be true faith) taks possession in the heart
of any man, so soon dois he regenerate and renew the same man. So that he
beginnis to hait that quhilk before he loved, and begins to love that quhilk
befoir he hated, and fra thine cummis that continual battle, Romans 7.15 16,
17, etc. Gal. 5.17
quhilk is betwixt the flesh and the Spirit in Gods Children: till the flesh
and natural man, according to the awin corruption, lusts for things pleisand
and delectable unto the self, and grudges in adversity, is lyfted up in
prosperity, and at every moment is prone and reddie to offend the majesty of
God. Bot the spirit of God, Romans 8.16 Romans 7.24 Romans 8.22 Romans 6.12 Ephesians. 4.17
18, 19.
quhilk gives witnessing to our Spirit, that we are the Sons of God, makis
us to resist filthy plesures, and to groan in Gods presence, for deliverance
fra this bondage of corruption: And finally to triumph over sin, that it reign
not in our mortal body is. This battle hes not the carnal men, being
destitute of Gods Spirit, but dois follow and obey sin with greedines, and
without repentance, even as the Devil, and their corrupt lusts do prick them.
Bot the sons of God, 2 Timothy 2.26.
as before was said, dois fecht against sin, dois sob and murne, when they
perceive themselves tempted in iniquity: and gif they fall, they rise again
with earnest and unfeigned repentance, and their thingis they do not be their
awin power, Ioh. 15.5.
bot be the power of the Lord JESUS, without whom they were able to do nothing.

15 What warkes are reputed good befoir God.
Exodus 20.3. etc. Deuteronomy. 4.7. etc.
WE confess and acknawledge, that God hes given to man his holy Law, in quhilk
not only ar forbidden all sik warkes as displeis and offend his godly Majesty,
but alswa ar commanded al sik as pleis him, and as he hes promised to rewaird.
And their warks be of two sorts. The ane are done to the honor of God, the
other to the profit of our Nichtbouris: and both have the reveiled will of God
for their assurance. To have ane God, to worschip and honor him, to call upon
him in all our troubles, reverence his holy name, Luke 2.75. Mic. 6.11.
to hear his word, to believe the same, to communicate with his holy Sacraments
are the warkes of the first Tabill. To honor Father, Mother, Princes, Ephesians.
6.1.7 Ezech. 22.1. etc. 1 Cor. 6.19. 20. 1 These. 4.4, 5, 6. Iere. 22.3, 9, etc.
Esaias 50.1, etc. 1 These. 4.6.
Rulers, and superior powers: to love them, to support them, ea to obey their
charges (not repugning to the commandment of God) to save the lives of
Innocents, to repress tyranny, to defend the oppressed, to keep our bodies
clean and halie, to live in sobernes and temperance, to deall justly with all
men both in word and deed: and finally, to repress all appetite of our
Nichtbouris hurt, are the good warkes of the secund Tabill, quhilk are may
pleising and acceptabill unto God, as their warkes that are commanded be
himself. The contrary quhairof, is sin may odious, quhilk always
displeisis him, and provokes him to anger. As not to call upon him alone, when
we have need, nor to hear his word with reverence, to contemn and despise it,
to have or worschip Idols, to maintene and defend Idolatry, lichtlie to
esteem the reverend name of God, to profane, abuse or contemn the Sacraments
of Christ Jesus, to disobey or resist any that God hes placed in Authority
(quhill they pass not over the bounds of their office) to murder, Romans 13.2.
Ezech. 22.13, etc.
or to consent thereto, to bear hatred, or to let Innocent blude be sched,
gif we may withstand it. And finally, the transgression of any other
commandment in the first or secund Tabill: 1 Ioh. 3.4.
we confess and affirm to be sin, by the quhilk Gods anger and displeisure
is kindled against the proud unthankful world. Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6. 1 Samuel
15.22. 1 Cor. 10.31. 1 Ioh. 3.4. Esaias 29.13 Mat. 15.9. Mark 7.7.
So that good warkes we affirm to be their only, that are done in says, and at
Gods commandment, quha in his Law hes expressed what the thingis be that
pleis him. And evil warkis we affirm not only their that expressedly ar done
against Gods commandment: bot their alswa that in matteris of Religioun, and
worschipping of God, hes na other assurance but the inventioun and opinioun of
man: quhilk God fra the beginning hes ever rejected, as be the Prophet Esaias,
and be our Master CHRIST JESUS we are taught in their words, In vain do they
worschip me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of men.

16. The perfectioun of the Law, and the imperfectioun of Man.
THe Law of God we confess and acknawledge may just, may equal, may
halie, and may perfect commanding their thingis, Leuit. 1^ Gal. 3.^ 1 Timothy
1.^ Romans 7.^ Psalm. 19.^ 8, 9, etc Deuteronomy. 5. Romans 10* 1 Kin. 8.^ 2 Chr. 6.^ Eccl.
7.^ Prove. 2^ 1 John 1^ Romans 1^ Gal. 3. ^ Deu. 27. ^ Phil. 2. ^ Esaias 64* Luke. 17
quhilk being wrocht in perfectioun, were abill to give life; and abill to
bring man to eternal felicity. Bot our nature is sa corrupt, sa weak, and sa
unperfite, that we are never abill to fulfill the warkes of the Law in
perfectioun. ea, gif we say we have na sin, evin after we are regenerated, we
deceive ourselves, and the verity of God is not in us. And therefore, it
behoovis us to apprehend Christ Jesus with his justice and satisfaction, quha
is the end and accomplishment of the Law, bequhome we are set at this liberty,
that the curse and malediction of God fall not upon us, albeit we fulfill not
the same in all points. For God the Father beholding us, in the body of his
son Christ Jesus, acceptis our imperfite obedience, as it were perfect, and
couers our warks, quhilk ar defiled with money spots, with the justice of his
Sone. We do not mean that we are so set at liberty, that we awe na obedience
to the Law (for that before we have plainly confessed) bot this we affirm,
that na man in earth (Christ Jesus only except) hes given, gives, or sall give
in work, that obedience to the Law, quhilk the Law requiris. Bot when we have
done all things, we must fall down and unfeinedly confess, that we are
unprofitable seruands. And therefore, quhosoever boastis themselves of the
merits of their awin warks, or put their trust in the warks of supererogation;
boast themselves in that, quhilk is nocht, and put their trust in damnable
Idolatry.

17. Of the Kirk.
AS we believe in ane God, father, son, and halie Ghaist: sa do we may
constantly believe, that from the beginning there hes been, and now is, Mat: 28
and to the end of the world sall be, ane Kirk, that is to say, Ephesians: ^ Col: 1^
Ephesians: 5^ 24, 25, ^
ane company and multitude of men chosen of God, who richtly worship and
embrace him, be true faith in Christ Jesus, quha is the only head of the same
Kirk, quhilk alswa is the body and spouse of Christ Jesus, quhilk Kirk is
Catholic, that is universal, because it conteinis the Elect of all ages, of
all Realms, Nations, and tounges, be they of the Jews, Apoc: ^
or be they of the Gentiles, quha have communion and society with God the
father, and with his son Christ Jesus, throw the sanctifitatioun of his halie
Spirit, and therefore is it called the communion, not of profane persounes,
bot of sancts, quha as Citizenis of the heavenly Jerusalem, have the fruition
of the May inestimable benefits, to wit, of ane God, Ephesians: 2:^
ane Lord Jesus, ane Faith, and ane Baptism: out of the quhilk Kirk, there is
nouther life, nor eternal felicity. And therefore we utterly abhor the
blasphemy of them that affirm, that men quhilk live according to equity and
justice, sall be saved, quhat religioun that ever they have professed. For as
without Christ Jesus, there is nouther life nor salvation: Ephesians. 4 John 5: John ^
so sall there nane be participant thereof, bot sik as the Father hes given
unto his son Christ Jesus, and they that in time cum unto him, avowe his
Doctrine and believe into him (we comprehend the Children with the faithful
Parents) this Kirk is invisible, knawn only to God, quha alane knawis whom
he hes chosen, Tim. 2.19 ^hn 13.14 ^ph. 1.10 ^^l. 1.10 ^^b. 12.4
and comprehends as well (as said is) the Elect that be departed, commonly
called the Kirk Triumphant, and they that it live and fecht against sin and
satan, as sall live hereafter.

18. The immortality of the Saules.
^^o. 14.13 ^^y 25.8. (...). 7.16 17 ^o. 21.4 (...). 16.10, 11 ^ay 66.24 ^^rk.
9.44, (...), 48. ^^k. 23.43 ^^k. 16. (...), 25. (...). 6.9, 10.
THE Elect departed are in peace and rest fra their labors: not that they
sleep, and come to a certain oblivion as some Phantastickes do affirm: but
that they are delivered fra all fear and torment, and all temptatioun, to
quhilk we and all God his elect are subject in this life, and therefore do
bear the name of the Kirk Militant: As contrariwise, the reprobate and
unfaithful departed have anguish, torment, and pain, that cannot be expressed:
sa that neither are the ane nor the other in sik sleep, that they feel not
their torment, as the parable of Christ Jesus in the 16. of Luke, his words to
the thief and their words of the saules crying under the altar: O Lord, thou
that art righteous and just, how long sall thou not revenge our blude upon their
that dwellis in the earth; dois declair.

19 Of the notes, be the quhilk the true Kirk is dicerned, fra the false, and
quha sall be judge of the doctrine.
BECAUSE that satan from the beginning, hes labored to deck his pestilent
synagoge with the title of the Kirk of GOD, and hes inflamed the hearts of
cruel murderers, to persecute, trouble, and molest, the true Kirk and
Members thereof, ^^n. 4.8. ^^n. 21.9 ^^n. 27.41 ^^t. 23.34 (...) 5.18, 19 (...)
1.35 (...). ^.20, ^
as Cain did Abell, Ishmael, Isaac, Esau, Jacob, and the haill priesthead of
the Jews, Christ Jesus himself, and his apostles after him. It is ane thing
may requisite, that the true Kirk be decerned fra the filthy synagogues, be
clear and perfect notes, least we being deceived, receive and embrace to our
awin condemnatioun, the ane for the other. The notes, signs, (...). 4. etc.
(...). 5.17,
and assured takens, whereby the immaculate spouse of Christ Jesus is knawen
fra the horrible harlot, the Kirk malignant: we affirm are neither antiquity,
^^n. 4.1 (...). 48.1, 2 ^^t. 5.35 (...). 12.42 ^^h. 2.20 ^. 2.42 ^^h. 10.27
^^h. 18.37 ^^r. 1.13 Cor. 11.23 ^^t. 28.20 ^^t. 16.15 ^^m. 4.11 (...) 18.15, 17
^or. 5.5* ^^t: 18:20
Title usurped, lineall descence, place appointed, nor multitude of men
approving ane error: for Cain in age and title was preferred to Abel and Seth:
Jerusalem had prerogative above all places of the earth, where also were the
Priests lineally descended fra Aaron; and greater number followed the Scribes,
Pharisees, and Priests, then unfainedly believed and approved Christ Jesus and
his doctrine: and it as we suppose, no man of sound judgment, will grant that
any of the forenamed, were the Kirk of God. The notes therefore of the true
Kirk of God, we believe, confess and avow to be, first the true preaching of
the word of God, into the quhilk God hes revealed himself unto us, as the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles dois declair. Secondly, the right
administration of the Sacraments of Christ Jesus, quhilk mon be annexed unto
the word and promise of God, to seal and confirm the same in our hearts.
Last, Ecclesiastical discipline vprightlie Ministered, as God his word
prescribes, whereby vice is repressed, and vertew nurished; wheresoever then
their former notes are seen, and of any time continue (be the number never so
few about two or three) there without all doubt is the true Kirk of Christ, who
according unto his promise, is in the midst of them. Not that universal, of
quhilk we have before spoken, but particular, 1 Cor. 1.2 2 Cor. 1.1. Gal. 1.2.
Ephesians. 1.1. Act. 16.9, 10. and 18. 1, etc. 1 Cor. 1, etc. Act. 20.17 etc. Ioh.
20.31 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. 2 Pet. 1.20 21
sik as was in Corinthus, Galatia, Ephesus, and other places, in quhilk the
Ministry was planted be Paull, and were of himself named the kirks of God:
and sik kirks, we the inhabitantis of the Realm of SCOTLAND, professoris of
Christ Jesus, professis our selfis to have in our Cities, towns, and places
reformed, for the doctrine taucht in our Kirk is, contained in the written word
of God, to wit, in the buiks of the auld, and new Testamentis, in those buikis
we mean, quhilk of the ancient have been reputed canonical. In the quhilk we
affirm, that all thingis necessary to be believed, for the salvation of
mankind, is sufficiently expressed. The interpretation quhairof, we confess,
neither appertains to private, nor public person, neither it to any Kirk,
for any pre-eminence, or prerogative personally or locallie, quhilk ane hes
above ane other, but apperteines to the Spirit of God, be the quhilk also the
Scripture was written. When controversy then happiness, for the right
understanding of any place or sentence of Scripture, or for the reformation of
any abuse within the Kirk of God, Ioh. 5.29.
we ought not sa meikle to luke what men before us have said or done, as unto
that quhilk the halie Ghaist uniformly speaks, within the body of the
Scriptures, and unto that quhilk Christ Jesus himself did, and commanded to be
done. For this is ane thing universally granted, that the Spirit of God,
quhilk is the Spirit of Unity, is in nathing contrarious unto himself. Gif
then the interpretation, determination, Ephesians. 4.4
or sentence of any Doctor, Kirk, or Council, repugne to the plain word of
God written in any other place of the Scripture, it is a thing may certain,
that there is not the true understanding and meaning of the haly Ghaist,
although that Councels, Realms, and Nations have approved and received the
same. For we dare not receive nor admit any interpretation, quhilk repugnes to
any principal point of our Faith, or to any other plain text of Scripture, or
it unto the rule of charity.

20 The authority of the Scriptures.
AS we believe and confess the Scriptures of God sufficient to instruct, 1 Timothy 3.16, 17.
and make the man of God perfect: so do we affirm, and avow the authority of
the same, to be of God, and nether to depend on men, nor angels. We affirm
therefore, that sik as allege the Scripture, to have na other authority, bot
that quhilk it hes received from the kirk, to be blasphemous against God, and
injurious to the true Kirk, Ioh: 10.27
quhilk always hears and obeyis the voice of her awin spouse and Pastor, but
takes not upon her to be Maistres over the samin.

21 Of general Councels, of their Power, Authority, and cause of their
Convention.
AS we do not rashly damn that quhilk godly men assembled together in general
Council lawfully gathered, have proponed unto us, so without just examination,
dare we not receive quhatsoever is obtruded unto men under the name of general
councels: for plain it is, as they were men, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
so have some of them manifestly erred, and that in matters of great weight
and importance. So far then, as the council previs the determination and
commandment that it gives, be the plain word of God: so soon do we
reverence and embrace the same. 1 Timothy 4:1, 2, 3:
But gif men under the name of a Council, pretend to forge unto us, new
Artickles of our faith, or to make constitutionis repugning to the word of God:
then utterly we must refuse the same, as the doctrine of Devils, quhilk drawis
our saules from the voice of our only God, Co: 2:18, 19 20, 21, 22, 23:
to follow the doctrines and constitutiones of men: The cause then quhy that
general Councellis conueened, was nether to make any perpetual law, quhilk God
before had not maid, nether it to forge new Artickles of our belief, nor to
give the word of God Authority, meikle les to make that to be his Word, or it
the true interpretation of the same, quhilk was not before, be his haly will,
expressed in his word: but the cause of Councellis (we mean of sik as merit
the name of Councellis) was pairtlie for confutation of heresies, Act: 15:1,
etc.
and for giving public confession of their faith, to the posterity following,
quhilk both they did the by authority of Gods written word, and not by any
opinion or prerogative, that they culd not err, be reasson of their General
assembly: And this we judge to have been the chief cause of general
Councellis. The other was for good policy and ordour, to be constitute and
observed in the Kirk, 1 Timothy: 3:15, Heb: 3:2: 1 Cor: 14:40
quhilk (as in the house of God) it becummis al things to be done decently and
in ordour. Not that we think, that any policy, and an ordour in ceremonies,
can be appointed for all ages, times and places: for as ceremonies, sik as men
have devised, ar bot temporal: so may and aucht they to be changed, when they
rather foster superstition then that they edefie the Kirk, using the same.

22. Of the Sacraments.
Gen: 17:10: Exodus: 12:3 etc: Gen: 17.4: Nom: 9:13: Mat: 28:19: Mar: 16:17: Mat:
26:26: Mar: 14:22 Luk: 22:19: 1 Cor: 11:24: 1 Cor: 10:16:
AS the fatheris under the law, besides the verity of the Sacrifices, had two
chief Sacraments, to wit Circumcision and the Passover, the despisers and
contemners whereof, were not reputed of Gods people: sa do we acknawledge and
confess that we now in the time of the evangell have two chief Sacramentse,
only instituted be the Lord Jesus, and commanded to be used of all they, that
will be reputed members of his body: To wit, Baptism, and the supper or Table
of the Lord Jesus, called the Communion of his body and blude. And their
Sacraments asweel of auld, as of New Testament, now instituted of God, not
only to make an visible difference, betwixt his people, and they that was
without his league: but also to exerce the faith of his children, and be
participation of the same Sacraments, to seil in their hearts the assurance of
his promise, and of that most blessed conjunction, union and society, quhilk
the elect have with their head Christ Jesus. And this we utterly damn, Rom:
6:3, 4, 5: Gal: 3:27:
the vanity of they, that affirm Sacraments, to be na thing else bot naked
and baire signs. No, we assuredly believe, that be Baptism, we are ingrafted
in Christ Jesus, to be made partakers of his Justice, be quhilk our sins are
covered and remitted. And alswa, that in the Supper richtlie used, CHRIST JESUS
is so joined with us, that he becommis very nurishment and fude of our saules.
Not that we imagine any transubstantiation of Bread into Christ's body, and
of Wine into his Natural blude, as the Papists have perniciouslie taucht, and
damnable believed: bot this vnioun and conjunction, quhilk we have with the
body and blude of Christ Jesus in the richt use of the Sacraments, wrocht be
operatioun of the haly Ghaist, who by true faith caryis us above all things
that are visible, carnal, and earthly, and makes us to feed upon the body and
blude of Christ Jesus, quhilk was anes broken and shed for us, quhilk now is in
heaven, Mar: 16:19: Luk: 24:51: Act: 1:11: Act. 3:21: 1 Cor: 10:
and appearis in the presence of his Father for us: And it notwithstanding the
far distance of place, quhilk is betwixt his body, now glorified in heaven, and
us now mortal in this earth: it we man assuredly believe, that the bread quhilk
we break, is the communion of Christ's body, and the cupe quhilk we bless, is
the communion of his blude. So that we confess, and undoubtedlie believe, that
the faithful in the richt use of the Lords Table, do so eat the body and
drink the blude of the Lord Jesus, that he remains in them, and they in him.
ea, they are so maid flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, that as the
eternal Godhead hes given to the flesh of Christ Jesus (quhilk of the awin
conditioun of nature was mortal and corruptible) life and immortality: so
dois Christ Jesus his flesh and blude eattin and drunkin be us, Ephesians. 5:30: Mat:
2:50: Mar. 15:37: Luk 23.46 Ioh: 19:30: Ioh: 6:51, ^ 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58:
give unto us the same prerogatives. Quhilk albeit we confess, are neither
given unto us at that time only, nether it be the proper power and virtue of
the Sacrament only: it we affirm that the faithful, in the richt use of the
Lords Table, hes conjunction with Christ Jesus: as the natural man can not
apprehend: ea, and farther we affirm, that albeit the faithful oppressed be
negligence, and namely infirmity, dois not profit sa meikle, as they wald,
in the very instant action of the Supper: it sall it after bring fruit forth,
as lively seid sawin in good ground. For the haly Spirit, quhilk can never be
divided fra the richt institutioun of the Lord Jesus, will not frustrat the
faithful of the fruit of that mystical action, bot all their we say cummis of
true faith, qohilk apprehenkis Christ Jesus; who only makis this Sacrament
effectual unto us. And therefore whosoever sclanders us, as that we affirm or
belevis Sacraments to be naked and bair Signs, do injury unto us, and speaks
against the manifest truth. But this liberally and frankly we confess,
that we make ane distinctioun betwixt Christ Jesus in his eternal substance,
and betuixt the Elements of the Sacramental Signs. So that we will nether
worship the Signs, in place of that quhilk is signified be them, 1 Cor: 11:28,
29:
nether it do we despise and interpret them, as unprofitable and vain, bot do
use them with all reverence, examining our selves diligently, before that so
we do. Because we are assured be the mouth of the Apostle, that sik as eat of
that bread, and drink of that cupe unworthily, are guilty of the body and
blude of Christ Jesus.

23 Of the richt administration of the Sacraments.
THAT Sacraments be richtlie ministrat, we Judge two things requisite: The ane,
that they be ministrat be lauchful Ministers, whom we affirm to be only they,
that are appointed to the preaching of the word, into quhai^ mouths God hes put
sum Sermon of exhortation, they being men lauchfullie chosen thereto be sum
Kirk. The other, that they ministrat in sik elements, and in sik sort, as God
hes appointed, else we affirm that they cease to be the richt Sacraments of
Christ Jesus. And therefore it is, that we fly the doctrine of the Papistical
Kirk, in participation of their sacraments: first, because their Ministers are
na Ministers of Christ Jesus, ea (quhilk is mair horrible) they suffer women,
whom the haly Ghaist will not suffer to teach in the Congregatioun, to
Baptize: and secundly, because they have so adulterated both the one Sacrament
and the other, with their awin inuentiouns, that no part of Christ's action
abydes in the original purity. For Oil, Salt, Spittill, and sik like in
Baptism, ar bot mennis inuentiouns. Adoration, Veneration bearing throw
streitis and towns, and keiping of bread in boxes or buistes, ar prophanatioun
of Christ's Sacraments, Mat. 26.26 etc. Mar. 14.22 etc. Luke 22.19 etc. 1 Cor.
11.24.
and na use of the same. For Christ Jesus said, Take, eat, etc. do e this in
rememberance of me. Be quhilk word and charge, he sanctified bread and wine, to
the Sacrament of his halie body and blude, to the end, that the ane should be
eaten, and that all should drink of the other, and not that they should be keiped
to be worshipped and honored, as God, as the Papists have done heirtofore.
Who also committed Sacrilege, steilling from the people the ane part of the
Sacrament, to wit, the blessed cupe. Moreover, that the Sacraments be richtly
used, it is required, that the end and cause, why the Sacramentis were
institute, be understand and observed, asweil of the minister, as of the
receiueris. For gif the opinion be changed in the receiver, the richt use
ceassis, quhilk is may evident, be the rejection of the sacrifice, as also
gif the teacher planely teach falls doctrine, quhilk were odious and
abominable before God (albeit they were his awin ordinance) because that
wicked men use them to an other end, then God hes ordaned. The same affirm we
of the Sacraments in the Papistical Kirk: in quhilk we affirm the haill action
of the Lord Jesus to be adulterated, asweill in the external form, as in the
end and opinion. Quhat Christ Jesus did, and commanded to be done, is evident,
be the Evangelistes, and be Saint Paull: quhat the Priest dois at his altar, we
neid not to rehearse. The end and cause of Christ's institution, and why the
self same should be used, is expressed in their words, Do e this in rememberance
of me, als often as e sall eat of this bread, and drink of this Cupe, Cor. 11.^,
26.
e sall shaw forth, that is, extol, preach, magnify, and praise the Lords
death, till he cum. Bot to what end, and in what opinioun the Preistes say
their Mess, let the word of the same, their awin doctouris and wrytings
witness. To wit, that they, as Mediatores betuixt Christ, and his Kirk, do offer
unto God the Father, a Sacrifice propitiatory, for the sins of the quick and
the dead. ^^b. 9.27, ^.
Quhilk doctrine, as blasphemous to Christ Jesus, and making derogation to the
sufficiency of his only Sacrifice, once offered for purgatioun of all they
that sall be sanctified, we utterly abhor, detest and renounce.

24 To whom Sacraments appertain.
(...) 2.11,
WE Confess and acknawledge, that Baptism apperteinis asweil to the infants of
the faithful, as unto them that be of age and discretion, and so we damn the
error of the Annabaptists, ^n. 4.11 ^. 17.10 ^ 28.19
who denies Baptism to apperteine to Children, before that they have faith and
understanding: bot the Supper of the Lord, we confess to appertain to sik
only, as be of the houshald of Faith, and can try and examine themselves,
asweill in their faith, as in their dewtie toward their Nichtbouris. 1 Cor.
28.29.
Sik as eat and drink at that haly Table without faith, or being at dissension
and division with their brethren, do eat unworthily: And therefore it is that
in our Kirk, our Ministers tak public and particular examination, of the
knawledge and conversation of sik, as are to be admitted to the Table of the
Lord Jesus.

25 Of the Civil Magistrate.
WE confess and acknawledge Empyres, Kingdoms, Dominiouns, and Cities, to be
distincted and ordained be God: Rom: 13: 1 Titus 3:1: 1 Pet. 2:13
the powers and authority in the same, be it of Emperors in their Empyres, of
Kings in their Realms, Dukes and Princes in their Dominions, and of vthers
Magistrates in the Cities, to be Gods haly ordinance, ordained for
manifestatioun of his awin glory, and for the singular profit and commodity
of mankind: So that whosoever goes about to take away, or to confound the
haill state of Civil policies, now long established: we affirm the same men,
Rom: 13:2
not only to be enemies to mankind, but also wickedly to fecht against God
his expressed will. We farther confess and acknawledge, that sik persouns, as
are placed in authority, ar to be loved, honored, feared, and halden in most
reverent estimatioun; because that they are the Lieu-tennents of God in whose
Sessiouns, Rom: 13:7 1 Pet: 2:17 Psalm: 82:1:
God himself dois sit, and judge; ea, even the Judges and Princes themselves,
to whom be God is given the sword; to the praise and defense of good men, and
to revenge and punish all open malefactors. Mairover, to Kings, Princes, Rulers
and Magistrates, we affirm that chiefly and most principally the
conservatioun and purgation of the Religioun appertains, 1 Chr: 22: 23, 24,
25, 26: chap 2 Chr: 17:7: 2 Chr: 29:30: and 31: chapters: 2 Chr: 34: and 35:
chap:
so that not only they are appointed for Civil policy, bot also for
maintenance of the true Religioun, and for suppressing of Idolatry and
Superstitioun whatsoever. As in David, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, and vthers
highly commended for their zeal in that caice, may be espied. And therefore we
confess and avow, that sik as resist the supreme power, doing that thing
quhilk appertains to his charge, do resist God his ordinance; and therefore
cannot be guiltles. And farther we affirm, that whosoever denies unto them
aid, their counsel and comfort, quhiles the Princes and Rulers vigilantly
travel in execution of their office, that the same men deny their help,
support and counsel to God, quha be the presence of his Lieu-tennent, dois
crave it of them.

26 The guiftes freely given to the Kirk.
ALBEIT That the word of God trewly preached, and the Sacraments richtlie
ministered, and Discipline executed, according to the word of God, be the
certain and infallible Signs of the true Kirk, we mean not that every
particular persoun joined with sik company, Mat: 13:24, 25, 26, etc:
be ane Elect member of CHRIST JESUS: For we acknawledge and confess, that
Dornell, Cockell, and Caffe, may be sawen, grow, and in great abundance lie in
the midst of the Wheit, that is, the Reprobate may be joined in the society of
the Elect, and may externally use with them the benefits of the word and
Sacraments. Bot sik being bot temporal professoures in mouth, bot not in heart,
do fall back and continue not to the end. And therefore have they na fruit of
Christ's death, Mat: 13.20, 21. Romans 10.9, 13.
Resurrection, nor Ascension: but sik as with heart unfeignedly believe, and
with mouth bauldely confess the Lord Jesus, as before we have said, sall most
assuredly receive their guiftes. First in this life remission of sins, and
that be only faith in Christ's blude. In sa mekle, that albeit sin remain and
continually abide, in their our mortal bodies, it it is not imputed unto us,
bot is remitted, and covered with Christ's Justice. Secundly, in the general
Judgment, Rom: 7: and 2 Cor: 5:21 Ioh: 5:28, 29: Ap: 20:23: Job 19:25, 26.27:
Mat: 25:31 Ap: 14:10:
there sall be given to every man and woman resurrection of the flesh. For the
Sea sal give her dead: the Earth they that therein be enclosed, ea the Eternal
our God sal stretche out his hand on the dust, and the dead sall arise
incorruptible, and that in the substance of the self same flesh that every man
now beiris, to receive according to their warkes, glory, or punishment. For sik
as now delight in vanity, cruelty, filthynes, superstition, or Idolatry, sal be
adjudged to the fire unquenchable. In quhilk they sall be tormented for ever,
asweill in their awin bodies, as in their saules, quhilk now they give to serve
the Devil in all abomination. Bot sik as continue in weil doing to the end,
bauldely professing the Lord Jesus: we constantly believe, that they sall
receive glory, Rom: 26. 7 8, 9, 10: Phil. 3:21: 1 Cor: 15:24, 28:
honor, and immortality, to reign for ever in life everlasting, with Christ
Jesus, to whose glorified body all his Elect, sall be made like, when he sall
appeir again in judgment, and sall rander up the kingdom (...) God his
Father, who then sall be, and ever sall remain all in all things God blessed
for ever. To whom with the Son, and with the haly Ghaist, be all honor and
glory, now and ever. So be it.

Number: 9:35 Psalm: 68:1: Act: 4:29:
Arise (O Lord) and let thy enemies be confounded, let them flee from thy
presence, that hate thy godly Name. Give thy seruands strenth to speak thy
word in bauldnesse, and let all Natiouns cleave to thy true knowledge. Amen.

FINIS.

