THE CONFESSION of FAITH, OF The Reformed CHURCHES in the NETHERLANDS. WITH The
FORMS which they use In The administration of the Sacraments. The Exercise of
Ecclesiastical discipline. The confirmation of Ecclesiastical Officers,
Ministers, Elders and Deacons. The Celebration of Marriage before the Church.
Translated out of Dutch into English.

printer's device of Steven Swart, featuring an angel holding up a book,
standing over a skeleton lying on the ground

AMSTERDAM, Printed by the Widow of STEVEN SWART, 1689.

THE CONFESSION of FAITH, Revised in the National Synod last held at
Dordrecht, in the year of our Lord 1618. and 1619.
The I Article.
WE all do believe with the heart and confess with the mouth, that there is one
only and single Spiritual Being, which we call God: everlasting,
incomprehensible, invisible, unchangeable, infinite, almighty, perfectly wise,
just, good, and a super-abounding fountain of all good.

II.
We know him by two means: First by the Creation, and maitaning, and governing
of the whole World; seeing it is before our eyes as a fair book, in which all
the Creatures, both great and small, are as characters, showing unto us the
invisible things of God, viz. his eternal power and Godhead, as St. Paul says,
Romans 1.20. All which things are sufficient to convince Mankind, and to leave
them without excuse. Secondly he makes him self known unto us more plainly and
fully by his Holy and Divine Word, to wit, as much as we stand in need of in
this life, to his Glory and the Salvation of his people;

III.
We confess that this Word of God was not sent nor produced by the will of man,
but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, as St. Peter
tells us. God afterward, by a special care which he takes for us and our
Salvation, commanded his Servants, the Prophets, and Apostles, to write down
his manifested Word: And he himself wrote with his own finger, the two Tables
of the Law. Therefore we call such Writings, Holy and Divine Scriptures.

IV.
We comprehend the Holy Scriptures in the two Volumnes of the Old and New
Testament, which are Canonical Books, without all contradiction. These are
summed up in the Church of God after this manner: The Books of the Old
Testament are the five Books of Moses, viz. Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, Deuteronome; the Book of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, two Books of Samuel,
and two Books of the Kings, two Books of the Chronicles; the first Book of
Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, the Psalms of David, the three Books of Solomon,
viz. the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song; the four great Prophets, viz.
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Daniel; and the other twelf lesser Prophets, viz.
Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, (...) Micah, Nahum, Habbakuk, Zephaniah, Haggai,
Zechariah, Malachi. Those of the New Testament are the four Evangelists, viz.
Matthew, Mark, Luke, John; the Acts of the Apostles, the fourteen Epistles of
the Apostle Paul, viz. to the Romans, two to the Corinthians, to the Galatians,
to the Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the Colossians, two to the
Thessalonians, two to Timothy, to Titus, to Philemon, to the Hebrews; the
seven Epistles of the other Apostles, viz. the Epistle of James, the two
Epistles of Peter, the three Epistles of John, the Epistle of Jude, and the
Revelation of the Apostle John.

V.
These Books only we receive as holy and canonical, to the regulating,
grounding, and confirming of our Faith; believing without any doubt all which
is contained in them, not so much because the Church does receive and take them
for such; but more especially because the holy Ghost bears witness in our
hearts that they are from God; seeing they carry the evidence of it along with
them: for the very blind are able to perceive the fulfilling of those matters,
that are fore told in the same;

VI.
We distinguish those holy Books from the Apocryphal, viz. the third and fourth
Book of Ezdras, the Books of Tobie and Judith, the Books of Wisdom, Jesus
Syrach, Baruch, the Appendix to the book of Esther, the prayer of the three men
in the fire, the History of Susanne, that of the Image of Bell, and the Dragon,
the prayer of Manasse, the Books of the Macchabees. All which the Church may
read, and take instruction out of them, in as much as they do agree with the
Canonical Books: But they have not such a power and efficacy, as to confirm by
any of their Testimonies any point of the Faith or Christian Religion; much
less, to detract of the authority of those other Holy Books.

VII.
We believe that these Holy Scriptures do fully contain the will of God, and
that every thing, which a man ought to believe unto Salvation, is sufficiently
taught in the same. For because the whole manner of service which God requires
of us, is writ down in them at large, it is unlawful, for any one tho an
Apostle, to teach otherwise then we are taught by the Holy Scriptures; nay
though it was an Angel from heaven, as St Paul says. For seeing it is
forbidden to add unto, or take away any thing from the word of God, it does
evidently appear that the Doctrine of it is very perfect, and complete in all
respects. Neither ought we to compare the writings of any men, tho never so
holy, unto those divine Scriptures; nor the customs with the truth of God, (for
the truth is above all) nor the great multitude, nor Antiquity, nor Succession
of times or Persons, nor Councels or Decrees. For all men are naturally Liars,
and more vain then Vanity it self. Therefore we reject with our very heart,
every thing which does not agree with this infallible Rule, as the Apostles
have taught us, saying, Try the Spirits whether they are of God. And, If there
come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house.

VIII.
According to this truth and this Word of God, we believe in one only God, who
is one single Being, which are three persons in deed and in truth and from
everlasting distinguished, according to their incommunicable Attributes, viz.
the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The Father is the cause, the
original, and the beginning of all things, both visible and invisible: the Son
is the Word, the Wisdom, and the Image of the Father: the Holy Ghost is the
eternal strength and power proceeding from the Father and the Son. Nevertheless
God is not, by this distinction, divided into three, since the Holy Scriptures
do teach us, That the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, each of them has
his substance, distinguished by their Attributes; but thus, that these three
persons are but one only God Hence it is plain, that the Father is not the
Son, and that the Son is not the Father, and that neither the Holy Ghost is the
Father, nor the Son. Howbeit these persons thus distinguished, are not divided,
nor mixed together. For the Father has not taken upon him the Flesh, neither
has the Holy Ghost done it; but only the Son: the Father has never been
without his Son, or without his Holy Ghost; for they are all three coeternall,
and coessential. There is no first nor last; for they are all three one in
truth, in power, in goodness, and mercy.

IX.
All this we know from the Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures, as also from the
Operations of them, and chiefly by those which we feel in ourselves. The
Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures, that teach us to believe this holy Trinity,
are held forth in many places of the Old Testament; which is needless to sum
up; only to select them distinctly and judicially. In Genes. 1: 26. God says,
Let us make man in our image, after our likeness, etc. and us. 27. So God
created man in his own image, male and female created he them. And Genesis 3: 22.
Behold the man is become as one of us. From thence it appears, that there is
more then one Person in the Godhead; when he says Let US make Man in our
Image: and he points at the singleness, when he says, God created, It is very
true, he does not say, how many persons there are; but that which seems
obscure unto us in the Old Testament, is very plain in the New: for when our
Lord was baptized in Jordan, the voice of the Father was heard, saying, This is
my beloved Son, the Son was seen in the water, and the holy Ghost made himself
manifest in the shape of a Dove. Likewise in the Baptism of Believers this form
is instituted by Christ. Baptize all Nations in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. In the Gospel of St Luke the Angel Gabriel
speaks to Mary, the Mother of our Lord, after this manner; The holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall over shadow thee:
therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the
Son of God. At another place it is said. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with you, There
are three that bear record in heaven the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost;
and these three are one. In all these places we are fully taught that there are
three Persons in one sole Divine Being; and tho this Doctrine far surpasses
the understanding of man, we nevertheless now believe the same through the
Word, waiting until we shall enjoy the complete knowledge and the fruits
thereof in Heaven. Further more we must consider the particular Offices and
operations of these three Persons, toward us: The Father is called our Creator
by his Power; the Son is our Savior and Redeemer, by his Blood; the Holy Ghost
is our Sanctifier by his dwelling in our hearts. This Doctrine of the holy
Trinity has always been assented and maintained by the true Church, eversince
the times of the Apostles, hitherto, against the Jews, Mahumetans, and some
false Christians and Heretics, as Marcion, Manes, Praxeas, Sabellius,
Samosatenus, Arrius and some others who have justly been condemned by the holy
Fathers. Therefore in this point we do willingly receive the three Symbols of
the Faith, viz that of the Apostles, of Nicea, and of Athanasius; and also that
which conformable there unto is agreed upon by the Ancients.

X.
We believe that Jesus Christ according to his divine Nature is the only
begotten Son of God, born from eternity; not made, nor created (for then he
should be a Creature) but coessential with the Father, also coeternall, the
express image of his Fathers substance, and the brightness of his Glory, equal
with him in all things. Who is the Son of God not only from the time that he
has taken upon him our nature, but from all eternity, as these Testimonies
teach us, when compared together; Moses says that God has created the World;
and St. John says that all things are created by that Word which he calls
God; the Apostle says that God has made the times by his Son, also that God
created all things through Jesus Christ; then consequently he that is called
God, the Word, the Son, and Jesus Christ, must needs have been before, if so be
that all things are created by him. And therefore says the Prophet Micah, His
goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting; and the Apostle, That he
has neither beginning of days, nor end of life. Then he is the true
everlasting God, the omnipotent, whom we adore, worship and serve.

XI.
We believe and confess also that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and
the Son from everlasting, not being made, nor created, nor born, but only
proceeding from both; who is in order the third Person of the Trinity;
coessential, and equal in Majesty and glory with the Father and the Son: being
true and eternal God, as the holy Scriptures do teach us.

XII.
We believe that the Father by his Word, that is, by his Son has created out
of nothing, the Heaven, the Earth, and all Creatures, when it seemed good unto
him, giving unto every Creature its being, shape and form, and several
offices to serve his Creator; that he does also up hold and govern them
according to his eternal providence and infinite power, for the service of
mankind; that so Man may serve his God. He has also created the Angels good,
for to be his Messengers, and Ministers unto his elected: some of which are
fallen from that Excellency, in which God created them, into everlasting
destruction; and others have kept steadfast, by the Grace of God, in their
primitive state. The Devils and evil spirits are so far corrupted, that they
are become enemies unto God and every good thing: laying in wait, to the utmost
off their power, like robbers and murderers for the Church and every member
thereof, for to spoil and destroy all by their deceit. And so they are
condemned by their own wickedness unto eternal damnation, daily expecting their
horrible torments. Therefore we reject and abhor the error of the Sadducees,
who denied the existency of Spirits and Angels; as also the error of the
Manichees, who affirm that the original of the Devils is out of them selves,
inasmuch that they are evil by their own nature, without having been corrupted.

XIII.
We believe that the same good God, after having created all things, has not
dismissed them, nor given them up to Chance or Fortune; but governs and rules
them according to his holy will, not suffering any thing to fall out in this
World without his direction; nevertheless God is neither Author, nor guilty of
any sin that is committed. For his Power and goodness is so large and
incomprehensible, that he operates and acts all his works justly, even then
when the Devils and the wicked do act injustly. And as to his acting of any
thing which surpasses the understanding of men; we will not be to nice in
searching any further, then our capacity will admit: but we do humbly adore
with all due respect and humility the righteous Judgments of God, which are
hid from us; contenting our selves that we are Disciples of Christ, only for
to learn those things, which he makes manifest in his word, without passing
beyond those Limits. This Doctrine affords us unspeakable consolation; since we
are taught thereby, that nothing can befall us by chance, but all is by the
direction of our bountiful heavenly Father, who watches over us with a
Fatherly care, keeping all Creatures under his Power, so that not a hair of our
head (for they are all numbered) nor a Bird, can fall upon the ground, without
the will of our Father: on whom we do rely, well knowing that he refrains the
Devils and all our Enemies, who are not able, without his will and permission,
to hurt us. And thus we reject that damnable Error of the Epicureans, who say,
that God does not trouble him self with any thing, but permits all to be acted
by Chance.

XIV.
We believe that God has created Man out of the dust of the Earth, and has
made and formed him after his own image and likeness, good, righteous and holy,
being able to make his will agree in all things with the will of God. But being
stated in honor he him self did not understand it, neither knew he his
Excellency; but subjected himself wilfully unto sin, and consequently unto
Death and the Curse, giving ear unto the word of the Devil. For he transgressed
the command of Life, which he had received, and by sin separated him self from
God, his true life, having corrupted his whole nature: whereby he has brought
upon him corporal and Spiritual death. Being thus become wicked, perverted,
and corrupted in all his ways, he has lost all excellent gifts, which he had
received from God; having nothing left him, but some small remnants thereof,
which are sufficient to leave man without excuse: for all the Light which is in
us, is changed into Darkness; as the Scriptures do teach us, saing The Light
shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not. Where St. John calls
men Darkness. Therefore we reject all which is taught, contrary to this, of the
Free Will of men, seeing Man is but a Slave to sin, and can receive nothing but
what is given him from Heaven. For who can glory of any good which he is able
to do out of him self; since Christ says No man can come unto me, except the
Father, who has sent me, draws him? Who can rely upon his own will, if he
understands that to be carnally minded is Enmity against God? Who can speak of
his knowledge, seeing the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of
God? In a word, who shall propound any thought, since he knows, that we are
not able out of our selves to think any thing, as from our selves, but that our
ability is from God: and therefore what the Apostle says ought with right to
be kept sure and firm; That God works in us both to will and to do, of his
good pleasure: for there is no understanding nor will conformable unto the
understanding of God, but what Christ has wrought in man; which he teaches us,
saying, Without me ye can do nothing.

XV.
We believe that through the disobedience of Adam the Original Sin has spread
it self over all Mankind: which is a Corruption of the whole Nature, and an
hereditary disease, where with all Infants are infected even in their mothers
womb, and which produces in man all sorts of sin, being in him as a root
thereof; and is therefore so vile and abominable in the sight of God, that it
is sufficient to condemn all mankind; neither is it quite put away or destroyed
by the Baptism: but sin does always proceed from this unhappy fountain, as
water out of a well: yet it is not imputed the Children of God unto damnation,
but by his grace and Mercy it is forgiven them: not for to rest quiet in sin;
but because the Believers should often groan under the sense of this
corruption, desiring to be dissolved from this body of death. And therefore we
reject the doctrine of the Pelagians, who say that this sin is nothing else but
from imitation.

XVI.
We believe that the whole generation of Adam being fallen into corruption and
ruin by the sin of the first man, God has showed him self such as he is, viz.
Merciful and just: Merciful, because he draws out of this Corruption and
delivers those, whom he has elected in his eternal and unchangeable council,
of his mere mercy in Christ Jesus our Lord; without any regard unto their
works. Just, because he leaves others in their fall and destruction, wherein
they have cast themselves.

XVII.
We believe that our gracious God, by his wonderful wisdom and goodness, seeing
that man had cast him self into a corporal and spiritual Death, and so was
become a most miserable creature, has even sought for him when he fled away
from him with trembling; and comforted him, promising him to give his son, who
should be born of a woman, and bruise the head of the Serpent, to make him
everlasting happy.

XVIII.
We confess that God has fullfilled the promises which he has made unto the
Fathers by the mouth of his holy Prophets, sending his own only begotten
eternal son in the world in due time, who took upon him the form of a servant,
and is become like unto man, taking indeed upon him a real humane nature, with
all its infirmities, sin only excepted; being conceived in the womb of the
blessed virgin Mary, by the virtue of the Holy Ghost without the means of man.
And he has not only taken upon him the humane nature, as to the Body, but
also a real human soul, that so he might be a real man. For seeing that both
the Soul and the body were lost, it was needful that he should take them both
upon him, that so they might both be saved. Therefore in opposition to the
Heresy of the Anabaptists, who deny that Christ took humane flesh from his
Mother, we confess, that Christ is become partaker of the flesh and blood of
Children; that he is a fruit of the Loins of David after the flesh, proceeded
from the seed of David after the Flesh; a fruit of Mary's Womb; begotten by a
Woman, a branch of David, a Shoot from the root Jesse, descended from the Tribe
of Juda; proceeded from the Jews after the flesh, of the seed of Abraham, since
he took upon him the seed of Abraham, and is become like unto his Brethren in
all things, sin excepted; so that of a truth he is our Immanuel, that is, God
with us.

XIX.
We believe that the Person of the Son, through this conception, is united and
joined inseparably with the humane nature; so that there are not two Sons of
God, nor two Persons; but two natures in one single Person united, yet every
nature keeping its distinct attribute As the divine Nature has always been
uncreated, without beginning of days or end of life, filling heaven and earth;
also the humane nature has not lost its qualities; but remained a Creature
having beginning of days, being a small nature, and keeping all that which
belongs to a true body. And although he fastened immortality upon it, by his
Resurrection, yet he has not changed the reality of his humane nature; because
our salvation and resurrection also depends from the reality of his body. But
these two natures are united so close in one person, that they have not been
separated even by his death. Therefore that which at his dying he committed in
the hands of his Father, was a real Humane Spirit, departing from his body;
nevertheless the divine nature was always united with the humane, even when he
laid in the Grave: And the Godhead did not cease in him, no more then when he
was a little Child, tho it did not appear so manifestly for a while. Therefore
we confess him to be real God and real Man; real God, for to overcome Death, by
his power; and real man, that by the infirmity of his flesh he might die for us.

XX
We believe that God, who is perfectly merciful and just, has sent his Son
for to take upon him that nature, in which the disobedience was committed: that
so in it he might give satisfaction for, and suffer the punishment of sin by
his severe sufferings and Death. Thus God has exercised his justice against
his Son, when he Laid our sins upon him; and has powered forth his Goodness and
Mercy on us, who were guilty and worthy of condemnation; in giving his Son up
unto Death, through a perfect love; and raising him up to our justification,
that so by him we might obtain immortality, and life eternal.

XXI.
We believe Jesus Christ to be an everlasting High Priest with and after the
order of Melchisedec, having proposed him self in our name to the Father for to
allay his anger with full satisfaction, offering him self up unto the Cross,
and shedding his precious blood, to the cleansing of our sins, as the Prophets
have foretold. For it is written, that the punishment is laid upon the Son of
God, that we might have peace, and be healed by his wounds; that he was brought
to death like a Lamb, being reckoned among the malefactors; that he was
condemned as a malefactor by Pontius Pilate, although he found him not guilty.
Thus he has paid for that, which he did not rob, and suffered, though just,
for the un just both in body and soul, feeling the horrible punishment which
our sins deserved, inasmuch that his sweat became, like unto drops of blood
falling upon the ground. He cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Suffering all this for the remission of our sins. Therefore we say right well
with Saint Paul, That we do not know anything, save Christ, and him crucified;
we count all things but dung, for the excellency of the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ: we find all manner of consolation in his wounds, and we have no
need to seek or invent any other means, to be reconciled unto God, but this one
sacrifice once offered up, through which the Believers become perfect for ever.
This also is the cause why he was called by the Angel of God, Jesus, that is
Savior, because he should save his people from their sins.

XXII.
We believe, That for the attaining to the true knowledge of this Mystery, the
Holy Ghost kindles in our hearts a sincere Belief, which embraces Jesus Christ
with all his merits, and owns him, seeking nothing besides him. For it must
needs follow, that either every thing, which is required to our salvation, is
not in Christ Jesus; or if all things are in him, then he, who enjoys Christ by
Faith, must have his salvation entirely Now to say that Christ is not
sufficient, but that there wants something besides him, would be to gross a
Blasphemy; for hence it would follow, that Christ was but half a Savior.
Therefore we have just cause to say with St. Paul, that we are justified
only by Faith, or by Faith without works. Yet, to speak more properly, we do
not mean the Faith to be that, by which we are justified, for it is but an
Instrument, by which we embrace Christ, our righteousness. But Jesus Christ
imputing us all his merits, and so many holy works as he has done for us and in
our room is our Righteousness, and Faith is an Instrument by which we are made
partakers of all his goods; which being become ours, are more then sufficient
to the absolving us of our sins.

XXIII.
We believe that our happiness consists in the Remission of our sins, for
Jesus Christ sake; and that our righteousness before God is contained therein;
as David and St. Paul do teach us, declaring this to be the happiness of man,
that God imputes him the righteousness without works; and the same Apostle
says that we are justified freely, or through Grace, by the Redemption which
is in Christ Jesus. And therefore we do always lay hold of this foundation;
giving all glory unto God, and humbling and acknowledging our selfs to be such,
as realy we are: without boasting of any thing out of our selves, or our own
merits, but only relying on the obedience of Christ the crucified; which is
ours, if we believe in him; being sufficient to hide all our Iniquities, and
to give us boldness, to free the conscience from terror, astonishment and fear
to approach unto God; without doing like our first Father Adam, who trembling
covered him self with fig leaves. And truly if we were to appear before God,
relying upon our selves, or any other creature, though never so little, alas!
we would be devoured. And therefore every one ought to say with David; Lord do
not enter into judgment with thy servant; for no living creature will be
justified before thee.

XXIV.
We believe, that this true Faith being wrought in man, by the hearing of the
Word of God, and the operation of the Holy Ghost, does regenerate and change
him into a new man, by which he comes to live a new life, and is made free from
the bondage of sin; This justifying Faith therefore is so far from making man
grow cold in an honest and holy life; that without it they will never do any
thing out of love unto God, but only out of love unto themselves, and for fear
of being damned. It is therefore impossible that this holy Faith should be
unfruitful in man; for we do not speak of a vain Belief, but of such an one
which in the Scriptures is called a Faith that works by Love, and stirs
man to the exercise of those works, which God has commanded in his Word.
Which works, if they proceed from the good root of Faith, are good and
acceptable unto God, because they are sanctified by his Grace; in the mean
while they are of no account toward our Justification. For it is by Faith in
Christ that we are justified, even before we do any good works; otherwise
they could not be good, no more then the fruit of a Tree can be good, before
the Tree it self is good. Thus we do good works, but not for any merit, (for
what could we merit?) Nay we are beholding unto God for those good works
which we do do, and not he unto us; since it is he that works in us both to
will and to do, according to his own good pleasure. Let us therefore take
notice of this saying which is left upon record: When ye shall have done all
these things, which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants: we
have done that which was our duty to do. Yet we do not deny that God rewards
the good works, but it is through his grace, that he crowns his Gifts.
Moreover though we act good works, yet we do not build our salvation thereon:
for we can do nothing which is not defiled by our flesh, and worthy of
punishment; and though it were otherwise, yet the remembrance of one sin is
sufficient, to make God reject it. So we should always be doubtful and
floating to and fro, without any certainty, and our poor consciences be vexed
continually, if they did not rely on the merits of the sufferings and dying of
our Savior.

XXV.
We believe that the Ceremonies and Figures of the Law are ceased at the
coming of Christ, and that all shadows are finished: wherefore the use and
practice of them ought to be abrogated among the Christians: yet the truth and
substance of the same remains with us in Christ Jesus, in whom they are
fulfilled, in the mean while we make use of the Testimonies of the Law and the
Prophets, to confirm us in the Gospel, and to order our life and conversation
in all honesty, to the Glory of God, according to his will.

XXVI.
We believe that we have no acces unto God, but by the only Mediator and
Advocate Christ Jesus the righteous: who for this cause is become man, uniting
together the divine and humane nature, that so we might have acces unto the
divine Majesty; for otherwise our acces would be barred up; But this Mediator,
whom the Father has given us, to interceed between him and us, must not deter
us through his goodness; and cause us to seek for another according to our
fancy. For there is none in heaven nor in earth among the Creatures, who loves
us more then Jesus Christ; who, tho he was in the form of God, yet made him
self of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a man and a servant, for
our sakes, and is made like unto his Brethren in all things. Now if we were to
seek for another Mediator, that might be favorable unto us whom could we find
that would love us more, then he who laid down his life for us, even whilst we
were his Enemies? And if we look for one that is mighty and majestious; who is
more conspicuous then he that sits at the right hand of his Father, having all
power in heaven and earth? Who shall be sooner heard then the welbeloved Son
of God, Therefore it is only by a mistrusting that this practice was
introduced of dishonouring the Saints instead of honoring them, doing that
which they never have done nor required, but constantly and according to their
duty rejected, as appears from their writings. And it ought not to be objected
here that we are not worthy, for it is not intended that we should offer up
our prayers on the account of our worthiness, but only because of the
Excellency and worthiness of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose righteousness is
become ours by Faith. The Apostle therefore, to take away from us this foolish
fear, or rather mistrust, tells us, that Jesus Christ is made like unto his
Brethren in all things; that he might be a Merciful and faithful High
Priest, to purify the sins of the people. For in that he him self has
suffered, being tempted he is able to succor them that are tempted. And to
give us more encouragement to go to him, he tells us. Seeing then that we have
a great High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let
us hold fast our profession. For we have not an High Priest, which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities: but was in all points tempted like
we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of
grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. The
same Apostle says, that we have liberty, to enter into the Holiest by the
blood of Jesus; Let us draw near, says he, in full assurance of says, etc.
Item, Christ has an unchangeable Priesthood: wherefore he is able to save them
to the uttermost, that come unto God by him; seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. What do we then want more, since Christ him self says.
I am the way, and the truth, and the life; no man comes to the Father but by
me. Why should we look for another Advocate, seeing it has pleased God to
give us his Son for an Advocate. Let us not leave him for to take another, or
rather to seek for another, without ever sinding him: for when God did give him
unto us, he knew very well that we were Sinners. Therefore according to
Christ's commandment, we call upon our heavenly Father through Jesus Christ our
only Mediator, as we are taught in the Lords prayer; being assured that what
ever we pray for to the Father in his name, it shall be given us.

XXVII.
We believe and profess one only Catholic or universal Church, which is a
holy Congregation of true Christian believers, who expect their salvation
altogether in Christ Jesus, being washed by his blood, and Sanctified and
sealed by the holy Ghost. This Church has been from the beginning of the
World, and will continue to the end of it: as does appear by Christ his being
an everlasting King, who cannot be without subjects. And this holy Church is
kept and preserved by God against the rage of the whole World: although
sometimes she may become very small, and almost vanished in the eyes of men: as
when the Lord, during the dangerous Reign of Achab, had kept seven thousand
men, who had not bowed their knees before Baal. Moreover this Holy Church is
not situated in or bound or limited to a certain place, or to certain persons,
but she is spread and seattered through the whole World, being neve theless
joined together and united with heart, will, and the same Spirit, by the power
of Faith.

XXVIII.
We believe, seeing this holy Congregation is an Assembly of those that are
saved, and that without it there is no salvation, that none, of what condition
or quality soever, ought to keep him self separate, or to rely upon his own
person; but that it is the duty of all men to join and comply with it,
preserving the unity of the Church, submitting them selves to the Instruction
and Censure thereof, bowing their neeks under the yoke of Christ Jesus, and
serving to the edification of the Brethren, according to the gift which God
has assorded them; as mutual members of the same body; and to the better
compassing of these ends, it is a duty incumbent on all believers, according to
the Word of God, to separate them selves from those that are not of the Church,
and to join to this Congregation, in what place socever God has constituted
the same, although it were contrary to the decrees of Magistrates and Princes,
even on pain of corporal punishment, or death. Wherefore all those, who
separate them selves from this Church, or do not join with it, act against the
ordinance of God.

XXIX.
We believe that it is requisite, to search diligently, and with a circumspect
care to discern from the Word of God, which is the true Church; since all
Sects that are in the World now adays do cover them selves with the name of
the Church. We do not speak of the company of Hypocrites, who are mixed in the
Church amongst the good ones, without belonging to the Church, tho outwardly
they are in it: but we say that the body and Communion of the true Church
ought to be distinguished from all Sects who call them selves the Church. The
marks to know the true Church by are these: If in the Church there is a pure
preaching of the Gospel; If the pure administration of the Sacraments, so as it
is instituted by Christ him self, is made use of; If the Ecclesiastical censure
is exercised for the punishment of sins; In a word, if the conversation is
according to the pure Word of God, rejecting all things contrary thereunto, and
holding Jesus Christ as the only head: By these tokens one may certainly know
the true Church, and none ought to separate themselves from the same. And as
for those that are of the Church, they may be known by the marks of the
Christians, viz. by their Faith, and when they have received the only Savior
Jesus Christ, avoiding sin, and pursuing righteousness, loving the true God and
their neighbor, not declining neither to the right nor to the left hand, and
crucifying their flesh with its deeds: Nevertheless they may be attended with
great weakness, but they sight against it through the Spirit all the days of
their life, having continually recours to the blood, death, susterings and
obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, in which they have remission of sins,
through Faith in him. As for the false Church, she ascribes unto her self and
her ordinances more power and Authority, then to the Word of God; and will not
submit unto the yoke of Christ; she administers the Sacraments not after such a
Manner as Christ has instituted in his word: but she adds and takes away,
according to her pleasure: She relyeth more upon men, then upon Christ; she
persecutes those who live a holy life, according to the Word of God, and who
rebuke her faults, coveteousness and Idolatry. These two Churches may easily be
known and distinguished.

XXX.
We believe that this true Church must be governed according to the Spiritual
policy which our Lord has taught us in his word: viz. That there must be
Ministers or Pastors for to preach the Word of God, and to administer the
Sacraments; as also Overseers and Deacons to make up together with the Pastors
an Ecclesiastical Council; and by this means to maintain the true Religion, and
to procure a free course for the true Doctrine; likewise that the Transgressors
be punished and restrained by Spiritual means; that the poor and distressed be
also relieved and comforted, according to what they stand in need of. Through
these means all things will proceed well and orderly in the Church, when such
persons are chosen who are faithful, and according to the rule which St. Paul
preseribes in his Epistle to Timothy.

XXXI
We believe that the Ministers of the Word of God, and the Elders and Deacons,
ought to be chosen to their respective offices by a lawful Election, with
invocation of the Name of the Lord, and in good order, as the Word of God
teaches. Every one therefore must take care of intruding him self by undecent
means; but ought to stay until he be called by God, that so he may have a
testimony of his calling, and be certain and assured that it is of the Lord;
And as for the Ministers of the Word, where ever they-are, they have an equal
power and Authority, being all Ministers of Jesus Christ, the one general
Bishop and only head of the Church. Moreoever, least the holy ordinance of God
be violated or despised, we say, that every one ought te have a special
respect unto the Ministers of the Word and the Elders of the Church, for their
works sake, and to live in peace with them, without murmuring, strife, or
dissension, as much as possibly can be.

XXXII.
In the mean while we believe, although it may be serviceable and good, that
those who govern the Church, do institute among them selves certain ordinances
for the maintenance and supporting the body of the Church, yet that they ought
to take heed of departing from any thing which Christ our only master has
ordered. And therefore we reject all manner of humane inventions and Laws,
which any might introduce in the Worship of God, thereby to bind and compel
the consciences: Admitting of nothing but what may serve to the nourishing and
preservation of Concord and Unity, and to keep all in the obedience of God,
unto which the Excommunication is required, according to the Word of God, and
the circumstances belonging thereunto.

XXXIII.
We believe that our gracious God, having regard on our meanness and
infirmity, has assorded us the Sacraments, for to be seals of his promises,
and pledges of the kindness and grace of God unto us; and thereby to nourish
and sustain our faith; having joined them with the Word of the Gospel, that so
he might propound to our outward senses, both that which he signifies unto us
by his Word, and that which he works inwardly in our hearts, assuring us of
the salvation, which he does impart us. For they are visible signs and Seals of
an inward and invisible thing, by which means God works in us through the
power of the holy Ghost. Therefore the signs are not invain or empty to be
deceived thereby; for Christ Jesus is the truth thereof, without whom they
would signify nothing at all. Moreover we are content with the number of the
Sacraments, which Christ our Master has instituted, being but two, to wit the
Sacrament of Baptism, and that of the holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ.

XXXIV.
We believe and confess that Jesus Christ, who is the end of the Law, has
made an end by the shedding of his blood, of all other sheddings of blood, that
might be made for the propitiation and satisfaction of sin; and that having
abrogated the circumcision which was done with blood, has instituted instead
thereof the Sacrament of Baptism, by which we are received in the Church of
God, and become separated from all other people and strange Religions, that so
we may be fully addicted to him, and bear his Mark and Ensign; And it serves
us for a testimony, that he will be our God, and a Gracious Father unto us for
ever. Therefore he has given a Charge to Baptize all that are his, in the name
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, only with pure water, giving us
thereby to understand, that as the water cleanses the filth of the body, when
it is powered upon us, which may be seen upon the body of him who receives the
Baptism, being sprinkeled thereby; so the blood of Christ performs the same
within in the souls, by the holy Ghost, sprinkling and cleansing them from
their sins, and regenerating us from Children of wrath unto Children of God.
However this is not done by the outward water, but by the Sprinkling of the
precious blood of the Son of God, who is our red Sea, through which we must
pass, for to escape the Tyranny of Pharao, which is the Devil, and to enter in
to the Spiritual Land of Canaan. Likewise the Ministers give us on their part
the Sacrament, and that which is visible: but our Lord gives that which is
signified by the Sacrament, viz. the invisible gifts and graces, washing,
cleansing, and purifying our Souls from all filthiness and iniquities, and
renewing our hearts, and silling them with all comfort, giving us a true
assurance of his Fatherly Kindness, enduing us with the new man, and putting
away the old man with all his deeds. Therefore we believe, that whosoever
intends to enter into life eternal, he must be Baptized but once with the only
Baptism, without ever repeating the same: for we cannot be born twice. And
this Baptism is not only useful whilst the water is upon us; and that we
receive the same, but also through all our life time; therefore we reject the
error of the Anabaptists, who are not content with the one only Baptism, which
once they have received, but condemn also the Baptism of the Infants of
Believers; which we believe ought to be baptized and sealed with the mark of
the Covenant, as the Infants in Israel were circumcised on the same promise
which is made to our Children. And indeed Christ has shed his blood no less for
the washing of the Children of the faithful, as he has done for adulted
persons. And therefore they ought to receive the sign and the Sacrament of that
which Christ has done for them: as under the Law the Lord commanded to
participate unto them the Sacrament of the sufferings and dying of Christ,
shortly after their birth, offering for them a Lamb, which was a Sacrament of
Jesus Christ. Besides, what the Circumcision did unto the Jews, the same is
done by the Baptism unto our Children; which is the cause why St. Paul call's
the Baptism the Circumcision of Christ.

XXXV.
We believe and confess that our Savior Jesus Christ has instituted and
ordained the Sacrament of the holy Supper, to nourish and sustain those which
he has already regenerated, and incorporated into his Family which is his
Church; those now who are regenerated have two sorts of lives in them, the one
corporal and temporal, which has accompanied them from their very birth, and
is common to all men; the other is spiritual and heavenly, which is given them
in the second birth proceeding from the Word of the Gospel, in the fellowship
of the body of Christ; and this life is not universal, but belongs only to the
Elect of God. Thus God has afforded us to the nourishing of the corporal and
earthly life, earthly and ordinary bread, which is serviceable thereunto, and
common to every one, as life is: But to the sustaining of the spiritual and
heavenly life, which the Believers enjoy, he has sent the living Bread, which
comes down from Heaven, to wit Christ Jesus, who feeds and nourishes the
spiritual life of the Believers, when he is eaten, that is, assumed and
received by faith in the Spirit. And for to represent unto us this Spiritual
and Celestial Bread, Christ has ordained an earthly and visible Bread, which
is a Sacrament of his Body, and the Wine for a Sacrament of his Blood; to
testify unto us, that as really as we receive and have in our hands the
Sacraments, and do eat and drink the same with our mouth, by which our life is
afterward sustained: so likewise by faith which is the hand and mouth of our
Souls, the true Body and Blood of Christ our only Savior, is received in our
souls, for our spiritual life. And it is certain and without all doubt, that
Jesus Christ has not commanded us the use of his Sacraments invain: Therefore
he works in us whatever he represents unto us by these holy Signs, although
his method surpasses our understanding, and is incomprehensible to us, even as
the operations of the holy Ghost are hidden and incomprehensible. In the mean
while we do not err, in saying that which we have eaten and drunk, is the
natural Body and true Blood of Christ, but the manner of our partaking of the
same is not the mouth, but the Spirit through Faith. Wherefore then Christ
Jesus sits always at the righthand of God his Father in the Heavens; and
nevertheless he makes us partakers of him by Faith. This Feast is a Spiritual
table, at which Christ distributes him self unto us, with all his goods, and he
causes us to enjoy both him self, and the merits of his sufferings and Death;
nourishing, strengthening and comforting our poor distressed Souls by the
eating of his flesh, and refreshing and cherishing the same by the drinking of
his Blood. Further tho the Sacraments are joined with the things signified, yet
they are not received with these two things by every one: for the wicked
receives the Sacrament to his condemnation, but he does not receive the truth
of the Sacrament; so Judas and Simon the sorcerer both did receive the
Sacrament, but not Christ, who was signified by it; for only the Believers are
made Partakers of him. Lastly, we receive the holy Sacrament in the
Congregation of the people of God with humility and reverence, solemnizing the
holy remembrance of the death of Christ our Savior, with thanksgivings, making
there Confession of our Faith and the Christian Religion. None therefore ought
to apply him self thereunto, without a foregoing trial, least eating of the
bread and drinking of the cup, he eats and drinks him self a condemnation. To
be short, through the using of this holy Sacrament we are stirred up to
fervent Love to God and our neighbor. Therefore we reject all mixings and
damnable inventions which men have added unto the Sacraments, accounting them
but profanations of the same: and say, that we ought to be content with the
ordinance delivered unto us by Christ and his Apostles; and that we ought to
speak in the same Terms as they did.

XXXVI.
We believe that our Gracious God, because of the corruption of Mankind, has
ordained Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, intending that the World should be
governed by Laws and Policy, that so the dissolution of mankind might be
refrained, and all things proceed orderly among men. To that purpose he has
given the Magistrates the sword, in their hands for a punishment of the wicked,
and a protection of the godly; And their office is not only, to take heed
unto, and to watch over politic assaires; but also to maintain the holy
Ecclesiastical service, for the hindering and exstirpating of all Idolatry and
false worship, for the throwing down of the Kingdom of Antichrist, and the
exalting that of Jesus Christ; and to cause the Gospel to be preached
everywhere, that so God may be honored and served of every one, as he has
commanded in his Word, Moreover every one, of what quality, condition or State
he is, is bound to submitt him self to the Magistrates, to pay taxes, to give
them all honor, and due respect, and to obey them in all things, that are not
contrary to the Word of God, praying for them in their prayers, that the Lord
may guide them in all their ways, and that we may live quietly and peaceably
in all God liness, and honesty. And therefore we reject the Anabaptists and
other seditious people, and in general al those that do reject Magistrates,
and the higher powers; and would subsert Justice, introducing a communion of
goods, and confounding the decency which God has instituted among men.

XXXVII.
Lastly we believe according to the Word of God, that when the time ordained
of the Lord (tho unknown to all Creatures) shall be accomplished, and the
number of the elect completed, our Lord Jesus Christ will come down from
heaven corporally and visibly, as he is ascended, with great Glory and Majesty,
for to declare him self a Judge both of the living and the dead; appointing
this old world to be burnt with fire and slames for its purification, and
then shall all men personally appear before this great Judge, both Men, Women,
and Children, that ever have been from the beginning of the World unto the end,
being summoned by the voice of the Archangel, and the sound of the divine
Trumpet. For all the dead shall be raised out of the grave, and the Souls
shall be joined and united with their own bodies, in which formerly they have
lived. And as for those who then shall live, they shall not dye, as the others,
but be changed in a moment, and from corruptible become incorruptible. Then the
Books of the Conscience will be opened, and the dead shall be judged according
to their deeds done in this World, whether they be good or evil; Nay men shall
give an account of every idle word which they have spoken, which has been
accounted by the World but sport and pastime: and then the hidden things and
the Hypocrisy of men will be made manifest and discovered before every one. And
therefore the very remembrance of this Judgment is terrible and dreadful to
the evildoers and the wicked; but very desirable and comfortable to the godly
and Elect; seeing then their full deliverance shall be accomplished, and they
shall there receive the fruits of their labor and troubles, which they have
undergone: their innocence will appear to all, and they shall see the terrible
vengeance, which God will execute against the wicked who have most cruelly
persecuted, oppressed and vexed them in this world. They will be convicted by
the testimony of their own consciences, and shall be immortal; but in such a
manner that it shall be for to be tormented in the everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. On the contrary the Faithful and
Elected shall be crowned with glory and honor. The Son of God will confess
their names before God his Father and his chosen Angels; all tears shall be
wiped away from their eyes. Their cause which now is condemned by many Judges
and Magistrates, as heretical and ungodly, will beeknown to be the cause of the
Son of God. And for a gracious reward the Lord will cause them to enjoy such a
glory, as the heart of men never should be able to imagine. Therefore we
expect that great day with a great longing, that so we may fully enjoy the
promises of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

FORM For the administration of the Sacrament of Baptism to Infants.
THE Doctrine of Baptism, consists of these three points:

First, That we, with our Children, are conceived and borne in sin, and are
therefore children of wrath, insomuch that we cannot enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, except we be borne again. This is signified unto us by sprinkling
the child with water; whereby the uncleanness of our souls is set forth unto
us; and we are admonished to loath our selves, and to be humbled before God,
and to seek our cleansing and salvation out of our selves.

Secondly, Baptism does signify and seal unto us the washing away of our
sins through Jesus Christ; therefore are we baptized in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; God the Father does witness and seal
unto us, that he has entered into an everlasting Covenant of grace with us,
that he has adopted us to be his children and heyrs, and will provide for us
all manner of good, and keep from us all evil, or turn it into good.

When we are baptized in the name of the Son, the Lord Jesus Christ does seal
unto us, that he washes us in his blood from all our sins, incorporating us
into the fellowship of his death and resurrection, that we are freed from our
sins, and accounted just before God.

In like manner, when we are baptized in the name of the Holy Ghost; the holy
Spirit of God does assure us by this Sacrament, that he will dwell with us,
and sanctify us to be members of Christ, applying unto us what we have in
Christ, namely, the washing away of our sins, the daily reneuwing of our
souls, till we be presented at last among the rest of the Elect, without
spot to partake of everlasting life.

Thirdly, Whereas in all Covenants there are contained two parts; therefore are
we by God through Baptism admonished of, and obliged unto new obedience,
namely, that we cleave to this One God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, that we
trust in him and love him with all our heart, with all our souls, and all our
mind, that we forsake the world, crucify our old nature, and walk in a new
and holy life.

And if through weakness sometimes we fall into sin, we must not despair
of Gods mercy, nor continue in sin, considering that Baptism is a sign and
seal of our everlasting Covenant with God.

And although our children understand not these things, yet may they not
therefore be excluded from Baptism, for as they are without their knowledge
partakers of the condemnation through Adam, so are they again received to
mercy in Christ; as God speaks to Abraham, the Father of all the Faithful, and
consequently to us, and our children, Genes. 17. saying: I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations
for an everlasting Covenant to be thy God to thy seed after thee. This also
the Apostle Peter testifies Act. 2. in these words; For the promise belongs to
you and to your children, and to as many as are afar off, even as many as the
Lord our God shall call. Hence it is, that God has of old commanded that
Infants should be circumcised, which circumcision was a seal of this
Covenant, and the righteousness of faith; and therefore also Christ received
the little Children, laid his hands upon them, and blessed them, Marc. 10.
Seeing then Baptism is put in the place of circumcision, therefore Infants are
to be Baptized as heyrs of the Kingdom of God, and of the Covenant: and
Parents are admonished to instruct their Children in these things when they are
come to years of discretion.

That therefore this holy ordinance of God may at this time be administered to
the glory of God, to our comfort, and the edification of his Church, let us
call upon the name of our God.

O Almighty and Eternal God, who, according to thy severe judgment, did
punish with the Flood the impenitent and unbeleeving World, and according to
thine infinite mercy did save Noah with his family; who did drown
hard-hearted Pharao with all his people in the Red Sea, and did safely lead
thy people Israel through the same, by which Baptism was signified unto us,
we beseech thee, that thou will be pleased out of thy infinite mercy,
graciously to look upon these Infants [this Infant] and incorporate them [it]
by thy holy spirit into thy Son Jesus Christ, that so they [it] may be buried
with him into his death, and also rise with him to newenesse of life, that they
[it] may take upon them [it] daily their [his] Cross, follow him, and cleave
unto him with a true faith, firm hope, and fervent love, and willingly leave
this life (which is nothing else but a continual death) and at the last day
may appear without fear before the tribunal seat of Christ thy Son, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who, with thee, and the Holy Ghost, one God, lives and
reigns for ever.

An Exhortation to the Parents, and those that come with them to Baptism.
Beloved in the Lord, ye have heard that Baptism is an ordinance of God to
seal unto us, and unto our seed his Covenant, therefore we must use the same
to this end, and not out of custom or superstition. That it may then be
manifest that ye are thus minded, you are to answer sincerely upon these
questions.

First, Whether you do not acknowledge that however our children are conceived
and borne in sin, and therefore are subject to all manner of miseries, yea to
condemnation it self, yet that they are sanctified in Christ, and therefore as
members of his Church ought to be baptized?

Secondly, Whether you do not acknowledge the Doctrine contained in the Old
and New Testament, and in the Articles of the Christian Faith; which is also
taught in these Christian Churches here, to be the true and perfect Doctrine
of Salvation?

Thirdly, Whether you do not promise, and intend to see your children, when
they come to years of discretion, every one whereof he is either Father or
Witness, to be brought up in the foresaid Doctrine, to the uttermost of your
power?

Answer. Yea.

After in baptizing, the Minister of the Word of God shall say: N. I baptize
thee in the Name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

A Thankesgiving.
O Almighty and most merciful God and Father; we bless and praise thee, that
thou have forgiven all our sins to us and our children, through the blood of
thy beloved Son Jesus Christ; and through thy Spirit received us as members
of thy Son, and adopted us to be thy children, and confirmed the same by this
holy Baptism; we beseech thee, through the same Son of thy love, to rule
always these baptized Infants [Infant] that they [it] may be educated in true
piety and Christianity, and grow up in the Lord Jesus Christ, acknowledging
thy Fatherly goodness and loving kindness shown to them, [it] and to us, and
live in all righteousness under our Only Teacher, King and Priest Jesus
Christ, fighting manfully against sin, Satan and his whole Kingdom, to land
and praise thee, and thy Son Jesus Christ, with the Holy Ghost, the one and
eternal God to all eternity. Amen.

FORM For the administration of Holy Baptism to persons of years.
HOwever children of Christian Parents (notwithstanding they understand not
this mystery) must be baptized by virtue of the Covenant; yet it is not lawful
to baptize those who are come to years of discretion, except they first be
sensible of their sins, and make confession both of their repentance and
faith in Christ For, for this cause has not only John the Baptist preached
according to the Commandment of God, the baptism of Repentance, for the
remission of sins to those who confessed their sins, Marc. 1. and Luc. 3. But
our Lord Jesus Christ has also commanded his Disciples to teach all Nations,
and then to baptize them in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Math.
28. Marc. 16. adding this promise: He that believes, and is baptized, shall
be saved. According to which rule, the Apostles, as appears out of Act. 2.
and 10. and 16. have baptized none who were of years of discretion, but such
who made confession of their Faith and Repentance; therefore is it not lawful
now a days to baptize those of years, except they have learned out of the
preaching of the Gospel the mysteries of holy Baptism, and are able to give
an account of their Faith by a confession of the mouth. Seeing therefore you
are also desirous of holy Baptism, to the end it may be to you a seal of your
ingrafting into the Church of God, that it may appear that you do not only
receive the Christian Religion, in which you have been privately examined by
us, and of which also you have made Confession before us, but that you (through
the grace of God) intend and purpose to lead a life according to the same, you
are sincerely to give answer before God and his Church:

First, Whether you believe in the true God distinct in three Persons, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, who has made Heaven and Earth, and all that is therein,
and that he sustaineth and governs the same in so much that nothing can come
to pass in Heaven or in Earth, without his will?

Answer. Yea.

Secondly, Whether you believe that you are conceived and borne in sin,
consequently that you are a child of wrath by nature, unfit to any thing that
is good, and prone to all evil, and that you in thoughts, words and deeds,
have many times transgressed the Commandments of God, and whether you be
heartily forry for your sins?

Answer. Yea.

Thirdly, Whether you believe, that Christ, who is the true and eternal God
and a true Man, who has taken his humane nature out of the flesh and blood of
the Virgin Mary, be also given of God to you as your Savior, and that you do
receive by Faith in his blood forgiveness of sins, and that you are a member
of Christ and his Church, through the power of the Holy Ghost?

Answer. Yea.

Fourthly, Whether you acknowledge all the Articles of the Christian Religion,
as they are taught in these Christian Churches out of the word of God, and do
purpose constantly to persist in the same Doctrine to the end of your life, and
also reject all heresies and errors, which are repugnant to this Doctrine, and
promise to persevere in the fellowship and Communion of this Church, not only
in the hearing of the Word, but using of the Supper of the Lord?

Answer. Yea.

Fifthly, Whether you have purposed from your heart to lead always a Christian
life, to forsake the world and all the evil lusts thereof (according as it
becomes a member of Christ and his Church) and submit your selves to all our
Christian admonition?

Answer. Yea.

The good and great God out of his bounty give his grace and blessing to this
your purpose, through Jesus Christ. AMEN.

FORM For the administration of the Supper of the Lord.
BEloved in the Lord Jesus Christ; Hearken to the words of the Institution of
the Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ, so as they are delivered by the Apostle
Paul, 1 Cor. 11. verse. 23.

I receyved of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord
Jesus the same night, in which heewas betrayed, took Bread, and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and said: Take, eat, this is my body which is
broken for you: this do in remembrance of me: after the same manner also he
took the Cup, when he had supped, saying: This Cup is the New Testament in
my blood, this do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me: For as
often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death
till he come: wherefore whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But
let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup, for he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body.

That we may now to our comfort celebrate the Supper of the Lord, it is above
all things necessary, that we first try our selves aright: and secondly, that
we direct it to that end for which Christ has instituted and ordained the
same, namely, to his remembrance.

First, Every one consider by himself his sins, and the curses of God due unto
him for the same, to the end that he may abhor and humble himself before
God, considering that the wrath of God is such against sins, that rather then
they should go unpunished, he has punished the same in his beloved Son
Jesus Christ with the shameful and bitter death of the Cross.

Secondly, Every one try his own heart, whether he do believe this
faithful promise of God, that all his sins are forgiven him only for the
Passion and death of Christ, and that the perfect righteousness of Christ be
imputed and freely given to him as his own, yea so perfectly as if he
himself in his own person has satisfied for all his sins, and consummated
all righteousness.

Thirdly, Every one examine his own Conscience, whether he purposes with
himself to show true thankfulness to God hereafter in his whole life, and to
walk uprightly before the face of God; as also, whether he have laid aside
unfeignedly all enmity, hatred, envy, and do resolve to walk in true love and
peace with his neighbor.

All those that are thus minded, God will certainly receive to mercy, and
account them worthy Communicants at the Table of his Son Jesus Christ: On the
contrary those who have not this witness in their hearts, they eat and drink
to themselves judgment.

Wherefore we according to the commandment of Christ and the Apostle Paul,
admonish all those, who are defiled with these following crimes, to keep
themselves from the Table of the Lord, and do declare unto them that they have
no part in the Kingdom of Christ: to wit,

All Idolaters, all who invocate saints deceased, and Angels, and other
creatures, all who worship Images, all enchanters, diviners, charmers, and
those who give credit to such enchantements. All despisers of God and his
Word, and his holy Sacraments: all blasphemers, all those who are given to
make strife, sedition and mutiny in Church and Commonwealth: all perjured
persons, all disobedient to Parents or Magistrates, all murderers, contentious
persons, who live in hatred and envy against their neighbor; all adulterers,
whoremongers, drunkards, thieves, usurers, gamesters, covetous and all who live
a scandalous life. All these, so long as they continue in such sins, are to
abstain from this meat (which Christ has ordained only for the faithful)
least their judgment and condemnation be made the heavier and increased.

But Beloved in the Lord, this is not to cast down or to deject the contrite
hearts of the faithful, as if none might come to the Table of the Lord but
such as are freed from all sin: For we come not to this Supper to testify
that we in our selves are perfect and just, but on the contrary considering
that we must seek our life out of our selves in Christ, we acknowledge
heerewith that we lie in death: therefore notwithstanding we feel many
infirmities and weaknesses in us, namely, that we have not such a perfect
faith, that we do not give our selves to serve God with that zeal as we are
bound, but must fight daily against the weakness of our faith and the lusts
of our flesh; yet seeing by the grace of God we are sorry for these
weaknesses, therefore we rest assured, that no sin or infirmity, which
against our will yet remains in us, can hinder us from being received of God
in mercy, and from being partakers of this heavenly meat and drink.

Let us now also consider to what end Christ has instituted his Supper;
namely, that we do it in remembrance of him. Now after this manner are we to
remember him by it.

First, That we are confidently persuaded in our hearts, that our Lord Jesus
Christ, according to the promise made to our Forefathers in the old Testament,
was sent of the Father in the world, and has taken upon him our flesh and
blood, and borne for us the wrath of God (under which we should have perished
everlastingly) from the beginning of his Incarnation to the end of his life
upon earth, and has fulfilled for us all obedience to the Law of God and all
righteousness; chiefly when the burden of our sins, and the wrath of God
pressed out of him that bloody sweat in the Garden, where he was bound that we
might be freed from our sins, and afterward sustained innumerable injuries
that we might never be confounded, was innocently condemned to death, that we
might be absolved before the judgment seat of God; yea, suffered his blessed
body to be nailed to the Cross, that he might fasten upon it the handwriting
of our sins, and has also taken upon himself the curse due to us, that he
might fill us with his blessing, and has humbled himself into the deepest
pangs of Hell with soul and body on the tree of the Cross, where he cried
out with a loud voice, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? that we
might be received of God and never forsaken of him; and finally, confirmed
with his death and bloodshedding the new and everlasting Covenant of grace and
reconciliation, when he said, It is finished.

And that we might firmly believe that we belong to this Covenant of grace,
the Lord Jesus Christ in his last Supper took Bread, gave thanks, brake it,
and gave it to his Disciples and said, Take, eat, this is my Body which is
given for you; do this in remembrance of me. In like manner also after Supper,
he took the Cup, gave thanks, and said; Drink ye all of this: This Cup is
the new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you and for many, for the
remission of sins: do this, so often as ye drink of it, in remembrance of
me. That is, as often as ye eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup, ye
shall thereby, as by a certain pledge and remembrance, be admonished and
assured of this my hearty love and faithfulness toward you, that whereas ye
should have suffered eternal death, I have given my body into the death of the
Cross, and shed my blood for you; and as certainly as you see this Bread
broken before your eyes, and this Cup given to you, and ye with your mouth do
eat and drink the same to my remembrance, so do I feed and refresh your
hungry and thirsty souls with my body and blood to everlasting life.

Out of this Institution of the Supper of the Lord Jesus Christ, we do see
that he directs our faith and confidence to his perfect sacrifice (which was
once offered on the Cross) as to the only ground and foundation of our
souls, that he is become to our hungry and thirsty souls the true food to
eternal life. For by his death he has taken away the cause of our everlasting
death and miseries, namely sin; and has merited for us the quickening
spirit, that we by the same (which dwells in Christ as the head, and in us
as his members) might have true Communion and fellowship, and be made partakers
of all his blessings to everlasting life and glory. Besides that, we by the
same spirit may also be united together into brotherly love, as members of the
same mystecall body; as the Scripture says, One Bread is it, so are we one
Body; because we are all made partakers of one Bread; For as out of many
grains being grinded, one Bread is made; and out of many Berries, being pressed
together, one drink flows, so shall we all who by a true Faith are
ingrafted into Christ, be one body, through brotherly love for Christ his
sake, who has so exceedingly loved us; and manifested the same one toward
another, not only in words, but also in works and deeds. Heereto assist us
the Almighty Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, through his Holy Spirit. Amen.

And that we may obtain this, let us humble our selves before God, and in
true Faith call upon him for his grace.

O Most merciful God and Father, we beseech thee, that in this ordinance in
which we celebrate the blessed memory of the most bitter death and passion of
thy Son Jesus Christ, thou will be pleased to work in our hearts through the
Holy Ghost, that we may give our selves more and more with true confidence to
thy Son Jesus Christ, that so our broken and burdened hearts may be fed and
comforted through the power of the Holy Spirit with his body and blood, yea
with him true God and Man, the only Bread of Heaven; and that henceforth we
may not live any longer in our sins, but he in us, and we in him, and be
also really partakers of that new and everlasting Covenant of Grace; no ways
doubting but that thou will be our eternal and Gracious God, not imputing our
sins unto us, but filling us with all good things for body and soul, as thy
beloved Children and Heirs. Grant also unto us thy grace, that we may take
upon us our cross cheerfully, deny our selves, confess our Savior, and in
all tribulations expect our Lord Jesus Christ out of Heaven, where he will
make our mortal bodies conformable to his most glorious body, and take us to
himself to be with him in all eternity.

Ans. OUr Father, which art in heaven.

1. Hallowed be thy Name.

2. Thy Kingdom come.

3. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

4. Give us this day our daily bread.

5. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them, that trespass against
us.

6. And lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil.

For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever, and ever.
Amen.

Strengthen us also by this Holy Sacrament in the Articles of our Christian
Faith, of which we make Confession, saying with heart and mouth:

I Believe in God, the Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

ij. And in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord.

iij. Which was conceived by the Holy Ghost: borne of the virgin Marie.

iv. Suffered under Pontius Pilate: was crucified, dead and buried: he
descended into hell.

v. The third day he rose again from the dead.

vj. He ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father
almighty.

vij. From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead.

viij I believe in the Holy Ghost.

ix. I believe an Holy Catholic church: the Communion of Saints.

x. The forgivenes of sins.

xj. The resurrection of the body.

xij. And life everlasting, Amen.

That we may now be fed with the true heavenly Bread, the Lord Jesus Christ,
so let not our hearts cleave to the outward elements of Bread and Wine; but let
us lift up the same into Heaven, where Christ our Advocate is, sitting on the
right hand of his heavenly Father, whether also we are directed by the
Articles of our Christian faith, nothing doubting but we shall be fed and
refreshed with his Body and Blood by the power of the Spirit, so certainly as
we receive this holy Bread and Wine to his remembrance.

In breaking and distributing of the Bread, the Minister shall say: The Bread
which we break, is the Communion of the body of Christ.

And when he gives the Cup, The Cup of blessing, wherewith we bless, is the
Communion of the Blood of Christ.

During the Communion, there shall either be sung some Psalm, or some Chapter
read, which may serve to the remembering of the Passion of Christ, as, Esa Chap.
53. Joh. 13. and 14. and 15. and 16. and 18. or the like.

After the Communion, the Minister shall say: Beloved in the Lord, Because the
Lord has fed our souls at his Table, let us all with thanckesgiving praise his
Name, and every one say in his heart thus:

Bless the Lord, o my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name;
Bless the Lord, o my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth all
thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases, who redeemeth thy life from
destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness, and tender mercies, who
satisfied thee with good things. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to
anger, and plenteous in mercy: He does not deal with us after our sins, nor
reward us according to our iniquities: for as the Heaven is high above the
earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him; as far as the East
is from the West, so far has he remooved our transgressions from us; like
as a Father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him; who
also has not spared his own Son, but has given him for us all, and has
given us with him all things: there fore does God show his love toward us
thereby, that Christ dyed for us, when we were yet sinners; therefore shall
we be the more saved by him from his wrath, after we are justified through
his blood. For, if we be reconciled through the death of his Son, when we
were yet enemies, much more shall we be saved through his life after we are
reconciled with him; therefore shall my heart and mouth praise the Lord from
this time forth and evermore. Amen.

Let every one therefore say with an attentive heart;

ALmighty and most merciful God and Father, we render thanks to thee with
all our hearts, that thou have given unto us, out of thy infinite mercy, thine
only begotten Son to be our Mediator and a Saerifice for our sins, yea,
to be our food to everlasting life; and have also given unto us a true and
lively Faith, whereby we are made partakers of all his benefits: and that thou
have caused thy Son to institute this Holy Supper, for the confirmation of our
Faith: Grant we beseech thee, most faithful God and Father, that through the
operation of thy Holy Spirit, this commemoration of the death of our Lord Jesus
Christ may tend to the increase of our says and saving fellowship with him,
through Jesus Christ thy Son our Savior, in whose name we conclude our
Prayers, saying: Our Father, etc.

FORM Of Excommunication.
BEloved in the Lord Jesus Christ; It is known unto you, how that at several
times, by several degrees, we have propounded unto you, what a heinous sin
has been committed by our fellow-member N. and what great offense thereby is
given, to the end that he, through the help of your prayers and Christian
admonition, might be brought to repentance, and so be freed from the bonds of
Satan where in he is kept, and awake to the will of the Lord; Now, we can
not conceal from you with great heaviness, that there is no body yet come to
us who has in the least measure given us to understand, that he through the
manifold admonitions which have been given to him both apart by himself
alone, and before witness in the presence of many, is come to any sorrow or
remorse for his sin, or to the manifestation of the least token of
repentance: Seeing therefore that he does aggravate his sin (which yet in it
self is no small one) by his stiffness and hardheartednesse; and seeing we
have signified unto you the last time, that in case he after such patience
showed toward him by the Church, do not repent, that we should be forced yet
further to be grieved for him, and to come to the last remedy; therefore we
are necessitated for the present to proceed to his excommunication, according
to the power and commandment given unto us in the Word of God, to the end
that he by this means, if it be possible, might be brought to shame and
remorse for his sin, and that the whole body of the Church may not be put in
danger by this rotten (and as yet incurable) member, and that the name of the
Lord may not be blasphemed.

Therefore we Ministers, and Elders of the Church, being met in the name and
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, declare before you all, that for reasons above
mentioned, we have excommunicated, and by these do excommunicate N. from the
Church of the Lord, and from fellowship with Christ and his Sacraments, and all
spiritual blessings which God has promised and does fulfill to his Church, so
long as he persists in his stubbornness and impenitency, and therefore is to
be esteemed of you as an heathen and publican, according to the Commandment of
God Mat. 18. who says, that is bound in Heaven, what his Ministers bind here
on Earth.

Further, we do admonish you, beloved Christians, that you keep no company
with him, that he may be ashamed; yet hold him not as an enemy, but admonish
him sometimes as you do a brother: mean while every one take to heart this and
the like example, to fear the Lord, and if he thinckes he stands, to be
careful that he may not fall, but having true fellowship with the Father and
his Son Jesus Christ, as also with all true believing Christians, persevere
therein to the end, and so partake of everlasting salvation. You have seen,
Beloved Brethren and Sisters, in what manner this our Excommunicated Brother
has begun to fall, and by little and little is come to ruin; observe
therefore, how subtle Satan is to bring people to destruction, and to take
them off from all wholesome means to salvation: therefore take heed of the
least beginning of evil, and according to the admonition of the Apostle,
laying aside all weight and sin, which does so easily beset us, run
constantly the race which is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the beginner
and finisher of our Faith: be sober, watch, and pray, that you fall not into
temptation; to day if you hear the voice of the Lord, harden not your hearts,
but work out your salvation with fear and trembling, and every one repent of
his sins, that God do not again humble us, and we be forced to be grieved
over any of you, but that you living godly with one accord, may be our joy and
crown in the Lord.

But seeing God must work in us both the will and the deed according to his
good pleasure, let us, with confession of our sins, call upon his name.

MOst righteous God and merciful Father, we bewail our sins before thy
most high Majesty, acknowledging that we have deserved that sorrow and grief
which has been caused by the cutting off of this party, once a member of us;
yea, we are worthy in regard of our great sins, if thou should enter into
judgment with us, to be eternally separated from thee: But thou, O Lord, art
gracious unto us for Christ his sake; Pardon unto us our sins, for we are
heartily sorry for the same: work in us a greater measure of sorrow; that we
fearing thy judgments which thou executest against stubborn and impenitent
sinners, may labor so much the more to please thee. Grant that we may keep
our selves from all pollutions and defilements of the world, and of all those
who are cut off from the communion of the Church; that we may not make our
selves partakers of their sins, and that those who are cut off, may be
brought to shame for their sins. And seeing thou take no pleasure in the
death of sinners, but that they return and live, and set always open the
bosom of thy Church to receive penitent sinners; be pleased to kindle in us a
right zeal, that both by our admonitions and examples we may labor to reduce
again this excommunicated person, and all such who through infidelity and
wickedness of life are going astray: bless our admonitions, that we may have
cause to rejoice over him, for whose sake we are now in heaviness, that thy
holy name may be glorified through the Lord Jesus Christ, who has taught us
to pray. Our Father, etc.

FORM For the receiving and admitting again of excommunicated persons.
BEloved in the Lord, it is known unto you, that sometimes past our fellow
member N. has been Excommunicated and cut off from the Church of Christ. Now
we can not conceal from you, how that he through the forenamed remedy, as
also through good admonishions and your prayers, is come so far, that he is
ashamed of his sins, and desires to be received again into the fellowship
of the Church.

Therefore we, being bound to receive such with joy, and yet to keep also
good orders, therefore we give you here to understand, that we are resolved
to loose again the forenamed excommunicated person from the bond of
excommunication at the next time, when by the grace of God we shall celebrate
the Supper of the Lord, and to receive him again into fellowship with the
Church, except there be some who mean while shall show any lawful cause,
wherefore this ought not to be done; which you are to signify to us betime. In
the mean time every one of you is to praise the Lord for his mercy manifested
to this poor sinner, and to entreat him, to perfect his work in him to his
everlasting salvation.

If no impediment be brought, the Minister is to proceed to the receiving of
the excommunicated person again after this following manner.

Beloved in the Lord; we have the last time acquainted you with the repentance
of our fellow member N. that he with your consent may be received again into
the Church of Christ; seeing therefore no body has brought any thing whereby
his admission again should be differred, therefore we intend at this time to
proceed to the same.

The Lord Jesus Christ, having confirmed the sentence of the Church in the
excommunication of an impenitent sinner, declares thereupon presently, that,
whatsoever the Minister shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven;
whereby he gives to understand, that when any body is cut off from the Church,
that thereby he is not bereaved of all hope of salvation, but that he can be
loosed again from the bond of his condemnation. Therefore, seeing God does
declare in his Word, that he has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but
that he be converted and live; the Church in like manner has hope of the
conversion of the excommunicated sinner, and keeps her bosom open to receive
again the penitent; therefore does the Apostle exhort, 1 Cor. 5. that the
Corinthian (whom he had declared, should have been cut off from the Church)
be received and comforted again, seeing that after he had been reprooved by
many, he was come to the knowledge of his sin, least he be swallowed up by
overmuch heaviness, 2 Cor. 2. Secondly, Christ in the forenamed place does
teach, that the sentence of absolution, which is pronounced to such a penitent
sinner according to the Word of God, is accounted steadfast and firm with the
Lord, therefore ought no body who does uprightly repent, make any question but
that he is received of God, as Christ says Joh. 2. Whose sins ye remit, to
those they are remitted.

To come therefore to the business in hand, I afke you N. whether you declare
here before God and his Church from your heart, that you are truly sorry for
your sins and obstinacy, for which you have most justly been cut off from
the Church; and whether you do unfeignedly believe that God has forgiven and
does forgive your sins for Christ his sake, and therefore are desirous to be
received again into the Church, to carry your self from henceforth in all
piety according to the Word of God?

Answer. Yea.

Hereupon shall the Minister say further.

We, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, being met here, declare you N. to
be loosed from the bonds of Excommunication, and pronounce you to stand again
in the fellowship of the Church, the holy Sacraments, and all other spiritual
blessings and benesits which God has promised, and makes good to his Church;
in which the eternal God preserve you through his only begotten Son Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Rest therefore assured, beloved Brother, that the Lord has received you
again in mercy: be careful to take heed of the subtle temptations of
Satan, and the wickedness of the world, that you fall not again into sin.
Love the Lord Jesus Christ, for many sins are forgiven you.

And ye beloved Christians, receive this Brother with hearthy affection;
rejoice that he who was dead, is made alive again: who was lost, is found
again: rejoice with the Angels in Heaven over this sinner, who repents:
hold him no longer as one who is a stranger, but a fellow Citizen of the
Saints, and of the houshoulde of God. And whereas we can have no good thing
from our selves, letus bless the Lord for this his mercy, and further call
upon his name.

GRacious God and Father, we bless thee through Jesus Christ, that thou have
given to this our fellow brother repentance to life; and us cause to rejoice in
his conversion: we pray thee, assure him more and more of the forgiveness of
his sins, that he may receive fullness of joy, and greater willingness to
serve thee. And whereas he has offended many hy his sin, grant that he
may edify many by his conversion, and that he may walk in thy ways
steadfastly to the end; and let us learn by his example, that there is mercy
with thee, that thou may be feared, and esteeming him our fellow brother,
and coheyre of eternal life, may serve thee togetherwith a child ike sear and
obedience all the days of our life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, in whose
name we conclude our Prayers, saying: Our Father, etc.

FORM For the Confirmation of the Ministers of the Word.
After Sermon and Prayers ended, the Minister shall say thus to the people.
BEloved Brethren; It is known to you, how that we three several times have
propounded unto you the name of our fellow Brother N. here present; to see if
there was any body who had any thing against him either in doctrine or life,
whereby he might be hindered from being confirmed in the Ministry of the
Word; seeing now that no body has showed any lawful exception against his
person, therefore are we now, in the name of the Lord, to proceed to his
Confirmation. For which cause you N. and all ye who are present, are to
hearken to ashort declaration touching the institution and work of the
Pastor, or Minister of the Word.

Where in the first place you are to observe; That God our Heavenly Father
having purposed to call and assemble out of sinful mankind a Church to
everlasting life, uses here unto out of his singular grace, the ministry of
men; therefore says Paul, That Christ has given some to be Apostles, some to
be Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of his service; namely, the edification of the body
of Christ. Out of which we see that the Apostle says, that, among others, the
Pastors Office is an institution of Christ.

Now, what belongs to his holy Office, we can easily see out of the very name
given unto it; for as the charge of a common Shepherd is to feed the flock
committed unto his charge, to lead, rule, and protect the same, so is it with
the spiritual Pastors, which are set over the Church of God, which God
esteems as sheep of his Pasture. The pastures wherewith these Sheep are to
be fed, is nothing else but the preaching of the Word of God, with the service
of Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments; the same Word of God is also
the staff wherewith the flock is lead and ruled; consequently the office of
the Pastors and Ministers of the word of God consists here in:

First; That they faithfully propound the Word of God contained in the writings
of the Prophets and Apostles, and apply the same both in general and
particular to the edification of the hearers, instructing, admonishing,
comforting and reprooving, according to every ones necessity; preaching
conversion to God, and reconciliation with him through faith in Christ, as also
refuting with the word of God all errors and heresies which are repugnant to
sound Doctrine. All this is plainly discovered unto us in holy Scripture; For
the Apostle Paul says, That these labor in the Word; and elsewhere he says,
That this ought to be done according to the rule of Faith, and that a Pastor
must hold fast that faithful and sincere word which is according to Doctrine,
and divide it aright: also, he that prophecyeth (that is, who teaches Gods
word) speaks to edification, admonition and consideration. In another place,
he does put himself as a pattern to Pastors, declaring that he openly and
in houses has taught, and testified the conversion to God and Faith in Jesus
Christ. But we read in an especial manner a true description of the Office
and Ministry of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 5. wherein the Apostle speaks after this
manner: All things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself through Jesus
Christ, and has given to us (namely to the Apostles and Pastors) the
ministry of reconciliation, to wit, That God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed
to us the word of reconciliation. Now then, we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God.

Touching refutation of unsound doctrine says the Apostle to Titus, Chap. 1.
verse. 6. That a Minister must hold fast the faithful word of God, that he may
be able by sound doctrine to convince the gainsayers.

Secondly, The office of the Pastor is publicly to invocate the name of God
in the behalf of the whole assembly. For what the Apostles says, We will give
our selves to prayer, and the Ministry of the Word; the same is common to
these Pastors with the Apostles: to which end the Apostle Paul thus exhorts
Timothy. Wherefore I exhort, that Supplications, Prayers, intercessions, and
giving of Thanks be made for all men, for Kings, and for all in Authority.

Thirdly, Their order is to administer the holy Sacraments which the Lord has
ordained and instituted as a seal of his grace; as appears out of the
Commandment which Christ has given to his Apostles and in them to all the
Pastors; Baptize them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. In like manner; I received of the Lord that which I also delivered
unto you. The Lord Jesus in the night, etc.

Fourthly, The office of the Minister of the Word, is to keep the Church in
good discipline, and to rule them after that manner which the Lord has
ordained. For Christ having spoken of Christian reproof, says thus to his
Apostles, What you shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: and Paul
will have Ministers to be able to govern their own houses well, because
otherwise they should not be able to govern well the Church of God. For this
cause also the Pastors are called Householders of God, and Bishops, That is,
Overseers and Watchmen; for they have the inspection of the House of God,
wherein they converse, to the end that all things may be done decently and in
order, and that they open and shut with the Keys, committed unto them, the
Kingdom of Heaven, according to the charge given unto them of God.

Out of these things it does appear, what an honorable work the Pastoral
office is, seeing that such great things are done by the same; yea, how
necessary it is to men for the salvation of their souls: which is the reason
also, why God would have this office always to remain. For thus speaks
Christ to his Apostles, when he sends them abroad to exercise this function;
Lo, I am with you to the end of the world.

Where we see, that his will and pleasure is, that this holy office should be
kept and maintained always upon earth, unto the end of the world; for, those
persons to whom he spoke, can not live to the end of the world, and therefore
Paul exhorts Timothy, that he would commend that which he heard of him to
faithful men, who are able to teach also others; and to this end also he
ordained Titus to be a Pastor, and commanded him that he should ordain
Bishops and Elders in every place.

For as much therefore, as we, to the maintaining of this office in the Church
of God, are now to ordain a new Minister of the Word; and having sufficiently
spoken of the charge thereof; Therefore you N. are to answer to that which
shall be propounded unto you, that so it may appear to every one that you are
minded thus to receive this charge.

First, I ask you, whether you feel in your heart that you are lawfully
called of the Church, and consequently of God himself, to this holy office?

Secondly, Whether you hold the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be
the only Word of God, and perfect Doctrine to salvation, and whether you
reject all opinions which are repugnant to the same?

Thirdly, Whether you promise to discharge your office faithfully according to
the same Doctrine, and to adorn your Doctrine with a godly life; submitting
your self to the admonition of the Church, if you should come to miscarry
either in Doctrine or life, according to the received order of the Churches?
Hereupon he shall answer; yea, from my heart.

Then shall the Minister, who demands these questions of him, or an other, if
there be more then one, lay his hands upon him; and say thus:

NOTA. This Ceremony shall not be used in the Confirmation of those, who have
been in the Ministry before.

God our heavenly Father, who has called you to this holy Office, enlighten
you by his holy Spirit, strengthen you by his grace, and so govern you in your
Ministry, that you may walk therein fruitfully as you ought, to the gloly of
his Name, and enlargement of the Kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ, Amen.

Afterward shall the Minister from the Pulpit admonish the Minister Confirmed,
and the whole Church in following manner.

Take heed therefore, beloved Brother and fellowservant in Christ, unto your
self, and to the whole flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you
Overseer, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood: Love the Lord Christ, and feed his sheep, taking oversight thereof not
by constraint, but willingly; not for silthy lucres sake, but with a willing
mind; not as being Lord over the people of God, committed to you; but as one
who is made a pattern to the flock; be an example to the faithful, in Word,
in Doctrine, in love, in faith, in purity. Hold on in reading, admonishing,
instructing; neglect not the gift which is given unto you; be diligent that
your progress may be made manifest in all.

Take heed to the Doctrine, and be constant therein; bear patiently all
sufferings and oppression as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. If you do these
things, you shall save your self, and those that hear you; and when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, you shall receive the incorruptible crown of glory.

And ye, beloved Christians; receive this your Minister in the Lord with all
joy, and respect; consider that God through him speaks to you; receive his
word, which he according to the Scripture shall declare unto you: not as the
word of man, but as it is the Word of God: let the feet of those who preach
you the glad tidings of peace, be welcome unto you: be obedient to those who
are set over you in the Lord, for they watch for your souls as those who must
give an account there of, that they may do it with joy and not with sighs,
for this is not profitable to you: if you do these things, it shall come to
pass that the peace of God shall enter into your houses, and that receiving
this man in the name of a Prophet, ye shall receive the reward of a Prophet,
and through his word believing in Christ, shall inherit eternal life through
Christ.

Yet seeing no man is of himself sit for these things; let us call upon the
name of God.

Merciful Father, we bless thee, that thou have been pleased out of lost
man kind, to gather a Church to everlasting life through the Ministry of man,
and that thou have so graciously provided a faithful Minister for this Church
in this place: We beseech thee, tot fit him more and more with thy Spirit to
the Ministry to which thou have called him; enlighten his mind to understand
the holy Scriptures, give him utterance to publish the mysteries of the Gospel
with an undaunted Spirit; furnish him with Wisdom, to rule aright the people
over whom thou have set him, and to keep them in Christian peace, that so thy
Church may under his ministry increase in number and virtue: give him courage
in all difficulties and troubles which he may meet with in his Ministry, that
he being strenghthened ihrough the comforts of thy Spirit remaining steadfastly
to the end, may be received with all thy faithful servants into his Masters
joy. Grant also to this people: that they may carry themselves a right toward
this their Minister; acknowledging him sent of thee, receiving his doctrine
with all reverence, and submitting themselves to his exhortations, that so
believing through his word they may be made pattakers of everlasting life.
Hear us, gracious Father, for thy dear Son his sake, who has taught us to
pray after this manner,

Our Father, etc.

FORM For the Confirmation of Elders and Deacons, when they are confirmed at
the same time; and if Elders and Deacons be confirmed a part, then shall this
Form be usud according to occasions.
BEloved Christians; you know that we now at several times have propounded
uto you the names of our fellow Brethren here present, who are called to the
Office of Elders and Deaconship to this Church, to know whether there be any
that has any thing against them why they should not be Confirmed in their
Offices; seeing that no body is come before us, who has brought any lawful
exception against them, therefore we are to go on at this present with the
Confirmation of the same; for this end ye N: N:, who are to be confirmed,
hearken first to ashort Declaration concerning the institution and the Offices
of Elders and Deacons.

Concerning the Elders: it is to be observed, that the name of Elders (which
name is taken out of the Old Testament, and signifies a person who is placed
in an honorable Office of Government over others) is given to two sorts of
Persons which serve in the Church of Christ. For the Apostle says, The Elders
who rule well, are worthy of double honor, specially those, who labor in the
Word and Doctrine: out of which it is manifest, that in the Apostolical Church
there have been two sorts of Elders, where of the first have labored in the
Word and Doctrine, and the others not: the former were the Ministers of the
Word, the Pastors who preach the Gospel, administer the Sacraments, but the
others who did not labor in the Word, yet serving the Church, had aspeciall
charge; namely, that they took oversight of the Church, and with the Minister
of the Word did rule the same. For after the Apostle Paul had spoken Romans 12.
of the Ministry of the Word, as also of the Office of the Deacons, he speaks
of this Office afterward, saying: He that rules, let him do it with all
diligence, and so in an other place, 1 Cor. 12. Among other Offices which God
has ordained in his Church, he reckens Government: in so much that this sort
of Ministers, is given as a help and assistance to the others who preach the
Gospel; as in the old Testament the Levites were joined to the Priests in the
common service of the Tabernacle, to be helpers unto them in those things,
which the Priests alone could not perform, remaining notwithstanding distinct
offices. Besides this, it is necessary that to the Ministers of the Word such
men be joined in the Government of the Church; that all Lording and Tyranny,
which can creep in sooner if the Governmentlye in the hand of one, or few, may
be kept out of the Church; and so the Ministers of the Word and the Elders
make up one Assembly, being as a Senate of the Church, and representing the
whole Church; whereunto Christ had respect, when he says; Tell the Church,
which can not be meant of the Church apart, but very well of those, who by the
Church are chosen, to govern the same.

The Office of the Elders, consists herein.

First, To take with the Ministers of the Word the oversight of the Church
committed unto them, carefully to look to it, that every one carry himself
aright in his Confession, and in his Conversation: to admonish those who carry
themselves scandalously, and to take heed, so much as lies in them, that the
Sacraments be not profaned, as also to deal with the penitent according to
Christian discipline, and to receive them again into the bosom of the Church;
as is manifest not only out of the forenamed saying of Christ, but also out of
other places of Scripture, 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 12. wherein it is apparent that
these things belong not to one: or a few, but to many, who are ordained there
unto.

Secondly, Whereas the Apostle commands that among Christians al things be
done decently and in order, and no body ought to minister in the Church, but
such as are lawfully called there unto, according to Christian Constitutions
concerning the same; therefore it belongs also to the office of Elders, to take
care thereof and of all things, which concern the good estate of the Church,
to assist the Minister with their counsel and advise; yea, all Christians with
advise and consolation.

Thirdly, It belongs also to the charge of Elders to look to the Doctrine and
life of the Ministers of the Word, to the end all may be ordered to the
edification of the Church; and that no strange doctrine be propounded,
according to that which we read Act. 20 where the Apostle admonishes to
watch diligently against the wolves who might come into the sheepfold of
Christ; and that they may do this the better, the Elders are bound to search
diligently the Scriptures, and to exercise themselves continually in meditating
of the Mysteries of the faith.

Concerning the Deacons; of the Original and institution thereof we may read
Act. 6. where we find, that in the beginning the Apostles themselves did serve
the poor, at whose feet were laid down the Price of those goods that were
sold, and by whom distribution was made to every one according to his need; but
when afterward there arose a murmuring, because the widows of the Grecians
were neglected in the daily ministration, therefore there were elected (by the advice of the Apostles) men who should make it their work to serve the poor,
that so the Apostles might give themselves continually to prayer and ministry
of the Word; and this has been kept from that time forward in the Church, as
does appear Romans 12. where the Apostle, speaking of this Office, says, that
those who distribute, shall do it with sincerity; and 1 Cor. 12. speaking of
helpers, he does thereby understand those who are ordained by the Church to
help the poor in their necessities. Out of which places it does sufficiently
appear what belongs to the Office of the Deacons; namely,

First, That they Collect and keep with all faithfulness and diligence the
Goods which are given to the poor; yea, to do their utmost endeavors, that
many helpers may be found out for the relief of the poor.

The second part of their Office, consists in the distribution, wherein is not
only required discretion and prudence, to give the alms to none but where
there is need; but also simplicity and cheerfulness to distribute the alms
with an hearty affection to the poor, according to that of the Apostle Romans
12. 1 Cor. 12. For which end it is necessary that they do not only relieve
the poor with outward gifts, but also with comfortable words out of the Word
of God.

To the end therefore, beloved Brethren N. N., that every one may see that you
are willing to take upon you the forenamed Offices, every one in his place, you
shall give answer to that which shall be propounded unto you.

First, I ask you both Elders and Deacons, whether you do not feel in your
hearts that you are lawfully called to these holy Offices, each to his, by the
Church, and consequently by God himself?

Secondly, Whether you hold the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be
the only Word of God, and the perfect Doctrine to salvation; rejecting all
Doctrines which are repugnant to the same?

Thirdly, Whether you promise to perform your Offices as they have been now
described with all faithfulness according to your power? Ye Elders N. N. in
the Government of the Church with the Ministers of the Word; and ye Deacons
N: N: in the Ministering to the poor. Further, Do ye promise both together,
to carry your selves in all Godliness; submitting your selves also to the
admonition of the Church, in case you should come to miscarry? Hereupon ye
shall answer, Yea.

Whereupon the Minister shall say,

The Almighty God and Father give unto you all his grace, that you may walk in
these your Offices faithfully and fruitfully. Amen.

And shall further admonish them, as also the whole Church, in this following
manner.

Wherefore ye Elders, be diligent in governing the Church, which with the
Ministers of the Word, is committed unto you. Be also Watchmen over the House
and City of God, to admonish every one faithfully, and to warn them of their
perdition. Take heed that the purity of Doctrine and Godliness of life be
maintained in the Church.

And ye Deacons, be diligent in Collecting of the alms, prudent and
cheerful in distributing of the same. Assist the oppressed, relieve the true
widows and orphans, show mercifulness to all, but especially to the household
of Faith.

Be ye all faithful in your Offices, and keep the mysteries of faith in a
pure conscience, and be good examples in all things to the people. In so doing
you shall get to your selves a good degree, and much cheerfulness in the
faith of Christ, and hereafter enter into your Masters joy.

On the other side, Beloved Christians, receive these persons as servants of
Christ; count the Elders who discharge well their Office, worthy of double
honor, give your selves willingly to their oversight and government. Provide
good means for the Deacons to the relief of the poor. Be liberal ye rich,
give thanckfully, and contribute willingly. And ye poor, be poor in spirit,
and carry your selves respectfully toward those who provide for you, be
thankful toward them and murmr not; follow Christ for the food of your
souls, and not for the loaves. He who has stolen (or been burdensome to his
neighbor) steal no more, but work with his hands, that he may give to those
who are in want: If ye do this, every one that which belongs to him, ye
shall receive of the Lord the wages of righteousness. But seeing we are not
able of our selves to do this, let us call upon the Name of our God.

O Lord God, Heavenly Father, we thank thee that for the better edification
of thy Church, thou have been pleased to ordain with the Ministers of the
Word, Rulers and Helpers, by whom thy Church may be kept in peace and
prosperity, and the poor be maintained; and that thou have given us into this
place men of good testimonies, who are furnished with thy Spirit. We beseech
thee give unto them more and more such gifts, as are necessary for them in
their ministrations, the gift of Wisdom, of Courage, of Discretion and of
Goodness; that so each of them may carry himself aright in his Office: the
Elders, in taking a careful oversight of the doctrine of life, in keeping out
of the Sheepefold of Christ all wolves, and in reprooving and admonishing all
persons who are goeing astray. In like manner the Deacons, in a diligent
receiving, and free and prudent distributing of the alms to the poor, and in
comforting of the same with thy holy Word. Give grace both to the Elders and
Deacons, that they may persevere in their faithful labor; and not shrincke or
grow weary through any trouble or pain, or love of the world. Grant also thy
special grace to this people, over whom they are set, that they may submit
themselves willingly to the good exhortations of the Elders, counting them
worthy of hounor for their Office sake; grant to the Rich liberal hearts
toward the poor, and to the poor thanckfull hearts toward those who are
helpefull to them, and serve them; that so every one carrying himself aright
in his Office, thy holy Name may be magnified, and the Kingdom of thy Son
Jesus Christ enlarged: in whose name we conclude our Prayer with that form of
Prayer which he has taught us. Our Father, etc.

FORM For the Confirmation of Marriage before the Church.
SEeing that married Persons are by reason of sin subject to many miseries
and crosses, to the end that you N: and you N: (who desire here openly to have
your marriage-bond confirmed in the Name of God before his Church) may be
assured in your heart of the assistance of God in your crosses; therefore
hearken out of the Word of God, how honorable the married estate is, and that
it is an ordinance of God which is pleasing to him: therefore also will he
bless and assist married persons, according to his promise; on the contrary,
punish the whoremongers and adulterers

First, therefore ye shall know, that God our Father (after he had created
the Heaven, the Earth, and all that is therein) has also created man after his
Image, that he might be Lord over all the beasts of the Field, the fishes in
the Sea, and the birds of the Air: and after he had created man, he said, It
is not good that man should be alone, I will make him a help meet for him;
and the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall on Adam, and he slept; and he
took one of his Ribbs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof; and the Ribb
which the Lord God had taken from Man, made he a woman, and brought her unto
the Man. And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh,
she shall be called Woman, because she was taken of Man; therefore shall a
man leave his Father and his Mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife, and they
twain shall be one flesh.

Therefore ye are not to doubt but the married estate does please the Lord God;
for he has made Adam his wife, brought her unto him; and given her to him to
be his wife: thereby wittnessing, that he to this day does bring, as with his
hands, to every man his wife: for this cause also the Lord Jesus Christ has
honored this estate with his presence, gifts, and miracles in Cana of Galite,
showing thereby that the married estate is to be kept honorably, and that he
will assist the married persons, yea then; when they least of all are thinking
upon it.

But that ye may live godly in this estate, you must know the reasons
wherefore God has instituted the same.

The first Reason, is; that each other faithfully assist one another in all
things that belong to this life, and a better.

Secondly, that they bring up the children which they shall get, in the true
knowledge and fear of God, to his glory, and their salvation.

Thirdly, that each of them avoiding all uncleanness and lusts, may live with
a good and quiet conscience. For to avoid fornication, let every man have his
own wife, and every wife her own husband; insomuch that all who are come to
their years, and have not the gift of continence, are bound by the Command of
God, to enter into the married estate, with knowledge and consent of Parents,
or Tutors and Friends, that so the Temple of God, which is our body, may not
be defiled, for, whosoever defiles the Temple of God, him shall God destroy.

Next, you are to know, how each is to carry himself toward the other,
according to the Word of God.

First, you who are the Husband, shall know, that God has set you to be the
head of your wife, that you, according to your ability, shall lead her with
discretion, instructing, comforting, protecting her, as the head rules the
body; yea, as Christ is the head, wisdom, consolation and assistence to his
Church: besides, you are to love your wise, as Christ has loved his Church;
you shall not be bitter against her, but dwell with her as a man of
understanding giving honor to the wife as the weaker vessel, considering that
ye are joint heirs of the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered:
And seeing it is Gods Command that the man shall eat his bread in the sweat of
his face, therefore you are to labor diligently and faithfully in the calling
wherein God has for you, that you may maintain your household honestly, and
likewise have some thing to give to the poor.

In like manner shall you, who are the wife, know, how you are to carry your
self toward your husband, according to the Word of God: You are to love your
lawful Husband, to honor and fear him, as also to be obedient unto him in
all lawful things, as to your Lord, as the body is obedient to the head, and
the Church to Christ. You shall not exercise any dominion over your Husband;
but be silent; for Adam was first created, and then Eve to be an help to Adam;
and after the fall, God said to Eve, and in her to all women; Your will shall
be subject to your Husband: you shall not resist this ordinance of God, but
be obedient to the Word of God, and follow the examples of Godly women, who
trusted in God, and were subject to their Husbands; as Sara was obedient to her
Husband, calling him her Lord: You shall also be an help to your Husband in
all good and lawful things, looking to your family, and walk in all honesty
and virtue without worldly pride, that you may give an example to others of
modesty.

Wherefore you N. and you N. having now understood that God has instituted
Marriage, and what he commands you therein; are ye willing thus to carry your
selves in this holy estate, as you here do confess before this Christian
assembly, and are desirous that you be confirmed in the same?

Answer. Yea.

Whereupon the Minister shall say to the Assembly,

I take you all, who are met here, to witnesses, that there is brought no
lawful impediment. Further to the married persons,

Seeing then it is fit that you be furthered in this your work, the Lord God
confirm your purpose, which he has given you; and your beginning be in the
Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth.

Hereupon they shall join hands together, and the Minister speak first to
the Bridegroom.

N. Do you acknowledge here before God, and this his holy Church, that you
have taken, and do take to your lawful wife N. here present, promising her
never to forsake her, to love her, faithfully to maintain her, as a faithful
and pious Husband is bound to do to his lawful wife; that you will live
holily with her; keeping faith and truth to her in all things according to the
Holy Gospel?

Answer. Yea.

Afterward to the Bride;

N. Do you acknowledge here before God, and his holy Church, that you have
taken, and do take to your lawful Husband N. promising to be obedient to him,
to serve and assist him, never to forsake him, to live holily with him, keeping
faith and truth to him in all things, as a pious and faithful wife is bound
to her Husband, according to the Holy Gospel?

Answer. Yea.

Then the Minister shall say;

The Father of mercies, who has called you out of his mercy to this holy
estate of Marriage, knit you together with true love and faithfulness, and
give you his holy blessings. Amen.

Hearken now how firm this bond of Marriage is, as Matthew. describes it, Chap.
19. Verse. 3.4.5.6.7.8.9

The Pharisees came unto Christ, tempting him, and saying unto him; Is it
lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause? and He answered, and
said unto them: Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning,
made them Male and Female? and said; For this cause shall a Man leave Father
and Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife; and they twain shall be one flesh:
wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God has
joined together, let no man put a sunder. They said unto him; Why did Moses
then command to give a Writing of divorcement, and to put her away? He said,
unto them; Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put
away your wives, but from the beginning it was not so: and I say unto you,
whosoever shall put away his wife except it be for fornication, and shall
marry an other, commits adultery; and who so marries her which is put away,
does commit adultery.

Afterward shall the Minister command the married persons to kneel down, and
exhort the Church to pray for them.

ALmighty God, who show thy power and goodness in all thy works and
ordinances, who have said from the beginning that it is not good that Man
should be alone, and for that cause have made a help meet for him, and have
ordained that these two should be one; who also do punish all uncleanesse;
we beseech thee, seeing thou have called these two persons to the State of
Marriage, and knit them together, that thou will give unto them thy holy
Spirit, that they may live holily together with a true and firm faith,
according to thy holy Name, and set themselves against all manner of sin.
Bless them, O Lord, as thou blessest those faithful Fathers, thy friends and
Servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that being partakers of that Covenant
which thou confirmest to those thy Servants, they may beget holy Children, and
educate them in a godly manner, to the honor of thy holy Name, to the
edification of thy Church, and propagation of the Gospel. Hear us, Father of
all mercyes, through Jesus Christ, thy dear Son, our Lord and Savior, in
whose name we pray further, Our Father, etc.

Hearken now unto the promise which God made in the 128 Psalm. Blessed is he
who fears the Lord, and walks in his ways; for thou shall eat the labor of
thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it shall be well with thee. Thy wife shall
be as a fruitful Vine by the sides of thine house; thy Children like
olive-plants round about thy Table. Behold, thus shall the man be blessed that
fears the Lord: the Lord shall bless thee out of Zion, and thou shall see
the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life: yea, thou shall see thy
childrens children, and peace upon Israel.
Our blessed Lord God fulfill your hearts with his grace, and grant, that ye
may live long together in all piety and holiness.

AMEN.

