THE FOOL Would be a FAVOURIT: Or, the DISCREET LOVER. A Trage-Comedy.

Written by LODOWICK CARLELL, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

Drammatis Personae.
Duke, Of Milaine. Agenor, His son, in love with Lucinda. Philanthus, Friend to
Agenor. Adrastus, A Lord, in love with Aurelia. Old Gudgen, A simple Bumpkin.
Young Gudgen, The Favourit that would be. His Man. Courtiers. Herald at Arms.
Dancing Master. Singing Master. Tailor. Moor. Servant. Aurelia, Daughter to the
Duke. Lucinda, Sister to Adrastus. Miranthe, Aurelia 's waiting woman. Linda,
Lucinda 's waiting woman.


Scene Milain.

THE FOOL Would be a FAVORITE: Or, the DISCREET LOVER.
Actus primus.
Enter Aurelia and a Servant. Aur. CAN the Prince Philanthus, my cosen, look so
far beneath himself, as on my servant.


Ser. Madam, believe me, he makes love to her daily, and now they are together
in the Garden.


Aur. If this be true, as I begin to fear, for I have heard him make some
desperate protestations; yet, by the stronger Magic of this brow, I Will break
those Spells that hold him; these Eyes, which have to all that sued ^een clad
in frowns, shall, for his sake, receive all the ^^ditions, that a woman's art
can give, to make them ^ictors. He shall not cast away himself, nor spend a
sigh more, for so mean a person. For sure, when I shall cosen him, making him
think, that I will daigne to love, he will hate himself, and fly so mean a
Mistress. I Will see, if they be still together.

Exeunt.
Enter Philanthus and Miranthe. Mir. I see the Princess coming.


Phil. The better. Injure not so much your own merit,
To misdoubt the truth of what I say; and if you fear
A change, I Will call the gods to witness.

Enter Aurelia, and Servant. Mir. Good my young Lord, spare your rash
inconsiderate oaths,
Which you would be content to buy again at any rate,
Within this month.

Aur. Crafty Wench, she sees us.


Mir. You must not think, that I will lay my self
Open to your courtship thus alone, it was
By accident you met me, pray let go.

Phil. Will you then leave me?


Aur. How now, Cosen, making love to Miranthe?


Phil. Madam, I should be glad to gain her good opinion.


Aur. Consen, I hope the Court has not infected you as yet. Will you dissemble
with me your friend, or no, if I should seriously ask you a question?


Phil. Madam, if I already know that vic^^^ name,
My I or No, will be but small assurance.

Aur. yet I dare trust you. Love you Miran earnest?
Why do I ask? I do not think you yet know love means.

Phil. Not what it is, I would I did not.


Aur. I see you do, that sigh approves it.
And, Miranthe, you love entirely.

Phil. Admit I grant.

Exeunt Miran. and Ser.
Aur. Leave us a little. Then you must grant withal,
That you much injure your self; for you are equal
To the greatest in your blood; to say, your mind
Or person's lovly, is a truth, befits some other
Better then my self to speak. Yet friendship,
And pity of your youth, to see you ignorantly offer your devotions
To so poor a Saint, whose influence, though never so favorable,
Cannot protect you from a general scorn forces me
To tell you, you will be counted of a low spirit,
Or wondrous ignorant, in loving Miranthe,
Your birth being so far above hers.

Phil. Madam, it is true, that being descended from your house,
I should have as just reason to be proud in that respect, as any:
But, being otherwise defective in those things,
Which I could not receive from Ancestors, my mind and manners;
Wonder not, that like a bastard Eaglet, I refuse to look upon
The Sun-bright Beauties of the Court. Yet, Madam,
You must think, in her I lord there is something,
Though perhaps not obvious to your eyes,
That to me renders her lovely.

Aur. It Is true, she is a good Wench, perhaps her virtue takes you.


Phil. Madam, I know you do not slight that in others,
^^ough in her you do; she is your servant and you say,
^^e's my Mistress, and Virtue should be Mistress to us all.
Give me leave so far, to justify her and my self
as to say, If she be more virtuous then the fairest
Lady living, I ought to love her best.

Aur. Yes, if you could be married to her virtues, not to her person;
For fix pence I Will buy a Book, shall more instruct you in that way.
But think you, Cosen, Virtue and Beauty may not dwell together.
I am accounted fair, wherein have I appeared to you
Less virtuous than Miranthe?

Phil. In nothing, Madam, rather the wonder of your sex.

Aur. Cosen, believe me, there are many in the Court, that exceed
Me in both. Let me persuade you leave Miranthe rather
for your Man to woe, and dedicate your worthier services
to some of those that I shall name you.

Phil. Madam, you persuade strongly, for I rely upon your counsel
As an Oracle But think you, I have handsomess o wit,
To make me acceptable to a fair Lady?

Aur. Yes doubtless.

Phil. I fear you say it only, to draw me from my Mistress.
But swear, you think me worthy.

Aur. As I live I do.

Phil. Well, Madam, you have persuaded me to be unconstant;
If there be a punishment, may't light on you:
Or, if I fail to gain a Mistress, you must promise
To instruct me; for, whom you will please to name
As worthy, I Will make love to tell you all my discourse,
And show you all my Letters.

Aur. Must you needs be in Love, it seems you he been much given to read love
Books; when I know your study, I shall fit you with a Mistress.

Phil. Faith, Madam, they live such pleasant lives in those books,
Kissing their Mistresses hands, and looking on their fair eyes,
That I have envied them.

Aur. Your imagination's very strong, you begin with me.
I must provide a Mistress for you very shortly,
I shall be troubled with you else my self.
Exeunt.
Enter two Courtiers. 1. Trust to my skill thus far, I have wrought him
handsomely

2. My part is only, to be ready to entertain you.

1. No more

2. Farewell then.

1. Farewell. Let me alone to fit him here in the Country to the business,
th'ass is rich, his father more fool then he, doting upon his sons believed
perfections -- Here comes the old fool.

Enter old Gudgen. O. Good. Good Morrow Mr. Courtier, you are late a rising; you
should have seen my son, your scholar, break half a dosen staves else, as
graciously, as ere a poor man's son in Milain, and for Cut, black Cut.


1. Indeed he is a good sober beast.


O. Good. Very quick, he starts before you can tell twenty; first does he trot,
but then stand; I have the barrier thus with my whip alost, and when he comes,
flash quoth I, away goes Cut so fast, you cannot see him move, then does he
stop most willingly.


^ He does indeed.


O. Gudg. And turns about with great 'liberation and 'gillity, but old Roane
what say you to him, there a hot Jade indeed, as like my son as can be, fiery
and full of metal, and here comes the grace of our Country, though I say 't.


Enter young Gudgen and Man. Y. Good. Luckey, poulcroone, look to my Roa^
Jennet, let him allay his fury in thy hand, before he fet his hoof within the
stable, and should thou let him drink, thou die as I am generous.


Man. Saving your young worships pleasure; he had more need be set up, and have
a peck of grains, heel never be able to plow to morrow else.


Y. Good. Peasant, I say let him allay his heat, and for the plow thou talkest
on, I will have thee know this mornings service has manumiz'd him from such
ba^^ employments.


O. Gudg. How Son, what is that?


Y. Good. I must speak plain to his dull understanding, oh torment! let it
suffice that Roane is free from service of the plow or harrow.


Man. I your worship I am sure has harrow'd all the flesh off his back, a
little rest and meat will do well, Sir.


Y. Good. Another word, and as I hope to be a Gentleman, I Will make him feed on
thee.


Man. Good your worship.


Y. Good. Nay worse, thou shall not wait upon m^ to our Court of Milan.


O. Good. It Is his care, Son you must forgive him


Y. Good. Live then; and thank this aged Nobleman


O. Good. Oh hopeful boy, he may be one indeed Sir may he not.


1. Yes yes?


O. Good. It Is no matter though I be a yeoman still.


1. No no, there will be no great indecorum in it.


O. Good. I, as you say 'twere well I were a'the coram, and so I will when my
son's a Lord.


Enter a Tailor. Y. Good. How my clothes not made yet! let me perish, if I do
not revenge the blood of all the innocent lice, since the first Tailor.


Tay. I beseech your worship, you know I wanted, and you promised to let me have
some money before hand.


Y. Good. How Tailor! money before hand? do thou not know I am to be a
Courtier, thou ignorant Country vermin, can there be hope to prosper in a
suite paid thee for, before hand.


1. No it is unpossible you would appear a prodigy


Y. Good. A prodigy; that's fine in faith, nay I will pay aforehand then, and be a
prodigy; if that be all my man to, he shall be a prodigy.


Man. I thank your worship.


Enter Dancer. Y. Good. Master of the Dance and Fence you have been long a
coming.


Dancer. Your worship knows it is two long mile and I came but softly, I must be
more careful of my legs then another man.


Y. Good. Why so man, thou make new ones every day.


Dance. I Sir but I make them with my legs, and every trades man will preserve
his tools.


Man. Or else his wife will Chide him when he comes home.


Enter Singer. Y. Good. Ha, ha, ha, him sol, sol fa, fa.


Sing. I am glad to hear your worship so careful of my documents, use a voice,
and have a voice.


Y. Good. Come come shall we to it?


1. Sir 'twere best to day you only used your martial exercises, you have rid,
and fencing will be enough.


Y. Good. You say true, first I will learn to fight, and then to make my
approaches to the Ladies: if they refuse to yield to my Courtship,

I Will compel them by force of Arms.


1. How ravish them, prove a Tarquine?


Y. Good. I, ten Tarquines, what shall they contend with me?


Man. By my faith, I will take your worships part.


Y. Good. She that shall oppose me had better come on Master of the Noble
science, behold thy scholar does thus confront thee.


Dan. Stay Sir you are too furious, first you must mark your distance.


O. Good. I but son, you lost your opportunity; I have seen the time I would
not have failed to pai'd him over the nodel, at such a vantage.


Y. Gudg. How take upon you to teach me, go to, you are an old busy fool, but,
lets see what you can do, come on your ways.


O. Good, Alas son, I am old, threescore.


Y. Good. I know you might have been my father, but I have seen a wiser at
thirty, come on Sir.


O. Good. Nay Son.


Y. Good. Take 'em, I charge you as you expect my favor, I Will let you see the
fence is altered since your sword and buckler time.


Tav. I have an itching to him.


1. Sir your Father's old, you will kill him.


Y. Good. It Is no matter, I shall not be ashamed o^ him when I am a Lord.


1. Faith Sir, play with your Tailor, he is a great mind to it.


Y. Good. Has he, come on Sir shred, dare you adventer, the third part of a man
to encounter; do thou know what thou do, I am a prodigy.


Tay. I Sir, but I must help to make you so: one bout sir, and it were at
Cudgels, I durst venture the making of your worships clothes.


Y. Good. Oh base Cudgels, I will kill that lowse that sits upon thy ninth
button.


Tay. Well sir.


They Play. Y. Good. Oh Rogue do you offer to strike, and then to thrust against
the Order of fence, this it is to play with ignorance.


1. It Is true sir, I wonder you would do it.


Tay. I know the blow could not be great, alas I am but a louse, a shred at the
most, Sir, but the third part of a man.


1. Away, you are saucie.


Tay. Will please your worship to let me have something before hand.


Y. Good. A pox on thee, thou have given me too much.


Tay. Truly sir, it was against my will, I did not think it possible I could
have hit your skilful worship, wilt please your worship try another bout?


Y. Good. No prithee.


1. A pox a these Marshall Exercises,
Lets to the City, Dance, Drink, Whore, and Dice,
These are the virtues, fighting is a vice.
Exeunt.
Enter Adrastus. Adra. Oh inconstant Aurelia, but women must be women still,
Changing though for the worst: for wherein can Philanthus be justly pris'd
before me; he is young
And unexperienced, so cannot serve her with that waryness
He ought considering her Birth, sure she cannot love him, oh yes she does, she
does, it is apparent.
They are still together and see, good manners pard me.
Enter Philanthus and Aurelia. I Will mark their actions, tho I cannot hear.

Phi. Maddam do not refuse to instruct me yo^^ scholar.
But hear in what language I am able to deliver
My affection in, and give such an answer as you think
Adrastus sister will do, whom you have
appointed me to make love to.

Aur. I will,


Phi. Fair Aurclia.


Aur, Her name's Lucinda.


Phi. Maddam you know that all one, but (...) th'at-tribute of Fair sufficient.


A^^ It Is old and foolish either to say, fair or virtue (...)
Or madam, mistress, or goddess, or Divine Lady
Sweet Creature, or abstract, or indeed
Any thing that way.

Phi. Then thus, If the respect I bear your had bee^ less,
Or that after the tender of my loyal heart,
And your refusal of it, I could have lived,
To enjoy your sight I had long ere this
Made my love known, but since the
Manifestation of your disdain and my death are
Inseparable accidents, wonder not that I
Have lost so many opportunities to tell you.
For all Creatures have a desire to preserve life:
And now I see my last period approaching.
For in your heavenly eyes I read the sentence of my death,
As plain as if the book of fate lay open to me.
You Are are the book of fate in two respects,
To all that see and know you as I do.
For if they love you, they justly perish by your scorn.
If they love you not, their ignorance transformes
Them into beasts, a worse Condition for a man
Then not to be at all hope cannot fool me further,
Then only make me to believe, that since
I have some interest in your blood you will shed a tear,
To witness that you greeve my ruin.

Aur. May I perish, if you have not delivered this with as much passion.
As if Lucinda for whom this speech was framed,
Had been before you, but how shall she conceave
That where you speak of interest in her blood?
Are you akine to her?

Phi. When you have answered in her person; for that, I shall resolve You.


Aur. Well if your affection were thus violent as you pretend,
I cannot but acknowledge that the consideration of it
Were sufficient to move pity in any woman,
That did allow the follies of protesting lovers.
But for my part I have ever laughed at those,
Who hoped to gain love by the manifestation
Of their sufferings, and therefore had you professed less
Till you had made your merits appear greater,
It would have moved me more: when I shall see
That in you which I as much covet to enjoy,
As it seems you do now something in me.
Then which an equality of affection we shall
Meet without all these sophisticated protestations,
And not before: for as you pursue that which you think
Would be your happiness; so do I mine.
Which I am sure consists in my freedom
From the follies of Love.

Phi. It Is even so, you have delivered nothing but what I expected.
The greatest merit I shall ere attain to,
Is quickly to remove out of the world.
One whom you so much contemn.
Offers to kill himself.
Aur. Philanthus, would you take this way
To assure your mistress of your affection?

Phi. No other ways then by my death after the assurance of her disdain.


Aur. P'shew, you must not despair for the first denial.
Our hearts and tongues do not always agree.
And because I am to instruct you to gain your mistress,
I Will discover some part of women's disposition, to you;
Tho it be to our disadvantage.

Phi. Maddam you shall infinitely oblige me.


Aur. First there is few of us what ere we seem,
But are content to be beloved by all that see us.
And those who are of birth may express love,
In their actions without offense, tho nere so many.
But he that comes to tell his mistress in words he loves, her,
Had need be first assured that she believes
That he has worth enough to gain a mistress
Equal to her self in merits, should he make
Tender of his love else where: for when an other
Would receave that which is offered it does approve
The value of the gift, and setts the giver
Free from scorn.

Phi. Maddam for this I thank you, but more I beseech you.


Aur. I will, it may be you believe you could not more
Oblige your mistress to respect you then by giving
Her assurance of many oaths that you can never love
Any other Lady, tho she should much neglect you.

Phi. Maddam, I do.


Aur. I thought so, mark a general error: whatsoere,
We are sure is ours, the worth of it does lessen
In opinion, for we are still in pursuit
Of new and difficult things to attain: yet it is
As great a grief to us if our prisoners.
Should undo their chains as it is contentment
To enthrall a new one and make another.
Woman's servant ours, pleases above thought,
Because it is a testimony of our great virtue
And merit that drew him.

Phi. The Change may grow as well from his inconstancy,
As Judgment in discerning the worthier.

Aure. At least he will add one to the number, and multiplying
Is the art most women study that are fair.

Aur. Are all so? Maddam; are you so?


Phi. I did not tell you I would give you my particular
Character, 'twas the general I spoke.

Phi. Maddam, I take it for granted, you are not such.
For these you name, are faculty in their humors.
And therefore you being singular deserve more love,
Which trust me maddam I must pay to You.
Not to Lucinda what ere I have seemed.
Nor ever loved I Miranthe.

Aur. How Philanthus?


Phi. Maddam, it is true by all that can be sworn by.
That I only love Aurelia now, but how long.
It will continue, if she neglect me, that I cannot tell.

Aure. This is fine Juggling, do you make me discover
The weakness of our sex, and then assault my self.
I hate you, hence from my sight.

Phi. Maddam, I do not believe you, you told me your self.
That women's hearts and tongues do not always agree.

Aur. But I told you withal I spoke not of my self.
And you granted too, I was not like other women.
Which you then made the argument of your love.
Therefore you must believe me when I say I hate you.

Phi. Yes when 'I do believe that, I deserve it.
You swore you thought me worthy when you went about
To persuade me from Miranthe, which assurance you
Said was necessary before the verbal protestation
Of affection, and fear not that you shall be too assured
That I esteem you, for I, according to your own rule
Will cease to love you when you use me ill.

Aur. Of which assure your self, for you have offended me much.
I much above expression, pray leave me to my self.

Phi. Maddam I will, but for my own advantage.
For when I am gone, you cannot choose but consider,
That my merit to your words is equal to the best.
Deserver, henceforth I will not woe in words but action.
And if you love, each thought is of my faction.
Exit.
Adra. Blessed opportunity.


Aur. It Is well, this troubles me; yet sure it cannot much displease me.
For who in Philanthus can find the least defect?
When I persuaded him not to love Miranthe,
And thought it was a friendly care, I was deceav'd.
Sure then I loved, it could not grow thus in an instant.
How in an instant, do I love him then? no no.
Enter Adrastus. I do not; yet it would trouble me to see him love another

Adrastus. I shall be troubled then.


Adra. Maddam excuse me that I interrupt your privacie
Forced by the violence of my passion, for when I shall be once.
Certain of that which I strongly suspect,
There shall be nothing able to keep me
From sudden death; not your command,

Aur. Adrastus, what is it troubles you?


Adra. Is It possible that you can ask me?


Aur. You see I do.


Adra. Maddam, you know how entirely I gave my self,
Reserving no faculty of mind or body, to be employed
Other ways then by your Discretions, nor dare I say
I yet repent, tho I see another ready to reap
The fruit of my labors, it is Philanthus happy Philanthus
Whoe's the more fortunat in that he is not above me in merit,
In affection far beneath me, nor should I greeve,
To see him happy, were he not raisd upon my ruins.
But I must say to hope to see him one day forsaken
Like my self: oh no I dare not, sure this change proceeds
From some defect in me which you believe
You have found, and not from your inconstancy.

Aur. Adrastus, the knowledge which I have had of your actions toward me,
And my own beauty, assured me that your loved.
But that my Courtesy had bred a belief in you,
That I desired you should do so, till now, I knew not of
Henceforward I shall set a remedy to that: For Philanthus
Being raised upon your ruins, it is a building of your fancy only.
But trust me it is strange you should be Jelous of what your nere
Possessed: but you believed you did, that was sufficient.
From this time know to value me and your self.
In so doing, you may regain that good opinion
I held of your judgment, which by this rash^ you have lost.

E^ Abra. Lost, even so I am contemned, is this the ward
Of all my services, all my fair hopes
Thus blasted? This Philanthus was born to ruin (...)
In all attempts of war and peace, he robs me of prize,
What ere she seemed, till Philanthus supplanted me
My services were most acceptable.
I had not else forsook Miranthe for her, and well
I know, she is even with me already,
Furthering Philanthus, my Rival, in his affection.
Now I must look
For naught but scorns from Aurelia. Could I (...) Philanthus
Yet with my self, 'twere some content; umh,
The way to do it, is, to continue the seeming friendsh^
Which I bear him, so shall my plot be carried free
From suspicion: He Is of an open heart,
And such natures are easy to work on.
The Politician, when he huggs, does strike:
Rivalls in Love and State, will do alike.
Ex^
Finis Actus primi.
Actus secundus.
Enter Agenor and Philanthus. Phil. SIr, you have bound me to you by so many
vours,
That you do give me cause to hope, that this
Discovery is not displeasing to you.

Ag. Come, leave this ceremony, it does not fit our loves.
If you do love my sister, the friendship I have vowed,
Ties me to aid you, although I know it may much
Prejudice me in my Father's love, should he know it;
For he so doats upon my sister, that he believes
None but a god is worthy of her.

Phil. It Is true, she is full of all that can be excellent
In women, yet so far do I prize you above mine own desires or hopes,
That could your sister recompense me with a love equal to mine,
And yet that love, purchased by you, prove prejudicial to you
I rather would give over the thought of love for ever,
At least in silence rather pine and die.
No, far be it from my friendship, to build my happiness,
Though never so great, upon your smallest discontent.

Ag. You wrong my love in this, and undervalue me;
For, you do seem to say, I fear to hazard my fathers frown,
Though I could purchase for you what you so desire:
Now, by the gods, 'twas a most unkind thought;
Nay, from a man less honest, 'twould appear
Hypocrisy; or, do you think my youth has not yet taught me,
What it is to be a friend? Know, Philanthus,
The few years I have past, have been employed,
To make me something capable of those parts,
Which most enobles us; and I have found
Friendship to be the soul and essence of a man.
Therefore, believe me, since for your merits I have chose you
For a friend, your discontents, dangers, and happiness,
Are all mine; no, friend, I say, your growing love
Can plead for you, not without success.
She loves, but would not have you too assured on it,
Lest it should make you less esteem the purchase.

Phil. Sir, you, in this assurance of your friendship,
And her love, transport me with a double joy,
Not to be expressed in words. I should fall down,
And worship such a god-like friend, that thus
Bestows his favors on a desertlesse person,
Made only worthy by his love.

Age. Still you forget our friendship, heaping your thanks
And praise on me, a burden my weak deserving
Cannot bear without much shame; let it suffice,
My love makes me a servant to your wishes;
If they do take effect, it is your own merits,
Whom the gods cannot refuse, that is the cause of it.
My friendship only a willing instrument,
Strives to bring their divine wills to pass.
But Oh! friend.

Phil. Why sigh you, Sir?

Age. I have long liked, and now I fear I love,
And therefore think, friendship obliges me
To tell you, yet with the reservation of her name:
For she is so cruel, so proud, if it be no sacrilege
In me a Lover, to give that attribute.
I say, she is so disdainful, and there is so little hope,
Nay rather such a certain impossibility,
That she will never love me, that I am ashamed
To name the Tiger, that will in time, I know,
Consume my heart.

Phil. Tell me her name, and send me to her, and I shall quickly
Make her know, she is cruel to her self.

Age. Oh friend, I do not wish to lose you,
'Twere the ready way to make you false; such a faith as yours
Perhaps, for once, might bring you off, free and untouched;
But should you often see her, and converse, you would soon
Break faith with me and all the world, to gain
One smile from her; yet, even that smile were death,
Except you might enjoy them often: the deprivation
Of a good possessed, being our greatest misery.

Phil. Sir, may I not know this wonder, for such I must believe her,
From your love; but more, that you believe she could
Taint my faith. Venture to name her.

Age. If you urge it as a duty, belonging to our friendship,
I must tell you; otherways I would for some
Respects conceal it.

Phil. Except you mean to employ me to serve you,
'Twill be to no advantage.

Age. If you will, I Will tell you.

Phil. Faith, Sir, I shall not take it ill, if you conceal her;
May be, it is her will, because her cruel usage
Of you, if known, would be thought folly.

Age. It Is her will indeed; yet, friend, she has more wit then all her sex.

Phil. Sir, were I not a Lover too, I should believe you.

Age, I dare not let you see her, so to approve it;
She Will quickly find your worth to exceed mine.
Now is my friendship from least taint most free:
If she knew both, there might grow jealousy.
Exeunt.
Enter old Gudgen, young Gudgen, 1. Courtier, and Man. Y. Good. Pass not beyond
this score, I charge thee, Father, upon thy allegiance; we are now within the
verge of the Court. Away, make haste, to turn those durty acres into crowns, to
buy the place you wot of.


O. G. Well son, even god be with thee.


Y. G. Weep not, I say, but get you home, and remember my blessing to the old
woman, your wife; bid her not be proud of me, though she have reason: Many a
sweet-fac'd youth, like my self, has miscarried at Court, coming to be a
Favorite; but I Will buy't, and make sure work, I.


O. G. Well, well.


Y. G. What, not gone yet, I think I shall be troubled with you. Sure I was a
bastard, I could not be his son, he is such a coxcomb.


1. Like enough.


Y. G. There have been Courtiers in our town, I and my mother was worth the
whistling after, I can tell ye


1. I doubt it not.


Y. G. But come, how do you like me?


1. Believe me, Sir, yee'r wondrous well accountred.


Y. G. Well accoutred, is that a courtly phrase?


1. Yes.


Y. G. I have heard some word near it in the Country. And how do you like my
vassail?


1. Very proper.


Enter a ragged Courtier. Y. G. Is he not well accoutred? What Is he, what is he,
Sir?


1. Some poor slight fellow, you must be surly to such, and look big.


Y. G. Nay, Sir, I can look big, I learnt that of my father's Bull,
He comes toward me.

R. C. Noble Sir, I shall be wondrous proud of your acquaintance.


Y. G. Then you shall never have it.


R. C. Why, Sir?


Enter 2. Courtiers. Y. G. Pride is a deadly virtue, humility a sin, that will
better become your clothes. Look I not big? Ha! stay, what is he, what is he.


1. Some great man, by those that sue to him: you must abase your garb, and
with an obsequious look salute him.


Y. G. Sir, I profess my self the vassail to your Dog; if you keep none, I am
a most devout and obsequious servant to your Cat.


Man. I shall desire to have the providing of her Mice.


2. Sir, I am full of employments, excuse me, I must suddenly give his Grace an
account.


Y. G. A great man certainly, it is well if I can come to speak with him this
two hours.


1. Sir, may I entreat to know, what place you hold in Court? this Gentleman, I
can assure you, is worthy your acquaintance.


Y. G. No, no, Sir; alas, I Am an ignorant, and know nothing, wondrous simple,
believe it; a week hence will be fair, I Will wait your leisure. But what is your
place, Sir, I beseech you honor me, Sir.


1. Pray, Sir, satisfy him.


2. Sir, I Am a favorite to his Grace.


1. What luck have you, Sir.


Y. G. I, is it not good luck? Why, Sir, I come to buy a Favorites place, and
think I am as fit for it as another man, and will give as much money too.


2. Believe it, Sir, you must pay well for it, it is a place of great advantage.


Y. G. I know it, Sir, but one may have it for money, I am assured on it.


2. Yes, you shall have mine on good conditions.


Y. G. Good or ill conditions, I care not, that is all one, I Will have it.


2. Sir, you know not yet the duties, nor the privileges of the place.


Y. G. That Is true, pray what are they?


2. First, you may be always next the Duke, and so advance, or else keep back
suites, as you favor or dislike the person.


Y. G. Nay, I Will dislike all suites, that are not like mine own.


Man. or mine.


Y. G. I, or thine.


2. The great men will give thee the first good morrow, perhaps show more
respect, they are very courteous in this age: The Ladies, thei'I observe ye
too, it may be, more then their husbands.


Y. G. That Is brave in faith.


1. Sir, hark ye, you must not seem so desirous of it. Let me alone to talk
with him, and make the bargain; let us go to the next Tavern.


Y. G. Sir, I do not greatly care for this Favorites place of yours, I hear, a
man shall never live in peace, my ears will always be glowing; they'I do
nothing but talk of me, and they'I be hanged before they speak any good.


1. Though you deserve never so much. Come, let us go.


2. Nay, that is certain, they'I misinterpret every action, if it prosper not;
their faith in that is like to Turks.


Y. G. Sir, I would have you know, I care not ijd. for your place; but if you'I
go to the next Tavern, he shall agree with you for it.


1. Fie, Sir, you'I spoil all.


2. But is there nothing the Duke may except against, in your friend?


Y. G. Except against me? it is impossible, he never saw me in's life: why
should he except against me then, am not I as fit for a favorite, as another
man?


2. It Is but a needful objection.


Y. G. Except against me?


2. Pacify your self.


Y. G. I tell you Sir, if he should but think of excepting against me, I would
return into the Country presently, as wise as I came.


1. Nay, good Sir, it is impossible.


Y. G. And he were ten Dukes, I Would send him to seek a Favourit, I warrant you.
Except against me? what me?


1. Nay, Sir.


Y. G. I tell you, Sir, should the Duke use me so,
His Dukeship does not a right Gudgen know.
Exeunt.
Enter Adrastus and Philanthus. Adr. Believe me, noble Philanthus, there is
nothing
That in the passages of life has more contented me,
Then the happiness of your friendship. The advantages of which,
You have now had, at this and all other exercises,
In the person of any other, would have given me cause
Of grief and envy; but since 'twas my beloved
Philanthus, that robbed me of the glory,
The theft was so far from displeasing,
That with the prise you won my heart too.

Phil. Your friendship, Sir, does make you attribute
To merit, that which was due unto my fortune only,
Or rather to your policy, who by permitting
Me to win this prize, thinks to encourage me
Against some others, weaker then your self;
And when I am grown something rich, by little victories over them,
You'I show, you only let me grow to this,
That with more ease at once, you might increase your store.

Adr. In this you overcome me too, but sure in love
You cannot; I think, were I still certain to enjoy
Your friendship, I nere should think of marriage:
For to say true, how can there be, in vain
Fantastic women, half that contentment found,
That Is in a perfect friend.

Phil. It Is certain, in vain Fantastic women, there no content.
But, Sir, excuse me, if I say, you are in an error,
If you hold all women so.

Adr. This moves him, I Will try him farther. Are you infected with that error,
To think, there can be any other good in women,
Than only, that they do increase mankind?

Phil. Certainly they are good for something else.


Adr. Yes, to set debate 'twixt the dearest friends,
To ruin husbands in their states and honors,
Nay, Kingdoms, Empires; in a word, for certain,
As they bring men into the world, so certain
Do they ruin all our joys.

Phil. You speak from malice, friend, I fear, not from judgment;
For you must give your opinion the lie, when you consider,
That our Prince that governs us had a mother,
Who, whilst she lived, did govern him.

Adr. It works. She was a Queen ordained by heaven and so
Indeed, that she partaks none of her sexe's
Ill, nor weaknesses. Name another.

Phil. She Is easily seen, did not your malice blind you;
The Princess Aurelia.

Adr. As she is a part of her divine Mother, I grant her excellent;
But that laid by, she is but a woman.

Phil. But a woman, would you have her a monster, would ye?


Adr. I must close with him, I am satisfied.
How his blood stirs at naming her.
Sir, I Will admit those two to have some worth.

Phil. You had a mother Sir, and you have now a sister,
Most perfect as I hear; will you bar them
From all that is worthy?

Enter a Servant. Ser. The Duke calls for you, he thinks your Lordships well
On your journey by this time.

Phil. Pray let him know no other.


Adr. Dear friend, your pardon.

Exe. Adr. and Ser.
Phil. I do not like this carriage of Adrastus,
He makes a greater show of love to me
Then usual, pretending a strange hatred
Against the nobler sex of women; noble, because
Dearest Aurelia's one. How blessed am I,
Though I dare only whisper to my self, I am beloved by her.
My plot was prosperous, and she one of my best assistants,
To whose dear care I owe my happiness,
For by thy means, I did receive the first hope,
That I was beloved above what she made show of.

Enter Miranthe. Mir. And from me you must receive assurance of the contrary.


Phil. Ha! that Aurelia loves me not.


Mir. She Is so far from loving you now, that she Does hate her self, that
e're she did


Phil. Oh! I am wretched, from what a pitch of happiness
Thou have thrown me in an instant, 'twas unkindly done; yet,
So soon to let me see thou have abused me
By thy flatteries, in this thou have disturbed,
More then informed my judgment.

Mr. How?


Phil. For, what care I for knowledge of that truth,
That brings a certain ruin?

Mir. She did love you, and may again; crosses in love are ordinary.


Phil. She Will hear me speak, that I may know the cause,
At least, of her displeasure.

Mir. I know she will not, her heart's so swollen with some offenses.


Phil. I have no other comfort left me but my innocence
Each accident does cross me. Tomorrow I must
Leave the Court, to wait upon the Prince;
How shall I get an opportunity to speak to her,
The loss of time will ruin me, I must
By Letters make her know my innocence.

Mir. When you are gone, if I can learn the cause
Of her displeasure, l'le write.

Phil. Thou art all my comfort.

Exeunt.
Enter Lucinda and Linda. Luc. See, Linda, what I found too in my Cabinet,
Looking indeed for one of my dear brother,
Kind Adrastus Letters.

Lind. Believe me, Madam, the language of this Letter,
Considering the sweetness of the youth that sent it,
Would have moved pity, if not procured love,
From any other, but your cruel self.

Luc. Alas, good wench, I see thou have a tender heart;
In truth I would it had been writ to thee.

Lind. Well, Madam, you think none worthy but your brother Adrastus.


Luc. I do indeed believe so; who equals him in worth?
And till I find one something near him, I shall not
Think of Marriage, I assure thee; for, my beauty,
Which gives place to none, will not permit me
To accept a servant, that is not equal to the best deserver.

Lind. Madam, though natural affection stop your ears,
Against all reports, that do not sound Adrastus praise;
Yet, I by others hear, Philanthus and the young Prince,
In all respects far praised above him.

Luc. Philanthus!


Lin. Why, Madam, speak you with so much scorn, he is now
Accounted the glory of the Court, a man framed
Both for Love and Arms.

Luc. Pish.


Lind. You never saw him.


Luc. Nor nere desire.


Lind. Well, Madam, you are strangely averse, take heed
Love do not lay some punishment upon you,
Equal to your contempt of his great deity.

Luc. Contempt of his great deity, had he a temple
Standing near, dedicated to him, and to his
Mother both, I would go in and yerk his little worship:
Or should she say, I were not fairer then her self,
And more to be adored, I Would break her Statue,
And those, whom by my beauty are captive made,
Should in th'stead of it, erect my Picture, frowning too,
That any should presume to love me; yet in those
Clouds, more powerful to draw men's hearts to my devotion,
Flourish. Then she, with all her wanton blandishments.
Exeunt.
Enter Duke, Adrastus, Aurelia, Courtiers, and Servant. Duk. Daughter, me
thinks you are sad, is it for your
Brothers absence, -- he is now upon return.

Aur. I am not sad, Sir, it is but your conjecture.


Duk. Adrastus, are there no sports, no pleasures to delight her?

Floris^
Adr. None, Sir, the Court is clouded in the absenc^ of the Prince.


Duk. What means this Trumpet? one go see.


Serve. A stranger Knight, Sir, one that desires to be admitted to your presence.


Enter Herald. Duk. We Will hear what he demands: What would ye?


Her. Great Duke, know, that this Knight is hither come,
To repair himself by Arms, of an injury
He has received; nor can he fear, so just a Prince
As your self, will break an honorable custom,
That has been so long used amongst your Ancestors.

Duk. It cannot, nor it shall not be refused.


Her. Is Adrastus in this company?


Adr. Yes, I am the man.


Her. Then, Sir, my Master will maintain with his life,
That you have belyed a Knight, equal to your self
In merit, in whose behalf he is come to prove,
That you have wickedly invented that,
Which you have said of him.

Adr. Though I do not know your Master, which might excuse
A man of my birth; yet, confident in mine own innocence,
As having wronged no man, I do accept the Combat.
Get me my Armor, nor shall it longer be deferred,
There cannot be more noble witness.

Duk. Adrastus, I prise you too much, to suffer it.


Adr. How, Sir? then may my arms rot off, if ever I
Lift them in your service; and yet my heart
Misgives me in this occasion, more
Then ever. Push is it not before divinest,
Aurelia? I shall do wonders.
Exit.
Aur. What can this stranger be? or what can
Be the wrong, he now seeks right of from Adrastus,
Whose valor makes him famous through the world?

Enter young Gudgen and his man. Y. G. Save your refulgent grace.


Duk. How now, who are you?


Y. G. A poor favourit of you graces, that desires to be better acquainted.


Duk. A favourit of mine, how came you so?


Y. G. Knowing my self fitly qualified, and well accoutred, as they say, I
made bold to venture a sum of money.


Duk. Is this he?


2. Yes, Sir.


Duk. I am bound to you, it seems you love me well, that would buy my service,
venturing in it my refusal of ye too.


Y. G. Yes, in good faith, I love ye very well; I have heard in the Country a
good report of you; besides, you are bound to love me too, by my place.


Duk. Who swore you, your own imagination?


Y. G. Swore me, why, do you misdoubt me? I warrant ye, Sir, I Will execute it
rarely. -- Stand by there, the Duke is busy, another time he will hear you.


Duk. We shall be troubled with this Ass.


Y. G. Take away this fellow, you hear what the Duke says,


Duk. Take him away, this is not a time for fooling, I am serious.


Y. G. Your grace is wise, it is true indeed. See the Councill-Chamber made
ready, it is a business of great importance, worthy your fear. I would my old
father were here, we two would advise you rarely i faith.


Duk. A way, coxcomb.


Y. G. He has a villainous head of his own, he will tell you how many acres of
land are in your Dukedom, and never measure it.


Duke How?


Y. G. Another shall measure it for him.


Cour. Away with this fool.

strikes up Gudgens heels
Y. G. Slight! what do you use a young Gentleman and a favorite thus, that
comes out of his mere love to Court?


2. He Is quite discouraged, that rude fellow has spoiled all.


1. Not a whit, if I do not raise him to a belief above what he had, never
trust my skill.


Y. G. 'Twas you Sir, that made me believe, I should rise at Court.


1. Why, so you do; but you are no ordinary Favorite, they rise first, and
fall after commonly; but you shall rise after your fall.

Flourish, Charge.
2. It Is not without example.

Exeunt.
Enter Adrastus and Philanthus. Duk. Are the Knights ready?


1. Yes, Sir, see where they enter.


Duk. Then let the justice of the injured's cause protect them

they sight.
1. Was ever seen a braver Combat?


Duk. 'Twere pity to lose such Knights, perhaps their quarrel,
Truly understood, may not be great.

Aur. The stranger does appear the braver.


Duk. I fear Adrastus. Sweet daughter, make trial of your power,
To stay the Combat, it is an an office will become you.

Aur. Most willingly. Sir, I beseech you hold.

She pulls him, and he turning suddenly, her fear makes her fall; he offering
to help her, Adrastus comes behind; but he recovering himself, lays Adrastus
at his feet.
Phil. Traitor, this baseness will express thee.


Aur. Hold, Sir, I adjure you by her whom you
Best love, give me his life.

Phil. Let him confess the wrong he has basely
Done to me, and her whom you adjure me
By; and he shall live by your command,
Though far unworthy to be so obliged.

Adr. I am dead else, I do, or any thing.


Phil. Live then, to be more miserable then death could make thee.


Duk. Be careful of Adrastus, but see this stranger
Receive no injury, from any of Adrastus friends.
Though ye have fought with one that we love dearly,
Yet, I so much admire your courtesy
And valor, that I should think my Court
Much honored by your stay.
Flourish.
Adr. Friends, if you love me or my fortunes, revenge me,
The way I leave to your discretion.

Friends. Enough, we will die or doot',
Notwithstanding the Dukes command.
Ex. omnes
Finis Actus secundi.
Actus tertius.
Enter Lucinda and Linda. Luc. LIghted that armed Knight that rid fast by, at
that little house?


Lin. He did Maddam, this fine day has tempt you
To walk further then you think: they say there is often
Robberies done in this wood.

Luc. Alas poor wench art afraid.


Enter Adrastus, Friends. Luc. What are these that make this haste.
Oh Maddam, thieves I fear.

1. Saw you a Knight ride by here, dear Lady is it you


Luc. Well met sir, yes I saw him, how does my brother?
Oh speak, I long to know, I dreamt of him to night.

1. Maddam I fear your brother is no more.


Luc. Ha? dead? Oh speak it not, for I shall bear him company.


1. Rather show us which way that Knight went, the Author of his death.
That so we may revenge his murder.

Luc. Oh heavens, murdered? yet you are just ye powers
That makes me thus the instrument of his revenge.
I will not wash this hand kercher in womanish tears,
But first in the murderers blood, then cleanse it again
With tears for my dear Brother.

2. But Maddam, which way went he?


Luc. I Will bring you where you cannot miss him, it is
Not long since I saw him enter a little house.
As we came walking hither.

Enter an old man, and an old woman. Wom. Now his wounds are dressed, he sleeps
soundly.


Man. Alas good gentleman, he takes our poor entertainment kindly.
He said at first he would come hither when he went to fight.

Wom. I wonder his man that dressed him, stays so long.
Enter Lucinda, Linda, and friends. It Is not far to the next Town.

O Man. What are these? thieves?


1. Stop their mouths, he sleeps, shall I strike him dead?


Luc. No let me see the Murderer first, sure he looks ugly.
You need not kill him, let the law seize on him.

2. Maddam I would not have him wake, he is stout.
'Twil not be in our powers to compel him.
By all the gods, it is Philanthus, but he shall die.

Luc. Stay -- it must be by my hand, no other.
I am most injured, and so most interested in the revenge.

1. Alas you are not able.


Luc. Leave it to me, or else by all that is sacred:
I Will lay you open to the Law give me your Dagger:
Retire and leave me.

1. Alas Maddam you.


Luc. Are you such fools, not to be content
To have a dangerous enterprise effected, and your selves
Freed from danger of the Law, none will supect me.

2. Maddam, if he should wake.


Luc. Stay you without, and if you hear me call
For help: come in, not, otherwise.

1. We dare not disobey you, her own great spirit
And the much love she bears her brother, makes her,
Forget her sex.

1. But we shall lose your thanks, since she performs it.


2. Not a whit, he shall not know it for us, how ere
She Is a witness of our zeal to do it; and we are free
From danger of the Law, if ever the deed be known.

Enter Lucinda. Luc. It Is done, away, he welters in his blood, leave all to me.


2. But what for these?


Luc. Fie, no, it is unnecessary, by giving Gold,
I Will make them speechless ever, but now I better
Think, bear them into some wood and bind them
But hurt them not.

1. Maddam, it is possible, your brother may not yet b^ dead.
How ere this act will please him much.

Lu. Not dead? this may be malice, then if it be known,
I Will Justify the Act, if not the thanks and recompense
Be you from him. I Will send, and know the truth of all.

Lin. Oh Maddam I never thought you could have done a wickedness like this.
The wounds which you have given will strike
Your own soul deep one day.

Lin. Oh fool the wounds I have received are far more dangerous,
Then those that I have given.

Lin. Maddam your own hand's cut.


Luc. It Is so, all the blood thou see came only from thence.
Let me with better leisure look on what I have preserved.
His travel makes him sleep sound.

Lin. Madam, how blessed were you to change your cruel resolution.
Some Angel prompted you to save him from those
Murderers, by seeming, as if you did your self intend to be one.

Luc. There was no other way; but the good angel
That prompted me, was Love; 'twas strange I should
Be taken by a sleeping man, that have from all eyes
That have seen me, almost banished sleep,
To think upon my beauty, which must be now
My part for him; for, I have lost my self
By saving him, since I am sister to his enemy.
Yet, he may love like me, when he intends revenge:
But shall I be so lovely when I sleep, and he behold
Some stand ready to murder me, so making
Pity usher love into his heart, as into mine?
For all ways else have been before attempted
To make me amorous, none prevailed: Oh no,
It cannot be, he stirrs, away.
I must do something,
What, I cannot tell:
Who loves, and dares not say, he lives in hell.
Exeunt.
Enter Aurelia and Miranthe. Aur. Miranthe, have you known valor, and so
little courtesy,
meet in the person of one man so fully,
As in this Knight that overcame Adrastus?

Mir. Madam, his valor did appear to all,
But wherein he behaved himself discourteously,
I am yet to learn.

Aur. What Knight but he, would have refused to stay
Their Combat, when I, a Princess,
Not to be contemned, besought him?

Mir. Oh, Madam, how unjust you are, since you accuse him
In that, wherein you ought to thank him?
You saw, when through your fear you fell, he turned
To take you up, by which he did receive
A wound, I feat too mortal, by that most base
Adrastus; and if he had given over the Combat
Afterward, when you desired, his enterprise
Had been most vain from the beginning:
Adrastus had not then confessed, that you or any
Might have heard, the lies he had invented.
But Philanthus is most unfortunate, to have
His best deservings still misinterpreted.

Aur. How! was it Philanthus that fought? me thought indeed,
The voice was his* but he being thought so far off,
Kept me from being certain.

Mir. It escaped my tongue before I was aware,
Now I must make it good. Yes, Madam, it was Philanthus,
To whom I did give notice in a Letter,
How much Adrastus injured you and him,
By saying, Philanthus boasted of the great love
You bare him, in every place, and that you partly did
Believe, he spoke but truth, which was the cause
Of your displeasure.

Aur. Is It then Philanthus has done me this displeasure?
Durst he put my honor on the hazard of fortune?
Durst he capitulate and make conditions,
When I did beg Adrastus life? am I so miserable,
That I was gladder to receive, then he to give
What I did ask?

Mir. Oh poor Philanthus, how happy art thou, if the wound
Thou did receave, helping her up, have freed
Thee from those greater torments, which her cruelty
Prepares, in recompense of all thy faithful services.
But, Madam when I think on it, did not you say,
He was to right himself with his sword, if he knew
No other remedy; and with more secrecy, or more
Discretion, it was to bar the action, all
Thinking Philanthus to be far hence,
Even when he drew their eyes to wonder at his valor.

Aur. Peace, no more of him, you praise him without cause.


Mir. Without cause?
When as his death, caused by your cruelty,
More then his wounds, shall make the world know,
'Twas he that overcame Adrastus, and for your sake,
As well as for his own. How will the virtuous
People tax you, of your great injustice?

Aur. I must confess, I should be very sorry his death
Should give the world a knowledge of my follies.

Mir. Be not you cruel to him, and prevent it.


Aur. Nay, let him love himself, and save me a labor.


Mir. Madam, he cannot love that, which he thinks you hate.


Aur. He Is neither worthy of my hate nor love.


Mir. Madam, it is impossible there should be that indifferency
Toward Philanthes, whom you must either love,
Or hate extremely.

Enter Agenor. Aur. Well then, I do not hate him, my brother; upon your life
Let him not know, that I do know the stranger was
Philanthus. Miranthe, seek not to excuse him, he is a most
Discourteous Knight, and I do hate him deadly.

Age. Who Is that she speaks of?


Mir. The stranger-Knight.


Age. Believe me, fister, you had no reason.


Aur. Well, Sir, I know mine own reasons best.


Age. But, sister, when you hear mine, which are stronger,
You Will be of another mind.

Aur. You may as soon persuade the fixed Stars
To move, as me from my opinion. 'Twas sure
Some enchantment that overcame Adrastus.

Age. Then you will abandon reason quite, this truly shows,
You women think your foes your friends, your friends your foes.
Exeunt.
Enter Philanthus, and Lucinda's Servants. Phil. Villains, for what respect
is it, that you do preserve
Me longer, to torment me? why did you not rather
Kill me, when you found me sleeping first?

Ser. 'Twas not in our commission, you are reserved to feel
A thousand torments, to which death is a pleasure.

Phil. From what person living have I deserved such usage?


Ser. I Will let you know your misery, the more to torment you.
Know, that we are servants to a Lady, the most malicious
And deformed, that ever lived; so great
An enemy to virtue, that it is her only study
To destroy those men in whom it does inhabit.
Her vigilance for mischief is ever busy.
It seems she has found you out to wreak her spite upon,
Intending here to keep you ever, except she shall
Prove merciful, and kill you.

Phil. If her hate to me only proceed from a belief,
That I am virtuous, it seems she knows me not,
I am not such. But if thou be a gentle villain,
Tell me, where I am.

Ser. Far from the house, in which we found you sleeding,
And now in the most loathed Prison, that ever eyes
Beheld, if eyes can be of use in so much darkness;
Your chiefest companions must be Toads, Snakes,
And Froggs, except two villains sometimes, as now, ready stand,
To inflict torments, that cannot be expressed.

Phil. Oh that I could but see, and were unloos'd, that with my fist
I might reward thee for this kind relation.

Ser. Screech Owls and Ravens, shall fill thy ears continually
With dismal sounds. Hark.
Recorders.
Phil. Sure some power, pitying the misery that I must suffer,
Gives me this farewell to all happiness.

Ser. Now begins your torments, but that they may be more
Sensible, let him see him his misery.
they unvail him.
Phil. Amazment seizes me, is this a loathed Prison?
Or this the harsh and dismal notes of wicked birds?
Or look these men as they would stab, rather adore me.
What do I fool my self, this is a dream.
I am sure asleep.

Ser. Propose your wishes, and we are ready to effect them,
As far as lies in human power.

Phil. This is no dream, I am awake, this is my hand,
And these my hairs, I feel pain, now I pull them.
Sure it is a vision, or worse enchantment; the wicked Mistress
Of this house, to all her other ills, is certainly a witch.
Enter Lucinda. I am confirmed it is so, for here she comes,
Changed in a form equal to Aurelia, and far more
Gently does she look upon me, than she did at our parting.

Luc. Sir, you are welcome, if there be defect in any thing,
It comes from negligence of servants, not from my will.
A valiant Knight, and fly thus from a Lady!

Phil. What should I fear, she cannot hurt my mind
With all her art, how ere she may my person.
Besides, she will change her form, and look before she do me ill.
This shape can naught produce, that can offend.

Luc, Pray you sir, sit.


Phil. I will.


Luc. Not so far off, if you please.


Phil. You think I fear.


Luc. No, Sir; but I perceive, you are not confident of what you see.
Sir, recollect your self; for what you heard
Before from these, was but what I directed,
With an intent indeed, to set off, as with a foil,
This mean but hearty entertainment.

Phil. I dare not trust you, you speak too well,
To mean well, since I am a stranger,
And no way have deserved these favors.

Ser. My Lady, Sir, has told you truth.


Luc. Save your pains, leave us, I Will clear his understanding.

Exeunt Servants.
Phil. The danger now approches, if she be a witch.
Wickedness desires no witness.

Luc. Sir, if ere you loved, which yet I wish you had not,
Then the discourse I am to make, will with more ease
Approach your understanding, and soon gain belief.
I am a Lady as you see, not much deformed;
The Servants and the stuff here are not borrowed,
Nor will it hurt my state thus daily to entertain
Such, as I make my friends; and such my birth is,
As bids me live thus without tax of pride.
I am mine own disposer, no Parents to blame
My disobedience, though my choice should only
Please my self: They live not, or if they did,
My fortune was not wholly left by them.

Phil. You are in a happy state, since you have power
To make some noble spirit fortunate, and you in him.
Sure she is really what she relates.

Luc. I might have been most happy, if my unlucky Stars
Had not in one particular crossed me.

Phil. Your courtesy obliges me, to ask you wherein?
I vow she weeps, the tears, like Oriental Pearls,
Drop from her eyes making a path down
Her most lovely cheeks, that may direct the looker on,
If lost in wonder, as I am, to find the way
Back to those heavenly springs, from whence all treasure
Flows, rich above Tagus, or what poets ever feigned.
Speak, gentle Lady, why this sorrow?

Luc. They are not tears of sorrow, but of anger,
To see my liberty thus lost, that liberty,
Which I have so much prised, as some have thought
There was just cause to think me proud, and then to lay
My self and all my fortunes, even at mine enemies feet.
Oh misery, have I not cause, think you, to weep,
And curse my cruel Stars, that force me to do this?

Phil. I must confess, it is a hard fate for to be subject
To ones enemy: But sure your merits have the power to turn
That enmity to friendship, if you please.
Be plain, and let me know your meaning;
And, with the hazard of my life, I Will serve you.

Luc. Then thus: I hated you above all creature living,
The cause seek not to know, for it is impossible; nay came
With an intent to see you murdered; but when I saw you
Though you then slept, the graces all, me-thought,
Dwelt in you face, and so protected you from harm;
That I that came with all that malice, became
Your sole preserver, and not content with that, straight way
I made you absolute commander of me and mine.

Phil. You amaze me.


Luc. But not intending that you e're should know me,
Nor the place of my abode, if you returned not love,
I made my servants bring you thus blind fold
Hither, lest you might boast my love hereafter.

Phil. Madam, it is a most strange discourse that you have made,
And yet you so deliver it, that I must think it
Truth; but what to answer, I am ignorant.
It Is best I should be plain, since you desire to be so.
Then must you know, that my unhappy Stars
Make me incapable to receive the unequal treasure,
Which you offer in your rich self. A Lady, like your self,
To say more fair, were false, has long since robbed
Me of the power, to be my own disposer.

Luc. I feared indeed, that so much worth as you are Master of,
Could not be undispos'd of, since where is that woman
Would not use her utmost art, to gain a servant,
That she might so justly glory in. I desire to know
Her name yet, that I may pay her beauty and her wisdom,
That respect it merits, for loving you.

Phil. Madam, I must not; but, trust me, she is too wise to love
Me still, for she has found me now of late, much 'much
Defective; but I do hope, my constancy will
Make supply; for, I vow, my affection and my life have
But one date.

Luc. Say you so, this protestation has much lessened
The opinion I held of your worth: Perhaps you say
This, to avoid my importunity, which I do too much
Apprehend. I am no ravisher; may be, when you shall see
Some greedily pursue what you do, with such scorn, refuse,
And those perhaps your equals, you will find too late,
You fondly have pursued your misery, and fled
From a great happiness, and begin to make you
Feel your folly* I Will tie you to this hard condition,
As I believe you will account it.

Phil. What is it, Lady? there is but one woman's threatening,
That can affright me.

Luc. Say you so, I Will try that; tell me that woman's name,
The place of her abode, or by my hopes of happiness,
I Will make you the most miserable man alive;
For, you shall never see again, what you so cov^^ enjoy.

Phil. You are witty in your anger, this is no ef^^^ of that great love,
That you professed; it may be, time will make me
Better know your worth. Methinks you look m^ lovely
Then you did, though at the first fair.

Luc. Oh Sir, do you begin to flatter: Her name, name,
And with it, liberty; if you deny, to prison.

Phil. No other way.

Luc. None, as I live; can you expect from me, the injured,
Any favor? Could I invent a way more to afflict y^^
You should be sure to feel it.

Phil. What shall I do? the choice is hard:
How can this any way advantage you?

Luc. If she be more deserving than my self,
I shall not then repine to be refused; if less,
Contemn you for your folly; and do not fear,
That I will make another partner of
The secret, which may be troubles you.

Phil. If I have not lost it, I am happy; read the direction of this Letter.


Luc. Let Us see it.


Phil. Aurelia made me so direct my Letters, so^^ deceive,
If any by misfortune should be seen.

Luc. To the fair hands of the most admired Lucinda.
How Is this? he must not see my blushing, this cannot be.
It may; How? I am transported betwixt joy and fear?
Swear by the gods, Lucinda is the creature you most affect.

Phil. There Is no help, she is too wise to be deceived.


Luc. Come, swear.


Phil. By Aurelia's self, the greatest oath, I lvoe no other then Aurelia.


Luc. All my hopes thus again vanished. You are free,
Enter Servants. And I the most unfortunate. Sir, you must be contented,
They bear you back as you came hither; and think,
What you have seen or heard, was but a dream.
Exit.
Phil. Thus I refuse, cruel Aurelia, for thy sake,
A beauty, that the powerful gods might rivalls make.

Ser. Sir, we must bear you many leagues hence.


Phil. Even where you please.

Exeunt.
Enter the two Courtiers. 1. He Is stark mad, with the conceit of his Favorites
place.


2. You Will never make him know himself.


1. The better: you see, he makes good sport at Court.


2, Take heed, it may be there are some that do believe, you brought him to
mock them.


1. If there be any there so simple to believe that, then I have personated
those I know not of, and I am glad on it


2. I, but to touch upon the name or actions of a Favourit, may bear equal
danger with those of Princes.


1. If this fool Favourit of ours do trouble any other, tell them, that Jewels
receive their luster from a foyl; if then not satisfied, they are near a kin to
him in judgment, and envious to me; yet, I forgive them, knowing their malice
cannot hurt my innocence, who rather wish to receive an injury my self, then
touch at any, whose fooling is not their greatest merit; I mean, their only
hope of rising. Here comes our Gallant.


Enter Gudgen and his Man. Y. G. Tell my Lords man, I am wondrous busy, and
cannot speak with him these two hours.


Man, I will, an't please your honor. He Is stark mad, but I must humor him.


2. What Lord's man?


1. There Is none to speak with him, it is his fancy.


Y. G. In good faith, Sir, I cannot do it for you.


Man. I am very sorry for it.


Y. G. I must not waste my stock of favor, on so unreasonable businesses.
Greater profit. I, ye say true; I know it will be the greater profit: But, Sir,
'twill likewise raise much envy against me, and I am not very well settled; the
great men apprehend the danger of my rising, and study how to give a stop to
all my hopes.


Man. Very like, Sir.


Y. G. Oh, Sir, assure your self, in any other thing I shall be ready to serve
you. Farewell, noble Sir.


Man. Now I must go.


Y. G. Pox of this coxcomb, why does he trouble me? Yet, it is good policy to
speak him fair to his face, I may have use of him. Please your grace, this is a
friend of mine, a deserving man.


Man. Alas, Sir.


Y. G. I humbly thank your grace. Your suit is granted.


Man. Is it?


Y. G. But with great difficulty. Sir, this man's suit is most impertinent,
himself an idle, ill natured, and seditious fellow; I have known him long.
Away, you are saucy. Madam, your husband shall have the place, I vow it is for
your sake only. Command you? no, Madam: I Will wait on you at your lodging,
sweet Madam. Gentlemen, you must pardon me, I cannot hear you now, you see his
grace has sent for me in haste, pray tell him that I come. You are
importunate, Get the Coach there hoe.


Man. Yes, Sir.

Exeunt.
2. This is direct madness, and yet he speaks more sense, than ere he did in
his life, but that he speaks to no body.


1. Nay, th'Ass is strangely mixed; sometimes he will have starts of wit, that
would almost cosen a man.


2. He would pass for a very accomplished Gentleman amongst some women; but
that his hoping to be a Favourit discovers him.


Enter Gudgen and his Man. Y. G. Slave, not my Coach ready?


2. What, the scene's changed now, the Lady is Sprat again.


Y. G. My Coach, thou cur.


Man. How many horses, Sir?


Y. G. Six, thou peasant.


Man. An't please your honor, will not Cut, and your father's dung-Cart serve
to day, I Will be the Coachman.


Y. G. Be dumb, thou traitor, do thou not know, Obedience, not advice,
belongs to servants; but I will teach thee how to be malepert, thou Brock.


1. Nay, Sir, for this time let me beg his pardon; besides, Sir, spend not your
rage so poorly. Hark you, Sir.


Y. G. How?


1. It must be so, your reputation is in danger else; a Favourit must be noble,
of a great spirit, careless of danger.


Y. G. Why, Sir, then I am right; I care so little for danger, I would never
come near it; and if danger approach me, it had better keep farther off, it
shall be sure of cold entertainment.


1. You are wise, Sir, I believe it.


Y. G. Wise, I would have you know,
Ere all be done, the world shall think me so.

1. I, Sir, we find the weight of it.

Exeunt
Finis Actus tertii.
Actus quartus.
Enter Philanthus. Phil. HOW strange a fortune have I run, since I did leave
The Court; but it most vexes me, to be ungrateful to
Her, that saved my life, though not by love; yet there
Might be some other way to serve her, did I know
Her name. Why, sure me thinks I Am free, since it is her will,
That bars me from the means, to know her. I have
No comfort left, but in the faithful friendship of the Prince.
His Sister is become cruel, I fear unconstant.
Adrastus, how will he entertain me?

Enter Adrastus. Adr. Ha, is it his ghost, or he himself? he lives I my hopes
are vain.


Phil. What means he, he cannot suspect 'twas I that overcame him.


Adr. I must dissemble. My dearest friend, where have you been
These many days? How it joys me to have you in these arms?
A Serpent or a Fury had been more welcome.
The Court, Sir, languishes in your absence, and reason,
Wanting you, the luster of it.

Phil. Rather in your sickness, Sir; Now you are well, it will recover quickly.


Adr. You have heard, it seems, of my dysaster.


Phil. I heard, Fortune envying your worth, became your enemy.
But, was the Combat equal, had he no odds in Horse nor Arms?

Adr. Something there was in that, but my respect to the Princess
Was most prejudicial to me; yet since, she has
Requited me, with so much love and care of my health,
That I esteem my self most happy to have received those wounds
And with them, such assurance of her affection.

Phil. How Is this?


Adr. I Will vex his soul with jealousy?


Phil. It cannot be.


Adr. If he accuse me for these words, I Will combat him,
And so recover my honor lost, or lose my life.
'Twas fortune, not his valor, that of recame me.

Phil. Oh woman, woman, what art thou?


Adr. Philanthus, what is it that troubles you? if any secret grief,
Discover it to me, whom you may boldly trust;
For I have told you, what to no other creature
Living I would discover, though wracked.

Phil. I am wracked indeed.


Adr. Come, speak man, be free, my friendship to you does command it.


Phil. I am of a sudden sick.


Adr. And that is my case: How I could hug my self for this?


Phil. Your pardon, Sir, I am not very well, I Will to my Chamber.


Adr. Shall I wait on you?


Phil. By no means.

Exit
Adr. A fine excuse, alas poor shallow lover.
Fortune, why do thou thus assist an ignorant
Against me? Why should she love him, and neglect me
Thus, that am so much in Art his Master? he has a smoother face,
And more youth about him; th'Adamants,
That draw a giddy Lady. I see him coming back,
I do not like it; I Will make as if I did not see him.

Enter Philanthus. Phil. Friend. He goes away. Adrastus.


Adr. I cannot hear.

Exit.
Phil. He will not hear. How base a wretched thing
Is a dissembler of which Adrastus is the chief.
With what a show of love he entertained me,
As if his soul were joy'd at sight of me;
When by the lie he did invent of me, and of the Princess,
I know he hates me: What a madness is it then in me,
To believe that, which he spoke of her love to him;
He Is sure too cunning to discover it, if it were true,
To me especially. Child that I was, I now find out his plot,
Suffering my passion to give him an assurance
Of my affection to Aurelia, which before
He only could suspect. -- See the sweet Prince.

Enter. Agenor. Age. Thou partner of my soul, where have thou been?


Phil. Oh Sir, the strangest fortune has befalln me, since
I received your Letter, that ever man encountered,
Too long to be told you now. But how go matters at Court?
What say they of the stranger, I mean, of me?

Age. My sister most unjustly hates you, and no persuasions
Can as yet alter her, as you are a stranger too.
I left her with a Gypsy and his daughter, who tells
The strangest things that e're were heard; indeed he tells
You almost what you can desire to know, men's fortunes past,
And, I think, that which is to come too, if he please:
Sure he is really a Conjurer,

Phil. I long to see and talk with this rare man,
But more your beauteous sister, if she will dain
To cast her heavenly eyes on so despised a subject.

Age. Come, fear it not, time will pacify that unjust anger,
That she conceived against you.

Phil. I fear she is unconstant.


Age. If she love any other, nay, if she love not Philanthus,
She Is no more my sister, but in name; a stranger
To my blood and my affection.

Phil. I do fear, if there be any body by, they will discover
By my distemper, the affection, which except to your dearselfe,
I have from all concealed.

Age. It shall be as you desire it. Come, leave these down-cast looks;
I could complain of my hard fate in love;
Here Is a greater witness of my Mistress scorn than ever,
She almost swears here never to love me;
There was some hope before, but I forget.
Each one in his own cause is tedious,
Taxes an other that is guilty in the same.
Exeunt
Enter Aurelia, Adrastus, Miranthe, Linda, and a Gypsy. Aur. Come, Sir, what
can you say to this hand?


Gip. You have been much in love, and there was cause
You should be so, your servant was most worthy.
But you of late have been unkind, perhaps
You love another; I can, but will not tell you at this time.

Au. This is partly truth. Show him your hand.


Mir. I defy him to tell any thing of me.


Gip. You Are a good dull soul, you neither think of love nor hate;
To wait upon your Lady is all your pleasure.

Aur. In troth it is true.


Lind. Pray, Sir, look on mine.


Gip. You Are wondrous amorous, and have already changed
Three Servants, the better for the worse still.

Aur. Upon my knowledge, Sir, you have told most certain truth.


Enter Agenor. Age. 'Save ye, sister. Can this man tell any thing?
Sir, show your skill on me, but to my self;
I would not have them hear what you conjecture:
More I know you cannot of no man's fortune.

Gip. You Will straight believe the contrary, your hand's
So easy, that I could almost tell every particular
Of your whole life; at least, your passages
Of love, which is the skill that I profess.

Age. Let Us hear.


Aur. Adrastus, has he seen your hand yet?


Adr. No, Madam, it is to no purpose, he can tell nothing.


Aur. I am not of your mind. It seems my brother
Will not have us know his fortune.

Gip. You were in love at seven years old, as much as that age
Could admit, and have continued the most constant living,
Upon the smallest hopes; and it is not long since
You received a great discouragment, yet still you love,
And much I fear in vain.

Age. It Is true, this makes me admire your skill.


Gip. You are as true a friend, as you are a lover too,
And you in that will be unfortunate.

Age. It is impossible.


Gip. I may fail, but I speak according to my art.


Adr. What think you of him?


Age. I think him a rare man.


Adr. I Will see if he can make me think him so.
Now, Sir, shall I entreat you to show your skill.

Gip. You will not have me speak aloud.


Adr. Why not aloud?


Gip. I will not; you have been a lover more then once, and still
Unfortunate; first, by your own unconstancy, your quarells
Too, have been no advancement to your reputation lately;
And more disgraces shall light on you, till you return
Unto your first affection: the gods are much displeased.
Be good, and reconcile your self to heaven.

Adr. A strange fellow, but I Will seem to contemn him.
The most ignorant might have told what he tells me,
Of which number I believe him one.

Gip. Say you so, pray let me see your hand once more.


Adr. Well, Sir.


Gip. Your own arm being too weak to defend you against your enemy,
I find, you basely have employed the arms of others.

Adr. Ha!


Gip. I find something like a murder written in this Line.


Adr. This fellow is a devil; besides, I see my falsehood does not thrive.


Aur. What says he to you?


Adr. He is indeed a rare man, and I recant,
And much esteem him and his skill.

Age. I see he has told you things that please you.


Adr. He has so.

Exit.
Age. Sister, if you love me.


Aur. Well, you know I can deny you nothing; I would not see him else.
How I long to speak with him, yet I Will torment him too.
It troubles me to think, my brother divides
The channel of his love, which else would wholly
Run in one continued stream to me.
Enter Agenor. I esteem you learned above all those I ever saw or heard of.
This evening, Sir, we will talk at better leisure.
Now I desire all to retire and leave me.
Exeunt Gypsy, and Maids. Now, brother, where is Philanthus?

Age. Friend.


Enter Philanthus. Phil. How I tremble: Were I to enter Combat against a Lion,
Nay, against an Host of men, methinks I should not
Be thus fearful. I know, it is not my part
To play the passionate Lover, she will laugh at me.
But I have lost that power I had over my passion,
By her unkindnesse, nor can I hide the sorrows of my heart.
she offers to go away.
Age. Whither, sister, did not you promise to hear him?


Aur. Whom?


Age. Philanthus.


Aur. Yes, but I see nothing but a statue, there is neither
Sound nor motion comes from that.

Phil. It is your cruelty that has transformed me then.
Dear Madam, tell me, from what can grow this alteration?
If any false report have done it, it is great injustice
To believe an enemy wronging a friend, and not
To hear that friend first answer for himself.

Aur. Philanthus, I do not complain at all, why do you go about
To justify your self, before you be accused?

Phil. Madam, why am I then banished from
Your presence, and your favor?

Aur. 'Twas your occasion drew you from the Court,
For ought I know; and for my favor, I never
Doated on you, nor do I hate you now.

Age. Yet, sister, this cold answer does not become
That love, which you, on my knowledge, desired,
That he should think you bear him.

Aur. Brother, I must acknowledge, that I love and honor Philanthus merits;
But yet, I take it, I never so far did engage my self,
As not to be my own disposer; and you too far
Interest your self, in being more a friend to him than me.

Age. As how?


Aur You blind my judgment, which should wholly direct me in my choice:
For he whom you commend of reasonable parts,
Must from me gain respect above the best deserver.
And much I wonder, that Philanthus will call in question
His own merits, for so he does in my opinion, to use you,
As a secundary means, since if he be a man deserves my love,
I hope he thinks, that I have wit to know it.

Phil. Madam, 'twere ignorance in me, or any other, to plead other
Desert, than readiness to obey; and fortune enviously
To me, has still denied such an occasion, as might let you see,
The greatest danger should to me seem none,
Where I might hope to do you any service.

Aur. Your promises are large, and I may perhaps
Meet with employment.

Phil. Madam, if so, I shall believe my self most happy.


Age. Well, dear sister, use him kindly.


Aur. Brother, you did desire, that I should give him hearing,

None by but you: I will exceed that favor,
And wish to enjoy his company alone; pray leave us.

Age. Most willingly.

Exit.
Aur. You may stay, Sir, if you please, except you fear
To be alone with me.

Phil. Madam, why fear, what danger?


Aur. More then you think, I must impart a business to you
In which I shall make trial of
The great love that you profess.

Phil. I am blessed, if you be serious; though I should
Perish in what you employ me, I must
Account my end most fortunate.

Aur. You must swear to perform what I enjoyne you,
According to your power.

Phil. Madam, I vow't, if it be not against mine honor.
I value you above my life, but less then that.

Aur. Well.


Phil. One exception more, and then be what it will.


Aur. What Is that?


Phil. Not to command me to cease to love you.


Aur. Oh! fear it not; and yet I will not promise to love you,
Not when you have performed, what I shall now enjoyne;
Yet, I confess, the service will be most acceptable:
Nor must you make my Brother, though your dearest friend,
Partaker of the secret.

Phil. That Is worst of all.


Aur. Swear.


Phil. I do.


Aur. Then know, that I do hate that Knight, that overcame Adrastus,
More then I love my beauty or my health.

Phil. How?


Aur. This cannot choose but pinch him. And do enjoyne you
By your oath, to find him out, and so deliver him into my hands,
That I may have still power to punish him as I think fit.

Phil. And, Madam, wherefore do you hate him? I heard,
His actions did not deserve it.

Aur. For his discourtesie, and neglect of me.


Phil. Know you of what Country he is?


Aur. No.


Phil. Oh, Madam, I find your plot, you know you shall
Still be importuned by my love, which will
Not give me leave, to let you live in peace;
And therefore you have set me on this useless task.
You are witty in your cruelty.

Aur. Not only so, for I desire to be revenged upon that Knight.


Phil. Will It content you if I kill him?


Aur. No, his punishment I reserve unto my self,
The way to bring him hither, to your own discretion;
By force, or by entreaty, as you please. And so I leave you.
Think on your oath, remember too I promise no reward.

Phil. Nor may I hope one neither.


Aur. You are your own disposer.


Phil. At least allow me this encouragement.
Why should I strive to please this scornful she, that hates me;
Nay, hates me, when I do deserve all love?
The beauteous Lady of the Castle did not so.
Am I not by the gods thus punished, for my ingratitude to her? yes.
Certainly, she saved my life: Her beauty is not much inferior,
Her wit seems equal; how e're, she ought
To be esteemed by me much more. But where is she,
Or what is she, I know not, only
I feel her growing here, here, in my heart.
flourish
Enter Duke, Agenor, Aurelia, Courtiers. Duk. This custom shall no longer be
of use;
The last Combat was granted, it seems,
Has drawn on this.

Age. Your Court will be dishonored by the refusal.
Shall it be said, You protect those, who do wrong
To others, when the guilt perhaps makes them
Too feeble to defend themselves.

Duk. Well be it as you will, I am innocent
Of any blood, that shall this day be shed.

Age. Let the Knight enter.


Enter Gudgen and his Man. Duk. How, Gudgen my favourit? nay, then there is no
great danger: Meant you 'twas he? Which of the women will he challenge?


Aur. Nay rather, how many men at all these weapons.


Y. G. Speak your prose first, and see you be not our before you begin your
legs.


Man. No, I warrant you, Sir, I Will make my (...)rences very sweetly.


Age, Something long a beginning.


Y. G. Take heed your tongue do not discover you.


Man. No, nor my tail neither, I warrant you, as (...) tell it.


Y. G. Remember, born a great way off.


Man. I, I, and not christened; for you are a T^^ you know.


Aur. Now he begins.


Man. Most doughty Duke. Master, what must I call you?


Y. G. Coxcomb.


Man. Oh!


Y. G. Should not name me.


Man. Most doughty Duke, my Master Coxcomb whom you see.


Y. G. Oh slave.


Man. Is come to Court, to show his chivalry against.


Y. G. Speak softly.


Man. Against speak-softly, servant to your grace.


Y. G. Bernardo, servant to your grace, you fool.


Man. Bernardo, servant to your grace, you fool whom if he be within this
dismal place, I him defy throwing the monstrous lie into his ugly throat.


Age. Good poetry.


Man. And should he come, I would not be ins coat:
For sure my Master, who is come thus far,
Will kill him dead before he be aware.
I am his mouth, and I do tell you from him,
My Master, if he come, will soundly bum him.

Y. G. Wool a?


Man. And therefore keep away, if you be wise,
Till I my Trumpet have forth-sounded thrice.

Phil. Methinks the Knight should speak for himself.


Y. G. I do not understand a word of your language.


Duk. Hard luck, how far was your Knight born?


Y. G. Be sure you say far enough, they 'I know me else.


Man. I warrant ye. Beyond the worlds end.


Age. How many miles may that be?


Man. Forty good miles, and more. His Father?


Y. G. Peace, sound again, I am in some fear.


Aur. He Will learn to speak anon.


Y. G. It seems the enemy dares not approach; if he do, I Will send him after
those ten Knights that I killed in Thrace, singly, man after man, though they
assaulted me all at once.


Phil. That Is strange.


Y. G. I, at one blow, with this rusty sword, rusty with being continually
imbrued in blood of brutish beasts,


Man. Indeed he killed a mad Bullock once.


Y. G. Clove to the teeth a monstrous high and mighty mastiff Dog, of a
Leminian Lion's hide.


Age. A Cow's perhaps, his father was a Butcher.


Y. G. Sound the third time. Not yet, how base is he, that dares do injury,
but much more base, that dares not justify his wickedness. Not yet?


Phil. Now he speaks plain.


Y. G. I with this Gun have killed a monstrous Wren.


Man. He come! Hang him coward.


Y. G. Oh that he durst, then would I. What noise is that?


Man. Nothing.


Y. G. I thirst for blood, if there be any here.


Aur. To drink, would he have it?


Y. G. That dare according to ancient books, maintain the beauty of his Lady
against mine. Since the enemy dare not appear, I must be in action.


Age. Where Is yours?

Flourist
Y. G. My squire here shall be she, my valor shall supply that which wants in
beauty.


Duk. None dares. I am weary of this fool.


Y. G. Dare none encounter me, march quite away?
He Is come, but it is too late, I scorn to stay.

Duk. What did you come for?


Y. G. I will tell you the secret, I did come hitherto no end,
And I do mean to depart to as little purpose.
Therefore like other Knights, that make a show
In glittering Armor, as I came I go.
Exeunt Gudg. and his Man.
Phil. Call him back again, he is a rank coward.


Duk. No, let him alone, I Am weary; besides the day is far spent,
And we do lose much better sport; nor were it well
To have him so discouraged.

Aur. Pray, Sir, let me enjoy your friend Gudgen's company sometimes.


1. C. Madam, I Will fit him the best I can to make you sport.


Aur. If Philanthus conceal from Agenor
What I enjoined, he loves me more then him,
Which I shall much rejoice in.

Age. Is this your friendship?

Exeunt, manet Phil. and Age.
Phil. Do not accuse me, where I am not guilty.
The secret is not mine, that is trusted by another to me:
And when it does concern them more then me,
Yet so much I am touched, that I do burst
With a desire to tell you.

Age. Why do you not?


Phil. She bound me by an oath to the contrary, most cunningly;
For else, she knew I would have told it, you.

Age. Philanthus, I see she has wholly won you from me,
And I am glad you need not use my friendship further.
Which of you two to accuse of most unkindnesse,
I know not well. For me, I should not have entertained
The knowledge of a secret, on a condition so prejudicial
To our friendship.

Phil. 'T were great injustice in you, if it should.
A perjured man would ill become your friendship.

Age. You tell it to no man in telling me.


Phil. Had not her tongue, her action did enjoin me to keep it from your
Knowledge of all men; you saw, she did desire your absence.

Age. Perhaps she feared to speak before me, that which yet she would
Be well content, that I should know from you.

Phil. If I have friendship, the knowledge of it, if you love me,
Would more afflict you, than my denyalls does.

Age. Such an excuse does worst of all: farewell.


Phil. Sure Aurelia so much hates me, that she envies me
That happiness of her brothers friendship, and only
Did invent this plot to break it. Stay, Sir, I Will give you proof
That I dare trust you with a secret, and you will
Say, a strange one though not this.

Age. Well, what is it?


Phil. I do not love your sister.


Age. How!


Phil. No otherwise then as she is your sister.


Age. This makes me more suspect your friendship.


Phil. Why should you think I love her, since she hates me,
And lays plots to deprive me of your friendship,
Which, by the gods, I prise above what happiness
Women can bring me.

Age. This protestation makes me think, you do not love indeed.


Phil. Be not mistaken, I do love.


Age. Whom?


Phil. Remember my past fortune with the beauteous Lady
Of the Castle, and you will find, that I have cause
To be a Lover, if only out of gratitude.
Your sister's cruelty has made my reason
Once more Master of my will; and being so;
I cannot choose, but see my former folly,
In hoping to enjoy so absolute a creature
As Aurelia is, whom heaven ordaines
For one of greater merits; the gods had been
Indeed unjust, to make unworthy me the center,
Where so much worthy loves should meet, the least
Of which, is sure to make the best deserver happy.

Age. Philanthus, my friendship's of that nature, that it does
Glue me unto your designs; and since I see
My sister has given over to deserve your love,
I must confess, I think you could not place it with more reason,
Than on this Lady. It Is true, that I would have thee still a Lover
Like my self, for so you will hear me, and not laugh,
When I deplore my misery in love; and I do glory,
To be found more constent than you are. The scorns
Of my Mistress have not altered me; I think
It vice to change, how ere she uses me.

Phil. Rather it is vice not to change, when reason does command it.


Age. Reason can never be your warrant to be false.
I had been false to reason and my self both,
To love where I should find neglect yet,
Where I love, it is with much passion, but
Not your blindfold constant way.

Age Nor would I that you should. I shall be happy
In your happiness, or you in mine, if either
Of our different ways do prosper. But you
Now love you know not whom, nor know you where to find her.

Phil. Pardon me, the skillful Moor, late come to Court,
Assures me, that he will let me see again
That Lady by his art.

Age. When this?


Phil. This morning I sent my man before to tell him,
I am coming; his house is here hard by.

Age. May I not see her too?


Phil. Perhaps, if you disguise you like my servant.


Age. I will.


Phil. Let Us go then, I know he does expect me.

Exit.
Enter Moor, and a Servant. Serve. Sir, my Master will straight be here.


Moor. Sir, I am ready.


Enter Philanthus and Agenor. Phil. Great Master of your art, good morrow.


Moor. Good Morrow, noble Sir.


Phil. I hardly yet believe it possible,
You should perform what you have undertaken.

Moor. More, Sir, if I please: I am in substance
What others seem; nor shall you stay
The making of a Circle. But who is this with you?

Phil. A servant, Sir, that I dare trust.


Moor. Pardon me, Sir, I have reason to be wary.
This art is no ways lawful; for telling fortunes,
That I count nothing. Is there naught else that you desire?

Phil. Nothing.


Moor. Stand by then. By that great power that is given me,
Recorder. I charge thee, the form of that Lady, to
Appear, that this Prince desires, so habited,
As when he saw her last.

Enter Lucinda. Phil. Oh ye powers, it is she. I must confess, your art
Is inimitable, it is the same form; methinks
It looks so like the life, that it would speak,
If I should question it: no beauty can be greater.
She Is gone, can you not once more show her.
Exit Luc:
Moor. Yes, and much more, if I were pleased.


Phil. What?


Moor. What? sit down and you shall see. Return thou beauteous shadow.


Enter Lucinda. Phil. She Is by much fairer then Aurelia; I was a fool
To pursue what is fled, and to refuse a blessing
Offered like this; she smiles, as if she understood me,
And confirmed my saying.

Age. Although I burst, I Will see the end.


Phil. When first I saw what is here presented, I
could not think she was the thing she seemed,
And now I cannot think she is a shadow,
But a substance, -- That sigh assures me,
That she is flesh and blood; and yet a Demon
May possess a body, making it move by its own Organs.
A dead Body, not a living body: pardon, if shadow,
Or if substance, this bold touch; it is not profane,
Since it proceeds from an affection, equal
To what a mortal ere could boast of, in so short a time.
This soft and warm hand does assure me, you are
That noble Lady, to whose courtesy I owe
My life, and now again it is within your power
To see me die. But if you shall once more, make me a tender
Of that love, which at your Castle I refused,
As being then a prisoner to another beauty.
Assure your self, I shall redeem that error,
With an affection equal to your merits, paying the debt
Of two lives that I owe you, and this of love the greater.

Age. Oh false friend.


Phil. She answers not. I fear I all this while, transported
By my passion, have spoken to a shadow.

Luc. Rather I fear your protestations will prove such.


Age. It Is she, and I am miserable.


Phil. Oh my joy. No, Madam, they are as firm as are the Poles,
Here the Gypsy pulls off his beard. That prop up heaven; and can I doubt? the
proofs
That you have given me of your love, are infinite,
In that you thus disguise your self thus once more
T'ingage me in an infinite affection, which I desire to seal thus.

Luc. Will you not think you, recall your vows,
When you shall know my name.

Age. Cruel woman, thou needst not tell him, he too well knows
Thou art Lucinda; the unkind Mistress of his
Too kind, and much wronged friend Agenor.

Phil. Lucinda, Oh my cross fortune, I am false and knew it not.


Age. Excuse it not, but justify thy self,
That I may kill thee without repining.

Phil. You know I never saw saw her.


Age. True. But was it possible thou could believe,
That I could be transported with that passion
For any other beauty, then for that thou see in her?
How often, ravished with admiration, did I describe
Her face, and thought by love, like the must cunning Painter,
To draw her very feature to thy understanding,
All this while, after their swords are drawn, the Gypsy and the Lady persuade
and hold the Prince. As they do to the sight; so much at least,
As if thou had but been that friend,
Which I did hope, it would have prompted thee to fear
No other but Lucinda could have been so fair.

Phil. You Are passionate without all reason, and
Forget friendship. Hear me.

Age. No, I am too tame, suffering thee, that have
Nothing, but the empty name of friendship,
Thus to abuse me and shall that be a sufficient
Bridle to hold back my revenge? Draw thy sword.

Phil. Why, you are mad.


Luc. I fear some ill event.


Age. Why smile you? Think you, because my valor is not like to yours,
The subject of each tongue, my maiden-sword,
Never unsheathed till now, that I do fear
In a just cause to use it? Provide your best defense.

Phil. Defense, hear me.


Age. Come, draw, and do not dally. Your guilt has
Made you weaker then you think, you are not
What you were, when you were faithful.

Luc. If I have any power, let me conjure you.


Age. You have none.

Here, she breaks from the Gypsy.
Luc. Hear me. -- How do you noble Sir: Oh for a Surgeon


Age. Ha! what have I done?


Phil. It Is in vain, I am well, well as I could have wished
I am removed from being a hinderance to
My friend in his affection. You perceive
How much he loves you, since it did force him
To make a sacrifice of me, me, his better half.
Sir, give me your hand; it was my fortune, not my will,
That crossed you in this Ladies love. And, Madam,
Remember, that my last breath is employed,
To assure you, that I shall never rest
In peace, if any other shall possess that place,
Which you thought me worthy to hold, in your affection,
Then this Prince, who only does deserve it;
To whom, I hope, my weak defense, may justify my innocence.

Luc. Thou cruel murderer of thy friend, who rather than
Endanger thee, would not defend himself. Thou cruel Butcher.

Age. I fear I have been too rash.
He no way did employ his sword.

Luc. Oh cruel fate. Gone, he is gone for ever.


Age. He Is quite dead, and you are hurt too, I think. Ha!


Luc. A scratch.


Age. He did employ his last breath to gain my love,
From you too; did he not?

Luc. He did, but it is in vain, for I shall hate thee more then a Serpent.


Age. Yet less then I shall do my cursed self,
The vildest monster of ingratitude,
That the earth ever bore: I wonder why
It does not gape, and swallow me alive.
It Is mockery to believe the gods are just,
After this sufferance: Here, if you have any mercy, kill me.

Luc. Not I.


Age. I Will do it my self then.


Moor. Hold, Sir, for heavens sake.


Age. Thou ignorant, 'twas to please heaven I would have done it.


Moor. You are deceived, they want not proper instruments;
If 'twere their divine pleasure to shed your blood,
To show their justice: No they delight in mercy more.

Age. But not so far as to confound their justice,
I am no subject for it.

Moor. Madam, your help, to save another mischief.


Luc. Only that thought makes you unfit, you are penitent already;
And that I may remove from you this black despair,
That darkens thus your understanding, know,
For your friends dear sake, if e're I love again,
It shall be you, except his memory.

Age. Fain I would die, yet fain I would believe her.
Oh love! what power thou have, that thus can change
My just revenge; although I know this protestation
Grows from a fear to offend his ghost, and not
From love to me, for that is impossible:
Yet, I will live, to inflict such punishment
Upon my self, that you shall give me leave to die,
To end my misery. The Tomb I will erect
For this dear Coarse, shall well express my love,
However, my unfortunate hand did shed his blood.
Let your care be bestowed upon the body,
Till I dispose of it; I shall reward your pain.

Moor. My Lord, I will.


Age. Heaven affects. Why do I live, and see him thus,
And I the Author? Madam, what is your pleasure?
Will you remove unknown, or shall I wait
Upon you to your brother?

Luc. Sir, I beseech you, give me leave to be my own disposer.


Age. Obedience is my sacrifice.


Luc. But how, or where, is yet unknown to me,
Uncertain fate, yet certain misery.
Exeunt.
Finis Actus quarti.
Actus quintus.
Enter the two Courtiers. 2. WHat, are our Comedians ready?


1. Yes, yes.


1. That Is well; the Princess does walk presently, and coming in unlooked
for, 't will please her the better. It Is fine Poetry, is it not?


1. Only faulty, if not foolish enough; a quarter of an hours work, when
'twas done; and yet I have studied a long time; and can find nothing more
ridiculous,


2. Is there no prologue?


1. No, there is too few Actors. -- Here Is the Princess.
They have their one, they will enter sure.

Enter Aurelia and Miranthe. Aur. How now, what strange hob-goblin's this?


Enter Man. Man. Love, that intoxicates the brains of mortals, where there is
any,
Here inhabits none to be intoxicated, it is well known.
Not Sisiphus, that restless rowles the stone still,
Takes more delight, then I do in my own fill.
Enter Gudgen like a Lady. My Phillida, lo where she does appear,
More humble then a Peacock, or his peer,
The Turkey, who with her bristling plumes,
Confounds my sense, and my poor heart consumes.
Oh gods* Oh most glittering Wight,
Thou workst upon me, I had need go write.
My passion, it is not a stumbling tongue,
That can express the love I bear thy bung.

Y. G. Kiss where thou love, I thee pray, even here;
Nothing I have too precious for my dear.
But you do fool me, I and frump me; you,
I Venus fair or chaste; go too, go too.

Man. Is Venus like to thee, thou durty sow?
No, thou art like unto our brended Cow:
But yet I fear she will prove wilder far,
Thou art incenst, thy goblin eyes make war.

Y. G. Puh let me go, these come not from your heart;
Too late I find you play the Courtiers part.

Man. May all the joys of earth confound me, I,
Have dyed thy love, and live I will perdy.

Y. G. Oh perjured man, see where she comes you wot of,
Betwixt you surely I am made a sot of.

Enter a Wench. Wen. Sir, I am come to visit you, and your fair Mistress.


Man. Most odoriferous Lady, you are offensibly welcome; for you have done me a
most desperate and intolerable favor; my Mistress does with me, I know,
congratulate the mischief.


Wench. Sir, I am a simple wench, that understand nothing beyond sense.


Man. I am sorry for it, yet I will descend to your understanding, and speak
none; or very little, hereafter.


Wen. It will become your person.


Y. G. Hark how she woes my dear: Oh, I am lost I fear.


Wen. Lady, you are sad, and much I wonder, being so happy in your servant.


Y. G. Damsel, you are unkind, your scorns are scurvy, and become you not.


Man. Oh thou art such a pretty wench, I could wish my self a gib Cat, and we
two together in the dark.


Y. G. Ah me! he is lost. Sir, you forget me, your Phillida.


Man. Thee? I do contemn the thought of such a dowdie.


Y. G. Ah me, then let me die; thou constant wretch, may thou sink down to
bliss; but shall I curse, whom I have loved more, then my best Cow M^ll: Oh
no. Come death and end my woe. But what shall finish my unhappy days? this
knife, this shall afford me passage to the shades below, where I will try by
dying thus my love to show, and fill his hard heartfull of dismal woe.


Man. Alas good fool.


Wen. Will you not save her?


Y. G. Now I am dead, do thou not grieve, thou cruel else,
If I had known, I had not killed my self.
Now I am stark dead, pray tell him so.

Man. Would thou were buried, thou wilt never leave talking else.


Aur. Miranthe, this is so woeful a story, I Will hear no more, make my excuse to
the dead Lady, when she revives.

Exeunt Aur. and Miran.
Man. Master, Master, rise, rise.


Y. G. That Is not my cue, he is out.


Man. The Princess is gone.


Y. G. Gone is not my cue neither.


Man. The play is done.


Y. G. Thou lie, I must be kis'd first; I will I not open mine eyes till I be
kis'd.


Man. What a coile's here, I could find in my heart, now his eyes are shut, to
undo my points, and give him his cue. Sir, Master. I think he is a verier ass
then my self, there let him lie, for me, I Will follow for a reward.

Exit.
Y. G. Is he gone, had I no place about me worthy his kiss?
Then let me wake from death. Why this it is,
Since when I courted him, he would not come,
My Ghost shall haunt him, till he kiss my hum, hum.
Exit.
Enter Aurelia and Miranthe. Aur. This is the day, and this the place, that
Philanthus
Intends to present himself as the stranger Knight,
To receive what punishment I shall inflict,
Where I will make him jealous of himself.

Mir. Why will you so torment him, since you confess you love him.


Aur. Still to draw greater proofs of his affection, in which I glory.


Mir. Take heed, whilst that you use him thus, you do not
Lessen what you would make greater, his love.
Were I man and in his place, I should have hated
You, for you in reason have appeared unworthy,
And inconstant, which how his generous spirit
May brook, who knows.

Aur. Puh these are needless fears, see where he comes,
The same arms he wore, when he over came Adrastus;
A coldness strikes my heart at sight of him.

Enter the Moor as Philanthus. Moor. If you be the Princess Aurelia, I was
enjoined
Thus low to bend my knee, lower my heart,
In my submission to your offended deity.

Aur. Yes, Sir, I am, and you I take to be the most
Discourteous Knight alive.

Moor. Madam, I have already paid for that offense,
The forfeit of my honor, if not to be recovered,
By faithfully performing what I was enjoined,
Rather commanded, by your Philanthus, for such
How e're you prise him, he desires to be esteemed.

Aur. How well he counterfeits another voice.


Moor. By a strange accident he met me, and when
Persuasion would not move me, for I had a desire
Another way, he did employ his not to be resisted valor,
Compelling me to swear, for safeguard of my life,
Here to present my self, and willingly receive
What punishment your rigor can inflict.

Aur. What censure do you expect?


Moor. Death, for I do believe you the most cruel Lady living.


Aur. Why do you think so?


Moor. Your rigor to Philanthns, who partly made
Me know his story, made me suspect; yet still
He loves you, more then his own soul. But your
Unjust hatred against me, gives me assurance,
Of your cruel nature.

Aur. Perhaps I did but seem to hate you, you feel am unarmed
For punishment, none but my self, and one weak woman more.
But you are bound by oath to endure what ere
I shall inflict; I Will try him fully.

Moor. I am, and wish to know my sentence.


Aur. With you own sword I will perform it.


Moor. Alas, you have not strength to take my life, were I unarmed.


Aur. Rather no will, you are not noble that would thus,
TO the danger of your life, perform your promise.
Receive your sword, and know, I am so far
From hate, that I did love you, for the great respect
You showed me, though I seemed otherwise.
But you retiring, and to me unknown,
Barred me from means to thank you, or let you know,
How much I liked your valor, which sure by Philanthus
Could not be exceeded; I rather take it as a courteous act
From you to him, he hoping the performance
Of the task enjoined, might reconcile him to my love,
Which is now impossible; yet, I did much affect him,
Till his boasting did beget my hatred.
But trust me, in his sending you, how e're,
I thank him, he has much prejudiced himself.
There is no honor that this Court can do you,
Which boldly you may not promise to your self.
Nor would I have you think I am unconstant,
For I have still professed to love, where I did find
Most worth, until I were confined by Marriage.

Moor. Madam, however some will censure this your humor,
To me it does appear the best. I honor you,
And shall believe my self the happiest creature
Living, in this your good opinion.

Aur. Longer, Sir, I will not hold you, but when you please
To visit me at Court, there is no assurance
Of my affection, that I shall refuse,
Which honor will permit me to bestow.

Moor. I, make me in my own opinion the mark of envy,
To the most happy living. Besides, thus on your hand,
I seal my lasting service.
Exit.
Mir. Madam, what is your design in this, to give Philanthus,
As a stranger, so large assurances of your affection,
And yet make him think, you hate him as he is himself.
Enter the second Courtiers.
2. Ah! Madam, the most unfortunate accident.


Aur. How! what? thou frightest me, speak.


2. The Prince your brother.


Aur. What of him?


2. Has killed his dearest friend, noble Philanthus.


Aur. It Is impossible, I know the contrary.


2. Oh, Madam, it is too true, your brothers sorrow is a witness of it;
The Court is drowned in tears, and justly,
It never felt a greater loss.

Aur. I have abused my self then, made vows and protestations
To I know not whom; the voice indeed was different.
But is this certain truth? were ye a witness?
But how, or why, or when? I am amazed
With wonder and sorrow. Speak.

2. It Is so certain, that your brother would have killed himself,
Had he not been prevented.

Aur. He had done well, it is fit we all should die;
For who would live after Philanthus.
Exeum.
Enter Lucinda. Luc. You Gods, was it not sufficient misery for me
To love a man, whom I had never seen before?
His heart given to another, or ere he knew me?
But that you afterward must raise me to the happiness
Of his affection, and then thus violently pull
Him from me. Why should you thus oppose your strongest powers
Against a silly woman. But, love, I know it is thy malice,
That did invite the cruel destinies to cut
The fine spun thread of dear Philanthus, and cruelly
Lengthen mine. You powers, it is enough; for you have humbled
My proud heart low as the earth. Seek out some other,
That has not felt your scourges, I confess
Your power, and am obedient too. But why should I
Begin to flatter unjust heaven, within whose power
It does not lie to pleasure me. Philanthus gone,
Whose name I Will reverence more in their despite,
Then all the envious deities, that took him from me.

Enter Philanthus, as a Ghost. Phil. Impious, cruel, and forgetful woman, thy
sacrilegious
Thoughts and words, I see, have been the causes,
That have stopped my passage to the Elysium fields,
Forcing me thus wandering to stay above the earth,
To feel torments above neglect in love;
Nay, equal to those hellish pangs, bred from the thoughts
Of a much loved inconstant Mistress. But I Will revenge
My self, by haunting thee perpetually.

Aur. Oh thou dear ghost, such a revenge were sweet,
I should desire to look upon thee ever.
After I had thee, thou were soon lost, I was not satisfied.
Let me if possible embrace thee, at least
Converse with thee for ever thus.

Phil. I see you have forgot my last request.
Think on the Prince, in whom I live; this way ye cross
The ordinance of heaven, who never fails
To punish disobedience, from me. If you
Be slack in loving him, my ghost shall never rest
In peace; and when I next appear, a thousand furies
Will come along, and in your sight torment me,
Past what a mortal can imagine, if not for love
Of him, for love of me. Be pitiful, and free me
From an endless misery. Go to my Tomb,
Where daily you shall find him weeping:
There make an offer of your self, in recompense
Of all his sufferings; this done, you may be happy.
But if refused, the height of misery will fall upon you,
To me, perpetual torment; remember,
On me perpetual torment.

Luc. Stay, stay, and hear me.


Phil. My time is past, remember lasting torment.

Ex*
Luc. It Is vanished, cruel ghost, that do conjure me,

Thus unkindly to forsake my first love, inconstancy's avice,
They do not love at all, that can love twice.
It Is to me impossible, which if I do it not, I shall be miserable.
And in doing it, I shall be so too then it is indifferent:
Oh no, I shall release from misery,
And happy make the ghost of Philanthus;
That thought alone o'recomes me.
(Recorders) Strange friendship when the ghost of him that is dead,
Shall for the living with such reason's plead.
Exit.
Enter the two Courtiers. 1. Where is the Prince? is he yet so transported with
sorrow?


2. I never saw man so torment himself. It Is true; Philanthus
Deserved to have as many tears shed for him,
As any Prince that lived, but yet, that being past,
And sorrow fruitless, methinks the sorrow should grow less.

1. If it be possible, it does receive increase.
Some say, the Princess Aurelia bears a part too.

2. Where Is the old Duke? followed his children to the Tomb
Of Philanthus: Never such a sorrow seen in Millain.

1. In duty we are bound to wait upon them,
Both with our persons and our sorrow.
Exeunt.
Enter Agenor. Age. Methinks this sacred ground, that does contain
The body of my friend, should open it self,
And give me leave once more to embrace him,
If his dear ghost be' concil'd; and if it hate me,
Why should not then the earth, in friendship
To its now inhabitants, gape wide and swallow me
Alive, for my base act? How often have the gods
Made even the insensible elements, the executioners
Of their justice, against a murderer, and a more
Hateful one was never performed: murdered my friend,
Oh base! and such a friend, that even in death
Expressed himself above my malice. The wound
This sword has made in his noble and undefenc'd breast
Was only like a vent to a full vessel,
That so the stream of his unequal love might find
The freeer passage. Why should I live then, to be the hateful,
And contemned example of ingratitude, to all posterity?
And I will daily sacrifice my sorrows and my tears
Upon his Tomb, 'twill not serve. Were I a woman,
Water might wash my guilt off; but as I am a man,
A manly sacrifice must expiate my fault.
Blood must be satisfied with blood. Philanthus,
Receive this sacrifice, I will revenge the murder.

Enter the two Courtiers. 1. Deer my Lord, what would ye do?


Age. Nothing, why do ye hinder?
Who made you my controulers?

2. Heaven forbid, that we should suffer you.


Age. For friendship sake, give me my sword, why should you
Keep me hereto torment me? in death I should find ease.
If any of you had a mind to die, and knew 'twould be for your content,
Think you I would be so discourteous to disturb you?
You need not hold me, you may give me freedom,
Now I have no weapon, you cannot hinder me to weep
These cursed eyes out; by whose false lights,
false to my soul, came in that beauty of Lucinda,
Whose violence working by jealousy, forced me
To murder my dearest dearest friend. Pardon love,
I have blasphemed against thy deity, for which I know,
His Ghost will hate me more then for his wounds.

Enter Aurelia and Miranthe. Aur. Hence hypocrite, do thou not fear his wounds
Should open themselves, and blead his searcloath through,
At thy approach.

Age. Sister, you cannot pronounce words half so harsh
As I deserve, nor tax me with a guilt so great,
But I Will acknowledge more, but not the same
Which you accuse me of: For, were the sorrow
Of the world joined in one for Philanthus,
Mine might be thought a worthy rival,
Nay, exceed that far.

Aur. Oh Philanthus.


Age. But sister, you, why you, why do you seem to grieve
Thus, that in his life showed such contempt?

Aur. Oh brother, brother, seeking to deceive and blind the world,
I have ruined and undone my self, the heavens
A^ witnesses, that Philanthus to me was more
Then father, you, and all the world. Then give me
Leave alone to grieve, since all griefs else are
but like drops to the vast Ocean.

Age. Sister, the Ocean has his bounds, though large,
But my sorrow, like to his love, for whom I grieve,
Must be beyond all limits, but his desert,
The cause of my affliction.

Aur. Philanthus, Philanthus. But what are words, or fighes, or tears,
But weak expressions? let a dead silence rather show,
They grieve not much, that can express their woe.

Enter Duke. 1. Sir, your father.


Age. Here, here.


1. Madam, the Duke.


Aur. Loved Philanthus, I know he did, and so did I,
Though I dissembled, dearly I loved him; if there be charity
In you, open his tomb, that I may make his body know,
By kissing his pale lips, that I did love him,
More then he did me; his spirit's already
Satisfied, I know, else it would haunt me.

Enter Lucinda. Luc. You twins of sorrow, that strive with eagerness,
Which should be thought the truest mourner, make room
For one, whose actions have in point of love,
Outgone your airie words.

Age. I know that voice, Lucinda.


Luc. For which of you, after the killing of a much loved brother,
For then I thought Adrastus dead, became
Enamoured of his murderer, as I did of Philanthus?
Or which of you forsook your honors, or your state,
Becoming like to me, a straggling Gypsy,
Forced to it, by a greater feeling of his merit,
Than ever touched your heart, pursuing him
In that disguise, even when to hope the least requital
Had been madness? and yet I must give proof
Beyond all these, when I have offered some
Few tears upon his Tomb.

Aur. Lucinda, for such I know your name is, how would it vex me,
To hear you boast your love thus of Philanthus,
Were he alive; and yet I should have gloried much,
To be by him preferred before so excellent a Lady
As your self: But since unkind brother,
But worse friend, has by his rash hand, enriched
The Tomb, with what we both should strive for, let' join
In sorrow, and from our moumfull eyes by turns,
Drop tears, till by continual motion, this hard
And unkind Marble, may yield us passage to him,
Which it now denies.
And so at last we by our tears shall gain,
What now by prayers we cannot obtain.

Duk. My dear children, why do you yield to sorrow thus
Where there is no hope of remedy? I am a partner
In your grief; you know that Philanthus was as
Dear to me as any; but since I know I cannot
Raise him to life by weeping, why should I
Show my self a child, and mourn in vain?

Enter Adrastus. Adr. How, my Sister here, and mourning over the Tomb
Of Philanthus, it is impossible, she never saw him.

Age. You are deceived, Sir, be your own witness.


Adr. It Is she. Degenerate from my blood, weep for mine
Enemy. Save you, Lady.

Luc. Brother, I know you wonder much to see me here;
But more, that I lament thus for a man,
Which you believe I knew not.

Adr. I do, I see the great love that you professed to me,
Was wholly counterfeit.

Luc. Rather your virtues, brother, are not what I thought'm^
But love however's my excuse.

Age. Oh Philanthus!


Luc. Ha! me-thought the spirit of Philanthus spoke from his Tomb.
Chiding my slackness in performing his will; did it not, Sir?

Age. Not that I heard.


Luc. His ghost appeared to me in dead of night,
And cruelly commanded me thus to present my self
Before his Tomb, a gift unto the Prince Agenor,
From his dead friend.

Age. How! do you mock me?


Luc. Which, though unwillingly, I here perform,
Much more to satisfy my promise to his ghost,
Than to requite your love; and yet, noble
Sorrow may be accounted merit.

Age. Strange ghost!


Adr. How?


Age. Madam, till now, my thoughts were in the grave with Philanthus,
His spirit it seems, knowing my hearty sorrow and repentance
Labored to make me happy in your love:
And I receive you with a joy above
What any tongue is able to express.

Adr. This makes for my advantage, and is it possible,
Aurelia may return to love me, Philanthus
Being dead. Who Is here, the Knight that fought with me?
These Arms are ominous.

Enter Philanthus and the Moor. Duk. Come from the Tomb, Agenor, leave this
sorrow.


Age. Sir, I Will obey you for this time; but after, daily offer up
Tears of joy and sorrow, in which Scene I still
Must be an actor.

Duk. Aurelia, be not wilful.


Aur. Thus all forsake me, no companions in my sorrow left,
And I do glory in it.

Phil. Sir, by your gracious favor: Lady, why weep you thus?


Aur. Ha! what are you so ignorant, that does not know the cause?


Phil Do you know me then, the large expression that
You made me of your respects, I might say love,
Made me believe, I should not be so soon forgot.

Aur. Pardon me, Sir, I took you for this Knight then, for whom I now
Weep, whose body lies here in this Tomb, from whence
I do not mean to part; pray leave me, Sir. How got
This Knight these Arms, they are the same Philanthus wore.

Phil. Lady, you grieve for one, does not deserve this sorrow;
Behold in me a worthier servant, who now am come to claim
Performance of your so large promises. Point not to that,
I beat him whilst he lived, and from him took these Arms.

Age. Traitor Knight, thou lie; no, thou did rather
Play the thief, and steal them, which I will
Make thee confess, else offer thee a
Sacrifice upon his Tomb.

Phil. In these Arms I overcame Adrastus.


Age. Thou lie, and shall not live to injure thus
The dead; know, 'twas Philanthus by all the gods,
And this is.

Phil. Philanthus, your servant.

discovers himself.
Age. Ha! is it possible.


Phil. Be not amazed, but trust your eyes.


Age. How can this be?


Phil. You being wilful and enraged, I rather
Ventured to receive one wound, and so seem slain,
Than in your death to lose a friend, a Mistress,
And my own life too; but life would have bin hateful
After your loss, if I could have preserved it.

Moor. But mark his love, while his wounds yet bled;
(For to my charge, you know, you did commit
The body) He studied to make you happy
In my Lady's love, which was effected, by playing
His own ghost, whilst I did in his Arms,
With you supply his place; how easy 'twas
To cosen you, and those you sent, by filling
The Coffin with some trash, having my brother
To assist me in it, the dullest may conceive.
For my part, I was glad to raise my Mistress to a greater
At least, if not a better fortune in
The Princes love.

Age. Madam, I hope you will not make his labor fruitless.


Luc. It were in vain to cross the will of heaven, which seems
To have ordained Philanthus for your worthier sister.

Phil. It lay not in my power till now, by reason of my wounds,
To keep my promise truly; but now, behold
Me ready to receive.

Aur. Me, as a recompense for all your sufferings; no other punishment.


Age. Sir, we are joined, and do mean to grow together,
If you do not severe us.

Duk. Enjoy your wishes both. Adrastus,
For your sisters sake I wish your friendship.

Adr. Pardon the faults that grew from love to Aurelia,
And I shall study your advancement.

Luc. Brother, be better then you have been.


Adr. Which to begin, I give my self again
A servant to fair Miranthe, whose love, I know,
Not malice, crossed me in my love to Aurelia.

Mir. I Will none, I thank you;
You that forsook me, aiming at a greater
Now offered I refuse, hoping a better.

Enter old Gudgen and young Gudgen. Y. G. Old man, I say to thee, be proud, and
eke rejoice, to see thy hopeful son salute the Duke in triumph, and by him
resaluted like to an Emperator.


Duk. Away rididulous ass.


Y. G. Did not I tell you?


Duk. Get you into the Country to your sheep and oxen, those, you feed well,
will like your company, here your Favouritship is grown stale; the Court is
not so barren, but it brings forth daily some new humor, which at first is
pleasant, but after, like to yours, grows tedious.


O. G. Why, son, is this your gracing?


Y. G. The envy of some Politic has done this.


Duk. See all things straight prepared to solemnize
The happy marriages of these, in whom,
Friendship and love strove for a name;
Exeunt. In you love, in you friendship overcame.
Flourish.
O. G. Come, son, come, after the loss of all our money, let us e'ne go home, and
be wiser once, never too old to learn.


Y. G. I, Father, but I am too young yet. Well, I will be a favourit for all
this; I, so it shall be. Gentlemen, I mean to make a petition to the Duke,
which I must entreat you to set your hand to, being the best judges of my
ability; and thus it is:

That since to be a worthy minion I Am not fit,
Yet I may be the chief fool-Favourit.

FINIS.

