THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the Seven Prisoners that suffered at TYBURN On
Wednesday the 6th of March 1677/8.

At which time were Executed William Johnson, Francis Rashfield, Another, Hugh
Mills, A Boy, Blanch Oakley, and Joan Griffin.


WITH An Account of their Behavior in Prison after Condemnation, and their
Discourses to some Friends and Ministers that Visited them.

The Wages of Sin is Death. This may be Printed.

To. L'Estrange.

London: Printed for D. M. 1678.

The Confession and Execution of the Prisoners at Tyburn, March 6. 1677/8.
THere were in all eleven persons (seven men and four women) that received
Sentence of Death at the last Sessions; who were most of them old Offenders,
and such as before had lain under that terrible Condemnation, or at least been
burnt in the hand or transported for their wicked Practices: But no Mercy can
Reclaim, no Warning Reform some obstinate and incorrigible sinners.

One of these, called William Johnson, had the benefit of his Clergy about five
years since, and has several times been in Newgate; but the Fact he now
suffered for, was thus: On Sunday the 17th of February, in Prayertime in the
afternoon, he and another, not yet to be found, knocked at a Goldsmiths house in
Cheapside, where there was no body at home but a young Gentlewoman; and
pretending some fair Errand from her Father, persuaded her to unlock the door,
and the Chain being unhappily down, they immediately rusht in upon her, gagged
and secured her whilst they rifled the house, and stole away Plate of a very
great value, as much it is supposed as they could well carry off. Though it were
positively sworn by the aforesaid maid that he was one of them, yet both at his
Trial and when he received Sentence he very stoutly denied it, and much pleaded
his innocence; yet afterward when he saw there was no hopes but he must
suffer, he acknowledged it: but could not be brought to discover the other
person that was with him, nor where the Plate was, though great endeavors were
used by the Ordinary and some others to persuade him thereunto.

Francis Rashfield, otherwise called Williams, was condemned for Felony and
Burglary, breaking in the nightime into the house of a Merchant in St.
Ellens, and stealing rich Clothes and other Goods, to a very great value. Being
a person of ill fame, and formerly burnt in the hand, he was taken with one
Motly, lately executed, upon suspicion; and the Gentlewoman that had been
robbed, coming to speak with him to endeavor some discovery, she observed a
Cravat about his neck made of the Lace of one of her Aprons, which she knew
very well, as being made with her own hands. He pretended the Cravat was given
to him, and brought in a slut, that was a Prisoner in Newgate, to own she gave
it him, and that it was made in the same Jail. But after Sentence, he confessed
he was concerned in that Robbery, and many others with the said Motly, and
behaved himself very penitently.

There was one that had been many years a Companion and Assister of naughty
persons. At his Sentence it was declared, That he had received and melted down
both the Plate of Chicester. Cathedral and that of New College in Oxford, and
been concerned in several other notorious Pranks; though that he was condemned
for, was about a Watch picked out of a Gentleman's pocked in St. Sepulchers
Church: so impiously daring are such wicked men, that they presume to practice
their Villainies even in the House of God, and make the Sacred Temple a Den of
Thieves. The Watch was taken upon him, and he could give no account how he came
by it. He seemed not much affected with his sad condition, but rather flattered
himself with hopes of getting off; but men must not think always to baffle or
elude the stroke of Justice: His fatal moment was come, and with much
appearance of Repentance for his past Ill life, he this day went to suffer with
the rest.

Hugh Mills died for stealing of Cloth. He had been not long since
transported, but was come back before the time limited, and was now found
guilty of a fresh Felony. He expressed more Remorse and Penitence in his
behavior than any of the rest, and confessed very freely what a wicked Liver
he had been; desiring all young men to take warning by him, and avoid Idleness,
Gaming, and Ill Company, which first brought him to these destructive Courses.

A young Lad suffered for stealing some foul Linen. He had (notwithstanding
all the Correction and Admonition of his Friends to the contrary) been guilty
of Thievery, and once Condemned to die before, and yet not above Sixteen years
of age. He begged hard for Transportation, and promised Amendment; but having
received Mercy before, he was now left to the severity of the Law as an
Incorrigible Offender.

Of the Women there was Blanch Oakley, who robbed her Master, a Jeweller, of
several Precious Stones, a Garter belonging to the Noble Order of St. George,
and other things of value: and was, it seems, one of those, whereof this Town
has too many, who under pretense of getting Service, do only seek
opportunities to rob those they pretend to serve.

The other was Joan Griffin, one that had long made Thieving her Trade, and not
long ago received the Kings Pardon; but immediately fell to her old practice of
stealing, having now robbed a person of a good parcel of Clothes, for which she
suffered.

The rest of the persons Condemned obtained his Majesty's gracious Reprieve;
and we wish they may make good use of their time which is allowed them by his
mercy, and abandon all their vile Associates to betake themselves to honest
Employments, that they may never again come under the like lamentable
Circumstances.

Between the time of Condemnation and Execution, Mr. Ordinary took abundance of
Christian pains both by Preaching, Praying and private Exhortations, to make
them all sensible of their Condition; and we hope with that effect, that their
poor Souls may now be blessing the God of Mercy in Happiness, for those
precious opportunities. It being observed that most of them, all the time after
Sentence, behaved themselves much more civilly, and with a better frame of
Spirit, than others that before them have been in the like Condition. And so in
their passage in the Carts to Tyburn, the Tears in their Eyes and penitent
Ejaculations, as they caused a general Pity, so gave good grounds to hope well
of their endeavors to make their Peace with God for all the Evils of their
Lives.

At the place of Execution there was not any of them said much, only begging
the Peoples Prayers, confessing the Justice of their Sentence, and desiring all
to take warning by them: Only one insisted more particularly upon his sin of
Sabbath-breaking; acknowledging it as a most just Judgment, that as he never
made any Conscience of Religious Duties on that day, so it was in that day he
committed the Fact which brought him to this shameful and untimely End.

FINIS.

