A Congratulatory Poem TO Her Royal Highness: Upon the Arrival of Their ROYAL
HIGHNESS'S In ENGLAND, May the 27th. 1682.
Dic quae majora canamus? GAy Spring, thou happy season of desire,
So warmed, so Blessed with a Majestic Fire;
Sure careful Nature, never could thee have crowned
With more Indulgent Graces, then are found
Luxuriant now in England's Peaceful Breast,
Whil st there Three Mighty Kingdoms Care does rest.
Blessed Pair! (so justly now you seem to be)
Freed from cold North, and faithless winding Sea;
Your gentle Vessel, with a Princ-elike Pride,
Stately on trusty Tides may calmly ride:
No lofty Billows here restrained do rage,
Or fatal tenth Wave threaten to engage
With Your guilt Barge, which can e n assuage.
All powerful Neptune, how ever so rough before,
Smooths his curled brow, and fairly greets the shore;
His brinish Rage flows sweetly into Love,
Whil^st on his yielding Back Your Graces move.
See how his nimble Offspring round You play,
In Luxury of Joy they waste the day.
Each Silver Eye Your flying Sails does trace,
Each Beam seems greedy of Your Charming Face.
All things grow sweet in Natures tender Spring.
To Loyal Subjects hearts You gladness bring:
Luster to all, and quiet to the KING.
Hence dull Phanaticks, seeming Virtuous Souls,
Quaffing Sedition off in high-froth'd Bowls:
To Satan's Closet haste, your Paradise,
Our joys you cannot taste, but in disguise.
Hence fly, no more by Shamming Methods try
To Raze HIS Virtue amongst Posterity.
Hail thou fair ALBION! happy Thou
Who Ages Frowns, nor Winters seem st to know,
Whilst no dull Care sits heavy on Thy Brow.
Thrice happy Thou, the Glory of a Crown,
(Whose daring Courage beats the Faction down,)
Secure is lodged within Thy dearest Arms,
And every Muse grows big with Noble Charms.
A Faming Gale in Tunesui Reeds do^s play,
And humbly salutes this welcome Day;
Old Thames, now charmed by no Rche^^ous Song,
With easy Pride glides youthfully along:
The Neighboring Youth in joy their Senses steep,
With Songs they hush all drowzy Care a^^eep.
In distant Echoes sounds your wished (...)
T^^mbling with Joy, each Muse inspired doe^
To Great APOLLO, President of Verse,
To whom (in great Confusion) they rehearse
YOU Both Arrived; The God s ha^monious Breast
With softing Airs is i^^tantly possessed;
His Ravish d Soul such joy of you invades
As did the Thracian Youth, when from the Shades
Orpheus return d, where his Euridice
From hidden Sorrows Anguish is not free;
A Lovely Passion each to other lent,
Such as! our Matchless Souls do represent.
Unhappy they, through Fate o r-ru^^ng Life;
Hope false did prove, and threw down joy with grief.
Grant, God of Love, that no regardless Fa^e
Suffer these Joys to have so short a date;
Joy due to ^our Return our Island Crowns;
At Your Bright Presence Envy shrowds her ^rowns;
A willing Proselyte after YOU she goes,
Charm d, at YOUR Feet her self a P^ostrate ^h^^ows;
Shining like Heavens Bright Queen, sublimes our Seat;
Than You our Courts searce feel a gentler heat.
Grace, mix d with Majesty, in Your Face appears;
YOU seem to entertain no Barren Cares.
FERTILE as Earth, Your Beauty does relieve
Each Fainting Soul, Your Royal Bed does give
New Peaceful Glories, and our HOPES Revive.
Fair Cyprian Queen, all Rage see you confine;
Let your soft Arms about our Princess twine;
Timely present to our impatient sight
The INFANT PRINCE, blessed Natures sole delight.
Such are our wishes due to Heaven-born Grace,
To YOU, and to Great Caesar's Princely Race.
Vivat Io! CAROLUS, magni quoque Gloria FRATRIS, Ah! sero subveant jura severa
necis. Per C. A.

LONDON, Printed by Not. Thompson, 1682.


