Lucida Intervalla: Containing diverse Miscellaneous Poems, Written at Finsbury
and Bethlem BY THE Doctors Patient EXTRAORDINARY.

-- semel Insanivimus omnes. LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1679.

TO THE Kings Majesty.
Great Sir,
BOth in Your Navy, and Gods Church, the Ark,
One Storm pursues the Parson and the Clark:
But now I see the Harbor; on a Rock
Defy the Seas, and Fortunes further Shock:
Kind Providence casts into Your Sacred Arms
The Shipwrackt Man; bids fear no future Storms.
To You, great Noah, me it does entrust,
That You secure my Bark from Wave and Gust;
For Your Experience has worse Billows broke,
And dangers greater stemmed in Royal Oak:
Show then, by giving me a quiet Station,
Your Thanks to Heaven for Your Preservation;
Your Preservation, which to Heaven's so dear,
That it works Miracles throughout the Year:
To sum them up, were to recount the Waves,
Or the Trees Leaves, where You it kindly saves:
The foot of the Account, is this late Plot,
In cold Blood, Charles to Murder on the Spot;
But the Defender of our Faith and Hope,
Guarded by Providence, defies the Pope;
The Pope, and all his Jesuits, conspiring;
Their own defeat, with Terror, now admiring.
The Head of England's Church, Sat in the Chair
Of Parliament, Rome's Conclave cannot fear;
More safe, than Pope Infallible, I Am sure,
Whom both the Houses Loves, not Walls, secure
Th'Embrace when mutual, Interests when they twist
Ignatius will fall by Loyalist.
TO THE DUKE, GENERAL OF THE Artillery Ground, Overlookt by Finnes-burrough
Mad-house, Where I was Confined.
YOur glittering Arms propitiously shine,
On me made Prisoner here by Hells design;
For Satan's Agents, my false Friends, combine
A Minister to Silence and confine.
I Am forced (though Sober) Bedlam to inherit,
When they, who put me here, the Prison merit;
For they are possessed, not I, by the Evil Spirit:
Then Soldiers send this Borough, Sir, to Ferret.
Summon me to Your Tent; I Am Sober, Sound;
Call me from Finnes-burrough, to the Artillery Ground;
For tho there is War Proclaimed 'twixt Arms* and Gown,
Yet here It does receive the deeper Wound.
Better be Killed, than Slavery endure;
Thus the Sword's Weapon-Salve, and serves to Cure:
To this Restraint my Self I cannot inure;
Where you are General, in the Field I Am sure*
A Trick was played me, to requite the Cheat,
A Madman I have Acted, as a Feat:
Relieve me; hold! my Suit I will not Repeat
TO a Prince so Generous: Muse, sound a Retreat
To His Royal Highness.
FRom Finnes-burrough, to Bedlam I am come,
To be a Sober man, not Act mad Tom:
My name is James, not Nokes, and yet an Actor;
But now, Mad Devil, seek another Factor:
I am a Minister of God's holy Word,
Have taken up the Gown, laid down the Sword;
That of the Holy Spirit I must weild,
And Conquer Satan in the open Field:
He Is the Strong man, who must be bound, disarmed,
And so cast out; by Preaching he is Charmed:
Get thee behind me then, Dumb Devil, be gone;
The Lord has Epphatha said to my Tongue:
Him I must Praise, who opened has my Lips,
Sent me from Navy, to the Ark, by Pepys;
By Mr. Pepys, who has my Rival been
For the Dukes favor, more than years thirteen:
But I excluded, he High and Fortunate;
This Secretary I could never Mate:
But, Clark of the Acts, if I Am a Parson, then
I shall prevail; the Voice out-does the Pen:
Though in a Gown, this Challenge I may make,
And Wager win: save, if you can, your stake.
To the Admiral I all submit, and vail
My Ambition's Topmast: Muse, now furl your Sail.
TO THE DUKE After my Enlargement.
I AM ready, Sir, to obey your great Command,
But find it dangerous to Kiss your Hand:
No sooner I this Honor had assumed,
But Folly me, and Envy Mad presumed:
On me forthwith they laid, with ill intent,
Their Poisoned Fangs, and unto Finnesbury sent;
Where Dungeon, Chains, and Physic me did wait,
My Mad-suppos'd Ambition to abate:
But never the less She yet survives, nay grown
Much stronger, all Opposers has overthrown:
And hoping from such Enemies you will save her,
She Is bold to beg, you would repeat the favor:
Yet Honor here all Danger so out-vies,
She Finnes-bury, and Bedlam too defies.
Presented to the DUKE ON NEW-YEARS-DAY.
LEt all the Birds, pair by pair,
As well the Crane, as the Stork,
Sing and Chatter in the Air,
God Bless the DUKE of YORK:
The Duke and his Lady God bless,
Let every Tongue and Pen,
With Devotion mickle express;
As well the Maids, as the Men.
The Humorous Lieutenant, he
So fondly did Love the KING,
He bought all his Pictures in the City,
Was not that a pretty thing?
Why, I am downright such a stark
Staring Lover of Royal JAMES,
Cause he thinks of his Parson and Clark,
Among the more Noble Names.
The Passion's great I discover,
My affection it such is,
That you will forgive the Mad-Lover,
If he Rival the very Duchess.
May the Prince of Orange and Dame
Command the White and the Tawny,
And extend their Royal Name,
Over the Delicate and Brawny.
May they be Hogan Mogan,
When the Mighty States are pulled down;
And the Boors, that drink in a Nogan,
Assist to put on their Crown.
Thus the Poet did Write and Talk,
At Bedlam clad in Freese;
Where his Pen and Ink, it was Chalk;
Boards, Paper; and Diet, Cheese.
THE Poetical History OF Finnesbury Mad-house.
THe Dr -- of Finnesbury-House
Knows, how to dissect an Oyster;
Whether Man, no more than a Mouse,
Be fit for Bedlam, or Cloister.
I Will tell you his way of Proceeding,
All you, that here shall enter;
Purges, Vomits, and Bleeding,
Are his method of Cure, at a Venture.
By the way you must know, this Elfe
Both Bedlams does haunt, like the Louse;
And sways, as Chairman himself,
Both upper and lower House.
Let him therefore be trusted by none,
But Fools, that are Fortunes Minions;
For, to Rule both these Houses alone,
Is to halt between two Opinions.
Mrs. Bish -- then shut up your Shop,
And another Diocese get;
Bid adieu to the Mad and the Fop,
No Fish are for Finnesbury Net.
To this College was brought by force,
A Parson, that shall be nameless;
The Doctor, he takes the same Course,
Though the Man be sober and blameless:
For he, both Fool and Physician,
At all no difference made,
Betwixt a Senseless condition,
And Madness in Mascarade.
He Reports to the KING and the Court,
That Learning had made the Man Mad:
To observe, was the Patient's sport,
How little the Doctor had.
This Parson, he tore his Garment,
Then Mad he was concluded;
Hold, Good Sir, there is no harm in it,
Your Senses are deluded:
You for your Mad Meeting House stickle,
And public Bedlam cry down;
But I pray, in a Conventicle,
Who Sober would wear a Gown?
Oh but, Parson, you break the Wall,
And Burglary you commit;
If I must not this Madness call,
I am sure, it is want of Wit.
Religio Medici's left in the lurch;
He knows not Good from Evil:
For surely, the way to Build up the Church,
Is to pull down the Chapel of the Devil.
Then throw the House out at Window,
And lay it flat with the Ground;
For undoubtedly they Sin do,
That keep it another Year round.
The Doctor his Argument urges;
This Parson must needs be Mad,
For on him, neither Vomits nor Purges,
Any Influence have had.
Fond Doctor, you beg the Question,
And you might have spared your pains;
For my Blood's from a good digestion,
And your Physic is lost in my Veins.
Nay, I prescribed Chains of Iron,
To take him off of his Mettle;
But Brass did him environ,
He had rubbed his Face with a Kettle.
My Fetters they were but Straw,
To the Sinews of his Arms;
And he burst Bars and Doors, as I saw,
By I know not what mighty Charms.
Moreover I him in the Hole,
As under a Bushel, confined;
Lest God's Word, the Light of the Soul,
In my Mad-house should have Shined:
Never the less into the Dungeon,
He let in the Rays of the Sun,
And in the Pit, where him I did plunge in,
Made Night and Day meet in one.
In a place I did him stow,
Where Rats and Mice do swarm;
These by Instinct the Madmen know,
And therefore do them no harm.
Now as Weasel, Squirrel, and Ermine
Are, then Rats of a higher strain*
Rats and Mice, the nobler Vermin,
Might awe the Worm in his Brain.
Yet he feared, lest the Rats and Mice,
Of his Senses should bereave him;
Therefore I taking good advice,
Sent Catmore in to Relieve him.
I laid him in Straw for a Bed,
Lest Feathers should make him lightheaded;
That there his wild Oats he might shed,
And again to his Wits be wedded.
Without either Shirt, or Clothes,
I lodged my merry Mad Youth;
For of Kin we may well suppose,
The Sober to Naked-Truth.
His Diet was most of it Milk,
To reduce him again to a Child;
And Butter as soft as Silk,
To smooth the Fierce and the Wild.
My Potions he turned into Drenches,
For he freely would take never a jot;
But by Thomas and the Wenches,
They were forced down his Throat.
To feel his Pulse, I never thought;
I a Month I see him but once:
And how my Mad Physic has wrought,
If I know in the least I Am a Dunce.
For, in Truth and sober sadness,
This Parson I found so smart,
That I feared his Wit, more than his madness,
The March-Hare I never dare start.
My Surgeon he fiercely withstood,
And he led him such a Dance;
That to let this same Gown-man Blood,
A Sword was more fit than a Lance.
I ordered his Keeper, at Large,
On occasion to ply him with Blows,
That what Iugular did not discharge,
The mad Blood might come out at his Nose.
Enough: Doc has done his Endeavor,
It must be confessed, though a weak one;
His Wits gather Wool for a Beaver,
But he is no Fool to speak on.
However, I Will Sue out his Pardon,
The man's not so much to be blamed;
For to make a Swan white is unheard on,
And Sobriety never was tamed.
Then pray all, the mad-Devil never touch you,
Nor yet the Cholick or Tissick;
Pray, MUFTI and MAMAMOUCHI,
Mr. Parson and Doctor of Physic.
His Apology.
Doctor, you must, where I severely Gibe,
To my Poetic Fury, Gall ascribe;
And Pardon, that I make in this New Trance,
Among your Rats and Mice, my Satyr Dance.
Quod medicum mordace tuum mea Carmina vellant
Dente, tuus Vati donet, Apollo, furor:
Nec Mures inter, poterit culpare Machaon,
Si Satyram jubeat jungere Musa Choros.
On his being Seized on for a Madman, only for having endeavored to reduce
Dissenters unto the CHURCH.
WHen Zeal for God inspires the Breast,
Says the Blind world, the Man's possessed;
And flattering their own cold desire,
Call Lunacy, the Heavenly Fire:
But though their Eyes are by the Flame
So dasled, they mistake the Name;
Know, that 'twas born with Christ at first
In Bethlehem, and at Bedlam Nursed.
To God the Father, and the Son,
And Holy Spirit, three in one,
By Men and Angels, be there given
All Glory, both in Earth and Heaven.
On the late Horrid Plot.
OF this late Hellish, Damnable, and (to join
Both in one word) Papistical Design,
What Purgatory can wash out the Spot?
It shames, and even blows up the Powder Plot*
We therefore hope, it is the last effort
Of Popery, dying in City and in Court;
And in this juncture that She times her end
The Martyr Godfrey's Funeral to attend:
Fanaticism too (which kept her Ground,
By Popish Policy) dies of the self-same Wound:
Thus Martyrs Blood, of old the Churches Seed,
In Corn grown up, kills every noisome Weed
May then the Church of England, spite of Rom*
Receive new Life and Vigor from his Tomb
And Conquering the joint force of Her and He
To Catholic Christian World with Triumph tell
Infallibility is her self mistaken,
And treacherous Peter now by Christ forsake
The Cross Match.
When Abigail, by mistake, had Layman Married,
In State Affairs, 'twas seen, he often miscarried;
Yet a long time Nub's Spouse put on no Gown,
But Hectored it, with Sword and Muff, in Town:
Convinced at last, though Poets him made a Farce on,
He Would turn his Coat, that Nab might have her Parson:
This done, her Mar-text she supposed she had,
And, when he talked of Preaching, thought him Mad:
Down to the Conventicle brisk he goes,
Resolved to Rout the Church of Englands Foes:
But words were the only Weapons of his War;
Love and Zeal led the Van; no Wound or Scar
From such a Skirmish fear; none Blood can lose,
Where Church is named for common Rendezvous;
Where Peace alone is aimed at, not a Fight,
Both sides to Yield, and Forces Reunite:
That England may for Caesar's Triumphs hope
A late Revenge on Rome, by Conquered Pope.
But the Enemy, to frustrate this Design,
Contrive Nab's Spouse to silence and confine:
This Trumpeter's Horn-mad they strait give out,
And making Nab of the Plot, her Martext rout:
To Mad-Quack, all agreed, they him commit,
By Hellebore to restore his never lost Wit.
Quack hugs himself with the conceit, secure,
He should great credit get, by Parson's Cure:
To work he goes; Proclaims him Mad at Court,
And spreads the Noise, to make the City sport:
Then half a year the Patient keeps in hand
(A Chirurgeon's Son he is, pray, understand)
But now observe how basely Doc's defeated,
And for Mad-Parson with a Poet cheated;
By whom Lampoon'd, mad-Quack is forced to say,
Madness and Wit act one part in the Play:
And thus these three, Fanatic, Wife, and Doctor,
In Bedlam me to keep, make up the Proctor.
Jackstraws Progress.
When Publican, in Pharisees old house,
Shut doors on me, and Finnesbury Mad Louse;
With Arms in sleeve of Gown redoubled stroke,
To open Bedlam-gates, I windows broke:
Then in my Charet Triumphant Rode away,
As well assured that I had got the day;
That this had stormed the Castle called Iackstraws,
Arch-Traytor unto Reason and her Laws.
It Is named from Bethlehem, now possessed by Turk;
'Therefore in's way the Priest of Englands Kirk
'Takes Coffee-House; where drinks a sober dish,
Goes thence to President, then to Porter Pish:
But to avoid suspicion of all force,
This, moving toward my Palace, was my course.
Their violent hands I quitted, who approacht me,
With their officious rudeness to have Coach'd me.
Alone a Volunteere I Rode along,
Prince like, attended with a Lacquay throng:
The Metaphor to pursue, as I did pass,
I armed my hands in Coach with broken Glass;
Threatening the Slaves, which waited on my wheel,
That if they touched me, they should find 'twas steel,
The affrighted multitude observe their distance,
Without their help I enter, or my resistance:
But the great Tumult, and such solemn state,
Amused the Officers of Bedlam-Gate:
So well I Acted, that they did not stick,
Me to receive as their Arch-Lunatick:
Madder than Prince of the East, that Jack a dandy*
Out-huffing both Nolls Porter, King, and Landy*
Their Emperor they conduct to his Bedchamber*
And lodge his Majesty in Straw, like Amber.
Next day, tho Mad concluded, yet Iackstraw
By which to Rule, published this sober Law:
Porter and Keepers, look to it, be you Civil,
The Parson then will Conjure down Mad-Devil;
But as a Madman if you him entreat,
All Bedlam he will outdo by many a feat:
Maugre this charge, the self-willed Slaves Rebel,
And Bedlam make with chains and darkness, Hell:
Here Hellish Physic Quack down my Throat does pour,
The foam of Styx, and Acherons black shore;
Administered by second Cerberus,
Matthews and Keepers here which govern us:
Only in this the just resemblance fails,
Hells Porter has three heads, but ours three tails;
Of which are fierce, the two from York and Wales;
On third, 'cause 't has no sting, the Monster rails:
All the three tails have head, and tongue their own,
But two wag only, and on their Master fawn.
Hold! Verse grows Monstrous too, and they the nail
Must hit, that say, 't has neither Head nor Tail.
Nullum Magnum Ingenium (absit verbo invidia) sine mixtura dementiae.
It goes for current truth, that ever some madness
Attends much Wit, it is strange in sober sadness:
But now this Riddle I Will explain, Sir Quack;
And pray suppose I do it for your sake.
Within the Banks Wit flows with Moderation,
But Pride a deluge makes and Inundation:
This with the world, know, is your common case;
And that with Pride, Envy keeps equal pace:
Hence they are called, by Plot of poor and rich,
Madmen, whose wit's above the standard pitch:
This makes a Carcass with an Eagles Eye,
Be thought a Fit-for- Bedlam Prodigy.
But sure, when Friends and you me Mad concluded,
'Twas you your senses lost, by th'Moon deluded:
Then take advice; with Physic, of Apollo
Pray ask more Wit, and 'twill in reason follow;
You Will think me fit, cure but your self of the Fool,
Not only you to Lash, but Boys at School.
THE Duke of Grafton, Looking into his Cloister, And kindly asking him; How he
did.
WHen Graftons Duke to Bedlam came,
The Sober Walls resound his Name;
The Echo charms the Evil Spirits,
And the Mad Devil dis-inherits:
Thus (as from the Poets you know)
To Pluto's Court descending Juno,
To every Fiend new pleasure yields,
And Hell turns to Elysian Fields:
When to my Cell his Grace drew near,
And kindly me saluted there;
An Angel seemed to bring Advice,
And Moorfields strait were Paradise:
He once withdrawn, that very Even
Vanished the New-created Heaven;
Bedlam came to it self, and I
Fell from my pleasing Ecstasy.
My loss fit to Repair, what is it?
If Deputy Angels here me Visit:
My Soul, on such Wings if you mount her,
Will save my Carcass from the Counter:
But I my Prison must change in the end,
Unless such Guardians you me send.
The Doctors Advice.
PArson, leave off the Poet and Lampoon,
You Will Sober be, and may defy the Moon:
This seems at first mysterious Paradox,
But I will prove't, as round as Iuglers Box.
Phoebus and Luna, Sister are and Brother,
And understand for certain one another:
I, of their Privy Council, as a Doctor,
Tell you your Case without a Fee or Proctor:
Unless the Moon assist him, I well know it,
Apollo never singly made a Poet.
Then Wit forswear, and like me prove but Dunce;
The Sun and Moon will quit you both at once.
The Patient Replies.
Faith, Doctor, what you say, is very prity;
Ine're before (nor now) thought you so witty:
But if it be thus, your Phys: I Will spill of the ground,
Vomit up Helicon, and then I Am sound.
The New Distinction.
TWo sorts of Patients Quack in Bedlam has*
The one, that witty is; the other, that was*
Mad both: in frost and snow hence Pot does come*
To cool hot Lunatiques, and Wits benumme.
By contraries to Cure, thus Doc takes pains,
Our much, with different heat, distempered brains*
But howso'ere the Moon he may control,
By Muses he is defied, and by their Droll.
It Is true for want of Fire, as if grown old,
My joints are stiff, and I Am oppressed with cold*
But influence of Apollo still is strong,
My Satyr brisk, lively my Muse and Song.
You that should Fury cure, and Poet save,
Are sending Post your Patient to the Grave:
For he (not frighted out of's Wits by Physic*
To your new Madness, Palsy adds and Tissick*
An Inscription To Madam Frazer, When he sent her some of his Verses.
YOur Father is Alexander,
And You his World-Conquering Daughter
(See the difference 'twixt Him and Her)
By Beauty, and not by Slaughter.
Among the rest, on your Charet,
Your Captive Poet does wait;
And in asking if he don't Mar it,
Expects from you a kind Fate.
I have sent you the Copies of Verses,
Presented by me to the Duke;
They are fit for the micklest of Herses,
I Will swear it upon a Buke.
If then you will make him but Witty,
By encouraging the Poet;
Your Praises he will Sing in the City,
And the Conquered World shall know it.
Pronounced at the taking of a VOMIT.
SUre the Stars reign not now, but some dire Comet
Sends Mad-quack to me with this Poisoned Vomit;
But thanks to Apollo, who is on my side,
And has with Antidote me fortified:
He has not yet forgot, since Python fell
By his sure hand, all Poison to expel.
Then Mithridates like, if not secured,
By being to its mischief long inured:
T'elude the needless Physics ill effect,
Purges and Vomits, Helicon shall correct.
A Dose for the Doctor. -- facit indignatio versum.
SO little Wit, so much of Phlegm and Rheum
Our Mad-Quack has, that I may well presume
Hither as Patient he will never be preferred,
To fill the number of the Madamens Herd:
Who e're is Mad, he first had Wit to lose;
Betwixt Fool and Physician wink and choose.
Was ever Man of Sense so great a Sot,
In half a year, not to smell out the Plot?
(By's leave I here shall call a spade a spade)
You Sot, I say, don't you know Mascarade
From downright Madness? I, the scorn and sport
Will make you, e're I Have done of Cit and Court.
Blush for your folly, Fop, or timely say,
Revenge for my Lampoons has made the Play:
Not? then pray judge, if he, whom want of wit
Excludes from Patient here, be Doctor fit.
But don't I Dream, and all this while am slave,
Not to a Fool, but a designing Knave?
Who either thinks the Sober too to tame,
And Cure of Madness to advance his Fame;
Or, snips with Pot, does Bedlam make for chink,
The Ditch over which'tis Built with Phys to out-stink.
And thus, for ought I know, my Doctor A-
May, without Poetry, prove Doctor K-
The Riddle.
DOctor, this Pusling Riddle pray explain;
Others your Physic cures, but I complain
It works with me the clean contrary way,
And makes me Poet, who are Mad they say.
The truth on it is, my Brains well fixed condition
Apollo better knows, than his Physician:
It Is Quacks disease, not mine, my Poetry
By the blind Moon-Calf, took for Lunacy.
PRESENTED TO HER GRACE, THE DUCHESS of PORTS MOUTH.
THe Gauls first Conquered, to make up the sum
Of Beauties Triumphs, you to Britain come;
Where all admiring Your Triumphant Face,
Do with amazed Eyes your Victory grace.
You them survey unmoved, as is the Center;
But none, to make attaque on you, dare venture:
Till Charles, like Caesar, you o'recame at sigh
And all Your charming forces put to flight.
Monsieur will now in vain to England dance;
This Conquest does renew our claim to France.
HIS Rule of Behavior: If you are Civil, I am Sober.
POrter and Keepers, when they are Civil
They charm in me the Madmens Devil;
The Roaring Lion turns to Lamb,
Lies down and couches wondrous Tame:
For though at Bedlam Wits ebb and flow,
As wandering Stars move swift or slow;
My Brains not ruled by the Pale Moon,
Nor keep the Spears my Soul in Tune;
But she observes, and changes notes
With the Azure of Sky-coulour'd Coats.
Ad Apollinem Poeseos and Medicinae Praesidem.
J Am Furor Humanos nostro de Pectore sensus
Expulit, and numen sentio, Phoebe, tuum:
Cede, Soror, Fratri; cum vellit Cynthius Aurem,
Quid mihi cum vestris, Pallida Luna, Rotis?
Carmina de Coelo possunt deducere Lunam;
Parce, Pater, Medicas frustra adhibere manus.
Poet no Lunatic.
What Is mortal Phoebus chasing, does inspire
My breast with breath of a diviner fire:
Yield Luna to your Brothers more powerful rays;
My Muse her Father first, not Aunt, obeys.
Apollo may spare his other Art; no fear,
His Poetry alone can rule thy Sphere.
When Priests of Delphi, and Parnassus Hill,
With Oracle or Verse, the God does fill;
Prophets and Poets Mad are (in a sense)
And Sober grow, as they their gift dispense
One vents his Rage by words in open Air,
By Ink on Paper He drops his with care.
Physician, heal thy self, we say; but know it,
In earnest said to the Self-curing Poet.
To a Tinmans Wife, Visiting him when he lay in Chains.
Mistress, the Chains on me which you put on*
When first I saw you, are outdone by none:
They are the strongest, but they need no foil*
They Are all pure Gold, and Bracelets them I call*
Another obligation of Tin,
Your Husband me designs to Shackle in;
Iron locks my Leg fast: thus a treble chain
Me different pleasure gives, and different pain
Relieve in part; for me too close environ,
And heavy are, your Gold, his Tin, my Iron.
Ad Medicum de praescripto Vomitu.
RVctantis Vomitum quicunque relambit Homeri,
Castalias frustra, jam Satur, haurit aquas:
Inde Poetarum nata est numerosa Propago,
Ingenio quorum vivit, and ore Pater.
Si mihi contingat similis Fortuna Vomenti,
Nonne manet Medicum, Funis, Apollo, tuum?
To Mr. Doctor, on his giving him A VOMIT.
What Homer our Great Grandfather did Vomit,
We licking up, turn sucking Poets from it:
Doctor, if this be my Fate, when I Spue,
That Lapping Curs rise, all Lampooning you;
Your Physic you must save, and past all hope,
With Crocus Metallorum buy a Rope*
To the Worshipful Sir William Turner, President of the Hospital of Bethlem.
I Two new Purgatories have of late discovered;
And from 'em both, thank God, I am recovered:
One Finnesbury, the other Bedlam named;
Whether successively me to be Tamed,
My Shrewish Wife and her Relations send:
But I grown fiercer, cheat 'em of their End.
Each with this difference shows a Middle State;
To Hell that is nearer, this to Heavens Gate:
Would we the reason of this difference know?
Sure from our President it needs must flow:
Judges all three in him their Virtues join;
There singly governs Bishop Proserpine.
THE Patients Advice TO THE DOCTOR.
SAys He, who more Wit than the Doctor had,
Oppression will make a wise man Mad;
One in his senses, fierce, untame, and vexed,
Means Solomon the Preacher in the Text:
Therefore, Religio Medici (do you mind?)
This is not Lunacy in any kind:
But naturally flow hence (as I do think)
Poetic Rage, sharp Pen, and Gall in Ink.
A sober Man, pray, what can more oppress,
Then force by Mad-mens usage to confess
Himself for Mad? Reduced to this condition,
He may defy the Rack and Inquisition.
Beyond all darkness, chains, and keepers blows,
Sir Madquack, is the Physic you impose;
Threatening, because my Satyrs frisk and dance,
With Purge and Vomit them to tame and Lance.
Quack, you're deceived; thus lies the argument;
One God (the Ancients say) is President
Of Poetry and Medicine too; one Father
Of Esculapius, and the Nine together:
If Verses then cannot Doctors Bills defy,
And Helicon all Potions else outvie;
If Poets are not Physic proof, Apollo
At War is with himself, 'twill plainly follow:
But Phoebus holds the Scale with equal hand,
And does, to keep his own bounds, each command.
Hence Poets, when Quack dares Physic in their rage,
They vent more sharply choler on the Stage:
Poison, the Body only does torment;
This strangely makes the very Soul ferment.
Let me prescribe then; Phys withdraw, and soon
You Will my new Madness cure, you call Lampoon.
Presented to His Grace the Duke of Monmouth.
THough Pegasus does willingly obey
My Fancy's rains, and ruled is in the way
To Muses Hill; yet cannot I persuade him,
To draw a Charet; that is a Task will Jade him:
Horses there are, Sir, in your Royal Stable,
More than Poetically for it able:
A pair give to your Poet, and he will pray,
That Fortunes Wheel may ever you obey;
That on your Charet Captive Slaves may wait,
And French King Chained, expect from you his Fate.
On Report of the Duke of Monmouth coming to see the Place.
To Bedlam when the General came from Flanders,
Fools-Cap and Mad-Cap were Cashiered Commanders:
Each a considering Monmouth-Cap did put on;
Turned Grave and Wise, as Hospital of Sutton.
Ad Medicum, se ab oculis omnium removeri, jubentem.
Clauserat obscuro cum me Medicaster in Antro,
Luce nova Tenebras ecce Puella fugat!
Formoso Angustas extendit lumine Rimas:
I nunc, and Solemn, Doctor inepte, nega.
On the Ladies looking into his Cell.
When Doctor Mad-Quack me in the Dark had put,
And a close Prisoner in my Cloister shut;
A Lady chanced peep in, whose Beauty bright
Enlarged the crannies, and let in new light:
Quack, I Am now pleased, without the Sun, confined
See how he Blushes, by my Star, out-shin'd.
To a Lady, who was very kind to him in the place.
MAdam, when first your Beauty shined
Into my Cell, on me confined,
I grew in Love with my dark Cloister;
Slighted (poor and hungry) Pearl and Oyster:
The Apricotts which you me threw,
The thoughts of Paradise renew;
In Edens Garden sure they grew,
Transplanted to Moorfields by you.
You gave me Silver; whence I hold,
I ought not to Envy Danae's Gold;
For though on her Jove rained a Shower,
Twant real, but Poetic Oar.
You me with Paper, Pen, and Ink,
Madam, supplied, as well as Chink;
This my Muse studies to requite
In part, to you when she does Write.
Your Charity sent me a Shirt, each thread
Whereof, to you me fast does Wed;
And thus from your extended hand,
The Shirt in mine, turns to a Band.
At Night in Straw, Lying a long,
To the Oaten Pipes this was my Song.
To a Friend that sent him a Box.
THus as I lie, I Fancy I Am Iack-straw,
And to Rebellious Bedlam give the Law;
Yet though a Prince, so low my Fortune's sunk,
That I do want, which you supply, the Trunk:
And for my Verses writ on Apricocks,
You kindly make Iack-straw, Iack-in-a-Box.
To another sending him a Chair.
We Greet you well, and as well it is resented,
That you Iackstraw with Chair of State presented:
But we shall yet be more considerable,
If your Companion Carpet send or Table.
A Bethlehemite in Bedlam, one of the small Prophets, and a minor Poet to the
Lady Sheriffesse Beckford, Mrs Catherine Heywood, and Mrs Johnson, requesting
them to make his Cloister fit for their Reception, and then to allow him the
Honor to kiss their hands, in the too close embraces of his Prison.

YOu three Graces, and Nine Muses are a Jury;
Do these agree, mine is fit for Bedlam fury?
No; nor am I Mad, but with design for certain:
Acting the Part, my Name-sake's not Sir Martin.
The Bedlam Quack, dissector of an Oyster,
Me as his Patient, Physics in this Cloister:
I sleep in Stubble, where I Am bid to Sow
My wilder Oats (may Ceres speed the Plough)
There as I lie, I second am Iack-straw,
And all the Bedlamites do overawe:
Fair Ladies, you the Posse Comitatus,
With Beauties force, can quell the Slaves that hate us.
But pray hence forward see, I lie in Feather;
With Quils picked out, I Will praise all three together:
To this the Poet better you will enable,
If his dark Cell you hang with brighter Sable;
And when your goodness has prepared the place,
Come challenge here the Glory of your Grace.
To the same.
By Virtue's Temple, Honor's you approach,
And from this Cloister go I to a Coach:
In lieu of hanging It, since I am well,
A Charet give, to take me from my Cell.
In windy Nights my House both rocks and reels;
Then Scythian-like, you will Build me one on wheels:
Each of the Ladies may, by your connivance,
Bestow a Horse; for this is the contrivance,
That People, seeing me ride, may call these forces,
The Posse Comitatus Coach and Horses*
ON Madam Gwyn's Saying of Her Self, She was the only Protestant Mistress.
I Sing a Ladies Praise, whose true Religion,
Rome's Eagle does defy, and Mahomet's Pidgeon:
Pens, that cannot here exceed an Enchiridion,
Come not from Pegasus, but a senseless Widgeon.
She Is true to Church of England, and its King,
A subject fit for dying Swans to Sing;
To be writ with Quils plucked from an Angels wing,
Her Beauty's so Celestial a thing.
When for the Curtain, she the Stage did change,
Cum Privilegio 'twas, Roger l'Estrange:
The Mystery's not easily revealed;
Contents must guest at be, when Letter's Sealed:
This is in part the Case; Unto St. Helen
A Church there is Consecrate, and ruled by Pelling
She sure must be that Saint: who can disprove it
To her Greek Namesake sure you will not remove it
If then the true Church Catholic she own,
And Christians to her Shrine vow That of Stone,
A double Claim she to the Title has
Of Mistress, to Defender of the Faith.
TO Mr. Stackhouse, Presenting me with a PERIWIG.
OUr Souls, into a Mansion House of Clay,
Are thrust by Heaven, there, while we live, to stay:
Therefore I must, from what you me present,
You Thatch-house call of Iackstraws Tenement:
I did it want, e're since my coming hither,
My upper Room to Skreen from wind and weather:
For though I Am thought hotheaded, I find no harm,
In keeping with your gift my Noddle warm:
I thank you then, to dance my Bedlam Gigg,
For furnishing Hair-brain with Huffing-Wigg;
And pay you for it the current Coin, he uses,
These curled locks and tresses of the Muses.
Poets are Mad.
IN Bedlam, best of Universities,
The Poet, not the Parson, takes degrees:
Among the common Herd at first he is entered,
After into a Room, with windows ventured:
That Sermons may not want a Psalm, the Droll
Lives fitly with Nolls Porter, Cheek by Iowl:
One end Musician Thamar, thought the milder
The Other extreme Poet takes up, that is wilder;
For his Wits rampant, and it is Mad-quacks pleasure
To say, his Madness has no other measure:
Nay, to the Governors this Fool declares,
Him fit for Bedlam, 'till he Wit forswears.
Poets and Players, now pack up your Awls,
To Bedlam you aloud, Fop Mad-Quack calls;
And 'till he cures you of Poetic Rage,
Our Galleries you must fill, quit Pit and Stage
On the Doctors telling him, that 'till he left off making Verses, he was not
fit to be discharged.
DEsiring his Imprisoned Muse t'enlarge,
The Poet, Mad-quack moved, for his discharge.
He angry answered, Parson, it is too soon,
As yet I have not Cured you of Lampoon;
For know, New Bedlam, chiefly for the infected
With this new sort of Madness, was erected:
Bucks both and Rochester, unless they mend,
Hither the King designs forthwith to send:
Shepherd and Dreyden too, must on 'em wait;
For he is resolved at once to rid the State,
Of this Poetic, Wanton, Mad-like Tribe,
Whose Rampant Muse does Court and City Gibe.
Thus Bedlam may be cured perchance, if it hits,
After despair of Physic, by the Wits.
The answer pleased; yet I have cause to fear,
The Doctor flattered, as it is usual here:
But if my Brethren come, I Have learnt this Lesson,
In such good Company, Bedlam is no Prison.
On the Doctors letting him Blood.
Doctor, my Rhythmes on you which do reflect,
Know, of Poetic fury are the effect;
To let me Blood then, you're but Fool in grain,
Unless your Lance prick my Poetic Vein:
No longer now, for shame, pretend the Moon,
For Phoebus rules my Madness and Lampoon.
The Mistake.
THE Occasion of this Error, who can tell?
I Bedlam Heaven thought, but find it Hell:
Darkness and Chains are here, and Porter too
Of Pluto's Court; for without more ado,
Mathews the Body; three Keepers, three Heads mate,
And Cerberus make up at Bedlam-Gate:
Here I must treated be like, Mad and Fop,
'Till to the Monster I can give a Sop.
Made the 13. of November, Being a Fast Day On Account of the Plot.
WHen Heavens Frown, and Clouds now big with Thunder,
Direct the fatal Bolt; I cannot but wonder
We charge the Storm on Jesuit and Pope,
And fondly threaten Tyburn and the Rope:
Just as when Tempest in the Seas did rise,
And Neptune tossed both Ships and them to Skies;
The huffing Xerxes lasht the Winds in vain,
And ordered Waves to fetter with a Chain.
The God of Heaven knows, our sins, our sins
Hatch all the mischief; there the Plot begins:
As they increase, the blackness from a hand,
Darkens the Sphere by the Almighty span'd:
Wash them away but with Repentant Tears,
Such flowing Streams an Ebb make in our fears.
What e're we think, we are in a safe condition,
By nothing more, than a strict Inquisition:
Examine well your hearts, and search your mind,
Sins with Grenades checkered, there you will find.
We Are Traitors to our selves; our Lusts conspire,
The City new Rebuilt to set on fire:
Zeal for Gods Glory, let it burn but high,
Destroying Flames will dwindle out and die:
Whatever ills we suffer, be we sure,
Sin's the Disease, Repentance is the Cure.
That we may then, Popes Bulls and Plots defy;
That Englands Church may haughty Romes outvie:
Let this our Ark in such a Deluge Swim,
As may from Weeping Eyes overflow the Brim:
The strongest Guardians, to assure our fears
Of Peter's Successor, are Peter's Tears.
ON A Fanatic Ropemaker.
REligion you put on, as Knaves their Cloak;
To hide your base designs, you it bespoke:
Thus we remember, how Old Noll did Pray,
That unsuspected, Charles he might betray.
In the Lords Name, it is known, begins all Evil;
His Livery you wear, and serve the Devil:
Witness your heart and mouths flat contradiction,
By Hell-bred lies, Truth turning into Fiction:
Witness poor Orphans, hook't into your Net,
And then devoured with greedy Appetite:
But, my good friend, be sure such Meat will choke you,
And Justice both from God and Man will smoke you.
Witness the cheating Practice in your Trade,
And selling Ocum when for Ropes you're paid.
He that vents rotten Cables against all Law,
Iniquity with Cart-Ropes needs must draw.
The Pilot now may justly fear the Port,
And Rocks and Storms in open Ocean court:
But could I dip my Pen in Gall and Rancour,
I Would scratch this Knave, makes Ships unsafe at Anchor:
The Knave that is Fool too, one of fortunes minions,
A Hypocrite, halting betwixt two Opinions:
Unheard of Villain, forsook and left in the lurch,
Both by the Devils-Chappel, and Gods Church.
New England too (that last and known retreat
Of all the Brethren of the Holy Cheat)
You have abused, they will banish you, and Swear,
The Artificer's as rotten as his Ware.
If then no Place nor Party him receive,
He Is ripe for Tyburn, that is not fit to live;
Where when he is Hanged, he may have some small hope,
To swing in one of's Own, and crack the Rope.
TO THE LADY JANE LEVISON GOWER, AND Mrs. CATHERINE NEWPORT, each giving him
Six pence.
TWo Ladies here me Sixpence gave a piece;
I valued each above the Golden Fleece:
In One I made a hole, about my Neck
Designing it to wear, to give a check
To Bedlam Spirits, and to charm Mad-Devil,
As Angel Gold is used, to heal King's Evil:
TO other I bowed, to take the faster hold;
Yet Both slipped through my fingers, as does Gold:
My Riches fled away on Eagles Wing,
And for the Honey in Carcass left their Sting:
But courage take, Iackstraw; the hands ( I Am sure)
That for thy Wound made way, can give thee Cure.
To a Friend, upon his sending him Venison to BEDLAM.
IF like be fed by like, what better meat
Can Horn Mad, wild as Buck, then Venison eat
Sir, this Philosophy you understood,
And sent a Hanch to be our Bedlam food:
Accordingly we it, for such like reason,
Did, 'cause Hotheaded, well with Pepper season
Madness and Wit then, being all one (of the place
Sir Quack) much Salt made proper in the Case
And the truth is, Deer must be Diet fit
For Horn-Mad equally, and nimble Wit:
The Virtue I feel, and this experience gain,
Venison in the Blood swells the Poetic Vein.
Now Doc and Pot, those whiffling Curs, in couple
That always Hunt, I Will keep at bay and bubble;
For Goat and Venison differ so small a matter,
That Buck will lusty make my Bedlam Satyr*
And ( when with Rope Sir Quack has cured the sma^
My Brisk Lampoon, survive the long-lived Ha^
Presented to the Right Honorable EDWARD SEYMOUR, Esquire His ever Honored Master.
WHen unfledged Orator, and Tongue but weaker,
For Secretary chose by Mr. Speaker,
I straitway got the knack of better talking,
And from Clarks desk, to Pulpit must be walking:
For not per saltum taken is Degree,
When of a Scribe, you're made a Pharisee.
Would you then know, how Clark became a Teacher,
And how the Speaker's man starts up a Preacher;
My Master's Spring, some drops on me distills,
And in his Ink I dipped my Infant Quills.
His Petition to Mr. Speaker.
A Man of Sense in Bedlam, I recount
Among our Grievances, or Tant-amount:
To Rescue me, then Sergeant send at Arms;
The Circle in the Crown, Mad-Devil charms:
And Man in Moon, so sure his Bush at Back,
Must fall by Mace, as fire by Malaga Sack.
On his mistaking the Name OF Sir Gabriel Silvius, Presented to his Lady.
SIr Gabriel I mistaking, call Sir George;
And of an Angel, thus a Saint do forge:
Sure Jealous, lest you (at our Saviors Birth
Being of the Quire of those that Sang on Earth)
Do from us Mortals, when you Mount and Sing,
Your Lady steal away upon your Wing.
Such Flight me robs of Soul, and what I am,
More plainly must discover then my Name
Our Life and Bliss secure then; lest we die,
Stay long on Earth, and late to Heaven fly.
But let me still you Englands Champion call,
As Omen of the Beast's and Dragon's fall.
The Poet's modest and reasonable Expostulation, with the non-Infallible Pope
of the Lunatiques, on behalf of the sober Parson, hitherto mistaken, and
misjudged by Religio Medici.
Humbly Presented to the Worshipful, the Treasurer, and other the Governors of
the Hospital of Bethlem.
A Pollo, God and Father, you and I
Own, both in Physic and in Poetry:
Brother, because Lampoon'd, what do you mean
A Son of Phoebus Lunatic to feign?
Guilty, the Verdict of a City Jury
Can bring him in, but of Poetic Fury;
Whereof necessity must guilt abate,
For he, all madness, pleads, is kin to Fate*
Since then, right Reason says, he cannot forego it,
Condemn his Fury, but discharge the Poet.
Doctor, I am (no ways, as worth Remarque is,
Your Patient, but) Your humble Servant, Carkesse.
Mr. Dr. Mr. D*
While I'gainst Keepers Tyranny Rebel,
And with the thought of Mad-quacks Poison swell;
He gives it out, that he my head can Cure,
But my proud heart from Physic is secure:
Pray then take heed, Sir Tinker Surgeon Quack,
Lest mending one, you may another Crack;
For I, whilst you prescribe so like a Fool,
My own Wit more admire, and you at School
Expect among my Boys, by Rod and smart,
To learn, though late, the Rudiments of Art.
I find that my old Schoolboy cannot spell,
Nor Satyr from familiar Satan smell:
This makes the Child, for Poet, read Possessed
(A Boy well taught, might better sure have guest)
This Owl no difference makes 'twixt Sun and Moon,
And calls at Random, Lunacy, my Lampoon.
THE Founders Intention.
HEnry the Eighth this Hospital Erected,
Madmen to Cure, with Lunacy Infected:
But Anger, a short Madness called, and Passion
Here to arraign was never the intent nor fashion:
This kind in Porter and in Keepers raigns,
And they should wear, who fasten on our chains:
This to be cured at Bedlam, were it meant,
It Is Doctor should be his own Patient;
Who, if in truth he be both Fool and Knave,
For saying so, shall I be kept a Slave?
Is It Lunacy to call a spade, a spade?
And, Ladies, tell me, in your Mascarade,
Are wit and senses lost? or does this follow,
When Poetry is given by Apollo?
Short-sighted Friends, and Madquack too, beware,
For your Mad Poet can with safety Swear,
Design procured him in this Bay a birth,
To puzle, and make you all his Muses (...).
I must confess, what e're's absurd, and wide
Of truth, by Bedlam may be justified;
But that its Doctor these Conclusions makes;
For Lunacy, Lampoon and Satyr takes:
To say no more, his case is very sad;
Such a great A -- can never hope to be Mad.
THE Porter, a Prince.
AN Hogan Mogan State we justly call,
The Governors of Bedlam Hospital;
For Orange they elect Prince Porter Blue
( Trueman and Knave in grain, are of one hue)
The Gentlemen their Servant him suppose;
But he is their Head, and leads them by the Nose.
This Loyal Hollands common prayer must be:
May our Nassau be absolute, as He.
ON Mrs. Moniments Giving him a Visit at Bedlam.
HEaring, that There was one, at sight,
Her Praise or Epitaph, could Write,
Carkesse to Visit with intent,
From Charing Cross came Moniment:
In such a Tomb I choose to lie,
And yield up Ghost before I Die:
She Is Kind, not Proud; as Both are fair,
To Niobe I her compare;
To Niobe, while Flesh and Bone,
Not her own Moniment of Stone;
For 'twould be her true Lovers loss,
Were either Marble she, or Cross.
To his Friends, that gave in Security, according to the Custom of the
Hospital.
A Publican and Stocking-Factor join,
In Bethlem Hospital me to confine.
It Is pleasant to observe, how both these tend,
By differing circumstances, to one end:
Clark of the Rates, Error in casting makes,
And for a Fraction, my cracked Brain mistakes;
The Hosier (fancying a Warehouse full)
Conceits, my scattered Wits do gather Wool:
But Poet, Lunatic, is ill reckoned;
And Man's a Man, but with a Hose on's Head.
Then his mistake each to correct had best,
One in Account, the other in's Interest;
And Paper-Fetters to withdraw, take pains;
For Bridewel Bonds give strength to Bedlam Chains.
On the late PLOT.
PEter thou art, and on this Rock, my Church
I Will Build, says Christ: Interpreters in the lurch
This Text has left, and puzl'd in every Age,
E're since our Savior went off the Stage:
Thousands of Souls on it, alas! have split,
By their own Folly, or others too much Wit:
On these words, rackt by Jesuit and Pope,
Their followers falsely ground their faith and hope:
On this foundation their late Plot did stand;
But thanks to heaven, that turned the Rock to Sand:
That all their high-built hopes has thrown to the ground,
And Babel-Builders fitter Mansions found:
Peter himself (spite of their Wit and Power)
Huggs Cloud, for Juno; for this Rock, the Tower.
Dr. Titus Oats, Anagramma, Testis Ovat.
Dicite, Jo Paean! and Jo, bis dicite, Paean!
Incidit in casses Itala Turba suos.
Per Titum Solymaea jacent, heu! Templa; ruinam
A Tito expectes Vindice, Roma, tuam.
Testis Ovat, laeto canit omine Musa; Britannis
Vberior (spes est) inde Triumphus eat.
England, Rejoice; see fallen into the Pit
Dug by himself, the subtle Jesuit.
Titus destroyed Jerusalem; and Rome
Her self, from Titus, may expect her doom.
Grow, Titus Oats, and thriving in this Land,
A Promise of our future Triumph, stand.
FINIS.

