THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the Five Prisoners suffering at TYBURN On
Friday the 16th of March, 1676/7.

VIZ. Thomas Sadler and William Johnson For a Burglary in the house of the
Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England, and stealing the Mace and
two Purses. AND Francis Webb For a Burglary, and stealing of Clothes to a great
value. Matthew Gammond and Anthony Richoake For a Burglary in Clarkenwel.

Together with their penitent Behavior in Newgate, since their Condemnation,
and last Speeches at the place of Execution.

With Allowance.

London: Printed for D. M. 1677.

The CONFESSION and EXECUTION of the Five Prisoners that died at TYBURN.
AT the last Sessions of Oyer and Termine^ and Jayl delivery of Newgate, there
were no less than Fifteen Malefactors, that is to say, Nine men and Six women,
Condemned to die; but by the gracious interposition of Royal mercy Ten of
these miserable wretches were Reprieved; and it is hoped they will spend the
remainder of their lives, so unexpectedly restored to them after they had
forfeited them by their own demerits, in repenting of their former evil
Courses, and avoiding the same for the future, lest, returning like senseless
Swine to their vomit, they bring themselves again into the same Pit of
Destruction, and there be none to deliver them.

Of these that now suffered, some had made themselves so infamously famous, as
well by the multitude and daringness of their Crimes, as by their long
continuance in them, and frequent escapes from Justice, that some Account
cannot but be expected abroad, how they behaved themselves afer Condemnation,
and at the place of Execution; wherein we shall endeavor briefly to satisfy
the Readers curiosity, as follows.

Sadler, though during the time of his several Trials (for he was arraigned on
Three distinct Indictments this Sessions, and found guilty on two of them, and
had been 14 times before this in Newgate) he carried himself very insolently;
yet when brought to the Bar and asked what he had to say for himself, why
Sentence of Death should not pass against him according to Law, in a much more
modest and serious manner declared, That he looked upon himself as a dead man;
and therefore had nothing to say, save only to beg convenient time of the Court
for preparing himself for Death; which he hoped their Charity would not deny to
so sinful a Soul, etc.When Sentence of Death was pronounced on him, he seemed
to be in a strange kind of Agony with the terrors of his condition, flinging
his Hat one way and his Perriwig another, and wringing his hands in a
lamentable manner.

At the same rate he continued for some time in Prison, raging like a Wild
beast caught in a Trap, and vainly showing the greatness or stubbornness of his
Spirit, rather than symptoms of Remorse or Contrition for his Offenses. On the
Lord's day, besides the public Exercises of Religion in the Chapel, he was
visited by some Divines, whose Charity invited them to that trouble, and to
take no small pains to convince him of the desperateness of his present estate,
the wickedness of his past life, the shortness of his time, the necessity of
speedy Repentance, the unspeakable and endless torments of Hell, etc. which
Christian Exhortations were pressed home with such pious Zeal and holy Ardour,
that it is well hoped, by the Cooperating Grace and Workings of that blessed
Spirit which blows where it lists, and is pleased to call some even at the
Eleventh hour, there was a deep sense and impression thereof made upon his
Heart, to melt it down from that obdurateness to a more humble and penitent
frame; so that he could not restrain the tears from over flowing his cheeks,
and much bewailed his Condition, confessing what abundance of Robberies and
Villainies he had been guilty of, never before discovered, etc.

His Companion Johnson was by Trade a Coach harness maker, a fellow well
educated, of good understanding, and great natural parts: He had lived some
time time in Holland, and spoke both the Dutch and French Tongues: For some
years past he has followed a loose way of living, and frequented ill Company,
yet never was in Newgate before. He obstinately denid his being concerned in
the Burglary, or breaking open of my Lord Chancellor's house; and when the Jury
brought him in guilty, fell down at the Bar in a Swoon. After Condemnation no
man could be more penitent, spending almost all these few remaining moments of
his life in Prayers and Tears. Before his Trial, having an excellent fancy,
and a hand no less happy at Limning, he had drawn most lively on the wall of
his Chamber in Newgate, a pair of Scales, and in one balance the Mace, and in
the other Tyburn; the last much over weighing the first: But since his
Condemnation, he drew in one Scale the Gallows, in the other a Crucifix; the
first mounted up by the greater weight of the last, and these Lines
underwritten, as I have been informed.

My precious Lord, from all Transgressions free,
Was pleased, in tender pity unto me,
To undergo the Ignominious Tree.
I suffer justly; but his Sacrifice,
I trust, shall make my grovelling Spirit rise,
And from the Gibbet mount the glorious Skies.
At the Sermons on Sunday he behaved himself very reverently, save only now
and then, in the anguish of his Spirit, he was ready to interrupt the Preacher
with the loudness of his sighs and groans.

The rest were for Burglaries, but had little remarkable to be observed in
their behavior.

On Monday, and the days following, several Ministers came to bestow their
Christian offices of Instruction, Information, and Consolation to all the
Condemned wretches. Some of them, taken more up with thoughts of getting
Reprieves and Pardons in this World, than making their Peace with God, or
securing an Interest of Bliss in that which is to come, seemed strangely
negligent and unregardful of any thing that then could be said to them for the
welfare of their Souls; others, though assured of unavoidable Death, according
to their Sentence, endeavored several ways to lull themselves to sleep in a
senseless stupidity, and put away all thoughts of that dreadful hour. 'Twas a
sad thing to see these poor Creatures how amazed and terrified they appeared
with the apprehensions of Death and a future state, which it is to be feared
they had never before considered seriously of one hour in their Lives: Now
their long sleeping Consciences awake with terror, and set the sad Bead-roll
of their multiplied Offenses and Crimes before their faces, remembering each
particular instance, and every aggravating Circumstance: They now find the
treachery and deceitfulness of Sin; that the Pleasures of the world are, at
best, but fading Trifles, or gaudy Snares, that whilst they kiss they betray,
and under pretense of delighting destroy us.

The day appointed for their Execution was Friday the 16th of March, they
being, in Christian compassion, allowed till that time to fit and prepare
themselves for the great work of their Change; at which time there were Five
that suffered. They spoke very little at the place of Execution, but in general
acknowledged the Justice of their Punishment, confessing what long and
notorious Offenders they had been; and desired all that were present at, or
should hear of their shameful and untimely end, to avoid those wicked Courses,
and have a Care of Pride, Idleness, and Ill Company, which had been the great
occasions that brought them to that destruction: And so after the usual Prayers
and Offices customary on such sad occasions, suffered according to their
Sentence.

FINIS.

