THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the Eight Prisoners suffering at TYBURN On
Wednesday the 30th of August, 1676.

VIZ.
Tho. Moore, Charles Godfry, Roger Withers, Richard Cook, Matthew. Walkenden,
Martha Harman, John Evans, and James Parker.
Giving a full and satisfactory Account of their Crimes, Behaviors, Discourses
in Prison, and last Words (as near as could be taken) at the place of Execution.

Published for a Warning to all that read it, to avoid the like wicked Courses,
which brought these poor people to this shameful End.

With Allowance,

Roger L'Estrange.
1676.
London: Printed for D. M. 1676.

The Confession, last Speeches, and Execution of the Prisoners at Tyburn, on
the 30th of Aug. 1676.
AT the S^ssions held for London and Middlesex, August the 23, etc. 1676, there
were in all Sixteen persons Condemned to be hanged for several great and
notorious Crimes: And though, for the most part, they were persons that
all-along, both at their Apprehension, Imprisonment, and Trials, carried and
behaved themselves with too much Confidence, yet when Sentence of death came to
be pronounced upon them (which was done in a most pathetick Oration and a
Gravity suiting the solemness of the occasion, by that worthy person whose
Charge it was) it could not but much affect the hearts of all present to hear
the sad Cries and doleful Lamentations which these miserable Wretches made,
begging and importuning the Court for mercy, when their own repeated offenses
had excluded it, and left room for nothing but Judgment.

Yet so great has been the Clemency of his gracious Majesty (the Fountain of
all Terrestrial Mercy as well as of Justice) that Eight of these desperate
Malefactors were Reprieved from death, the other Eight that suffered their
Names and Offenses were as follows:

Thomas Moore and James Parker, convicted for stealing the Goods of a person of
Quality at Cue in Surrey; and though they were here only indicted for Felony,
because they were taken with the Goods, by one that knew them to be Thieves, in
Aldersgate Street, the same day the Fact was done, yet it appeared to the Court
to be a Burglary too in the said County of Surrey. These Two upon their first
apprehension, were put into Bridewel, and sent aboard a Ship by their consent,
whence they run away; and being retaken on a new score, were now found guilty:
the latter of them was transported for the like Tricks about five years ago,
and by trifling now with the Court before he would plead, forced them to commit
him to the Press, where, before he would recant his obstinacy, he was very much
bruised, so that without further Execution, 'twas much doubted whether he would
have survived.

Charles Godfry and Roger Withers, were convicted for stealing Goods, to the
value of Ten pounds; which likewise appeared to the Court to be a Burglary in
Hartfordshire.

Richard Cook and Matthew Walkenden, were condemned for Burglary: They were
both old Offenders; had several times had the mercy of the Court, but it seems
would by no warning be reclaimed from their vicious Courses.

The next we may justly call a matchless piece of Female Impudence: A young
woman, named Martha Harman, was condemned for breaking open a house at
Islington, a Crime rarely if ever attempted by that Sex. She had four times
before been tried before the Court for several Offenses; but now could not
obtain further indulgence, Laesa toties misericordia fit furor.

The last we are to mention, was the youngest in years, not above Fifteen; by
name John Evans: He was convicted for breaking open a house, and several other
Indictments against him; to which he pleaded guilty within the benefit of the
Clergy, but that Plea in his Case was vain; for he had received that Legal
favor in his hand several Sessions ago.

All these were visited in Goal by several able and godly Ministers, whose
Charity to their perishing Souls led them to come to them in the Dungeon;
besides the daily pains of the Ordinary, who very diligently performed his
Christian duty on this occasion.

The Ignorance they had been bred in, the ill Courses they had all their lives
time followed, whereby the custom of sinning had taken away the sense of it,
rendered them very hard and difficult to be wrought upon, or p^eked into any
degree of Contrition, by the most earnest or searching Discourses or
Persuasions that could be used to them for a long time, their minds being more
taken up with flettering hopes and vain endeavors to prolong their lives in
this world, than to prepare and fit them for an eternal life in the next.

But that omnipotent wisdom which of old was pleased to afford, by miracle,
plentiful water out of a dry and barren Rock, did now graciously vouchsafe at
last to mollify some of their obdurate hearts, into a deep, due, and melting
sense of their miserable state.

The Ministers, as Embassaders sent from the glorious Court of Heaven with
Offers of Peace and Pardon to these desperate and forlorn wretches, were not
wanting to represent to them their miserable Condition by nature, aggravated
and increased by a numberless number of actual Transgressions; not only
against the light of their Consciences, and dictates of humane Reason, and
common Right, but also against several political Indulgences and Warnings from
their own former dangers and others miserable fates.

Some of them appeared to be very sensibly touched with these grave and
seasonable Admonitious, and to cast back a repentant Eye on their former
miscarriages, with endeavors to improve those few remaining minutes of their
lives, to obtain pardon for their past Offenses: Oh! how welcome would a few of
those days, they had formerly spent in vanity, been now to these poor wretches,
that they might have had sufficient time and opportunity to bewail their past
miscarriages, and get some assurance of future happiness, being now to lanch
out into the Ocean of Eternity.

Most of them were very full and open breasted in their acknowledgments, that
they had violated both the Laws of God, of man, and Dictates of their own
Consciences, in unjustly invading the proprieties of other men. And (what is
very remarkable) they confessed, that what they died for was the least of their
Transgressions against the Laws of God; having otherwise by multiplied Offenses
justly provoked the Divine Vengeance against themselves.

On the Tuesday there were at once four Ministers attending them in Spiritual
Instructions and Prayer, for several hours together, the effect of which was,
That several of the dying men seemed entirely convinced of their desperate
Estate, and in that Agony to entreat, with the greatest earnestness in the
world, the Prayers of all good people.

When they were brought to the place of Execution (whither they were attended
besides the people, with several Ministers) few of them spoke any thing
considerable, only one or two declared the Original of their ruin to be
disobedience to their Masters, and particularly neglecting their duties on
Sabbath Days at the places of public Worship, the temptations of lewd Women,
and idleness in their lawful Callings; from which they were debauched by ill
and extravagant Company: of, and from all, which they seriously and in the
words of dying men, desired all that heard them to beware and refrain.

And so suffered according to their Sentence: And may their lamentable Examples
warn all others that saw the same, or shall here read it truly related, deter
them from those wicked Facts and Courses, which brought these unhappy Wretches
to this sad, deplorable, and ignominious End.

FINIS.

