THE FAMOUS TRAGEDY OF OSMOND The great TURK, Otherwise called the NOBLE
SERVANT.

Written by LODOWICK CARLELL, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at his shop at the Princes Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

Drammatis Personae.
Melcoshus, Emperor of Tartary. Orcanes, His Son. Osmond, The noble Servant.
Calibeus, A jealous Cham. Odmer, Faithful to the Emperor. Haly, An aspiring
Traitor. Hosa, Servant to Orcanes. Eunuch. Prisoners. Soldiers. Captains.
Mutes. Messenger. Despina, A fair Christian Slave. Ozaca, Wife to Calibeus.
OSMOND the great TVRK, Or the NOBLE SERVANT.
Actus Primus.
After an Alarm, and people running over the Stage; Enter Osmond, a Tartar
with his Sword bloody. Osm. THe City reekes with the warm blood of murdered
Christians whose avarice has made them and their wealth our prey. Sword! thou
have shed much blood, and of the first and noblest: not added by this arm; for
thou to it lentst vigor: a virtue thou retainst, since Melcoshus my great and
royal Master buckled thee on my thigh, for which so unaccustomed favor and
many other, when I forget still to adore him equal to our Prophet, may my
death quickly follow; now if any thing ( charge.) like danger's left, that dare
appear, I Will meet it. Exit.


Enter two Soldiers, and Despina. 1. Sold. Villain hold off thy hands, she is
my prize; what though thou first seizedst on her, is she a prey for so base a
slave?


2. Sold. How, slave! I Will prove my self thy better.


Desp. Unhappy maid, must I become the cause of bloodshed, tho even of Tartars
our Enemies, heavens forbid; hear me, you wrathful men, by your great Prophets
name, I charge you: we Christians pacify our rage for our dear Masters; sake
make a division of me and of my clothes, he to whose lot I fall, I Will be his
faithful slave.


1. Sold. I am content; so I who am a Janisarie may have the better share of
her person.


2. Sold. No, I Will have that, take thou her clothes and Jewels.


1. Sol. Then I Will have all.


Desp. Alas, why strive you for this worthless person, so far as lies in my
ability i will serve you both.


2. Sold. A good kind wench.


1. Sold. I am agreed; so I may first lie with her, to share her clothes and
jewels.


Des. How, lie with me?


2. Sold. We Will cast lots.


1. Sold. Agreed.


Des. Divinity assist me, what mean these men? went I about to save their
lives for this?


2. Sold. I am first.


1. Sold. You lie, she is mine.


Des. Oh I fear! Would that sword that pierced my Noble Fathers heart, had cut
me from the world, e're this unhappie hour of my dishonor.


2. Sold. Leave her or thy life. ( Exeunt striving for her.)


Enter Melcoshus, Odmer, Haly, Captains, and Prisoners. Mel. Thus Soldiers,
though cold hunger, and all impediments of war seem to block up our way, we
have made passage by our unwearied valor: the gods were forced to give us
victory, and such a victory as makes your King an Emperor, and you in honor
and riches equal to Kings, I mean our Chams; each private soldiers wealth
equals some Christian Lords.


Odm. Our riches, lives, and honor we hold from our magnificent Emperor great
Melco^^us, and as his slaves, thus low prostrate, we kiss his happy feet.


Mel. You see, dogs, it is not with us, as with your ruined Master; who when
he pleaded with his best eloquence, as I have heard, to make his greedy
Subjects open their Cofers for their own safety, could not prevail with them:
for they both base and foolish, rather chose to perish with their Idols, than
to relieve the general necessity, and so have hazarded saving both life and
honor, which makes me not restrain the Soldiers from any insolency, though I
know a city taken by assault to be the only stage, where rape, murder, and
sacrilege is acted to the life.


Haly. Melcoshus is godlike-wise in all; those who forget their Emperor under
whom they live, deserve no pity from a conquering Enemy; our prophet has
appointed you his scourge; mercy unto his Enemies were cruelty to him.


Cap. Haly, do not incite to blood, he is nearest faultiness that way of any:
should he grow thirsty by custom, we have not Christians enough always ready
to quench that thirst; or, glutted with these, our own blood may be found
perchance more sweet, if we grow rich or popular.


Haly. Captain, it is true; the fox would rather strive to abate than increase
the Lions feirceness, since forced to obey and serve him.


Mel. Honest Odmer, thou careful servant of thy Masters honor and safety,
their taxes shall be lessened, though their revolt cannot fright us: let all
the Greek Prisones of note be at our banquet that Osmond seems to whisper. we
may glory in our triumph over them; some of their deaths we will honor with our
presence. These are base traitorus, betrayers of their country,
selfe-murtherers by their own avarice, away with them, and let the Soldier
exercise his rage upon them.


Enter Osmond and Despina: Pri. We are justly punished.


Osm. Dread Lord, behold a present which the meanest of your slaves intends to
make you.


Mel. Is It a boy or a woman, unvaile and show me?


Osm. Sir, a while your pardon, until I let you know that ignorantly I part
not with this jewel, for I so well do understand the value, that were the
citty-spoiles laid in one balance, the Empire too, and but this in the other,
nay an assurance of a happy reign added to that, and on the other side but to
enjoy this creature (to whom no attribute of excellence can be given high
enough) one year, here were my choice.


Mel. Osmond, tho I have loved thee of a child, yet do not tempt that frown
that is death: think not that state that I am now possessed of, admitts any
comparison of happiness, yet not content with this thou do contemn my
fortune; show me that argument of thy presumption, though excellent, but if not
worthy our longing expectation, perhaps the cause of thy destruction: Majesty
delights not to be played with.


Osm. Pardon, dread sir, that man who shall affirm he has an humbler soul
toward great Melcoshus then Osmond, I dare him to the trial with this sword
or faithfuller, which makes me sir assure you, you are in danger of your
liberty, see not her face, for it is a woman so far I Will warn you, a weeping
one, until you do withal consider she is your slaves slave, I mean my
prisoner: were she less worthy; she had been my Mistress, but being thus
excellent who can deserve to look on her but you, let her be covered still, for
if I draw this veil, you then must yield, the thought of all your glories laid
asside, and in her heavenly eyes read your aptivity.


Mel. Osmond, I see thou doatest thy self, and think we must do so: delay
no longer. ( he unvailes her.)


Osm. Prepare then for a bondage which will bring delight above all freedom.


Mel. More, more, by all my glories, than was delivered! Osmond so well I like,
cover her gives him his hand to kiss. face lest I do surfeit with beholding,
nor must the vulgar equal me in such a happiness, my envy makes me find a
torture for my self. Off with that vail, the meanest of creatures may behold
the Sun: and as his beams in showry April breaks through the clouds, so does
the lightening of her glorious eyes break through their watery circle, and
grow more powerful by that opposition; so powerful, that a conquering Prince
descends his throne and beggs that he may hear you, whom fortune has made
his slave, yet to command both him and fortune; for sure your tongue cannot be
less powerful then your eyes.


Des. Ah me unhappie Despina.


Mel. Divinest creature! rise and know thy happiness, thou shall command
Melcoshus, King of the Tartars, who not content with that, intends to make all
Asia the subject of his victories.


Haly. Sir, fear and amazement have not yet forsook her, let her be kept by
your Eunuchs, till time and they make her more capeable of your desires.


Mel. Thou counsellest well, see it performed: but let entertainment be such as
may most delight, and soonest free her from her grief, I shall but languish
till I may enjoy her.


Osm. Lady, you may boldly promise to your self all joy the earth affords.


Des. The Gods reward your piety in saving of my life and honor; but joy be
ever far from me. Exeunt Haly, Despina.


Mel. Tell me thou noble youth, how did thou find this glorious creature,
and what her name is?


Osm. She calls her self Despin. I found her so near being unworthy of me to
give, or you to accept, that being saved it does increase her value; Two
Soldiers being fired with lust, strove which should first enjoy her, but
seeing her a creature of such excellence, I thought my sovereign only worthy
her embraces, and she a fit present for me to offer, which made me to oppose
them both; and my intention being nobler gave victory to my weak arm, aided
by this your gift.


Mel. Had they not perished so, they should have found a death with studied
torments; name some Province thy reward.


Osm. Other reward then your acceptance would mark me for the server of your
pleasure, an Eunuchs office, and soil my act of duty: when I shall overthrow
an enemy in field, or in some doubtful battle guard your sacred person then
Sir, advance me to some honor if you please, for so I shall become the
powerfuller to serve you; but for Despina think not of any recompense to me,
for, by the Gods, the Empire were too little, did not my love and adoration of
your sacred person force me to think she was created for You, not for a subject.


Mel. This freedom in any other had bin death, in thee it but augments our
love, be near Us.

From whence?


Enter Messengers. Mes. From your Son Orcanes who is arrived.


Mel. We have already appointed Callibeus for his host, to morrow he shall
kiss Our hand. Exeunt.


Enter Callibeus. Call. Our Great Cham out of his love appoints his son Orcanes
to be my guest; this were an honor I confess to one that were not old and had
a beauteous wife, such as my Ozaca is: but when the Prince shall view her, and
she him, their very eyes shall speak to my dishonor, and conclude me a
Cuckold in their desires, though they should nere converse. I Will let her know
his coming hither, and from her behavior gather how she approves of it: Ozaca.


Enter Ozaca. Ozaca. Your will.


Call. Ozaca, the Prince Orcanes will strait be here, he for whose sake it is
thought nature will turn a bankrupt, she has in every part of him so played the
prodigal; his face such as might make you take him for the beautifullest of
women; yet through that beauty shines his fathers spirit Great Melcoshus [how
her blood boyles!] a personage equal to that; but then so courteous, though a
Prince and eloquent with all, that every woman that but hears him speak,
modestly thrown by, woes him to acts of love, in which he far outgoes belief
[by all my hopes my fears are true, I see a lustful languishing in her eyes]
speak Ozaca, could you not be content (I being absent) to pass an hour in
conference upon your couch with this young Prince, speak, could you not, ha?


Oza. Oh sir, your needless jealousies do make me miserable, but your self
more.


Call. I see thy heart, strumpet, and it writes a resolution to dishonor me,
and so revenge that which thou call'st a needless jealousy in me, but, by our
sacred Prophet, if thou shall see this Prince except by chance, I Will pull thy
eyes out; if converse with him, thy tongue; or write, thy hand is forfeit;


Oza. I find I am a woman, I long extremely, Aside. they say indeed he is
wondrous handsome, and I have heard, seeing by chance my picture, he did not
contemn my beauty.


Call. It shall be so* go walk in the back garden I charge you, till I send
for you. I would not have him see her, nor she him, no not at a window: it may
be the Emperor will send him away ere long, but should he see Ozaca, I fear
he would never leave my house: about this hour I expect him. Exit.


Enter Orcanes and Hosa. Ho. My Lord, you see this back way, you are free from
the multitude of people, by whom I would not have you seen, till you appear to
morrow like your self; I have sent to advertise your host Callibeus, that you
are entered this way by the back-garden.


Orc. It Is well; they say this Cham is most extremely jealous of his wife, we
shall not see her sure.


Enter Ozaca. Ho. She Is wondrous handsome, he has reason --


Oza. O that I might but see this Prince.


Orc. Whose's that, sure it is the Lady of the house.


Oza. My wish -- it is certainly the Prince, I Will seem to go away.


Orc. Nay, fly not Lady:


Oza. If you are the Prince Orcanes which I believe, my duty is a warrant for my
stay.


Orc. Lady, I am Orcanes who come to be your guest. She unvailes.


Oza. Sir, that assurance warrants me this further expression of my duty.


Orc. The Painter was a niggard of his skill, or grossly ignorant that drew
your picture, but Art must ever yield to Nature in a piece so excellent, and
come far short, since it is but imitation. Rise beauteous Lady, my father would
not suffer this.


Enter Callibeus. Call. Hell and confusion, what is this I see; peace, he is thy
Sovereign's.


Oza. My husband.


Call. Behold your humble servant, who yields up the power both of himself and
all that is his to your command.


Or. Thanks, Callibeus.


Call. I am sorry your Highness came the worst way into the house.


Orc. I did it to avoid the press of people, but trust me I found the passage
very pleasant.


Calli. He means his kissing you, but, whore, thou have a life to lose.


Orc. I never saw a Garden where I received greater content, the Roses and the
Lillies are so finely mixed, that I could stand a year only to gaze on them.


Call. By Mahomet, he means the beauty of my wife, which is my curse, Oh that
she were a Negro. Speak Negro alone.


Orc. What Is that you say, a Negro.


Call. I say my Lord, those flowers you like were planted by a Negro, a skillful
Gardener.


Orc. There are some other rarities, that I would praise, but that I want words
to express them, they are so excellent, I wish I did possess some such.


Call. Palpable, by all my fears! she conceaves his meaning too, and with the
joy of it, I see her lustful heart leap in her bosom, but hush: will it please
your highness enter the house.


Orc. The superstitious More, Callibeus, does not behold the rising sun with
greater reverence, than I his setting in a bright evening like to this: who
knows when we shall have the comfort of his glorious beams again? either
some envious clouds may interpose themselves betwixt us; that bright planet,
jealous that we are not enough thankful may withdraw his comfortable heat,
without which I would not wish to live.


Call. It Is true indeed, the Sun gives life to all and the most witty and
industrious men make great profit by him; those who prepare the soil, and apt
it for his beams receive greatest increase. Your highness, I fear, takes
occasion by the Evenings brightness to excuse your entering under so mean a
roof; but since the great Cham appointed you my guest to honor me; go Ozaca,
and let the diligence of Servants strive to supply every defect, I Will send way
the Sun he means.


Or. Nay, Callibeus, I would not have you think that we misdoubted your
lodging or entertainment, we will enter when you please, there is a cloud ready
to oppose it self betwixt the Sun and us. Exit Orcanes.


Call. The Prince in his discourse makes the Sun his bawd, his father I think
did intend to torture me, no house but mine, you must be walking, whore, and
entertain the Prince, but by our prophet thou shall see no Sun. Exeunt Omnes.


Finis Actus primi.
Actus Secundus.
Enter Despina and an Eunuch. Des. What shall I say, I find I am a weak
unconstant woman, sure I have lost my self, at least my grief; how pleasure
and greatness gains upon our natures! I who wept at first each time their
Eunuchs did me reverence, thinking they mocked me, now take a great delight in
their observance: sent you for Osmond?


Eunuch. He waits without to know your pleasure, tho sildome has been
permitted by the great Cham that any should enter here, but he intends not to
deny you any thing.


Enter Osmond. Des. Bring him in and leave us.


Osm. Thus low as to my Princes Mistress! what was it you intended?


Des. That which civility tied me to, the offer of my lips, and not my roabe
to kiss, you saved my honor, a modest kiss to you could not impair it then.


Osm. Should I have kissed you and been seen, death was my sure reward, nor had
the purchase been too dear, if so I had not been a traitor to my self and
virtue in my disloyalty unto my prince.


Des. Think it no immodesty in me but ignorance of your strict customs: a
salutation amongst Christians breeds no suspicion of ill.


Osm. Did ever any under the degree of a prince receave that honor?


Des. They have if you call that an honor.


Osm. Then it cannot be in me presumption to kiss your hand, yet I in this
too far do stretch my duty.


Des. You Tartars bear a greater reverence to your earthly Lords then
Christians, though you neglect him that should be most honored; but this is
from the cause I sent for you: In all that you have done or said that did
concern me* if I be not an ill observer of man's passion you have expressed a
love not to be equaled, withal so great a spirit, that even in midst of all
my griefs your merits found a passage to my heart, and tho I see I shall be
able to command Melcoshus, and in him the world, yet if you dare apply your
courage to the performance of what I shall offer, and that effected become a
Christian, I shall think my self happy, to be again wholly at your
disposing, as I was when you did unkindly to your self and me, bestow me on
another.


Enter Melcoshus. Osm. The Great Cham. Exit Osmond.


Mel. Despina, accuse thy own excellence that makes me interrupt thy
privacies, rather then me; for I so wholly am become thine, that but to live a
minute from thee is a torment; Say beauty abstract, shall this day be more
favorable then many that are past, may he who can command all, yet hope to
obtain his suite?


Des. Could you command all, you would command that passion in your self,
which makes you strive to ruin my honor.


Mel. Can it be ruin to your honor, to set you on the highest point of honor,
to make you the possessour and disposer of all that your imagination can
propose.


Des. How can this be, when I cannot dispose of my poor unworthy self; give me
my liberty.


Mel. You should have liberty, were you what you allege, unworthy; but it is
your inestimable value, makes you a prisoner; what all Poets have feigned sweet
or lovely in other women, is truth in you; these do so tie you to my heart,
that should I grant you liberty, you would bear it a long, so all the empire
should be governed by a heartless man: yet bribe me with one loving kiss and
try. With how much scorn you turn away. I wrong that power that is given me
from above, it was ordained I should command, not sue to any. Woman, beauteous
woman, for more thou art not, what ere my dotage makes thee think thy self,
consider I who may command, entreat, but if refused the violence of my
affection will compel me to use force.


Des. I know you will not, you have too much praised Osmond for relieving me
from rape, your self now to perform it; tho you now seem cruel, yet do I
hope you are just, for I have heard the world esteem you so.


Mel. The act will not be wholly mine; your not to be-resisted beauty first
made a rape on me, enforcing me to love you; that love made me desire to enjoy
the happiness of your embraces, which you denying reason steps into right my
wronged affection, and bids me force you, assuring me, that nature who does
naught in vain, had never taken such pains in framing you so sweet and
lovely, but that she meant some one or other should enjoy that sweetness; and
shall I so far yield to any others merit, or wrong my fortune which bestowed
you on me, as not to think I am the happy man appointed by wise nature to
enjoy you; the Gods cannot in justice, after so great victories, appoint
Melcoshus the office of a slave to be the keeper of such dainty fruit for any
other man, and he himself He Offers violence. not taste it; no I have lost
too many hours of pleasure, and will no longer suffer my self to be
tormented more then Tantalus, for he was forced to fast, but foolishly I starve
having my hands at liberty, and in my power that which will satisfy beyond
expression. ( aside.)


Des. Oh Sir, consider er'e you go about a deed of so much baseness, how will
this rank amongst your noble acts to be a murderer, for do not think I will
out live my fame; for your own sake be wise then, if you love me, and do not
rob your self of the content you may hereafter find, if you take noble ways
and make my heart yours, then you may have a lasting pleasure Aside. now the
deed once done will bring repentance ever.


Mel. Who would not threaten rape to hear such pretty arguments against it.
No Despina I have no faculty which is not more obedient to thy will then to my
own, each threatening word I uttered was to my self a torment: dry those
bright eyes that never shall have use of tears again, if not for their own
cruelty against Melchoshus; consider but my power, and thy own beauty which
would inflame old age, and from thy justice my temperance must needs find some
reward.


Des. If thus you woe me, I dare not say but time and woman's weakness may make
me love you, and for your this days temperance, this kiss be your reward.


Mel. I am transported, force can bring no such pleasure, kiss me again and
by our Prophet, it shall seal, your honors freedom by an oath: my blood is
fired, one such kiss more would make me break that promise, for making which
this kiss was given me.


Des. Oh Sir.


Mel. But fear not, base passion shall not overthrow my wise and nobler
resolutions, for since I love you as you are altogether excellent, I must enjoy
Despina, not Despina's person only that is not half your self; I will not
look on you, your eyes tho chaste may more increase my lust, which my minds
pure love makes me now know to be a crime;

And hold our Prophet Mahomet unjust,
That made no laws against a Princes lust.
Exeunt.
Enter Orcanes and Hosa. Orc. Hosa: is Callibeas gone to court?


Hos. He is my Lord.


Orc. Is there no means think thou to see his wife?


Hos. It is impossible, his jealousy makes him set spies in every corner.


Orc. I see thou art not read in tricks of love, I have made use of all that
art and nature has bestowed upon me; youth and beauty what woman can resist?
or were these wanting, yet a Princes name is a powerful advocate, I never yet
laid siege to any femall Fort, but either by assault or policy I found a way
to conquest yet am I careful of their honors I enjoy, and so dissemble my
affection, that each Lady thinks I only am her servant; would my youth and
beauty ever last, I would not wish to change the life I lead now, to enjoy the
Kingdom; although my father possess the greatest beauty of the world, yet is it
not by stealth: security takes from the pleasure it is dull so to enjoy a
beauty.


Hos. You Will find your present task full of difficulty if you delight in
that, I do not think you will ever see her more, Callibeus having taken notice of
your love.


Orc. He sees, but will not say he sees, being my father's slave, he dares not
find the least fault: me thinks she should corrupt some Eunuch that attends
her, or from her window drop a letter to express the love I am sure she
bears me.


Hosa. How are you sure she loves you?


Orc. Sure she loves me, as sure as if she had told me so, nay, surer; her eyes
spoak plainly, which I will trust in women more then their tongue: but I am so
experienced, I cannot well miss in either.


Enter Eunuch. Eun. My Lady does entreat your Highness, not to walk before her
window for, if my Lord return, and see you, he will be with her offended.


Orc. Return, and tell your Lady, I shall be ready to obey any command of hers,
though to my own torment.


Eun. I shall.


Hos. Sir, it appears, she loves you Callibeus above drops a Letter. not by
this, else she would take delight to look on you.


Orc. This letter lay not here, last turn we made; before I open it, to let
thee see, I am the Master of my Art, though here is no superscription, I now
tell you, this Letter is to me, and from Ozaca, full of affection too.


Hos. I shall another time believe you, if it be; retire your self here out of
sight, and read it.


Orc. The Sun, though clouded by jealousy, The Letter. will shine again, not
only to warm, but inflame, if it have power, those who seem to take comfort in
his beams. If a reciprocal fire be kindled express it not in words -- Here Is
wit, Hosa, besides beauty. No fair Ozaca, not in word, but thus I do express
my zeal. Hosa, she is at the window, but dares not open it, for the Eunuch. I
have a plot, which thou must needs assist me in, and then she is mine, spite
of her husbands jealousy.


Enter Callibeus, and Eunuch. Call. How in silence he wooed her, and thanks was
given for her Letter, as he thought. Was It not a good device in me, to be
assured of his intentions; he shall break through forty doors, ere he plant
here. Now to Ozaca, which I removed into another Chamber, whilst I supplied her
place. Exeunt.


Enter Osmond with a Letter. Osm. It was a happy fate, that brought the
Emperor so to cross my yielding; how could I have resisted such a motion,
coming from her that I adore. Let me consider, become a Christian, fly, and
marry me: What a temptation's this? I gave this Beauty to Melcoshus, and shall
I childishly recall my gift, nay, basely steal the jewel of his life, in whom
the Kingdoms weal consists? 'twere unexampled treason. Hence thou enticing
charm, whose witchcraft almost does enforce me, to forsake my faith and
virtue. Stay, become a Christian, that is but to be as she is; and can the
heavens be cruel to such, such, sweetness? shall not their providence
preserve what they have framed so excellent, and me, for serving her? Say I
forsake our Prophet, and trust upon that Power which she adores, then must I
basely fly, forsake Melcoshus my dread Lord; and what can recompense that
loss, or seem a plausible excuse for such a falsehood? Oh yes, to marry fair
Despina, which she offers, is to be happy in so high a nature, that it would
stop the mouth of churlish censure; all would excuse a fault, that brought so
great contentment to the guilty, as her embraces must be.


Enter Melcoshus. Mel. Osmond, thou have undone me in thy rich gift.


Os. How, Sir?


Mel. She does, and may, so justly glory in her own purity, that she disdains
to mix in love with me; and yet, till her denial taught me to know I was
defective, my very thoughts, much more desires, did never meet a check: Whose
wife or daughter that I should covet, would not the husband or glad father
bring me? or, if their honor mastered their love or duty, what could resist my
power?


Osm. Naught, but such another excellent creature as Despina, she can oppose
your will against your power, and make, both wait her pleasure.


Mel. Oh Osmond! could she be equaled, my love and admiration would grow less;
but as it is, I languish in desire, and must do ever: Should I use force, my
royal word were broke to her, whose good opinion I strive more to gain, than
all the world's; and by those Christian virtues that she proposes too, Faith
and Temperance.


Osm. Sir, since you find so much affliction, would I had never presented her.


Mel. Osmond, thou art a traitor in thy wish, and nothing could preserve thee
from my rage, but that thou did what now thou wished thou had not; should my
beloved son Orcanes but say, he wished, that I had never seen Despina, by
Mahomet, his life were forfeit: For, though I for the present find some
torment in her denyalls, yet, by one smile, she may advance me to a happiness,
above all earthly Monarchs; what will her kisses do then, I mean, when she
shall give them freely, uncompell'd, transport me from my self, the mere
imagination does almost perform it; and see, amazement leave me, that I may
express some part of the content I feel, in viewing this deer object, thus to
approach me, smiling, nay, as if she meant to make me happy, by commanding
something.


Enter Despina. D^s. I am indeed a suitor, but cannot hope I shall prevail yet,
piety commands me to make trial, since it is for some of my religion, and your
enemies.


Mel. Though they had plotted against my life, I freely pardon them; you cannot
ask me that I will not grant you; and in your servant, all that is mortal shall
obey you; nay, Mahomet himself shall cease to be adored, if he be not
assistant to your wishes.


Des. I have no further suit, only let Osmond see performed, what I shall now
direct him.


Mel. On thy allegiance, Osmond, that, and all she shall command thee else:
with greater care, and more devotion, I should perform it than ere I offered
yet at Mecha.


Des. The Emperor speaks, dear Osmond, as if he knew what I intend to command
you.


Osm. Divinest Lady, what is the occasion, wherein your trembling Vassail may
express his care and duty.


Enter Haly. Des. Dear Osmond, look not pale, nor shake so, but mark those few
words, which this short time will suffer me to speak. I so much love thee, that
again I offer to fly, now when opportunity presents it self: For, my suit
unto Melcoshus, which you must see performed, is, to set free a Christian
Merchant, with his ship and men, with whom, we being both disguised, may 'scape
away; or should we be discovered, to die would not much grieve me. Your answer
in a word.


Osm. Could paradise be gained by crooked paths, I would not tread them. I
grant, to be your husband, were to enjoy a heaven upon earth; for the danger in
attaining that, would but add unto the happiness. I should a thousand times
repent me of my gift, did not he prise you to your value, if it be possible;
but since he does, and only can continue you in your full luster, making you
shine a wonder to the world, far be it from the thought of Osmond, to yield so
far to passion, as to destroy his Masters happiness, and his own faith. For
you, if you shall but in thought continue this design, the Gods will punish
you, for offering to oppose their sixth decrees, since it is apparent by your
equal merits, you only were appointed for Melcoshus, and he for you.


Desp. Do you refuse me then?


Mel. Ha(...) dares Osmond expect to live, after refusing what she shall
command.


Osm. I do not wish it, Sir.


Desp. My passion made me to forget, Sir. Osmond is the noblest of your
servants, and ready to obey me.


Mel. To show the power you have over me, I freely pardon him, nor shall your
commendations light in vain on any much less on Osmond; I here create thee
Bassha of Aleppo.


Osm. Sir, you will but in this, forestall my future services, and rob me of
desert to climb by a way I rather should have wished to tread. But when I do
consider, Madam, it is your praise, no other woman's, that advances me, it
shows, my merit was not small, since I attained your good opinion, which fully
satisfies.


Desp. It Is nobly said of Osmond; yet, since his denial, I look on him with
other eyes. Melcoshus greatness, and his love exceeding that, makes some
impression in me. [Florish.]


Mel. Say thou bright Angel is there ought wherein Melcoshus may express his
love.


Desp. Your humble vassail's too much honored, who rather does deserve your
frown for her presumption. [Masque.]


Mel. There are some sports, which you perchance have heretofore deigned to
behold. Exeunt.


Enter Haly, two Captains. ( Flourish.) Hal. You see the Emperor throws by
all care of Subjects, addicting himself wholly to pleasure; days, weeks, and
months he spends with Despina, that painted Sorceresse; and when he hears of
any revolted Province, or of preparing enemies, he asks, how fair Despina
slept that night, affirming, that in her alone, was loss or victory. Revolt of
subjects! I often have heard him wish, that all his subjects love were turned to
hate, so that his goddess would but favor him: Was It not a Kingly wish?


1. Cap. It Is strange, our Emperor should thus dote upon a captive, a
Christian too.


Hal. Aye, fellow soldiers; but consider to what a pass we now are grown, to
be thus governed; we, who have power to make the world ours, all Kings obey us,
thus to be led to ruin, nay, to a ruin that we see apparent: I dare not say,
but I could wish, that we did not quite forget the power of Soldiers. We had
power, when 'twas to raise Melcoshus for his virtues.


Cap. It Is true, his virtues made him Emperor (rather his seeming virtues,
more they were not) and they being counterfeit, if we be firm to him that is
fallen into vice and imbecility, we forsake virtue and our own strength: Some
in the Camp equal his former worth, then far outgo his present.


Enter Messenger. Mess. Odmer, and some other of the Captains, will straight be
here.


Hal. It Is well, I know you are friends to those that love the Soldier; for my
part, I will not promise much, yet, if the gods shall breed a change, and think
me worthy of advancement, virtue shall steer me wholly.


1. Cap. We know it shall, most noble Haly; and when the time grows ripe,
expect our utmost aid.


2. Cap. We Will not be found here, lest Odmer should suspect our friendship to
you; we will rather seem to come by accident, hearing of his being here. Exeunt
Cap.


Hal. You shall do well: By seeming virtuous, I have the faith corrupted of many
others in the Army; but these, though they perceive that I aspire, yet for
their own ends, they will assist my plots, pretending, as if A Table. we believed
each other virtuous. Love to our Country moves us; yes, as much as it does the
Crocodile, that laments that creature, which she means to make her prey. How
e're, Melcoshus is careful of the soldiers good, and most ambitious of their
love. I have so wrought upon them by flattery, that he not once suspects, how
they distaste his easy pleasant life, their bane; nor shall he know it, until
the error ruin him, in all opinion, and make me powerful. I will observe and
flatter him in smallest things, all must run smooth and eeven; he shall not
see, at least not hear, a discontented man, yet underhand, by injuries, I Will
make the greatest so; then by my instruments so work them, that they shall fix
their eyes on me as their sole remedy, being the only man that loves his
Country. True, the masque of virtue I put on, must be worn cunningly indeed.
Odmer, that Fox too I must ruin, by his own honesty and faith unto his Prince;
I cannot be secure of any plot whilst he has breath; and here he comes.


Enter Odmer and Captains. Odmer. According to your desire I am come and pray
Mahomet our present meeting may produce some happy issue for the good of our
Sovereign.


Ha. Amen, good Odmer, sit, sit, most noble friends, you the Pillars of the
Empire, upon which the huge Colossus of our Princes same was raised: here is
not at this Table (I to my comfort speak it to be so honored) a man that does
not merit to lead himself an Army, I being exempted. What victory did our
Melcho^hus get, that some brave Arm here did not act wonders, I dare not say
equal to what he did? yet to continue doing bravely still, is fair for
Soldiers: for Kings sometimes slack in their worth. But Ours you will say is
gracious, careful of the State and soldiers.


Od. I know not what they will say, but I must say so, and withal add if you
think not so too, you are a flatterer: for have not I heard Haly with fair
words smooth over the errors of the King small in themselves at first, but by
your conformation still continued not amended, as not thought wrongful actions.


Ha. I grant good Odmer when I have seen the Emperor enraged not to be
contradicted but with danger, I have applied my self to serve his humor for
the present, hoping my reason afterward might better overthrow his error,
when it should be forsaken by his passion, nor failed I often; but were it not
madness in any that should tell him, that this his dotage on Despina makes him
neglect his office? how all the Soldiers that have any spirit or sense of
their vast wrongs talk of electing them another Emperor who better shall
distinguish betwixt their honored scarrs, and upstart Ignorants, who never
shed drop of Enemies blood, or had their own spilt to advance his glory? would
you have me tell him this, though all yet know, this is truth.


Od. Though I know this is false, how e're opinion sway the envious and
ignorant; yet did you think it true; were you true subjects you would tell it
him: but he that fears his loss of life more then his loss of faith and
honor, thinks no reward can equal such a hazard.


2. Cap. Then Odmer, yo'u would seem as if your faith and love so far transport
you, bove your reason that you durst tell the Emperor this.


Ha. No Odmer, twere' folly.


Od. Haly, to you it may appear so; but may Odmer be as cold in duty as you,
and find what it deserves, some heavy punishment: if he do not make known e're
long, unto his Sovereign how he daily loses his Soldiers love, for that I
grant is truth though undeserved from him; for he has still desired to give
them all their dues, nay bin more liberal then his Ancestors how ere false
servants and corrupted ministers have deceived his trust: the sweetest and most
plentious springs passing through noisome and straight passages may lose their
comfortable qualities; even you my Lord (I must be plain) have wrought your
self to such a power by the advantage of your birth and his employing you that
all depend on you more then on him: all that you think will please the
Soldiers you make your Act, the Emperor by you induced to it, and by you
performed; but what may give them cause of murmur or discontent, that you give
out that you persuade him from: thus do you rob him of his greatest wealth the
Soldiers love, and in the stead of it procure their hatred for him, which
justly you deserve. But would that tyrant, Love, release him, that he might
show himself again in Arms, and look about him, he soon would know, that
Haly his most trusted counselor has abused his trust, whilst he has bin
fast lulled asleep with pleasure.


Ha. Zealous Odmer, what you have spoke might seem an injury not to be borne,
to those that did not know us both: who would think I could suffer in my own
house my loyalty thus to be called in question nay condemned? for you have
spoke no less then what might brand me for a Traitor. But know good Odmer
your zeal thrice heated by your envy, to see me greater then your self not
only in my place but in the soldiers love, can no way sindg my reputation, or
make my faith mistrusted by my Prince; and since I know you cannot hurt, my own
power garding me, but most that innocence which I have ever borne as the best
shield against all slanders; I am so far from being angry, that I profess I
love you, and will advise you for your honors sake, which else might suffer
since you are honest Odmer To tell the Emperor all things are amiss; the
greatest danger that can arise to you, he being of a gentle nature, will be but
strangling; or, may be, for the kind office you shall take upon you to be his
tutor, (for it was never known that any yet counseled him unasked) his fauchion
may be employed that he may view your brains who would be wiser then your Lord.


1. Cap. Faith Odmer, tell him: my Lord counsel's well.


Ha. First let him know (my faults) if you intend I should be punished; you will
have no time when you have told him (his.)


Os. Haly, you speak to me in scorn; but I perchance shall do that which
would fright thee even to death only to think on it.


Ha. Odmer, your blood is stirred and you are angry.


Os. If thou had given me any real cause, this place, nor these, should not
protect thee; but since I know thy plotting brain to be thy only weapon, thou
can not move me, and so I leave you. Exit.


2. Cap. My Lord, will you endure this?


Ha. Let him alone, the honest fool is running to his ruin.


1. Cap. As how, what danger?


Hal. Danger enough, Melcoshus frown, for he will inform him what he has promised.


1. Cap. By Mahomet, he dares not.


Ha. He will, I know his humor best, or if you please to call it simple
honesty, you may, which I have wrought upon by opposing; so shall his faith
serve my aspiring ends.

Odmer once sacrificed for truth, who will be Melcoshus's friends? Exeunt.


Enter Orcanes and Callibeus. Or. It Is strange, my Father should so dote. I
thought in time, the force of his affection would have abated; but on the
contrary, his love increases, never was such a change. What poor things are we,
when our lust has once overthrown our reason! that any man of spirit should so
far yield to passion, as to become his captives captive! and all this coil
only for obtaining that, which in the enjoying does not yield a minutes
pleasure: How happy am I, that have no such desires.


Enter Hosa. Call. Oh hypocrite!


Orc. Have you done what I bad you?


Hos. Yes, you shall see the effects on it immediately.


Orc. The truth is; our Laws gives us too great a liberty that way; how much
better were it, might every man only enjoy one woman? for, lust does both
corrupt the bodies and the souls of men.


Call. What means this seeming sanctity? it does indeed my Lord, it is a most
ugly vice, though to the great ones tolerated.


Orc. I do protest, my Father's error does so much lessen him from what he
was, that I Will forswear the very company of women; bewitching Sirens, that
confounds our judgments.

Fire, fire, fire. [within.]


Call. What noise is that, ha, fire!


Enter Orc. Hosa. Orc. My Lord, I Will to the Court this morning. Finis Actus
secundi. Exeunt omnes.


Actus tertius.
Enter Orcanes and Ozaca. Oz. SIr, I beseech you think not meanly of me; for
having won me thus, thus without parley, I freely must confess, the force you
used did not displease me, whatsoever I seemed; for, I did something love you,
before mine eyes were blessed with viewing your perfections; yet, modesty or fear
to be contemned, would have for ever closed my lips.


Orc. Why, fair Ozaca, did not you by a Letter dropped from your window one day
make me know my happiness, in your requital of affection, in the same phrase,
to that I spoke at first in, to let you know, I was your servant, though your
husband then were present, I doubting a second opportunity.


Oz. Alas, my Lord, I did not know your meaning, if you spoke to that effect;
but it may be, my husband prompted by a just fear, did understand you; for you
are made up of sweetness, that might tempt an angel.


Orc. My behavior gave him no cause of suspicion sure.


Oz. His jealousy proceeding from his excess of love to me, made him believe,
it seems, I was an object worthy of your eye, when indeed the god of love
pitying my silent languishing, did rather wound you, to show his power, than
that my beauty could command affection from one, so far in all respects above
me: And if you did receive any Letter to that effect, he writ it as from me,
none else durst have presumed.


Orc. It Is certain, and he himself has been the unhappy happy instrument, to
make me now enjoy the miracle of nature; for, had I not been so encouraged by
that Letter, I should not have thus ventured on this rash attempt, of firing
the house.


Oz. Sweet Prince, I fear some jealous pang may take my husband, and he return
before the fire be quenched, and find you; at least the Eunuch may.


Orc. Shall I then so soon leave you?


Oz. Oh yes, you must; yet do not, except you every day could set a
Garden-house on fire; for, without some such extraordinary means, we hardly
shall again enjoy each others company, which how sweet it is to me, let this
kiss witness, being more then ever yet I offered to my husband.


Orc. Let us not part, what danger can be equal to this happiness? By
Mahomet, I never till now did find content with any woman. Why should a subject
be thus blessed. Let this make all my other conquests be forgotten, over other
women; for I am now what I have often seemed, but never was in earnest, in
Love, nay taken after the enjoying. knock within


Oz. Oh me, we are undone, one knocks, I fear my husband's Confusion on them.


Call. Ho Ozaca, Ho Ozaca.


Oz. It Is he: what will become of me?


Orc. Spare those tears, or rather let them fall to save your honor, by
seeming, as if I had used violence. To say, that I at all have not injured you,
were to no purpose, he will never believe it: Put your self in such a posture, as
may beget belief. My birth shall save me from all danger; or should I perish,
so I save your honor, it matters not.


Enter Callibeus. Call. What, asleep Ozaca, and such a fire. I Will use my private
key. The Prince! now, all the furies, had the house been burnt, ay, all the
house, nay, all that is in it, my self, I had been far less miserable. For ever
let all comfort cease, Ozaca is a strumpet, I am dishonored, the boys will
hoot at me as I pass the street. Sensibly I feel my self transformed from man
to beast.


Orc. You Are too much honored slave: that I should take so much pains, and
only once enjoy that, which thou may possess at ease, and often! For her,
she is so far from being a strumpet, that she is chaster in thought then thou
could wish her, how e're her person suffered violence. Behold an object, if
any thing could move me to repent so soon of that, wherein I lately took such
pleasure, those lovely cheeks bathed in her tears, my friends it seems, who by
their quantity, would wash from off her face those bloody stains, the witnesses
of my rude act.


Oz. Hence from me, Serpent.


Call. Oh, leave my house, lest I forget you are Melcoshus son: but for thee,
strumpet.


Orc. Build not on my ill laid foundation, make not the rape I have committed,
the cause of any future injuries to her, for so you shall on me lay greater
weights of sin, which I Will revenge on thee. And Lady, though I know I do appear
to you a devil, nay worse; yet, when you shall consider your own beauty, you will
excuse me something. -- What, spit at me spits at him. being your Prince; nay,
then I know my crime was heinous; your eyes too, that may give life to others,
like to the Basilisks, do strike me dead. Remember Callibeus. Exit.


Call. Abused and threatened! I am too tame, I Will after him; rather, revenge me
on this whore that did allure him.


Oz. Do, you cannot add unto my misery: I am already made unworthy of your bed,
dishonored, ravished; and you that should revenge the wrong, are cold in
taking vengeance, though in hot blood: You that could let him part, having a
sword so near your hand, and such a cause to use it in, will shortly bring me
to him, nay, be assistant, whilst he ravished me again; but you would rather use
it against me than him: if so, behold this breast, sometime the subject of your
praise; employ it then, and take away the cause of your dishonor; No? give it
me she offers to pull out his sword. then, and you shall see --


Call. Hold* what would thou do?


Oz. Free my self from misery, since you refuse to do it.


Call. Ozaca, I confess I was too cold in my revenge; indeed I doubted, whether
thou had yielded willingly or not; but now that I do know thy virtue, and am
my self collected by my reason, I find indeed, there was no cause of jealousy
in thee at all, how e're my extreme love made me suspicious: I shall forgive
the offense, I hope, nay, 'twas none, since 'twas against thy will; and after
some small time, receive thee to my bed: For my revenge I have a way, that
without blood I Will find my satisfaction.


Oz. For that, Sir, as you please; but never will I come within your bed, I am
not worthy: as a soyl'd garment, throw me by, seeing another man has used me.


Call, Not for the world, my Ozaca, thou art still worthy.


Oz. Too worthy, since Orcanes loves, to be enjoyed by thee. [Aside.] Exeunt.


Enter Melcoshus and Osmond. Mel. Oh my dear Osmond, grant me but one request.


Osm. you may command, Sir.


Mel. Become my partner in the Empire, for thou have given me more then the
whole, in my most kind Despina: for she is no longer cruel, I have enjoyed
her freely, by her own consent, which does express more happiness, then all
the tongues of men can utter.


Osm. You owe me naught for this. When I presented her, then she was coy and
cruel; if by your noble usage you have won her to crown your wishes, the debt
was due unto your sufferings, and you now are paid, which I rejoice in.


Mel. The joy, my Osmond, is so great, that if I do not by communicating delay
it something, it will be dangerous.


Osm. Sir, I believe there is none living, that sooner could conceive your
happiness than I, since none does more admire and reverence Despina^ For, were
a love from me to her as warrantable, as it is from me to you, grounded on
virtue, I sure should equal, if not exceed you in affection; nay, could she
love again, be happier: for all the love that she can render you, is to your
merits and your fortunes due; But if she that is above me shall descend, my
happiness beyond yours must extend. This, Sir, I speak only, to let you know, I
see the way, which the gods by chance had left open, to my happiness in Despina;
but knowing that it was by chance, and that they did not intend to any subject
such a beauty, I forbore, nay thought my self most happy in that they chose
me for their instrument to salve the error by presenting you with what they had
provided for you, and which it seems they meant to crown your conquests with.


Enter Despina, Haly, Captains. Mel. Osmond, in all thy words and actions thou
are perfect: next her that now appears, I do esteem thee, for if there be one
corner in my heart, that is not filld with her, thou do possess it, nay thou
art mingled with each loving thought of her. Oh my Despina, how glorious thou
appear'st! the Sun is but a cold and obscure lamp compared with thy two
heavenly eyes, from whose sparkling fires all that behold except my self must
perish, but I by their more gentle influence breath-in a temperate pleasant
air, or should I be consumed with others, yet it is permitted me to kiss
these lips which might restore me but should this more inflame me, which is
possible, yet would those eyes produce such pearly drops for their own
cruelty in having so consumed their faithfullest adorer, that it would quench
even their own fire, and so preserve me still the happiest of men.


Des. May I prove worthy of your favors, and in my future love and service
make satisfaction for the time of ignorance, and disobedience that is past; my
present happiness, best makes me see my error.


Mel. No more, least I do surfeit: had you killed my father, nay revild our
Prophet the highest crime, this were too much.


Haly. Our Prophet should have appeard unjust, if he had made Melcoshus so
far in worth above all other men, and not rewarded that unequalled merit:
which what could so well do as this rare creature? The Prince Orcanes.


Enter Orcanes. Mel. Now my son Orcanes, are all things ready for our sports?


Orc. Sir, all attend you.


Mel. Orcanes, tell me had thou a beauty like to this, would thou go hunt
and leave her tho but for an hour, could all variety of pleasures else be
joynd, and in one minutes time their quintessentiall part enjoyed, I would not
lose her company that minute: nor would thou, had thou once tasted my
delights; but as it is, hunt, my Orcanes, and in that enjoy the greatest
delight of mortals: but for me, I have pleasure in my divine Despina, far
above sense, tho sense convaie it to my understanding, and am immortalizd by my
vast joys? Exeunt.


Haly. Was ever such dotage, is this a man to govern us? no, fellow soldiers,
no.


1 Cap. He must not long, if we be men, and have but sense to see our miseries
in him, and what a happy people we should be under some other.


Haly. Farewell most trusty friends. Exit.


2. Cap. We shall rule the world, we that are soldiers.


1. Cap. Who can tell, Haly being advanced may grow as lazy.


2. Cap. Then down with him, and choose another.


1. Cap. Is that the friendship you bear him?


2. Cap. My profit and my pleasure are those with whom I only keep friendship,
nor have you, on my knowledge, any other resolution; each man pursues his own
desires, there is no such thing as faith left in the world but amongst our Mufti.


1. Cap. Are they there?


2. Cap. Yes, in their books, and now and then upon occasion we hear on it.


1. Cap. Do they no more? we speak of virtue too, and seem to show our love
to it, our present designs are to be sheltred under a pretense of love to our
country.


2. Cap. And so it is, man: come near, examine these things. Haly has power and
will advance us with himself, let that satisfy: The Emperor and Callibeus:
stand close, we may perhaunce hear some thing that will avail us the Emperor
trusts him much.


Enter Melcoshus and Callibeus. Mel. Now, Callibeus, what is the important cause
that you thus press upon my privacies, have you received intelligence of any
foreign Enemy, or that our person here at home's in danger; say, if not so,
you have presumed tho we esteem you much, to rob us of Despinaes company a
minute.


Call. Dread Sir, your pardon then, I come for justice.


Mel. Justice Callibeus? to whom is it denied within our kingdom?


Call. The person against whom I must complain, Sir, is exempted from all
punishment, excepting, that which your self shall lay upon him.


Mel. Name him.


Call. The act, Sir, is so foul that I dare name him, it is your son Orcanes
whom I accuse as a guilty person, I beseech you look on him, and do me
justice; my wife by him is ravished, dishonored: the laws of hospitality were
of no other then only to perform his wickedness: oh Sir, consider that you
lodged him in my house and if you punish not, you shall appear an accessarie.


Mel. What proof of this?


Call. Oh Sir, too much, I took him all most in the violent act; besides he
glories in it too.


Mel. Degenerate bastard, for could a son of mine commit so base an act; had
I usd force, where had my joys in Despina bin? but yet I must not seem as if
did intend to punish, for the injurer is my son, the injured but my slave.


Call. Oh justice, Sir.


Mel. Why Callibeus, art not thou my slave, and if my son have forced thy wife,
is she not more my slave whom thou command; it was disobedience, either in
her, or thee, that did not offer, what he was pleased to like: he too much
honored thee, and like a common guest fed of the same dish with thee; go, be
gone, and hold thy self happy, that I do not inflict a punishment upon thee,
both for the evil thou wished upon my son, and for thy present troubling.
Exit.


Ca^li. You Gods! is this Melcoshus justice, for which he has bin so renowned?
but his fond love has ruined all his virtue: farewell all faith and duty
which hitherto has bin by me inviolately kept.


1. Cap. Lose not this opportunity, he is discontented, let us strive to make
him ours; my Lord, by accident we overheard your injuries, and grieve so much
that we will assist you to redress them, you know we still have honored you.


Calli. I know you are my friends, it is true that I am injurd, past sufferance.


1. Cap. We will give you ease. Exeunt omnes


Finis Actus Tertu
Actus. Quartus.
Enter Osmond. Osm. I Was too scrupulous, my duty did not bind: me to give
that to another without the which I could not live my self; 'twas against
reason and I was drunk with zeal, else I had never done it: I with the danger
of my life did purchase her, and heaven did ratify, it seemed, the conquest,
since they made, her love equally: she is not wanting in affection, yet, for
ought I know, she now sent for me to tell me; although her person be the
Emperors yet her heart is mine, nay both by stealth this, this corrupt flesh
and blood would basely have me think, but virtue and honor which must rule my
soul tells me these are ignoble thoughts, and ill befit the faith of Osmond,
who allwaies has applied himself to virtue, how ever weak in his
performances; nay something noble bids me arm my self so strongly in my
virtue, that tho she should become a suitor, yet not to grant and, by our
Prophet if my flesh against my faith rebel and she consent, He free my nobler
soul, and send this trunck to hell -- but all these fears are needles for so
much goodness shines in her face that sure her heart is far from being empty
rather a magazine from whose abundance all that do want, might be supplied
could they be sensible of their poverty: According to your command, behold
your slave.


Enter Despina. Des. Osmond how ere the Emperor, in my command ore him, makes
all the empire subject to my will, yet if you kneel I must not be exempt: for
well you know I love you.


Osm. I fear.


Des. Yet not so as heretofore, it is now a sisterlie affection.


Osm. Thanks heaven.


Des. Which that I may witness more then in words accept this from me, not as
they in themselves are rich, but as they are made so to you in being my gift;
and let them tell you when you look on them, that there is nothing in Despinas
power, her faith kept sacred to Melcoshus, whom now I in my soul adore, but
that you may command as freely, as you might a sister that entirely loves you.


Osm. Virtue I see is never without reward: how far I am exalted in this joy
above what sin could have produced: your pardon, madam, though my thanks come
slow, yet they are sure, I am overjoyed and want words to express my self,
not in the riches of what you have given but in your protestation that you love
me so, as my own soul desired.


Des. The emperor knows I love you more then any, and is pleased it should be
so, nor need you keep that distance that all others do, but freely visit me. I
have a suit concerning the releasing some poor prisoners for which you from
the Emperor must receave order, who strait will visit me.


Osm. I am too happy to continue long so. Exeunt.


Enter Melcoshus and Odmer. Od. Did not my love unto your sacred self make me
prefer duty before danger, I should as others do in silence only mourn, the
ruins of your state and murderd honor.


Mel. Ha.


Odm. But though I know that he which thus undermines you, has power to give
me death with studied torments, by turning that which loyalty makes me utter,
to rash presumption in your acceptance, yet i will become a zealous priest and
sacrifice my self to show your danger; what though your passion will not let
you read a faithful warning writ in my bloody intralls, and so you will think
the sacrificer mad, I from the Gods shall find a recompense; having discharged
a faithful Subjects part to heaven and you, the end of my creation.


Mel. Odmer, thou still have found belief, nor have thy fears at any time bin
idle: name what thou mean.


Od. First draw your sword, then promise you will hear me out ere you make use
of it, for I shall move you highly; the sore I come to launch is too much
festerd to be cured with flattery.


Mel. It Is strange, I promise thee, how? is my honor tainted, or my state in
danger?


Od. I should not need to let you see the peril and dishonor that attends
your too much Love (I dare not call it dotage) on Despina, if your own
judgment were at liberty that better could inform you.


Mel. Traitor thou can not speak eternally, then I shall be revenged for
blasphemy and break no oath: Can love to her be dotage?


Od. Consider, Sir, what you have lost by loving her, oh could you see, but you
are hood winck'd by your lust, from what a pitch of honor you are fallen, you
would find that word too little to express it; consider what you were at
taking of the city, to you accursed though gotten by a glorious victory; all
neighbor Princes feared you so as does the lesser hawke the Kingly Eagle when
he takes his flight no one durst keep the skies to search a prey, but glad to
flag their fearful wings, and seek the obscure earth for safety: for your
own subjects they so honored you that daily they committed blasphemy, making
you, equal to our Prophet in all that could immortalize a man; now each Prince
seems to scorn you and your power, knowing your noble faculties are asleep nay
murdered by your lustful passion. What need they care to do you injuries that
cannot leave your Mistress to revenge them; your Soldiers that from your
examples had their valors steeled against their enemies only seeing you
undermine your self and them in your ill government, turn likewise traitors to
themselves and you, swearing a captive shall not govern them, they must have
one to lead them forth to war; nor is this only the common Soldier's saying,
apt after ease to mutiny, but even the greatest Captains hold this resolution.


Mel. Peace, No more.


Odm. If not for shame yet for the dangers sake bethink your self; in you the
kingdom suffers; struggle a little but for liberty; our Prayers shall untwist
your bands; and, once free, your virtues soon will shine again; so shall you
make the world believe it was no fault of yours, rather the envy of the gods
that kept you in obscurity so long; for had your virtues not bin thus eclipsed,
you might have darkened theirs: Now Sir if you mistrust the truth of what I have
delivered, or that my zeal has made me to deliver truth unreverently, behold
my heart which may for both or either satisfy; and if you search each corner
you shall find that envy moves me not, nor fear to lose my power by her
ingrosing all your favors: no my soul bears witness with me, your safety
and the general good did only prompt my tongue, in what I uttered.


Mel. Odmer, thou have presumed above that freedom that even dull Christians
do allow their servants, but thou borne my slave thus presumptuously to enter
into my greatest secrets, to rip up my faults before my face, and as it were by
force pull from out my arms my dearest Despina, what can thou hope for but
death by some unheard of torments?


Od. Sir if you intend still to pursue your pleasure selling your honor and
the kingdoms safety for a few wanton kisses, I can expect no less; but if the
spirit of great Melchoshus, strangled by sloth and wantonness, again respire
by a true servant's zealous conjurations making his body move to noble deeds
such as may even out shine his bravest ancestors, then I may chance to die a
gentler death, a nobler can I never. I rather would be sacrifised for truth and
loyalty, then be rewarded for base flattery.


Mel. Because thou were brought up with me a child, and many ways approv'dst
thy self faithful; I pardon thee this presumption, and ere long thou and
those of thy opinion shall know that I am able to govern my passion, perhaps,
to their amazement.


Exeunt Enter Orcanes, and Hosa, severally. Hosa. So soon returned from hunting
Sir.


Orc. What comfort can it be for me to follow beasts, having such a beauty in
pursuit, for know, my friend, that my affection is more violent than it was
before I did enjoy her. In that I imitate my father who now doats more upon
Despina than ever. But, know you, what the Basha has complained unto my
father, that I have forced his wife; we so well did dissemble; but such an
answer did my father give him, that thou shall see he will bring Ozaca to me, nay
be content to hold the door, whilst I again enjoy her.


Hosa. But do you think my Lord he will endure it, will he not by some private
means seek a revenge.


Orc. He dares not, he is too tame: but stood my Father as strictly on the
point of justice, as heretofore, ere love had softened him, I should fear his
frown, but feeling daily the force of beauty in Despina, he will look upon my
act with favorable eyes.


Enter Messenger. Mes. My Lord the Emperor seeing you return desires your
company.


Orc. I Will wait upon him, Hosa, this night I have contrived a way, if 't be
possible, at least to see Ozaca. Exeunt.


Enter Melchoshus. Mel. My valor, vigilance, and justice made me Commander
over this numerous people, with when I have acquired an Empire, and made the
neighbor world stand amazed fearing my fierce invasion; but by my sloathfull
life I am become hated; nay worse, contemned by my own subjects, as thought
unfit to govern, but since by the goodness of our blessed Prophet my eyes are
opened, and I see my error, I Will tread those virtuous paths again that did
advance me, and the first act that must incite to look with favorable eyes on
my proceedings, shall be the justice I Will perform on my degenerate Son Orcanes.
What though he were, next my Despina the comfort of my life, I can know no
partiality to him, nor to my self, in prejudice of justice; yet it may falsely
brand me with the name of cruel and unnatural. My Son Orcanes, I hear you
have a Mistress, fair I confess and chaste most certainly: for you did gain
her by a boistrous way.


Enter Orcanes. Orc. Sir it were in vain for me to deny it, since Callibeus
has informed you, Sir it is true her beauty did compel me.


Mel. It was impossible thou should believe Ozaca to be more beautiful then
Despina in my temperance, then although my cause of passion far outwent thine,
behold how far thou art from being the son of my virtues, to show thy baseness
I extol my self. I being a Monarch free from the check of any but our
divinest Prophet, having a made within my power, a captive maid, whose only
friend or aid was her own innocence, no husband to complain or seek redress of
any, she being wholly mine, given to me for my pleasure too, yet all these
motives could not so far prevail as once to make me offer brutish violence,
though even from her refusals my desires increast: but thou whose base desires
has killed all thoughts of virtue or humanity, imployedst that force lent thee
for nobler ends against a silly woman: and when thou had enjoyed what could
thou boast, but tasting of a fruit, wherewith her husband often had bin cloyed?


Orc. Sir, as affection cannot be created where we list, it cannot be removed
where it is formed: having at first sight taken possession of the heart, I did
yet, faintly I confess, check my fond passion, it being unlawful to love
another wife; but alas her eyes were much too powerful to be so resisted;
besides imbred corruption in my self told me, it was nothing to enjoy her,
were she free, and at her own disposing, but having such a watchful dragon to
orelook her as her jealous husband, his care made me believe the treasure was
more rich, so better worth the stealing.


Mel. It was to him indeed a treasure that possessed it lawfully, though being
gained by thee, it makes thee poor, to the condition of a slave: his honor
suffers through thy violence, nay bleeds until my justice makes thee bleed to
cure it.


Orc. I hope you will not be so cruel for an offense like this, committed
through the heat of youth, since you your self even at these years add to
Love's triumphs.


Mel. Degenerate bastard, can thou hope that an excuse like this, will pass
with me for current, who still has bin a severe punisher of unjust acts? it
seldom has bin known that such a wrong was e're appeased but with the
offenders blood, or else the partial judge within whose power it was to
punish, he has paid for it; or if they could escape the hands of men, yet sure
the gods will find them out, and I that do intend to be a punisher even of my
self, for my least follies, dare not suffer, lest I offend against heaven thy
heinous crimes to pass unscourg'd; and therefore mark thy sentence.


Orc. O Sir, Remember who I am.


Mel. Whilst thou wast what thou oughtst to be thou needst not bid me to
remember that thou were my son, but since thou art become a stranger to that
nobleness that should accompany thy birth, like a corrupted branch I Will cut
thee from the stock, lest I for my injustice by the justice of the heavens
should perish with thee, nor shall my subjects be a loser in it, one of more
virtue shall succeed me, that will not ravish women.


Orc. Sir, I am miserable, and must implore your mercy; for in your eyes I read
my death or something near it, oh speak then, your tongue cannot pronounce
like cruelty.


Mel. I find I am a father, and if I hear him longer, pity will overthrow my
justice, and therefore I pronounce.


Orc. Oh hold, what Sir, my death or banishment I have bin all my life until
this present hour your hopeful son, for so you often have called me, your heir,
and shall I now inherit naught but death or else a thousand deaths, in being
banished from your presence: which of the two to wish, I know not.


Mel. Oh that I might lay by the office of a judge, or else put off the nature
of a father: for I in this distraction suffer more then he can do in death;
even injured Callibeus self would be content with a less punishment, and the
severest powers of heaven will call me cruel in execution of what I intend,
rather then partial, since he is my son.


Orc. Oh speak not Sir, if you intend my death; rather by signs make me know
Melchoshus stamps with his foot. my doom, twill be less cruel


Mel. In this behold it then.


Enter Mutes. Orc. Nay then Ozaca, either thy honor or my life is forfeit,
these tongue-lesse men do yet pronounce my death certain as fate: I see my end,
Sir, but what the passage to it is I know not.


Mel. A dark passage trust me thou must have, but longer much then thou
expectest, thou shall not die.


Orc. Not die, her honor's safe, prison or banishment I will endure.


Mel. These eyes the causes of thy ill, least they again betray thee shall for
ever loose their light.


Orc. Is that your mercy? rather take my life.


Mel. If thou had bin a private man, thou should have died, but being a
Prince and my son, this is more just, and natural, however for the present
thou think is greater cruelty, for thou shall live by sorrow to appease our
Prophet.


Orc. Oh Sir your mercy reaches to the highest point of cruelty, 'twere better
not to be at all, then not have the comfort of the light: what can life profit
me a Prince, if made incapable of government?


Mel. Dispatch, it is decreed. They put out one eye.


Orc. Hold, hear me sir, I have endured enough to show, I prise Ozaca's
honor, one eye is lost. Sir I have belied my self; for know, Ozaca was more
willing to meet my wished embraces, then I to offer them.


Mel. Now I repent my pity, thou wretch made up of baseness would thou to
save that other wicked eye increase the villianies thou did commit against
Ozaca: thou only did before defile her person, now thou do murder her, and
her husband, both alive but I in their behalf and justice pronounce thy death
for should thou live, thou would infect the world with baseness yet
unheard of: bear him from my sight and strangle him, lest as I am a Father,
Pity confound my Justice.


Orc. By Mahomet, Sir, father hear me.


Mel. Away with him, the fear of death would make him heap more perjuries upon
his soul.

A Prince that for the loss of sight dares lie.
Deserves death here, hereafter infamy.
Exeunt.
Finis Actus quarti.
Actus quintus.
Enter Haly, Odmer, Hosa, and Captains. Hal. ODmer, you that have all the
favors of the time can surely tell, if you will honor us so much, for what
great cause it is, that we, and all the Captains are commanded to assemble here.


Odm. Great Haly, who thinks all not done by him ill done, and who envies the
smallest grace that any other shall receive, though their deserts perhaps may
equal his, can even as well inform himself he thinks as Odmer can, and out
of scorn does only ask the question, but know, my Politician, that ere long
you will find some alteration that you dream not of. Hoboyes


Enter Melchoshus and Despina* Haly. Odmer, is this your change you talk of?


Odm. Why, Haly, in his eyes you may read something if you will observe not
usual, I have not seen him look like himself since he forsook Mars to
become the slave of Venus.


Mel. I hear that there are some amongst you that dare take upon them to
malign my pleasures, and tax me for my easy life, alleging that I have
forgot the duty of the gods, paying all my devotions to this Saint; nay some
have gone so far as to affirm, I have given ore to be a King, making my self
my captives slave, and so deserve no longer to bear Rule. Although I need not
make Apologies (for none can call me to account but heaven) yet I Will so far
descend from that high pitch of Majesty whereon I am seated, as in familiar
terms to question with you, and by the honor of a King, which I have yet kept
pure from stain, however some have by their divellish cunning striven to blot
it, I Will give you liberty to answer, in what I shall ask you, with as much
freedom as if you were all Kings, or I your fellow subject.


1. Cap. What can this mean?


Haly. I know not what will follow, but well I understand what is past, and will
prevent him since he has found me out, I shall be caught in mine own snare
else.


Mel. Tell me and tell me truly, which of you that had a beauty like to this,
but sometimes would to enjoy her company neglect our greatest business, view
her well for I Will make no description; only let me advise you fix not your eyes
at first upon her eyes if it be possible, least their brightness should strike
you blind before you had observed her other beauties, and when you have beheld
her outward form, know that her mind as far exceeds that, as the soul is more
worthy then the body, which does indeed admit of no comparison.


Haly. She is more excellent then can be spoke, and all that should but tax
you, if you should even adore her, deserve death for their gross ignorance.


1. Cap. Haly has spoke what all confess, and we have too unjustly murmured
at your pleasures.


2 Cap. No man could go abroad to War, that might enjoy such happiness in peace.


Haly. Who would not for her sake neglect even heaven it self?


Mel. Unto her excellence add the consideration of the difficulty I had in
obtaining her, which ties man's nature faster to the object.


1 Cap. We all acknowledge that your joys are infinite in her, and that it
lies not in the power of man to quit such happiness.


Mel. To make you know the difference then twixt you and me, and that I value
the good of you my subjects and my honor far above fading pleasures, be this
my witness, thus cut I from my self such a content, that Mortals nere enjoyed.


Des. Oh me, my fault lay in my blood, let that expiate my sin against heaven,
mercy, mercy.


Om. Oh cruelty.


Od. An act noble above example yet it moves my pity, this was no end of mine,
heaven knows.


Mel. Now by this act judge whether your Emperor be able to govern his
passions or no, when they oppose themselves against his honor, and that you
may know that pleasure has not changed my nature, prepare for war, and what
the neighbor Princes whilst we slept by stealth obtained.

By force which interest back shall be regained.

See the body nobly intumb'd, I dare not view it

(Exit)
Od. Now Haly was not this unlooked for? Exit


Haly. Yes Odmer, on the first opportunity we are lost else. Exit


1 Cap. It must be so, this act will gain the people.


2 Cap. It must be so.


Enter Osmond. Osm. What meant the Emperor to send me from this meeting on
such a sleevless errand: ha what bloody object is this, I hope I dream, if
not, may I be blind for ever, it is she: which of the gods fearing to be
transplanted by her greater excellence has done this? no mortal man durst, or
could have the heart to execute such mischief: lay down the sacred load and let
me know the bloody villain; art thou gone? say whose hand was it, that let out
her pure soul at these grim wounds, and in the bloody act parted more
excellence, then ere shall meet again.


1. Sol. One that dares justify it.


Osm. Villain thou lie he dares not, though thou and all thy generation
should assist him who wast?


1. Sol. I am a soldier, take your lie again, for know it was Melcoshus.


Osm. Slave, do thou mock my griefs?


2. Sol. Hold, noble Osmond, and know we manifest our love unto your virtues in
forbearing to cut you all in pieces for daring to offer this violence: for by
the honor of soldiers he tells you truth, the Emperor with his own hands here
performed it, before all chief commanders with an intent I think to get
again the soldiers love, which he had lost by her.


Os. I do confess my rashness, let my cause of rage excuse it: the Emperor do
it, say you? it is impossible* now, by Mahomet, you are all traitors, and by
some bloody statesmen are subornd to do this wickedness, and being found to save
your guilty selves from justice, you lay it on the Emperor, you might as well
make me believe that he had pulled his eyes out, or his heart, for she was far
more dear, and therefore He defer revenge no longer.


Enter a Captain. 2. Sold. Wound him, not only defend your selves, he is mad
with passion.


Cap. Hold noble friend, what means this?


Osm. These villains here have killed the Emperors Mistress and would escape
by laying it on him; when he, when he shall know it once, will wish no longer
life.


Capt. Pacify your rage and hear me by Mahomet, what you have heard is
truth, and never was there act gained more applause amongst the old soldiers,
whose loss of blood has quite extinguished the desire of women: but for my
part me thought, though it be brave in the consideration* yet it was a horrid
spectacle to see.


Osm. Is It even so? then had he taken a surfeit by being too happy?


Capt. No sure he loved her, when he killed her.


Osm. Shall I die with thee, my deer sister, for so it was thy will I should
esteem thee: oh look upon this face and tell me, if there remained the least
spark of humanity in him, that could but once have said, that she should thus
be murderd; what was he then that could himself perform it! horrid, horrid
deed: she in whose arms he slept the night before, and had no doubt more
joys then tounges can utter: but if there be those Gods, which punish
villainies, he may hereafter pay for it.


Capt. Osmond, this ill becomes your duty, which hitherto has led the way
even to the forwardest in zeal.


Osm. Why friend, I speak not of Melcoshus, he could not do it, some fury
enterd him.


Capt. Sir I love you: so well, that I dare not stay to hear you: bear off
the body. Exit.


Osm. Oh stay, good soldiers, let me take my last leave: what shall I say,
she cannot answer, it may be her fair Soul hovers about to see how they will
use her dear Companion: if so, oh let it hear my vow by Mahomet and all the
powers of heaven I swear with speed to be revenged upon thy cruel murderer,
all his brave former acts are by thy innocent blood washed from my remembrance:
for his love to me and payment of my duty they in it are cancelld, I was not
more his slave then he was thine; confirmed with many thousand oaths, and most
unjustly he has not only broke those bands, but with thy dear blood died his
villainie in grain, so that they cannot change their horrid color in my
memory, till I take equal vengeance, but I must needs come short both that I
am by his example taught, and that I shall but kill a murderer when thou diedst
innocent.


1. Sol. We in this stay, hazard our lives.


Osm. I have done, now let me after death do that which love and duty to
Melcoshus, whilst she lived, would never suffer me: these pale cold lips have
yet the power to make me burn in revenge, and these dear eyes sometimes the
master piece of nature can yet command me to extinguish their extinguisher.
Now soldiers take her hence, and I will bear you company to see her buried,
the passion I have showed, you may excuse, since all know I did first present
her to Melcoshus; for which of you, that had but given a horse or dog,
excellent in their kind, and seeing it at first as it deserved loved and
cherisht by him that did receave it, and after thus used without a cause, but
would grieve something; deal freely, would it not move you, ha, if so, then
think what I now suffer, who heaven knows did love this Lady, as my sister.


2. Sol. Sir we grieve with you, and wish the Emperor had not bin so cruel.


Osm. Thanks soldiers, but where wishes fail, we must apply our reason to ease
our grief.

My ease alone consists in shedding his heart blood.
That gained, and then destroyed, earths cheifest good.

Exeunt. Enter Ozaca. Oza. Shall I rejoice, or shall I grieve my present
fortune? rejoice most certainly, though all difficulty and danger attend my
love; for my Orcanes is a Prince so excellent in all, that though I ne'ere
again enjoy him, yet am (...) happy: but his affection sure which seemed to
equal mine will make him study some way how we again may meet, but soft here
comes my husband with a joyful Countenance.


Enter Callibeus. Calli. My dear Ozaca, I bring ease to thy vexed soul, I had
bin here long since, but that the Emperors express command upon affairs with
held me, and far too happy was the news for any other but my self to bring:
kneel down with me and pray the Gods to prosper long Melco^hus.


Oza. Why Sir, what is the occasion? speak I pray you.


Calli. I knew his justice could not slack what er'e he emd.


Oza. What justice? speak, oh my fears!


Calli. The Prince.


Oza. Speak, what of him?


Calli. The lustful Prince, my dear Ozaca, has by his blood washed clean thy
stain.


Oza. Ha. [Shee Sownds]


Calli. Ozaca, my Ozaca, oh speak; the joy of her revenge overcomes her know
my deer wife the Prince Orcanes for his foul rape on thee is by his noble
father justly put to death: oh praise Melcoshus in thy soul, who would not be
unjust to save his son being a villain.


Oza.. Is the Prince dead then?


Calli. I, my best love to my great comfort, now I may kiss thee joyfully, the
wound thy honor did receive is cured.


Oz. Forbear, I must not kiss you, till I know by whom the cure was wrought,
if any other then your self informed against O^canes, and so provoked the
father to kill his son; nay, if you did not extol justice, and cry down mercy
quite, though it be the greatest attribute belonging to the gods, hope not that
I should ever look on you with love, or come within your bed.


Call. Thinks my Ozaca, I so little love her, that I did sleep in my revenge:
How often did I urge unto Melcoshus all arguments, that might incense him
against his son, nay, told him, as I well might do, O^canes could not be his
Offspring that had so basely given himself to vice: However, I alleged in
putting him to death, he should perform a justice, that would make him famous
through the world, since natural affection, the gods appointing him to hold
the balance, could not yet weigh down justice.


Oz. Did you allege all this, and did this move him to put the Prince to death?


Call. It did. Me thinks thou lookst not kindly on me for all this.


Oz. And shall I live after Orcanes? No.


Call. What says Ozaca?


Oz. Nothing, but is he dead, dead certainly, and by your means?


Call. He is.


Oz. Umh, umh, gone, for ever gone.


Call. Ozaca, speak to me.


Oz. He died to save my honor, and shall I live behind him, and live with him
too, that triumphs in his death? It must not, it shall not be; I am too far
indebted, I Will first make eeven with some. Oh husband, if you had killed Orcanes
your self, then the revenge had stood more noble. You should stabs her husband
and her self. have struck him thus and thus.


Call. Ozaca.


Oz. And then your self to escape shameful death.


Call. What can this cruelty in thee, Ozaca, mean?


Oz. Know, thou dull beast, I was so far from being forced, that I did burn in
a more ardent flame then he: Yet, had thy jealous brain not taught thee, to
frame that Letter for thine own dishonor, I had been innocent in act perhaps,
how ere my will had horned thee. But having once enjoyed a Prince so perfect, I
never would admit thy loathed embraces, and so have rather chose death, with
revenge on thee too boot, who were the cause Orcanes suffered death. Being thus
divorced from thee, I hope I in Elizeum shall enjoy him


Enter Servants. Call. Help ho, help ho, I find that this is truth, my wounds
are witness, and that there is no trusting women's tears I durst have sworn
thee more innocent, than now I see thee wicked; yet, however live, and repent
thy sins, for I can forgive thee, nay, perchance never cease to love thee.


Oz. D^ll fool, can thou believe my resolutions are so weak, as for the fear
and pain of death, to give them over, less for the love of thee; were thou
the Monarch of the whole world, I would not live after Orcanes, to be the
partner of thy glories; but as it is, this knife is far more welcome to me;
than thy sight* fly, my soul, fly, and leave this loathed prison to meet
Orcanes. So, so, let this witness, I for thee die, Orcanes, and hope I have
revenged thee. [dies.]


Call, My wound is far more dangerous than I thought, and I, for ought I know,
may bear thee company; but we shall soon part ways, if there be any justice in
the gods. I would live, bear me to my chamber; and for that wicked woman, one
my wife, let her be buried honorably. [Exeunt servant with him.]


Enter Melcoshus. Mel Night, dark thoughts, and justly so, since by my
cruelties, obscured that light, which was my only comfort. Oh Despina, pardon
me most penitent and now no more afflict me in my dreams; if thou be
merciful. I will erect an Altar in this obscure Walk, and in the dead of night
offer thee sacrifice; nay, even at noon day would I perform it, and in the
sight of all, but that I know it must appear too plainly, that I to thee
performed all rites with greater reverence, than to our sacred prophet and so
the people might rebel, for fear of which, and loss of my neere-fading
honor, I did become thy cruel butcher. Bear me, cold earth, till I have some
way reconciled my self to my dear saint.


Enter Haly and Captains. Hal. Are they come over?


1. Cap. They are. How are we sure he is here now?


Hal. It Is not so dark, but we shall find him; stand close a little, perchance
he is not come down yet.


Enter Osmond. Osm. You just powers, be this night auspicious in aiding my
revenge; guide you this instrument as right unto his tyrant heart, as I will
give it strength to pierce it: but soft, by the Moons light, I see some men
before me, what can it mean? it is death for any but Melcoshus to enter here.
'Twould grieve my soul to die, and miss revenge too. Behind this bush unseen,
I shall observe.


Mel. Oh my Despina.


Hal. He Is in the Arbor, I heard him groan; let us lose no time, but strike
him dead, before he draw his sword, or call for help; if he see to morrow's Sun
he will know too much of our designs ere night, for us to see it set Odmer
suspects our conspiracy shrewdly, and suddenly will find the truth.


2 Cap. Delay no time then.


Osm. What Is this I hear, how ere in me it is but justice to take Melcoshus
life in them it is damned treason, which I Will prevent; nor shall they frustrate
me of my revenge their hands are far too base.


Hal. Draw, and dispatch him. They sight, Haly and be Captains slain.


Osm. Sink down to hell, Haly, thou root of treason, with these thy cursed
branches.


Mel. Osmond, let me embrace thee in these wounded arms, I fear, to death.
Thou were ordained to be the lasting pattern of love and duty.


Osm. Forbear this kindness, for know, how e'rel did preserve you from their
swords, I come my self to kill you for Despina's sake, her innocent blood
cries for revenge; and by those powers I am ordained to see their j^stice
satisfied, by taking life from him, who cruelly extinguished that pure light,
which for a long time they intended should have been a comfort to the world,
and a great witness of their power.


Mel. Nay, if my Osmond be a traitor but in thought once, he shall not need to
use his sword, I would not wish to live beyond his faith; for, can there be a
love or truth left in a subject, when it is not to be found in him. Now I
perceive the murder I committed was most horrid, since he that loved me more
then her, she she being alive, would now rob me of life to revenge her.


Osm. Know, Tyrant, I loved thee once, when thou were worthy to be my Prince
and Master, more than my self: But thou, when thou had satisfied thy beastly
lust, to please the ignorant multitude, thou made a sacrifice of her to them,
to whom thou rather should have made them offer sacrifice, on peril of their
lives.


Mel. Osmond, thou art here more cruel in thy accusation, then in thy intent
to kill me: For, from the danger of thy sword, there is a divinity that waits
upon the person of a Prince, that would protect me; but against the thoughts of
thy unexpected treason, there is no armor; for thy unkindnesse so invades my
soul, that all that blood that should supply these nerves, flies to my heart to
tell it, Osmond no longer does wish to have a being there, if so, to split it
will be kindness,


Osm. Me thinks I find my resolution of revenge begin to bate its force.


Mel. If the consideration of your faith and love to me, so far prevail above
your own affection, that you dispensed with it to make me happy; believe
likewise, from the consideration of that care a King should have over his
subjects, which wholly was, and ever should have been whilst she did live by
me, neglected, I rather killed her, than that my love was ought diminished; for
had I loved her less, she might have lived; but I believing her to be so
excellent, could think of nothing whilst she lived, but her embraces.


Osm. And therefore would you make her suffer for your sault, was that the
justice of Melcoshus? Your Son offended, and you punished him; but here you
spared your self, striking an innocent.


Mel. It Is true, I struck her being innocent, yet did not injure her or any,
but my self: I broke no Laws of Gods nor men: to prove which, I ask no more
of heaven, but that the taper of my life, which now grows dim, may burn some
minutes longer; then shall I show my Osmond, by their light of reason, that my
unhappy Stars are rather guilty of Despina's death, than I; she was a Captive,
and a Christian, which by our Laws, we freely may dispose of as we please; her
death then, had I been but a subject, was no breach of them.


Osm. She was a creature, for whose sake you would have once have broken all
Laws.


Mel. I could break none, my power being unconfined. But interrupt me not, lest
I do faint, ere I can make an end. The Soldiers were so far from being
displeased, that they acknowledged her death a Jubilee. Our prophet Mahomet
might most rejoice to see her breathless, whose perfections, being a
Christian, so far out-went all those that honored him, that some in time might
justly doubt our God to be less powerful than theirs, and so the reverence we
now pay, grow cold.


Osm. All this I grant; but for your injuries to her, what art can salve them?


Mel. She was the advocate of all those of her faith, and at my hands procured
much mercy for them. The perfect Christian is so proud of naught as Martyrdom,
and the more innocent from crime, the greater joy they take in death. Although
Despina was not martyred for her faith, I grant, but by the force of her
unequalled beauty, made a sacrifice to save my honor; yet amongst those of her
sect, she cannot miss the adoration of a Saint: And so I only sent her to a
greater happiness. You may allege it was a happiness.


Osm. Oh divine Despina.


Mel. She did not yet desire, to die but rather wished to live with me, she
loved. To this again I answered, that I so much did dote upon her excellence,
that I should have forgot to rule; and she must then have lived, to see me
miserably deprived of state and honor. Yet, as it now falls out, my fortune
then had been more favorable; for, then had Osmond's love been left a pattern
to posterity, and I should sure have found the comfort of his faith, when all
men else were traitors. But now --


Osm. He has delivered this Apology with so much grief, majesty, and love,
that my own reason makes me know it is truth, and bids me justly turn that
hatred, which I hither brought against him, upon my guilty self, for I have
been a heinous traitor. Oh dread Sir, your pardon. But why should I once hope,
I that have stood so strictly on my faith, and by a thousand obligations, been
fast tied in bands of duty, yet thus to break without a just cause, just cause,
as if there could be any pretense for treason: Shall injuries make men cease to
be virtuous?


Mel. Let my soul part with joy, since Osmond sees his error; thy love to me,
to virtue, and Despina, have fought so nobly, that it still overcames; which
was most virtuous? thy love made thee present her to me, thy faith made thee
refuse to take again what thou had given, when she did offer it; and when
thou thoughtest, that cruelly and most unjustly I had killed Despina, thy noble
anger made thee pursue revenge; but now, that thou do find that anger was
unjust, thy faith overthrowes it, nay, turns it on thy self, since 'twas my
fate, not I, was guilty of her death, which let my pardon mitigate, so at my
death thou shall express obedience, for now I feel his messenger approach; nor
does it grieve me now so much to die, as to have lived, and thou been false. If
Lovers meet in Elysium, and enjoy each other, there will thy virtues gain
Despina from me. [he dies.]


Osm. Stay, he is gone, and shall I live, he and Despina dead? 'twere madness;
for what is in the world left that is worthy; or, if there be two such, it is
not like, that I shall love the one, and serve the other. The fates ordained me
only for this end, he nursed and bred me, to wait upon him here, and in the
other world. But should I stay, until the Soldiers know he is dead, some one
of greater faith and courage may, by a voluntary death, seek to prevent me;
besides, Despina, and the expiation of my intended treason, urges me to die
Come my dear friend, perform thy latest service, in sending me thy Master to
Elysium. So, me thinks I see Despina stand ready to embrace me, but for
Melco^hus sake, even there again I will refuse her. Here at his honored feet
I Will lay me down. You gods, let not the noble affection of our soul change
after death, let us remain all three so linkt together in affection, as we were
before this bloody separation. [he dies.]


Enter Odmer, Hosa, Captain, and Soldiers. Od. Be favorable, you gods, and
grant, that the clashing of swords we heard within Melcoshus's private walk,
have not prevented us; my heart misgives me that we come too late: Treason is
swift in execution, the devil thrusting on to mischief; and see a bloody
witness, that my fears are true, it is Haly. Mahomet, defend the Emperor.


Cap. See, here are others dead, the Emperor I think.


Odm. Ha! what say thou, screetch Owl?


Hos. Alas, and noble Osmond too.


Odm. Cold as earth. You gods, was this your justice? could you suffer this
royal building, which you had raised unto a glorious height, to show your
power on mortals, to fall to earth again in such obscurity, as none could be
witness of his ruin. But pardon me, you powers, I have profaned* we may
conclude from these witnesses, he nobly fell, and died not unrevenged. He ever
walked alone, how then comes Osmond here; one to suspect him for a traitor,
were a sin against Virtue, his very posture witnesses his love, kissing his
Masters feet, but more his faithful hand assures me, that his wounds are from
himself, as scorning the world, since it no longer did contain Melcoshus, who
gave it luster. And shall so young years show the way of love and duty, yet old
Odmer fear to follow him? No, Boy, thou shall not so outstrip me.


Hos. Hold, noble Odmer, will you forsake us too? then must the Tartar cease to
be a people: Who shall command us? all will run to ruin. Accept the Empire
rather.


Om. Hail Odmer, King of the Tartars.


Odm. Tempt not my faith so: shall hope of honors make me live after
Melcoshus? Be this my witness to the contrary.


Capt. Odmer till now did never show, he was a greater lover of himself than
virtue; he would sleep quiet in his grave, rather than by a little trouble in
the world, preserve us all from ruin. But in the name of Mahomet, I charge you
forsake death, and accept the Empire.


Odm. Grant, that Melcoshus's son, the dead Orcanes brother, when he is of age,
may take my place, and I Will obey the gods, in yielding to your desires.


Om. Long live Odmer, King of the Tartars.


Odm. By whom you were inspired to teach me this more reasonable way of duty,
take up this noble Coarse; for which I will erect a Tomb, shall make his name
live to eternity, in which the faith and love of Osmond shall not be forgotten.


FINIS.

