CONCERNING THE CONSTITUTION OF AN AIR INFECTED.

And how to know Plague-sores and Carbuncles.

In tanta calamitate magnus est sumendus animus, quaerenda trepidis solatia,
demendus ingens timor. Nullum malum sine effugio. Sen. OXFORD, Printed by
LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1644.

Concerning the Constitution of an Air infected; and how to know Plague-sores
and Carbuncles.
IS this Constitution of the Air pestilentiall?

Hippocrates gives a Description of a Pestilentiall Constitution. Carbunculi in
Cranone aestivi, circa Arcturum pluviae multae flante Austro. Much Rain about
the middle of August, the South-winde blowing; a Southerly Constitution and
much Rain, the Spring before; the Winter before that Southerly and moist,
thence Carbuncles and hot Blisters. I think the Seasons of this Year have not
been such. It Is true that in Epidemicall Diseases, which take many away, some
are Pestilentiall, some only Malign of an ill Nature; yet their ill
Seminaries easily become venomous. So Malign spotted Feauers may precede
Pestilentiall; yet a Pestilentiall Fever may be without a Plague, and a Plague
without a Pestilentiall Fever. 1. De differ. Feb.
So Galen says. A Plague follows all Diseases, and may strike you suddenly
without a Fever. The last Year more died of those spotted Fevers than now,
as our Sextons say.

These Fevers now are Pestilentiall, from the putrefaction of the humors in a
high degree, which the Tumors and Sores witness: the Plague then is in the
humors now, as erst it was in the spirits, in the sweating sickness which
was Ephemera pestilens, according to the best Physicians. Now putrid humorall
Fevers may be either Malign or Pestilentiall, according to the several
degrees of putrefaction in the humors. And the Ancients, says Galen, not
knowing the great cause of corruption in the blood; referred it to the Gods for
their sins: 'twere well if we did so too; for a high degree of corruption in
the humors is argued by Plague-sores; yet all that die here, die not of the
Plague. Public Authority has carefully provided for it, even in their care
to lessen our fears: and we must be heedfull not to increase them, by thinking
that each man dies, to die of the Plague. Though this Town be infected, which I
deny not, yet we must not increase the Infection. The Spots last Year were
contagious, yet none shut up for them, I hereby persuade none to stay here, but
rather advise them to answer their fears and be gone. Aesculapius his Temple
was out of the City; and a recesse thence may be for health, especially when
fear exposes the heart to danger, and betrays the Fort: only the extent of
our apprehensions in dangers may be rightly bounded, considering by the true
signs, whither the affliction which happens to particulars be pestilentiall or
otherwise.

Valesius sometimes Physician to the King of Spain, In Epid. Hip.
a learned man, carefully considers of humoral Fevers, whither they be Malign
or Pestilentiall. In rotten pestilentiall Diseases, now Nature would disburden
herself, and therefore would vent those putrid matters by the common sinkes;
it appears in Sores in the glandulous parts, the Groine, the Arme-pits, yet
Tumors in these parts are not always pestilentiall. Some quickly come up, and
increase, are red, and suppurate quickly; a true sign of an inflammation only.

So it may not perhaps be useless to describe what Sores are truly
pestilentiall.

There are either large black vulgarly Tokens.
Spots in the Plague, or pestilent Tumors in the glandulous parts, as Groine,
Arme-pits, etc. for so Bubones pestiferi are designed to be, or Carbuncles.

Pestilent Tumors are worse than Carbuncles according to Ficinus, Bubo
pestifer.
for the expulsion of the matter into the Tumor argues the principal parts to
have been charged with it: but if it be a critical Tumor, Nature is eased by
it. Bubones in Febribus male exceptis diariis. Hip.
If in color they be yellowish, livid, or black, they are the worse; if they
go back they are most dangerous; those under the Arme-pits, are worse than
elsewhere; next those in the neck, and under the ears.

1. Signs.
Sudden faintings in the beginning of a continued Fever, without any manifest
Cause is a true sign of Infection, bleeding, vacuations, want of sleep,
sadness, fears, are evident causes.

2. If with these Tumors and Carbuncles livid and black Spots appear, with
black excrements, and excessive thirst, it is evidently pestilentiall.

3. The body seems not to be hot, neither pulse or urines bad, yet they are
unquiet and burn inwards. As it was in the Plague Thucidides describes: it is
so in all pestilentiall Constitutions.

Some would have these Tumors to be the same with the Carbuncle, but men
experienced distinguish them. The more there comes forth of those Tumors the
better it is; but this holds not in Carbuncles.

A Carbuncle ( Ignis Persicus, Pruna) has in the middle a crust like a Coal,
and thence it is so called: it is a fire and burns the circumjacent parts. The
crust is not always black, but sometimes a blackish yellow, so Galen; the
black color is with a kind of shining; so Paulus Aegin. It has a pitchy
color in the brightness: the pain is so great that the Patient thinks
himself girded with irons: some find an itching in the middle part of it, and
scratching, a pimple arises, under which the flesh is burnt, and of a livid
color: and if it be pestilentiall he nauseates and vomits: Lesser Carbuncles
are worse than greater, harder and livid, worse than soft. Those in the upper
parts above the other former Tumors are worst of all, near the heart and
stomach. The farther off from the principal parts the less dangerous: so
Celsus. A delirium is an ill sign, when the Carbuncle is in the upper parts,
for the membranes of the brain may be inflamed. The plainest Cure for these
Swellings is to apply Cupping-glasses to them, then the bare breech of a
Pullet, for it draws the poison: after the death of the Pullet, scarifie the
place. Some cautenze it. Some use this vulgar Causticke, they wrap a few ashes
in a linen cloth, and boil it in oil, and rub the Tumor with it a good
while; when it is sufficiently burnt, they cure it as they do a Carbuncle. They
suppurate the Crust with Mallows, Lillyrootes and Butter: they keep it open as
long as possible, and cleanse it with juice of Smallage, and honey of Roses.
Sometimes these Spots, Tumors and Carbuncles appear in dead men, which in
their sickness did not appear, as 'twas observed in a Plague at Lions. If
they be driven back, the Spots are brought again if the Body be washed with
hot water.

FINIS.

