A CONFVTATION OF M. Jews Hewes HIS DIALOGVE: OR, AN ANSWER to a DIALOGVE or
Conference between a Country Gentleman and a Minister of Gods Word, about the
Book of COMMON PRAYER. Set forth for the Satisfying of those who clamor
against the said Book, and maliciously revile them that are serious in the use
thereof. Whereunto is annexed a Satisfactory Discourse concerning EPISCOPACY
and the SVRPLISSE.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for I. M. at the George in Fleestreet, near Saint Dunstans
Church, 1641.

M. JEWS HEWES His DIALOGVE ANSVVERED: Or, An Answer to a Dialogue or
Conference between a Country Gentleman and a Minister of Gods Word, about the
Book of COMMON PRAYER. Set forth for the Satisfying of those who clamor
against the said Book, and maliciously revile them that are serious in the use
thereof. Whereunto is annexed a Satisfactory Discourse concerning EPISCOPACY
and the SVRPLISSE.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for I. M. at the George in Fleestreet, near Saint Dunstans
Church. 1641.

AN ANSWER TO A Dialogue or Conference BETWEEN A Country GENTLEMAN AND A
MINISTER of GODS Word, About the Book of Common PRAYER.
The DIALOGUE.
Gent. I Am very glad that I have met with you, and did long to speak with
you, that you might satisfy me in some things, concerning the Book of Common
Prayer; therefore I pray you tell me truly (as I hope you will) is there any
thing in it contrary to Gods Word?


Min. Yes verily, it is full of Popish errors, and does appoint horrible
blasphemies, and lying fables to be read to the people, in stead of Gods holy
Word; and has caused the Church of England to groan under the abominations of
the Church of Rome, even from the infancy of it, in Queen Elizabeth's time,
until this hour; and now there is great hope, that a time of refreshing and
deliverance is at hand, through the blessing of God, on this Parliament.


The ANSWER.
If you were not as great a friend to the Brownists, as you are an enemy to
the Papists, you would not thus cast dust in the face of the Church of England,
and blemish the piety of those, who notwithstanding they died in defense of
the truth against Popery, did nevertheless embrace the Book of Common
Prayer, using it to their great comfort, commending it to others, and sometimes
hugging it even in the very flames: as in Master Foxes Acts and Monuments may
be seen.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. I never heard any blasphemy, or lying fable read in the Church.


Minist. I think so, because (it may be) that you were never in the Church on
those days, wherein they are appointed to be read.


Gent. Upon what days are they appointed to be read?


Minist. On the fourth of October, in the forenoone, it appoints an horrible
blasphemy to be read for the first Lesson, out of the 12. of Tobie and the 9.
verse; where it is written, that Alms do save from Death, and purge away all
sin: which is a maine ground of Popery, and an horrible blasphemy against
Christ and his blood, that cleanses us from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7.

Also in the 15. verse of that Chapter, it is written, that there are seven
Angels, that do present our prayers: which is another horrible blasphemy
against Christ, who only does present our prayers, Rev. 8.3,4.


Gent. These are horrible blasphemies indeed.


ANSWER.
I hope (if you be a Minister, as you say you are) you cannot but know that
those Books which are not in the number of the Canonical Books of Scripture,
are not appointed to be read as the other are. For our Church (though it be
otherwise in the Church of Rome) does not apply them to establish any doctrine;
as in her sixth Article of Religion she has proclaimed. They are not allowed
to thwart any place of holy Scripture; but at the best to inform manners, and
not to confirm faith: For though they be in many things clear and
correspondent to the holy Scriptures yet this makes them not to be of the same
Canonical authority. All that S. Hierom says is this, viz. that they be
Canonici ad informandos mores, non ad confirmandam fidem. And S. Austin thus,
Aug. De Civit. Dei, lib. c. 23.
Let us (says he) omit the Scriptures that are called Apocripha, because the
old Fathers, of whom we had the Scriptures, knew not the authors of those
works, wherein though there be some tr^ths, yet their multitude of falsehoods
makes them of no Canonical Authority, where by saying, Let us omit the
Scriptures that are called Apocripha, he means that they should not be used
for the proving of any Doctrine, which cannot be proved out of the other
Scriptures, which are the undoubted Word of God.

Nor be they but of use likewise for matter of Story, especilly the Books of
the Machabees; which nevertheless, are not to teach a man either to sacrifice
for the dead, or to kill himself.

The direction therefore which King James gave the Clergy, in his Conference
with them at Hampton Court, is altogether a full answer; namely, that wherein
there was any error, he would not have them read at all; w^h saying of his
must needs be enough to stop this quarrellers mouth, and tell him, that he
makes a stir without a cause, not caring to disturb the peace of his holy
mother; which how he can be able to answer, let him judge by that which Christ
has charged him with, in Cantic. 2.7.

And thus, both by the Articles of our Church, the determination of Fathers,
and the direction of his late Majesty of blessed memory, all moderate and
quiet spirits may be satisfied concerning these books Apocrypha, both for
their gonerall and particular.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. I pray you let me hear some of the Fables that are in it.


Min. On the fourth of October in the afternoon, it appoints a lying fable
to be read out of the 11 of Tobie, where it is written, that Tobie going to the
door to meet his son Tobias coming from Rages, did stumble; and that his
son ran unto him and laid the gall of a fish to his eyes, and that the
whiteness did scale off, and he restored to his sight.


ANSWER.
To think that this is therefore fabulous, because the gall of a fish is said
to be used as a medicine for the eyes, is more than a wise man will be forward
to affirm. Vid, Llod's Treasury of health.
Physicians write, that dimb sighted eyes are cured by the gall of a Partridg:
so also, by the gall of a Turtle-dove. I have likewise read that the gall of a
Cock mixed with the juice of Selandine and honey, being anointed on the eyes,
restores sight. The gall of a Gripe or Ram is also used in medicine for the
same purpose. And if the galls of these creatures be thus precious for the
eyes, why may not the like virtue be in the gall of some fish? I have read it
of the Tench, that his slime is for some things as medicinable as a salve;
whereupon the Tench is commonly called the Physician of other fishes. And
although I want leisure to search further, yet on the sudden this I find,
That the fat of fresh river fishes, molten and mingled with oil and honey, are
of great excellency for the clearenesse of the eyes: and if the fat of some
fishes, why not of some their gall?

I conclude therefore, that more happy is he, who by his pains and industry,
can find out the causes of things, than he who is so singular as to account all
fables but his own fancies.

DIALOGUE.
Minist. On the thirtieth of September, another lying fable is appointed to be
read, of an Angel that was sent to scale the whiteness from his eyes, and to
give Sara the daughter of Raguel to his son Tobias in marriage, and to bind
Asmodeus an evil spirit, that was in love with her, and had killed seven men
that had bin married unto her.


ANSWER.
You care little for method, I see; September else had been before October.
But to let that pass, and come to the matter in hand: Though I think no man
bound to believe any further of this, which you term another lying fable,
than himself pleases; yet this is certain, that the Scriptures themselves
declare how the Angels are sent on Gods arrants, and have sometimes appeared
not only to punish the wicked, but also to do good offices for the godly: as
when Lot was led out of Sodom, two Angels came unto him and left him not,
until they had set him in safety. Nor was the Poole of Bethesda but moved by
an Angel; after which motion he that first stepped in was healed, of
whatsoever infirmity he had.

The Scriptures also mention, that the Angels are all ministering spirits, sent
forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation, Hebr. 1.14. and
that the good Angels sometimes fight against the bad, Revel. 12.7. and that
they pitch their tents round about those that fear God, Psalm. 34.7. The
Scriptures (says Saint Austin) Aug de civit. Dei, ^b 15. c. 23
plainly aver that the Angels have appeared, both in visible and palpable
figures. Which saying of his, is verified, even by that already mentioned
concerning the Angels which came to Lot at Sodom: for Lot saw them in the
likeness of men, talked with them, and had trial of the palpablenesse of
their bodies, even when they put forth their hands and pulled him into the
house, if not also when they led him out of the City. An Angel of the Lord
appeared likewise unto Gideon, in the likeness of a man, with a staff in his
hand, Judges 6.21. And how Manoah and his wife were instructed by an Angel,
concerning the birth and education of their son Sampson, is recorded in the
thirteenth chap. of the same book of Scripture.

By all which it appears, that there is no absolute necessity, that this
which you mention should be therefore fabulous, because an Angel was sent
among them: For the word (...), is Nuncius in Latin, as you know, and that (in
English) is a Messenger. It comes from the word (...), which is Mitto, To send:
and therefore the word Angel is no name of Nature, but of Ministry or Office;
as is observed by the Fathers.

And as for that which is next, of the evil spirit being in love with the
daughter of Raguel, I find in the writings of some Authors that which I am
sure is nothing against it. And first of all I shall mention that which is
certain; namely, that some, both places and persons, have been haunted by
evil spirits: and therefore it is not altogether improbable to think some such
thing of Saras bed and Chamber. The more unlikely is, that the evil spirit
should have liberty to kill her seven Husbands: and yet we know that the
Devil has had leave sometimes to do the like; as in that See also Psalm.
78.49.
example of Jobs servants and his children (recorded in the first Chapter of
the book of Job) is plainly manifest.

But the most unlike is, that this evil spirit should be in love: a thing
which comes something near to that interpretation which Lactantius gives,
Lact. lib. 2. cap. 15.
of the Sons of God and the daughters of Men, in Genesis the sixth, the
second; namely, that they should take them Wives, have carnal action with
them, and by that means be kept out of Heaven and cast to the Earth; who
thereupon became agents and officers for the devil and his angels, who were
fallen long before. Now against this, Saint Austin comes with a firm belief:
for though he seems to yield, rather than deny some such thing concerning
Devils, as I shall afterward mention; yet he firmly believes the contrary
concerning Gods Angels. And as for devils, Michael Psellus affirms (out of
one Mark a great Daemonist) that the watery and earthly Devils have such
bodies as are nourished like spunges with attraction of humor, affirming also
that they have certain genitours, cast forth sperme, and produce (by which I
think he means the Fairies) diverse little creatures. The Egyptians say that
the devils can only accompany carnally with Women, and not with Men. Plutarch
goes further, and says, That the Fables of the Gods signified some things
that the Devils had done in the old time. And there are (says Ludovicus Vives)
Com. in Aug. De civit. Dei lib. 15. c. 23.
a people at this day which glory that their discents are from the Devils, who
accompanied with Women in Men's shapes, and with Men in Women's.

Whereto agrees that which is reported of Merlin, that he was begotten of a
spirit. Nor is it but a general report, and averred by many, either from their
own trial, or from others that are of indubitable honesty and credit, as
says Saint Austin; that the Sylvanes and Faunes, commonly called Incubi, have
often injured Women, desiring and acting carnally with them: And, that certain
Devils (whom the Frenchmen call Dusies) do continually practice this
uncleanness, and tempt others to it, is affirmed by such persons, and with
such confidence that it were impudence (as says the same Father) to deny it.
See August. De Civitate Dei, lib. 15. cap. 23.

Much more concerning this may be read in Burtons Melancholy; which relations,
whether they be true or false, is not much material: or suppose them false,
yet can they make nothing against us, it due regard be had to that allowance
which Our Church gives to these Books Apocrypha.

DIALOGUE.
Minist. On the first of October another lying fable is appointed to be read,
how Tobie being about to send his Son Tobias to Rages in Media for a Wife,
did bid him go and look for a man to go with him, and that he went and found
an Angel, and brought him to his Father, who promised to give the Angel
wages, and agreed with him what he should have by the day, and sent him with
his son and his dog.


ANSWER.
Had old Tobie known him to be an Angel, it is like enough he would have
demeaned himself otherwise: but taking him to be a man as he seemed, he was
more honest than to set him a work for nothing. Nor in case this story were as
true as could be, were it more absurd for old Tobie to offer this Angel wages
whilst he knew him not, than it was for Gideon to present an Angel with a Kid;
or for Lot to afford the Angels lodging; or for Manoah to dress a Kid
likewise, that the Angel might eat: For Manoah, says the Scripture, knew not
that he was an Angel, Judges 13.16. And as for the dog going with them, it is
an usual thing for a dog to run abroad with his Master: and (I pray)
quarrel not with him, for fear he bites you. Little reason is there that you
should be troubled to see a man with a dog at his heels, except he were
going into a Church: But if you be of the Pack of Praecisians, you care as
little to exclude your dog from thence, as you do to shut out your own
irreverence. And yet Jacob could say, Genesis 28.17.
How dreadful is this place! surely, it is no other than the house of God, and
the gate of Heaven. The Lord also says, Levit. 19.30.
Ye shall observe my Sabbaths and reverence my Sanctuary. And in the Prophet
Malachie; Mal. 1.6.
If I (says the Lord) be a Father, where is my honor? If I be a Master, where
is my Fear? And in the Gospel, Mat. 21.13. and Luke 19.46.
It is written (says Christ) that my House shall be called the house of
prayer; but ye have made it a den of Thieves: Thus it was then. And I would to
God it could not (in some sort) be as truly said, that Gods House is by many
made no better still than a den of Thieves: wherein they rob him of his
service, and are not against the respect which is done there to themselves,
giving none at all to him before whom they cannot be too reverent, but should
bow (which we commonly read Worship,) fall down, and kneell; Psalm. 95.6.
as the Psalmist speaks.

Nor does Saint Paul but say 1 Cor. 11 22.
That the Corinthians despised the Church of God: for which he praised them
not. And as for reverence to be done to the Lord of Heaven and Earth, the same
Apostle instructs the Hebrews thus: Wherefore (says he) Heb. 12.28,29
We having received a kingdom which cannot be shaken, let us have grace
whereby we may serve God acceptablie, with reverence and a godly fear; For
our GOD is a consuming fire. All which Scriptures, mentioning these things, are
quoted in the Margent.

DIALOGUE.
Minist. On the third of October another lying fable is appointed to be read,
how Tobias being come from Rages did call the Angel unto him, and bade him
take a servant and two Camels, and go to Rages for money, and that the Angel
went and carried writings which he delivered to Gabael, who brought bags of
money sealed up, which he delivered to the Angel.


ANSWER.
Here Is still great noise, and little Wool: much spoken but to little purpose;
as in the former answers has been already showed.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. O horrible, how have the Bishops deluded King Edward the sixth, Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and Our gracious King Charles, and the whole estate, and
made them believe, that there was nothing in the service Book contrary to Gods
Word. God Almighty deliver us from them.


ANSWER.
You talk you know not what: for, that the Bishops have not deluded the state,
nor those Princes which you speak of, appears; First, by the Martyrdom of
those worthy Bishops which suffered in the days of Queen Mary, Secondly, by
the conference holden at Hampton Court in the beginning of King James his
Reign, who (as you know) was a Prince so well accomplished in learning, and
particularly in Divinity, that (if they would) they could not have captivated
his judgment and skill; as in that conference is most apparent: His wise Nobles
saw it well enough; For being present and observing all passages, they were
persuaded that His Majesty spoke by inspiration. And thirdly, that they went
not about to delude him, appears by that which they said throughout the whole
conference; and especially by the fair dealing with His Majesty about
particular absolution, and private Baptism.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Now that you have showed me the blasphemies and lying fables; show also
what are the Popish errors that are in it, and first tell me, whether the
Service Book does command, that all both Ministers and people shall bow their
bodies, when the Name Jesus is read?


Minist. The Bishops only, without any warrant from God, but from the Pope.


Gent. I have read that the Name Jesus was a common name among the Jews, was
it so?


Minist. Yes, Syrach of Jerusalem had a son whose name was Jesus, Eccl. 50.23.
Also Joshua the son of Nun was called Jesus, Acts 7.57. and one of Saint Paul's
fellow Laborers was called Jesus, Col. 4 11.


Gent. Why do the Bishops make an Idol of the name Jesus, by causing men to
bow their bodies, and to put off their hat when it is read?


Min. Because they mistake the Word of God, where it is written, that at the
name of Jesus every knee shall bow, both of things in Heaven, of things on
earth, and of things under the earth, Phil. 2.10.


Gent. What is the name of Jesus?


Min. As by the name of our gracious King Charles is meant, not the name
Charles, (which is a common name) but the authority and power that God has
given him over all people within his own dominions; as when men are pressed to
the Kings service, they are pressed in the Kings name, that is, by virtue of
authority and power from the King: even so, as by the name of K. Charles is
meant his authority and power, etc. So, by the name of Jesus ia meant the
authority and power, that God has given him over all things in Heaven and in
Earth, and under the Earth.


Gent. What is meant by things in Heaven?


Min. By things in Heaven are meant the holy Angels and souls of the
faithful, that have no knees.


Gent. What is meant by things on Earth?


Min. By things on Earth, are meant all mankind living on earth, whether they
be Elect or Reprobate.


G^nt. What is meant by things under the Earth?


Min. By things under the Earth, are meant the Devils and damned souls in
hell.


Gent. What is meant by bowing of the knee?


Min. By bowing of the knee is meant subjection, Isa. 45.23. and not bowing of
the body when the name Jesus is read, as Pope Anastatius did command, Anno 404.


Gent. What is meant by bowing of every knee, of things in Heaven, of things on
earth, and of things under the earth?


Min. Thereby is meant, that all the holy Angels and Saints in Heaven, and all
mankind on earth, and all the Devils and damned souls in hell shall submit
themselves to Christ, and acknowledge him to be Lord of all, and to have power
over all, to save and condemn whom he will.


ANSWER.
You undertake at the first to speak of things in the Common-Prayer-Booke: but
now I see you are fallen upon something else. His name (as you say) which first
commanded to bow at the name of Jesus, was Anastatius, a man I hope of an
earlier date than either to be termed Pope, by way of derision, or to be
slighted for his care about this custom, which the Church was acquainted with
a long time before he was ever Bishop of Rome. Saint Hierom (in his Comment
upon Esaias the 45.23. which is the very text alleged by you, to be a testimony
against bowing of the knee) speaks of it as no new thing in his time: for It
is (says he) the custom of the Church to bow the knee to CHRIST; which the
Jews, showing the perverseness of their minds, altogether refuse to do.
noting thereby, that it was so far from being new, as that it was come to be
one of the Churches customs. Zanchy is able to say, that the use is ancient.
Nor do men of great reading but affirm, that it was used in the time of Arius;
which must needs be in the Primitive times, because Arius was before the first
Council of Nice. Nor might it but be used sooner, if we cast an eye to the
scoffings of the Jews: For the Jews began to scoff and mock at our Savior,
in allusion to his name, even when he suffered; and have ever since derided the
Christians with their crucified Jesus. Thus the chief Priests mocking him,
with the Scribes and Elders, alluding to his name Jesus, said; He saved others,
himself he cannot save, Matthew. 27.42. And (as Marlorat speaks) Marl. in Mat.
chapter 1. ^ 21.
The Jews in scorn and derision to this day call our Savior, not Jesus, but
Jehu, which with them signifies only some common and contemptible fellow.

As then the name Jesus is that name in which he was derided, and which they
abuse by their chopping and changing that they might thereby abase our Savior,
and with which they flout us for our faith; so is it that name in which he must
be honored: The Father has assigned so much unto him, and we are bound to
afford it as a part of his reward for the death of the Cross. His person (we
know) is taken from us; but his Name he has left still with us: And as his
Person for suffering is crowned with honor and glory, Heb. 2.9. So must his
Name be so far exalted, as that at the Name of Jesus every knee must bow,
Phil. 2.10.

And thus will your figurative exposition be nothing worth, though illustrated
by a comparison of things done in the Kings name: For at the name of Jesus is
meant Jesus named, to whom we how when we hear him called by that name. For
though his Person be exalted and sits at the right hand of God; yet his
Name, in which he was despised, is not exalted by us as it ought, except we
also reverence his Person upon the mentioning of that name, which God has
given him to be above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should
bow.

Where is then the Idol which you speak of? it would trouble you (sure) to find
it out: and therefore that calumny was either ignorantly cast upon the
Bishops, or maliciously to bring upon them the greater Odium, obloquie,
contempt, and scorn.

But others you say were called Jesus, as well as our Lord and Savior: true,
some others have had that name given them by humane imposition, but not as
given to our Redeemer by God, with a command of his adoration: There Is none of
them that could either do that which he did, or be saved but by him; and must
therefore so resign this name to him, as that he bear it with a maine
difference from them all.

And as for that which you say of the holy Angels and souls of the faithful
which have no knees, they have their ways surely to do that which we do in
our bodies; else it would never be given in charge, that all the Angels of GOD
must worship him, Hebr. 1.6. Nor be written that the Saints in Heaven fall
down before him, Rev. 5.8,9.

Nor may them in Hell be excluded: For though it be a torment to them to
testify either reverence or subjection; yet, seeing Christ must Reign till he
have put all his enemies under his feet, they shall (whether they will or no)
be brought unto it: a proof of which assertion is in the foureteenth chapter
of the Romans, at the tenth and eleventh verses. In which regard the Apostles
words, Phil. 2.10.
mentioning that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, both of things in
Heaven, of things on Earth, and of things under the Earth, are not unfitlie
said to be a Prophecy, which by many Christians is fulfilling in this life
here on earth, by blessed spirits and Saints is fulfilled in Heaven, and shall
fully be accomplished in the day of judgment as Master Calvin very well
observes. For though it be a prophecy, we must know that under this
prophecy expressed, there is a duty employed; For Prophecies (says one) are
of two sorts, some that are fulfilled in an instant, others by degrees and by
little and by little; of which latter sort is this prophecy, that every knee
shall bow.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What do you think of them that kneel when they receive the Communion
bread?


Min. The Papists say, that they are Idolaters, because they kneel, and do
not believe the real present, as they do.


ANSWER.
It is no matter what the Papists say; Their dislike should (me thinks)
moderate your spleen, and make you think the better of us for their sakes. To
believe their real presence, is no part of our Creed; and yet to kneel is a
part of our devotion. We kneel no more to the Bread than to the Pulpit, or to
our seats when we join with the Minister in praying unto God: But our
quarrel is not now with them of Rome, but with you for taking dirt out of
their puddles, and causelessly to throw it at us.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Who was the first that brought in kneeling?


Min. Pope Honorius, about the year of our Lord 1220. after that the error of
Transubstantiation was hatched at the Council of Lateran.


Gent. J have read in Gods Word, that the Apostles did not kneel when Christ
Himself delivered the bread unto them. I have read also in the Book of
Martyrs, that the ancient Councels in the Primitive Church did make Canons
against kneeling, least it should prove an occasion of Idolatry. Ought not we
to conform our selves to our Savior Christ and his Apostles, and to the
Christians of the Primitive Church, rather than to the Devils Vicar-generall,
the Pope?


Min. Yes verily, for it is gross hypocrisy in us to make a show, as though
we were more godly and zealous than the Apostles and Christians of the
Primitive Church.


ANSWER.
The error of Transubstantiation we detest as much as you; but may not
therefore fall in with you in your irreverence. If the King offer us his hand
to kiss, we take it upon our knees: How much more when the King of Heaven
gives us his son in these pledges, on whom we feed in our hearts by Faith
with Thanksgiving. Another reason is, because it is received in Prayer: and if
men will be ruled by reason, they will not, when they are to petition the King
of Kings, omit such a gesture of humility, as kneeling is, being the most
suitable for a man at his prayers, and for this cause we kneel at the
Communions receiving; whereat we both lift up thankful hearts unto God, for
the death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ: as also beg of God, that by the
merits thereof, our bodies and souls may be preserved to everlasting life.

It would trouble you (sure) to derive our kneeling from the error of
Transubstantiation: and therefore to no purpose do you come in with the name
of Pope Honorius, and tell us of what was hatched at the Council of Lateran.
If you were acquainted with Tertullians accipere and reservare, you would be
ashamed to say that Pope Honorius was the first that brought in kneeling.
Adoration of the Host was indeed brought in by him, but not kneeling without
such adoration in the act of receiving: for they kneeled at the Sacrament in
Tertullians time; and he lived betimes, and was flourishing about the year of
our Lord 200. which was 1020. years before the Council of Lateran. But you
think it a great matter I perceive, to set up a Shaw-foule to scare a fool:
yet men of understanding will find you out.

To ollow on therefore that of Tertul. In the Primitive times were times of
persecution, when the christians could not meet so often as they would for
fear of troubles: they had also their Station days, on which it was not
lawful to worship kneeling. In the first case they did accipere and reservare,
receive this Sacrament from the hands of the Priest at Church in several
portions, and take it home and eat it there, at such times as they thought it
fit for their ghostly comfort, that they might be sure to have it for their
last Viaticum at the approach of sudden and unexpected danger: but did not
always so; for that were to overthrow the nature of the holy Supper and make
the Communion to become a private eating. And secondly, on the days of
station, when they might not kneel, they rather chose to forbear the
receiving and partaking of the holy Sacrament, than to take it standing.
Tertullian therefore wishes them to come, though they might not kneel, and
take it standing at the Altar, from whence they might be suffered to carry it
home and eat it at their own houses kneeling. The Leper which came to Christ,
as Saint Mark reports, he kneeled; and as St. Luke, he fell on his face:
teaching us in prayer to fall down and kneel before the Lord our Maker. He
that worships God irreverently, shows himself not a Christian, but a
Manichee; who thought God made the soul, but not the body.

It is recorded of the Heathen, that before they began their Sacrifices, the
Priest first beheld the people round about him, and demanded, (...), Who is
here, who is here? (...), say the people again: meaning, A company of good
folks. Intimating hereby, that if there were any there guilty to themselves
of any foul offense, they should depart as unworthy the sight of those rites
or mysteries of their religion, which were then to be performed. And yet
because they used to sit at their Sacrifices, Tertullian blamed them: Ter. lib.
de Or^t. cap 12.
For (esteeming them to be Gods whom they worshipped) they ought to show more
reverence than to sit before them whom they thought to be Gods: and thereupon
infers, Quanto magis sub conspectu Dei vivi, Angelo adhuc orationis astante,
factum istud irreligiosissimum est. Meaning, that if it were irreligious for
them to sit before their false Gods, seeing they esteemed them for true ones;
it would be more irreligious for us to do the like before the true God indeed.

But you say that the Apostles did not kneel, when Christ Himself delivered
the Bread unto them? I answer that if this be a good argument, then we should
receive in no place but in an upper Chamber, have no more company but twelve,
no women but men, and take it at no time but after Supper; al which we know is
otherwise throughout the whole Christian world it being in the Churches power
to alter matters of circumstance, although she may not alter any matter of the
essence, or substance of either this or the other Sacrament.

The rule which we find in Scripture is, 1 Cor. 14 40.
that all things be done decently and in order: And without question, what is
reputed enough decently and orderly done at some time and place, and upon some
occasion; is not so at another time and place, where no like occasion is: we
do not therefore make our selves wiser than Christ and his Apostles, but
follow the rule which his word affords. So then, if they sat when they
received, most like it was because they sat down to supper, and were not yet
risen from the Table: nor did they know what their Master was about to do: it
was more than ever he did before; They might perhaps be therefore less orderly
than otherwise they would have been. And yet that they took it irreverently,
is no where manifest, neither that their sitting was like your fashion of
sitting, but after another manner, as differing from your sitting, as kneeling
is from standing. Or however, this is certain that things were not brought
into order, but by degrees; Saint Paul had else never said it, that other
things he would put in order when he came. 1 Cor. 11.34.
I tie you then still to Scripture: For though the Kings Daughter be All
glorious within; Yet her clothing is of wrought Gold: Psalm. 45.13,14
so says the Psalmist, in the 45. Psalm, at the 13. verse.

And whereas you terrify us with the noise of Canons; when you know how to
allege them to better purpose, we shall be willing to hear you: For to urge
Canons that were, against Canons that are, is nothing for you. It shows indeed
your factious zeal in the way of Shismaticks, and the desire that you have to
separate from us, although we care as little for the Pope as you. But because
you talk of ancient Canons, I will afford you one to your little comfort;
namely, That with Heretics or Shismatickes we ought not to pray: which Canon
you may read in the Code of Canons, For the Universal Church, authorized by
the Emperor Justinian. And that you may the sooner find it, I direct you to
the hundred and seven and thirtieth Canon of the same Book; or to the three
and thirtieth Canon of the Council of Laodicea, which was celebrated in the
year of our LORD GOD 364. as Iustellus writes.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What other error do you find to be in the Service-Booke?


Min. The interrupting of the Minister by the Clarke and the whole Congregation
is a foul error and such an error and confusion as does much offend God; and
that therefore many are unwilling to come into the Church, till the Service be
all read.


ANSWER.
I doubt me you are none of those who will be so diligent as to read the whole
Service: your pretended errors and dislikes which you here lay down in this
Dialogue, are cause enough to make me think so. And therefore they of your
Parish had need to come betimes to Church, if they mean to know your Text, or
hear any more than a piece of your Sermon; except you do as no few of your
Sect, trifle away a great deal of time in vain repetitions and idle
tautologies in some prayer of your own, which our Savior Himself likens to
the practice of the Heathen, and calls no better than much babbling.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. How do they interrupt the Minister?


Minist. By rehearsing his words with a loud voice, and by taking words out of
his mouth, and by mingling their prayers with his.


ANSWER.
This may be answered out of Doctor Boys, whose words be these.

I am occasioned (says he) in this place justly to defend the peoples
answering the Minister aloud in the Church: The beginning of which
interlocutory passages, is ascribed by Platina to Damasus Bishop of Rome, by
Theodoret to Diodorus Bishop of Antioch, by Walfridus Strabo to Saint Ambrose
Bishop of Millane: all which lived 1100 years before the Church was acquainted
with any French fashions: and yet Basil Epist. 63. alleges that the Churches
of Egypt, Lybia, Thebes, Palestina, Phoenicians, Syrians, Mesopotamians, used
it long before Socrates and Strabo writ, that Ignatius a Scholar unto Christ's
own Scholars, is thought to be the first Author hereof. If any man shall
expect greater antiquity and authority, we can fetch this order even from the
Quire of Heaven: I saw the Lord (said Esaias) Esaias 6.3.
set on an high Throne, the Seraphims stood upon it, and one cried to another,
saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, all the World is full of His
glory, Esaias 6.3. Blessed spirits in praising God answer one another:
interchangeably, though unhappie scornful spirits unmannerly term this
custom, Tossing of Service, an interrupting of the Minister, a foul error,
yea such an error and confusion as does much offend God*

DIALOGUE.
Minist. The Minister when he prays, is the mouth of the people, speaking to
God for them: therefore they ought to be silent, till he has done speaking,
and then to say Amen, 1 Cor. 14.16. and not to interrupt him by rehearsing
every word after him, as in the confession of sin, when the Minister says
Almighty and most merciful Father, we have erred and strayed out of thy ways
like lost sheep: and in the Letany, when he says, o God the Father of Heaven,
have mercy upon us miserable sinners; The Minister must stop and be silent,
till the Clarke and people have with a loud voice rehearsed every word after
him; in which time, it is impossible for the Minister to keep idle and
by-thoughts from coming into his mind.


ANSWER.
If it be so with you, that idle and by-thoughts will not be kept from coming
into your mind, pray to God to settle you better, and be not so rash as to
measure other men's corn by your own Bushel. Saint Ambrose tells us, that in
his times the Church resounded again with the responds of Men, Women, and
Children, like to the Sea with its beating waves; or like to the rushing of
many waters. Thus in the Latin Church. And in the Greek Church, Saint Basil
is witness that the voice of their prayers and Responds, was like the noise of
waters beating against the Rocks: The pattern whereof seems to be in Revel.
14.2. besides what was before, out of Esaias 6.3.

This is therefore all that I may yield you; viz. that in every part of the
service it is not requisite that it should be so: For in many of the Prayers
the people are to be silent, and have no more to do with an open and loud
voice than to say, Amen. But then again, when occasion is offered, I must say
unto them as David did: O praise our God ye people; and make the voice of his
praise to be heard, Psalm 66.7. Or, as it is in another Psalm, Psalm. 95.1.
O come let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful noise to the Rock of
our salvation. Or, as in another, Psalm. 107.31.32.
o that men would praise the Lord for his goodness; and for his wonderful
works to the children of men: Let them exalt him also in the Congregation of
the people, and praise him in the assembly of the Elders. And in a word, as for
those times, in which (by the Apostles warrant) they are to say Amen at the end
of the Ministers prayer, it was not without due care observed in the ancient
times: Saint Paul mentions it, in the place alleged by you; 1 Cor. 14.16.
And as Saint Hierome writes, it was the praise of the Primitive Church, That
their Amen, was like a clap of thunder; and their Halleluja as the roaring of
the Sea.

DIALOGUE.
Minist. Also, when he prays for the King, saying, Lord save the King, they
interrupt him, by mingling their prayer with his, saying, And mercifully hear
us when we call upon thee. The Minister being interrupted and put out, in
praying for the King, does pray for Ministers, saying, Indue thy Ministers with
righteousness; they do then also interrupt him, by mingling their prayers
with his, saying, And make thy people joyful.


ANSWER.
This is strange that you dare dally thus; These Suffrages, at which you kick
with scorn, are answerable to that prayer of David, in the hundred and two and
thirtieth Psalm, where he prays for the Prince, Priests and People orderly.
For the Prince: Lord remember David. For the Priests: Let thy Priests be
clothed with righteousness. For the People: Let thy Saints sing with
joyfulnesse. So we in like manner: Lord save thy King. Indue thy Ministers with
righteousness: And make thy chosen people joyful.

This also justifies our order in praying for the King first; for the Clergy
next, and for the Laity last of all in our well composed Letany, with which you
quarrel next: But had your quarrel been with the mattter of it, as with the
manner, I should have said as worthy Hooker did, What one petition is there
found in the whole Letany whereof we shall ever be able at any time to say,
That no man living needs the grace or benefit therein craved at Gods hands?
And a little before; It now remains (says he) a work, the absolute
perfection whereof upbraydeth with error, or somewhat worse, them whom in all
parts it does not satisfy. And let me say, that heretofore Rogations or
Letanies were the very strength, stay, and comfort of Gods Church. In the days
of Mamercus bishop of Vienna, the people seeing how heaven threatened their City
with imminent ruin, began to fly away from it: but their Bishop staying still
and some others with him, exhorted such as remained to use those virtuous and
holy means wherewith others in the like case have prevailed with God: Whereupon
they fly to the Rogations or Letanies formerly used, the Bishop perfects them
in what he th^ught meet, and adds unto them what the present necessity
required. Their good success was not only a thing known, but an encouragement
to others, who being afflicted with famine, and besieged by their enemies, took
the same course; as in particular is storied of Sidoneus the Bishop of Arverna.
Nor do we but find by daily experience that those calamities may be nearest at
hand, and readiest to break in suddenly upon us, which we in regard of times
or circumstances, may imagine to be farthest off; as judicious Hooker speaks:
Or if they do not indeed approach, yet such miseries as being present all men
are apt to bewail with tears, the wise (says he) should rather by their
prayers prevent. Or if finally, we for our selves had a privilege of immunity,
does not true Christian charity require that whatsoever any part of the world,
yea any one of all our brethren does either suffer or fear, the same we
account as our own burden. The Letany (says one) is a common treasure house
of all good devotion. It may be said of the Church in composing that exquisite
prayer, as it was of Origin, writing upon the Canticles: In caeteris alios
omnes vicit, in hoc seipsum: In other parts of our Liturgy she surpasses all
others, but in this her self. Some mislike the Letany, for that it has a
petition for all men, and all people: and yet the precept in Gods word is, that
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men. 1 Timothy 2.1.

Others are angry that we should pray, From sudden death, good Lord deliver
us. And I wonder much at this: let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise
man hearken unto me, whether it be not better to leave this world with a kind
of treatable dissolution, then to be snatched away as in a moment? Xenophon and
Plato were Ethnicks, and strangers from the common wealth of Israel; yet it was
no little beauty to their stories to tell us how leasurely Cyrus in the one,
and Socrates in the other departed hence. Absolon had a sudden death, and how
did David therefore exceed in lamentation? Elibu speaks of some which die in a
moment: we may therefore beg of God to depart as Jacob, Moses, Joshua, David,
who had, not only respit to end their own lives in peace; but also to add
comforts and blessings to those about them. But I hasten, and come again to the
Dialogue.

DIALOGUE.
Min. Throughout the whole Letany they do interrupt him by mingling their
prayers with his.


ANSWER.
Here still you urge us with interruptions: but I have already showed the
weakness of this cavil in my former answers; and should be glad to see you
studdy quietness, and not to think your self wiser then the Church of God in
all ages, with whom these eager devotions were better esteemed. And as Fishes
were never accepted for Sacrifices: so neither would those Christians be as
mute as Fishes in their Congregations.

DIALOGUE.
Min. They do also, without any warrant from God, but from Pope Hormisda,
interrupt the Minister when he reads the Psalms, by taking every other verse
out of his mouth, to read it for him with a loud, hackering, and confused
noise, especially in Country Churches, where the people cannot read well.

The Minister when he reads or preaches Gods word, is the mouth of God
speaking to the people; therefore they ought to be silent, and to hearken with
reverence?


ANSWER.
The Psalter (as you know) contains the whole book of Psalms: they were made by
several men; someby Moses, some by Solomon, some by Asaph, and the most by
David: and not seldom composed upon special occasions; for the most part
either to pray unto God, or to praise him in such a set form of words. David
inscribes many of them to sundry Musicians, had them used in the service of
God, were then, and have been since otherwise used in the Lords service then
the other Scriptures: their tittles show it, and the practice of the Church,
both among the Jews and the Christians, evidently declare it. This therefore
takes away the edge of your argument, by which you endeavor to limit them
altogether to the mouth of the Minister.

And whereas you would bear the world in hand, that Hormisda was the man that
first appointed them to be used interchangeably, See St. Aug. confess. lib. 10.
cap. 33.
you are greatly out from the truth of the story, as even your own T. C. will
witness against you.

Pantaleon brings testimony that this which you mention was done by Celestine,
Pantal. in Chronol.
who was Bishop of Rome about an hundred years before Hormisda. But Polydore
Virgil goes higher, and says; Polyd. Virg. de invent. rerum, lib 6 cap. 2.
That the division of David's Psalter into seven parts called Nocturnes,
according to the seven days of the week, was the work of Hierom at the request
of Damasus, who was then the Bishop of Rome. Damasus also (says the same
author) instituted that the Psalms should be sung and said by course. Thus also
Platina: Plat. in vitae Damasi.
but some again say, as Polydore notes, that this was first devised by
Ignatius. Thus also Socrates, who makes Ignatius the Bishop of Antioch in
Syria, Hist. Eccl. cap. 8.
the first beginner thereof even under the Apostles themselves: he suffered
Martyrdom in the days of the Emperor Trajan, unto whom it was related by his
own vicegerent concerning the Christians of Pontus and Bithinya, that the
only crime he knew of them, was, they used to meet together at a certain day,
and to praise Christ with Hymns as a God [secum invicem] one to another amongst
themselves. secund.
Nor does this but agree most aptly to the Apostles exhortation, in Ephesians. 5.19.
Speak to your selves (says he) In Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs. See
also Exodus 15.1. compared with verse 21. and again look into Esaias 6.3.

DIALOGUE.
Min. When they read the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth verses of the
fifty Psalm, they are likened by some to women scoulding and accusing one
another. The Clark and people do begin to scould with, and to accuse the
Minister, saying, When thou saw a thief, thou consentest unto him, and have
been partaker with adulterers; Then the Priest accuses the Clark, saying, Thou
have let thy tongue speak wickedness, and with thy tongue thou have set forth
deceit; Then the Clark and people do set upon the Minster again, and do accuse
him, saying, Thou sit and speak against thy brother, yea, thou have
slandred thine own Mothers Son.


ANSWER.
If you were not a man of a corrupt mind, you would never (I fear me) vent
such stuff as this: do you not tremble, are you not afraid to dally thus with
the word of God? They are likened by some (you say) to women scoulding and
accusing one another. And with whom (I pray) should the Minister scould, or who
is it that he should accuse, if at any time he should chance to read thus to
the people alone? I hope you would shrink out and be none of his auditors for
fear he should scould with you, accuse you for consenting with a thief, note
you for a partaker with adulterers, a speaker against thy brother, or tell thee
that thou have slandred thine own Mothers son: away therefore with such
impious cavils, and dally not thus with the word of God. These scoffs are
fitter for Pagans then for Christians; especially if they consider how
dangerous a thing it is to sport themselves with holy things. Be not angry Man,
for I do but reprove thee and set before thee the things that thou have done: I
retort, with as much patience as I can, no more then what your self has cast
abroad: Others make points, and you take in hand to tag them. But (alas) we
have more much like this a little after, which (as I meet it) shall be answered.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. I remember that in the Churching of women, the Minister is called
Priest, tell me, I pray you, is that a fit name for a Minister and Preacher of
the Gospel?


Min. No verily; For we read in Gods word, of no more orders of Priests, but of
two, the order of Aaron, and the order of Melchisedech.

Of the order of Aaron, were the Leviticall Priests, whose office was to offer
sacrifices, which together with the Sacrifices was abolished in Christ his
death.

Of the order of Melchisedech was Christ only, and shall remain Priest for
ever.

A third order of Priests is to be found no where; but in the Masse-book, and
in our Service Book.

The name Priest, belongs to every Christian man and woman, as well as to the
Minister, according as it is written, Revel. 1.6. That Christ has made us
Kings and Priests unto God: The meaning is that Christ has made all the Elect,
(men and women) Priests, to offer the sacrifices of praise, and of thanks unto
God.


ANSWER.
The Minister is called Priest, and why not? I hope you know (for you have
noted it) that all true Christians are called Priests: and so Saint Peter, as
well as Saint John declares it, 1 Pet. 2.5. Revel. 5.10. and therefore the
Minister in particular may much more be called by that name, although he offer
none of those Sacrifices which were abolished by Christ, nor intend the
upholding of the Popish Mass, with the blasphemous figments which are there:
else we condemn the Primitive Church of God, in which this name, which you here
would quarrel with, was of frequent use; as you cannot but know, if you know
any thing of the ancient times.

The Prophet Esaias does Chapt. 61.6.
in one place say the same of Christians in general, which even Saint Peter
and Saint John have written: and in Chapt. 66.21.
another place declares, that God will choose some from among them to be
Priests and Levites; which, though it be but an allusion, does denote a
Priesthood still, and this to confist of an imparity as well as of old among
the Jews. Besides, were it so that the Minister might not be called Priest no
more then any other Christian, because the Scripture says of every Christian,
man and woman, Ye are an holy Priesthood, are made Kings and Priests unto
God: Then would it sollow, first that none in particular should be a King; And
secondly, that neither might any among the Jews have been a public Priest, or
called by that name, because the same which was said to Christians was also
said to them, when (out of the Mount) God sent them his message by his servant
Moses: Ye have seen (says the Lord) what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I
bare you on Eagles wings, and brought you unto my self. Now therefore if ye
will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar
treasure unto me above all people: for all the earth is mine. And ye shall be
unto me a kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation, Exodus 19.4,5,6. It is also
warranted by that of Saint Paul, in Hebr. 7.12. where (if you mark it) you
shall find that Priesthood is not taken away, but translated or changed only:
and so also Irenaeus says, lib. 4. c. 34. And as for the testimonies out of
the other Fathers, they are so common, as I need not mention them: only let me
say, that you may find the name both of Priest and Priesthood in the writings
of Ignatius that Martyr already mentioned, who (as you know) was scholar to
Saint John that wrote the Revelation.

This strife of words you should therefore carefully avoid: it does but
disquiet unstable souls. Grant then that name (without quarrelling) to him,
which the Scripture not only gives to every true member of the Church, but
foretold it in some sort of even the Evangelicall Ministers in more particular:
where, though the Prophet mentions Levites also, who were properly so called in
regard of their tribe; yet, as is probable enough, he means not that therefore
the name of Priest should not be used no more then that of Levite: for except
those Priests to which he alludeth, had had their name only in respect of such
Sacrifices as then were offered, and to be ended at the death of Christ, and
not in regard also of other duties which are common to us and them, which
neither are nor may be abolished, I see no reason to think otherwise. To teach
and bless the people were the services of the Priests, both before the Law,
and under the Law; as well as now. Melchisedech was a Priest before the Law,
and blessed Abraham: to whom also Abraham paid his Tithes, Genesis 14.19,20. Nor
was it but said to Aaron and his sons, under the Law; That they should teach
the sons of Israel all the Statutes which the Lord has spoken unto them by
the hand of Moses, Levit. 10.11. and in Malachy it stands recorded, The priests
lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth: for he
is the Messenger of the Lord of hosts; Malach. 2.7. and in Ezekiel, They shall
teach my people the difference between the holy and profane, chapter 44.23. and in
6 Number. the 6 last verses; The Lord spoke unto Moses saying, speak unto Aaron
and to his sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of
Israel, saying unto them: The Lord bless thee, and keep thee, The Lord make
his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto the: The Lord lift up his
countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. And they shall put my name upon the
children of Israel, and I will bless them: All which is still done by the
Ministers of the Gospel: they bless, they teach, they instruct, they rebuke,
they reprove, they exhort, they consecrate the Bread and Wine to holy uses,
they offer up the Prayers of the people: nay more, they do as it were offer
Christ in a Mystery, and sacrifice him objectively, by way of commemoration. In
which we differ far from the Church of Rome: for the Romish Church professes
the Body and Blood of Christ to be the proper subject; we nay, but the proper
object of our Celebration.

We take then a Priest and Presbiter now to be all one, and list not to
quarrel any longer about the word. For should we descend to Grammar, we are
told as much as comes fully home; namely, that the word Priest has his right
place in him whose mere function and charge is the service of God.

Whereunto let me only add that which I find in Bishop Jewel, We know (says
he) that the Priest or Minister of the Church of God is divided from the rest
of his brethren, as was the tribe of Levi from the children of Israel, and has
a special office over the people. Neither may any man force himself into that
office, without lawful calling. But as touching the inward Priesthood, and
the exercise of the soul, we say even as Saint Peter and Saint John, and
Tertullian have said; in this sense every faithful Christian man is a Priest,
and offers to God Spiritual Sacrifices: In this only sense, I say; and none
otherwise. Thus he: granting that there is a Priesthood internal, and a
Priesthood external; For (says he) there is not one of us that ever taught
otherwise. See this in his Defense of the Apology for the Church of England,
Part 2. page 130.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What do you think of the Priest and Clark, when they do Church a woman?


Min. I will not tell you what I think, but I will tell you what some do say.


Gent. What do they say?


Min. They say that the Priest is like a witch.


Gent. Why do they say that the Priest is like to a witch?


Min. Because he does as a witch does, when she says the Lords Prayer.


Gent. What does a witch when she says the Lords Prayer?


Min. She leaves out these words, but deliver us from evil, and so does the
Priest when he does Church a woman.


Gent. Why will not a witch say these words?


Min. Because the Devil will not let her, till she has bewitched so many as
he would have her: For by the evil that is prayed against in that petition, is
meant the Devil, and the sin whereunto he tempts: therefore the Devil
will not have her to say these words, because when she says them, she prays
that God will deliver her from him and the witchery whereunto he tempts her.


ANSWER.
This is a cavil scarce worth the answering: for it is most certain, that the
evil which you speak of, is prayed against. The most therefore which you could
urge fairly is no more but this; viz. That the order in saying that Prayer had
been better without an answer interposed, then by the interposing of one; in
which (I think) you should have met with few or none to quarrel you. But to
speak so basely, and in such unbeseeming manner as you have done, serves as a
figne to show with what a malignant spirit you wrote these things, who do
rather play the witch your self, by speaking perverse words to draw away
disciples after you, then justly accuse the Priest in these your vain
janglings. But it is as Saint Paul gave notice a great while since, when he
called the Elders of Ephesus together; as we read in the twentieth chapter of
the Acts of the Apostles, at the 30 verse.

DIALOGUE.
Min. The Priest does also skip over the conclusion of the Lords Prayer, for
thine is the kingdom, power and glory: and therein also they say that he is
like to a witch when she does say the Creed: for when she says the second
Article, And in Jesus Christ his only son, she skips over these words, Our
Lord, and so does the Priest slip over the conclusion of the Lords Prayer.


Gent. Saint Luke leaves it out, and therefore the Priest may leave them out,
Luke 11.4.


Min. It follows not, that therefore the Minister may leave them out; for
Saint Luke did not write any thing of himself, but what the holy Ghost would
have him to write.


Gent. Why would not the holy Ghost have him to write them?


Min. Because it was sufficient that Saint Matthew had writ them, Math. 6.13.


ANSWER.
Here you show us still more of your skill in witchery, and tell us of the
Priests skipping over the conclusion of the Lords Prayer. And indeed if there
were not some President for it in Scripture, it might not be; But there is
president for it (in Luke 11.4.) although you be pleased to pass it over with
a non sequitur: And yet for all that, it may follow well enough. For whereas it
seemed good to the holy Ghost, in one Evangelist, to add the Doxologie; and in
another to omit it; the Church is blameless, and may indifferently follow
either the one or the other, seeing both of them wrote by inspiration: For who
knows (except you, who know any thing) whether it were the purpose of the holy
Ghost to have Saint Luke omit it, because Saint Matthew had recorded it; and
not rather to show that it was a complete Prayer at the end of the petitions,
although the reason of the petitions be not mentioned where the Doxology is
omitted? It is well then to repeat those words of the conclusion; and not ill,
although they be not always mentioned: for our Church in so doing has the
pattern not only of all the Latin, and some of the Greek Fathers, but even of
Saint Luke himself. Quando dicimus, libera nos a malo; nihil remanet quod ultra
adhuc debeat postulari, as says Saint Cyprian; Cypr. de Orat. Dominic.
that is: When we say, Deliver from evil; there remains nothing more to be
prayed for.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Some do think, because Saint Mark, and Saint John do make no mention
of the Lords Prayer, that therefore the Minister may omit the reading of it;
and that because the Evangelists and the Apostles did not use to say it as a
Prayer, therefore none (neither Minister nor people) ought to use it as a
Prayer.


Min. The truth is, that our Savior Christ did make it for all Christians to
use as a prayer, and also for a pattern to pray by?


Gent. Where do you find that our Savior Christ would have it used as a
Prayer?


Min. In the 11 chapter of the Gospel written by Saint Luke, and the second
verse, where it is written, that our Savior said; When you pray, say, Our
Father which, etc.


Gent. Where do you find that our Savior would have it used for a pattern?


Min. In the sixth chapter of the Gospel written by Saint Matthew, and the
nineth verse; where it is written, that our Savior said, After this manner
pray you, Our Father which, etc.


ANSWER.
I would that all in your book could have been as well approved as this: for
here you speak both the words of soberness and truth; and I commend you for it.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Why will not the witch acknowledge Christ to be the Lord?


Min. Because the Devil would have her to take Him, and not Christ for her
Lord.


ANSWER.
This is mentioned to great purpose, I promise you; is it not? I am loath to
trifle away the time in these passages, I should else go near hand to tell you,
that as Simon Magus was taken for some great one, because he had a long time
bewitched the people with sorceries: so you, perhaps, would be thought some
great one too, for your profound knowledge in what passes between the Devil
and witches, of which you have so often told us. But whilst you are so busy
in the Theory of their trade, and apply your speculations no better, you do
but show your self in your colors to please a company of frantic and
mis-perswaded people, wilful and wandering souls, who are led with an
intemperate spirit as well as you. The simple (says Solomon) Prove. 14.15,16
believes every word: but the prudent man looks well to his going. A wise
man fears and departs from evil: but the fool rages and is confident.
Chapter 16. v. 29, 30
A violent man entiseth his neighbor, and leads him into the way that is not
good. He shuts his eyes to devise froward things: moving his lips, he
brings evil to pass. Chapter 15.2.
The tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright: but the mouth of fools bableth
out foolishness; And I pray (good Sir) do you a little work upon that.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Why do some say that the Priest and Clarke when they do Church a
woman, are like to a couple of players acting their parts?


Min. Because the Priest does skip over these words, But deliver us from evil,
and does leave them to the Clark to say for his part, etc.


ANSWER.
Before he was like to a Witch; but now he and his Clark are likened to
Players: you will one day be ashamed of this, I fear; unless you act a better
part before you leave the stage; your present Plaudite may deceive you: the
future is that which is most material. But lets go on, and see what follows.

DIALOGUE.
Min. And (then) as soon as the Clark has said them, the Priest says Lord
save this woman thy Servant, then the Clark comes in again with his part,
saying, which puts her trust in thee; then the Priest, as though he would
not have the woman to put her trust in him, turns her over to the Clark, and
bids him be unto her a strong Tower: then the Clarke answers and shows
wherein, saying, from the face of her enemy.


ANSWER.
Oh desperate wickedness! dares any man be so bold as to utter such impieties?
The first words [Lord save this woman thy servant] will stand as a sentence
against this profane babbler to witness against him, be he whom he will. He a
Minister! more fit to make a railing Rabshakeh, or a scoffing Michal. Let him
therefore in time look well unto it, lest with profane Esau he loose his
birthright, and be deprived of his heavenly Fathers blessing. As well may he
tell us that we are to have no other God but the Minister, because the Minister
reads the first Commandment, as vent this thus concerning the Priest and Clark
in their Churching of women.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. This is a very strange kind of giving of God thanks for women's safe
deliverance from the great pain and peril of Childe-birth.


Min. It is indeed, and no small grief to honest women, not only because there
is no thanks given to God for their safe deliverance from the pain and peril
of Childbirth, but also because thanksgiving is turned to a Jewish kind of
Purification: For they must come with a veil to cover their faces after the
Jewish manner, signifying thereby, that by childe-bearing they were made
unclean, and that they were ashamed of their uncleanness, or that they had
played the Harlots, and were ashamed to show their faces; and Juda thought that
Thamar was an Harlot because her face was covered with a veil, Genesis 33.14.15.


It is a great offense, not only to honest women, but also to every true
Christian man, to see his wife go to the Church like a Jew, or like an Harlot.


ANSWER.
You have a fine faculty in moulding of matters, I see; and in fashioning of
things according as your self thinks good to fancy: One while you say it is a
strange giving of thanks; another while, it is no giving of thanks; and then
again, it is a giving of thanks, but turned to a Jewish kind of Purification.
You would make a pretty Proteus, I perceive: But I will reprove thee, and set
before thee the things that thou have done: Thou have let thy mouth speak
wickedness, and with thy tongue thou have set forth deceit; according to that
of the Psalmist, with which you dallied but even now. Can I tell how to say
otherwise? Is here no giving of thanks? I marvel that you blush not, nor be
ashamed to wrest things contrary to the evidence of open sight. I have lifted
up mine eyes unto the hills from whence comes my help: words (sure) of
thankfulness. Nay the whole Psalm is an Hymn of Praise and thanksgiving,
fitly chosen for such a purpose. 2 Chr. 29,30.
Moreover, Hezekiah the King, and the Princes commanded the Levites to sing
praise unto the Lord, with the words of David, and of Asaph the Seer: and they
sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their ^eads and worshipped, 2 Chro
29.30. The Church then you see goes on in a right way, and repaires to a worthy
storehouse for a fitting form. But I perceive your drift, as if you aimed
(like T. C. your great Goliath) to have no public thanks in such a case as
this, because it comes too near the Jewish kind of Purification. Wherefore I
shall answer in more particular, and tell you, that although that Law as
concerning the Ceremony be ceased; yet the righteousness thereof is to be
fulfilled in those which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans
8.4. For in all things we are commanded to give thanks, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. And must
offer the Sacrifice of praise unto God, Heb. 13.15. And if for other benefits
thanks and praise be due, then for this preservation, which (in Melancthons
phrase) is Magnum miraculum, a great miracle: insomuch that if the Child, when
he comes to know it, will not stick to say with David, Psalm. 139.13. I will
give thanks to thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: then may the
Mother not refuse who is wonderfully preserved and delivered. So then; this is
no Jewish Ceremony, but a Christian duty, performed, not out of Custom, but
out of Conscience; not to make the act of honorable Marriage unclean, but to
bless God for deliverance from so manifold perils. Whereupon neither can the
veil be the badge of an Harlot; but as new gloves are fit for Marriages, and
blacks for Funerals: so this, an attire for such a time, not only decent and
grave, but also most useful and convenient to distinguish her from other
women: And herein the Apostles rule is well observed, viz. that All things be
done decently and in order. Where Is then the Jew or the Harlot that you spoke
off; or the great offense, not only to honest women, but also to every true
Christian man? you fight with shaddows, I do assure you; and produce the
abortive fancies of your own brain, which are too weak to endure the touch.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Many do say, that the manner of administering the holy Sacrament of
Baptism prescribed in the Service Book is very absurd and full of Popish
errors, and so ridiculous as they cannot but laugh at it; I pray you tell me,
what do you find in it to be so absurd and ridiculous, as they cannot but
laugh at it?


Min. The Interrogatories ministered to Infants that have no understanding; and
the answer of the Godfathers and Godmothers are so absurd and ridiculous, as
they cannot but laugh at them: as first, the Minister must examine the Infant,
and ask him, If he does forsake the Devil and all his works, the vain pomp
and glory of the world, the covetous desires of the same, the carnal desires
of the flesh, so that he will not follow nor be led by them: he must also ask
him, if he does believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and if he will
be baptized in that Faith.


Gent. Were not these Interrogations administered to Infants in the Primitive
Church?


Min. No, these or the like were then administered to such as were of years,
when they were converted and came to be baptized, and afterward commanded by
the Pope to be administered to Infants.


Gent. What answer does the Godfathers and Godmothers give?


Min. They give no answer, but do counterfeit the Infants voice (as if he were
a conjured Ghost) speaking within them, and answering to the first
Interrogation, concerning the Devil and all his works the vain pomp and glory
of the world, the covetous desires of the same, and the carnal desires of the
flesh, that he does forsake them all; and to the second and third, concerning
the Articles of the Christian Faith, that he does believe them all; and that he
does desire to be baptized in that Faith.


ANSWER.
Oh how daintily you toy and dally still with the Churches Customs! Do you
not hug your self for this rare invention of the conjured ghost? It must
neeeds be admirable, to be a man of such a deep conceit, and to have such a
Spirit within him, as can make him express himself thus pithily. Your dull
Doctors may hold the blinking candle to you, and come hither (with shame
enough) to learn as curious fancies every way, (or very near,) as admirable
as what was delivered by you formerly, of the Devil and Witch, of the Players
and the Scoulds, in which your masterpiece of piety was most apparent, and
proved to be as impious an expression as any you need to utter.

But to beat about the bush no longer: Your quarrel is now about
Interrogatories ministered to Infants, and the Answers of the Godfathers and
Godmothers; a custom (you say) first brought into the Church by the Pope. But
by what Pope, I wonder? The name Pope, you know, is ancient; but in ordinary
acceptance sounds harsh, and is odious; and had never been mentioned thus
covertly by you, had it not been for the better coloring of your bad cause,
which indeed you had need varnish over as well as you can.

If he were a Pope that first appointed this order, I must tell you he was a
very ancient one: one that lived before you, or your great Grandfather were
borne. They that call him by his name, use to say that it was Otherwise written
Higinius.
Higynus Bishop of Rome, about the year aster Christ's birth 150. At which time
(you know, and a great while after) Rome was famous for her glorious Martyrs,
the very Bishops (whom you scornfully term Popes) laying down their lives for
the faith of Christ. You cannot tell how to deny it; your face must be more
then brazen if you should attempt it: nor can you exclude him from among the
men of the Primitive times, who was flourishing no later.

Infants, as well as elder ones, were baptized from the first: for to this
appertains that which is clearly set down in the Scriptures, that the
Apostles baptized whole houses or families. Origin says, Orig. in Epist. ad
Rom^. viz. in ca 6.
That the Church of Christ received of the Apostles themselves, baptizing of
Infants. And Augustine (against the Donatists) lib 4. c. 23, 24.
boldly affirms, That baptizing of Children was not fetched from the
authority of men, or of Councels, but from the tradition or doctrine of the
Apostles. Neither do I think it a matter easy for any man to prove, that ever
Baptism did use to be administered without some kind of interrogatories, or
profession of Faith: whereunto Saint Peter (as the learned think) alluding,
has said, 1 Pet. 3.21.
that the Baptism which saves us is not (as legal Purifications were) a
clensing of the flesh from outward impurity, but (...), an interrogative trial
of a good conscience toward God. Higynus then might dispose of something in
this order, in such sort as it has continued since, but not be he that first
appointed it: whereto is pertinent that which I find alleged by another,
namely, That the profession of Faith, as it appears by records, Mr. Bedf.
treat. of the Sacr. pa. 200.
was at the first direct and plain, by recitation of the Creed, and forms of
Confession: Afterward it seems, that for help of memory, and to provide a
remedy against bashfulnesse, that which the party repeated was put into
questions propounded by the Minister, answered briefly (as now the form is) by
the party; And what the Men grown answered by themselves, the same did Parents
for their Children before the time of Higynus. It is the saying of worthy
Hooker, Eccl. Polit. lib. 5. sect. 64.
That which a Guardian does in the name of his Guard or Pupil stands by
natural equity forcible for his benefit, though it be done without his
knowledge. And shall we (says he) judge it a thing unreasonable or in any
respect unfit, that Infants by words which others utter should, though
unwittingly, yet truly and forcibly bind themselves to that whereby their
estate is so assuredly bettered? Herewith Nestorius the Heretic was charged as
having fallen from his first profession and broken the promise which he made to
God in the arms of others. Of such as profaned themselves being Christians,
with irreligious delight in the ensigns of Idolatry, Heathenish spectacles,
shows, and Stage-plaies, Tertullian (to strike them the more deep) claims the
promise which they made in Baptism. Why were they dumb being thus challenged?
Wherefore stood they not up to answer in their own defense, that such
professions and promises made in their names were frivolous, that all which
others undertook for them was but mockery and profanation? That which no
Heretic, no wicked liver, no impious despiser of God, no miscreant or
malefactor, which had himself been baptized, was ever so desperate as to
disgorge in contempt of so fruitfully received customs, is now their voice
that restore (as they say) the ancient purity of Religion. Thus that worthy
Hooker. We ask them (says Saint Austin) Aug. Epist. ad Bonif. 43.
which offer the Infants, and say: Believes be in God? (who being of that age,
knows not whether there be a God or no: They answer, He believes: and so
they answer unto every question which is asked. They became sick and were
burdened, another sinning: so also being to be made sound they are saved,
another confessing for them; as even the same Father observes. Sermon 10. de
ver. Apost.
And it is amplified by a late judicious writer, thus: Profession is either
actual, or virtuall: An actual profession of Repentance, and faith is
required of them, who by the acts of reason formerly abused, have multiplied
their personal transgressions; but for Infants a virtuall profession is
sufficient, and such a profession we find in them, in respect of their
Propagation: They are not unfitly termed Believers, because they are borne
within the Profession of Christianity: As also the Infants of Pagans are justly
accounted Infidels, because they are born in the Profession of Infidelity: And
if Saint Paul had disputed this case, I doubt not, but as he said of Levi, that
in Abraham he paid tithes to Melchisedech; so he would have said, that the seed
of the faithful do in their Parents profess the Faith of Christ. And then,
as it follows: Add this (says he) That this virtuall profession is actuated
by the promise of the Sureties, and Parents at Baptism. And a little after, It
is plain that that Ab-renunciation, is the profession of repentance, in the
name of the Child: so also the Recitation of the Articles, a profession of
Faith, and reputed his, according to that well known saying of Saint Austin,
peccavit in alio, credit in alio, as his offense, so his profession is the act
of another, but his by Imputation: The same Father also says, Aug. in Epi. 105
We confess that as they be born again by the Ministry of Baptisers, so they
believe by the hearts and mouths of the Confessors. And in another place,
Sermon. 10. de verb. Apostoli.
Accommodat illis Matter Ecclesia aliorum pedes, ut veniant aliorum cor, ut
credant: Our Mother the Church lends them other men's feet, that they may
come: and other men's hearts that they may believe. Math. 9.2. Mat. 2.5. Luke 5
20.
And as the Palsieman in the Gospel fared the better for the faith of his
friends: so the little Children are by these means qualified for holy Baptism:
and being baptized are no less bound to observe the Faith of Christians, then
the Jews (infants, as well as others) bound themselves by Circumcision to the
Law of Moses. For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he
is a debtor (says the Apostle) to do the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. Whereto agrees
that which the Scripture also says, That he who names the name of Christ must
depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. We have therefore Sureties, who are
examined, not altogether in regard of the Infant, but also in some respect in
regard of themselves, that thereby it may appear, whether they be fit to
undertake for the Child for which they come to answer. For they be Sureties
for the Child, and in the name of the Child they do promise and vow that
which the Child is afterward bound to perform. To which end is Confirmation
after Baptism, that when Children come to the years of discretion, and have
learned; What their Godfathers and Godmothers promised for them, they may then
themselves with their own mouths, and with their own consent openly before the
Church ratify and confirm the same, and live by their own Faith: their
Godfathers and Godmothers being in the mean time bound to teach them what a
solemn Vow, Promise, and Profession they have made by them their Sureties, who
are not only special witnesses of their naming and receiving into the Church,
as God said to his Prophet, Esa. 8.2. But are also undertakers and special
monitours for them. For if (as the Apostle teaches, in the 1 Cor. 12.25) there
is to be no schism in the body, but that the members should have the same care
one for another; then much more are they bound, who specially undertake for
others.

In the phrase of some kind of men (as our Hooker speaks) they use to be
termed witnesses, as if (says he) they came but to see and testify what is
done. It savoureth more of piety to give them their old accustomed names of
Fathers and Mothers in God, whereby they are well put in mind what affection
they ought to bear toward those innocents, for whose religious education the
Church accepts them as pledges. This therefore is their own duty: But because
the answer which they make to the usual demands of stipulation proposed in
Baptism is not [absolutely] their own, the Church does best to receive it of
them in that form which best shows whose the act is.

And thus much for satisfaction concerning Interrogatories in holy Baptism: at
which whilst you scoff and are pleased to make your self merry, you see what
a scorn you put upon the Church of God, which has been acquainted with this
custom long before the novell times of upstart Popery.

DIALOGUE.
Ge. What does the minister after he has received these feigned answers?


Min. He does baptize the Infant, and does mark him on the forehead with a
Cross, which does offend many, because they take it to be the mark of the
Beast, mentioned, Revel. 14.9.


Gent. Why do they take it to be the mark of the beast?


Min. Because there is no one thing in all Popery, set on the forehead, and on
the hand, but a cross; made on the forehead by the Priest in Baptism, and by
the Bishop on the right hand in Confirmation, saying, Signaculum Christi, in
manu tua dextra trado tibi: therefore they say, that it is a mark wherewith the
Beast does cause all that are of his Church to be marked; according as it is
written, that he has made all, both small and great, rich and poor, bond and
free; to receive a mark on the forehead, and on the right hand, Rev. 13.16.

It is written, Rev. 14.9. that if any receive his mark on the forehead, and on
the hand, he shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, therefore some do
keep their children unbaptized, rather then have them marked with the mark of
the beast.


ANSWER.
By that figne made on our foreheads is intented that we should be put in
remembrance of that Christian warfare which every one baptized is to enter
into, and to continue in unto the end, if he will be saved, See Romans 8.13. 1 Timothy 6.1. Revel. 2.10,11. and chap. 21.7,8. So that we are not signed with the
sign of the cross in token of any superstitious matter, but of a matter most
necessary: For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh;
but are commanded to fight the good fight of Faith, to endure hardness as a
good soldier of Jesus Christ, to be strong in the Lord and in power of his
might, to put on the whole armor of God whereby we may be able to stand
against the wiles of the Devil; and are taught not to glory, save in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto us, and we
unto the world: nor is it but written, that Michael and his Angels, fight
against the Dragon and his Angels, Revel. 12.7. And therefore we are to acquit
our selves like men, and must confess the Faith of Christ crucified, and must
take unto us the whole armor of God, whereby we may be able to withstand in
the evil day, and having done all to stand, Ephesians. 6.13. Galat. 6.14. 1 Timothy
6.12. 2 Timothy 2.3, etc.

Now all these are main Christian duties, and who so unfainedly endeavors to
keep them, needs not in any wise be offended at the sign used to put him in
mind of them; but will rather thank God, that he is born in such a Church,
where not only the true Christian life is taught by tongue and pen, but is also
signified by some ceremony, for ones more remembrance of the same. The
Israelites had their fringes on the borders of their garments, with a ribban of
blew, that looking thereupon they might remember all the Commandments of the
Lord, Number. 15.38,39. Nor has the Christian Church but power to appoint
Ceremonies, though the particulars be not as directly specified as was that to
them of Israel: for which we have a text, in 1 Cor. 14.40. She therefore uses
this godly Ceremony of signing with the sign of the Cross, for a good
signification, and transgresses not, no more then those in the days of
Joshua, who built an Altar (for which they had no command in the Law of Moses)
in regard they did it (as do we) for a good signification, See Josh. 22.22.

And whereas you tell us of the mark of the Beast: The mark of the Beast is
surely one thing; and the sign of the Cross, another. They are threatened with
damnation which receive the mark of the Beast: But is an Infant therefore
damned because he reciveth at another hand the sign of the Cross upon his
forehead, and is no agent in it himself nor able to know either what is done or
threatened? You show your self a proper Divine, I promise you; and would broach
such an inequality in the ways of God, as is utterly condemned in his holy
word. The soul (says the Lord) that sins, it shall die: the Son shall not
bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the iniquity of
the Son; the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. Ezekiel. 18.20. which, if it make not
against you, let your self be judge.

Besides, as we are free enough from receiving any mark on the hand at
Confirmation; so are we as able to show, that the sign of the Cross was in
use before the Beast that should impose it was born: yea, even whilst the
Bishops of Rome were glorious Martyrs, and the Church of God under the troubles
of the persecuting Emperors; witness those proofs which are brought out of
Tertullian, Origin, and Cyprian by the learned, to show that they used it, In
immortali lavacro, in the immortal laver. See Tertull. lib. de resur. Carnis.
Cypr. Epist. 56. Jeu lib. 4. Epist. 6. and lib. de Lapsis sub init. and lib. ad
Demetrianum: In the first of which quotations out of Cyprian, the said Father
councelleth, that the forehead be guarded, that thereby the sign of God may be
kept in safety; and in the second, he speaks of the same sign upon the
forehead; and in the third he says, that by this Sacrament [ viz. Baptisme]
and sign we are enrolled. Nor does Bishop Jewel but grant, that the sign of
the Cross among the Christians was had in great regard. Neither when the
Papists charge us with Novelties, can you better know how to answer their
objection, then truly to tell them, that their abuses are new, but the things
which they abused we retain in their primitive use, and forsake only the novell
corruption: and for as much as this Ceremony was abused (as is confessed) in
time of Popery, it does plainly imply that it was well used before Popery; as
King James of blessed memory has very worthily affirmed in the conference
holden at. Hampton Court.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What fault do they find with the Prayers that are made at the
administration of Baptism?


Min. They find fault with the Popish errors that are in them, as in the first
Prayer before Baptism, it is written, that God has sanctified the flood
Jordan, and all other waters, to the my stycall washing away of sin. The
truth is, that there is no mystical washing away of sin in water, but a true
and real washing away of sin in the blood of Christ. 1 John 1.7. The water in
Baptism does but signify, that as foul things are washed and made clean in
water, so the souls of the Elect, defiled with sin, are made clean in the blood
of Christ, 1 John 1.7.


ANSWER.
You come now to find fault with the Prayers that are made at the
adminstration of baptism, and to pick some holes in their popish coats: for in
your esteem they want not their popish errors. But shall I tell you, Saint
Austin speaks in the same language that you mention to be in the first Prayer
before baptism: else he had never said in his 29 Sermon Detempore, That Christ
in the waters of Jordan consecrated the waters for the reparation of humane
kind under baptism. And a little after, Et quia (says he) per universum
mundum sacramentum Baptismi humano generi opus erat, omnibus aquis
benedictionem dedit, quando in Jordanis alveum unica ac singulari piet ate
descendit: Tunc enim Christum Dominum non tam lavit undo, quam lota est. That
is, And because (says he) the Sacrament of Baptism was needful for mankind
throughout the whole world, he gave a blessing to all waters, when in his only
and fingular piety he descended into the river Jordan: For then the water did
not so much wash Christ the Lord, as was washed by him.

The truth then is, that this is no popish error in the judgment of so holy a
Father, although now a days any thing be popery which a peevish precisian
thinks good to stumble at.

As little (or less) cause have you to quarrel about the mystical washing
away of sin: for a thing may be really performed, although the manner be
mystical, and the means such as does not discover in what maaner the reallity
of the thing is done. So that although it be true that the souls which are
defiled with sin, are washed in the blood of Christ, which Saint John
affirms; yet the virtue and efficacy of his blood shed is conveyed and
sealed to us by such ways and means, as himself has appointed: otherwise he
had never said, that Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God. Joh. 3.5.

But the water you say, does but signify. Signify it does: but to say it does
but signify, is to assign unto it no end but only to teach the mind, by other
senses, that which the word does teach by hearing. And unto Infants which are
not capable of instruction, who would not think it a mere superfluity that any
Sacrament is administered, if to administer the Sacraments be but to teach
receivers what God does for them? But when our Savior Christ says, as in the
text already mentioned, that except a man be born of water and of the spirit,
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God; the truth is, that as the Spirit is a
necessary inward cause; so Water is a necessary outward mean: why else are we
likewise taught in another text, That Baptism is a bath of Regeneration, Tit.
3.5. And that with water Christ does purify and cleanse his Church? Ephesians. 5.26.
Let then the Sacraments have their due: for though they do not confer grace
ex opere operato, as the Papists teach, yet they confer grace ex opere
operantis, because the holy Ghost works both in and by those holy Rites and
Institutions.

DIALOGUE.
Min. In another prayer, the Minister prays that the Infant may receive
remission of sins, by spiritual regeneration. The truth is, that the
Children of God have their sins forgiven, and are sanctified by Faith Rom,
5.1. and not by spiritual regeneration, which is but an effect of Faith
purifiing the heart, Act. 15.9. Or to speak more plainly, it is God that
justifies, Romans 8.33. by accepting of the sufferings and obedience of Christ,
as a sufficient recompense and satisfaction, and does by Faith assure the
hearts of his Children, that for the merits of the sufferings and obedience of
Christ, his wrath is pacified and his Justice satisfied.


ANSWER.
And is it possible, that you should be offended with this Prayer, because the
Minister prays that the Infant may receive remission of sins by spiritual
regeneration? Why man, Remission of sins is plainly promised to them that
receive Baptism aright; as we read in Act. 2.38. It is therefore the Doctrine
of the Catholic Church to believe one Baptism for the remission of sins; as
I am sure you know, and are bound unto it, except you mean to be an Heretic.
Let it then (good Sir) be lawful to pray for that which the Scripture
promises, and to demean our selves as we ought in the use of these holy
mysteries. Simon Magus indeed received no benefit by Baptism, because he was
not disposed aright: but yet nevertheless where no obstacle comes between,
even the sins of the Baptized are remitted.

Your false tenet is also again confuted by that which the devout Ananias said
to Paul at the time of his Conversion; And now why tarriest thou? Arise, and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord, Act.
22.16. See then your error now at full: not only remission spoken of, but also
Prayer mentioned. If therefore your accusation be just, let any man that will
but come and see as he ought to do, be judge.

You have alleged Scripture, but very impertinently: and as for your first
quotation, out of Romans 5.1. there is no such thing there as you speak of,
concerning sanctification by Faith: Put on your Spectacles, when you look again.

But I conclude this answer in the words of that worthy Hooker. Eccles. Polit.
lib. 5. sect. 60 page 132. 133.
There were (says he) of the old Valentinian Heretics, some which had
Knowledge in such admiration, that to it they ascribed all, and so despised the
Sacraments of Christ, pretending that as Ignorance had made us subject to all
misery, so the full redemption of the inward man, and the work of our
restoration, must needs belong unto Knowledge only. They draw near unto this
error, who fixing wholly their minds on the known necessity of Faith, imagine
that nothing but Faith is necessary for the attainment of all grace; Yet is it
a branch of Belief that Sacraments are in their place no less required then
belief it self.

DIALOGUE.
Min. In another Prayer, thanks is given to God for regenerating the Infant
with his holy Spirit. The truth is, that the Children of God do receive the
Spirit of God to Regenerate them, not by springling of water in Baptism but by
hearing the Gospel Preached, 2 Cor. 3.8. Act. 10.44. To make mention of all the
Popish errors that are in other Prayers and Collects, would be too tedious.


ANSWER.
To be regenerated is to receive new motions of the mind by the holy Ghost,
and to be made a new creature. Whereto agrees that which Melancthon writes,
Melanct. in Loc. page 246.
Cum spiritus sanctus novos motus, and novam vitam afferat, dicitur haec
conversio Regeneratio. But this (you say) is done, not by the sprinkling of
water in Baptism, but by hearing the Gospel Preached: and hereupon you point us
to two places of Scripture. I shall show you two other, which are more plain
and proving; the one is, Jam. 1.18. the other is in 1 Pet. 1.23. In that of S.
James, the words bethese; of his own will begat he us, with the Word of Truth,
And in S. Peter, thus; Being born again not of corruptible, seed but of
incorruptible by the Word of God which lives and abides forever. And yet
notwithstanding, the scripture says elsewhere; That a man must be born again of
Water and the Spirit, Joh. 3.5. And in another text, Baptism is expressly
termed the Laver of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. to both which places in a former
answer, I have already pointed you. So that Regeneration is wrought, you see,
by several means: not by the word alone, but by Baptism as well as by the
word. The one you mention, the other is forgotten; nay, it is altogether denied
by you. But be better advised, and cross not the Scriptures, good Sir, I
beseech you.

And for a full clearing, let it be known that what the word does, in that
which you mention, is to be understood of those who be Adulti, or men grown;
who have lost and forfeited their Baptismall Regeneration by actual gross
sins not repented off, yielded unto without any reluctance, or striving
against: the apprehension of what they see in the world as soon as they come to
knowledge leading them into a wrong habit both of desiring and doing, whereby
they walk not like children of the light; who must be therefore spoken unto as
to men unregenerate, because a new kind of regeneration, at least a new degree
thereof; must be wrought in them by the Ministry of the word, which by the Law
brings them to repentance, and by the Gospel to Faith in Christ; these graces
being further fortified by the second Sacrament, which upon due examination of
themselves they are bound to receive. Dicitur quidam a nonnullis, concedendam
non esse^ Regenerationem, nisi per verbum, quod est semen Dei: Petrus quippe
ait, priori Epist. cap. 1. nos esse renatos baudquaquam semine corruptibili,
sed incorruptibili, quod est sermo Dei. Caeterum ad id respondemus, de adult is
hominibus id esse intelligendum; De infantibus autem non it a rem se habere,
nisi velimus Hebraeorum filios melioris facere sortis, quam Christianorum; as
Peter Martyr speaks, See Peter Mar, in his common Places, page 838.
That is, It is said indeed by some, that regeneration is not to be granted,
but by the Word, which is the seed of God: because Peter says, in the first
Epist. chapter 1. That we are born again in no wise by corruptible seed, but
by incorruptible, which is the word of God. But to that we answer, That it is
to be understood of men grown; but concerning Infants the case is otherwise,
except we would make the children of the Hebrews of a better condition, then
the Children of Christians. So then, albeit we know this Sacrament of Baptism
to be effectual to the regeneration of Infants, yet are we not to grant
Baptismall grace in it self sufficient to the salvation of men grown. Mr. Tho.
Bedf. in Sermon on Romans 6,7. page 58.
It is fitly therefore said by a learned Preacher, to be available for the
state of infancy, to them a state of salvation, as the Church teaches them to
style it, and to bless God for it. But afterward when they become actual
sinners, they must become actual penitents. And as they have contracted a new
guilt: so they must seek for a new grace: otherwise the first will be found
insufficient to salvation; Thus far that author. And so you see how little
you have gotten by your restriction of regeneration to the word alone: For
though you were so peremptory in your assertion concerning it, as that you
could say, The truth is, That the Children of God do receive the Spirit of God
to regenerate them, not by sprinkling of water in baptism, but by bearing the
Gospel Preached; yet the truth is, that Truth is nothing near you: for you
affirm falsely, and will by degrees be found still to be full of so many
malicious slanders, absurdities, lies and errors, as will make Orthodox and
quiet men cry out that you are not so much tedious as troublesome both to the
Church and State, as be also the rest of your crew which now adays do use to
show their heads and faces with such audacious boldness, as makes it be
admired that such spirits should be amongst us; and be the first (forsooth) for
reformation. But I pray God work all for the best, and settle us so in peace,
that Truth, Unity and Goncord may flourish amongst us: and seeing (oh Lord) the
foolish ones do reproach thee daily, do thou arise and maintain thine own
cause, in spite of all that shall oppose it.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What do they say of the Catechism in the Service Book?


Min. They say it is full of Popish errors, as first in the Rubric before the
Catechism, it is written, that Children baptized, have all things necessary to
salvation, and are undoubtedly saved. The truth is, that they have no knowlede
of sin, nor of the wrath and curse of God due to sin, nor of Christ, nor of
the Articles of the Christian Faith, and therefore have neither Faith nor
Repentance, without which none can be saved. It is true, that Infants, born of
the Elect, are undoubtedly saved by virtue of Gods everlasting Covenant of
grace, so many as are of the number of the Elect; I say, so many as are of the
number of the Elect, because many of the Elect that are now Saints in Heaven,
have brought forth children that are Reprobates and damned souls in Hell, For,
Adam had Cain as well as Abel, and Abraham had Ishmaell as well as Isaac, and
Isaac had Esau (whom God hated) as well as Jacob whom God loved.


ANSWER.
Well, and what of all this? Are not Infants baptized because they are born in
original sin? and is not original sin washed away in baptism? And if so, then
who will not say that a child baptized is undoubtedly saved? For though the
root of corruption does still remain, yet the guilt is pardened: and so, such a
child dying before it has procured a new guilt through the fructification of
the branches which spring from the foresaid root, is by virtue of holy baptism
so washed as it may be saved. For baptism is not a mere naked sign or badge
of Christianity, but an ordinary and efficatious means of Regeneration; as I
have already proved, out of plain texts of holy Scripture.

And where as you come in again, according to your wonted manner, with The
truth is that they have no knowledge of sin, nor of the wrath and curse of
God due to sin, nor of Christ, nor of the Articles of the Christian Faith,
and therefore have neither faith nor repentance, without which none can be
saved, it is further answered, in the words of one well able to satisfy, See
M. T. Bedf. Treat. of the Sacr. page 192.
viz. That in the Baptism of Infants, the spirit works not as a moral agent
to proffer grace to the will, but as a natural, or rather supernatural Agent,
to work it in the will, to put grace into the heart, conferring upon them
seminall and initiall grace, which does not presuppose Faith, but is in it
self the seed of Faith; To parents converted, Baptism conveyed (as did
Circumcision to Abraham) a superaddition of further grace, to what they had
extraordinarily received: But to their Children Baptism conveyed (as did
Circumcision to Isaac) the first seeds of grace, and regeneration: Add this,
that the Faith of the Parent is sufficient to qualify the child for Baptism,
yea, for the grace of Baptism; the child I say, in whom as yet corruption of
nature, being scant active, calls for no act of personal grace to remove the
bar of guilt: polluted he is, but by the act of another, not by consent of
his own; therefore the faith of the Parent suffices to procure for the child
the Sacrament, and the benefit thereof. Yea, and let me also add, That the
right qualification of Godfathers and Godmothers, is here also to be regarded;
as is formerly showed in answer to the exceptions taken against
Interrogatories: where also is showed how the profession of Faith and
repentance is performed.

But you go on, and tell us that they be the Insants of the Elect only which
are undoubtedly saved, by virtue of Gods everlasting covenant of Grace: and yet
not these neither, though born of such parents as you speak off, except they
also be in the number of the Elect. In which, this is granted; that it is by
virtue of Gods covenant with the Parents, that Infants have right of title or
interest to baptism, which at the first they were admitted unto, even as soon
as ever their Parents being converted, were baptized. For, in this, the
proceeding of the Converts was surely such when the Apostles baptized whole
households, as when the covenant, and what was thereupon commanded concerning
Circumcision, was made with Abraham. The covenant is made, and no sooner made,
but he with all the males in his house were circumcised, young and old So
doubtless no sooner was the covenant of grace ratified betwixt God and the
Parents by baptism, but presently their Children or Infants of the same family
are accounted holy and Baptized. It is plain and evident, that unto those to
whom Saint Peter preached, in the second chapter of the Acts, Act. 2.39.
and bad them repent and be baptized, he said The promise is made to you and
your Children. Nor does Saint Paul but also teach the same unto the Gentiles,
in the first Epistle written to the Corinthians, Cor. 7.14.
the seventh chapter, at the fourteenth verse. And where the means is alike to
all, Gods Election which you speak of, appears not to be but according to his
foreknowledge of the effects of his means graciously and of mere mercy offered
to us. ^ Pet. 1.10.
For though many be called, yet few are chosen; because all the called of God
are not found with their wedding garments on, they do not make their calling
and Election sure. But to be so searching as to put a difference among Infants,
who can no ways hinder the efficacy of this Sacrament, or bar themselves of
the benefit or fruit thereof, is more then you are able how to manifest. For
though many of the Elect, that are now Saints in heaven, have brought forth
children that are reprobates and damned souls in Hell: yet if they had done
well, the Scripture tells us they had been accepted; as is particularly
instanced in one of them whom you have mentioned, namely Cain, Genesis 4.7. And if
hereby you think it follows, that Election is not until after Vocation: then
for your further satisfaction, I must tell you, that in respect of Gods purpose
and decree, Election is granted to be before the foundation of the World; but
not re ipsa, not so in very deed. For both his Election and Calling to the
Kingdom of Grace, and out of those his Election of some to the Kingdom of
Glory, is according to his eternal purpose; yet not actuated, but in time,
neither the one nor the other: Not the one, for I will call them my people
which were not my people, and her beloved which was not beloved: Not the other,
for When the King came in and saw one there which had not on a wedding garment,
he commanded him to be bound hand and foot and cast into utter darkness; Romans
9.25. Hos. 2.23. Mat. 22.11,13.
To which action declared by that Parable, our Savior presently subjoyns this
saying, Mat. 22.14.
For many are called but few are chosen. Where note I pray you, that they are
actually elected who are found to have the wedding garment on, walking like
Children of the light which they received by their Election unto grace, and do
so come under the use of the means and are benefitted thereby, as that they
make their Calling and Election sure: for such as these, are undoubtedly
clothed with the robe of Christ's righteousness; they have put off the old
Man, and by a true and a lively Faith (which by the means afforded them is
wrought in them upon their submission and applying thereunto) they have put on
the New: Christ dwells in them; yea, their life is hid with Christ, and when
Christ who is their life shall appear, then shall they also appear with him in
glory. Coloss. 3.3,4.

And then next, as for that of Ishmael; It is true that he was the son of
Abraham, as well as Isaac; but that he was damned, is more then I dare
determine: especially seeing when Abraham prayed unto God, Genesis 17,18,20.
that he might live in his sight; the Lord gave him answer, That as concerning
Ishmael, he had heard him. If you say that this is meant only in regard of his
temporal prosperity, then must it be also granted, that he is cast out of
Abraham's house, and Aliud nihil erat, quam reprobari a typica illa haereditate
terrae Canaan, quam Isaaco Deus assignabat.
differenced from Isaac, not because he was a Reprobate (as you would have him)
but because he might not be heir with Isaac. For, Cast out the bondwoman and
her Son: the Son of the Bondwoman shall not be heir with the Son of the
Freewoman, Genesis 21.10. All which comes to one and the same, and does either way
make well against you.

And last of all, as for that which you have concerning Jacob and Esau, how
that God loved the one and hated the other; there be them who think that it may
be taken as if it should be said, He loved the one less then the other: and
not as if it were absolutely meant of an hostile hate, or of an hatred to
damnation; but of a negative hatred, which in this seems to be no other thing
then a posthabitation concerning the land of Promise, and a denial of the
privileges belonging to the birthright, whereby the one is preferred before
the other. For as Scharpius mentions in his Symphonia, Odium duo significat;
Primo, affectum amori contrarium, vel hostilem animum, quo erga Esauum Deus
affectus non fuit. Secundo significat aliquid in re aliqua negligere and alteri
postponere; it a Deus Esauum odio habuit, cum illi Jacobum praetulit, and
Esauum eaten us pra Jacobo neglexit, ut ad illum (licet primogenitum) ne jus
primogeniturae, nec promiss terrae Canaani, nec origo Messiae secundum carnem
pertinuerit. A like phrase of speech is in Deuteronomy (chap. 21.15.) where the
words are concerning a man with two wives, the one whereof he is said to hate,
the other to love; and this because the one was less loved th^n the other: for
so we are taught in the 29 chap. of Genesis, at the 30, 31 verses, even
concerning Rachel and Leah, the two wives of Jacob. After the same manner
likewise are those words of our Savior Christ to be understood, in Luke 14.26.
where he says, that If any man come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother,
etc. he cannot be my Disciple. Thus our Savior: Now we know that a man is
bound to honor his Father and Mother, to love them and not to hate them: and
yet he that shall love either Father or Mother more then Christ, is not worthy
of Christ, Matthew. 10.37. And thus does one place explain another.

But howsoever the meaning be; that what you mention is not to be referred
precisely to the particular persons of Jacob and Esau (whereupon you loose that
you strive for) is plain enough. First, because Gods Oracle to Rebecca was
concerning two Nations, Genesis 25.23. where the words be these, And the Lord said
unto her, two Nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be
separated from thy bowels: and the one people shall be stronger then the other
people: and the elder shall serve the younger. Duae gentes, nen in seipsis, sed
in suis patribus; secundum Prophetiam quoque ipsius Isaac, quando Minorom pro
Majore benedixit. And secondly, because the Prophet Malachy declares the same;
nay, he shows the accomplishment thereof in the Israelites and Edomites, the
one whereof were descended of Jacob, the other of Esau; Malach. chap. 1. The
Paraphrase whereof, is as follows. Ecce populus Israeliticus, ex Jacobo
oriundus, populus iste est, quem singulariter dilexit Deus quippe cui ex mer^
dilecti^e and gratia terram prom^ssam, melle and lacte fluentem, Abrahamo and
Isaaco olim promissam, velut haereditatem possidendam dedit: Populus vero
Edomeus ex Esau progenitus, populus iste est, quem Deus amore isto singulari
complecti and favore tam prolixo adficere noluit, quippe cui horrida and
inculta loea, montes Seir vastos saxosis, desertosque, and cum fertili ista
terra promissa mini^ conserendos, habitandos dedit, ut servilis borum, filialis
istorum conditio, juxta praegressum de illorum capitibus or aculum, clare
elucesceret. And was it not, that out of both these, Saint Paul cited that
which you have aimed at? and in Saint Paul's Epistles are some things hard to be
understood, as Saint Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 3.16. Wherefore let me advise you,
not to be rash in citing from thence things hard to be understood: nor come
with things obscure, against what is elsewhere plain and manifest; for then you
will neither benefit your self, nor truly instruct others. The elder shall
serve the younger: understand that, not of the persons of Esau and Jacob, for
Esau never served Jacob; but of the two Major populus serviet Minori, id est,
Primogenitus populus haeres non trit terrae Canaan, sed secundogenitus.
Propositum enim Dei erat, vocare semen quos and quales vult.
Nations which were to come of them, as the words of God declare; which said
not to Rebecca, Two men, but two Nations are in thy womb. And then whereas the
Apostle presently subjoyneth, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated, it is
not to be taken as if it were spoken before the children were born, as was the
former Oracle: for this was said many ages after by the Prophet Malachy, and
spoken likewise not of two men, but of two people, as in the said Prophet is
apparent. Besides the very phrase of speech declares that this was not (as the
other) spoken before the Children were born: for then it had not been in the
Preterperfect, but in the Future tense: So that all the reference which this
can have unto the former, is but to show how Gods purpose took effect in
preferring the Nations which came of Jacob, before the people which came of
Esau, which he terms love and hatred, and is found to be so in the sense
already mentioned.

But whereto serve those examples, if they be not to show that God
irrespectively decreed to save the persons of some of them in particular, and
absolutely in particular, according to the Council of his will, to damn the
others? Verily, he that shall read the Scriptures, and find it Ezekiel. 18 32. and
chapter 33.11. 1 Timothy 2.4. 2 Pet 3.9.
written that God would not the death of him that dyech, would have all to be
saved, and is not willing that any one should perish, will scarce be persuaded
that God has absolutely decreed any man's damnation: I answer therefore, Gods
love to mankind is such, that not only is the promise of Grace Universal, but
also free, and taken by Faith alone: insomuch that the Apostle to the Romans
plainly excludes all prerogative of the flesh and merit of works, and
concludes that every one who believes shall not be ashamed. For there is no
difference between the Jew and the Gentile; For he that is Lord over all, is
rich unto all that call upon him. And hereto serve those famous Types and Heads
of Nations which he propounds, when he brings in the sons of Abraham and of
Isaac already mentioned: which types (as Hemmingius speaks) Hemming. Syntagm.
capit. De Praedestinat. sect 32.
are to be fitted after this manner, viz. that in certain commodities belonging
to this life, all which are born of the seed of Abraham and Isaac, are not
reckoned for their sons: Much less in things spiritual are they accounted
as sons, who draw their original from those holy Fathers. Wherefore, even as
in profits and privileges belonging to this life, they only are reputed the
sons of whom the holy Patriarchs had the promises: So in things Spiritual,
they only are to be reckoned as sons of Abraham, whose faith is in the free
promise; and not those who exult and swell by reason of the Prerogative of the
flesh, as did the carnal Jews whose rejection he shows to be just,
notwithstanding they could say we have Abraham to our Father. *Similiter nunc
propositum hoc Dei manet, quo Judaeos legem praefracte sectari volentes, licet
illi praeferri debere videantur Gentilibus, semen vocare non vult, sed omnes
and solos eos, sive Judaei sunt, qui Evangelio filii ejus credunt, et si hi
illis deteriores and indigniores esse videantur.


DIALOGUE.
Gent. This error you say is in the Rubric, what is in the Chatechisme?


Min. In the Catechism it is affirmed, that Christ has redeemed all Mankind.
The truth is, that Christ came into the world, not to redeem all Mankind, but
the Elect only; therefore the Evangelist Saint Luke setting forth the Genealogy
of Christ, begins from Joseph and ascends to Adam, and from Adam does
descend to Sheth, who was the first of Elect that was born after the death of
Abel, and makes no mention of Cain, nor of any of his posterity. And Saint
Matthew beginning from Abraham, and from Abraham descends to Isaac, and from
Isaac to Jacob, and makes no mention of Ishmael nor of Esau, nor of any that
came of them.

Also our Savior Christ says, that he gave his life a ransom for many,
Matthew. 20.28. and that his blood was shed for many, Matthew. 26.28. He does not
say, that his blood was shed for all mankind, but for many, that is, for the
Elect only, who are many, though but few in comparison of the multitude that
are Reprobates.


ANSWER.
When our Church teaches her Children to say, I believe in God the son, who
has redeemed me and all mankind, she has respect to the ample latitude of
the merit of Redemption wrought by Jesus Christ; which is such, and so large,
as that it extends it self to all: it excludes none, but has satisfied
Justice, and made a way for all men to attain unto mercy. For if God be not
willing that any one should perish, as Saint Peter speaks; 2 Pet. 2.9.
but that all men should be saved, as Saint Paul to Timothy declares: 1 Timothy
2.4.
then surely the Son of God, who came to seek and to save that which was lost,
and to do the will of his Father, laid down his life in common for all, that
thereby a way might be made for all to attain unto mercy. Christ indeed gave
his life for his sheep, and laid it down for his friends, but not for them
only: For He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for
the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. And well might he say he gave his life
a ransom for many, and that his blood was shed for many, who shed his blood
for all, and gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. Nor do we but read,
that Judas was one of them to whom Christ said, My blood is shed for you, Luke
22.20. and yet Judas was a Reprobate. To which agrees that of Saint Peter,
concerning some who should bring in privily damnable Heresies, even denying the
Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1. And again says another scripture, Of how
much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite to the spirit of Grace?
Hebr. 10.29. And in the second chapter of the same Epistle, the Apostle says
expressly, Heb. 2.9.
But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the Angels, for the
suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God
should taste death for every man; And again, The Lord (says the Prophet) has
laid on him the iniquity of us all, Esa. 53.6. And I (says Christ) if I be
lifted up from the Earth, will draw all men unto me, Joh. 12.32. And in the 2 Corinthians. 5.14. Christ dyed for all. And in Tit. 2.11. The grace of God that
brings Salvation, has appeared to all men. And in Romans 5.18. As by the
offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation: even so by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of
life: as our common translation reads it.

And will you, notwithstanding all this, deny that the price paid by Christ,
was not paid for all, nor made for all? The truth is, that it has not been
beneficial to all: and in that respect our Saviors words are manifest, that
he shed his blood for many. And so the Apostle likewise means; expressly
declaring, that we trust in the living God, who is she Savior of all men,
specially of those that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. you see then that God excludes
none, but those that exclude themselves by unbelief. For though Christ has
not gained all, yet nevertheless he has dyed for all; as Chrysostom. speaks.
Chrysostom. in Romans 14.
He has done that which was his part to do: if therefore others will not do
that which is theirs, they must (notwithstanding Christ's death) be damned. Ideo
passus est, ut tolleret peecatum Mundi. Si quis autem in Christum non credit,
generali beneficio ipse se frodat: ut siquis clausis fenestris radios solis
excludat, says Saint Ambrose: Ambr. Sermon. 8. in Psalm. 118.
That is, Christ therefore suffered that he might take away the sin of the
world. But if any one believe not in Christ, he defrauds himself of that
general benefit: as any one, by having his windows shut, excludes the light of
the Sun. In medio Temple misericordia est, non in angulo aut diversorio: In
communi posita est, offertur omnibus, and nemo illius expers nisi qui renuit,
as says Saint Bernard Bern. Sermon. in purif. page 101.
which is as if he should say, Although Christ's merits are common to all, and
that he keeps open house to all comers; yet those only have full benefit by
them that lay hold upon him. God loved the World indeed when he gave his only
begotten son: howbeit, they only shall not perish but have life everlasting,
who believe on him, Joh. 3.16. So then, that Christ's precious blood has
greater efficacy or force in some then in others, is not the fault of him who
did so well impart it, but of them who do so ill employ it. And so, all this
while, no error in our Common Catechism.

DIALOGUE.
Min. It is also affirmed in the Catechism, that we are made the Children of
God in Baptism. The truth is, that whosoever is not a child of God before he
be baptized, shall never be a child of God, because all that are the children
of God, were (before the world was) made the children of God, by virtue of Gods
eternal decree of Election.


ANSWER.
This is answered before: and therefore, to avoid prolixity and repetition, I
shall justly pass it over.

DIALOGUE.
Min. It also affirms, that there are two Sacraments generally as necessary
to salvation; intimating that the Sacraments are necessary to salvation, so as
if a child dye before he be baptized, be shall be damned, which is the cause
that Midwives, do take upon them to Baptize. Intimating also, that there are
more Sacraments then two; therefore it is written in the Rubric You would say,
after: if you cared to relate things aright.
before the Communion, that every Parishioner shall communicate thrice in the
year, and also receive the Sacraments; meaning the five Popish Sacraments: For
there are none other.


ANSWER.
We teach indeed that Christ has ordained in his Church, two Sacraments only
as generally necessary to Salvation, viz. Baptism and the Supper of the Lord;
and will you be he that shall blame us for it; These two, are said by the
Ancients to flow out of Christ's side, when hanging upon the Cross for us, the
soldier with his spear let out from thence Water and Blood, Joh. 19.34. It is
therefore said, that This is he that came by Water and Blood even Jesus Christ;
not by Water only, but by Water and Blood, 1 John 5.6. And will you be he which
shall not grant these two legitimate and true born Sacraments to be generally
necessary to Salvation? Why then are they not left, either to be used, or not
to be used, ad placitum, as every one pleases? The Scripture I am sure grants
no such freedom: for generally and in ordinary they are necessary, and so
commanded. If therefore the Spirit do convey grace to any without the use of
the Sacraments, this is to be accounted extraordinary; no man in common is to
rely upon it, but to use the ordinary means which Christ has appointed. For
what is sometimes done ex part Dei, on Gods part, in cases not of wilful
neglect or contempt, but in cases of desire when the want proceeds from
inevitable necessity, is not to be reckoned ex part nostra, or by us, enough
at other times to rest upon. Understand then this phrase, generally necessary,
to be as much as commonly and in ordinary.

And as for the morenesse, or super-duality of the Sacraments, which you say is
here intimated: we answer, that in a large signification there may be, not only
seven, but many Sacraments; but strictly and properly no more then these; only
two, and true Sacraments. If our Church teach otherwise, then speak and spare
not: till then be silent, and spare your breath to cool your broth; for
there, it may be of more use then it can be here; especially if you could but
remember what is delivered in that Homily which declares, that Common Prayer
and Sacraments ought to be administered in a known tongue. This is all that I
shall need to say; your scruple is cleared far enough.

DIALOGUE.
Min. It affirms also, that Godfathers and Godmothers do promise and vow
three things; first, that the Infant shall forsake the Devil and all his
works, the pomps and vanities of the wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of
the flesh; Secondly, that he shall believe all the Articles of the Christian
Faith; Thirdly, that he shall keep Gods holy will and commandments, and walk
in the same all the days of his life; which no man is able to do of himself.


ANSWER.
Here is nothing more then what we have had before, excepting a word or two
about the keeping of Gods commandments, which you say no man is able to do of
himself. And does not the very Catechism also teach the same, in the question
next before the Lords Prayer? you are blind, sure; else you might have seen
it. Let me therefore entreat you to look better about you, and although you
cannot see wood for trees, be not (good Sir) angry at it.

DIALOGUE.
Min. The truth is, thatt the Godfathers and Godmothers, do neither promise
nor vow, that the infant shall do these things.


Gent. What then do they?


Min. They do nothing, but counterfeit the Infants voice, as if he were a
conjured Ghost within every one of them, speaking and saying, that he does all
these things.


ANSWER.
This of the conjured Ghost pleases you (sure) very mightily, as well as that
other of the witch, which you have mentioned, more then once: but harp on; The
string which you harp so much upon, will break at last, and help but little,
although for the present it may be used by the Minstrels of your own sect, to
make the simple dance.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Are there any other things that do offend and discourage the people from
coming into the Church till service be all read?


Min. Yes.


Gent. What are they?


Min. They are the perverting of the meaning of the holy Ghost, in many places
of the Psalms, Epistles, and Gospels, by putting in, and leaving out of words,
and also of the meaning of our Savior Christ in many places of the Revelation.


Gent. Wherein is the meaning of the holy Ghost perverted, by putting in and
leaving out of Words?


Min. In the Psalm 106.30. Phineas prayed, are put in for, Phineas executed
judgment. Psalm. 105.28. Not obedient, are put in for not disobedient. Psalm.
125.3. these words, The rod of the ungodly comes not on the lot of the
righteous, are put in for rests not on the lot of the righteous. In the
Epistle on You are deceived: it is in the Epistle on the Monday before Easter.
monday in Easter week, these words, Israel remembered are put in, for he, that
is, God remembered. To make mention of all the places in the Psalms, Epistles
and Gospels, would be too tedious.


ANRWER.
I verily think, that if what you here mention, had been a thing of moment, it
had been amended when it was urged in the Conference at Hampton Court, where so
judicious a King (as our late King James of blessed memory) heard all the
grievances which then were brought: among the which, this in particular was
one. And verily, this is certain, that words in the Original do many times
admit of a diverse and doubtful reading, and may indifferently be taken either
the one way or the other: as is easy to instance, even in one of those
Scriptures which you have mentioned. For whereas you say Phineas prayed, are
put in for Phineas executed judgment; I answer, the original word in that
very text, has diverse significations, and is therefore translated diversely:
for in the Septuagint it is, Phineas did propitiate or pacify God: in the
Chalde, he prayed; And in later ones, it is translated, He executed judgment.

And as For the next, if it cannot be answered with the like facility, then
that which follows may: for whereas the words are barely turned, The rod of
the ungodly comes not on the lot of the righteous; you can but open the
meaning, and say That it comes not, so as to rest or abide upon it; and yet
comes nevertheless.

After this you tell us of another pervertion, in the Epistle on Monday in
Easter week, where these words, Israel remembered, are put in for He, that is,
God remembered. But shall I tell you, there is no such thing at all in that
Epistle: you do but dream sure, or take your wares upon trust; it had been
else in the Epistle on the Monday before Easter, where we read indeed, thus:
Yet remembered Israel the old times of Moses: which (as you say) should be He,
that is, God remembered. This is your gloss; and yet the Geneva notes, that
the word He has relation to the people of Israel, who being afflicted called
to remembrance Gods benefits, which he had bestowed upon their Fathers in times
past: which is also the way that is taken in our translation used in the
Service Book, both in this and in some such other passages as are either
doubtful, or stand in need of explanation, which are rather rendredin a mean
between the liberty of paraphrasts and literal rigor, of an obscure
translation, then otherwise; and has ever been judged the fittest for public
audience, witness the practice of all Nations, Greeks, Latins, Persians,
Syrians, Aethtopians, Arabians, as Hooker notes.

And so also for that other [of not obedient, and of not disobedient] it is
much after the same manner: and translated as S. Matthew once translated a place
out of the Prophet Mich: For in Mic. 5.2. we read that Bethlem was the least,
Minima existendo in ducibus Jehudae: and yet in Matthew. 2.6. we find it turned,
Thou Bethlem not the least; the one regarding the quantity of the place, the
other the dignity. So in this of the Psalmist, They were not obedient is true,
if it be applied to Pharaoh and the Egyptians: although not of such an exact
truth as the very letter of the original verity may import, by referring the
speech to Moses and Aaron, as the most do; or to the Signs wrought in Egypt,
as Junius does; For then the righter reading is, They were not disobedient. So
that you see, both upon what ground this reading stands; and upon what ground
it may be altered, if authority think fitting so to do, unto whom I leave it.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. You said, that the Service Book does pervert the meaning of Christ in
diverse places of the Revelation, I pray you show me some of those places.


Min. The fourteenth Chapter is appointed to be read on Childermasse day, after
a Popish manner, for an Epistle, of purpose to pervert the meaning of Christ.


ANSWER.
What an uncharitable and a rash accusation have we here? I think that unless
the Devil himself should interpret intentions, a worse interpretation could
seldom have been hatched.

DIALOGUE.
Gen What was the meaning of Christ in that Chapter?


Min. The meaning of Christ in that Chapter, was, and now is, to show, that in
time of greatest persecutions, when the heathen persecuting Emperors, and
after them the Popes did rage most against the Christian Religion, and
professors thereof, Christ had his In his Church, I think you mean: else there
will be scarce sense in the words.
Church (though invisible) 144000. preserved by him, and kept chaste and
undefiled This ( with) I think you meant ( from.)
with spiritual fornication of Idolatry.


ANSWER.
These 144000 were the particular true members of the Church militant in the
days of Antichrist, set down in a mysterious number not easy to be
understood: and were (without question) that seed of the woman mentioned, chap.
12.17. with whom the Beast should make war, chap. 13.7. yea these were all
those faithful people of God, who from the beginning of Antichrists reign
(which began about the year of our Lord 606, as is not improbable) professed
the truth, even until the days of the Reformation of the Church afterward
mentioned; at which time these first fruits, day by day, were more and more
increased; yea, these being contemporary with the beast, do plainly teach, that
God had many thousands of his true worshippers, even in the darkest days of
the great Antichrist, when there seemed very few or none remaining: For the
Papacy creeping in, was like a botch or filthy soar, by which the fair face
of the woman, in Chapter the twelfth, was over spread. The heathen persecuting
Emperors were before this, even whilst the said woman, glorious in the
Primitive times, was clothed with the Sun, Crowned with a Crown of twelve
Stars, and trampled the Moon under her feet. Nor does this but likewise seem to
be parallel to those days of Elijah when there were 7000 scattered throughout
the tribes of Israel, who were unknown: For so in these times there were many
thousands, some in one Country, some in another, who did distaste the
Idolatries and Superstitions of Rome: and with these the Lamb was present.
Wherefore from hence we may easily give answer to that question, which the
Papists, to no purpose, have often urged again us, saying; Where was your
Church before Luther? It was amongst them like an handful of wheat in a
Mountain of chafe. For this place (as in the 12 chapt. before) teaches, that
the Church has had her latency, and yet was not extinguished no more then the
Sun when he is hid by the covering of some dark or thick cloud. For look by
how much the want of sincerity, and increase of the Popes usurped tyranny
prevailed, by so much was the Orthodox Church (being true professors of the
primitive purity) obscured; and in respect of a greater multitude) so
suppressed and clouded over, that a man would think there were scarce any such
to be found at all. But true it is, they were but respectively invisible: and
therefore persecuted by the Popish faction, through whom their faith was not
seldom sealed with blessed martyrdom. And this chiefly is all that is meant
by the latency of the true Church, and flying of the woman into the wilderness.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. How is the meaning of Christ perverted?


Min. By misapplying that to Children slain by Herod which was written of
Christians persecuted and slain by the heathen persecuting Emperors and Popes.


Gent. Why does the Pope pervert the meaning of Christ by misapplying that to
the Children slain by Herod, which was written of Christ and his Church
persecuted by the heathen Emperors and the Popes.


Min. The Pope and so many of our Lord Bishops, as are popish, do pervert the
meanning of Christ, by causing that chapter to be read on Childermasse day, of
purpose to keep weak Christians in blindness, so as they shall not be able to
give an answer to the Papists when they shall ask them, where their Religion
and Church was an hundred years a go, before Martin Luthers time.


ANSWER.
Here Is still more of your little charity: but me thinks you rather might have
said, that as 144000. were seen standing with the Lamb upon mount Sion; so the
blessed Innocents, as on this day murdered by cruel Herod, were witnesses to
the Lamb, not by speaking but by suffering for Christ, and so both his name and
his Fathers name were written in their foreheads; and their voice was like the
sound of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, because in Rama was
there a voice heard, lamentation, weeping, and great mourning: and their crying
was a song, a doleful ditty to their Parents ear, Rachel weeping for her
Children, and would not be comforted because they were not, but yet a pleasant
and precious ditty in Gods ear, so sweet as the voice of Harpers harping with
their harps. Nor was this their sighing but as a new song, because they were
the first fruits of Martyrs unto God. They may be also said to follow the Lamb
whithersoever be went, Cant. 5.10.
because as the Lamb was white and ruddy; so they were white in their
innocence, being Virgins in their chastity, without any guile in their mouth,
or guile in their life: but in respect of their bloodshed for the Lamb, they
were bloody, red and bleeding.

So then you see, that although the Epistle was Historically true in what was
afterward, as in the former answer I have explained: yet fit to be read on
that day, which you call Childermasse day, in allusion to what was then.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What other meaning had Christ in that Chapter?


Min. His meaning was to show that in his good time he would give a free
passage, and good success to the Preaching of the Gospel, as (thanks be to
his holy Majesty) it has had in many kingdoms since Martin Luthers time, and
shall have every day more and more.


ANSWER.
This which you now mention is well spoken, and not amiss. For true it is,
that at the fixed verse, the second part of the Chapter begins, wherein the
downfall of Antichrist is proclaimed by three preaching Angels; the first
whereof is said to fly through the midst of Heaven, having an everlasting
Gospel to Preach. By which and those other Angels following, we are not to
understand any celestial Angel in respect of the accomplishment of this
Prophecy; but rather some special Ministers of God, whom the Lord stirred up
as his instruments to work a reformation in the Church. And yet I deny not but
that Saint John saw the representation of this (in that heavenly theater
wherein his visions were represented to him) in the seeming shape and person of
a celestial Angel: which was but to show, that at the time appointed, God
intended the accomplishment of this and the like appearances, by such
instruments as were pre-ordained for the same purpose.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. I am glad to hear this, I pray you go on, to show where the meaning of
Christ is perverted.


Min. On Michaelmasse day, the twelfth chapter, from the seventh verse to the
thirteenth, is appointed to be read for an Epistle, it being no Epistle, but a
prophecy, etc.


ANSWER.
The Corinthians, you know, are termed Paul's Epistle written in his heart: an
Epistle, for that they were in stead of an Epistle; as Theophylact observes.
So this Scripture, howsoever not an Epistle properly, may stand in stead of an
Epistle. For the denomination given to this and other portions of Scripture,
taken out of the Prophets, Acts, and Revelation, is retained in respect of the
greater part which is taken out of the Epistles, and not because they be in
themselves Epistles properly: which why it should be quarrelled with, is more
then needs.

But you go on, and tell us That it is a Prophecy of a battle fought in
Heaven, between Michael and his Angels, and the Dragon and his Angels, and of
the victory that Michael and his Angels, had over the Dragon and his Angels;
and of the casting of the Dragon and his Angels out of Heaven; all which is
true, and not at all to be denied.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What is meant by Heaven?


Min. By Heaven is meant, not the highest heaven, but the Church of Christ
militant here on earth.


ANSWER.
Concerning this war in Heaven, you speak well enough. For in respect of the
vision seen it was showed in that heaven or heavenly theater where Saint John
saw the representation of these things, as I think need not be denied; and not
in heaven it self: For in heaven properly taken there is no fighting, the
warfare of those who inhabit there is quite ended, they are all triumphant,
they rest in joyful peace. But in respect of the accomplishment, there is
cause enough to grant that we are pointed either to the Church of God (which is
a kind of heaven upon earth) or else to that heaven whither the woman's Child
was taken up, after his mother had brought him forth: for the Dragon (in the
Imperial Dragons, or heathen persecuting Emperors) reigned over the Church
till then, I mean till Constantine subdued them; who hanged up on high over the
gates of his Palace, a Table wherein was painted a Dragon, which lay thrust
through with a dart, under his own and his subjects feet.

DIALOGUE.
Min. By Michael and his Angels are meant Christ and his true followers,
especially the faithful Preachers of the Gospel.


ANSWER.
This is also reasonably well expounded; but not full enough: For the
accomplishment it self shows, that Constantine is chiefly to be comprehended
amongst those of Michaels Angels, who fought with the Dragon and his Angels; as
(if I were to write purposely of these things) I could show at large.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What is meant by the Dragon and his Angels?


Min. By the Dragon and his Angels are meant the Devil, and the heathen
persecuting Emperors, and the Popes.


ANSWER.
Not the Popes: for this was a vision of what was done before their times. The
vision which belongs to them, is in the next chapter: and in the account of
times came not in thus soon. In the rest you speak right enough: For though
that old Serpent which is called the Devil and Satan, be the Dragon
primarily; yet nevertheless the instruments of his fury are secondarily termed
Dragons too, as well as he: for which we may see the Scriptures, in Jer. 51.34.
Ezekiel. 29.3. Psalm. 74.13,14. Esa. 27.1. and chap. 51.9.

And so also for his Angels, not only the infernal Hags of Hell are meant,
but even the wicked men who were of his side, and helped to fight against the
truth: for which we may likewise see the Scriptures, in Pro. 17.11. Revel.
2.10. and chap. 9.14.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What is meant by the Battle?


Min. By the battle is meant persecutions raised by the heathen persecuting
Emperors, and the Popes, and the popish Princes, against the Christian
Religion and the professors thereof.


ANSWER.
You extend again the Vision too far, in bringing it down so low as the Popes
and popish Princes: For it is a Prophecy of a war begun and finished before
the Dragon went forth to make war with the remnant of the woman's seed; which
war was indeed in the days of Antichrist, and is found to have relation
first of all to those cruel wars of the Beast against the Albigenses and
Waldenses, together with all such as were (if any were) called by other name
professing the true worship of Christ, and has hitherto continued still
against the Saints, both in Martyrdomes, Inquisitions, Massacres, and the like:
but the horns of the beast falling from him by degrees, shall at the last give
an end to this war; and being become partners with the Saints (as many of
them already are) shall turn their forces against the Beast, as in the 17.
Chapter may be seen. And for your better instruction, you may see it in the
end of the 12. Chapter, how that S. John says, he saw the Dragon standing upon
the Seashore, or upon the sand of the Sea; which was not only a good while
after the Battle that he had with Michael, but was also for the raising up of
the Beast to do that which you here mention to be done by the Popes and Popish
Princes.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What is meant by the victory that Michael and his Angels bad over the
Dragon and his Angels?


Min. By the victory is meant the victories that Christ gave to Constantine the
Christian Emperor; and that he has, does, and daily will give to Christian
Princes fighting his battle against Antichrist and his partakers, and to the
faithful Preachers against false Teachers.


ANSWER.
Here still you fail, by carrying the accomplishment lower then the days of
Constantine. The success of Christian Princes against Antichrist, and of
faithful Preachers against false Teachers, belongs to other visions, and
cannot be here intended, unless you had the faculty of making one thing serve
for all purposes.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What is meant by the casting the Dragon and his Angels out of heaven?


Min. Thereby is meant the utter confusion and overthrow of Antichrist by the
Spirit of Christ's mouth, that is, by Preaching of the Gospel, so as he shall
be deprived of all dignity, and shall have no place in heaven, that is, in the
Church of God, to domineere any more; as thanks be to God, the Archbishop of
Canterbury is deprived of all dignity, and shall never have any place again in
heaven, I mean in the Church of God, to domineere as he has done.


ANSWER.
The further you go, the more wrong still in your interpretation. But was it
so, that you could not have a fling at the Archbishop of Canterbury, except you
streine a Prophecy? You had better sure have let him alone, then by a false
gloss corrupt the text: for in this very passage you have done no less, as is
more then manifest; nor do my former Answers but declare it.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Why is this Prophecy appointed to be read on Michaelmas day?


Min. It is appointed to be read on Michaelmasse day, of purpose to pervert the
meaning of our Savior Christ, by mis-applying to Michael and all Angels in the
highest Heaven, the victory that Christ has, and daily does, and will (every
day more and more) give to true Christians, that do follow him, fighting his
battle against Antichrist.


ANSWER.
Here is again another small dram of your little Charity: the accusation is
the same with a former; and the exposition not agreeing with the scope of the
Prophecy: For if you study the Revelation thoroughly, you will find this to be
a vision of the Primitive times, and not to be extended so low as Antichrist,
or to the success of sound Christians fighting against him.

Besides, as for the Churches meaning, you might have soberly judged this to be
the meaning of the Church in ordering to have this Scripture read at the time
appointed; That albeit Christ be figured and signified to us under the type of
Michael; yet even the Angel Michael is understood to have appeared in the
vision showed to S. John, with an host of other Angels fighting against the
Dragon and his Angels, representing thereby Christ with his heavenly Angels,
and his servants on earth, to sight against the Devil with his Angels and
wicked accomplices, and to prevail against them; as was historically fulfilled
in the days of Constantine, who with his soldiers did undoubtedly fight under
Christ's banner, and was encouraged thereunto by miracle, and thereby made
General upon Earth of this holy warfare: for behold a bright Cross appeared
in the Heavens about midday, with this inscription on it, Vide lib. 1. de
vita. Constant. cap. 22.
In hoc signo vinces, under this ensign thou shall overcome: The truth of
which miracle was confirmed to Eusebius by Oath, even from Constantine himself.
And at the sight of this, Constantine being admonished of the Christian
Religion, suffered himself to be taught in Christianity, and had the Banners
of his Soldiers proportioned according to the fashion of the Cross, with two
Greek letters (X and P) made upon them, which should stand to signify the name
of Christ. After all which, when the war was ended (the divine providence
thus ordering these occurrences, that thereby we might learn the accomplishment
of this Prophecy) he took order that a table should be hanged up on high over
the gates of his Palace, wherein a Dragon was painted, which lay thrust through
with a Dart, under his own and his Subjects feet; as a little before I have
already mentioned, and do now cite for my Authors, Eusebius, Socrates and
Theodoret. Eusebius. de vit. Constable. lib. 3. cap. Socrat. lib. 1. c. 6. Theod. lib.
1. cap. 15. In every of which places of the said authors, the story mentioned
stands recorded.

AND thus hitherto I have followed you step by step, and balked nothing which
your pretions Dialogue has afforded. You make a sally next against new Orders,
which because they are upon their trial, I pass them over: heartily wishing,
that under the fear of hatching Popery, we may be better settled then to part
with piety. For whilst these things have been in question, the ruder sort are
every day more and more irreverent. But the God of Heaven put it into the
hearts of the high Court of Parliament to look into it, and to make the whole
kingdom know that the Lord is King both of Heaven and Earth, and therefore
more to be honored then any King, nay then all Kings else: Psalm. 99.1.
The Lord is King (says David) be the people never so unpatient: he sits
between the Cherubins, be the Earth never so unquiet. Ps 96 3,4,5,6,7,8,9.
Declare his honor unto the heathen: and his wonders unto all the people. For
the Lord is great, and cannot worthily be praised: he is more to be feared then
all Gods. As for the Gods of the heathen they are but Idols: but it is the Lord
that made the Heavens. Glory and worship are before: power and honor are in
his Sanctuary. Ascribe unto the Lord (oh ye kindred of the people) ascribe
unto the Lord worship and power. Ascribe unto the Lord the honor due unto his
name: bring presents and come into his Courts. O worship the Lord in the beauty
of holiness: let all the Earth stand in aw of him. Ps. 122.1.
I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the house of the Lord. Ps.
93.6.
Thy testimonies, O Lord, are sure: Holiness becomes thine house forever.
Psalm 95 6.
O come, let us worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker.
Ps 86.8,9,10.
Among the Gods there is none like unto thee (O Lord) there is none that can
do as thou do. All nations that thou have made shall come and worship thee,
O Lord: and shall glorify thy name. For thou art great and do wondrous
things: thou art God alone. Psalm 5.7.
I will come into thy house, in the multitudes of thy mercy: and in thy fear
will I worship toward the Temple of thy holiness. Ps 63,2,3,4,5,6.
My Soul thirsts for thee, my flesh also longs after thee: in a barren and
dry land where no water is, Thus have I looked for thee in holiness: that I
might behold thy power and glory. For thy loving kindness is better then the
life it self: my lips shall praise thee. As long as I live will I magnify thee
on this manner: and lift up my hands in thy name. My Soul shall be satisfied,
even as it were with marrow and fatness: when my mouth praises thee with
joyful lips. Ps 74.2,3,4,5,6,7.
O think upon thy Congregation: whom thou have purchased and redeemed of old.
Think upon the tribe of thine inheritance: and mount Sion wherein thou have
dwelt. Lift up thy feet, that thou may utterly destroy every enemy: which
has done evil in thy Sanctuary. Thine adversaries roar in the midst of thy
Congregations; and set up their Banners for tokens. He that hewed timber before
out of the thick trees: was known to bring it to an excellent work. But now
they break down all the carved work thereof: with axes and hammers. All which
being spoken by a man after Gods own heart, is of current weight, and without
exception. I may therefore turn again now to follow what is next in the
Dialogue. And that which is next, is about the order prescribed by the Church
in the Visitation of the sick: in which because you have some exceptions, the
same with what we have heard from you already, in certain other passages, shall
not here be again repeated.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. What form of Prayer does the Service Book prescribe for sick persons?


Min. It prescribes no form to be used in the Church,


Gent. What then?


Min. The Minister must go to their houses and salute them, as the Mass Priest
does, saying, Peace be to this house, and to all that dwell in it; and when he
is come where the sick person is, he must kneel, kc.


ANSWER.
And why (I pray) do you quarrel with this? Christ taught his Disciples so to
salute the house into which they entered, Math: 10.12,13. and Luke 10.5,6,7. And
may not the Ministers since those times do the like, but be blamed for their
labors? You fight with your own shadow, and quarrel without a cause: as is
most apparent. There be six duties of charity, of which our Savior will speak
at the latter day; and to come and visit the fick is one of them, Math.
25.35,36. Nor is it in the Minister, but even a work also of his office: And
therefore, being sent for, he comes to pray with, instruct, comfort, and
strengthen the sick party. For Is any man sick among you, let him call for the
Elders of the Church, and let them pray over him Jam. 5.14. This order then is
not without a scripture rule.

But you have a further quarrel; and that is against our absolving the sick
person from all his sins, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Why man, if it be done in the name of the blessed Trinity, it is not by any
primary or original power that is in our selves. For the Bishops and Pastors
of the Church do not forgive sin by any absolute power of their own (for so
only Christ their Master forgiveth sins) but ministerially, as the servants
of Christ, and stewards, to whose fidelity their Lord and Master has committed
his Keys. If you ask me how Christ came by this power, seeing none can
forgive sins but God, I answer, first that he had it by Commission from God;
it was a power given him by his Father: and so we read, in Joh. 20.21.
Secondly, he had it through the Union of the Godhead and Manhood into one
person: For though it be true, that as he was God he had it of himself; yet
not so, as he was Man: For as he was Man he had it by virtue of the Union from
God. Now this he transfers further: Peter had a promise that the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven should be given; but this promise was not accomplished
until afterward, not until the day of Christ's Resurrection: whereupon we
read, in as plain words as may be, That the same day at night, which was the
first day of the week, and when the doors were shut where the Disciples were
assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and said
unto them, Peace be unto you. And when he had so said, he showed unto them his
hands and his sides* Then were the Disciples glad when they had seen the Lord.
Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: As my Father sent me, so send
I you. And when he had said that, he breathed on them, and said unto them,
receive the holy Ghost. Whosoevers sins ye remit, they are remetted unto
them: and whosoevers s^nnes ye retain, they are retained. Joh.
20.19,20,21,22,23.

When this promise was made to Peter, although spoken to him in particular, yet
not with an intent to invest him solely in the thing promised, as even the
sequel and accomplishment thereof fully proves. Howbeit, because he by his
Confession gave answer for the rest, and was the speaker for them, when Christ
said, But whom say ye that I am? therefore does Christ direct his speech to him
again in particular; who as he spoke for them all, so he is promised the Keys
in the behalf of them all; See Mat. 16.15,16,17.18,19.

This then shows, that S Peter was endued with no more power then the rest of
the Apostles; and therefore the Pope can claim no more then another Bishop:
and in that regard our Ordination is lawful and right, valid and firm,
although we go not over to Rome to fetch it: For so long as we have Bishops of
our own, consecrated and installed into their Office, as Bishops always have
been, there is no doubt or scruple to be made. Knowing therefore that when we
take Ordination we also receive an holy and Ghostly authorioy, not only in
having the word of Reconciliation, and dispensation of the Sacraments committed
unto us, but also of binding and loosing, or of remitting and retaining sins;
we may not suffer our Church to be d^famed, nor the Ministers thereof to be
accounted Antichristian. For has our Savior said, Whose sins ye remit,
they are remitted; and whose sins ye retain, they are retained: and shall
any mortal man deny it? His words are not, Whose sins ye signify to be
remitted, but Whose sins ye remit; which the Author of the Practice of Piety
(no Papist sure) has well observed. Nor is the same but granted by a
distinction put between declare and pronounce: For, to declare is chiefly to
show Gods goodness toward penitent sinners, which every good Christian may
do, when he sees occasion, for the comfort of his brother according to the
truth of Gods gracious promises: but to pronounce, is to give sentence as a
Judge, in the name of him who has the authority primarily in himself.

You speak of the key of Knowledge, and explain it well enough; but that is
not the sole key of binding and loosing, and therefore not a thing which comes
fully home to the purpose. Whenever therefore any sick person, or burdened
sinner shall unbosome himself to one of Gods ministers, and shall hear him
pronounce thus, By the authority which Christ has committed to me, I do
absolve thee from all thy sins, in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost; then may the said Sinner rest assured that his sins
are forgiven him, and that God does ratify in Heaven what his Priest
pronounces on Earth. The like may be said of one who for the present sees not
sufficiently into himself, but by the striking of him with the terrors of the
Law is brought to the full sight of his wretchedness, and by the glad tidings
of the Gospel is raised up again, and kept from desperation, namely, That
then God does fully speak peace unto his soul, when by the like Deputy he
shall hear the like sentence of absolution.

Protestants (says Bishop Protest. Appeal p. 254.
Morton) do greatly approve the use of private and voluntary confession, when
a man either suspecteth the unlawfulness of any action, or else when he
groaneth under the sensible guilt of a troubled soul, and shall desire the way
of curing his disease, by the comfortable pronunciation of Gods pardon from the
mouth of him who has the commission thereof from God. And in another place,
Idem, in his Appeal, p. 270.
The power of Absolution (says he) whether it he general or particular,
whether in public or in private, it is professed in our Church: where both in
henpublike Service is proclaimed Pardon and Absolution upon all Penitents, and
a private applying of Absolution unto particular Penitents by the office of the
Minister; and greater power then this no man has received from God: thus he.
Bishop Usher likewise against a Jesuits Challenge, at the 109 page says, He
has done us open wrong in charging us to deny, that Priests have power to
forgive sins. And he gives a reason irrefragable, as another great Scholar
terms it, because he mentions hereupon, that The formal words which our
Church requires to eused in the Ordination of a Miuister, are these; Whose
sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins thou distretaine,
they are retained. The execution of which authority accordingly is put in
practice in the Visitation of the Sick. And shall I further tell you, you
shall find it noted in the Practice of Piety, that Doctor Holland absolved
Doctor Rainolds at his death; who not being able to speak, kissed the hand
wherewith he was absolved. And in the Conference at Hampton Court, the said
particular Absolution in the Common-Prayer-booke being read, His King James of
blessed memory.
Majesty, who was indeed a second Solomon) exceedingly well approved it, adding
that it was Apostolical, and a very good ordinance, in that it was given in
the name of Christ, to one that desired it, and upon the clearing of his
conscience.

Has then Almighty God given such power unto Men, as not only to publish the
conditions of Peace and Reconciliation to the sons of Men, viz. Credenti
remittentur peccata, if they believe they shall receive Remiffion; but also to
apply the comfortable assurance of Remission to this and that man in
particular, and upon the sight and approbation of Penitency to say, I absolve
thee? Or is this doctrine of Confession and Absolution agreeable to the
Scriptures, and practice of the Church as well present as primitive? Then (that
I may speak it in the words of our ^. Boyse, page 523. impres. 1629.
English Postiller,) albeit some scribbling Scribe pen an invective pamphlet
against a discreet Pastor executing this office, or some selfe-conceited
Pharisee tell the people, this man blasphemeth; he may notwithstanding (upon
good information of faith and repentance) say to the fick sinner in his bed,
Thy sins are forgiven thee; and by Christ's authority committed unto him, I
absolve thee: greater power then which no man ever received.

Thus t^en, clave non errante, if the Minister fail not in the key of
knowledge, that is, in discerning and rightly judging of the penitential
sorrow, and contrition of the peccant, his key of Power and Authority delegate
is found effectually operative, and has in it (as one truly speaks) M
Bedford, Treat. os the Sacr. p. 60.
the stamp of God for the quiet and content of the troubled conscience. Qui
vos audit, (...) audit, he that hears you, hears me. Try this (says
another) See the Pract. of Pity.
and tell me whether thou shall not find more ease in thy conscience then can
be expressed. Adding moreover, that did profane men consider the dignity of
this Divine Calling, they would the more honor the Calling, and reverence the
Persons. For as God has reconciled the world to himself by Jesus Christ, so
has he given unto us the Ministry of this reconciliation, as says the Apostle
in 2 Cor. 5.18.

Verily the difference between the Papists and us in this point is very great:
They tie the keys to the Popes girdle, so as whosoever has them, has them not
but from him. He grants Absolutions sealed with Lead, in form of a Judicial
sentence of a Court, although he know not how the party that he means to
absolve stands affected, or desires an Absolution. Some have had Absolutions
sent them from Rome for their moneys: others have caused them to come by Bills
of Exchange. The Pope, under pretense of this power, takes upon him to untie
the knot of fidelity which Subjects owe to their natural Prince: he
discharges men of their lawful oaths, and children of the obedience which
they owe to their Parents. A man they say, may be absolved against his will; no
matter therefore for conditions requisite, or qualifications of Faith and
Repentance in the penitent. Their Bishops and Priests (they say) forgive sins
by the very word of Absolution, or by the bare pronouncing of the words and
syllables; by a true and physical efficiency, reaching to the very production
of grace, as Suarez speaks; or to the dissolution and destruction, or
extinguishing of Sin, as Bellarmine affirms. They fail also whilst they
hold, that at the will and pleasure of every Priest exercising the Keys on
earth, men are bound and loosed in heaven, without any proviso at all, of Clave
non errante. And Bellarmine would feign make the world believe, that the Keys
remain in our Savior Christ's hand only at the vacancy of the Popedom.
Absolution is among them made a true and a right Sacrament: They tie all upon
pain of damnation to come to shrift, thrusting this their auricular confession
upon the souls of Christians as an expiatory Sacrifice, and a meritorious
satisfaction for sin: They leave none to liberty, either to come or not to
come, to confess or not to confess; but cry out, that all who will be saved
must necessarily go on in this way, though he feels no distress; but having
thoroughly fearched himself, has been truly sorrowful already, and received
secret comfort from above. Nor are they but tied to enumerate all their sins,
which is impossible.

Hugo, in his book of the Churches power to bind and loose, speakesfully
thus: I dare boldly say (quoth he) if before the Priests absolution any man do
come to the Communion of the Body and Blood of the Lord, that he does assuredly
eat and drink his own damnation, although be repent him never so much, and
does never so greatly lament his offenses. But yet though Hugo were thus bold,
Saint Paul has said, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this
Bread, and drink of this Cup. Hugo might have seen it, and not have made all
eases alike: notwithstanding which peremptory assertion of his, the Church of
Rome left the matter still at liberty; yea, though Peter Lombard were mightily
for it. For Gratian, who lived and flourished at the same time with Lombard,
determines nothing definitively, but showing sentences for either side (both
that we must confess our sins to the Priest, and not confess them) does leave
it indifferently unto the Readers judgment. After whom followed Lotharius
Levita, a Doctor of Paris, the scholar and earnest follower of Peter Lombard;
who being once made Bishop of Rome, and named Innocent the third, made a law
for it in the Council of Literan, which Gregory the ninth recites in his
Decretall of Penance and Remission, the fifth book, and twelfth Chapter, to
this effect; Let every person of either sex, after they are come to the years
of discretion, faithfully confess alone, at least Semel in animo, in the
Latin, for semel in anno.
once in a year their sins unto their own proper Priest; and do their
endeavor with their own strength to do the penance that is enjoined them;
receiving reverently at Easter, at the least the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
unless peradventure by the council of their own Priest, for some reasonable
cause, they think it good for a time to abstain from receiving it. Otherwise
in this life let them be prohibited to enter into the Church; and when they are
dead, to be buried in Christian burial. This is that new Law which in their
little pretty Council of Trent was further enlarged, and more errors added to
their abused practice of Absolution. But let not the Antichristian abuse of
this divine Ordinance abolish the lawful use thereof betwixt good Christians
and their Pastors, when need and occasion is to have it used. And so I leave
this point, and come next to give answer unto something else.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Why will they not suffer the Genealogy of Christ to be read to the
people?


Min. They have no warrant for it from God, but from the Pope, who says that
ignorance is the Mother of devotion: therefore the Genealogy of Christ is
forbidden to be read, of purpose to keep the people in blindness, not able to
see the truth of God, in fulfilling his promise to Abraham and to David, that
Christ should come of them, and of their seed; nor to see that Christ came not
only of Abraham and of David, who were Jews, but also of Rahab and of Ruth,
who were Gentiles; and that therefore Christ is not a Savior of the Jews
only, but also of us Gentiles.


ANSWER.
Your judgment is too rash to be credited; too rash, good man, I dare assure
you. If you had said that the Genealogies were less edifying then other
scripture, and therefore omitted, your reason had been of more authority and
better agreeing to what is mentioned in the order before the Calendar. For tell
me (I beseech you) whether those Instructions and Lessons which you gather from
hence, are manifest upon the bare reading? and if not (as for certain they be
not) then why should you dare to accuse the Church of such a wicked purpose as
to intend the keeping of the people in blindness?

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Why is the Book of Canticles forbid to be read?


Min. It is also forbid of purpose to keep the people in blindness not able
to see the ardent love and affection of Christ toward them, least thereby they
should be stirred up to love Christ, and to be zealous of his glory, and to
abhor the Pope and his Antichristian Religion.


ANSWER.
An heap of slanders still: Here you take the like liberty to judge that you
did before: a thing nothing strange to men of your Sect; I should else have
wondered, that you could not have thought the reading of this book to be omited
for some other reason, which (if need were) it is like enough I could lay before
you. But I pass it over, and shall only tell you, that Preaching may explain,
what reading cannot: And therefore till you hear Ministers forbidden to open in
their Sermons either this book or the other Scriptures that you mention, you
may (right worthy Sir) sit worshipfully down and hold your peace.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Why are the books of Kings and of Chronicles forbid?


Min. Because they do show that godly Kings did ever love Gods true Prophets,
and did hearken unto them, and were zealous in maintaing the true Religion, and
in suppressing Idolatry.


ANSWER.
You should speak the truth, and shame the Devil. At the entrance of these
accusations although I passed it by, because I might here declare it) you said
that both the Books of the Kings, except the eight first Chapters of the first
Book, were forbidden: but look again, and you will find it otherwise. If your
eyes be dim, you may use your Spectacles: for the truth is, that both the books
are appointed to be read throughout, excepting those eight Chapters which you
mention: and not vice versa; for that is false. And because the Books of the
Chronicles do relate the same stories which are written in the Books of the
Kings, it is sufficient to appoint the reading of the one, although the other
be omitted.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. Why is the Book of the Revelation forbid?


ANSWER.
You grant this book also to be forbidden: and yet you know that we have
Lessons taken out of the Revelations, and read upon Saint John's day, as also
upon the day of All Saints: besides Epistles taken from thence, and appointed
to be read on Trinity Sunday, Michaelmasse day, and Innocents day. Know all men
therefore by these presents that you plainly show your self no better then a
false accuser.

In the next place you fall foul upon Bishops, and besprinkle them with the
dirt which your Spleen has raised: only you do a little qualify your distaste
toward them that suffered Martyrdom in the days of Queen Mary; but like not
their love to the Book of Common Prayer: thinking your self to be more
illuminated then were they, notwithstanding they laid down their lives in
defense of the truth, in denying the Popes usurped supremacy, and for not
granting the Bread and Wine in the Lord Supper to be the Body and Blood of
Christ. All the rest since have been odious unto you, their remembrance
loathsome, and judged to be men destitute of the true fear of God. Their
Prelacy dislikes you, and your language against them is just as was the
language of Corath, Dathan and Abiram in the days of old, against Moses and
Aaron. Number. 16.3.
Diotrephes was one also who would not receive the Apostles, but prated against
them with malicious words, as Saint John has told us: Epist. 3. v. 9, 10.
and because this pert man that thus prated against them, could not be above
them, he slights them and labors for preeminence. But what say the Scriptures?
they give us notice of some, who in the latter days should perish in the
gainsaying of Corah, as well as of some who should be led with the error of
Balaam for reward. See S. Judes Epist. verse. 11.
Look well about you, and take heed how you strike; an Angel else may chance to
stand against you, whilst you ride on the beast, and be as loath to loose the
rewards of your good Masters and Dames, as was Balaam to loose the rewards of
the King of Moab. For the Pope may be Antichrist, though Bishops be upheld:
they were never limbs of that man of Sin, as Bishops, but as Popish; whilst
they swore subjection unto him, whilst they defended him, whilst they
worshipped him above all that is called God, and extorted this homage from
others: But shall they therefore which defy him, resist, trample upon him,
spend their lives and labors in opposing of him, be necessarily still in the
same condition, because they are Bishops? a foolish argument, and he were a
senceles man that should subscribe it. But shall I tell you? there were many
Kings and Princes that gave their strength and power to the Beast, but are now
revolted from him: are they not therefore Kings and Princes still? Yes sure:
their calling is not lost, they are Kings and Princes still, although not
Antichristian Kings and Princes. England was once termed the Popes Ass, but
has long since shaked off that yoke and abolished the Popes tyranny, is it not
therefore England still? Or to speak of what was late, The Princes, Peers and
Magistrates of England in Queen Mary's days were shoulders and arms of
Antichrist; their calling is still the same, and must still be retained,
notwithstanding then they went the wrong way in it. The like is to be said of
Bishops in regard of their order, which in it self is as firm, strong, and
sound as ever; notwithstanding what you, or any man else, may urge to the
contrary. If you were not a man of faction, but would deal fairly in this
business, you should not plead for parity, or go about to destroy the
government of Gods Church by Bishops; but labor to retain the Primitive form:
which consistteth, not in the abolishing of Bishops, and striving to make all
Pastors equal; but in the restoring of Presbyteries, by joining with the
Bishops deserving, honest, and able See for this Mr. Thorndikes book of the
primitive Government of Churches.
Presbyters; not Lay Elders, but learned Ministers.

In a word, there is one thing more, which before I go further must be
rememhred. For you tell us, that in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's reign,
when she began to be sickly, and not like to live long, then Doctor Bancroft
Lord Bishop of London, knowing that King James was to succeed her, and fearing
that his Majesty would reform things amiss in the public worship and service
of God, and in the Government of the Church, did License a Book written by a
Jesuit that he kept in his house, wherein it was written, that it was in the
Popes power, as a gift appropriate to Saint Peter's chair, to depose the Kings
of England, and to give authority to the People to elect, choose, and set up
another.

Whereto I answer, that in this you do but cast dirt in the face of the dead:
For that which you here mention is but what was objected in the Conference at
Hampton Court by Doctor Reynolds, and openly proved then (in presence of his
Majesty which you speak of) to be but a false aspersion by which the Bishop was
injured and standered. Wherefore you do ill to revive it now for the incensing
of the people to the more malice, who are already too eager to inveigh against
Bishops. For I verily think. that never since the times of Christ and his
Apostles, were Bishops in such hatred, nor had in such contempt as now. I
wonder that they go not about likewise to cry down a standing Ministry: for
personal offenders may as well countenance the abolishing of the one, as of
the other: And indeed it is in a manner come even to that too, amongst some
furious and fanaticke spitits. But the God of Heaven put a right end to these
busy stirrs, lest all at the last be brought to ruin. Let the fierceness of
those Opposites who cry Down with them, down with them, even to the ground,
turn to thy praise o blessed Lord: yea, the fierceness of them who are thus
furious, do thou restrain; and bring honor to thy name out of this dishonor,
and good to thy Church out of this evil: It is thine own cause, o God; arise
therefore and defend it, in spite of all that shall oppose it.

And thus I am come almost to the end of your dowty Dialogue; a little more
will bring me to it.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. There was a little Book written of late, and dedicated to the Mouse of
Parliament, that had most of these things in it, that you have spoken of,
concerning the Service-booke and the Bishops.


Min. There was so, but the Author thereof is much grieved every time that he
does think upon it, because it was dispersed without his consent, and printed
false, by putting in and leaving out of words; so as it was not fit to be
presented to the House of Parliament.


ANSWER.
Great pity sure to see so worthy a work defaced, especially being intended
for the view of the high Court of Parliament. But grieve not at it, though you
sometimes chance to think upon it; for you make amends for all, in this most
learned and throughpaced Dialogue; which is instar omnium, and a great deal
fitter for the Parliament then that little Book you speak of. Aquila non
capit Muscas; Parliaments meddle with great matters. Let little Books
therefore go, and think your self better with this great volume of almost
twenty leaves in Quarto; which the Parliament (when it has nothing else to
do) will read and relish as well as it can. This is enough to comfort you; you
may by no means desire more, except you had written to better purpose.

DIALOGUE.
Gent. It made mention of Judgments, etc.


ANSWER.
Here you come in with a di^course, out of your little Book, of some fearful
Judgments showed on Churches by Thunder and Lightning, in Service time; and
you mention chiefly two; the one on the Parish Church of Whitcomb in
Devonshire, upon the 21 day of October 1638. the other on the Parish Church of
Anthony in Cornwell upon Whitsunday 1640. when the people were kneeling at the
Communion: which fell upon those places to show that God is not pleased, but
much offended with the public Worship and Service which is prescribed unto his
holy Majesty in our Service-booke. Thus says your Dialogue, page 32. 35. and
37.

But what says the Apostle? O how unsearchable are Gods Judgments, and his
ways past finding out! And verily, we thank God, our Service book is clearly
proved to be of another nature, then to offend the diyine Majesty. But in this
you speak against us just as did the Pagans sometimes against the Christians;
who imputed all the calamities that befell them, to be in regard of the
Christian religion: plagues, famine, fires, and whatsoever public calamity
befell them, was for no other cause. This therefore made the poor Christians
suffer the more persecutions, and come under the greater troubles, even to the
shedding of their blood, with a purpose of destroying them quite, and rooting
them out. Howbeit the God of Heaven did sometimes send them times of breathing,
and at last stirred up a powerful patriot carefully to defend them: all which
was showed in vision to Saint John, as we may read it in the 12 Chapter of the
Revelation. And as for us, beside the whole Answer to your Dialogue, I have
already (even in particular) showed you, how Letanies have prevailed with God
in times of danger. And are these services now become odious to Heaven? not in
themselves, but in those who do not use them as they ought: For God is the
same always, from one Generation to another; he changes not, but is the same
for ever; and is well pleased to see us come into his Courts, and to do our
devotions before him. But this is evermore the fashion of your Sect, to dive
deeper into Gods secrets then they who are wise unto sobriety dare determine.

God bless the King, and direct aright the High Court of Parliament; and so
guide and direct us all, that we may with a joint consent strive together truly
to set forth his praise and glory. To which let all that love the Lord say
evermore Amen, Amen.

An addition in a word or two, to give satisfaction concerning the Surplice.
THe Dialogue, I confess, meddles not at all with this: But because some
scruple at it, without cause; I shall speak a word or two about it.

The attire which the Minister of God is by order to use at times of Divine
Service, is a long w^ite garment, which we commonly call a Surplice: to which
Graduates have their hoods and such like other Ornaments added, according to
their degrees in the University. The use whereof is not only appointed by
Canon, but established by Act of Parliament: as may be seen in the Rubric
entitled, The Order where Morning and Evening Prayer shall be used and said.
Which Rubric is set before the beginning of Common Prayer: comprehending also
the Ornaments or Robes of Bishops, as well as of other inferior Ministers. All
which were likewise in u^e by Authority of Parliament, in the second year of
the reign of King Edward the fixed, and by like authority continued amongst us,
even ever since.

The original of this white garment came not first from Popery, but was used
in the Church of God long before. They do ill therefore who affright themselves
at the fight thereof, and terrify others also with it, as if it were a Relic
or R^g of Popery. Were it not better (says worthy Hooker) Eccles Polit. page
61. lib. 5.
that the love which men bear to God should make the least things that are
employed in his Service amiable, then that their over-scrupulous dislike of so
mean a thing as a Vestment should from the very service of God withdraw their
hearts and affections?

Divine Religion, says Saint Hierom, has one kind of habit to Minister
before the Lord; another, for ordinary uses belonging unto common life. This he
said in his Comment upon the 44. chap. of Ezekiel, in regard of the ornaments
which even the Priests under the Law were clothed with: Howbeit his words are
extensive to Divine Religion in general: and therefore he chides with Pelagius
when he taxed at large all neat apparel, as if he had meant something also
against the white garment worn by persons Eccle siasticall, when they
administer the usual Sacrifice: Hieron. advers. Pelag. lib. 8. c. 6.
For this he says they did in a garment that was white. Chrysostom also
mentions the same, and calls it, A white shining garment; as may be seen in that
which he speaks to the Clergy men at Antioch: where he does not accuse them
because they wore it; but told them (as Hooker fitly notes) that it was a
matter of small commendation in it self, if they which wear it do nothing else
but air the robes which their place requires, Chrysostom. ad popul. Antioch.
tom. 5. Sermon. 60.

The Priests garments under the Law, had (I grant) their mystical reference
peculiar to those times: beside which they served likewise for comelines,
expressed in Exodus where it is said They were for glory and for beauty. Ex.
28.2. and are not therefore exempted from the choice of the Church of Christ, to
select some special one or other out of the number of those holy garments, or
to appoint some other to be worn for decency and order; according to that
general Canon of the New Testament which the Apostle mentions, in the 1 Cor.
14.40. Nor is it but certain, that the Analogy of their Law is a rule to us:
yea the equity and righteousness thereof binds us still; and even in this
teaches us, that Gods Ministers, as well now as then, are not only to be
differenced from the people, but even from themselves in respect of their
attire at other times. For the more solemn the performance is of any public
duty, the better it is imprinted in the regard and esteem of others. Eccl.
Polit. p. 168. lib. 4.
"For we must not think but that there is some ground of reason even in nature;
whereby it comes to pass, that no Nation under heaven either does or ever
did suffer public actions which are of weight, whether they be Civil or
Temporal, or else Spiritual and Sacred, to pass without some visible
solemnity, as Hooker speaks. Magistrates of note have their robes in highest
Courts, and Judges at Law are gravely attired: And shall not Ministers
officiate in comely garments?

The Angels that appeared at our Saviors Resurrection were then employed in a
part of their service; And were they not clothed in white? a fitting Pattern
for Gods Ministers, whom the Scripture sometimes terms Angels, Malach. 3.1.
and Revel. 1.20.

It is written also in the Revelation, Revel. 15 6.
that the Seven Angels came out of the Temple, clothed in pure and white
linen: a pattern again for Gods Ministers, and more perspicuous, who as they
are Angels in name, so may be like Angels in this, whilst they do service to
their God in any Temple. And if (as one speaks) Mr. Reeve in his Divinit. p.
103.
it be granted to the wife of the Lamb, that she should be arrayed in fine
linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints;
why may it not (says he) be granted to her more excellent M^mbers to be so
arrayed in presence of that Lamb, land in his public service, with material
fine linen, clean and white, in signification of the righteousness of Saints,
wherewithal they ought most eminently to be arrayed: for so the Psalmist
mentions, in Psalm. 132.9. Hereto again agrees our worthy Hooker, Eccl. Polit.
lib. 5. page 61.
namely, That it suteth so fitly with that lightsome affection of joy, wherein
God delights when his Saints praise him; and so lively resembles the glory
of the Saints in Heaven, together with the beauty wherein Angels have appeared
unto Men, that they which are to appear for men in presence of God as Angels,
if they were lest unto their own choice and would choose any, could not easily
devise a garment of more decency for such a service. Psalm. 149.2. Rev. 15.6.
Mar. 16 5.


Thus then we see what little cause there is for any one to scruple, eryout, or
rail against the solemn wearing of this Vestment. For mine own part, I shall
better esteem it then ever yet: yea, though it should chance to be quite put
down, my thoughts will be ever the same, in the mean time accounting them no
other then turbulent troublers of the Churches quiet, who shall still be
obstinate, and upon no terms receive satisfaction, but perversely provide to
advance puritanicall humors; which being once predominant, are like a naked
sword, sharp, and unsheathed in a mad man's hands. But from such as these, Good
Lord deliver us.

A further addition concerning a place in the XII. Chapter of Tobie, at the IX.
verse, where it is written that Alms do save from death, and purge away all
sin.
SOme say it is an Hyperbole, and ought so be taken, least otherwise we detract
from the Blood of Christ, to whom it belongs to free from Sin and Death.

Others answer thus, that we must have recourse to the rule, because the
doctrine of the Law without Christ profits nothing. Placent igitur
Eleemosynae Deo, quae sequuntur reconciliationem seu justificationem, non quae
praecedunt; that is, Alms please God which follow Reconciliation or
Justification, not which go before it: This thus in the book of the Concord of
the Prince Electours in Germany, and of those Divines which embraced the
Augustane Confession. Wherein is further added, that Alms are the exercises of
faith, which receives Remission of sins, which overcomes Death, whilst it
exercises it self more and more, and in those exercises gains forces. There
it is also written, that the whole speech of Tobie being looked into, shows
that Faith is required to go before Alms. All the days of thy life have God
in thy mind. And again, Always bless God, and desire of him that be would
direct thy ways. Now this is properly of such a ones Faith, of which we
speak, which perceives that it has God appeased by reason of his mercy, and
is willing to be justified of God, sanctified, and ruled by him. Thus far out
of that book, in the answer to the Papists, who cite certain places against us
to prove that Faith does not justify, and that we deserve Remission of sins
and grace by our Works.

Doctor Fulke, against the Rhemish Testament, denies these words to be in the
Greek text of Tobie. But there is a place much like it, in Dan. 4 24. See also
Prove. 15.27. Prove. 16.6. Luke 11.41. and then hear an answer out of Bishop
Morton, in his Protestant appeal, lib. 3. cap. 9.. 1.

First (says he) in these places which have been objected, there is only
mention made of Alms: can the Romanists say that Alms alone have this force
of redeeming sin? If they should, then might they readily be confuted by
their own Jesuit Maldonate, showing from St. Austine, that no man will say
that giving of Alms can avail for purgation of sin, without faith in him
(Christ) who is the author of salvation. And this doctrine the Protestants
(they know) do not mislike.

Secondly, the question is, How then can Alms be said to purge sin?
Whereunto their foresaid Jesuit answers, that it is impossible for Alms to
cleanse the soul from sin, but to dispose it. Which exposition is that which
we may easily admit in his true sense: for God disposes man unto faith and
charity, and then is man disposed and qualified to receive Remission; as in the
margent he notes.

Thirdly, their Bishop Jansenius and Cardinal Bellarmine examining the same
text, report the excellent judgment of Basil, who taught, that Alms of
themselves cannot expiate sin; but the primordiall cause is the mercy of God,
wberehy men have Redemption in all other actions.

Well then, without any further searching into Authors, thus I conclude, that
Alms are the fruits and exercises of faith, and well pleasing unto God, Heb.
13.16. And for any one to make an outward show of Religion, and to talk much
of Faith, but practice no deeds of Charity, is to be like a sounding Brass and
tinckling Cymball, and to be dead still in sins and trespasses, not bringing
forth fruits meet for Repentance. 1 Cor. 13. Mat. 3.8. Psalm, 1. v. 1, 2, 3.
Blessed (therefore) is the man that has not walked in the council of the
ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners; and has not sit in the seat of the
scornful. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord: and is his Law does he
exercise himself day and night. For he shall be like a tree planted by the
waters side, which will bring forth ber fruit in due season. In a word, This is
a true saying, and these things I will thou should affirm, that they which
have believed God, might be careful to show forth good works, Tit. 3.8. And
then at the 14 verse, Let ours also learn to show forth good works for
necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.

Soli Deo gloria.
A further and final Addition concerning Episcopacie, to prove that it is of
Divine right, because instituted by Christ and his Apostles, which this
Dialogue-writer grants, not to be till 334. years after Christ; together
with a Corollary concerning a new Edition of the said writers Book.
THe beginning of Imparity among the Ministers of the New Testament, was first
laid by our Savior Christ: and upon his ground, as Churches were planted, the
Apostles raised the fabric of that government which in all parts of the
Church they left established, before such time as they left the world. Only
Diotrephes maliciously prated against them, and scorned to acknowledge the
transcendent power of their Apostolical jurisdiction. Whereupon we read in the
third Epistle which was written by S. John, that when the said Apostle wrote
unto the Church, this great Stickler proudly stood out against him. For I wrote
unto the Church (says he) but Diotrephes which loves to have the pre-eminence
among them, receives us not. Wherefore, if I come, I will call to your
remembrance his deeas which he does, prattling against us with malicious words;
and not therewith content, neither he himself receives the Brethren, but
forbids them that would, and thrusts them out of the Church.

But Diotrephes might have seen a manifest imparity in our Saviors own
choice, even at the first, when he chose twelve Apostles, and made them more
eminent then his other Disciples: for if the Seventy and the Twelve had been in
all things equal, Christ had surely mentioned more Thrones then twelve, when
he said; You that have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit in the Throne of his glory, shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging
the twelve Tribes of Israel, Mat. 19.28.

It is true indeed, that even those 70. were Ministers of the Gospel; but those
Twelve were as it were the Patriarchs of the Church, and noted still by an
Article of eminence (as one worthily;) (...), that is, the Twelve: for thus in
Scripture we find them mentioned. These therefore were Stars (without doubt)
of the greatest magnitude: and in that regard, as when the vision concerned the
seven Churches of Asia in particular, it deciphers out the Angels thereof by
Seven Stars, to note out the Governors or Bishops there, as shall be
afterward showed: So, when it concerns the Church in general, the glorious
woman is brought forth with a Crown of twelve Stars upon her head, in honor
of the twelve Apostles, Rev. 12.1

It is recorded likewise in the first Chapter of the Acts, that when a place
was void among the Twelve, by reason of the transgression of the traitor Judas,
another is elected by the casting of a Lot, to succeed him in his charge, which
is in express words said tobe a Bishopric, as at the 20 verse. (...): that
is, And his Bishopric let another take. Now the one of those who were
nominated or presented hereunto that the choice might be made, was Joseph,
called Barsabas, whose Surname was Iustus: and he (as Dorothcus, in his
Synopsis, mentions) was one of the seventy Disciples.

Besides, this is also true, that other of the Ministry had the holy Ghost;
but these were so eminent, as that they gave it. The proof is plain in Philip
the Evangelist, who (as the said Auther says) was one likewise of the
Seventie: for though he preached, wrought miracles (according to the
extraordinary gifts of those times) converted and baptized the Samaritanes; yet
nevertheless till Peter and John came down and prayed, and laid their hands on
them, they received not the holy Ghost, as is expressly written in the 8.
Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, at the 14, 15, 16 and 17 verses.

But proceed we further: the Apostles are still careful to do the work for
which they are sent, they plant therefore Mother-Churches in Mother-Cities,
they ordain them Presbyters, and so long as they themselves take the chief
care of those Churches, they have no other Bishops to govern them, no otherwise
then in common: for even the whole company were invested with a kind of
oversight in the Apostles absence, whilst things were in fieri, though
afterward, when they were in facto, such as these were rather (...) then
(...); as is plain enough, and needs no question: but in the mean while for
this cause it was, that the name as yet was promiscuously given to the whole
Bench of Presbyters, where the Apostles still were head, and had set up none in
particular above the rest: An example whereof is in that of S. Paul to the
Philippians, chap. 1. verse. 1. and in some place also, where a particular
Bishop was appointed, the name for a while is still in common, as we see in
the 1 Timothy 3.1. and in Titus chap. 1. v. 7.

But it is not the name that we strive for; the thing is that which makes the
difference: for though the name of Bishop was not suddenly appropriated to one
more then another; yet the thing it self was: insomuch that the Bishopric
where the Apostles had ordained Presbyters, was still to them in chief, until
they began to set up, were out, or otherwise to withdraw upon occasion of
planting in some other parts of the world: which when they did, both the name
and office were then more nearly connected and distinct: the office fully, and
the name as fully too, even quickly after. And (without question) this not well
observed, makes some talk strangely, and bestirre them madly for a Parity;
urging upon us Scripture to none or little purpose.

The first that was settled, was James, Bishop of Jerusalem, one of the
Apostles, under whom and his Presbyters was the Church of Jerusalem: his Deacon
was S. Steven, as Ignatius Epist. ad Trall. mentions. This was his peculiar
charge, and for this Church they first provided before their departure from it.
And when sometimes after this, they have occasion to come up thither, James is
mentioned as one settled there, Gal. 1.18. His name is put in the first place,
because that was his peculiar charge, Gal. 2.9. which at verse 12. is more
manifest; when S. Peter, by the direction of S. James, withdrawes himself from
eating with the Gentiles. We read also of S. Paul, how at his last journey to
Jerusalem, he went to James, where he and his Presbyters were assembled, and
takes advice from him (because of his settled abode in that place) how he ought
to behave himself toward those of the Circumcision which believed, Act. 21.19.

Afterward (although not presently) Timothy and Titus are made Bishops, the
one of Ephesus, the other of Crete.

And first for Timothy: he is commanded to charge the preachers of Ephesus,
that they teach no other doctrine then was prescribed, 1. Tim. 1.3. Now if
Timothy were but an equal Presbyter with the rest, who would not think how
equally apt the rest would be to bid him keep within his own compass, and not
to meddle with them? Nor do we but read again at the third Chapter, verse. 10.
that he must examine the Deacons, and let them minister if they be found
blameless. And in the next Chapter at the 12. verse, he is charged both to
command and teach And in the Chapter after this, at the 17. verse, he must see
that the painful Presbyters be respectively used, and liberally maintained.
And at the 19. verse, he has power to censure ill deserving Presbyters, but
upon fair grounds: for he may not receive an accusation against a Presbyter,
under two or three witnesses: and will any man think that this could be done
without the power of a Jurisdiction? Then, at the next verse, when he finds a
Presbyter convicted by such testimony as aforesaid, he may, he must rebuke him
before all; that others also may fear. This made that Father Epiphanius,
haeres. 75. say, not only that the Divine speech of the Apostle teaches who
is a Bishop and who is a Presbyter, in saying to Timothy, Rebuke not an Elder:
but also, How could a Bishop rebuke a Presbyter, if he had no power over a
Presbyter. Then, at the next verse he is strictly charged to observe these
things, without preferring one before another, and to do nothing partially. A
plain proof again of his power and authority over the rest. And finally, in
the verse after this, he is forbidden to lay hands suddenly upon any one, He
had power therefore of the imposition of hands, and to ordain Presbyters: For
the charge is particularly directed to him, and not to them; even as we shall
see it afterward in the Church of Crete, where the power of ordination is as
peculiar to Titus, as here to Timothy; and in neither places committed to the
Presbyters. This therefore made one say, that Their hands without His, will not
serve; His without Theirs might. An Apostle did so to him, (meaning to
Timothy;) and he a Bishop might do it to others: For the Apostle does not say
here, Lend thy hand to be laid on with others; but appropriates it as his own
act, saying even to him in particular, Lay hands suddenly upon no man, neither
partake of other men's sias. Be there then what Presbyters there will, although
the Bishop (and so is the practice of our Church) may join their hands to his
own; yet that they alone without him can make a man a lawful Minister, is
utterly denied: for a mere Presbyter, or many Presbyters of themselves, did
never ordain others into the holy Ministry. And Epiphanius gives the reason of
it; For how can it be (says he) that a Priest should create [qui potestatem
imponendi manus non habet] who has no power of the imposition of hands?
Hierome himself could say, Excepta ordinatione: who being no fast friend to
Bishops, may be the better heard without suspicion. Quid enim facit Episcopus,
excepta ordinatione, quod Presbyter non facit? For what does a Bishop, except
ordination, which a Presbyter also does not? they be his own words in an
Epistle written to Evagrius. And in the days of Athanasius, when that worthy
Hosius was also famous, there was one Colluthus (a certain Priest of
Alexandria) who took upon him to ordain Presbyters: but the Church in a
general Council, convented him, and pronounced against his ordination, that
it was no other then a mere Nullity. Quo pacto igitur Presbyter Ischyras, aut
quo tandem authore constitutus? nunquid scilicet a Collutho? says Athanasius
in his second Apology, Ischyras was no Priest, because ordained by Colluthus.
He is therefore not only opposed whilst he had the holy cup in his hand; but
even divested afterward of his pretended orders, and with all the rest which
Colluthus undertook to ma^e, put amongst the Laics, ranked in their order,
and under their name admitted to the holy Supper.

But some (perhaps) will say, that Paul and Barnabas in Acts 13.3. received
imposition of hands by the Presbyters of Antioch; and therefore mere
Presbyters may ordain. No sure, never a jot the more for this. Imposition of
hands was for more causes then one: both Paul and Barnabas were in the
Ministry before this; and therefore by that which was now done, they received
not their consecration into holy orders. It may rather be said, that Paul had
his ordination from Ananias, a certain Disciple of Damascus; because he
(before this) came and laid his hands upon him, as we read in Act. 9.17. But
neither was this to ordain him into holy orders, in regard that his calling
was immediate; and therefore says he to those of Galatia, that he was an
Apostle not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father,
Gal. 1.1. And to the Corinthians, That he was not inferior to the very chief
Apostles; as he has likewise told us in the 2. Cor. 12.13. What then? It is
true that God gave extraordinary gifts in those days, even to the healing of
the sick, and curing of the diseased; in which regard S. Paul being blind
through the bright luster of the vision, is cured when Ananias comes and lays
his hands upon him; and is also filled with the holy Ghost, which seems to be
for the strengthening of him after his conversion, and for his settlement in
Religion and the says of Christ: for we see that it was done by the special
appointment of God, and not so much before he went abroad to preach, as before
he was received into the Church by holy Baptism: yea, the whole business was
extraordinary, even in respect of the instrument, who had an immediate
direction and an extraorinary gift, to do in this all that he did, be it for
what it will. And as for them at Antioch, they were not only teachers, but
Prophets by whom the Holy Ghost declared likewise that they must separate
Barnabas and Saul from the rest of the Ministers or Disciples there, and not
now make them Ministers; that they were before: yet because they must be gone
from them, and go further abroad among the Gentiles, they solemnly commend
them to the grace of God: for they fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on
them, and let them go; the express words of the text: so that this may be
rather termed a Manumission, then an Ordination. And all this while the way is
plain.

But there is yet a place in the first Epistle to Timothy, chap. 4. verse 14.
which is also urged to prove, that Presbyters may ordain; the words being
taken by some as if Timothy received his consecration into holy Orders by the
hands of Presbyters. But if Saint Paul may be suffered to be his own
interpreter, he afterward shows us, that this was otherwise: for I put thee in
remembrance (says he) that thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee, by
the laying on of my hands, 2 Timothy 1.6. His then were the hands that ordained
Timothy; and according thereunto is the charge that he also gave to the said
Timothy, when he bade him Lay hands suddenly upon no man: there being no one
word to invest every ordinary Presbyter with the like power. What is it then?
The text objected says not, Neglect not the gift that is in thee, etc. by the
imposition of the hands of the Presbyters; nor by the imposition of the hands
of a Presbytery: but by the imposition of the hands of Presbytery; that is, by
the laying upon thee the hands of Ordination, termed the hands of Presbytery or
Priesthood, because that is the office into which the party consecrated is then
ordained: more then which cannot be fairly gathered thence, especially seeing
the Apostle does so clearly put the matter out of doubt, by saying that his
were the hands that ordained Timothy, as in that before I have already showed.
And indeed if Timothy were ordained by a Presbytery, then by more then one: but
Saint Paul in that other place has said, that his hands (and no other) were
imposed on him. Nor is this but granted, even by Calvin himself, to be the
right sense of the place; as in the fourth book of his Institutions, at the
third Chapter, is manifest.

But leaving Timothy, look next at Titus: the large Island of Crete is
expressly committed to his peculiar charge, in which were many Cities, and he
expressly said to be set over them all, no mention being made of any other. For,
For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should put in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain Presbyters in every City, as I appointed
thee, Tit. 1.5. Titus was therefore a Bishop at the least, and has the power
of Ordination; as in this first testimony is more then manifest. Besides, it is
to Titus that the authority is given to stop the mouths of false teachers, and
to convince them sharply that they may be sound in the faith, verse 11.13. And
again, upon him is the charge laid to reject an heretic, after he had been
once or twice admonished, as in the third Chapter, at the tenth verse. So then,
though the Diocese was large, and the Clergy numerous, yet he is in power
above them all. Idem Ministerium, sed diversa potestas.

But come we next to the Seven Churches of Asia, which are ruled by their Seven
Angels, although at the same time they had in them their other Pastors. All (as
one speaks) were Angels in respect of their Ministry; one was the Angel in
respect of his fixed superiority. For the Apostles that planted Churches in
Cities, left them to one Bishop; and the rule is according to Gods word, that
there be one Angel to watch over the City and Country belonging to it: and so
we see it here in these Seven Churches, where each Angel answers for the whole
City, as one Temple committed to him. And therefore (as is worthily avouched)
the Pope that will be over all Cities, and Diotrephes that will be under none,
that is, he who rejects equals, and he that receives no superiors, are equally
proud of an unjust pre-eminence.

The evasion which some have sought, is very poor; to one, that is (say they)
to more; To one Angel, that is collectively to more Angels then one. But to
what purpose is it to insist any where upon propriety of speech, if a man may
as he pleases, take such a lawless liberty of construction: for (without
doubt) no more are the Seven Angels to be taken collectively, then are the
seven Churches: of both which Christ himself has said, The seven Stars are
the Angels of the seven Churches, and the seven Candlestickes that thou saw,
are the seven Churches, Rev. 1.20. And then afterward, these seven Churches
are likewise named, both at the 11. verse of that first Chapter, as also in the
two next Chapters that follow, and showed to be these, viz. Ephesus, Smyrna,
Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea.

In a word, the approvements, charges and chalenges here made, are personal,
and easy to be distinguished from the speeches directed to others of the same
Church: as in example may be seen in that which is said both to the Angel and
to them of Smyrna; where first the graces of that Angel are acknowledged, and
then to those of his Church is said, that the Devil should cast some of them
into prison, and that they should be tried, and endure tribulation ten days;
wherein they are in general premonished of the persecution that should befall
them: And then addressing to the Angel of the Church in particular, the speech
is to him in the singular, saying, Be thou faithful unto the death. And so
indeed he was; for Polycarpus was then the Angel of Smyrna, and died Bishop
there, being crowned with the royal wreath of Martyrdom, about the year of
our Lord 170. which was 86. years after he began to be Bishop, and to serve
God in that charge; the head of this beginning reaching up to the year of
Christ 84. which was ten years before S. John received his Revelation: he is
poor in reading that shall deny it, and rich in wrangling that will not grant
it, making thereby Ireneus and Eusebius of no better credit then the histories
of Tom Thumb and Garagantua. Nor is it but greatly worth the marking, with what
an admirable constancy that blessed Martyr continued faithful, as Eusebius
largely tells the story: by which (without doubt) he set a clear Comment upon
the Text, in sticking so closely to his heavenly admonition.

I will instance in no more, although the like may be seen in some of the rest;
especially in that which was said to the Angel of the Church of Thyatyra, who
(notwithstanding those good parts, services and graces which were commended in
him) is not a little taxed in this; viz. that he suffered the woman Iezabel.
For mark how the words run, Thou suffer the woman Iezabel, (who calls
herself a Prophetess) to teach and seduce my servants, etc. Now (as one
worthily) were he but an ordinary Presbyter, unarmed with power, how could he
help it? Or why should he be charged with what he could not redress? A A
little Brass, or Copper well rubbed and furbished, may glitter like gold; but
here are more then shows and probabilities of imparity amongst Christ's
Ministers, clear testimonies of supereminent and jurisdictive power; as from
first to last, in these few lines has been truly made apparent. Episcopacie is
therefore of no other then Divine Institution, and was first begun by our
blessed Savior in his twelve Apostles: it has been continued ever since by
the governing of the Church with Bishops, who are in this the Apostles
successors, and to be continued till the end of the world. He that shall deny
it, had need to look better about him: for (setting aside some prerogatives
and privileges, peculiar only to them who were the first Apostles) their
calling could not be extraordinary: for if it were, then how could Christ be
with them until the end of the world? But lo (says he) I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world, Matthew. 28.26.

And now after all this, I could further back the whole with testimonies of the
Ancient: but the Scriptures are clear enough without them. And yet, to give
truth the greater luster, I shall collect some few (besides what of this nature
has been already) and briefly set them down.

S. Hierom shall be first, who expounding these words in the 44. Psalm, namely,
that In the stead of Fathers thou shall have Children, breaks forth into these
words: Fuerint (O Ecclesia) Apostoli patres tui, quia ipsi te genuerunt; Nunc
autem, quia illi recesserunt a mundo, habes pro his Episcopos silios: that is,
O Church, the Apostles were thy Fathers, because they begat thee: But now
because they have left the world; thou have in their stead Bishops, and they
are sons. The same does also S. Austin note upon the foresaid Psalm. Quidest
(says he) pro patribus tuis nati sunt tibi filii? Patres missisunt Apostoli;
pro Apostolis filii nati sunt tibi, constituti sunt Episcopi. S. Hierom again
Catol. Script. Eccles. Epist. ad Evagr. Com. in Matthew. in Proem. and in
Praefat. in Marc. (though no fast friend) has left recorded, that Bishops in
Alexandria began whilst many of the Apostles were aliye; as S. Peter and S.
Paul, S. James and S. Mark: which last, I mean S. Mark, is by the confession
of the said Father, granted to be the first Bishop there.

Saint Ambrose could say, upon Gal. 1.18. that S. Paul saw James at Jerusalem,
because he was made Bishop of that place by the Apostles. So also says
Eusebius, in his second book of Ecclesiastical History, at the first and 23.
Chapters.

Ireneus says, in his third Book and third Chapter against Heresies, that he
could reckon who were Bishops from the Apostles to his own times.

Eusebius is able to do the like; and in express terms says, that Timothy
and Titus were the first Bishops of Ephesus and Crete, Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 4.

The subscriptions at the end of two of S. Paul's Epistles, have also said it:
and though no part of the Text, yet of age enough to bear witness with the
rest.

But come we to Ignatius, a man who was not only one of S. John's Disciples,
but a faithful Martyr, and one that had likewise seen Christ in the flesh: and
he, in his first Epistle, says: Quid enim aliud est Episcopus, quam is, qui
omni principatu and potestate superior est. And a little after, Quid vero
Presbyterium aliud est, quam sacer catus, Conciliarii and Assessores Episcopi?
Quid vero Diaconi, quam im^itatores angelicarum virtutum, purum est inculpatum
Ministerium illi ministrantes? Meaning in the general, that a Bishop is
superior to his Bench of Presbyters; they next to him; and the Deacons
inferior to both. Lo then, here we have three orders, which he likewise
shows a little before; and esteems them no better then out of the Church,
who will not obey their Bishop in the first place, and then the rest
accordingly. Also in his Epistle ad Magnesios, he rejoices in them that obey
their Bishop. He also says. That neither Presbyter nor Deacon, nor Lay man,
can do any thing ( viz. in matters Ecclesiastical) without their Bishop.

And in his Epistle ad Philadelphenses, (...): id est, Episcopo attendite, and
Presbyteris, and Diaconis, Obey your Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons. And in the
same Epistle a little after, (...): Do nothing without your Bishop.

The like to which he writes to those of Smyrna* and in the the same Epistle
says, he saw our Savior Christ after his Resurrection. The same does Saint
Hierom also witness of the same Father, in his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical
Writers. And in the foresaid Epistle he wills That the Layman be subject to
the Deacons, the Deacons to the Bishop, the Bishop to Christ, as Christ is to
his Father. And in his Epistle to Polycarpus (the Angel of Smyrna) Let nothing
(says he) be done without thy mind; neither do thou any thing without the
mind of God. And in his Epistle to the Ephesians, Studete (dilecti) obedire
Episcopo, etc. Study (beloved) to obey your Bishop. Nor does he but name who
was the Bishop of that Church then; viz. Onesimus, mentioned likewise in the
Scripture.

But I have done. And now, if this which has been said, be not sufficient to
prove the Divine right of Episcopacy, I must for ever acknowledge the Stars
to be more glorious then the Sun, and Glow-wormes to carry more fire and
light in their tails, then the greatest flame: which, till I want my senses, I
will never do. Yea, by this it appears, how wrongfully our Dialogue-writer
has alleged, that there were no other Bishops then ordinary Preachers of Gods
word, until 334. years after Christ: which false tenet we may find at the
27. page of his Book.

And know moreover, that whilst my answer to this present Dialogue of his, was
at the Press, there came to my hands a new Edition of his book, containing
still the same things (excepting some one or two left out) but here and there
chopped and changed in their order from what they were in that which I first
received, and intermingled likewise with a few weak Additions, and scurrilous
railings against the government of the Church by Bishops, as Antichristian,
affirming that they themselves are Antichrists, and that the Clergy of England
are like those of the Church of Laodicea, neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm:
All which (with what else his new Edition has affoorded) he might very well
and wisely have spared, until he had found himself fully able to defend his
first writings: which because he cannot, the rest will fall of it self,
without any further answer; especially seeing there is very little or nothing
more then what will come within the compass of this.

FINIS.

