A Congratulation OF THE Protestant-Joyner TO Anthony King of Poland, Upon his
Arrival in the Lower World.
Joyner. Welcome, my Lord, unto these Stygian Plains;
Welcome unto a Land where Discord reigns:
This is a Land Your Lordship will approve,
From whence these States hope you will never remove;
Welcome to These, as to the States above.
From Them I Am come, and this blessed News I bring,
Discord is dead, and they have chose You KING.
Pride, Envy, Malice, Hell would soon decay,
Should Peace appear, and Discord fade away.

Anth. Thanks Friend, whoe'r thou art, for this blessed News;
The Name of King I hate, yet cannot refuse;
I wish some other Name they would confer.

Join. What think You then, my Lord, of Emperor?


Anth. Spoke like a Roman Soul; who, though they hate
The Name of Kings, yet Emperors create.

Join. Or, if these please not, what if You should be
Dubbed of Mankind Plenipotentiary?

Anth. Spoke like a Non-con 's Soul, that very Name
Does all my Vitals heat, and sets my Soul on flame.
Let me embrace, and hug thee in my Arms;
That Hogen-mogen word is full of Charms:
There Is Beauty in it, that leads my Soul away,
And I must follow, though I go astray,

Join. What means my Lord by that recanting Speech?
To go astray implies You Have made some breach.

Anth. The observation of it does imply
You have been bold in the world as well as I.

Join. It Is true, my Lord, I aimed at mighty Things,
To Subvert Kingdoms, and to Murder Kings;
To teach the Nation to be Picts once more,
And die their Skins with their own crimson Gore:
That is the truest stain, that never will out;
Witness His Father, murdered by the Rout.

Anth. That Is the dead-bone, which (touching) bleeds anew;
And that is the cause I did the Son pursue:
Like Cataline, our Mischiefs are not sure;
But by effecting greater to secure.

Join. But since in the world Your Taper does not shine,
Like Damocles tho Presbyterians dine;
The Sword of Justice trembles o'r their head,
And hangs secured but by one single Thread;
There needs no Atrapos to cut the String,
One blast of Treason more against their KING,
Does all the Vengeance on their own heads bring.

Anth. You seem a Convert now; Prithee declare,
What is your Name? From whence, and what you were?

Join. My Lord, survey this Face, and You will find
(With a small recollecting of Your mind)
What my Profession was, and what is my Name,
By whom employed, from whence, and what I am.

Anth. I seriously observe you, but cannot tell,
You are so altered since you came to Hell;
But guess you are a Man of no great Fame;
Nor ever had, until of late, a Name:
A Name, I mean, that does deserve Renown
For Murder, or for striking at the Crown.

Join. Small Shrubs, my Lord, may tall as Cedars grow;
What was John Leyden and Massanello?
What was Wat Tyler and Jack Straw of late?
And our prodigious Oliver's great Fate,
That made all Europe shake? To such a height
I might have rose; but Fortune owed a spite,
And struck it home just in the nick of Time;
And for a Throne, I did a Gallows clime.
My Lord, you sure may know me now; --

Anth. I do;
Your Name is College, and I pity you.
But prithee tell me, for I fain would know,
In all my journey hither, to and fro,
I could not spy one glimmering light of Heaven;
For all was dark, but what from hence was given,
Only some Link-boys Skeletons did ply
In The way, with Lights most dreadful to the eye.
What is the reason? For I Have heard men tell
Strange Stories, and that viewing Heaven is Hell,
And not enjoy't; Prithee what shall I do?
I Would give a world that happy place to view.

Join. The reason is, You did in Holland die;
A place that to the Center lies so nigh,
That you're no sooner dead, but you are here;
It is a shorter cut by half a year:
It lies so low, and sunk so deep in the Sea,
It wants the use of the Primum Mobile.
Had you in England staid, and died as I,
You might have clipped the Air, and reached the Sky.

Anth. But since I Am forced into this dark abode,
Describe the pleasures of that blessed Road:
I fancy that some pleasure will ensue,
To hear that told which I shall never view.

Join. No sooner was my Soul discharged of Clay,
But up it sprang, and pinioned quick its way;
I passed the Orbs with wonder and delight,
And wa'n't took notice of in all my slight,
At last, on Heavens Battlements I stayed,
And all that bright Empire I round surveyed;
Observed how the Primum Mobile did fly
Ten thousand times more swifter than the Eye:
The vast Expance did all with Glory shine,
And every thing I saw was all Divine;
A Gate of Pearl did on my right hand stand,
And Peter, (as I guess, by the Keys in's hand)
Who ope'd the door, and all pure Souls received,
I thought to enter too, but was deceived.

Anth. What happiness to those blessed Souls was given!
Who'd plague their King and Country to lose Heaven!

Join. He took me by the hand, and turned me round;
Bid me avaunt, for that was holy Ground:
Yonder Is your Road; down there the Angels fell,
And so must you. At which I struck at Hell;
For in a moment (so quick was my Fate!)
My Head was dashed against Hells Iron-gate,
(Which then was shut) A wonder to the Crowd!
Open the door! I boldly yaul'd aloud:
A Thundering Voice I heard; From whence? From who
Do You come? I strait replied I came from Yon;
I am a Joyner by my Trade, and come
To sit and Wainscot up his Lordship's Room.
At which the Gates slew open, I entered in,
Swept clean the Room of all things there but Sin;
She must remain, and your Companion be,
For ever, and to vast Eternity.

Anth. I Am mad! I rave! The Vulture gnaws my Breast!
I would repose, but it is in vain to rest.
No rest is here! My scorching Entrails burn!
And all my Guts to horrid Snakes do turn!
Oh, cursed Fate! that I should die so soon,
When all my Treasons scarce did reach their Noon!
Oh! had I but a little longer stood,
I would have made the Nation flow with Blood:
But I am dead; yet still I must Rebel,
And add more Flames unto the Flames of Hell;
I Will make grim Pluto tremble in his Throne,
And all the Subterranean Empire groan;
I Will make 'em drink again the bitter Cup,
And undermine their Hell, and blow 'em up.
With that he foamed at mouth, hung out his Tongue,
(At which a horrid ugly Scorpion hung;)
His Eyes so hot did glow, made Fiends admire;
And burnt so fierce, as Hell it self cried Fire:
But a shagg'd Fiend appeared, and in a trice
Hurled his hot Soul into a Hell of Ice;
Where may each Traitor, that their KINGS control,
Find this Estate entailed upon their Soul.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for N. Thompson, Anno Dom. 1683.


