The Confession and Repentance of George Sanders Gent. late of Sugh, in the
County of Hertford, who killed his own Uncle, and accused his own Father for
the Murder, but by Gods providence being discovered, dyed for the same, where
he wrote this Song with his own hand.
Lord bring my Soul out of Prison. Psalm. 142.



GOds judgments now, are rightly seen, said I
Dear father, I have slain him, let me dye,
O let me dye, and set my father free,
Or else like Judas damned shall I be.
Whereat the People in that very place,
They praised God that gave me so much grace,
To quit my father from that crying sin,
which I with-blood-red streams am drowned in.
My fathers saved, and I to prison sent,
Where I remained with many a sad lament;
Which when you see, you cannot choose but say,
Repentance comes before my dying day.
His Repentance in Prison.
To the same Tune.
Among Lions fell in Daniels Den am I,
In lowest prison cast with Jeremy,
Fed with Elias by the Ravens fell,
And placed with Judas in the maw of hell.
Naked with Esau fearful do I walk,
Dumb with old Zachary silent do I talk:
Afflictions bread, with Micha is my food,
And with the Prophet drink I sorrows flood.
As poor as Job, even now so poor am I,
Despised with Lazarus in great misery:
Banished with David from my native land,
Cast up with Jonas on the Ninivites sand.
Made blind with Toby by the Swallows dung,
And wi^h poor Joseph cast in Prison strong:
weep with Mary who had l^st her Master,
And run with Peter who should run the faster.
I sinned have, for sin God cursed the ground*
I sinned have, for sin the world was drowned,
I sinned have, sin Sodom set on fire,
Also for sin did Egypt feel Gods ire.
I sinned have, for sin did Adam dye,
I sinned have, sin caused David's cry,
I sinned have, and for sin Satan fell,
From an high Angel to a devil in hell.
Did David weep, and shall not I then cry?
Did Mary weep, and shall mine eyes be dry?
Did Esau weep, and shall not I weep more?
Did Peter weep, such tears let me have store.
Did Mary weep for loss of Master dear,
Did Martha weep, with sorrow touch her near*
Spring eyes with tears to wash his sacred feet,
That for my sin did shed his blood so sweet.
Lark like I fly unto the living Spring,
Desiring pardon of my Heavenly King,
Past worldly hope, now like the thief on tree*
I only fix my faith and hope in thee.
Look back on me, as thou did unto Peter,
Speak to my soul, as to the thief most sweeter*
O spy me out with Zache on the tree,
And ^ith sweet Bartholomew call me Lord to thee.
O let me now with holy Abraham spy,
A saving Ram that Isaac may not dye,
O let me live for to sound forth thy praise,
That I may show thy mercy in my days.
M^ke me a Swallow in thy house, O King,
That Swallow like I may sit there and sing,
O let me in thy Temple keep a door,
That I may praise thy name for ever more.
FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, J. Wright and J. Clarke.


