THE CONFESSIONS OF THE FAITH Of all the CHRISTIAN AND Reformed Churches,
Which purely profess the holy doctrine of the Gospel in all the Kingdoms,
Nations, and Provinces of EUROPE: with the order of time when they were
written, and an exact Table of the principal Articles of Faith, which in every
Confession is debated.

Wherein the obscure and difficult places are explained, and those things which
may in show seem to contradict each other, are plainly and modestly reconciled,
and such points as yet hang in suspense, are sincerely pointed at.

Freely submitted to all Reformed Churches, as a means to knit and unite all
the Churches of Christ in one bond of love, for the avoiding of Heresies,
Discords and Schisms in these dangerous times.

1 Pet. 3. 15. But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always
to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and fear. LONDON, Printed for Austin Rice, and are to be
sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Three Hearts in St Paul's Churchyard, near
the West end. 1656.

A PREFACE IN THE NAME OF THE Churches of France and Belgia, which profess the
reformation of the Gospel.
AMbrose in a certain place says notably, There ought to be no strife, but
conference, among the servants of Christ. For, seeing the dullness of man's
understanding, especially in heavenly matters, is such, that we cannot ofttimes
perceive matters otherwise very plain, it can by no means be denied, but that
by mutual conference, and friendly, and brotherly debating of the matter, we
come to very great light. And that especially seems profitable and needful,
that some should be set on edge by others, that those things which the Lord
has particularly bestowed upon several members of the Church, may redound to
the common benefit of the whole body, and that all sinister affection set a
part, Christ, who is the Fathers wisdom, and the only Master and Teacher of
the Church may be heard: and as he is the Prince of peace may so by his spirit
join together our minds, that if it be possible, we may all think one and the
same thing in the Lord. But to strive, braule, and fiercely, and frowardly to
contend, as fensers do, is so far from becoming men that are taught of God,
as that it is not seemly for modest or civil persons. And if so be that in
all, yea even in the very least affairs of man's life, that rule of modesty is
to be kept, what, I pray you, is to be done, when we are in hand with God and
Gods matters? Surely, holy things are holily and devoutly to be handled, in the
fear of God, and love of our neighbor. Who, if he go out of the way, is by
the spirit of meekness to be called back again: but if he take the right way,
he is more and more to be instructed therein, to the end it may appear, that
we are not driven by any motion of man, but that in all things our minds are
ruled and governed by God. Yet alas, such is the spot and stain of our times,
that the evil custom of writing whatsoever, and even of railing, has seized
upon the wits, and minds not of mean men only, but even of those, whom it
most of all behooved to do the clean contrary. The rabble of Jesuits, and such
other like fellows, (whose very reward is the earnest of bondage and cursed
speaking) how shamelesly and outragiously they are carried against us and the
truth: and with what bitterness they cast out against us such things, as they
have been taught in the school of shamelessness, it may be sufficiently
perceived of any man.

For they, when they feel themselves pressed with most strong reasons, and
overcome with express places of Scripture, they run to cavils and slanders, as
to the only refuge of their errors. They say we have revolted from the
Catholic Church, that we might follow the diverse imaginations of men: they
cry aloud that we are heretics, schismatiques, and sectaries, and they
ofttimes in mockage call us Confessionists: and moreover they lay in our dish,
that we neither agree with our selves, nor with others, who detest the Bishop
of Rome: but there are as many Religions among us, as there are Confessions of
Faith. And that they may seem to procure credit to themselves, and to give a
check to the Germane Churches especially, they bring forth both certain other
writings, and especially that Form of Agreement, of late published in
Germany, in which there are certain things to be seen far differing from
those ancient Confessions of Faith, which the Churches of the Gospel have even
since the beginning given out. But let them so think, that the fault of
heresy is not to be laid upon those, whose faith altogether relieth on most
sure grounds of Scripture: that they are no schismatiques, who entirely cleave
to Gods Church, such an one as the Prophets and Apostles do describe unto us:
nor to be accounted sectaries, who embrace the truth of God, which is one and
always like itself. What do they mean, I pray you, by the name of
Confessionists so often repeated? For if every man be commanded to make
confession of his Faith so often as Gods glory, and the edifying of the Church
shall require; what a wonderful or strange thing ought it to seem, if Cities,
if Provinces, if whole kingdoms have made profession of their Faith, when they
were falsely charged by the Popish sort, that they had gone from the doctrine
of the true believing Church? but they will say, there ought to be one
confession of faith and no more: as though forsooth, a confession of faith were
to be valued rather by the words, then by the thing it self. What therefore
will they say to our Ancestors, who when they had the Apostles Creed, yet for
all that set out the Nicene, Chalcedonian, and many more such like Creeds? Those
Creeds, say you, were general. Yea surely, but so general, that a great part
of the world in those elder times followed the frantique heresies of the
Arrians, whom the godly forefathers by setting forth those Creeds desired to
bring home into the Church again. The truth, says Hilarie, was by the advice
and opinions of Bishops many ways sought, and a reason of that which was meant
was rendered by several confessions of faith set down in writing: And a little
after. It ought to seem no marvel right well-beloved brethren, that men's
faiths began to be declared so thick: the outrage of heretics lays this
necessity upon us. Thus much said Hilarie. What, that Athanasius, Augustine,
and many other ancients set forth their Creeds also, that the purity of
Christian faith might more and more shine forth. Therefore if Kingdoms, Cities,
and and whole Provinces have privately made confession of their faith, this was
the cause thereof, for that hitherto the state of times has not suffered, that
a general Council of all those, who profess the reformed Religion, might be
holden. But if it once come to pass (and the Lord grant that the Churches may
at length enjoy so great a benefit) then there may be one only confession of
faith extant, conceived in the same words, if the state of the Churches shall
seem to require it. Let them therefore leave of in mockage to term us
Confessionists, unless perhaps they look for this answer at our hands, that
it is a far more excellent thing to bear a name of confessing the faith,
then of denying the truth. For even as more small streams may flow from one
spring, so more confessions of faith, may issue out from one and the same truth
of faith.

Now to speak somewhat also of those, who while they will seem to embrace the
truth of the Gospel, and renounce popish errors, show themselves more unjust
toward us, then was meet they should, we are compelled to find want of
Christian charity in them. This one thing in deed was remaining, that after so
many dangers, losses, banishments, down-fals, woes without number, griefs and
torments, we should also be evil entreated by those, of whom some comfort was
rather to be looked for. But that ancient enemy of the Church is far
deceived (by whose subtilties this evil is also wrought for us) while he
hops that we may by his crafts be overwhelmed. But bearing our selves bold on
that love, which the merciful God through Jesus Christ our Lord bears unto
us, and who has planted a love and fear of him in our minds, we leap for joy
in these very things, and boast with the Apostle, that it will never be, (the
same grace of God always preventing us) that tribulation, anguish, hunger,
nakedness, the sword, false accusation, or cursed speaking shall withdraw us
from the truth once known and undertaken. For we know that saying of
Chrysostom to be true, It is not evil, to suffer, but to do evil. Neither
are we any whit disgraced hereby, but they whom I know not what distemperature
whetteth against us having deserved nothing, and to repay them like for like,
quitting railing with railing, far be it from us, whom God vouchsafes this
honor, that being fashioned like to the image his Son we might through good
report and evil report walk on, upholden with the stay of a good conscience,
yea we have resolved with our selves not only to abide the open wrongs of our
enemies, but even the disdain of our brethren, although never so unjust.

And what we furthermore think of the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
confession of our faith, set forth many years ago, has made it known to the
whole world: and we have God, and Angels, together with men, witnesses of that
sincere endeavor, by which we labored, and do as yet, to the uttermost of
our power, labor to set up again and maintain the pure worship of God among
us ont of Gods word.

And, even as we showed our selves to be ready at all times to render a reason
of the hope that is in us: so we thought it a matter worth the pains, to make
all men privy to that bond which one our part is very straight with the holy
and truly Catholic Church of God, with every Saint and sound member thereof,
that so far as we can, we might deliver, partly our selves, partly the
Churches joined with us from those most grievous crimes, by which some men's
speeches and books are laid to our charge. And when we bethought our selves by
what means it might best be done, this especially for the present time seemed a
meet way unto us, which would give offense to no man, and might satisfy all
that would yield unto reason, namely, to publish this Harmony of confessions,
whereby it might sufficiently be understood, how falsely we are charged, as
though we, that have rejected popish errors, agreed not at all among our
selves. For (to begin with those stout maintainers of the Romish tyranny, who
will yet seem to be defenders of the truth, this conference of confessions
will pluck every visard from their faces, when as it shall plainly appear,
that all the opinions in these confessions of faith were in other sundry words
so laid down, that yet the same truth always abides, and there is none at
all, or very little difference in the things themselves. And how narrow must
they needs perceive the bounds of that their Catholic Church to be, when it
shall be openly known, that so many kingdoms, provinces, cities, peoples and
nations professing the truth of the Gospel, do with common consent renounce
the abuses and orders of the Romish Church? As for those whom (without any
desert) it pleases to count us among the Arrians and Turks, they shall see
also how far through the benefit of God we be from such heinous and wicked
errors. And they also, who accuse us of sedition, shall perceive how
reverently we think of the dignity of Kings, and the Magistrates authority,
and they to conclude that not being content with those public confessions of
the Churches of Germany, may by laying against us that form of new agreement
seem worthily more and more to sever themselves from us, and who have already
very pithily been refuted by most learned writings, they also shall, if true
agreement be earnestly sought, be satisfied with this Harmony. For (that we may
freely say as it is indeed) that long rank of names sealed and written at that
book is such, that it seems rather to stand idly in the field, then to fight
manfully.

And if it had pleased us to follow this policy, we might have set down the
names not of seven or eight thousand mean men (most famous Princes and some
other excepted) of whom it may worthily be doubted, whether there ever were any
such, or what they were, but also the names of far more Churches. And this our
diligence had been far more commendable, namely, being bestowed, not in
wringing out and begging from village to village some hundreds of names, but in
laying out the opinions of most gracious Kings, most renowned Princes, of noble
nations, and peoples, of most mighty commonwealths and Cities: of which a
great part has not been used to dispute in corners, or to trifle, but has
known these many years how even unto blood to suffer many and grievous things
for Gods truth sake. But we know that the truth has not it warrant from men,
nor by men: it is simple, it will be simply published and taught. Therefore we
are purposed for this time not to deal by any long disputation with any man,
but barely to open the meaning of the reformed Churches, to knit all the
Churches of Christ together with one bond of brotherly love, to keep peace
with all men, and so far as it ought to be done, to judge well of all men:
yea and to entreat those, who think somewhat too hardly of us, that if we
disagree from the Confession of no Church that does truly believe, they would
themselves also begin to be of the same mind with us, and quietly, and
soberly confer with their brethren, of what things they shall think good,
rather then themselves to slander and give the adversaries occasion to rail
upon the Gospel. But if they will not do it, let this public and everlasting
monument witness to all that come after, that we and all of our side are and
shall be free not only from the grievous reproaches, with which we are
undeservedly laden, but also without blame of all the hurly burlies and
dissentions that have been hitherto, and that (which God forbid) are
peradventure like to be more grievous, unless it be speedily prevented on both
sides.

And seeing in this Harmony we speak not only with our own, but even with
the mouth of all those Nations, whose Confessions we have brought into one
form of one and the same doctrine; we hope it will come to pass that not so
much the several names of the French, Belgia, and other Confessions shall
hereafter be heard, as that one only universal, simple, plain, and absolute
Confession of all the Churches (speaking as it were with one and the same
tongue of Chanaan) shall be seen: and that they who were thought to be far
wide (as has hitherto not altogether without desert by reason of over many
men's private writings been thought of us and the brethren of the Confession of
Auspurge) if so be that men keep within the bounds of the Confessions, and all
cavilling and sophistry be laid aside, and as well faithful as favorable
exposition be admitted, shall be thought very nearly to agree in all things.
And this was the cause why we desired to put the Confession of Auspurge,
together also with that of Saxony, and Wirtemberge, in this Harmony, that it
might be the more easily kuowne, that both we agree with them in all particular
points of faith, and that there are very few matters hanging in controversy
between us. For concerning that doubt about the Lords Supper, in the thing, and
of the thing it self, there is no strife, we differ in certain adjuncts and
circumstances of the thing. In the thing it self, I say, we agree: although as
the gifts of God are diverse, so some do more plainly, some do not so
plainly, and perhaps not so fitly, utter that which they think. For we all
acknowledge that the holy signs, have not a bare signification, but that by the
ordinance of God they assure our consciences that the things themselves are as
truly and certainly given of God to all that come, as the signs themselves are
given by Gods Minister. But this question remains, whether as the sign, so
also the present thing it self be given to the body, or rather the present
sign be given to the body, but the present thing given only to the mind and
faith: Again, whether as both be given to all, so both be received of all, of
some unto life, and of other some unto death. In like sort, we all believe the
true Communication of the true body and the true blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The controversy stands in the manner of communicating, but who may
therefore of right think, that the holy unity of the Churches is to be plucked
asunder? That they of our side were always desirous of peace and agreement,
the history of the conference at Marpurge, and such things as were afterward
done in the year 1536. do sufficiently witness.

Moreover, so often as there appeared any hope of agreement, it is clear, that
there was no other cause, but the importunity of some certain men, why new and
sudden braules being raised, the matter could not come, or long continue in
that agreement which was hoped for. For that we may let pass very many other
things, although in the beginning it were openly known among al, that there was
no controversy between us (no not so much as the very Papists excepted) in the
opinion about worshipping the mystery of the holy Trinity; lo, about the
latter end, that unhappy monster of Vbiquitie came forth, which if it be
admitted, will quite overthrow the true doctrine of Christ's person, and his
Natures. Hence then come the distractions of Churches, hence come so deadly
quarrellings. But seeing this whole matter has been often handled by many
learned men, it is no time for us to deal any farther therein. For it is
sufficient for us to show in few words, that our men so far as was possible,
always provided for the peace of the Church.

Neither truly has any man cause after the example of certain Moderators
(such as not long since have been) why he should persuade himself that we
would hear of this hotch-potch of opinions make a certain medlie as it were
of contrary qualities. But we leave all things whole, that every one may so
know his own words being compared with the sayings of others, that he shall
find nothing forged, nothing taken away, nothing put to, or wrested. And to
conclude, the form and drift of this whole work, if it be more narrowly
viewed, shall not unworthily be judged a sound body of Christian doctrine,
framed and allowed by the writings, and as it were by a common council of the
godly Churches well nigh of all Europe. For here all the chief points of our
Religion, being discussed and approved, are by the public authority of all
the chief Nations in Christendom with one consent published and knit
together: yet we must confess, as we before touched, that through the manifold
and busy braulings of private persons, and glosses (as men commonly speak) the
matter was brought far from the grounds thereof to things clean besides the
purpose and impertinent. For first there began to be dealing only about the
Supper: then it came to Christ's Ascension and sitting in heaven: and within a
while after to the personal union of both his natures, and what stay will
there be in the end? for many, (by all men's leave be it spoken) seem to be
delighted with this continual striving, that howsoever, and whatsoever it
might cost them, they might not be unknown. But it becomes the Disciples of
Christ to seek peace, and to despise glory. For as Bernard says, They that
despise peace, and seek after glory, they lose both peace and glory. Away
therefore with those speeches, I am of Paul, I am of Cephas, and let that one
saying be heard, I am Christ's, I am the Churches.

There is something that may be misliked, yet there are very many things that
may well be liked: the same ground work of faith abides, let therefore the
same love continue: and let us not think much to take them for brethren, whom
God vouchsafes to take for sons: neither let us despise those, for whom
Christ despised him self. That thing is assuredly true, and very much liked of
us, that nothing in holy doctrine is to be thought of small importance: but
rather that even in the least points thereof a certain faith and full
assurance is required, flat contrary to the wavering of the Academikes: yet we
cannot like of too too much peevishness, through which some do straight way
upon very small occasion call their brethren heretics, schismatikes, ungodly,
Mahometans: let these speeches be thrown out against Atheists, Epicures
Libertines, Arians, Anabaptists, and such like mischevous persons, which desire
to have the Lords field utterly destroyed: but let us every day grow in faith
and love: and let us teach the flocks committed to our charge, to fear God, to
hate vices, and follow after virtues, to deny the world and themselves:
obeying the commandment of our Lord and teacher Jesus Christ, who bids us
not to braule but to love each other. Whose example in governing the Church if
we will follow, we shall raise up those that are afflicted, take up those that
are fallen, comfort the feeble, waken the drowsy, and not negligently denounce
Gods wrath against sins, and shall draw out the sword of the same word which
is no blunt one against hypocrites, wolves, dogs, swine, goats, and to
conclude against all wicked ones which in our Churches mingle themselves with
the true sheep, and which cause the word of God to be evil spoken of. It were
a far better thing surely then that which some do, busying the sharpness of
their wit in making of certain trifles, that forsooth the knowledge of such
subtilties, may shake out of our minds all conscience. It was justly said that
the strength of the Gospel was weakened through the thorny subtilties of
schoole-questions: and we through our wayward disputations what else do we,
then cause that the authority thereof be not strengthened, but rather weakened,
and do even stagger among the wicked. We read it excellently written in
Livie, a very grave writer, that not only grudges, but also wars have an
end, and that oftentimes deadly foes become faithful confederates, yea and
sometimes Citizens: and that by the same speeches of the people of Rome, very
bitter or cruel enmities have been taken up between men of great account.
And that which these few words wrought with the heathen, shall not godliness
toward God obtain at the hands of Christians, of Divines, and of Pastors of
Churches? yea of the travel of reading and diligently examining and conferring
of this book shall not be irksome, if upright and sincere judgment, if not
prejudicate opinions, but the love of one truth shall bear sway in all men's
hearts, it will shortly obtain it. That old contention about the celebrating
of Easter very hotly tossed to and fro, for two hundred years, or there about,
between the Greeks and the Latins, was long since by us thought worthy of
laughter: but we must take good heed, lest in a matter not altogether unlike,
we seem to be wiser then both, if so be that we desire to have the Church
whole, and not to leave it rent unto the posterity, and would have our selves
be counted not foolish among men, and not stubborn in the sight of God. There
has scarce been any age, which has in such sort seen all Churches following
altogether one thing in all points, so as there has not always been some
difference, either in doctrine, or in ceremonies, or in manners: and yet were
not Christian Churches through the world therefore cut asunder, unless
peradventure then, when the Bishop of Rome brake off all agreement, and
tyrannically enjoined to other Churches, not what ought to be done, but what
himself would have observed: but the Apostle did not so. Barnabas indeed
departed from Paul, and Paul withstood Peter, and surely for no trifle: and yet
the one became not more enemy or strange to the other, but the self same
spirit, which had coupled them from the beginning, never suffered them to be
dis-joyned from them-selves. It is the fashion of Romists to command, to
enforce, to press, to throw, out oursings, and thunder excommunications upon
the heads of those that whisper never so little against them: but let us,
according to the doctrine of the holy Ghost, suffer, and gently admonish each
other: that is, keeping the groundwork of faith, let us build love upon it and
let us jointly repair the walls of Sion lying in their ruins.

It remains, that through the same Lord Christ we beseech our reverent
brethren in the Lord, whose Confessions published we set forth, that they take
this our pains in good part: and suffer us to lean, as it were, to a certain
stay, to the common consent of the reformed Churches, against the accusations
and reproaches of the common adversaries of the truth. But it had been to be
wished, that we might at once have set out all the Confessions of all the
reformed Churches: but because we had them not all, therefore we set out them
only, that were come to our hands, to which the rest also, so far as we
suppose, may easily be drawn. And we also could have wished, that the thing
might have been made common to all the reformed Churches. But when as the
state of our Churches seemed to force the matter, and that they could not abide
any longer delay: the right well beloved brethren will pardon us, with whom by
reason of the time we could not impart both the Harmony it self, and the
Observations, as also the intent of this whole Edition. Whereas moreover we
have put to more confessions of one and the same Nation, as of Auspurge, and
Saxony, as also the former and latter of Helvetia, that was not done without
cause: for besides that one expounds another, we thought it good also hereby
to rid them from all suspicion of inconstancy and wavering in opinion, which
the adversaries are wont to catch at, by such repetitions of Confessions.

Yet why we would not add some Confessions of the brethren of Bohemia often
repeated, we will straight way show a cause: and we hope that our reason will
easily be liked of them. And we have set down every where two, yea and in some
places three Editions of Auspurge, for this respect, lest in this diversity we
might seem to have picked out that, which rather favored our side, and to
have utterly misliked the other. Wherein notwithstanding we have not every
where followed the order of times, in which every of them came to light, but
the coppie which we had in our hands printed at Wirtemberge 1572. with a double
Edition. And we have therefore thought it meet to pass over the Apologies
adjoined to the Confessions (as of Auspurge, Bohemia, Sueveland, and England,)
as well that the work might not grow to be exceeding big, as also that we
might not seem rather to increase disputations and controversies, then to make
an Harmony of doctrine. And as for our Observations, our mind was to meet
with the cavils of sophisters, who we know well enough will take hold on the
least matters, that they may thereby set us on work. Wherefore lest they
should charge us to set out a discord rather then a concord of Confessions, we
have added in the end very short Observations, in which we lay open those
things which might seem some what obscurely spoken, and do favorably and
freely, giving them an interpretation, expound those things, which either have,
or seem to have any show of repugnancie. And we beseech the brethren to bear
with us therein, as the most distressed, and desirous of the peace and
agreement of the Churches among those, who in these last times have embraced
the truth of the Gospel. For God forbid, that we should desire to be counted
Censurers of others, who are ready rather to be taught of our brethren, and to
be strengthened in this race of truth, which is begun. We would therefore have
them so to think, that these Observations are laid before them, that they may
judge of them, and may, if they shall think it any where needful, better and
more fitly declare their own opinion, and in the mean while accept of our
pains.

YE therefore most gracious Kings, Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, most famous
Barons, and noble Lords, ye Cities, and Commonwealths, ye most wise Pastors,
Doctors, and, to be short, all Christian people, professing the truth of the
Gospel, be present in souls and bodies, suffer not the poison of discord to
spread any farther: but kill this hurtful Serpent, and receive with a
Christian mind as is meet, and as is offered unto you this most sure token and
earnest of the everlasting friendship of the French and Belgian Churches with
you, offered to you in the face of the whole world: that we being by a friendly
league coupled together in Christ, may vanquish all Antichrists, and may sing
that Hymn to the Lord our God, Behold, how good and joyful a thing it is,
brethren to dwell together in unity.

A CATALOGVE OF THE CONFESSIONS WHEREOF this HARMONY is framed, according to
the order of the times, wherein every of them were written and published.
I.
THE Confession of AUSPURGE was first presented in the Germane tongue at the
City Auspurge, in the year 1530. to Charles the fifth being Emperor, by
certain most renowned Princes of Germany, and other States of the sacred
Empire, whom they call Protestants. Secondly the self same year it was set
out and published at Wirtemberge in Latin, somewhat corrected in certain
Articles, with a Preface, and the subscription of the Authors names.

II.
THat Confession of the four Cities was presented both in the Germane, and
also in the Latin tongue, to the same most sacred Emperor Charles the fifth,
in the same assembly held at Auspurge, in the same year, by the Ambassadors of
the Cities of Strausbrough, Constance, Meminga, Lindaw: both which we have in
certain Articles compared together, that the Readers might have the one made
more ample by the other: and we have therefore in the titles called it the
Confession of Sueveland, for that those four Cities, by whom it was presented,
are commonly counted neighbors to Sueveland.

III.
THat of Basil about the year 1532. was first written in the Germane tongue by
the Ministers of the Church of Basil, and also by a common subscription allowed
of the Pastors of Strausbrough, then again in the year 1561. both recognized
and received by the self same Ministers of Basil. Afterward also it was
published by the Magistrate of Millaine in his own name in the Germane tongue
with a Preface, as though it had been that Churches own Confession. And at the
last it was turned into Latin. Which we, as more ancient then the rest of
Helvetia, have thought good to be set down here also, and do else where in
like sort call it the Confession of Millaine.

IIII.
THe former Confession of Helvetia was written at Basil about the year 1536.
in the behalf of all the Churches of Helvetia, and and sent and presented to
the Assembly of Divines at Wirtemberge by Master Bucer, and Master Capito: and
in the year following 1537. it was again propounded together with the
declaration thereof to the assembly at Smalcaldia by B^cer himself, and
allowed of that whole assembly, namely, of all the Divines and degrees of
Protestants, as Luther his own letters to the Hel^^tians do testify. And the
declaration in Latin was conferred in very many places with the more ample
copy written in the Germane tongue.

V.
THat of Saxony was written in Latin in the year 1551. in the behalf of the
Saxon Churches, by Master Philip Melancthon, that it might be presented to the
Council of Trenr: to which not only the Saxon and Meisfen Churches, but also
very many other did subscribe, as if it had been to the Confession of Auspurge
repeated.

VI.
THat of Wertemberge was of the most renowned Prince and Lord, Lord Christopher
Duke of Wertemberg and Tecca, Earl of Mountbelgard, by his Ambassadors
presented to the assembly of the Tridentine Council the 24. day of the Month
of Januarie in the year 1552.

VII.
THe French Confession was in the year 1559. presented to Francis the second
King of France, first at Amboise, in the behalf of all the godly of that
kingdom: secondly, in the year 1561. at Poifie. It was presented again in
French, to Charles the ninth: and at length also published by the Pastors of
the French Churches, with a Preface to all other Evangelicall Pastors, in the
year 1566.

VIII.
THe English Confession was inserted in the general apology written in the
year 1562. in the behalf of the English Church.

IX.
THe latter Confession of Helvetia was written by the Pastors of Zurich, in
the year 1566. and approved and subscribed unto, not only of the Tigurines
themselves and their confederates of Bern, Scaphusia, Sangallia, Rhetia,
Myllaine, and Bienna: but of all them of Geneva, and of Savoi, of Polonie, and
likewise by the Churches of Hungary, and Scotland.

X.
THe Confession of Belgia was published in French in the name of all the
Churches of Belgia, in the year 1566. and in the year 1579. in a public
Synod held at Belgium, it was repeated, confirmed, and turned into the Belgian
tongue.

XI.
THat of Bohemia being the last of the four former, which were far more
ancient, (which for the largeness we thought good not to be inserted into this
Harmony) being recited in the same order of Chapters and Arguments, and
somewhat more plainly expressed, and in the year 1573. published in diverse
places, was also approved by common testimony of the University of
Wirtemberge, even as Master Luther, and Melancton had approved the former,
published in the year 1532. being altogether the same in doctrine with this,
as Luther his Preface witnesses: and we have called it elsewhere the
Confession of the Waldenses, following the common title assigned thereunto by
those Churches: which we would have to be spoken without any prejudice to those
brethren.

AN ADMONITION TO THE GODLY AND GENTLE READER, TOUCHING THE Order and course of
this whole HARMONY.
THis whole Harmony of Confessions (gentle Reader) is parted into 19.
Sections, which we have taken sometimes out of more, sometimes out of fewer
Confessions in number, as each seemed every one in his own place to handle one
and the same matter or chief point of doctrine. But in rehearsing the context
of every Confession, because we were to have regard of the order of things and
doctrine, rather then either of the time, or worthiness of the Churches and
Authors that wrote them, or other such like circumstance: therefore it seemed
good without any envy or prejudice of other Confessions, either more ancient
or more famous, to give the first place to the latter Confession of Helvetia;
both because the order thereof seemed more fit, and the whole handling of
doctrine more full and convenient: and also because that Confession was
publicly approved and subscribed unto by very many Churches of diverse
Nations. Farther upon this do the rest fitly follow, to wit, the former
Confession of Helvetia, and then all other, without any choice, indifferently,
save that we had rather join together the Confessions of Germany, then sever
them each from other, according to the argument of every Section. Yet we were
enforced to put that Confession of the four Cities, as received somewhat late,
in the last place. Which order notwithstanding if it shall not seem fit and
convenient to any, it may easily be altered in the second Edition, as other
Confessions also, if any such besides these shall be wanting, may in their due
place be adjoined.

To conclude, that the godly Reader may want nothing, and that no man may
suspect any thing to be taken away or added to any of those Cofessions, we have
here set down the Articles or chief points in the order wherein they were
first written, Which we desire every man favorably to interpret, and to enjoy
this our labor, rather seeking peace and agreement, then maliciously hunting
after occasions of dissentions.

PROPER CATALOGVES FOR EVERY CONFESSION, CONTAINED IN THIS HARMONIF, AFTER
THAT ORDER wherein they were first written.
The Articles of the former Confession of Helvetia.
SCripture. 1 Interpretation. 2 Fathers. 3 Humane Traditions. 4 The drift of
the Scripture. 5 God. 6 Man, and his strength. 7 Original sin. 8 Free will.
9 The eternal Counsel, touching the restoring of man. 10 Jesus Christ, and
those benefits which we reap by him 11 The drift of the doctrine of the
Gospel. 12 Faith, and the force thereof. 13 The Church. 14 Of the Ministers of
the word. 15 Ecclesiastical power. 16 The choosing of Ministers. 17 The head
and shepherd of the Church. 18 The duties of Ministers. 19 Of the force and
efficacy of the Sacraments. 20 Baptism. 21 The Eucharist. 22 Holy assemblies.
23 Of Heretics and Schismatikes. 24 Of things indifferent. 25 Of the
Magistrate. 26 Of holy Wedlock. 27
The Chief points of the latter Confession of HELVETIA.
OF the holy Scripture, being the true word of God. 1 Of Interpreting the holy
Scripture, and of Fathers, Councels, and Traditions. 2 Of God, his unity and
the Trinity. 3 Of Idols, or Images of God, Christ, and Saints. 4 Of the
Adoration, worship and Invocation of God, through the only Mediator Jesus
Christ. 5 Of the providence of God. 6 Of the creation of all things, of Angels,
the Devil, and Man. 7 Of the fall of man, sin, and the cause of sin. 8 Of
free will, and so of man's power and ability. 9 Of the Predestination of God,
and Election of the Saints. 10 Of Jesus Christ being true God, and man, and the
only Savior of the world. 11 Of the law of God. 12 Of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, of the promises, also, of the spirit, and the letter. 13 Of Repentance,
and the Conversion of man. 14 Of the true justification of the faithful. 15 Of
Faith, and good works, and of their reward, and the merit of man. 16 Of the
Catholic and holy Church of God, and of the only head of the Church. 17 Of
the Ministers of the Church their institution, and duties. 18 Of the Sacraments
of the Church of Christ. 19 Of holy Baptism. 20 Of the holy Supper of the
Lord. 21 Of holy and Ecclesiastical assemblies. 22 Of the Prayers of the
Church, of singing and Canonical hours. 23 Of holy days, fasts, and choice
of meats. 24 Of Comforting, or visiting the sick. 25 Of the burial of the
faithful, and the care that is to be had for the dead, and of purgatory, and
the appearing of Spirits. 26 Of Rites, Ceremonies, and things indifferent. 27
Of the goods of the Church. 28 Of single life, Wedlock, and the ordering of a
Family. 29 Of the Magistrate. 30
The Articles of the Confession of Basil.
OF God. 1 Of man. 2 Of the care of God toward us. 3 Of Christ, being true God,
and true man. 4 Of the Church. 5 Of the Supper of our Lord. 6 Of the
Magistrate. 7 Of Faith, and works. 8 Of the last day. 9 Of things commanded,
and not commanded. 10 Against the error of the Anabaptists. 11
The chief points of the Confession of Bohemia.
OF the holy Scripture, and of Ecclesiastical writers. 1 Of Christian
Catechizing. 2 Of the unity of the divine essence, and of the three Persons. 3
Of the knowledge of himself. Also, of sin, the causes and fruits hereof, and
of the promises of God. 4 Of repentance. 5 Of Christ the Lord, and of
Justification through faith in him. 6 Of good works, which be holy actions. 7
Of the holy Catholic Church, the order and discipline hereof, and moreover of
Antichrist. 8 Of the Ministers of the Church. 9 Of the word of God. 10 Of the
Sacraments in general. 11 Of holy Baptism. 12 Of the Supper of the Lord. 13
Of the Keys of Christ. 14 Of things accessory, that is, of rites, or
Ecclesiastical ceremonies. 15 Of the politic or civil Magistrate. 16 Of
Saints, and their worship. 17 Of fasting. 18 Of single life, and wedlock, or
the order of married folk. 19 Of the time of Grace. 20
The Articles of the French Confession.
OF God, and his one only essence. 1 Of the knowledge of God. 2 Of the
Canonical books of the holy Scripture. 3 Of distinguishing the Canonical
book from the Apocryphal. 4 Of the authoritic of the word of God. 5 Of the
Trinity of the Persons in one only essence of God. 6 Of the creation of the
world. 7 Of the eternal providence of God. 8 Of the fall of man, and his
free will. 9 Of original sin. 10 Of the propagation of original sin, and
of the effects thereof. 11 Of the free election of God. 12 Of the repairing of
man from his fall through Christ. 13 Of two natures in Christ. 14 Of the
hypostaticall union of his two natures. 15 Of the death and resurrection of
Christ and of the fruit thereof. 16 Of the merit, and fruit of the sacrifice of
Christ. 17 Of the remission of sins, and true Justification. 18 Of the
Intercession, or Mediation of Christ. 19 Of justifying Faith, and the gift, and
effects thereof. 20, 21, 22 Of the abolishing of ceremonies, and true use of
the mor all law. 23 Of the intercession of Saints, Purgatory, and other
superstitious traditions of the Popish sort. 24 Of the ministry of the
Gospel. 25 Of the unity of the Church, and the true notes thereof. 26, 27, 28
Of Ecclesiastical functions. 29 Of the power, and authority of the ministers.
30 Of their lawful calling, and election. 31 Of Ecclesiastical discipline. 32
Of Excommunication, and other Censures. 33 Of the Sacraments in general. 34 Of
Baptism. 35 Of the holy Supper of the Lord. 36 Of the efficacy, and true
communication of the thing signified by the signs. 37, 38 Of the Magistrate,
and politic laws. 39, 40
The Articles of the English Confession.
OF one God in three Persons. 1 Of Jesus Christ being the true Son of God,
and of the Incarnation, and other works of Redemption, and of his two natures
being unseperably united and unconfounded. 2 Of his last coming. Of the holy
Ghost, and his works in us. 3 Of the Catholic Church, and the one only King,
head, and husband thereof. 4 Of the diverse degrees of the Church. 5 Of the
lawful calling the Antichrist of Rome. 5 Of the lawful calling and Election
of Ministers. 6 Of their power, and the use of the Keys. 7 Of marriage and a
single life. 8 Of the Canonical Scriptures. 9 Of the Sacraments, and the
number thereof. 10 Of Baptism. 11 Of the holy Eucharist. 12 Of the sale of
Masses. 13 Of Purgatory. 14 Of Ceremonies, and Ecclesiastical rites 15 Of
Prayer in a vulgar tongue. 16 Of the only Intercessour, and Mediator Christ.
17 Of the corruption of man through sin, of his justification through Christ.
18 Of the one only sacrifice of Christ, whereby we are perfectly reconciled to
God. 19 Of good works. 20 Of the last resurrection of this flesh. 21
The Articles of the Confession of Belgia.
OF the Essence or nature of God. 1 Of the double knowledge of God. 2 Of the
beginning, and author of the word of God. 3 Of the Canonical books of the old
and new Testament. 4 Of their authority. 5 Of the Apocryphal books. 6 Of the
perfection of the Canonical Scripture above all the doctrines of all men. 7 Of
three persons in one only essence of God. 8 Of the testimonies of both the
Testaments, whereby both the Trinity of the persons, and also their properties
may be proved. 9 Of the divine nature, and generation of Jesus Christ the Son
of God. 10 Of the divine nature of the holy Ghost. 11 Of the creation of the
world, and Angels, and the distinguishing of them. 12 Of the Providence of God,
and of his just government, both general, and special. 13 Of the creation of
man, his fall, corruption, and servile free will. 14 Of original sin. 15 Of
free election, and just reprobation. 16 Of the repairing of man through Christ.
17 Of the first coming of Christ, and his true incarnation of the seed of
David. 18 Of his two natures hypostatically united in one only person. 19 Of
the cause, or end of his death, and resurrection. 20 Of his only Priesthood,
and expiatorie sacrifice. 21 Of faith, the only instrument of our
justification. 22 Of true justification through Christ. 23 Of regeneration and
good works. 24 Of the abrogating of the law and shadows. 25 Of the only
Mediator or Intercessour Christ, against the Intercession of Saints. 26 Of the
Catholic Church. 27 Of the unity and communion thereof. 28 Of true notes of
the true Church. 29 Of the government, and Ecclesiastical functions. 30 Of the
Election of Ministers, Elders and Deacons, and of their authority. 31 Of
Ecclesiastical traditions. 32 Of the Sacraments, and their number. 33 Of
Baptism. 34 Of the Supper of the Lord. 35 Of Magistrates, and their office and
power. 36 Of the last Judgment. 37
The Articles of the Confession of Auspurge.
OF God, and the persons of the divinity. 1 Of original sin. 2 Of the
incarnarion of the Son of God. 3 Of Justification. 4 Of the Preaching of
Repentance, and general Remission. 5 Of the righteousness of good works. 6 Of
the Church. 7 Of the Sacraments which are administered by evil men. 8 Of
Baptism. 9 Of the Lords Supper. 10 Of Repentance. 11 Of Confession. 12 Of the
use of Sacraments. 13 Of Ecclesiastical order, or degrees. 14 Of
Ecclesiastical rites. 15 Of civil ordinances. 16 Of the last judgment. 17 Of
free will. 18 Of the cause of sin. 19 Of good works. 20 Of Invocation. 21
Articles concerning the abuses which are changed in external rites.
OF the Mass. 1 Of either kind of the Sacrament. 2 Of Confession. 3 Of the
difference of meats, and such like Popish traditions. 4 Of the marriage of the
Priests. 5 Of the vows of Monks. 6 Of Ecclesiastical power. 7
The chief points of the Confession of Saxony.
OF Doctrine. 1 Of original sin. 2 Of the remission of sins, and of
Justification. 3 Of free will. 4 Of new obedience. 5 What works are to be done.
6 How good works may be done. 7 How new obedience does please God. 8 Of
rewards. 9 Of the difference of sins. 10 Of the Church. 11 Of the Sacraments.
12 Of Baptism. 13 Of the Lords Supper. 14 Of the use of the whole Sacrament.
15 Of Repentance. 16 Of Satisfaction. 17 Of Wedlock. 18 Of Confirmation and
anointing. 19 Of traditions or Ecclesiastical rites. 20 Of a Monastical life.
21 Of the invocating of godly men departed out of this life. 22 Of the civil
Magistrate. 23
The chief points of the Confession of Wirtemberge.
OF God, and three persons in one Godhead. 1 Of the Son of God. 2 Of the holy
Ghost. 3 Of sin. 4 Of Justification. 5 Of the law. 6 Of good works. 7 Of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. 8 Of the Sacraments. 9 Of Baptism. 10 Of
Confirmation. 11 Of Repentance. 12 Of Contrition. 13 Of Confession. 14 Of
Satisfaction. 15 Of Prayer. 16 Of Fasting. 17 * Of Alms. 18 Of the Eucharist,
that is, of the Sacrament of thanksgiving. 19 * Of the Mass. 20 Of holy
orders. 21 Of Marriage. 22 * Of extreme Unction. 23 Of the invrcating of
Saints. 24 Of the remembrance of the dead. 25 Of Purgatory. 26 * Of
Monastical vows. 27 Of Canonical hours. 28 Of Fasting. 29 Of the
consecrating of water, salt, wine and other such like things. 30 Of the holy
Scripture. 31 * Of the Pope. 32 Of the Church. 33 Of Councels. 34 Of the
Teachers of the Church. 35 Of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies. 36
THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK FOLLOWING, ACCORDING TO THE SECTIONS, which are in
number nineteen and of how many confessions each Section does consist.
THE FIRST SECTION. page 1.
OF the holy Scripture being the true word of God, and the interpretation
thereof. This Section consists of ten confessions: to wit. Of the former and
latter confessions of Helvetia, of that of Basil or Myllane; of Bohemia or the
Waldenses, the French, the English, that of Belgia, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and
Sheveland.

THE SECOND SECTION. page 19.
OF God in essence one, in persons three, and of his true worship. This Section
consists of 11. confessions, to wit, Of the former and latter confession of
Helvetia, that of Basil, of Bohemia, or the Waldenses, the French, the English,
that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, Sueveland.

THE THIRD SECTION. page 52.
OF the eternal providence of God, and the creation of the world. This Section
does consist properly of four Confessions only, to wit, Of the later
confession of Helvetia, Basil, the French, and that of Belgia, which alone have
express titles of these chief points of doctrine. But these four, to wit,
the former confession of Helvetia, the English, that of Auspurge, and
Wirtemberge, do by the way make mention, both of the providence of God, and
also of the creation of the world, in the Article of God, as is to be seen in
the 2. Section. And the others, to wit, those of Bohemia, Saxony, and
Sueveland, have altogether omitted this part of doctrine.

THE FOVRTH SECTION. page 58.
OF the fall of man, of sin, and of free will. This Section consists of 10.
Confessions: to wit, Of the former and latter confessions of Helvetia, of that
of Basil, Bohemia or the Waldenses, the French, English, that of Belgia,
Auspurge, Saxony, and Wirtemberge.

THE FIFTH SECTION. page 82.
OF eternal Predestination. This Section consists of four Confessions
only, to wit, Of the latter Confession of Helvetia, that of Basil, the French,
and that of Belgia.

THE SIXTH SECTION. page 85.
OF the reparing or deliverance of man from his fall by Jesus Christ alone:
Also, of his Person, names, office, and the works of Redemption. This Section
consists of 12. Confessions, to wit, Of the former and latter Confessions of
Helvetia, that of Basil, Bohemia, the French, the English, that of Belgia,
Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, Sueveland.

THE SEVENTH SECTION. page 105.
OF the law and the Gospel. This Section consists of 7. Confessions only,
to wit, Of the former and latter confessions of Helvetia, that of Bohemia, the
French, that of Belgia, Saxony, and Wirtemb.

THE EIGHTH SECTION. page 116.
OF Repentance, and the Conversion of man. This Section consists of 6.
Confessions only, to wit, Of the latter confession of Helvetia, that of
Bohemia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemb. and Sueveland

THE NINTH SECTION. page 144.
OF Justification by faith, and of good works, and their rewards. This Section
consists of 11. Confessions, to wit, Of the former and latter confessions of
Helvetia, that of Basil, Bohemia, the French, the English, that of Belgia,
Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemb. and Sueveland.

THE TENTH SECTION. page 204.
OF the holy Catholic Church. This Section consists of 11. confessions, to
wit, Of the former and latter confessions of Helvetia, that of Basil, Bohemia,
the French, the English, that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and
Sueveland.

THE ELEVENTH SECTION. page 233.
OF the Ministers of the Church, and of their calling, and office. This Section
consists of 9. Confessions: to wit, Of the former and latter confessions of
Helvetia, that of Bohemia, the French, the English, that of Belgia, Auspurge,
Wirtemberge, and Sueveland.

THE TWELFTH SECTION. page 270.
OF true and false Sacraments, in general. This Section consists of 11.
Confessions. Of the former confession of Helvetia, and the declaration thereof,
the latter confession of Helvetia, of that Basil, Bohemia, the French, the
English, that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueveland.

THE THIRTEENTH SECTION. page 286.
OF the Sacrament of holy Baptism. This Section consists of 10. Confessions,
to wit, Of the former confession of Helvetia, and the declaration thereof, of
the latter confession of Helvetia, that of Bohemia, the French, the English,
that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueveland.

THE FOVRTEENTH SECTION. page 302.
OF the holy Supper of the Lord. This Section consists of 11. Confessions: to
wit, Of the former confession of Helvetia, and the declaration thereof, of the
latter confession of Helvetia, that of Basil, Bohemia, the French, the English,
that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueveland.

THE FIFTEENTH SECTION. page 35^.
OF Ecclesiastical meetings. This Section consists of 8. Confessions: to
wit, The former and latter confessions of Helvetia, that of Bohemia, the
French, the English, that of Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueveland.

THE SIXTEENTH SECTION. page 366.
OF Holy days, fasts, and the choice of meats, and of the visiting of the
sick, and the care that is to be had for the dead. This Section consists of
9. Confessions, to wit, of the latter confession of Helvetia, that of Basil,
Bohemia, the French, the English, that of Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and
Sueveland.

THE SEVENTEENTH SECTION. page 400.
OF Ceremonies, and rites, which are indifferent in general. This Section
consists of 11. confessions: to wit, of the former and latter confessions of
Helvetia, that of Basil, Bohemia, the French, the English, that of Belgia,
Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueveland.

THE EIGHTEENTH SECTION. page 422.
OF Wedlock, single life, and Monastical Vows. This Section consists of 8.
confessions: to wit, of the former and latter confessions of Helvetia, that of
Bohemia, the French, the English, that of Auspurge, and Sueveland.

THE NINETEENTH SECTION. page 458.
OF the civil Magistrate. This Section consists of 10. confessions: to wit,
of the former and latter confessions of Helvetia, that of Basil, Bohemia, the
French, that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueveland.

THE CHIEF POINTS OF CONFESSIONS BELONGING TO THIS First Section of the holy
SCRIPTURE.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA touching the holy SCRIPTURE, being the true
Word of GOD.
CHAP. 1.
WE believe and confess the Canonical Scriptures of the holy Prophets and
Apostles of both Testaments, to be the very true word of God, and to have
sufficient authority of themselves, not of men. For God himself spoke to the
Fathers, Prophets, Apostles, and speaks yet unto us by the holy Scriptures.
And in this holy Scripture the universal Church of Christ has all things
fully expounded, whatsoever belong both to a saving faith, and also to the
framing of a life acceptable to God: in which respect it is expeffely commanded
of God, that nothing be either put to, or taken from the same. We judge
therefore that from these Scriptures is to be taken true wisdom and
godliness, the reformation and government of Churches, also the instruction in
all duties of piety: and to be short, the confirmation of opinions and the
confutation of errors, with all exhortations, according to that of the Apostle,
All Scripture inspired 2 Timothy 3.
of God is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, etc. Again, These things I
write unto thee (says the Apostle to Timothy. 1. Chap. 3.) that thou may
know how it behooveth thee to be conversant in the house of God, etc. Again,
the self same Apostle to the Thessalonians, When, says he, ye received the
word of 2 Thessalonians. 2.
us, ye received not the word of men, but, as it was indeed, the word of God,
etc. For the Lord himself has said in the Gospel, It is not ye that speak,
but the spirit of my Father speaks Matthew. 10. Luke 10. John 13.
in you: therefore he that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you,
despises me. Wherefore when this word of God is now preached in the Church by
Preachers lawfully called, we believe that the very word of God is preached,
and received of the faithful, and that neither any other word of God is to be
feigned, or to be expected from heaven: and that now the word itself which is
preached, is to be regarded, not the Minister that preaches: who although he
be evil and a sinner, nevertheless the word of God abides true and good.
Neither do we think that therefore the outward preaching is to be thought as
fruitless, because the instruction in true religion depends on the inward
illumination of the spirit, because it is written, No man shall teach his
neighbor. For all Jer. 12. 1 Cor. 3. John 6.
men shall know me. And, he that watreth, or he that planteth, is nothing, but
God who gives the increase. For albeit no man can come to Christ unless he be
drawn by the heavenly Father, and be inwardly lightened by the holy Ghost, yet
we know undoubtedly, that it is the will of God, that his word should be
preached even outwardly. God could indeed by his holy spirit, or by the
Ministry of an Angel, without the Ministry of Saint Peter have taught
Cornelius in the Acts, but nevertheless he refers him to Peter: of whom the
Angel speaking says, he shall tell thee what thou must do. For he that
illuminated inwardly, by giving men the holy Ghost, the self same by way of
commandment said unto his Disciples, Go ye into the whole world, and preach
the Gospel to every creature. And so Mark. 16. Acts 16.
Paul preached the word outwardly to Lydia a purple seller among the
Philippians, but the Lord inwardly opened the woman's heart. And the same Paul
upon an elegant gradation fi^ly placed in the 10. to the Romans, at last
infers: therefore faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. We
know in the mean time that God can illuminate whom, and when he will, even
without the external Ministry, which is a thing appertaining to his power:
but we speak of the usual way of instructing men, delivered unto us of God
both by commandment and examples.

We therefore detest all the heresies of Artemon, the Manichees, Valentinians,
of Cerdon, and the Marcionites, who denied that the Scriptures proceeded from
the holy Ghost, or else received not, or polished and corrupted some of them.
And yet we do not deny that certain books of the old Testament were of the
ancient authors called Apocriphall, and of others Ecclesiastical, to wit, such
as they would have to be read in the Churches, but not alleged to avouch or
confirm the authority of faith by them. As also Austin in his 18 Book De
civit. Dei. C. 38. makes mention, that in the books of the Kings, the names
and books of certain Prophets are reckoned: but he adds, that they are not
in the Canon; and that those books which we have, suffice unto godliness.

CHAP. II. Of interpreting the holy Scriptures, and of Fathers, Councels, and
Traditions.
THE Apostle Peter has said, That the holy Scriptures are 2 Pet. 2.
not of any private interpretation, therefore we do not allow all expositions:
whereupon we do not acknowledge that which they call the meaning of the Church
of Rome, for the true and natural interpretation of the Scriptures, which
forsooth the Defenders of the Roman Church do strive to force all men simply
to receive: but we acknowledge that interpretation of Scriptures for
authentical and proper, which being taken from the Scriptures themselves (that
is, from the phrase of that tongue in which they were written, they being also
wayed according to the circumstances, and expounded according to the proportion
of places either like or unlike, or of more and plainer) accords with the rule
of faith and charity, and makes notably for Gods glory and man's salvation.
Wherefore we do not contemn the holy Treatises of the Fathers, agreeing with
the Scriptures, from whom notwithstanding we do modestly dissent, as they are
deprehended to set down things merely strange, or altogether contrary to the
same. Neither do we think that we do them any wrong in this matter, seeing
that they all with one consent will not have their writings matched with the
Canonical Scriptures, but bid us allow of them so far forth, as they either
agree with them, or disagree, and bid us take those things that agree, and
leave those that disagree: and according to this order we do account of the
Decrees or Canons of Councels. Wherefore we suffer not our selves in
controversies about Religion or matters of faith to be pressed with the bare
testimonies of Fathers, or Decrees of Councels, much less with received
customs, or else with multitude of men being of one judgment, or with
prescription of long time. Therefore in controversies of religion or matters of
faith, we cannot admit any other Judge then God himself, pronouncing by the
holy Scriptures, what is true, what is false, what is to be followed, or what
to be avoided. So we do not rest but in the judgments of spiritual men, drawn
from the word of God. Certainly Jeremy and other Prophets did vehemently
condemn the assemblies of Priests, gathered against the Law of God: and
diligently forewarned us, that we should not hear the Fathers or tread in
their path, who walking in their own inventions, swarved from the Law Ezekiel. 20.
18.
of God. We do likewise reject humane Traditions, which although they be set
out with goodly titles, as though they were Divine and Apostolical, by the
lively voice of the Apostles, and delivered to the Church, as it were by the
hands of Apostolical men, by mean of Bishops succeeding in their rooms: yet
being compared with the Scriptures, disagree from them, and by that their
disagreement bewray themselves in no wise to be Apostolical. For as the
Apostles did not disagree among themselves in doctrine, so the Apostles
Scholars did not set forth things contrary to the Apostles. Nay it were
blasphemous to avouch, that the Apostles by lively voice delivered things
contrary to their writings. Paul affirms expressly, that he taught the same
things in all Churches. And again. We, 1 Cor. 4. 2 Cor. 1.
says he, write no other things unto you, then which ye read, or also
acknowledge. Also in another place he witnesses, that he and his Disciples, to
wit Apostolical men, walked in the same 2 Cor. 12.
way, and jointly by the same spirit did all things. The Jews also in time past
had their traditions of Elders, but these traditions were severely confuted by
the Lord, showing that the keeping of them hinders Gods Law, and that God is
in vain worshipped Mat. 15. Mar. 7.
with such.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA.
THe Canonical Scripture, being the Word of God, and delivered Artic. 1.
Scriptura.
by the holy Ghost, and published to the world by the Prophets and Apostles,
being of all other the most perfect and ancient Philosophy, does alone
perfectly contein all piety and good ordering of life. The interpretation
hereof is to be Artic 2. Interpretatio.
taken only from herself, that her self may be the interpreter of her self,
the rule of charity and faith being her guide. Which kind of interpretation
so far forth as the holy Fathers Artic 3. Patres.
have followed, we do not only receive them as interpreters of the Scripture,
but reverence them as the beloved instruments of God. But as for the traditions
of men, although never Artic. 4. Tradit. humanae.
so glorious and received, how many soever of them do withdraw or hinder us,
as of things unprofitable and hurtful, so we answer with that saying of the
Lord, They worship me in vain, teaching the doctrine of men. The drift of the
Canonical Scripture is this: that God wishes well to mankind: and by Christ
the Lord his Son has declared this good will, which is received by faith
alone, and faith must be effectual through love, that it may be showed forth
by an innocent life.

Out of the Confession of BASIL. Of things commanded and not commanded. Artic.
10.
WE confess that as no man can command those things which Christ has not
commanded, so likewise no man can forbid those things which he has not
forbidden. And in the margent. For it is written, hear him. Also section the
third, in the same place. And much less can any man license those things,
which God has forbidden, etc And in the marg. God said, I am Iehova your God,
Levit. 18. and by Moses, Deuteronomy. 10. for Jehovah your God is God of gods, a great
God and terrible. Who therefore among his creatures can grant those things
which he has forbidden? In like sort section 4. And again, no man can forbid
those things, which God has granted, etc. The other things which are contained
in this article, because they belong to other sections, they are inserted,
every one in their places.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA or the WALDENSES. Of the holy Scriptures.
CHAP. I.
FIrst of all the Ministers of our Churches teach with one consent, concerning
the holy Scripture of the new and old Testament (which is commonly called the
Bible; and is lawfully received and allowed of the Fathers, which are of best
and soundest judgment) that it is true certain, and worthy to be believed,
whereunto no other humane writings whatsoever, or of what sort soever they be,
may be compared, but that, as man's writings, they must give place to the holy
Scripture: First, because it is inspired and taught of the holy Ghost, and
uttered by the mouth of holy men, written by them, and confirmed by heavenly
and divine testimonies: which spirit also himself opens and discloseth the
meaning how it ought to be understood, and the truth of this Scripture in the
Church, in what manner seems him best: especially by raising up and giving
faithful Ministers, who are his chosen instruments. Of which spirit David
speaks, when he says, The spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was
in my tongue: 2 Samuel 22. 2 Pet. 1.
and Peter, For prophecy came not in old time by will of man, but holy men of
God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost: and 2 Timothy 3. Romans 15. Ioh. 5.
Paul. The whole Scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable, etc.
besides, the Lord himself says, Search the Scriptures. And again, Ye are
deceived, not knowing the Scriptures, Mat 22. Luke 24.
neither do ye understand the power of God. And, he opened the minds of his
Disciples, that they might understand the Scriptures.

Secondly, because it is a true and sure testimony and a clear proof of Gods
favorable good will, which he has revealed Heb. 11.
concerning himself, without which revelation of Scripture, there is no
wholesome knowledge, nor faith, nor access to God. For in this, such things as
are necessary to doctrine, to discipline and government of the holy Church,
for all and singular persons in the ordinary ministry of salvation (whence
also springs true faith) in this I say, are all such things fully,
absolutely, and so far forth, as is requisite, as in a most excellent and most
exquisite work of the Holy Ghost, comprehended and included, then which no
Angel from heaven can bring any thing more certain, and if he should bring any
other thing, he ought not to be believed.

And this persuasion and belief concerning holy Scripture, namely that it is
taught and inspired of God, is the beginning and ground of our Christian
profession, which takes beginning from the Word outwardly preached, as from an
ordinary mean, ordained of God for this purpose. Wherefore every one ought
very highly to esteem of the divine writings of the holy Prophets and
Apostles, resolutely to believe them, and religiously to yield unto them in all
things, diligently to read them, to gather wholesome doctrine out of them, and
according to them ought every man to frame and order himself, but especially
they, who after an holy manner are set over the Church of God. For which causes
in our Churches and meetings this holy Scripture is rehearsed to the hearers in
the common and mother tongue which all understand, and especially (according to
the ancient custom of the Church) those portions of the Gospels in Scripture,
which are wont to be read on solemn holy days out of the Evangelists and
Apostles writings, and are usually called Gospels and Epistles: out of which
profitable and wholesome doctrines, and exhortations, and sermons are made to
the people, as at all times occasion and need requires. We likewise teach that
the writings of holy Doctors, especially of those that are ancient, are also to
be esteemed for true and profitable: whereof there may be some use to instruct
the people, yet only in those things wherein they agree with the holy
Scripture, or are not contrary thereunto, and so far forth as they give
testimony to the excellency thereof, to the information and example of the
Apostolic Church, and swerve not from the consent, judgment, and dec^ees, of
the ancient Church (wherein she has continued unspotted in the truth) after
what sort they themselves also have charged men to judge and think of their
writings, and have given warning that heed should be taken, lest that they
being but men, too much should be ascribed to them. Of which thing S. Augustine
speaks in this manner. In preoem. in 3. de sanct. Trinit.
Be not thou a servant to my writings, as it were to the Canonical Scriptures,
but in the Canonical Scriptures such things as thou did not believe, when
thou have there found them, immediately believe. But in my writings that which
thou know not for acertaine truth, unless thou perceive it to be certain,
hold it not resolutely. And elsewhere he says, Give not as great credit to
mine or Ambrose his words, as to the Canonical Scriptures. This is the ^ight
rule to discern writings by, which so greatly (...) the Papists that they have
cited it in their decretal distinct. 9. Chap. Notimets verbis, etc.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
THis one God has revealed himself to be such a one unto men, first in the
creation, preservation and governing of his works; secondly far more plainly
in his word, which Artic. 2.
word in the beginning he revealed to the fathers by certain visions and
oracles, and then caused it to be written in these books which we call holy
Scripture.

All this holy Scripture is contained in the Canonical books Artic 3.
of the old and New Testament. The Catalogue whereof is this. The five books
of Moses (namely Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomie: Joshua,
Judges, Ruth, two books of Samuel, two books of the Kings, two books of
Chronicles, or Paralipomenon, one book of Esdras, Nehemiah, Ester, Job, the
Psalms, Solomon's Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Songs, Esaias, Jeremy,
with the Lamentations, Ezechiel, Daniel, the 12. small Prophets, (namely Ose,
Joel, Amos, Abdiah, Jonah, Michea, Nahum, Abacuc, Sophon, Haggaie, Zachary,
Malachie) the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ according to Matthew, Mark, Luke,
and John, the Acts of the Apostles, Paul's Epistles (namely one to the Romans,
two to the Corinthians, one to the Galathians, one to the Ephesians, one to the
Philippians, one to the Collossians, two to the Thessalonians, two to Timothy,
one to Titus, one to Philemon, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of
James, two Epistles of Peter, three Epistles of John, one Epistle of Jude,
John's Revelation.

We acknowledge these books to be Canonical, that is, we Ar^ic. 4.
account them as the rule and square of our faith, and that not only for the
common consent of the Church, but also much more for the testimony and inward
persuasion of the Holy Ghost, by whose inspiration we are taught to discern
them from other Ecclesiastical books: which howsoever they may be
profitable, yet are they not such, that any one article of faith may be builded
upon them.

We believe that the word contained in these books came Artic. 5.
from one God, of whom alone, and not of men, the authority thereof depends.
And seeing this is the sum of all truth, containing whatsoever is required
for the worship of God and our sa^vation, we hold it not lawful for men, no
not for the Angels themselves, to add or detract any thing from that word, or
to alter any whit at all in the same. And hereupon it follows, that it is not
lawful to oppose either antiquity, custom, multitude, man's wisdom and
judgment, edicts, or any deerees, or Councels, or visions, or miracles, unto
this holy Scripture, but rather that all things ought to be examined, and tried
by the rule and square thereof. Wherefore we do for this cause also allow
those three Creeds, namely the Apostles, the Nicen, and Athanasius his Creed,
because they be agreeable to the written Word of God.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
WE receive and embrace all the Canonical Scriptures, Artic. 10.
both of the Old and New Testament, giving thanks to our God, who has raised
up unto us that light, which we might ever have before our eyes: lest either by
the subtlety of man, or by the snares of the devil, we should be carried away
to errors, and lies. Also we profess that these be the heavenly voices,
whereby God has opened unto us his will: and that only in them man's heart can
have settled rest: that in them be abundantly, and fully comprehended all
things, whatsoever be needful for our help, as Origin, Augustine,
Chrysostom, and Cyrillus, have taught: That they be the very might and
strength to attain to salvation: that they be the foundations of the Prophets
and Apostles, Whereupon is built the Church of God: that they be the very sure
and infallible rule, whereby may be tried, whether the Church do swerve, or
err, and whereunto all Ecclesiastical doctrine ought to be called to account:
and, that against these Scriptures neither law, nor ordinance, nor any custom,
ought to be heard: no though Paul himself, or an Angel from heaven should come
and teach the contrary.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
HE has revealed himself much more plainly in his holy A^tic. 2. Sub fi^em.
Word, so far forth as it is expedient for his own glory, and the salvation
of his in this life.

We confess that this Word of God was not brought or delivered Artic 3.
by any will of man: but that holy men of God inspired by Gods holy Spirit
spoke it, as S. Peter witnesses: but afterward God himself for that exceeding
tender carefulnes which he has of his, and of their salvation, gave in
Commission to his servants the Apostles and Prophets, that they should put
those oracles in writing: and he himself also wrote the two Tables of the Law
with his own finger: which is the cause why we call such writings sacred and
divine Scripture.

And we comprehend the holy Scripture in those two books of the Old and New
Testament, which are called the canonical Artic. 4.
books: about which there was never any ado. And of them this is the number
and also the order, received of the Church of God. The five books of Moses,
the book of Joshua, of the Judges, of Ruth, two books of Samuel, two of the
Kings, two of the Chronicles, which are called Para^ipomena, the first of
Esdras: Nehemiah, Ester, Job: also David's Psalms, three books of Solomon,
namely the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs: the four great
Prophets, Esaias, Jeremy, Ezekiell, and Daniel: and further more also the 12.
small Prophets: moreover the Canonical books of the New Testament are, the
four Evangelists, namely Saint Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, the Acts of the
Apostles, the 14. Epistles of Saint Paul, and seven of the other Apostles, the
Revelation of Saint John the Apostle. These books alone do we Artic. 5.
receive as sacred and canonical, whereupon our faith may rest, be confirmed
and established: therefore without any doubt we believe also those things, which
are contained in them, and that not so much because the Church receives and
allows them for Canonical, as for that the holy Ghost bears witness to our
consciences that they came from God, and most of all for that they also
testify and justify by themselves this their own sacred authority, and
sanctity, seeing that even the blind may clearly behold, and as it were
feel the fulfilling and accomplishment of all things which were foretold in
these writings.

We furthermore make a difference between the holy Artic. 6.
books, and those which they call Apocriphall: for so much as the Apocriphall
may be read in the Church, and it is lawful also so far to gather
instructions out of them, as they agree with the Canonical books, but their
authority, and certainty is not such, as that any doctrine touching faith or
Christian Religion, may safely be built upon their testimony: so far off is
it, that they can disanull or impair the authority of the other.

We believe also that this holy Scripture does most perfectly Arti^. 7.
contain all the will of God, and that in it all things are abundantly taught
whatsoever is necessary to be believed of man to attain salvation. Therefore
seeing the whole manner of worshipping God, which God requires at the hands of
the faithful, is there most exquisitely and at large set down, it is lawful
for no man, although he have the authority of an Apostle, no not for any Angel
sent from heaven, as Saint Paul speaks, to teach otherwise then we have long
since been taught in the holy Scriptures. For seeing it is forbidden that any
one should add or detract any thing from the Word of God, thereby it is
evident enough that this holy doctrine is perfect and absolute in all points
and parcels thereof: and therefore no other writings of men, although never so
holy, no custom, no multitude, no antiquity, nor prescription of times, nor
personal succession, nor any councels; and to conclude, no decrees or
ordinances of men are to be matched or compared with these divine Scriptures
and bare truth of God, for so much as Gods truth excels all things. For all
men of their own nature are liars, and lighter then vanity it self:
therefore we do utterly refuse whatsoever things agree not with this most
certain rule, as we have been taught by the Apostles, when they say: Try the
spirits whether they be of God. And, If any come unto you, and bring not this
doctrine, receive him not to house, etc.

Out of the SAXONS Confession. Of Doctrine.
SEeing it is most undoubtedly true, that God out of mankind does gather
together unto himself a Church unto eternal life for and by his Son,
through preaching of that doctrine which is written in the books of the
Prophets and Apostles, we plainly avouch before God and the whole Church in
heaven and in earth, that we do with a true faith embrace all the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles, and that in that very natural meanning, which is
set down in the Creeds of the Apostles, of Nice, and of Athanasius. And these
self same Creedes, and the natural meanning of them we have always
constantly embraced without corruption, and will by Gods help always embrace:
and in this faith do we call upon the true God, who sending his Son, and
giving clear testimonies, has revealed himself in his Church: joining our
prayer with all Saints in heaven and in earth: and our Vide obseru. 1. adhaac
conf^ss. tum in hac s^ct. tum in s^ct. secunda.
declarations upon the Creeds are abroad, containing the whole body and ground
of doctrine, which show that this our protestation is most true, We do also
very resolutely condemn all brainesicke fantasies, which are against the
Creeds: as are the monstrous opinions of heathen men, of the Jews, of the
Mahometists, of Marcion, the Manichees, of Samosatenus, Servetus, Arrius, and
those that deny the person of the holy Ghost, and other opinions condemned by
the true judgment of the Church.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE,
Of the holy Scripture. CHAP. 30.
THe holy Scriptures we call those Canonical books of the Vide obseru 1. in
hanc Confess.
old and new Testament, of whose authority there was never doubt made in the
Church. This Scripture we believe and confess to be the Oracle of the holy
Ghost, so confirmed by heavenly testimonies, that If an Angel from heaven
preach any other thing, let him be accursed. Wherefore we detest all doctrine,
worship, and Religion contrary to this Scripture. But whereas some men think,
that all doctrine necessary to be known of us to true and everlasting salvation
is not contained in this Scripture, and that the right of expounding this
Scripture lies so in the power of chief Bishops, that what they according to
their own will give out, is to be embraced for the meaning of the holy Ghost,
it is more easily said then proved. The whole Scripture is given by inspiration
of God, and is profitable 2 Timothy 3.
to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the
man of God may be perfect, being thoroughly prepared to every good work. And
John 15. I have called you friends, for all things that I have heard of my
father, have I made known to you. And those things which the Apostles received
of Christ, those have they by their preaching published in the whole world, and
by their writings delivered them to posterity. It is a plain case therefore
that all things which are needful to be known to salvation, are contained in
the Prophets Chrysostom. ad Titum. hom. ^.
and Apostles writings. He has revealed his own word in due season by
preaching, which is all committed to me: this is the preaching. For the Gospel
contains things, both things present, and things to come, as honor, piety,
and faith, yea and all things he has jointly comprised in this one word
preaching. Again, Jerome ad Tit. Cap. 1. August. super Joan. Cap. 11. Tract.
40.
Without authority of the Scriptures, babbling has no credit. For seeing the
Lord Jesus did many things, al are not written, as the same holy Evangelist
himself witnesses, that the Lord Christ both said and did many things which
are not written. But those things were selected to be written, which seemed to
suffice for the salvation of those that believe. For whereas they say that the
right of expounding the Scripture lies in the power of chief Bishops, it is
evident, that the gift of expounding the scripture is not of man's wisdom, but
of the holy Ghost. To every man, says Paul, is given the manifestation of the
spirit to profit withal: for to one is given by the spirit the word of
wisdom, etc. But the holy Ghost is altogether at liberty, and is not tied to
a certain sort of men, but gives gifts to men according to his own Number. 11.
good pleasure. Oh that all the people had power to prophecy, and that the
Lord would put his spirit upon them. Debora a woman Iud. 4.
the wife of Lapidoth is raised up to be a Prophetess. Again, I am Amos. 7.
no Prophet, nor Prophets son, but I am a heard man, and a gatherer of wild
figs. And yet Amos received the holy Ghost, and was made a Prophet. All these
things works one and the 2 Cor. 12.
same spirit distributing to every man as he will. Many examples also do
witness that chief Bishops have been often and very foulely deceived:
wherefore the gift of expounding the Scripture is not so tied to the Popes, that
whosoever shall be Pope, must needs rightly expound the Scripture: but the true
meaning of the Scripture is to be sought in the Scripture it self, and among
those, that being raised by the spirit of God, expound Scripture by Scripture.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of Councels.
WE confess that Councels ought to have their judgments in the Church
concerning the holy doctrine of Religion, and that the authority of lawful
Councels is great: but the authority of Gods Word must needs be the greatest.
For although the Church have a sure promise of Christ's continual presence, and
be governed by the holy Ghost, yet not every assembly of men may be taken for
the true Church: and albeit never so many seem often times to come together in
the name of Christ, yet few are chosen, and all have not faith. And as it is
wont to fall out in civil meetings, so does it also in meetings of the Church,
that for the most part the greater side overcommeth the better. Hitherto may be
added, that the holy Ghost does not make men in this life not subject to sin,
but leaves in them many and sundry infirmities. Examples also witness, that
not only the Popes, but also Councels have been deceived. Wherefore seeing
that the doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets is confirmed of God, the
sentence of no one man, nor of any assembly of men, is to be received simply
without trial, for the Oracle of the holy Ghost: but it is to be laid to the
rule of the Prophets and Apostles doctrine, that that which agrees therewith
may be acknowledged, and that which is contrary thereunto may be confuted. If
we or an Angel from heaven Gal. 1.
preach unto you a Gospel beside that, which we have preached unto you, let
him be accursed. And, believe ye not every spirit, 1 Ioh. 4.
but try the spirits whether they be of God. Again, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Try all things, and keep that which is good. Augustine against Maximius a
Bishop of the Arrians in his 3. book, Chap. 14. says, But now am I neither to
cite the Council of Nice, nor you the Council of Arimine, as it were to
prejudice the matter, neither am I bound by the authority of the one, nor you
by the authority of the other: with authorities of Scripture, which are
witnesses not proper to any one, but common to us both, let matter with matter,
cause with cause, reason with reason, etc. And Panormitane in the Chapter
significasti. Extr. de electio. In things concerning faith, even the verdict of
one private man were to be perferred before the Popes, if he were lead with
better warrants of the old and new Testament then the Pope, And Gerson in the
first part about trial of doctrines. The first truth should stand, that if
there a plain private man sufficiently instructed in holy Scripture more
credit were to be given in a case of doctrine to his assertion, then to the
Popes definitive sentence. For it is plain, that the Gospel is more to be
believed then the Pope. If then a man so leaned teach any truth to be contained
in the Gospel, where the Pope were either ignorant, or willingly deceived, it
is clear whose judgment were to be preferred. And a little after. Such a
learned man ought in that case, while a general Council were holden, at which
he himself were present, to set himself against it, if he should perceive the
greater part of malice or ignorance to incline to that which is contrary to
the Gospel.

Of Ecclesiastical Writers. CHAP. 34.
RIse up before an hoare head, says the Scripture, and reverence the person of
an old man. We do therefore reverence the gray hairs of our ancestors, who
even since the Gospel began to be revealed and published have in the world
taken upon them the travel of furthering the Church, not only by preaching,
but also by public writings that the posterity might from the Apostles, even
unto this time, have manifest and certain testimonies of the holy doctrine.
And we so embrace their writings, as both the holy Scripture allows us to use
man's authority, and as themselves would have their writings acknowledged. (You
my friends say) that in the ancient Job 12.
is wisdom, and in the length of days is understanding (but I say unto you)
that with him, to wit, with the Lord our God is wisdom and strength he has
council and understanding. And 1 Corinthians. 4. Let the Prophets speak two or
three, and let the rest judge. And, Try all things, and keep that which is
good. 1 Thessalonians. 5. It is not lawful for us to bring in any thing of our own
Tertut Lib de scrip. haeret.
head, no not so much as to take that which any man has brought in of his own
head. We have the Apostles of the Lord for Authors, who chose nothing of their
own heads which they might bring in; but the discipline which they received of
Christ, they faithfully delivered to all nations. And Augustine says, Neither
Epist ad F^^^unat. Did. 8.
ought we to esteem of the writings of any men, although they be Catholic and
commendable persons, as of the Canonical Scriptures, as though it were not
lawful (yielding them that reverence which is due unto such men) to disallow
and refuse something in their writings, if perchance we find that they have
thought otherwise then the truth is understood either of others, or of our
selves, through the gift of God. Such am I in other men's writings, In Proe. in
Lib. 3. de Trinie.
as I would have them construers of mine. Again, Be thou not tied to my
writings as it were to the Canonical Scriptures: but in the Canonical
Scriptures, that which thou did not believe, when thou have found it, believe
it incontinently: but in mine that which thou thoughtest to be undoubtedly
true, unless thou perceive it to be true indeed, hold it not resolutely. And
again, I neither can nor ought to deny, that as in those who have gone before,
Ad Vincent. Lio.
so also in so many slender works of mine there are many things, which may with
upright judgment and no rashness be blamed. And again, I have learned to
give this reverence to In Epist. a^ Ierom.
these Writers alone, which are now called Canonical. Again, But I so read
others, that be they never so holy, or never so learned, I do not therefore
think it true, because they have so thought, but because they could persuade
me by other Author, or by Canonical, or at least by probable reasons, which
disagree not from the truth. And in another place, Who knows not that holy
Scripture, De unico baptismo in Epist. ad Vincent.
etc. And, Do not brother against so many divine, etc. For these places are
known even out of the Popes own Decree.

Out of the Confession of SUEVELAND. Art. 1. ss. 1. Whence Sermons are to be
taken.
FIrst, a controversy being raised amongst the learned, about certain
Articles of Christian doctrine, when as the people with us were dangerously
divided by reason of contra^y preachings, we charged our Preachers, that they
should henceforth broach nothing to the people in any Sermon, which either is
not taught in the Scriptures of God, or has not sure ground thereout: as it
was openly Decreed in the Assembly holden at Norimberge in the 22 year after
the smaller account: which moreover is also the opinion of all the holy
Fathers. For seeing Saint Paul writes, That the Scripture given by inspiration
of God is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct, that
the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect to every good work, we
could not determine any otherwise, but that it was meet, that we also being in
danger of schism should fly to that holy Scripture, to which in times past
not only the holy Fathers, Bishops, and Princes, but also the children of God
every where in such extreamitie have always resorted. For Saint Luke
witnesses, not without singular commendation of the Thessalonians, that they
compared the Gospel they had heard of the Apostle with the Scripture, and tried
it. Paul also warns his scholar Timothy, that he exercise himself very
diligently in the Scriptures, and this holy Scripture was had in so high
reputation of all holy Bishops and Doctors, that neither any Bishop desired to
have his ordinances obeyed, nor any Doctor his writings believed, except he had
thereout approved them. And surely seeing Saint Paul does plainly testify,
that by the holy Scripture the man of God is made absolute and perfect to every
good work, no part of Christian truth and sound doctrine can be wanting to him
who with all his might labors to follow and embrace the Scripture of God.

THE SECOND SECTION. Of GOD, in Essence one, in persons three, and of his true
Worship.
The Latter Confession of HELVETIA.
Of God, his Unity, and the Trinity. CHAP. 3.
WE believe and teach, that God is one in Essence or nature, subsisting by
himself, all sufficient in himself, invisible, without a body, infinite,
eternal, the Creator of all things both visible and invisible, the chiefest
good, living, quickening and preserving all things, Almighty, and exceeding
wise, gentle or merciful, just and true. And we detest the multitude of Gods,
because it is expressly written, The Lord thy God is one God. I am the Lord
thy God, Deuteronomy. 6. Exodus 20.
thou shall have no strange Gods before my face. I am the Lord, and there is
none other, beside me there is no God. Am not I the Lord, and there is none
other beside me alone? a just God, and a Savior, there Isa. 54.
is none beside me. I the Lord, Jehovah, the merciful God, gracious, and long
suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, etc. Exodus 34.

We nevertheless believe and teach, that the same infinite, one, and
indivisible God is in persons inseparably and without confusion distinguished
into the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, so as the Father has begotten
the Son from everlasting, the Son is begotten by an unspeakable manner, and the
holy Ghost proceeds from them both, and that from everlasting, and is to be
worshipped with them both. So that there be not three Gods, but three persons,
consubstantiall, coeternall, and coequall, distinct, as touching their persons,
and in order one going before another, yet without any inequality. For as
touching their nature or essence they are so Vide observe. 1 In hanc confess.
joined together, that they are but one God, and the divine essence is common
to the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. For the Scripture has delivered
unto us a manifest distinction of persons, the Angel among other things saying
thus to the blessed Virgin: The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the Luke 1.
highest shall over shadow thee, and that holy thing which shall be borne,
shall be called the Son of God. Also in the Baptism of Christ a voice was
heard from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son. The holy Matthew. 3. John 1.
Ghost also appeared in the likeness of a Dove. And when the Lord himself
commanded to baptize, he commanded To baptize in the Matthew. 28.
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. In like sort else
where in the Gospel he said, The Father will send the holy John 14. 15.
Ghost in my name. Again he says, When the Comforter shall come, whom I will
send unto you from the Father, the spirit of truth, who proceeds from the
Father, he shall bear witness of me, etc. To be short, we receive the
Apostles Creed, because it delivers unto us the true faith.

We therefore condemn the Jews and the Mahometists, and all those that
blaspheme this Trinity, that is sacred, and only to be adored. We also
condemn all heresies and heretics, which teach that the Son and the holy
Ghost are God only in name, also that there is in the Trinity some thing
created, and that serves and ministers unto an other: finally, that there is
in it some thing unequal, greater or less, corporal, or corporally
fashioned, in manners or in will diverse, either confounded, or sole by it self:
as if the Son and holy Ghost were the affections and proprieties of one God the
Father, as the Monarchists, the Novatians, Praxeas, the Patripassians,
Sabellius, Samosatenus, Aetius, Macedonius, Arrius, and such like have thought.

Of Idols or Images of God, of Christ, and of Saints. CHAP. 4.
ANd because God is an invisible spirit, and an incomprehensible essence, he
can not therefore by any Art or Image be expressed. For which cause we fear
not with the Scri^ture to term the Images of God mere lies. We do therefore
reject not only the Idols of the Gentiles, but also the images of Christians.
For although Christ took upon him man's nature, yet he did not therefore take
it, that he might set forth a pattern for Carvers and Painters. He denied that
he came, To destroy the Law Matthew. 5.
and the Prophets: But images are forbidden in the Law and the Prophets. He
denied that his Bodily presence should any whit profit the Church. He promises
that He would by his spirit be present Deuteronomy. 4. Isa. 40. John 16. 2 Cor. 5.
with us for ever: who would then believe that the shadow or picture of his
body does any whit benefit the godly? and seeing that he abides in us by his
spirit, We are therefore the Temples of God. But what agreement has the Temple
of God with images? And seeing 1 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 6.
that the blessed spirits, and Saints in heaven, while they lived here,
abhorred all worship done unto themselves, and spoke against images, who can
think it likely, that the Saints in heaven, and the Act. 3. and 14.
Angels are delighted with their own Images, whereunto men do bow their knees,
uncover their heads, and give such other like honor? But that men might be
instructed in Religion, and put in mind of heavenly things, and of their own
salvation, the Lord commanded To preach the Gospel, not to paint, and instruct
the Mark. 16.
Laytie by pictures: he also instituted Sacraments, but he no where appointed
Images. Furthermore, in every place, which way soever we turn our eyes, we may
see the lively and true creatures of God, which if they be marked, as is meet,
they do much more effectually moove the beholder, then all the Images, or
vain, unmooveable, rotten, and dead pictures of all men whatsoever, of which
the Prophet spoke truly, They have eyes, and see not, etc. Psalm. 115.
Therefore we approove the judgment of Lactantius an ancient writer, who
says, Undoubtedly there is no religion, wheresoever there is a picture. And we
affirm that the blessed Bishop Epiphanius did well, who finding on the Church
doors a veil, that had painted in it the picture as it might be of Christ, or
of some other Saint, he cut and took it away: For that contrary to the
authority of the Scriptures he had seen the picture of a man to hang in the
Church of Christ: and therefore he charged that from thence forth nosuch
vailes, which were contrary to our religion, should be hanged up in the Church
of Christ, but that rather such scruple should be taken away, which was
unworthy the Church of Christ, and all faithful people. Moreover we approove
this sentence of S. Augustine, Cap. 55. de ver a relig. Let not the worship of
mesn works be a religion unto us. For the workmen themselves that make such
things are better, whom yet we ought not to worship.

Of the adoring, worshipping, and invocating of God, through the only
Mediator Jesus Christ. CHAP. V.
WE teach men to adore and worship the true God alone: this honor we impart
to none, according to the commandment of the Lord, thou shall adore the Lord
thy God, and Matthew. 4.
him alone shall thou worship, or, him only shall thou serve. Surely all the
Prophets inveighed earnestly against the people of Israel, whenever they did
adore and worship strange gods, and not the one only true God. But we teach
that God is to be adored and worshipped, as himself has taught us to worship
him, to weete, in spirit and truth, not with any superstition, but with
sincerity, John 5. Isa. 66. Ier. 7. Acts 17.
according to his word, lest at any time he also say unto us, who has required
these things at your hands? For Paul also says, God is not worshipped with man's
hands, as though he needed any thing, etc. We in all dangers, and casualties of
our life, call on him alone, and that by the mediation of the only Mediator,
and our intercessour Jesus Christ. For it is expressly commanded us, Call upon
me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
Psalm. 50.
Moreover, the Lord has made a most large promise, saying, whatsoever ye shall
ask of my Father, he shall give it you. And again, John 16. Matthew. 11.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
And seeing it is written, How shall they call upon him, in Romans 10.
whom they have not believed? and we do believe in God alone, therefore we
call upon him only, and that through Christ. For there is one God (says the
Apostle) and one Mediator between 1 Timothy 2. 1 John 2.
God and men, Christ Jesus. Again, If any man sin, we have an advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, etc. Therefore we do neither adore,
worship, nor pray unto the Saints in heaven, or to other Gods neither do we
acknowledge them for our intercessours or Mediators, before the Father in
heaven. For God and the Mediator Christ do suffice us, neither do we impart
unto others the honor due to God alone and to his Son, because he has
plainly said, I will not give my glory to another: and Isa. 42. Acts 4.
because Peter has said, There is no other name given unto men, whereby they
must be saved, but the name of Christ. In which doubtless they that rest by
faith, do not seek any thing without Christ.

Yet for all that we do neither despise the Saints, nor think basely of them.
For we acknowledge them to be the lively members of Christ, the friends of God,
who have gloriously overcome the flesh and the world. We therefore love them as
brethren, and honor them also, yet not with any worship, but with an
honorable opinion of them, and to conclude, with their just praises. We also
do imitate them. For we desire with most earnest affections and prayers to be
followers of their faith and virtues, to be partakers also with them of
everlasting salvation, to dwell together with them everlastingly with God, and
to rejoice with them in Christ. And in this point we approve that saying of
Saint Augustine, in his book De verarelig. Let not the worship of men departed
be any religion unto us For if they have lived holily, they are not so to be
esteemed, as that they seek such honors, but they will have us to worship
him, by whose illumination, they rejoice that we are fellow servants, as
touching the reward. They are therefore to be honored for imitation, not to be
worshipped for religions sake, etc. And, we much less believe that the
relics of Saints are to be adored or worshipped. Those ancient holy men
seemed sufficiently to have honored their dead, if they had honestly committed
their bodies to the earth, after that the soul was gone up into heaven: and
they thought that the most noble relics of their ancestors were, their
virtues, doctrine, and faith: which as they commended with the praise of the
dead, so they did endeavor to express the same so long as they lived upon
earth. Those ancient men did not swear by the name of the only Iehova, as it
is commanded by the Law of God. Therefore as we are forbidden To swear by the
name of strange Gods, so we do not swear by Deuteronomy. 10. Exodus 23.
Saints, although we be requested thereunto. We therefore in all these things
do reject that doctrine which gives too much unto the Saints in heaven.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA.
WE thus think of God, that he is one in substance, three in Artic. 6.
persons, and almighty. Who as he has by the word, that is, his Son, made
all things of nothing, so by his spirit and providence, he does justly, truly,
and most wisely govern, preserve, and cherish all things.

Who as he is the only Mediator, intercessour, and sacrifice, Artic. 11.
also our high Priest, Lord, and King, so we acknowledge, and with the whole
heart believe, that he alone is our atonement, redemption, satisfaction,
expiation, wisdom, protection, and deliverance, simply rejecting herein all
means of life and salvation, besides this Christ alone.

Out of the Confession of BASIL.
WE believe in God the Father, in God the Son, in God Artic. 1.
the holy Ghost, the holy divine Trinity: three Persons, and one eternal,
Almighty God, in essence and substance, and not three Gods. And in the
marginall note is added. This is proved Artic. 10.
by many places of the whole Scripture of the old and new Testament. Therefore
we mislike the worship and invocation of dead men: the worshipping of Saints,
and setting up of Images, with such like things. And in the same place in the
marginall note upon the word Saints. Nevertheless we confess that they serve
in Gods presence, and that they reign with Christ everlastingly because they
acknowledged Christ, and both in deed and word confessed him to be their
Savior, redemption, and righteousness, without any addition of man's merit.
For this cause do we praise and commend them, as those who have obtained grace
at Gods hand, and are now made heirs of the everlasting kingdom: Yet do we
ascribe all this to the glory of God and of Christ.

We plainly protest that we condemn and renounce, all strange Artic. 11.
and erroneous doctrines, which the spirits of errors bring forth, etc. And
ss. 2. Of the self same article: We condemn that doctrine which says, that
we may in no case swear, although Gods glory and the love of our neighbor
require it. And in the marginall note upon the word Swear. It is lawful to
use an oath in due time. For God has commanded this in the old Testament, and
Christ has not forbidden it in the new: yea Christ and the Apostles did swear.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA or the WALDENSES.
Of the unity of the divine Essence, and of the three Persons. CHAP. 3.
OVt of this fountain of holy Scripture, and Christian instruction, according
to the true and sound understanding and meaning of the holy Ghost, our men
teach by faith to acknowledge, and with the mouth to confess, that the holy
Trinity, to wit God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, are three
distinct Persons: but in essence one only true, alone, eternal, almighty,
and incomprehensible God: of one equal indivisible divine essence, Of whom,
through whom, and in whom are all things: Romans 11. Exodus 20.
who loves and rewards righteousness and virtue, but hates and punishes
all iniquity and sin. According to this faith men are taught, to acknowledge
the wonderful works of God, and those properties which are peculiar to each
person of the holy Trinity, and of the Divine Unity, and to acknowledge the
sovereign and infinite power, wisdom, and goodness of the one only God:
out of which also arises and proceeds the saving knowledge as well of the
Essence, as of the will of God. One kind of works or properties of the three
persons of the Godhead (by which they are discerned one from the other) are the
inward, eternal, and hypostaticall proprieties, which always remain
immutable, and are only apprehended by the eyes of faith, and are these.

That the father, as the fountain and wel-spring of the Godhead, from all
eternity begets the Son, equal to himself, and that himself remains
not begotten, neither yet is he the person of the Son, seeing he is a person
begetting not begotten. The Son is begotten of the eternal. Father from all
eternity true God of God: and as he is a person, he is not the Father, but the
Son begotten of the essence or nature of the Father, and consubstantiall with
him: which Son in the fullness of time, which he had before appointed for
this purpose, himself alone (as he is the Son) took unto him our nature of
the blessed Virgin Mary, and united it into one person with the godhead,
whereof we shall speak afterward. But the holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father and the Son, and so he is neither the Father, nor the Son, but a
person distinct from them eternal; and the substantial love of the Father and
of the Son, surpassing all admiration: these three persons are one true God,
as is aforesaid.

The other kind of works in these persons, and in the unity of the godhead
issues as it were into open sight out of the divine essence and the persons
thereof, in which being distinct they have manifested themselves: and these are
three. The first is the wonderful work of Creation, which the Creeds do
attribute to the Father. The second is the work of Redemption, which is proper
to Christ. The third is the work of Sanctification, which is ascribed to the
holy Ghost, for which cause he in the Apostles Creed is peculiarly called holy.
And yet all these are the proper works of one true God, and that of him alone,
and none other: to wit, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. This true
and absolute faith, and difficult knowledge of God, as well concerning his
nature, as his will, is comprehended, and contained in the aforenamed Catholic
and Apostolical Creed, and in the decree of the Nicene Council, agreeing
therewith, and in many other sound decrees, and also in Athanasius his
confession. All which we judge and profess to be true. But it has everlasting
and sure grounds on which it relyeth, and most weighty reasons, by which it is
out of the holy Scripture convinced to be true: as by that manifestation
wherein the whole Trinity showed it self, when Christ the Lord was baptized
in Iordane: by the commandment Matt. 3. Matt. 28.
of Christ, because in the name of the persons of the same holy Trinity all
people must be baptized and instructed in the faith. Also by Christ's words,
when he says, the holy Ghost the Comforter whom the Father will send in my
name, shall teach you all these John 14.
things: and before these words he says: I will pray the Father, and he will
give you another Comforter, who shall be with you for ever, even the spirit of
truth. Besides we teach, that this only true God, one in essence and in divine
nature, and three in persons, is above all to be honored with high worship, as
chief Lord and King, who rules and reigns always and for ever, and
especially after this sort, that we look unto him above all, and put all our
confidence in him alone, and offering unto him all subjection, obedience,
fear, all faith, love, and generally the service of the whole inward and
outward divine worship, do indeed sacrifice and perform it, under pain of
loosing everlasting salvation: as it is written: Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve: and again, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God Deuteronomy. 6. Matt. 22. Mar. 12. Luke 10.
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and to be short,
with all thy might, as well of the inward as outward powers, to whom be glory
from this time forth for evermore, Amen.

Of holy men and their worship. CHAP. 17.
AS touching holy men, it is taught, first, that no man from the beginning of
the world unto this time, either was is, or can be henceforth unto the end
sanctified by his works or holy actions: according to the saying of Moses, the
faithful servant of the Lord, when he cried out unto the Lord, O Lord in thy
sight no man Exodus 34. Job. 15.
is innocent, that is, perfectly holy. And in the book of Job it is written,
What is man, that he should be undefiled, and he that is borne of a woman, that
he should appear just? (to wit, before God.) Behold among his Saints, none is
immutable, and the heavens are not clean in his sight: how much more
abominable and unprofitable man, who drinks in iniquity as water? And the
holy Scripture plainly witnesses throughout all the books thereof, that all
men Ephesians. 2. Psalm. 14.
even from their birth are by nature sinners, and that there neither is, nor
has been any one, who of himself and by himself was righteous and holy, but
all have gone aside from God, and are become Romans 3.
unprofitable, and of no account at all. And whereas some are made holy and
acceptable unto God, that is purchased unto them without any worthiness or
merit of theirs, by him, who alone is holy. God himself, of the mere grace,
and unspeakable riches of his goodness has ordained, and brought them to that
estate, that they be blessed, and called redeemed by Christ, cleansed and
consecrated by his blood, anointed of the holy Ghost, made righteous and holy
by faith in Christ, and adorned with commendable virtues and good deeds or
works, which beseem a Christian profession: Of whom many having finished
their life and course in such works, have now received and do enjoy by grace
eternal felicity in heaven, where God crowns those that be his. Some of
them also God has endued wiht a certain peculiar grace of his, and with divine
gifts, unto the ministry, and to the public and common good of the Church,
such as were the Patriarchs, Prophets, and other holy fathers, also Apostles,
Evangelists, Bishops, and many Doctors and Pastors: and also other famous men,
and of rare excellency, and very well furnished with the spirit, whose memory,
monuments of their labors, and the good things which they did, are extant and
continue even until this day in the holy Scriptures and in the Church.

But especially it is both believed, and by open confession made known, as
touching the holy Virgin Mary, that she was a daughter of the blood royal, of
the house and family of David that dear servant and friend of God: and that
she was chosen and blessed of God the Father, consecrated by the holy Ghost,
visited, and sanctified above other of her sex: and also replenished with
wonderful grace and power of God to this end, that she might become the true
mother of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God: of whom he vouchsafed to take
our nature: and that she was at all times, before her birth, in the same, and
after it, a true, chaste, and pure Virgin: and that by her best beloved Son,
the Son also of the living God, through the price of his death, and the
effusion of his most holy blood, she was dearly redeemed and sanctified, as
also made one of the dear partakers of Christ by the holy Ghost through faith,
being adorned with excellent gifts, noble virtues, and fruits of good works,
renowned as happy before all others, and made most assuredly a joint heir of
everlasting life. And a little after. Furthermore, it is taught in the Church,
that no man ought so to reverence holy men as we are to worship God, much less
their Images, or to reverence them with that worship and affection of mind
which only are due to God alone. And, to be short, by no means to honor them
with divine worship, or to give it unto them. For God says by the Prophet
Esaias, I am the Lord thy God, this is my name, I will not give mine honor to
another, nor my glory to Images. Again a Esa 42. 48.
little after. But even as that thing is gainsaid, that the honor due to God
should be given to Saints, so it is by no means to be suffered, that the
honor of the Lamb Christ our Lord, and things belonging to him, and due to
him alone, and appertaining to the proper and true Priesthood of his nature,
should be transferred to them: that is, lest of them, and those torments which
they suffered, we should make redeemers or merits in this life, or else
advocates, intercessours, and Mediators in heaven, or that we should invocate
them, and not them only, but not so much as the holy Angels, seeing they are
not God. For there is one only 1 Timothy 2. Hebr. 9. 1 Timothy 2. 1 Jo^. 2.
Redeemer, who being once delivered to death, sacrificed himself both in his
body and in his blood: there is also one only Advocate, the most merciful
Lord of us all.

And they are not only to be reputed and taken for Saints, who are gone before
us, and are fallen a sleep in the Lord, and dwell now in joys, but also they,
who (as there have always been some upon earth) so do likewise live now on
the earth: such are all true and godly Christians, in what place or country
soever, here or there, and among what people soever they lead their life: who
by being baptized in the name of the Lord may be sanctified, and being endued
with true faith in the Son of God, and set on fire, are mutually enflamed
with affection of divine charity and love: who also acknowledging the
justification of Christ, do use both it and absolution from their sins, and
the communion of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and diligently
apply themselves to all holy exercises of piety beseeming a Christian
profession: as also the Apostles call such believers in Christ, (which as yet
like strangers are conversant here on earth according to the state of mortal
men) Saints. As for example, Ye are 1 Pet 2. 2 Cor. 1^. Heb. 1^.
a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people.
Again all the Saints greet you. In like manner, Salute all those that have
the oversight of you, and all the Saints, that is, all faithful Christians.

For this cause it is taught that we ought, with entire love and favor of the
heart to embrace all Christians, before all other people, and when need is,
from the same affection of love to afford unto them our sevice and to help
them: further, that we ought to maintain the society of holy friendship with
those that love and follow the truth of Christ, with all good affection to
conceive well of them, to have them in honor for Christ's sake, to give unto
Rom 12 Gal 6. 1 Cor 12.
them due reverence from the affection of Christian love, and to study in
procuring all good by our duty and service to plea^ure them, and finally to
desire their prayers for us. And that Christians going astray, and entangled
with sins, are lovingly and gently to be brought to amendment: that
compassion is to be had on them, that they are with a quiet mind in love, so
as becomes, to be borne withal, that prayer is to be made unto God for them,
that he would bring them again into the way of salvation, to the end that the
holy Gospel may be spread farther abroad, and Christ's glory may be made known
and enlarged among all men.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE believe and acknowledge one only God, who is one only and simple
essence, spiritual, eternal, invisible, immutable, infinite,
incomprehensible, unspeakable, almighty, most wise, good, just, and merciful.

The holy Scripture teaches us that in that one and simple divine essence,
there be three persons subsisting, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
The Father, to wit, the first cause in order, and the beginning of all things:
the Son, his wisdom and everlasting word: the holy Ghost, his virtue, power,
and efficacy: the Son begotten of the Father from everlasting, the holy
Ghost from everlasting proceeding from the Father and the Son: which three
persons are not confounded but distinct, and yet not divided, but coessentiall,
coeternall, and coequall. And to conclude, in this mystery we allow of that
which those four ancient Councels have decreed: and we detest all sects
condemned by those holy ancient Doctors, Athanasius, Hylarie, Cyrill, Ambrose,
and such as are condemned by others agreeably to Gods word, Hitherto also
belongs the 2. Art.

This one God has revealed himself unto men to be such a one, first by the
creation, preservation, and government of his works, then much more clearly in
his word, etc. Seek the rest in the 3. division.

We believe, that we by this one means obtain liberty of praying Artic. 19.
to God with a sure confidence, and that it will come to pass that he will
show himself a Father unto us. For we have no entrance to the Father, but by
this Mediator.

We believe because Jesus Christ is the only Advocate given Artic. 24.
unto us, who also commands us to come boldly unto the Father in his name,
that it is not lawful for us to make our prayers in any other form, but in
that which God has set us down in his word: and that whatsoever men have
forged of the intercession of Saints departed, is nothing but the deceits and
sleights of Satan, that he might withdraw men from the right manner of praying.
We also reject all other means whatsoever men have devised to exempt
themselves from the wrath of God. So much as is given unto them, so much is
derogated from the sacrifice and death of Christ.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
WE believe, that there is one certain nature and divine Artic. 1.
power, which we call God: and that the same is divided into three equal
persons, into the Father, into the Son, and into the holy Ghost: and that
they all be of one power, of one majesty, of one eternity, of one Godhead,
and one substance. And although these three persons be so divided, that neither
the Father is the Son, nor the Son is the holy Ghost, or the Father, yet
nevertheless we believe, that there is but one very God: And that the same one
God has created heaven, and earth, and all things contained under heaven.

We believe, that Jesus Christ the only Son of the eternal Artic 2.
Father, etc. The rest of this article you shall find in the 6. section,
whereunto those things do properly pertain, which are contained in this
second article, of the Person and Office of Christ.

We believe that the holy Ghost, who is the third person in the Artic 3.
Trinity, is very God, not made, not created, not begotten, but proceeding
both from the Father and the Son, by a certain mean unknown unto man, and
unspeakable: and that it is his very property to mollify and soften the
hardness of man's heart, when he is once received into the hearts of men, either
by the wholesome preaching of the Gospel, or by any other way: that he does
give other men light, and guide them unto the knowledge of God, to all way of
truth, to newness of life, and to everlasting hope of salvation.

Neither have we any other Mediator, and Intercessour, by Artic 3.
whom we may have access to God the Father, then Jesus Christ, in whose only
name all things are obtained at his Fathers hand. But it is a shameful part,
and full of infidelity, that we see every where used in the Churches of our
adversaries, not only in that they will have innumerable sorts of Mediators,
and that utterly without the authority of Gods word, (so that as, Jeremy
says, the the Saints be now as many in number, or rather above the number of
the Cities: And poor men cannot tell, to which Saint it were best to turn
them first: and though there be so many, as they cannot be told, yet every of
them has his peculiar duty and office assigned unto him by these folks, what
to give, and what to bring to pass) But besides this also, in that they do
not only wickedly, but also shamefully call upon the Blessed Virgin Christ's
Mother, to have her remember, that she is the Mother. And to Command her Son,
and to use a Mothers authority over him.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe in heart, and confess with the mouth, that Ar^^^ ^.
there is one only and simple spiritual essence which we call God, eternal,
incomprehensible, invisible immutable; infinite, who is wholly wise, and a most
plentiful wellspring of all good things.

We know God by two means: first by the creation, and preservation Artic. 2.
and government of the whole world. For it is unto our eyes as a most excellent
book, wherein all creatures from the least to the greatest as it were certain
characters and letters are written, By which the invisible things of God may
be seen and known unto us, Namely his everlasting power and Godhead, as Paul
the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. ^0. which knowledge suffices to convince all men
and make them without excuse. But much more clearly and plainly he afterward
revealed himself unto us in his holy and heavenly word, so far forth as it is
expedient for his own glory, and the salvation of his in this life.

According to this truth and word of God we believe in one only God (who is
one essence, truly distinguished into three persons from everlasting by mean
of the incommunicable properties) to wit, in the Father, in the Son, and in
the holy Ghost. For the Father is the cause, fountain, and beginning of all
things visible, and invisible: the Son is the Word, wisdom, and Image of
the Father, the holy Ghost is the might and power which proceeds from the
Father and the Son. Yet so, that this distinction does not make God as it
were divided into three parts: seeing the Scripture teaches, that the Father,
and the Son, and the holy Ghost, have a distinct person or subsisting in
their properties, yet so, that these three persons be one only God. Therefore
it is certain, that neither the Father is the Son, nor the Son the Father,
nor the holy Ghost either the Father, or the Son. Nevertheless these persons
thus distinguished, are neither divided, nor confounded, nor mingled. For
neither the Father nor the holy Ghost have taken unto them man's nature, but the
Son alone. The Father was never without his Son, nor without his holy
Ghost, because every one in one and the same essence is of the same eternity.
For none of these is either first or last, because all three are one, both in
truth and power, and also in goodness and mercy.

And all these things we know as well by the Testimonies of holy Scripture, as
by the effects: and chiefly those which we feel in our own selves, and the
testimonies of holy Scripture, which teach us to believe this holy Trinity,
are very common in the old Testament: which are not so much to be reckoned up,
as with sound judgment to be selected, such as are in these: in the first of
Genesis God says, Let us make man according to our Image and likeness, etc.
and straight after: Therefore God made man according to his own Image and
likeness, male, I say, and female created he them. Again, Behold the man is
become as one of us. For by that which is said, Let us make man after our own
likeness, it appears that there are more persons in the godhead. But when it
is said, God created, etc. the unity of the godhead is signified. For although
it be not here expressly set down how many persons there are, yet that which
was obscurely delivered in the old Testament, in the new is made clearer unto
us then the noone day. For when our Lord Jesus Christ was baptized in Jordan,
the voice of the Father was heard, saying, This is my beloved Son: and the
Son himself was seen in the waters, and the holy Ghost appeared in the
likeness of a Dove. Therefore we are also commanded in the common baptism of
all the faithful to use this form, Baptize ye all nations in the name of the
Father, and the Son, and the holy Ghost. Lo also in Luke, the Angel Gabriel
speaks to Mary the Mother of our Lord. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the highest shall over shadow thee, therefore that holy thing
which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God. In like manner,
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with you. Again, There are three that bear witness in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, which three are one. By all
which places we are fully taught, that in one only God there are three
persons. And although this doctrine pass all the reach of man's wit, yet we now
steadfastly believe it out of the Word of God, looking when we shall enjoy the
full knowledge thereof in heaven. The offices also and effects of these three
persons, which every of them shows toward us, are to be marked. For the
Father by reason of his power is called our Creator: the Son our Savior and
Redeemer, because he has redeemed us by his blood: the holy Ghost is called
our Sanctifier, because he dwells in our hearts. And the true Church has
always even from the Apostles age until these times kept this holy doctrine
of the blessed Trinity, and maintains it against Jews, Mahometanes, and
other false Christians, and heretics, such as were Marcion, Manes, Praxeas,
Sabellius, Samosatenus, and the like: all which were worthily condemned by the
fathers of most sound judgment. Therefore we do here willingly admit those
three Creeds: namely that of the Apostles, of Nice, and Athanasius, and
whatsoever things they, according to the meaning of those Creeds, have set
down, concerning this point of doctrine.

We believe that Jesus Christ in respect of his divine nature is Artic. 10.
the only Son of God, begotten from everlasting, not made or created (for
then he should be a creature) but of the same essence with the Father, and
coeternall with him: who also is the true Image of the Fathers substance, and
the brightness of his glory, in all things equal unto him. But he is the
Son of God, not only since the time he took upon him our nature, but from
everlasting, as these testimonies being laid together teach us. Moses says,
that God created the world: but Saint John says, That all things were made by
the word, which he calls God: so the Apostle to the Hebrews avoucheth, that
God made all things by his Son Jesus Christ. It follows therefore, that he
who is called both God, and the Word, and the Son, and Jesus Christ had his
being even then, when all things were made by him. Therefore Micheah the
Prophet says, His going out has been from the beginning, from the days of
eternity: again, He is without beginning of days, and without end of life.
He is therefore that true God, eternal, Almighty, whom we pray unto, worship,
and serve.

We believe also and confess, that the holy Ghost proceeds Artic. 11.
from the Father and the Son from everlasting, and that therefore he was
neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but only proceeding from them both,
who is in order the third person of the Trinity, of the same essence, glory
and majesty with the Father and the Son, and therefore he also is true and
everlasting God, as the holy Scriptures teach us. Artic. 26.


We also believe that we have no access to God, but by that one only
Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ the righteous, who was therefore made man
(uniting the humanity to the Divine nature) that there might be an entrance
made for us miserable men to the Majesty of God: which had otherwise been shut
up against us for ever. Yet the Majesty and power of this Mediator (whom the
Father had set between himself and us) ought in no case so much to fray us,
that we should therefore think another is to be sought at our own pleasure.
For there is none either among the heavenly or earthly creatures, who does more
entirely love us then Christ himself, who when he was in the shape of God,
humbled himself by taking upon him the shape of a servant, and for our sakes
became like unto his brethren in all points, and if we were to seek an other
Mediator, who would vouchsafe us some good will, whom I pray you, could we
find, that would love us more earnestly then he, who willingly laid his life
down for us, when as yet we were his enemies? If moreover we were to seek
another that excels both in sovereign authority and also power, who ever
obtained so great power, as he himself, who sits at the right hand of God
the Father, and to whom all power is given in heaven and in earth? To conclude,
who was more likely to be heard of God, then that only begotten and dearly
beloved Son of God? therefore nothing but distrust brought in this custom,
whereby we rather dishonor the Saints (whom we think to honor) in doing these
things, which they in their life time were ever so far from doing, that they
rather constantly and according to their duty abhorred them, as their own
writings bear witness. Neither is our own unworthiness here to be alleged
for excuse of so great ungodliness. For we at no hand offer up our prayers
trusting to our own worthiness, but resting upon the only worthiness and
excellency of the Lord Jesus Christ, whose righteousness is ours by faith,
whereupon the Apostle for good cause to exempt us from this vain fear (or
rather distrust) says, that Christ was in all things made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest in those
things that were to be done with God for the cleansing of the peoples sins. For
in as much as he being tempted has suffered, he is also able to help those
that are tempted. And that he might encourage us to come the more boldly to
this high Priest, the same Apostle adds, Having therefore a great high
Priest, who has entered the heavens, even Jesus the Son of God, let us hold
fast this profession. For we have not an high Priest that cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities, but he was in all things tempted in like
sort, yet without sin. Let us therefore with boldness approach unto the throne
of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need.
The same Apostle says, that we have liberty to enter into the holy place
through the blood of Jesus. Let us therefore draw near with a constant
persuasion of faith, etc, And again, Christ has an everlasting Priesthood.
Wherefore he is able also to save them, that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives, to make intercession for them. What need many words? when as
Christ himself says, I am the way, the truth, and the life. No man comes to
the father but by me. Why should we seek unto our selves any other Advocate?
especially seeing it has pleased God himself to give us his own son for our
advocate, there is no cause why forsaking him we should seek another, lest by
continual seeking we never find any other. For God undoubtedlie knew, when he
gave him unto us, that we were miserable sinners. Whereupon it is, that
according to Christ's own commandment, we only call upon the heavenly Father,
by the self same Jesus Christ our only Mediator, even as he himself also has
taught us in the Lords Prayer. For we are sure that we shall obtain all those
things, which we ask of the Father in his name.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
CHAP. 3.
THE Churches with common consent among us do teach, Artic. 1.
that the Decree of the Nicene Council, concerning the unity of the Divine
Essence, and of the three persons, is true, and without all doubt to be
believed: To wit, that there is one Divine Essence, which is called, and is
God, eternal, without body, indivisible, of infinite power, wisdom,
goodness, the Creator and preserver of all things visible and invisible: and
that there be three persons, of the same essence, and power, which also are
coeternall, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. And they use the name of
person in that signification, in which the Ecclesiastical Writers have used it
in this cause to signify not a part or quality in another, but that which
properly subsisteth.

They condemn all heresies sprung up against this Article, as the Manichees,
who set down two beginnings, Good and Evil: they do in like sort condemn the
Valentinians, Arrians, Eunomians, Mahometists, and all such like. They condemn
also the Samosatenes, old and new, who when they earnestly defend that there is
but one person, do craftily and wickedly dally after the manner of
Rhetoricians, about the Word and the holy Ghost, that they are not distinct
persons, but that the Word signifies a vocal word, and the Spirit a motion
created in things.

Artic. 21. We have found this 21. Article set forth three diverse ways. The
first Edition 1559. goes thus.
INvocation is an honor, which is to be given only to God Almighty, that is,
to the eternal Father, and to his Son our Savior Jesus Christ, and to the
holy Ghost. And God has proposed his Son Jesus Christ for a Mediator, and
high Priest that makes intercession for us. He testifies, that for him alone
our prayers are heard and accepted, according to that saying, Whatsoever you
ask the Father in my name, he shall give it to you. Again, There is one
Mediator between God and men. Therefore let them that call upon God offer up
their prayers by the Son of God, as in the end of prayers it is accustomed to
be said in the Church, through Jesus Christ, etc. These things are needful to
be taught concerning Invocation, as our men have elsewhere more at large
written of Invocation. But contrariwise the custom of invocating Saints that
are departed out of this life is to be reprooved and quite thrown out of the
Church, because this custom transferreth the glory due to God alone unto men,
it ascribes unto the dead an Omnipotency, in that Saints should see the
motions of men's hearts, yea it ascribes unto the dead the office of Christ the
Mediator, and without all doubt obscureth the glory of Christ. Therefore we
condemn the whole custom of invocating Saints departed, and think it is to
be avoided. Notwithstanding it profits to recite the true Histories of holy
men, because their examples do profitably instruct, if they be rightly
propounded. When we hear that David's fall was forgiven him, faith is confirmed
in us also. The constancy of the ancient Martyrs does now likewise strengthen
the minds of the godly. For this use it is profitable to the recite the
Histories. But yet there had need be discretion in applying examples.

The second Edition is thus. Artic. 21.
COncerning the worship of Saints they teach, that it is profitable to propose
the memory of Saints, that by their examples we may strengthen our faith, and
that we may follow their faith and good works, so far as every man's calling
requires, as the Emperor may follow David's example in making war to beat
back the Turks, for either of them is a King: we ought also to give God
thanks, that he has propounded so many and glorious examples of his mercy in
the Saints of his Church, and that he has adorned his Church with most
excellent gifts and virtues of holy men. The Saints themselves also are to be
commended, who have holily used those gifts which they employed to the
beautifying of the Church: But the Scripture teaches not to invocate Saints,
or to ask help of Saints, but lays only Christ before us for a Mediator,
Propitiatour, high Priest and Intercessour. Concerning him we have
commandments and promises, that we invocate him, and should be resolved that
our prayers are heard, when we fly to this high Priest and Intercessour, as
John says, Chap. 16. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will
give it you, etc. and John 14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that I will
do. These testimonies bid us fly unto Christ, they command us to believe that
Christ is the Intercessour and Peace maker, they bid us trust assuredly that we
are heard of the Father for Christ's sake. But as touching the Saints, there are
neither commandments, nor promises, nor examples for this purpose in the
Scriptures. And Christ's office and honor is obscured, when men fly to Saints,
and take them for Mediators, and invocate them, and frame unto themselves an
opinion, that the Saints are more gracious and so transfer the confidence due
to Christ unto Saints. But Paul says, There is one Mediator between God and
men. Therefore Christ especially requires this worship, that we should believe
that he is to be sought unto, that he is the Intercessour, for whose sake we
are sure to be heard, etc.

In the third Edition these things are thus found. Artic. 21.
TOuching the worship of Saints they teach, that the memory of Saints may be
set before us, that we may follow their faith and good works according to our
calling, as the Emperor may follow David's example in making war to drive
away the Turks from his country: for either of them is a King. But the
Scripture teaches not invocate Saints, or to ask help of Saints, because it
propounds unto us one Christ the Mediator, Propitiatour, high Priest, and
intercessour. This Christ is to be invocated, and he has promised that he will
hear our prayers, and likes this worship especially, to wit, that he be
invocated in all afflictions, 1 Ioh. 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate
with God, etc.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY. Of invocating godly men that are departed out
of this life. Artic. 22.
IN the 42. Chapter of Esaias it is written, I am the Lord, this is my name, I
will not give my glory to another: Invocation is a glory most properly
belonging to God, as the Lord says, Matthew. 4. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. And it is an immooveable and eternal
Decree of the first Commandment, Thou shall have no strange Gods. It is
necessary therefore that the doctrine touching Invocation should be most purely
upholden in the Church, for the corrupting of which the devil, even since the
beginning of mankind, has and will diverse ways scatter seeds. Wherefore we
ought to be the more watchful, and with greater care to retain the manner of
invocation or adoration set down in Gods word, according to that saying,
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will do it. In these words
there is an order established, which we ought most constantly to maintain, not
to mingle therewith other means contrary to Gods word, or which are warranted
by no example approoved in the Scriptures. There is no greater virtue, no
comfort more effectual, then true invocation. They therefore must needs be
reprooved, who either neglect true invocation or corrupt it, as there be diverse
corruptions. Many do not discern their own invocation from that which is
heathenish, neither indeed consider what it is which they speak unto. Of these
the Lord says, John Chapter 4. Ye worship ye know not what. He will have the
Church to consider whereto it speaks, saying, We worship that we know. Many
consider not whether or wherefore they shall be heard. They recite prayers, and
yet they doubt although it be written, Let him ask in faith without wavering.
Of these matters we will speak elsewhere. In this place we reproove this
heathenish corruption, whereby the custom of those that ca^^ upon men departed
out of this life, is defended, and help or intercession is sought for at their
hands. Such invocation swarveth from God, and gives unto creatures virtue,
help, or intercession. For they that speak some what modestly, speak of
intercession alone. But humane superstition goes on farther, and gives virtue
to them, as many public songs declare. O Mary Mother of grace, defend thou us
from the enemy, and receive us in the hour of death. These short verses have
we heard a Monk of their divinity say before one that lay a dying and often
repeating them, whereas he made no mention of Christ: and many such examples
might be rehearsed.

There are yet also other brainsick opinions. Some are thought to be more
gracious with such or such images: these frantike imaginations seeing they are
at the first sight like heathenish conceits, do undoubtedly both greatly
provoke the wrath of God, and are to be reprooved by the Teachers, and sharply
to be punished by Godly Magistrates, which reproof contains these three
manifest reasons: To ascribe unto creatures omnipotency, is impiety.
Invocation of a creature, which is departed from the society of this life,
ascribes unto it Omnipotency, because it is a confession, that it beholds
all men's hearts, and discerns the true sighs thereof from feined and
hypocritical. These are only to be given to the eternal Father, to his Son
our Lord Jesus Christ; and to the holy Ghost. Invocation therefore is not to be
made to men that are departed out of this life. It is to be lamented that these
evils are not perceived: but look to thy self, and weigh what thou do: in
this invocation thou forsakest God, and do not consider what thou do
invocate, and thou know that those patrones which thou seek, as A^ne and
George, see not the motion of thy heart, who if they know themselves to be
invocated, they would even tremble, and would not have this honor (...) to
God, given to any creatures. But what kind of invocation is there of the
deaf? Albeit we know what answer the Adversaries make (for they have coined
cavils to delude the truth) yet Gods testimonies are wanting to their answer,
and prayer which is without faith (that is, when thou can not be resolved
whether God allow and admit such kind of praying) is in vain.

We remember that Luther often said, that in the old Testament it is a clear
testimony of the Messiah his Godhead, which affirms that he is to be
invocated, and by this property is the Messiah there distinguished from other
Prophets: he complained that that most weighty testimony was obscured and
weakened by transferring prayer to other men. And for this only cause he said,
that the custom of praying to other was to be misliked.

The second reason is, Invocation is vain without faith, and no worship is to
be brought into the Church without Gods commandment: but there is no one
sentence to be seen, which shows that this prayer made to men, which they
maintain, pleases God, and is effectual: the prayer therefore is vain. For
what kind of praying is it, in this sort to come unto Anne or George? I pray
unto thee, but I doubt whether thy intercession do me good, I doubt whether
thou hear me, or helpest me. If men understood these hid sins, they woudl
curse such kind of prayers, as they are indeed to be cursed, and are
heathenish. Afterward of such faults what outrages ensue? flocking and praying
to particular images, craving certain benefits of every one; of Anne, riches
are begged, as of Juno, of George, conquests, as of Mars, of Sebastian and
Paul, freedom from the Plague, of Anthony, savegard for swine, although the
adversaries say they like not these things, yet they keep them still for gain
sake, as plainly appears.

Now let us add the third reason: it is expressly written, there is one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, on him ought we in all
prayer to cast our eyes, and to know the doctrine of the Gospel concerning him,
that no man can come unto God but by confidence in the Mediator, who together
makes request for us, as himself says. No man comes to the Father, but by
the Son. And he bids us fly unto himself, saying. Come unto me all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you: and he himself
teaches the manner of Invocation, when he says, Whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name, he will give it you. He names the Father, that thou may
distinguish thy invocation from heathenish, and consider what thou speak
unto: that thou may consider him to be the true God, who by sending his
Son, has revealed himself, that thy mind may not wander, as the heathenish
woman in the tragedy speaks, I pray ununto thee, O God, whatsoever thou art,
etc. But that thou may know him to be the true God, who by the sending,
crucifying, and and raising up again of his Son has revealed himself, and
may know him to be such a one as he has revealed himself. Secondly, that
thou may know, that he does so for a certainty receive and hear us, making
our prayers when we fly to his Son the Mediator, crucified and raised up
again for us, and desire that for his sake we may be received, heard, helped,
and saved, neither is any man received or heard of God by any other means.
Neither is the praying uncertain, but he bids those that pray on this sort
to be resolved through a strong faith, that this worship pleases God, and that
they who pray on this manner are assuredly received and heard: therefore he
says, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that is, acknowledging, and naming
or calling upon me as the Redeemer, high Priest, and Intercessour: this high
Priest alone goes into the holiest place, that is, into the secret counsel of
the Deity, and sees the mind of the eternal Father, and makes request for
us, and searching our hearts presents our sorrows, sighs, and prayers unto
him.

It is plain that this doctrine of the Mediator was obscured and corrupted,
when men went to the Mother Virgin, as more merciful, and others sought other
Mediators, And it is plain that there is no example to be seen in the
Prophets or Apostles, where prayer is made unto men, hear me Abraham, or hear
me O God for Abraham's sake: but prayer is made unto God, who has revealed
himself, to wit, to the eternal Father, to the Son our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to the holy Ghost, that he would receive, hear and save us for the Sons
sake. It is also expressly made to the Son, as 2 Thessalonians. 2 Our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, and God and our Father, who has loved us, strengthen you,
etc. And Genesis 48. Jacob names God, and the Son the Mediator, when he says,
God before whom my fathers walked, and the Angel that delivered me out of all
troubles (that is the promised Savior) bless these children. Therefore we use
these forms of Invocation. I call upon thee O Almighty God, eternal Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of heaven an earth, together with thy Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, and thy holy Spirit, O wise, true, good, righteous, most
free, chaste, and merciful God, have mercy upon me, and for Jesus Christ's
sake, thy Son, crucified for us, and raised up again, hear and sanctify me
with thy holy Spirit. I call upon thee O Jesus Christ, the son of God,
crucified for us, and raised up again: have mercy on me, pray for me unto the
everlasting Father, and sanctify me with thy holy Spirit. In these forms we
know what we pray unto. And seeing there are testimonies of Gods word to be
seen, which show that this praying pleases God, and is heard, such praying
may be made in faith. These things are not to be found in that invocation which
is made unto men. Some gather testimonies out of Augustine and others, to show
that the Saints in heaven have care of humane affairs. This may more plainly
be showed by Moses and Elias talking with Christ. And there is no doubt but
that such as are in happiness pray for the Church, but yet it follows not
thereupon that they are to be prayed unto.

And albeit we teach that men are not to be prayed unto, yet we propound the
histories of those that are in blessed state unto the people. Because it is
necessary that the history of the Church be by some means known unto all, by
what testimonies the Church is called together and founded, and how it is
preserved, and what kind of doctrine has been published by the fathers,
Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs. In these histories we command all to give
thanks unto God, for that he has revealed himself, that he has gathered
together his Church by his Son, that he has delivered this doctrine unto us,
and has sent teachers, and has showed in them the witnesses of himself: we
command all to consider of this doctrine, and to strengthen their faith by
those testimonies, which God has showed in them. That they like wise consider
the examples of judgment and punishments, that the fear of God may be stirred
up in them: we command them to follow their faith, patience, and other virtues,
that they learn that in God is no respect of persons, and desire to have
themselves also received, heard, governed, saved, and helped, as God received
David, Manasses, Magdalene, the thief on the Cross. We also teach how these
examples are to be followed of every man in his vocation: because error in
imitation, and preposterous zeal is often times the cause of great evils. We
also commend the diligence of the Saints themselves, who took heed of De
essusione S p sancti, vide observat. 1. ad hanc Confess. Sect. 4.
wasting Gods gifts in vain. And to conclude, they that are most fools may
gather great store of doctrine out of these histories, which doctrine is
profitable to be published to the people, so that superstition be set aside.

Out of the Confession of WITTEMBERGE
CHAP. 1.
WE believe and confess that there is one only God, true, eternal, and
infinite, almighty, maker of all things visible and invisible, and that in
this one and eternal Godhead there are three properties or persons of
themselves subsisting, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. As the
Prophetical and Apostolical Scriptures teach, and the Creedes of the Apostles
of Nice and of Athanasius declare.

Of the Son of God. CHAP. 2.
WE believe and confess that the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, was
begotten of his Father from everlasting, true and everlasting God,
consubstantiall with his Father, etc. Look the rest in the 6. division.

Of the holy Ghost. CHAP. 3.
WE believe and confess that the holy Ghost proceeds from God the Father,
from everlasting, that he is true and eternal God, of the same essence, and
majesty, and glory with the Father, and the Son, as the holy Fathers, by
authority of the holy Scripture, well declared in the Council of
Constantinople against Macedonius.

Of Invocation of Saints. CHAP. 23.
THere is no doubt but the memory of those Saints, who when they were in this
bodily life furthered the Church either by doctrine or writings, or by
miracles, or by examples, and have either witnessed the truth of the Gospel by
Martyrdom, or by a quiet kind of death fallen on sleep in Christ, ought to
be sacred with all the godly: and they are to be commended to the Church, that
by their doctrine and examples, we may be strengthened in true faith, and
inflamed to follow true godliness.

We confess also, that the Saints in heaven do after their certain manner
pray for us before God, as the Angels also are careful * Vide observe. 1. ad
confess. Saxon. sect. 1.
for us, and all the creatures do after a certain heavenly manner groan for
our salvation, and travel together with us, as Paul speaks. But as the
worship of invocation of creatures is not to be instituted upon their
groanings, so upon the prayer of Saints in heaven, we may not allow the
invocation of Saints. For touching the invocating of them, there is no
commandment, nor example in the holy Scriptures. For seeing all hope of our
salvation is to be put, not in the Saints, but in our Lord God alone, through
his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, it is clear, that not the Saints, but God
alone is to be prayed unto. How shall they call on him, says Paul, in whom
they believe not? but we must not believe in the Saints: how then shall we pray
unto them? And seeing it must needs be, that he who is prayed unto be a
searcher of the heart, the Saints ought not to be prayed unto, because they are
no searchers of the heart.

Epiphanius says, Mary's body was holy indeed, but yet not God, Contra
Collyidia eos.
she was indeed a Virgin, and honorable, but she was not propounded for
adoration, but her self worshipped him, who as concerning his flesh was borne
of her. Austine says Let not the worship of dead men be De vera relig. cap.
ult.
any religion unto us, because if they have lived holily, they are not so to be
accounted of, as that they should seek such honor, but rather they will have
him to be worshipped of us, by whom themselves being illuminated rejoice, that
we should be fellow servants of their reward. Ibidem.
They are therefore to be honored for imitation not to be worshipped for
Religion sake. And again in the same place. We honor them with love, not with
service. Neither do we erect temples unot them, for they will not have
themselves so to be honored of us, because they know that we our selves being
good, are the Temples of the high God. And again, Neither do we consecrate
temples, Priesthoods, holy De ^ivit Dcil 8 cap 27
rites, ceremonies, and sacrifices unto the same Martyrs, seeing not they, but
their God, is our God, etc. We neither ordain Priests for our Martyrs, nor
offer sacrifices. Ambrose upon the Romans, Chap. 1. They are wont to use a
miserable excuse, saying, that by these, men may have access unto God, as to a
King by Earls. Go to, is any man so mad, I pray you, that being forgetful of
his own salvation, he will challenge, as fit for an Earl, the royalty of a
King? And straight after. These men think them not guilty, that give the
honor of Gods name to a creature, and leaving the Lord, worship their fellow
servants.

But we, say they, worship not the Saints, but only desire to be helped before
God by their prayers. But so to desire, as the service of Letanies shows, and
is commonly used, is nothing else but to call upon and worship Saints: for such
desiring requires, that he who is desired, be every where present and hear
the petition. But this Majesty agrees to God alone, and if it be given to the
creature, the creature is worshipped.

Some men feign that the Saints see in Gods Word, what things God promises,
and what things seem profitable for us: which thing although it be not
impossible to the Majesty of God, yet Esaias plainly avoucheth. That Abraham
knows us not, and Israel is ignorant of us: where the ordinary gloss cites
Augustine, saying, that the dead, even Saints, know not what the living do,
etc.

For that the ancient writers often times in their prayers turn themselves to
Saints, they either simply without exact judgment followed the error of the
common people, or used such manner of speaking, not as divine honor, but as a
figure of Grammar, which they call Prosopopaeia: Whereby godly and learned men
do not mean that they worship and pray to Saints, but do set out the
unspeakable groaning of the Saints, and of all creatures, for our salvation:
and signify that the godly prayers, which Saints through the holy Ghost powered
out in this world before God, do as yet ring in Gods ears, as also the blood
of Abel after his death still cried before God: and in the Revelation, the
souls of the Saints that were killed cry, that their blood may be revenged:
not that they now resting in the Lord, are desirous of revenge, after the
manner of men, but because the Lord even after their death, is mindful of the
prayers, which while they yet lived on earth, they powered out of their own and
the whole Churches deliverance.

Epiphanius himself against Aerius, does also somewhat stick in the common
error, yet he teaches plainly, that the Saints are mentioned in the Church,
not that they should be prayed unto, but rather that they should not be prayed
unto, nor matched in honor with Christ. We says he, make mention of the
righteous Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs,
Confessors, Bishops, Anachoretes, and the whole company, that we may single out
the Lord Jesus Christ, from that company of men, by the honor which we give
unto him, and that we may give him such worship, as by which we may signify
that we think, that the Lord is not to be made equal with any among men,
although every of them were a thousand times, and above, more righteous then
they are.

Out of the Confession of SUEVELAND.
Artic. 1. ss. 7.
SInce Sermons began with us to be taken out of the holy Scriptures of God, and
those deadly contentions ceased, so many as were led with any desire of true
Godliness, have obtained a far more certain knowledge of Christ's doctrine,
and far more fervently expressed it in the conversation of their life. And
even as they declined from those things, which had perversely crept into the
doctrine of Christ: so they were more and more confirmed in those things, which
are altogether agreeable thereunto: Of which sort are the Articles, which the
Christian Church has hitherto steadfastly believed touching the holy Trinity:
to wit, that God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are one essence and
three persons, and admit no other division or difference, then the distinction
of persons

Of Invocating and worshipping of Saints. Artic. 11.
MOreover, that abuse also was reproved and confuted, by which some think they
can so, by fastings and prayers, win and bind unto themselves both the
blessed Virgin Mary that bare God, and other Saints, that they hope by their
intercession and merits they may be delivered from all adversities, as well of
soul as of body, and be enriched with all kind of good things. For our
Preachers have taught by the commandment of Christ the Savior, that that
heavenly Father alone is by the same Christ in the holy spirit to be prayed
unto, as he who has promised that he will never deny us any of those things,
which we by a true faith ask of him through his Son. And seeing the
Scripture it self sets before us one only Mediator between God and men,
to wit, the man Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 2. who both loves us more entirely, and
can by authority do more with the Father then any other, they rightly think,
that this only intercessour and advocate ought to suffice us. Yet they do
therewithal teach, that the most holy mother of God and Virgin Mary, and other
beloved Saints, are with great diligence to be honored. But that that thing
cannot otherwise be done, then if we study to be conversant in those things,
to which they especially gave themselves (namely, to innocence and
sanctification,) and of which they set before us so worthy examples. For since
they with all their heart and soul, and with all their strength do love God,
we can in nothing please them better, then if we also with them love God from
the heart, and by all means possible to make our selves conformable to him, so
far off are they from ascribing their own salvation to their merits: how
therefore should they presume to help any other with their merits? Nay rather
every one of them while they lived here, said with Paul, the life which I now
live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself for me. For I despise not the grace of God. Seeing therefore they
themselves attribute whatsoever they either be or have to the goodness of God
and to the redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ, we can please them no way
better, then if we also wholly rest in the same things alone: which very thing
Saint Augustine also teaches toward the end of his Book, De vera religione.

Of Images. CHAP. 22.
AS touching Images, our Preachers reproved this especially out of the holy
Scriptures, that adoring and invocating of of them is so openly granted to the
simple people against the express commandment of God. Secondly, that so great
cost is bestowed for their worship and ornament: by which rather the hungry,
thirsty, naked, fatherless, sick, and those that are in bonds for Christ,
ought to have been relieved. Lastly, because the most part are so persuaded,
that with such worship and cost bestowed upon Images, (both which things God
abhors) they deserve much at Gods hands, and that they obtain special
help by this means. Contrariwise the same men do teach, that the ancient
writers (so long as Christian faith remained some what pure) understood the
Scriptures, which forbid worshipping and praying to Images, in this sense, that
they thought it an abominable thing to admit any Images, either graven or
painted, in the Church, although they were not otherwise ignorant, what our
liberty is, as in all external things, so likewise in Images. For they nothing
doubted but that it was flat contrary both to the commandments of Scripture,
and also to the holy religion. Which may especially be proved even by those
things which blessed Epiphanius in times past Bishop of Salaminium in Cyprus,
writes of himself in an Epistle to John Bishop of Jerusalem, which also Saint
Jerome turned out of Greek into Latin, because he thought it both Christian,
and profitable to be read, and these are Epiphanius own words.

When we went together to the holy place which is called Bethel; that there I
might make a collection with thee, after the custom of the Church, and was
come to the village which is called Anablotha, and passing by saw there a Lamp
burning, and had asked what place it was, and had learned that it was a Church,
and was gone in to pray, I found there a veil hanging at the entry of the
same Church, stained and painted, and having the Image as it might be of Christ
or some Saint, (for I do not well remember whose picture it was) when
therefore I had seen this in Christ's Church contrary to the commandment of
the ^cripture, that there hung a man's picture, I cut it: and moreover I
counseled the keepers of that place that they should wind and bury some
poor body in it. And a little after, when he had brought an excuse for his
delay in sending another veil that he had promised, he adds, And now I have
sent that I could find, and I pray th^e bid the Elders of the same place take
the veil, that we have sent* of the bearer, and bid that henceforth such
vailes as be contrary to our religion be not hanged up in the Church of
Christ. Lo this godly Bishop writes, that it is against the holy Scriptures,
and Christian Religion to have even Christ's own picture in the Church: and
that in so plain words, that it may appear to them, that as well the Bishop
of Jerusalem himself, and Jerome, as all other men of that age throughout the
same, and that that faith and custom of detesting Images has been always of
old in the Church of Christ, and brought in by the Apostles themselves.

Whereas some say further, that Images be profitable for the instruction of the
Lay people, it appears first of all, that almost all Images were set up for
pomp and superstition rather then for any other use. Secondly, neither is that
reason very sound. For although the Lord would instruct and bring to the
knowledge of his goodness the Jews (far more dull then becomes Christians
to be) by diverse outward ceremonies and pedagogies, yet he was so far from
thinking that the use of Images, was fit and convenient for that purpose, that
he did even by name forbid it unto them. For whosoever is not instructed and
stirred up to the worship of God by the word of God, and by so excellent works
of his (which he lays before us both in heaven and earth, and which are
continually before our eyes and at hand, and which to conclude we so
plentifully enjoy) surely the form of Gods creatures altered by man's cunning,
and so shapen, that stones, trees, metals, and other like matter do no longer
detain their own shape, such as they received it of God, but carry the
countenance either of men or of beasts, or of other things, will do him no
good. Yea it is certain, that by the workmanship of such Images men are more
withdrawn from the view of Gods works to their own works, or to men's
inventions: so that they do not every where think alike of God, but keep in
religious cogitations until such time as they light upon some Image. But
surely if a man mark it well, the heaven and the earth, and whatsoever is
contained in them, are excellent and worthy Images of God.

The heathens also used a pretense of instruction and teaching, to maintain
their Idols, but the holy fathers rested not in such excuses. (Of which matter
Lactantius teaches at large in his second book of Institut.) Neither could
the heathens better abide to be upbraided for that they worshipped stones, and
stocks, then can the men of our age, as they which oftentimes confidently
affirmed, that they took the Images to be nothing else but Images: and that
they sought nothing else, but to be Instructed and admonished by them.

And these things does Athanasius control in these words: Go to, let them
tell me how God is known by Images, that is, whether it be for the matter
whereof they consist or for the form imprinted in that matter. If the m^^ter
ser^e the turn, what need is there I pray you of the form? For God himself
shines forth even in the matter, before that any thing be framed thereof by
man's hands, for all things show forth Gods glory. But if the form it self,
which is fitted to the matter, gives occasion to know. God what need such
Images? might not God be known far more excellently by the things
themselves, whereof Images be made? surely the glory of God might much more
visibly be seen, by the living creatures themselves, either reasonable, or
unreasonable, set before our eyes, then by dead Images which cannot move. And
if any man shall say, these things might well be brought against Images, by
which men think they may come to the knowledge of God, but we are to think
otherwise of the Images of our Lord Jesus Christ, and other Saints. Let him in
like sort think that God did many external works in Israel, of which he
commands them to be mindful for ever: and that he raised up unto them not a
few famous and holy men, whose faith he would never have them to forget. Yet he
never established the memorial of them by such Images: that he might give no
occasion of backsliding or Apostasy, which is wont to follow the worshipping
of Images. Wherefore in the purer Primitive Church it was abomination to have
even the Image of Christ, as has been before showed. To be short, our
Preachers confess that Images of themselves are indifferent, so that no
worship or adoration be done unto them. But it is not enough for a Christian
man to have a thing free, but he ought always to have a diligent respect
hereunto, whether the same be profitable for edification. 1 Cor. 10. for
nothing is to be suffered or assayed in the Church, which has not in it some
certain use of edifying. Seeing then it plainly appears what grievous
offenses Images ^n times past brought forth, and do as yet bring forth; and
seeing it cannot be showed, what profit can be hoped for thereof (unless^ (...)
adventure we will be counted quicker sighted then God himself, and the ancient
Christians that were truly godly, who were so far from taking any profit
thereby, that they even abhorred Images in Churches) all Images and Idols are
worthily to be abhorred in the Church. Neither can the workmanship of the
Cherubins upon the Arc of the Covenant or other ornaments of the Temple, which
the Patrons of Images are wont to object unto us, hinder this truth among
Christians. For God had expressly commanded the Cherubins to be made, but he
would not have them seen of the people. And all the other things were ordained
rather for the beauty of the Temple, then to learn any knowledge of God
thereby: although from them (as from all the rest of Gods works) they which
were spiritual, might take occasion to meditate upon the goodness of God. But
it is requisite also to call this to mind, that we are much more bound to
worship God in spirit and in truth then they of old time were: for that we are
more plentifully enriched with Christ's spirit, if we truly believe in him.

THE THIRD SECTION OF THE ETERNAL Providence of God, and the Creation of the
World.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA.
Of the providence of God. CHAP. 6.
WE believe that all things, both in heaven and in earth, and in all creatures
are sustained and governed by the providence of this wise, eternal, and
omnipotent God. For David witnesses, and says, The Lord is high above all
nations, and his glory above the heavens. Who is as our God who dwells on
high and yet humblet himself, to behold the things that are in heaven and
earth? Again he says, Thou have foreseen all my ways. For there is not a
won Psalm 139. 3.
in my tongue, which thou know not wholly, O Lord etc. Paul also witnesses
and says, By him we live, move, and have our being Acts 17. 28. Romans 11. 36.
And, of him, and through him, and from him are all things. Therefore Augustine
both truly and according to the Scripture said in his book De agone Christi,
cap. 8. The Lord said, Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of
them shall not fall on the ground without the will of your Father? By speaking
thus he would give us to understand that whatsoever men count most vile, that
also is governed by the almighty power of God. For the truth which said, that
all the hairs of our heads are numbered, says also that the birds of the air
are fed by him, and the lillies of the field are clothed by him.

We therefore condemn the Epicures who deny the providence of God, and all
those, who blasphemously affirm, that God is occupied about the poles of
heaven, and that he neither sees or regards us nor our affairs. The
princely Prophet David also condemned these men, when as he said, O Lord, How
long, Psalm. 94.
how long shall the wicked triumph, they say the Lord does not see, neither
does the God of Jacob regard it. Understand ye unwise among the people, and ye
fools when will ye be wise. He that has planted the ear, shall he not hear,
and he that has formed the eye, how should he not see? Notwithstanding we do
not contemn the means whereby the providence of God works, as though they
were unprofitable, but we teach, that we must apply our selves unto them, so
far as they are commended to us in the word of God. Wherefore we mislike the
rash speeches of such as say, that if by the providence of God all things are
governed, then all our studies and endeavors are unprofitable. It shall be
sufficient, if we leave or permit all things to be governed by the providence
of God, and we shall not need hereafter to be careful or to be taught in any
matter. For though Paul did confess that he did sail by the providence of
God, who had said to him, Thou must testify of me also Acts 23. 11.
at Rome, who moreover promised and said, There shall not so much as one soul
perish. Neither shall an hair fall from your heads. Yet the mariners devising
how they might find a way to escape, the same Paul says to the Centurion, and
to the soldiers, Unless Acts 27. 34.
these remain in the ship, ye can not be safe. For God who has appointed,
every thing his end, he also has ordained the beginning and the means by
which we must attain unto the end. The heathens ascribe things to blind
fortune and uncertain chance, but Saint James would not have us say, To day or
tomorrow we will James 4.
go into such acitie, and there buy and sell: but he adds, for that which
you should say, if the Lord will, and if we live, we will do this or that. And
Augustine says, All those things which seem to vain men to be done
unadvisedly in the world, they do but accomplish his word, because they are
not done, but by his commandment. And in his exposition on the 148. Psalm. It
seemed to be done by chance, that Saul seeking his fathers Asses should light
on the Prophet Samuel: but the Lord had before said to the Prophet, to morrow I
will send unto thee a man of the Tribe of Benjamin, etc.

Of the Creation of all things, of the Angels, the Devil, and Man. CHAP. 7.
THis good and Almighty God created all things both visible and invisible by
his eternal word, and preserves the same also by his eternal spirit: as
David witnesses, saying: By the word Psalm. 33. 6.
of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of
his mouth. And (as the Scripture says) All things that the Lord created were
very good, and made for the use and profit of man. Now we say, that all those
things do proceed from one beginning: and therefore we detest the Maniches
and Marcionites, who did wickedly imagine two substances and natures, the one
of good, the other of evil; and also two beginnings, and two Gods, one
contrary to the other, a good, and an evil.

Amongst all the creatures, the Angels and men are most excellent. Touching
Angels the holy Scripture says, Who makes Psalm. 10 4. 4. Heb. 5. 14.
his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fore. Also, Are they not
ministering spirits sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be the
heirs of salvation? And, the Lord Jesus himself testifies of the Devil
saying, He has been a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of
his own: for he is a liar, and the Father thereof. We teach therefore that some
Angels persisted in obedience, and were appointed unto the faithful service of
God and men, and that other some fell of their own accord, and ran headlong
into destruction, and so became enemies to all good, and to all the faithful,
etc.

Now touching man, the Spirit says, that in the beginning he was created good
according to the image, and likeness of God, that God placed him in Paradise
and made all things subject unto him: which David does most nobly set forth in
the 8. Psalm. Moreover God gave unto him a wife, and blessed them. We say also,
that man does consist of two and those diverse substances in one person, of a
soul immortal (as that which being separated from his body, does neither
sleep, nor die) and a body mortal, which notwithstanding at the last
judgment shall be raised again from the dead, that from thenceforth the whole
man may continue for ever, in life or in death. We condemn all those, which
mock at, or by subtle disputations call into doubt the immortality of the
soul, or say that the soul sleeps, or that it is a part of God. To be
short, we condemn all opinions of all men whatsoever, which think otherwise
of the creation of Angels, Devils, and Men, then is delivered unto us by the
Scriptures in the Apostolic Church of Christ.

Out of the Confession of BASIL.
WE also believe, that God made all things by his everlasting Artic. 2.
word: that is, by his only begotten Son: and and that he upholdeth and
works all things by his Spirit, that is, by his own power. And therefore
that God, as he has created, so he foreseeth and governs all things. And
albeit man by the Artic. 3.
same fall became subject to damnation, and so was made an enemy to God, yet
that God never laid aside the care of mankind. The Patriarks, the promises
before and after the Flood, likewise the Law of God given by Moses and the holy
Prophets, do witness this thing.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
THis one only God has revealed himself unto men: first, Artic. 2.
both in the Creation, and also in the Preservation, and government of his
works, etc. Look the rest in the first Section, of the Scripture, and the
second Section, of God.

We believe that God, the three persons working together, by Artic. 7.
his virtue, wisdom, and incomprehensible goodness has made all things,
that is, not only heaven and earth, and all things therein contained, but also
the invisible spirits, of which some fell headlong into destruction, and some
continued in obedience. Therefore we say that they, as they are through their
own malice corrupted, are perpetual enemies to all good, and therefore to the
whole Church: but that these, preserved by the mere grace of God, are
ministers for his glory, and for the salvation of the Elect.

We believe that God has not only made all things, but also Artic. 8.
rules and governs them as he who according to his will disposes and
orders whatsoever happens in the world. Yet we deny that he is the author
of evil, or that any blame of things done amiss, can be laid upon him, seeing
his will is the sovereign and most certain rule of all righteousness, but he
has wonderful rather then explicable means, by which he so uses all the
devils and sinful men as instruments, that whatsoever they do evilly, that
he as he has justly ordained, so he also turns it to good. Therefore while
we confess that nothing at all is to be done, but by the means of his
providence and appointment, we do in all humility adore his secrets that are
hid from us, neither do we search into those things which be without the reach
of our capacity. Nay rather we apply to our own use that which the Scripture
teaches for our quietness and contentation sake, to wit, that God, to whom
all things are subject, with a fatherly care watches for us, so that not so
much as a hair of our head falls to the ground, without his will: and that
he has Satan and all our adversaries so fast bound, that unless leave be
given them, they cannot do us any little harm.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA
WE know God by two manner of ways, first by the making, Artic. 2.
preserving, and governing of this whole world. For that to our eyes is as a
most excellent book, in which all creatures from the least to the greatest are
graven, as it were characters, and certain letters, by which the invisible
things of God may be seen and known of us: namely his everlasting power and
Godhead, as Paul the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. Chap. 10. which knowledge
suffices to convince and make all men without excuse, etc. Look for the rest
in the first Section, of the Scripture, and in the second Section, of God.

Artic. 12.
WE believe that the Father by his word, that is, by the Son, made heaven,
earth, and all other creatures of nothing, when he saw it fit and convenient,
and gave to every one his being, form, and diverse offices, that they might
serve their Creator, and that he does now cherish, uphold, and govern them
all, according to his everlasting providence and infinite power: and that to
this end, that they might serve man, and man might serve his God. He also made
the Angels, all good by nature that they might be his Ministers, and might also
attend upon the Elect: of which notwithstanding some fell from that excellent
nature in which God had created them, into everlasting destruction: but some by
the singular grace of God abode in the first State of theirs: but the Devils
and those wicked spirits, are so corrupted and defiled, that they be sworn
enemies to good and all goodness, which as thieves out of a watch tower lie in
wait for the Church and all the members thereof, that by their juglings and
deceits they may destroy and lay waste all things. Therefore being through
their own malice addicted to everlasting condemnation, they look every day for
the dreadful punishments of their mischiefs. We therefore in this place reject
the error of the Saduces, who denied that there were any spirits or Angels, as
also the error of the Manichees, who hold that the Devils have their beginning
of themselves, and of their own nature evil, and not corrupted by wilful
disobedience.

We believe that this most gracious and mighty God, after he had made all
things, left them not to be ruled after the will of chance or fortune, but
himself does so continually rule and govern them, according to the prescript
rule of his holy will, that nothing can happen in this world without his Decree
and Ordinance, and yet God cannot be said to be either the author, or guilty
of the evils that happen in this world. For both his infinite and
incomprehensible power and goodness stretches so far, that even then he
decrees and executes his works and deeds justly and holily, when as both the
devil and the wicked do unjustly. And whatsoever things he does passing the
reach of man's capacity, we will not curiously and above our capacity inquire
into them: Nay, rather we humbly and reverently adore the secret, yet just
judgments of God. For it suffices us (as being Christ's Disciples) to learn
only those things which he himself teaches in his word, neither do we think
it lawful to pass these bounds. And this doctrine affords us exceeding great
comfort. For by it we know that nothing befalls us by chance, but all by the
will of our heavenly Father, who watches over us with a Fatherly care indeed,
having all things in subjection to himself, so that not a hair of our head
(which are every one numbered) can be plucked away, nor the least sparrow light
on the ground, without the will of our Father. In these things therefore do we
wholly rest, acknowledging that God holds the Devils and all our enemies so
bridled as it were with snaffles, that without his will and good leave they are
not able to hurt any of us: and in this place we reject the detestable opinion
of the Epicures, who fained God to be idle, to do nothing, and to commit all
things to chance.

THE FOVRTH SECTION. OF MAN'S FALL, SIN, AND FREE WILL.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA.
Of man's fall, fin, and the cause of sin. CHAP. 8.
MAN was from the beginning created of God after the Image of God, in
righteousness and true holiness, good, and upright: but by the instinct of
the Serpent and his own fault, falling from goodness and uprightness, became
subject to sin, death, and diverse calamities, and such an one as he became by
his fall, such are all his offspring, even subject to sin, death, and sundry
calamities. And we take sin to be that natural corruption of man, derived or
spread from those our first parents unto us all, through which we being drowned
in evil concupiscences, and clean turned away from God, but prone to all
evil, full of all wickedness, distrust, contempt, and hatred of God, can do
no good of our selves, no not so much as think of any. And that more is, even
as Matthew. 12.
we do grow in years, so by wicked thoughts, words, and deeds committed
against the law of God, we bring forth corrupt fruits, worthy of an evil tree:
in which respect, we through our own desert, being subject to the wrath of God
are in danger of just punishments: so that we had all been cast away from God,
had not Christ the Deliverer brought us back again.

By death therefore, we understand not only bodily death, which is once to be
suffered of all us for sins, but also everlasting punishments due to our
corruption and to our sins. For the Apostle Ephesians. 2.
says, We were dead in trespasses and sins, and were by nature the children of
wrath, as well as others. But God which is rich in mercy, even when we were
dead by sins, quickened us together in Christ. Again, As by one man sin entered
into the world, and by sin death, and Romans 5.
so death went over all men, for as much as all men have sinned, etc.

We therefore acknowledge that original sin is in all men: we acknowledge,
that all other sins, which spring here out, are both called, and are in deed
sins, by what name soever they be termed, whether mortal or venial, or also
that which is called sin against the holy Ghost, which is never forgiven: we
also confess that sins are not equal, although they spring from the same
fountain Mar. 3. 1 John 5. Matthew. 10. 11.
of corruption and unbelief, but that some are more grievous then other, even
as the Lord has said, that It shall be easier for Sodom, then for the City
that despises the word of the Gospel: we therefore condemn all those that
have taught things contrary to these, but especially Pelagius and all the
Pelagians, together with the Jovinianists, who with the Stoickes count all sins
equal, we in this matter agree fully with S. Augustine, who produced and
maintained his sayings out of the holy Scriptures. Moreover we condemn
Florinus and Blastus (against whom also Iraeneus wrote) and all those that make
God the author of sin: seeing it is expressly written, Thou art not a God that
loves wickedness, Psalm. 84. 4.
thou hate all them that work iniquity, and wilt destroy all that speak
lies. And again, When the Devil speaks a lie, he speaks of his own,
because he is a liar, and the father of lying. Yea there is John. 8. 44.
even in our selves sin and corruption enough, so that there is no need that
God should infuse into us either a new or greater measure of wickedness.
Therefore when God is said in the Scripture, to harden, to blind, and to
deliver us up into a reprobate sense, it is to be understood, that God does it
by just judgment, as a just judge and revenger. To conclude, as often as God
in the Scripture is said and seems to do some evil, it is not thereby
meant, that man does not commit evil, but that God does suffer it to be done,
and does not hinder it, and that by his just judgment, who could hinder it, if
he would: or because he makes good use of the evil of men, as he did in the
sins of Joseph's brethren: or because himself rules sins, that they break not
out and rage more violently then is meet. Saint Augustine in his Enchiridion
says, After a wonderful and unspeakable manner that is not done beside his
will, which is done contrary to his will, because it could not be done, if he
should not suffer it to be done, and yet he does not suffer it to be done
unwillingly, but willingly: neither would he being God suffer any evil to be
done, unless being also Almighty he could make good of evil. Thus far
Augustine. Other questions, as, whether God would have Adam fall, or whether he
forced him to fall, or why he did not hinder his fall, and such like, we
account amongst curious questions, (unless perchance the frowardness of
heretics, or of men otherwise importunate, do compel us to open these points
also out of the word of God, as the godly Doctors of the Church have often
times done) knowing that the Lord did forbid that man should not eat of the
forbidden fruit, and punished his transgression: and also that the things done
are not evil in respect of the providence, will, and power of God, but in
respect of Satan, and our will resisting the will of God.

Of free will, and so of man's power and ability. CHAP. 9.
WE teach in this matter, which at all times has been the cause of many
conflicts in the Church, that there is a triple condition or estate of man to
be considered. First, what man was before his fall, to wit, upright and free,
who might both continue in goodness, and decline to evil: but he declined to
evil, and has wrapped both himself and all mankind in sin and death, as has
been showed before. Secondly, we are to consider, what man was after his fall.
His understanding indeed was not taken from him, neither was he deprived of
will, and altogether changed into a stone or stock. Nevertheless, these
things are so altered in man, that they are not able to do that now, which
they could not do before his fall. For his understanding is darkened, and his
will which before was free, is now become a servile will; for it serves sin,
not nilling, but willing: for it is called a will, and not a nilling. Therefore
as touching evil or sin, man does evil, not compelled either by God or the
Devil, but of his own accord: and in this respect he has a most free will:
but whereas we see, that often times the most evil deeds and counsels of man
are hindered by God, that they cannot attain to their end, this does not take
from man liberty in evil, but God by his power does prevent that, which man
otherwise purposed freely: as, Joseph's brethren did freely purpose to slay
Joseph: but they were not able to do it, because it seemed otherwise good to
God in his secret counsel. But as touching goodness and virtues, man's
understanding does not of it self judge aright of heavenly things. For the
Evangelicall and Apostolic Scripture requires regeneration of every one of us
that will be saved. Wherefore our first birth by Adam does nothing profit us to
salvation. Paul says, The natural 1 Cor. 2. 2 Cor. 3.
man perceives not the things which are of the spirit, etc. The same Paul else
where denies, That we are fit of our selves, to think any good. Now it is
evident, that the mind or understanding, is the guide of the will: and seeing
the guide is blind, it is easy to be seen how far the will can reach.
Therefore man not as yet regenerate has no free will to good, no strength to
perform that which is good. The Lord says in the Gospel, Verily, verily I say
John 8.
unto you, that every one that commits sin, is the servant of sin. And Paul
the Apostle says, The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against Romans 8.
God. For it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.
Furthermore, there is some understanding of earthly things remaining in man
after his Fall. For God has of mercy left him wit, though much differing from
that which was in him before his fall, God commands us to garnish our wit,
and therewithal he gives gifts and also the increase thereof. And it is a
clear case, that we can profit very little in all Arts without the blessing of
God. The Scripture doubtless refers all Arts to God. Yea and the Ethnicks
also did ascribe the beginnings of Arts to the Gods, as to the Authors thereof.

Lastly, we are to consider, whether the regenerate have freewill, and how
far forth they have it. In regeneration the understanding is illuminated by
the holy Ghost, that it may understand both the mysteries and will of God. And
the will it self is not only changed by the Spirit, but is also endued with
faculties, that of it own accord it may both will and do good. Unless we grant
this, we shall deny Christian liberty, and bring in the bondage of the law.
Besides, the Prophet brings in God speaking thus, I will Iere. 3. Ezech. 31.
put my laws in their minds, and write them in their hearts. The Lord also
says in the Gospel. If the Son make you free, then are you free indeed. Paul
also to the Philippians, Unto you it is given, for John 7.
Christ not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake. And Phil.
1. Phil 2.
again, I am persuaded that he that began this good work in you, will perform
it until the day of the Lord Jesus: Also, It is God that works in you the
will and the deed. Where nevertheless we teach, that there are two things to
be observed: First, that the regenerate, in the choice and working of that
which is good, do not only work passively, but actively. For they are moved
of God, that themselves may do that which they do. And Augustine does truly
allege that saying, that God is said to be our helper. For no man can be
helped, but he, that does somewhat. The Manichees did bereeve man of all
action, and made him like a stone and a block.

Secondly, that in the regenerate there remains infirmity. For seeing that
sind welleth in us, and that flesh in the regenerate striveth against the
spirit, even to our lives end, they do not readily perform in every point that
which they had purposed. These things are confirmed by the Apostle, Romans 7.
Gal. 5. Therefore, our free will is weak, by reason of the relics of the old
Adam remaining in us so long as we live, and of the humane corruption, which so
nearly cleaves to them. In the mean while because that the strength of the
flesh and relics of the old man are not of such great force that they can
wholly quench the work of the spirit, therefore the faithful are called free,
yet so, that they do acknowledge their infirmity, and glory no whit at all of
their freewill. For that which S. Augustine does repeat so often out of the
Apostle, ought always to be kept in mind by the faithful: What have thou,
that thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why do thou
boast, as though thou had not received it? Hitherto may be added, that that
comes not straight way to pass, which we have purposed. For the events of
things are in the hand of God. For which cause Paul, Besought the Lord that he
would prosper Romans 1. 19.
his journey. Wherefore in this respect also free will is very weak. But in
outward things no man denies but that both the regenerate and unregenerate
have their free will. For man has this constitution common with other creatures
(to whom he is not inferior) to will some things, and to nill other things. So
he may speak, or keep silence, go out of his house or abide within. Although
herein also Gods power is evermore to be marked, Numb. 24. Luke 1.
which brought to pass that Balaam could not go so far as he would, and that
Zacharias coming out of the Temple, could not speak as he would have done. In
this matter we condemn the Manichees who deny, that the beginning of evil unto
man, being good, came from his free will. We condemn also the Pelagians, who
affirm that an evil man has free will sufficiently to perform a good
precept. Both these are confuted by the Scripture, which says to the former,
God made man upright, and to the latter, If the Son make you free, then are you
free indeed.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA.
MAN being the most perfect Image of God in earth, and having the Chiesdome of
all visible creatures, consisting of soul and body, whereof this is mortal,
that immortal, after he was made holy of the Lord, he by his own fault
falling into sin, drew whole mankind with him into the same fall, and made him
subject to the same calamity.

And this infection, which men term Original, has so invaded Artic. 8.
the whole stock, that the child of wrath and the enemy of God, can by none
other, then by the divine help of Christ, be cured. For if there be any spark
of good fruit remaining here, it being weakened daily by our sins, declineth to
the worse. For the force of evil does get the upper hand, neither does it
suffer reason to bear the sway, nor the most divine faculty of the mind to
have the pre-eminence.

Whereupon we do so attribute free will to man, as that knowing Artic. 9.
and having a will to do good and evil, we find notwithstanding by
experience, that of our own accord we may do evil, but Genesis 1.
we can neither embrace nor follow any good thing, except, being illuminated by
the grace of Christ, we be stirred up and effectually moved thereunto. For God
is he which works in us both to will, Ephesians. 4.
and to bring to pass, according to his good will. And, Salvation is of the
Lord, destruction of our selves.

Out of the Confession of BASIL. Artic. 2. Of man.
Genesis 3. and 5. Romans 5. 1 Cor. 15. Ephesians. 2. Genesis 6. and 8. Ioh. 3. Romans 3.
WE confess that in the beginning man was made of God, in righteousness and
true holiness, after the true Image of God: but he fell into sin of his own
accord, by the which fall whole mankind is made corrupt and subject unto
damnation. Hence it is that our nature is defiled, and become so prone unto
sin, that except it be renewed by the holy Ghost, man of himself can Psalm. 143.
Ephesians. 2.
neither do, nor will any good.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA, or the WALDENSES. Of the knowledge of a man's
self. Also, of sin, the causes and fruits thereof, and of the promise of God.
CHAP. 4
FOurthly, touching the knowledge of himself, man is taught, and that after two
sorts. First the knowledge of his estate, yet being in his innocence, or void
of all fault, that is, of his nature being perfect, from whence he fell:
Secondly, the knowledge of Genesis 1.
his sin and mortality, into which he fell. The estate and condition of his
innocence and righteousness consists in these points: that the Lord in the
beginning made man after his own Image and likeness, and adorned him with the
gifts of his grace or bounty: that he engraffed in him righteousness and his
spirit, a soul and a body, together with all the faculties and powers thereof,
and so made him holy, just, wise, immortal, and a most pleasant temple for his
heavenly spirit, in the mind, will, memory, and judgment, and bestowed upon
him clear light of understanding, integrity, and a very ordinate or lawful
love toward God and all his creatures: also a full and absolute obedience, or
ability to obey God, the true fear of God, and a sincere Eccles. ^7. Ephesians.
1.
heart and nature, that man might be his own possession, and his proper and
peculiar workmanship, created unto the praise of his glorious grace. Man being
placed in this estate had left unto him free will, so that if he would, he was
able to fulfill that commandment which God gave him, and thereby to retain
righteousness both for himself and for all his posterity after him, and
every way to enjoy a spirit, soul, body, and an estate most Eccles. 15.
blessed; and further also to make a way unto a far more excellent glory, by
considering that fire and water, life and death, were set before him: which if
he would not consider, nor do his endeavor therein, by choosing of evil, he
might loose all those good gifts.

The second part of the knowledge of a man's self (namely before justification)
stands in this, that a man acknowledge a right the state of this fall, sin,
and mortality. For that free liberty of choice which God permitted to the will
of man, he abused and kept not the law of his justice, but swerved therefrom,
and therein transgressed the commandment of God, insomuch as he obeyed the
devil and those lying speeches of his, and gave credit unto them, and
performed to the devil such faith and obedience as was due to God alone:
whereby he stripped and bereaved himself and his posterity of the state of
perfection and goodness of nature: and the grace of God, and those good gifts
of justice, and the Image of God, which in his creation were engraffed in him,
he partly lost them, and partly, corrupted and defiled them, as if with
horrible poison one should corrupt pure wine, and by this means he cast
headlong both himself and all his offspring into sin, death, and all kind
of miseries in this life, and into punishments eternal after this life.

Wherefore the spring and principal author of all evil is that cruel and
detestable devil, the tempter, liar, and manslayer: and next the free will of
man, which notwithstanding being converted to evil, through lust and naughty
desires and by perverse concupiscence, chooses that which is evil.

Hereby, sins according to these degrees and after this order may be
considered and judged of. The first and weightiest or most grievous sin of
all was without doubt after that sin of Adam, which the Apostle calls
Disobedience, for the which death reigns Romans 5.
over all, even over those also, which have not sinned with like transgression
as did Adam. A second kind is original sin, naturally engendered in us and
hereditarie, wherein we are all conceived and borne into this world. Behold,
says David, I was borne in iniquity, Psalm. 51. Ephesians. 2.
and in sin has my mother conceived me. And Paul, We are by nature the
children of wrath. Let the force of this hereditarie destruction be
acknowledged and judged of by the guilt and fault, by our pronenesse and
declination, by our evil nature, and by the punishment which is laid upon it.
The third kind of sins are those which are called Actual, which are the
fruits of Original sin, and do burst out within, without, privily and
openly, by the powers of man, that is, by all that ever man is able to do, and
by his members, transgressing all those things which God commands and
forbids, and also running into blindness and errors worthy to be punished
with all kind of damnation. This doctrine of the true knowledge of sin, is
of our men diligently handled and urged: and to this end were the first and
second Tables of the Law delivered to Moses of God, that men especially might
know themselves, that they are conceived and borne in sin, and that forthwith,
even from their birth, and by nature, they are sinners, full of lusts, and
evil inclinations.

For hereof it comes, that straight even from the beginning of our age, and
so forth in the whole course of our life, being stained and overcome with many
sins, men do in heart, thoughts, and evil deeds break and transgress the
commandments of God, as it is written, The Lord looked down from heaven to
behold the children Psalm. 14. Romans 3.
of men, to see if there were any that would understand, and seek God: all are
gone out of the way, they have been made altogether unprofitable, there is none
that does good, no not one. And again, When the Lord saw that the wickedness
of man was great in the Genesis 6.
earth, and all the cogitations of his heart were only evil continually. And
again, The Lord said, the imagination of man's heart is evil Genesis 8.
even from his youth. And Saint Paul says, We were by nature the children of
wrath as well as others. Ephesians. 2.


Here withal this is also taught, that by reason of that corruption and
depravation common to all mankind, and for the the sin, transgressions, and
injustice, which ensued thereof, all men ought to acknowledge, according to the
holy Scripture, their own just condemnation, and the horrible and severe
vengeance of God, and consequently the most deserved punishment of death, and
eternal torments in hell: whereof Paul teaches us, when he says, The wages
of sin is death: And our Lord Christ, They which have Romans 6. John 5.
done evil, shall go into the resurrection of condemnation, that is, into
pains eternal, Where shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

They teach also that we must acknowledge Look the first observat. upon this
confession.
our weakness, and that great misery which is ingendered in us, as also those
difficulties from which no man can ever deliver or rid himself by any means,
or justify himself (that is, procure or get righteousness to himself) by
any kind of works, deeds, or exercises, seem they never so glorious. For that
will of man which before was free, is now so corrupted, troubled, and weakened,
that now from henceforth of it self, and without the grace of God, it cannot
choose, judge, or wish fully, nay it has no desire, nor inclination, much less
any ability, to choose that good wherewith God is pleased. For albeit it fell
willingly and of it own accord, yet by it self, and by it own strength it
could not Look the second observat. upon this confession.
rise again, or recover that fall, neither to this day, without the merciful
help of God, is it able to do any thing at all. And a little after. Neither
can he which is man only, and has nothing above the reach of this our nature,
help an other in this point. For since that original sin proceeding by
inheritance possesses the whole nature, and does furiously rage therein, and
seeing that all men are sinners, and do want the grace and justice Romans 3.
of God, therefore says God by the mouth of the Prophet Esaias, Put me in
remembrance, Let us be judged together, count thou if Esa. 43.
thou have any thing that thou may be justified: thy first father has
sinned, and thy interpreters (that is, they which teach thee justice) have
transgressed against me, and a little before, speaking of works in the service
of God after the invention of man, he says: Thou have not offered unto me the
Ram of the burnt offerings, neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices:
I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with
incense. And unto the Hebrews it is written: Sacrifice, and offering, and Heb
10.
burnt offerings, and sin offerings thou would not have. Neither did dest
thou approove those things, which were offered according to the Law.

This also must we know, that the Lord God for sin does permit and bring all
kinds of afflictions, miseries, and vexations of mind in this life, upon all
men, such as are heat, cold, hunger, thirst, care, and anguish, sore labors,
calamity, adversity, doleful times, sword, fire, diseases, griefs, and at
the last also that intolerable and bitter death, whereby nature is
overthrown, as it is written, Thou shall die the death. Again, Cursed is the
earth for thy sake, Genesis 2. Genesis 3.
in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life; thorns also and
thistles shall it bring forth to thee. And yet it is taught, that men must and
ought to bear all these punishments patiently, seeing that they owe unto God,
and have deserved a far more cruel punishment. Yet they must not be so
persuaded as though they deserved any thing by suffering this punishment, or
should receive from God any grace or reward in recompense for the merit of
these punishments, seeing that Paul speaking of a much more worthy cross and
sufferings which the true believers, take upon them for Christ's sake, says, that
they be not comparable to the glory, which shall be showed unto us: And these
punishments are laid upon us, and are patiently to be borne, that we may
acknowledge the greatness of our sin and how grievous a thing it is, and there
withal our own weakness, needs, and misery, and that by experience we may
know how wicked, foul, and bitter a thing it is, even above all that we are
able to conceive, for a man to forsake the Lord his God, as says the Prophet.
And moreover that they which being plunged in these miseries, and oppressed
with these burdens, may again be stirred up to repentance, and to seek for
favor and help from God, which is a Father full of mercy and compassion.
Howbeit this is also expressly added, that the labors and torments which holy
men do suffer for the name of Christ, that is, in the cause of eternal
salvation, for the holy truth of Christ, are an acceptable and pleasant
sacrifice to God, and have great and large promises, especially in the life to
come: the which thing also did even so fall out with Christ our Head, of whom
the Epistle to the Hebrews speaks thus, that for the joy that was set before
him, he endured the cross: who also by himself consecrated and hallowed the
cross to them, even to this end, that those sufferings which we endure for
Christ his names sake, might be pleasant and acceptable unto God.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE believe that man being created pure and upright, and Artic. 9.
conformable to the image of God, through his own fault fell from that grace
which he had received, and thereby did so estrange himself from God the
fountain of all righteousness and of all good things that his nature is
become altogether defiled, and being blind in spirit, and corrupt in heart,
has utterly lost all that integrity. For although he can somewhat discern
between good and evil, yet we affirm that whatsoever light he has, it
straightwayes becomes darkness, when the question is of secking God, so that
by his understanding and reason he can never come to God. Also, although he be
endued with will, whereby he is moved to this or that, yet insomuch as that is
altogether captivated under sin, it has no liberty at all to desire good, but
such as it has received by grace and of the gift of God. We believe Artic. 10.
that all the offspring of Adam is infected with this contagion, which we call
Original sin, that is, a stain spreading it self by propagation, and nor by
imitation only, as the Pelagians thought, all whose errors we do detest.
Neither do we think it necessary to search, how this sin may be derived from
one unto another. For it is sufficient that those things which God gave unto
Adam, were not given to him alone, but also to all his posterity: and
therefore we in his person being deprived of all those good gifts, are fallen
into all this misery and curse.

We believe that this stain is indeed sin, because that it makes Artic. 11.
all and every man (not so much as those little ones excepted, which as yet lie
hid in their Mothers womb) guilty of eternal death before God. We also
affirm, that this stain, even after baptism, is in nature sin, as
concerning the fault: howbeit they which are the children of God, shall not
therefore be condemned, because that God of his gracious free goodness and
mercy, does not impute it to them. Moreover we say, that this frowardness of
nature does always bring forth some fruits of malice and rebellion, in such
sort, that even they which are most holy; although they resist it, yet are they
defiled with many infirmities and offenses, so long as they live in this world.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
WE say also, that every person is borne in sin, and leads Artic. 18.
his life in sin: that no body is able truly to say, His heart is clean.
That the most righteous person is but an unprofitable servant: That the Law of
God is perfect, and requires of us, perfect, and full Obedience: That we are
able by no means to fulfill that Law in this worldly life, that there is no
mortal creature, which can be justified by his own deserts in Gods sight.

Ou of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe that God of the slime of the earth created man, Artic. 14. Genesis 1.
26. Ephesians. 4. 24.
after his Image, that is to say, good, just, and holy, who had power by his
own free will, to frame and conform his will unto the will of God. But when
he was advanced to honor he knew not, neither did he well understand his
excellent state, but wittingly and willingly did make himself subject to
sin, and so Genesis 3. 17.
consequently unto eternal death and malediction, whilst that giving ear to
the words and subtilties of the devil, he did transgress that commandment of
life, which he had received of the Lord, and so did withdraw and alienate
himself from God (his true life) his nature being altogether defiled and
corrupted by sin, Romans 5. 12.
whereby it came to pass, that he made himself subject both to corporal and
to spiritual death. Wherefore being made wicked, and perverse, and also
corrupt in all his ways and endeavors, he lost those excellent gifts
wherewith the Lord had adorned him, so that there were but a few little sparks
and small steps of those gracesleft in him, the which notwithstanding are
sufficient to leave men without excuse because that what light soever we Acts
14. 16. Romans 1. 20, 21 Joh. 1. 5.
have, is turned into palpable darkness, even as the Scripture it self
teaches, saying, The light shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended
it not: For there John does manifestly call men darkness. Therefore Look the
1. observe. upon this Confession. Joh. 3. 27.
whatsoever things are taught, as touching man's free will, we do worthily
reject them, seeing that man is the servant of sin, neither can he do any
thing of himself, but as it is given him from heaven: For who is so bold as to
brag that he is able to perform whatsoever he lists, when as Christ
himself says, No man can come unto me, except my Father, which Joh. 6. 44.
has sent me, do draw him? Who dare boast of his will, which hears, that
All the affections of the flesh are enemies against God? Romans 8. 1 Cor. 1. 14.
Who will vaunt of his understanding, which knows, that The natural man
cannot perceive the things of the spirit of God? To conclude, who is he that
dare bring forth any one cogitation of his own, which understands this, that
we are not Able of our selves to think any thing, but That we are sufficient,
it is altogether 2 Cor. 3. 5.
of God? Therefore that saying of the Apostle must needs remain firm and
steadfast, It is God which works in us both to will, and P^il. 2. 12.
to do, even of his good pleasure. For no man's mind, no man's will is able to
rest in the will of God, wherein Christ himself has wrought nothing before.
The which also he does teach us, saying Without me ye can do nothing. Joh. 15.
5.


We believe, that through the disobedience of Adam, the sin, Artic. 15.
that is called Original, has been spread and powered into all mankind. Now
Original sin, is a corruption of the whole nature, and an hereditarie evil,
wherewith even the very infants in their Psalm. 51. Romans 3. Genesis 6. Joh. 3. Romans
5. Ephesians. 1.
Mothers womb are polluted: the which also as a most noisome root does branch
out most abundantly all kind of sin in man, and is so filthy and abominable
in the sight of God, that it alone is sufficient to the condemnation of all
mankind. Neither are we to believe that this sin is by baptism utterly
extinguishet or plucked up by the roots, seeing that out of it, as out of a
corrupt fountain, continual floods and rivers of iniquity do daily spring
and flow: how be it to the children of God it does not tend, neither is it
imputed to condemnation, but of the mere favor and mercy of God it is
remitted unto them, not to this end, that they trusting unto this remission
should be rocked a sleep in security, but that it may stir up often sighs
in the faithful by the sense and feeling of this corruption, and that they
should somewhat the more earnestly desire, To be delivered from this body of
Romans 7. 18. 2.
death. Therefore we do condemn the error of the Pelagians, which affirm,
that this Original sin is nothing else but a certain kind of imitation.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
ALso they that teach that after the fall of Adam all men descended Artic. 2.
one from another after a natural manner, have original sin even when they
are borne. We mean by original sin that which the holy fathers, and all of
sound judgment and learning in the Church do so call, namely that guilt,
whereby all that come into the world, are through Adams fall subject to Gods
wrath and eternal death, and that very corruption of man's nature derived from
Adam. And this corruption of man's nature comprehends both the defect of
original justice, integrity, or obedience, and also concupiscence. This
defect is horrible blindness, and disobedience, that is to wit, to want that
light and knowledge of God, which should have been in our nature being
perfect, and to want that uprightness, that is, that perpetual obedience,
that true, pure, and chief love of God, and those other gifts of perfect
nature. Wherefore those defects and this concupiscence are things damnable, and
of their own nature worthy of death. And this original blot is sin indeed,
condemning, and bringing eternal death, even now also, upon them, which are
not borne again by baptism and the holy Ghost.

They condemn the Pelagians, who deny Original sin, and think that those
defects or this concupiscence are things indifferent, or punishments only, and
not of their own nature damnable, and dream that man may satisfy the Law of
God, and may for that peculiar obedience be pronounced just before God.

These things are thus found in another Edition.
ALso they teach that after Adams fall all men begotten after Artic.
the common course of nature are borne with sin, that is, without the fear
of God, without trust in him, and with concupiscence, And that this disease or
Original blot is sin indeed, condemning and bringing eternal death even now
upon all that are not born again by baptism and the holy Ghost.

They condemn the Pelagians and others, that deny this Original blot to be
sin indeed, and that they may extenuate the glory of the merit and benefits
of Christ, they do reason that a man may by the strength of his own reason,
be justified before God.

Concerning free will, they do teach, that man's will has some Artic. 18.
freedom to Look the 1. observat. upon this confession.
perform a civil justice, and to make choice of things that are within the
reach of reason: but it has no power to perform a spiritual justice, without
the holy Spirit, because Paul says, The natural man perceives not the things
which are of the spirit of God: and Christ says, without me ye can do
nothing. Now this spiritual justice is wrought in us, when we are Look the 2.
observat.
helped of the holy Ghost. And we receive the holy Ghost, when we assent unto
the word of God, that we may be comforted through faith in all terrors of
conscience, as Paul teaches, when he says, That ye may receive the promise of
the spirit through faith. These things almost in as many words faith S.
Augustine lib. 3. Hypognost.

We confess that there is in all men a free will which has indeed the
judgment of reason, not that it is thereby apt without God either to begin, or
to perform any thing, in matters pertaining to God, but only in works
belonging to this present life, whether they be good, or evil. In good works I
affirm those to be, which arise of the goodness of nature, as to be willing
to labor in the field, to desire meat or drink to desire to have a friend, to
desire apparel, to desire to build an house, to marry a wife, to nourish
cattle, to learn the art of diverse good things, to desire any good thing
pertaining to this present life, all which are not without Gods government, yea
they now are, and had their beginning from God In evil things I account such
as these, to desire to worship an Image; to desire manslaughter. This sentence
of Augustine does notably teach what is to be attributed to free will, and does
put a plain difference between civil discipline or the exercises of humane
reason, and spiritual motions, true fear, patience, constancy, faith,
invocation in most sharp tentations, in the midst of Satan's subtle
assaults, in the terrors of sin. In these surely we had great need to be
guided and Look the 2. observar.
helped of the holy Spirit, according to that saying of Paul, The Spirit
helps our infirmity.

We condemn the Pelagians and all such as they are, who teach that by the
only powers of nature without the holy Spirit, we may love God above all, and
fulfill the Law of God, as touching the substance of our actions. We do freely
and necessarily mislike these dreams: for they do obscure the benefits of
Christ. For therefore is Christ the Mediator set forth, and mercy promised in
the Gospel, because that the Law cannot be satisfied by man's nature, as Paul
witnesses, when he says, Romans 8. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against
God. For it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. For albeit
that man's nature by it self can after some sort Look the 3. observat. upon
this confession.
perform external works (for it can contain the hands from theft and
murder) yet can it not make those inward motions, as true fear, true faith,
patience, and chastity unless the holy Ghost do govern and help our
hearts. And yet in this place also do we teach, that it is also the
commandment of God, that the carnal motions should be restrained by the
industry of reason and by civil discipline, as Paul says, The law is
schoolmaster to Christ: Also, The law is given to the unjust.

These things are thus found in another edition.
As touching free will they teach, that man's will has some Artic. 18.
liberty to work a civil justice, and to choose such things as reason can
reach unto. But that it has no power to work the righteousness of God, or a
spiritual justice, without the spirit of God: Because that the natural man
perceives not the things that are of the spirit of God. But this power is
wrought in the heart, when as men do receive the spirit of God through the
word. These things are in as many words affirmed by Saint Augustine, Lib. 3.
Hypognost: etc. as before. They condemn the Pelagians, and others, who teach,
that only by the power of nature, without the Spirit of God, we are able to
love God above all, also to perform the commandments of God, as touching the
substance of our actions. For although that nature be able in some sort to do
the external works (for it is able to withhold the hands from theft and
murder) yet it cannot work the inward motions, as the fear of God, trust in
God, chastity, patience.

Touching the cause of sin, they teach, that albeit God does create and
preserve nature, yet the cause of sin is the will of the wicked, to wit, of
the Devil, and of ungodly men, which turns it self from God unto other
things, against the commandments of God: when he speaks a lie, he speaks
of his own.

This is found thus in an other edition.
TOuching the cause of sin, they teach, that albeit God does create and
preserve our nature, yet the cause of sin is the will of the wicked, to wit,
of the Devil, and of ungodly men: which will being destitute of Gods help,
turns it self from God, as Christ says, Joan. 8. When he speaks a lie, he
speaks of his own.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY.
ANd seeing the controversies, which are sprung up, do chiefly pertain unto
two articles of the Creed, namely to the article, I believe the remission of
sins, and I believe the Catholic Church, we will show the fountains of
these controversies, which being well weighed, men may easily understand, that
our expositions are the very voice of the Gospel, and that our adversaries have
sowed corruptions in the Church. And first of the Article.

I believe the remission of sins.
HEre many and great corruptions are devised of our adversaries. I believe,
nay, say they, I doubt: also, Then I will believe, when I shall have merits
enough. Also, they do not say, I believe certainly that remission is given
freely for the Son of God, not for any merits of ours, or any worthiness of
ours. Also, They do not rightly show what sin is, and feign that man is
able to satisfy the Law of God, and that by the fulfilling of the Law, he
becomes just before God, in this life. Therefore first, as touching sin,
and the cause thereof, we do faithfully retain the doctrine of the true
Church of God. Seeing that God in essence is one, the eternal Father, the
coeternall Son, being the image of the Father, and the coeternall holy Ghost,
proceeding from the Father and the Son, of infinite wisdom, power, and
goodness, true, just, bountiful, chaste, most free, as he describes himself
in his Law; and seeing he has therefore made the Angels and men, that being
from all eternity he might impart unto them his light, wisdom, and
goodness, and that they should be the temples of God, wherein God might dwell,
that God might be all in all, as Paul speaks: he therefore created them at
the beginning good and just, that is, agreeing with the mind and will of God,
and pleasing him. He also gave them a clear knowledge of God, and of his will,
that they might understand that they were made of God, that they might be
obedient, as it is written in the fifth Psalm: Thou art not a God that loves
wickedness. But the devils and men abused the liberty of their will, swarved
from God, and by this disobedience they were made subject to the wrath of God,
and lost that uprightness, wherein they were created. Therefore free will in
the devil and in men was the cause of that fall, not the will of God, who
neither wills sin, nor allows it, nor furdereth it, as it is written,
When the Devil speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, and he is the father
of lying. And 1 John 3. He that commits sin, is of the devil, because the
devil sins from the beginning. Now sin, is that, whatsoever is contrary
to the justice of God, which is an order in the mind of God (which he did
afterward manifest by his own voice in the Law and in the Gospel) whether it be
original disobedience, or actual, for the which the person is both guilty,
and condemned with everlasting punishment, except he obtain remission in this
life, for the Son the Mediators sake. We do also condemn the madness of
Marcion, the Manichees, and such like, which are repugnant in this whole
question to the true consent of the Church of God.

Of Original sin. Artic. 2.
AS touching original sin, we do plainly affirm, that we do retain the
consent of the true Church of God, delivered unto us from the first Fathers,
Prophets, Apostles and the Apostles scholars, even unto Augustine, and after
his time: and we do expressly condemn Pelagius, and all those who have
scattered in the Church like doting follies to those of the Pelagians. And we
say, that all men, since the fall of our first parents, which are borne by the
coupling together of male and female, do together with their birth bring with
them Original sin, as Paul says, Romans 5. By one man sin entered into the
world, and by sin death. And Ephesians. 2. We were by nature the children of
wrath as well as others. Neither do we dislike that usual definition, if it
be well understood; Original sin is a want of Original justice which ought
to be in us: Because that Original justice was not only an acceptance of
mankind before God, but in the very nature of man a light in the mind,
whereby he might assuredly believe the word God: and a conversion of the will
unto God, and an obedience of the heart agreeing with the judgment of the Law
of God, which which was graffed in the mind: and, as we said before, man was
the temple of God, That Original justice does comprehend all these things, it
may beunderstood by this saying. Man was created after the Image and likeness
of God, which Paul does thus interpret, Ephesians. 4. Put ye on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, where undoubtedly by
true holiness he understands all those virtues, which shine in our nature,
and are given by God, not ascited by art, or gotten by instruction (as now
those shadows of virtues, such as they are in men, be ascited) because that
then God dwelling in man did govern him. And when we consider what Original
justice does signify, then the privation opposite thereunto is less obscure.
Therefore Original sin is, both for the fall of our first parents, and for
the corruption which followed that fall, even in our birth to be subject to the
wrath of God, and to be worthy of eternal damnation, except we obtain
remission for the Mediators sake. And this corruption is, to want now the
light or the presence of God, which should have shined in us: and it is an
estranging of our will from God, and the stubbornness of the heart resisting
the law of the mind, as Paul speaks; and, that man is not the temple of God,
but a miserable Mass, without God, and without justice. These wants, and this
whole corruption, we say to be sin, not only a punishment of sin, and a
thing indifferent, as many of the Sententiaries do say, That these evils are
only a punishment, and a thing indifferent, but not sin. And they do
extenuate this Original evil, and then they feign that men may satisfy the
law of God, and by their own fulfilling of the Law become just. The Church
must avoid ambiguities. Therefore we do expressly name these evils,
Corruption, which is often named of the ancient writers, Evil concupiscence.
But we distinguish those desires which were created in our nature, from that
confusion of order which happened after our fall, as it is said, Ier. 10 The
heart of man is wicked. And Paul says, The wisdom of the flesh is omnit is
against God. This evil Concupiscence we say to be sin, and we affirm, that
this whole doctrine of sin, as it is propounded and taught in our Churches,
is the perpetual consent of the true Church of God.

Of Free Will. Artic. 4.
NOw let us make manifest also the doctrine of free will Men truly instructed
in the Church have always distinguished between discipline, and the newness
of the spirit, which in the beginning of life eternal: and they have taught,
that in man there is such freedom of will, to govern the outward motions of
the members, that thereby even the unregenerate may after a sort perform that
outward discipline, which is an external obedience according to the Law. But
man by his natural strength is not able to free himself from sin and
eternal death: but this freedom and conversion of man unto God, and this
spiritual newness wrought by the Son of God, quickening us by his holy
Spirit, as it is said, If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, the same is
not his: and the will having received the holy Ghost, is not idle. And we give
God thanks for this unspeakable benefit, that, for the Son his sake and
through him he gives us the holy Ghost, and does govern is by his Spirit. And
we condemn the Pelagians, and the Manichces, as we have at large declared in
an other place.

Of the difference of sin Artic. 10.
SEeing it is said, that sins remain in the regenerate, it is necessary to
have a difference of sins delivered unto us. For out of that saying, Luke 11.
He went and took unto him seven other spirits worse then himself, and they
enter in, and dwelt there, etc. And of such like sayings it is manifest, that
some, who are regenerate, do grieve and Look the 1. Observer upon this
confession.
shake off the holy Ghost, and are again rejected of God, and made subject to
the wrath of God and eternal punishments. And Ezech. 18. it is written, when
the righteous man shall turn from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, he
shall die therein: and, when the wicked man shall turn from his wickedness,
and do judgment and justice, he shall live therein. Therefore it is necessary
that those sins, which remain in holy men in this mortal life, and yet do
not shake off the holy Ghost, be distinguished from other sins, for the which
man is again made subject to the wrath of God, and to eternal punishments. So
Paul, Romans 5. distinguishes between sin that reigns, and sin that
reigns not. And Romans 8. he says, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die:
but if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, ye shall live. And in
the first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 1. he gives a rule: Fight a good fight,
keeping faith and a good conscience. Therefore when a man does not keep the
faith, but either wittingly, or by some error loses some part of the
foundation, that is, some article of faith, or allows Idols (as many do,
which are deceived with false opinions, or do not uphold themselves by the
comfort of faith, but are overcome by doubting or by despair, or against their
conscience do break any commandment of God) he does shake off the holy
Ghost, and is made again subject to the wrath of God and to everlasting
punishment. Of these men faith Paul, Romans 8. If ye live according to the flesh,
ye shall die. And 1 Cor. 6. Neither fornicatours, nor adulterers, nor
Idolaters, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God. And that the oath, Ezech.
18. does clearly say, As I live, says the Lord, I do not desire the death of
a sinner, but rather that he be converted, and live. In this oath two parts are
joined together, conversion, and life. God does desire, and that with an oath,
the conversion of man: therefore they do not please him, which retain a
purpose to sin. Now in this number we comprise both the sins of affectate
omission (that is, affectate negligence in a duty, which is contrary to that
saying, This is required, that we be faithful.) And also affectate ignorance,
such as is Pharisaicall, and is to be seen in an infinite multitude, which
endeavors not to search out the doctrine of the Church, and ignorantly
retains Idols, or does also further the rage which is used in the defense of
Idols. Thus much of those falls, whereby the holy Ghost is shaken off. There be
also other sins in the regenerate, who keep faith and a good conscience,
which do not corrupt the foundation, Look the 2. Observat. upon this
confession.
neither are sins against the conscience, but are the relics of Original
sin, as, darkness, doubting, carnal security, wandering flames of vicious
affections, and omissions, or ignorances not affected. Some extenuate these
evils, and name them deformities beside the Law of God. But this blindness is
greatly to be reproved, and we must consider both the greatness of the evil
in this whole pollution, which is contrary to the Law and will of God, and
also the greatness of the mercy and benefit of the Son of God, who covers
these great and lamentable wounds in this miserable nature. And Paul commands
us to Resist those evils by the spirit: that is, Atticus and Scipio do bridle
their corrupt affections by reason, but Joseph and Paul do bridle them by the
spirit, that is, by the motions of the holy Ghost, by true grief, true faith,
fear of God, and invocation. Paul, feeling in himself doubts and other
wandering motions, is sorrowful, and by faith persuaded, that this pollution is
covered by the Mediator, and by the fear of God does stay himself, that he
give no place to anger, or to other wandering motions: and there withal he does
invocate God, and desire his help, saying, O Lord create in me a new heart.
When we do after this sort withstand that corruption, which as yet remains
in the regenerate, these evils are covered, and it is called sin that does
not reign, or venial sin, and the holy Ghost is not shaken off.

It is evident that this doctrine concerning the difference of sins, is true,
plain, and necessary for the Church. And yet many know, what manner of
intricate disputations are to be found in the books of our adversaries
touching the same, etc. Having thus briefly declared the sum of the doctrine
of justification, we should now also declare and confute the arguments, which
are objected against this judgment of ours; but because diverse men do object
diverse things, we have only recited our confession, and offer our selves to
larger declarations in every member of the confession.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE. Of Sin. CHAP. 4.
WE believe and confess that in the beginning man was created of God, just,
wise, endued with free will, adorned with the holy Ghost, and happy: but
afterward for his disobedience he was deprived of the holy Ghost, and made the
bondsman of Satan, and subject both to corporal and eternal damnation: and
that evil did not stay in one only Adam, but was derived into all the
posterity. And whereas some affirm, that so much integrity of mind was left
to man after his fall, that by his natural strength and good works he is able
to convert and prepare himself to faith and the invocating of God, it is
flatly contrary to the Apostolic doctrine and the true consent of the
Catholic Church, Romans 5. By one man's trespass evil was derived into all men
to condemnation, Ephesians. 2. When ye were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in
times past ye walked according to the course of this world, and after the
Prince, etc. And a little after, We were by nature the children of wrath as
well as others. He says, Dead in sins, and, the children of wrath, that is,
strangers from the grace of God. But as a man being corporally dead, is not
able by his own strength to prepare or convert himself to receive corporal
life, so he which is spiritually dead is not able by his own power to convert
himself, to receive spiritual life. Augustine says, The Lord, that he might
answer Pelagius to come, does noth not say, without me Tom 7. contra du^^
epist. Pelag ad Bonifacium lib. 2. cap. 8.
ye can hardly do any thing, but he says, without me ye can do nothing. And
that he might also answer these men that were to come, in the very same
sentence of the Gospel, he does not say, without me ye can not perfect, but
without me ye can not do any thing. For if he had said, ye cannot perfect, then
these men might say, we have need of the help of God, not to begin to do good,
for we have that of our selves, but to perfect it. And a little after, The
preparation of the heart is in man, but the answer of the tongue is of the
Lord. Men not well understanding this, are deceived, thinking that it
appertains to man to prepare the heart, that is, to begin any good thing
without the help of the grace of God. But far be it from the children of
promise so to understand it, as when they heard the Lord saying, without me ye
can do nothing, they should as it were reprove him, and say, Behold, without
thee we are able to prepare our hearts, or when they hear Paul the Apostle
saying, Not that we are fit to think any thing, as of our selves, they should
also reprove him and say, Behold, we are fit of our selves, to prepare our
hearts, and so consequently to think some good thing. And again, Let no man
deceive himself: it is of his Tom. 9. in Io. tract. 49.
own, that he is Satan, it is of God, that he is happy. For what is that, of
his own, but of his sin? take away sin, which is thy own, and
righteousness, says he, is of me. For what have thou, that thou have not
received? Ambrose says, Although it be in man, to will that which is evil,
yet he has not power, to will that which is good, De invocat. ^gent. l. 1. c.
9 Hom. 1. de annuntiat. beatae Mariae.
except it be given him. Bernard says, If humane nature, when it was perfect,
could not stand, how much less is it able of it self to rise up again, being
now corrupt?

THE FIFTH SECTION. OF ETERNAL PREDESTINATION.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA. Of the Predestination of God, and the
election of the Saints. CHAP. 10.
GOD has from the beginning freely, and of his mere grace, without any
respect of men predestined or elected the Saints, whom he will save in
Christ, according to the saying of the Apostle, And Ephesians. 1. 4.
he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world. And again. Who
has saved us, and called us with an holy 2 Timothy 1 9.
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given unto us through Jesus Christ before the world was, but
is made manifest by the appearance of our Savior Jesus Christ. Therefore
though not for any merit of ours, yet not without a means, but in Christ, and
for Christ did God choose us, and they who are now engrafted into Christ by
faith, the same also were elected. But such as are without Christ, were
rejected, according to that of the Apostle, Prove your selves whether you be 1
Cor. 13. 5.
in the faith. Know you not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you?
except you be reprobates. To conclude, the Saints are chosen in Christ by God
unto a sure end, which end the Apostle declares, when he says, He has chosen
us in him, that we should Ephesians. 1. 4.
be holy, and without blame before him through love, who has predestined us
to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, for the praise of his
glorious grace. And although God knows who are his, and now and then mention
is made of the small number of the elect, yet we must hope well of all, and not
rashly judge any man to be a reprobate: for Paul says, to the Philippians, I
Phil. 1. 3. etc.
think my God for you all (Now he speaks of the whole Church of the
Philippians) that you are come into the fellowship of the Gospel, and I am
persuaded, that he that has begun this work in you, will perform it, as it
becomes me to judge of you all. And when the Lord was demanded, whether there
were few that should be saved? he does not answer and tell them, that few or
more should be saved, or damned, but rather he exhorts every man, to Strive
Luke 13.
to enter in at the straight gate. As if he should say, it is not for you
rashly to enquire of these matters, but rather to endeavor that you may enter
into heaven, by the straight way. Wherefore we do not allow of the wicked
speeches of some, who say, Few are chosen, and seeing. I know not whether I am
in the number of those few, I will not defraud my nature of her desires. Others
there are which say, If I be predestinate and chosen of God, nothing can hinder
me from salvation, which is already certainly appointed for me, whatsoever I
do at any time. But if I be in the number of the reprobate, no faith or
repentance will help me, seeing the decree of God cannot be changed. Therefore
all teachings and admonitions are to no purpose. Now against these men, the
saying of the Apostle makes much. The servants of 2 Timothy 2. 24, etc.
God must be apt to teach, instructing them that are contrary minded, proving
if God at any time will give them repentance that they may come to amendmennt
out of the snare of the devil, which are taken of him at his pleasure. Beside
Augustine also teaches, Lib. de beno perseverantiae. Cap. 14.
that both the grace of free election and predestination, and also wholesome
admonitions and doctrines are to be preached.

We therefore condemn those, who seek other where, then in Christ, whether
they be chosen from all eternity, and what God has decreed of them before all
beginning. For men must hear the Gospel preached, and believe it: If thou
believe, and be in Christ, thou may undoubtedly reckon of it, that thou art
elected. For the Father has revealed unto us in Christ his eternal sentence
of predestination, as we even now showed out of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. This is
therefore above all to be taught and well waied, what great love of the Father
toward us in Christ is revealed: we must hear what the Lord does daily preach
unto us in his Gospel, how he calls, and says, Come unto me all ye Matthew.
11. 18. John 3. 10.
that labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you. And, So God loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son for it, that all which believe in
him should not perish, but have life everlasting. Also, Matthew. 18. 14.
It is not the will of the Father, that any of these little ones should perish.
Let Christ therefore be our looking glass, in whom we may behold our
predestination We shall have a most evident and sure testimony that we are
written in the book of life, if we communicate with Christ, and he be ours,
and we his by a true faith. Let this comfort us in the temptation touching
predestination, then which there is none more dangerous, that the promises of
God are general to the faithful, in that he says, Ask, and ye Luke 11.
shall receive: Every one that asks, receives: and to conclude, in that we
pray with all the Church of God, Our Father which art in heaven: and for that
in baptism we are ingrafted into the body of Christ, and are fed in his
Church, oftentimes with his flesh and blood unto everlasting life. Thereby we
being strengthened, we are commanded to work our salvation with fear and
trembling, according to that precept of Paul.

Out of the Confession of BASIL.
HEreupon we confess, that God, before he had created the Artic. 1 ss. 3.
world, had chosen all those, to whom he would freely give the inheritance of
eternal blessedness.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE believe that out of this universal corruption and damnation, wherein by
nature are men are drowned, God did deliver and preserve some, whom by his
eternal and immutable counsel, of his own goodness and mercy, without any
respect of their works, he did choose in Christ Jesus, and others he left in
that corruption and damnation, in whom he might as well make manifest his
justice, by condemning them justly in their time, as also declare the riches of
his mercy in the others. For some are not better then others, till such time as
the Lord does make a difference, according to that immutable counsel, which he
had decreed in Christ Jesus before the creation of the world: neither was any
man able by his own strength to make an entrance for himself to that good,
seeing that of our nature we can not have so much as one right motion,
affection, or thought, till God do freely prevent us, and fashion us to
uprightness.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe that God (after that the whole offspring of Artic. 16.
Adam was cast headlong into perdition and destruction, through the default of
the first man) has declared and showed himself to be such a one, as he is
indeed, namely, both merciful and just. Merciful by delivering and saving
those from condemnation and from death, whom in his eternal counsel, of his
own free goodness, he has chosen in Jesus Christ our Lord, without any
regard at all of their works: but Just, in leaving others in that their fall
and perdition, whereinto they had thrown themselves headlong.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
THe Confession of Auspurge does so mention predestination in the 20. Article,
the title whereof is, De fide, Of faith, that it affirms it to be a needless
thing, to dispute of predestination in the doctrine of justification by faith.
Which in what sort it may be said, we have declared in the 6. Observation in
this Confession, sect. 9. where these words of the Confession are rehearsed.

Also the SAXON CONFESSION Does in the same sense, by the way make mention of
Predestination and Election, about the end of the third Article, where it
treats of faith, which part we have therefore placed in the 9. Section.

THE SIXTH SECTION. OF THE REPAIRING OR Deliverance of Man from his Fall, by
Jesus Christ alone: and of his Pesron, Natures, Office, and the works of
REDEMPTION.
The former Confession of HELVETIA. Of Jesus Christ, being true God and man,
and the only Savior of the World. CHAP. II.
MOreover we believe and teach, that the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ,
was from all eternity predestined and foreordained of the Father to be the
Savior of the world. And we believe that he was begotten, not only then, when
he took flesh of the Virgin Mary, nor yet a little before the foundations of
the world were laid, but before all eternity, and that of the Father, after an
unspeakable manner. For Isaiah says, Who can tell Isa. 35. Mich 5. 2: Ioh. 1.
1. Phil. 2. 6
his generation? And Micheah says, Whose egresse has been from everlasting.
For John says, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and
God was the word, etc. Therefore the Son is coequall and consubstantiall with
the Father, as touching his divinity, true God, not by name only, or by
adoption, or by special favor, but in substance and nature. Even as the
Apostle 1 John 5. 18.
says elsewhere, This is the true God, and life everlasting. Paul also says,
He has made his Son the heir of all things, by whom also he Heb. 12.
made the world: The same is the brightness of his glory, and the ingraved
form of his person, bearing up all things by his mighty word. Likewise in the
Gospel the Lord himself says, Father glorify John 17. 5.
thou me with thy self, with the glory which I had with thee before John. 5.
18.
the world was. Also elsewhere it is written in the Gospel, The Jews sought
how to kill Jesus, because he said that God was his Father, making himself
equal with God. We therefore do abhor the blasphemous doctrine of Arrius, and
all the Arrians uttered against the Son of God. And especially the blasphemies
of Michael Servetus the Spaniard, and of his accomplices, which Satan by them
has as it were drawn out of hell, and most boldly and impiously spread abroad
throughout the world against the Son of God.

We teach also and believe, that the eternal Son of the eternal Matthew. 1.
God was made the Son of man, of the seed of Abraham and David, not by the
mean of any man, as Hebion affirmed, but that he was most purely conceived by
the holy Ghost, and was borne of Mary, who was always a Virgin, even as the
history of the Gospel does declare. And Paul says, He took in no sort the
Heb. 2. 16.
Angels, but the seed of Abraham. And John the Apostle says, He that believes
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God. The flesh of Christ
therefore was neither flesh in show only, nor yet flesh brought from heaven,
as Valentine and Marcion dreamed. Moreover our Lord Jesus Christ had not a
soul without sense and reason, as Apollinaris thought: nor flesh without a
soul, as Eunomius did teach; but a soul with it reason and flesh with it
senses, by which senses he felt true griefs in the time of his passion, even
as he himself witnesses when he said, My soul is heavy Matthew. 26. John. 12.
even to death. And, My soul is troubled, etc.

We acknowledge therefore that there be in one and the same Jesus Christ our
Lord, two natures, the divine, and the humane nature: and we say that these two
are so conjoined or united, that they are not swallowed up, confounded, or
mingled together, but rather united or joined together in one person, the
proprieties of each nature being safe and remaining still: so that we do
worship one Christ our Lord, and not two, I say, one, true, God and man, as
touching his divine nature, of the same substance with the Father, and as
touching his humane nature of the same substance with us, and Like unto us in
all things, sin only excepted. As therefore we detest the heresy of
Nestorius, which makes two Christ's of one, and dissolveth the union of the
Person, so do we curse the madness of Eutiches, and of the Monophelites, or
Monophysicks, who overthrow the propriety of the humane nature. Therefore we
do not teach that the divine nature in Christ did suffer, or that Christ
according to his humane nature is yet in the world, and even in every place.
For we do neither think nor teach, that the body of Christ ceased to be a
true body after his glorifying, or that it was deified, and so deified, that it
put off it properties, as touching body and soul, and became altogether a
divine nature, and began to be one substance alone: And therefore we do not
allow or receive the unwittie subtilties, and the intricate, obscure and
inconstant disputations of Schucnkfeildius, and such other vain janglers about
this matter. Neither are we Schuenkfeildians. Moreover, we believe, that our
Lord Jesus Christ did truly suffer and die for us in the flesh, as Peter
says. We abhor the most horrible madness 1 Pet. 4. 1.
of the Iacobites and the Turks, which abandon the passion of our Lord. Yet we
deny not but that the Lord of glory (according to the saying of Paul,) was
crucified for us. For we do reverently 1 Cor. 2. 8.
and religiously receive and use the communication of proprieties drawn from
the Scriptures, and used of all antiquity in expounding and reconciling places
of Scripture, which at the first sight seem to disagree one from another.

We believe and teach that the same Lord Jesus Christ, in that true flesh, in
which he was crucified and died, rose again from the dead, and that he did not
raise up another flesh in stead of that which was buried, nor took a spirit in
stead of flesh, but retained a true body: Therefore whilst that his disciples
thought that they did see the spirit of their Lord Christ, he showed them his
hands and feet, which were marked with the prints of the nails and wounds,
saying, Behold my hands and my feet, for I am he indeed: Luke 24. 39.
Handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

We believe that our Lord Jesus Christ in the same his flesh did ascend above
all the visible heavens into the very highest heaven, that is to say, the seat
of God and of the blessed spirits, unto the right hand of God the Father, Look
the 1. Observation on this Confession. John. 14. Act. 3.
which although it do signify an equal participation of glory and majesty,
yet it is also taken for a certain place, of which the Lord speaking in the
Gospel, says, That he will go and prepare a place for his. Also the Apostle
Peter says, The heavens must contain Christ, until the time of restoring of
all things. And out of heaven the same Christ will return unto judgment, even
then, when wickedness shall chiefly reign in the world, and when Antichrist
having corrupted true religion shall fill all things with superstition and
impiety, and shall most cruelly destroy the Church with fire and bloodshed.
Now Christ shall return to redeem his, and to abolish Antichrist by his
coming, and to judge the quick and the dead. For the dead shall arise, and
those which shall be found alive in that day Acts 17.
(which is unknown unto all creatures) shall be changed in the twinkling of
an eye, and all the faithful shall be taken up to meet Christ in the air,
that thenceforth they may enter with him into heaven there to live for ever.
But the unbeleevers or ungodly 1 Cor. 15. Matthew 25. 41. 2 Timothy 2.
shall descend with the devils into hell, there to burn for ever, and never to
be delivered out of torments. We therefore condemn all those which deny the
true resurrection of the flesh, and those which think amiss of the glorified
bodies, as did Ioannes Hiercsolymitanus, against whom Jerome wrote. We also
condemn those, which thought both the devils and all the wicked shall at the
length be saved, and have an end of their torments. For the Lord himself has
absolutely set it down, that, Their fire is never Mar. 9.
quenched, and their worm never dies. Moreover we condemn the Jewish
dreams, that before the day of Judgment there shall be a golden world in the
earth: and that the godly shall possess the kingdoms of the world, their
wicked enemies being troad under foot. For the Evangelicall truth, Matthew. 24
and 25. and Luke 18. and the Apostolic doctrine in the 2 to the Thessalonians,
2. and in the 2 to Tim. 3. and 4 are found to teach far otherwise.

Furthermore by his passion or death, and by all those things Romans 14. 5.
which he did and suffered for our sakes, from the time of his coming in the
flesh, our Lord reconciled his heavenly Father unto all the faithful, purged
their sin, spoiled death, broke in sunder condemnation and hell, and by his
resurrection from the dead he brought again and restored life, and
immortality. For he is our righteousness, life, and resurrection, and to be
short, he is the fullness and perfection, the salvation and most abundant
sufficiency of all the faithful. For the Apostle says, So it pleases the
Father that all fullness should dwell in him. And, In him ye are complete,
Coloss. 1. and 2. For we teach and believe that this Jesus Christ our Lord is
the only and eternal Savior of Look the 1. Observation on this Confession.
mankind, yea and of the whole world, in whom are saved by faith all that ever
were saved before the Law, under the Law, and in the time of the Gospel, and so
many as shall yet be saved to the end of the world. For the Lord himself in
the Gospel says, He that enters not in by the door unto the sheepfold, but
climeth up an other way, he Joh. 10.
is a thief and a robber. I am the door of the sheep. And also in another
place of the same Gospel he says, Abraham saw my days, John 8. Acts 4.
and rejoiced And the Apostle Peter says, Neither is there salvation in any
other, but in Christ: for among men there is given no other name under heaven
whereby they might be saved. We believe therefore that through the grace of our
Lord Christ we shall be saved, even as our fathers were. For Paul says, That
all our fathers 1 Cor. 10.
did eat the same spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink, for
they drank of the sprituall rock, that followed them, and that rock was
Christ. And therefore we read that John said, That Christ was that Lamb which
was slain from the beginning Apoc. 15. John 1.
of the world. And that John Baptist witnesses, That Christ is that Lamb of
God, that takes away the sins of the world. Wherefore we do plainly and
openly profess and preach, that Jesus Christ is the only Redeemer and Savior
of the world, the King and high Priest, the true and looked for Messiah, that
holy and blessed one (I say) whom all the shadows of the Law, and the
Prophesies of the Prophets did prefigure and promise, and that God did perform
and send him unto us, so that now we are not to look for any other. And now
there remains nothing, but that we all should give all glory to him believe
in him, and rest in him only, contemning and rejecting all other aids of our
life. For they are fallen from the grace of God, and make Christ of no value
unto themselves, whosoever they be that seek salvation in any other things
besides Christ alone.

And to speak many things in few words, with a sincere heart we believe, and
with liberty of speech we freely profess, whatsoever things are defined out
of the holy Scriptures, and comprehended in the Creeds, and in the Decrees of
those four first and most excellent Councels holden at Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus, and Chalcedon, together with blessed Athanasius his Creed, and all
other Creeds like to these, touching the mystery of the Incarnation of our
Lord Jesus Christ: and we condemn all things contrary to the same. And thus
do we retain the Christian, sound, and Catholic faith, wholly and
inviolable, knowing that nothing is contained in the foresaid Creeds, which is
not agreeable to the Word of God, and makes wholly for the sincere declaration
of faith.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA.
The eternal Counsel of the restoring of man.
ANd though man by this fault was deputed to damnation Artic. 10.
and had incurred most just wrath, yet God the Father never ceased to have a
care over him, the which is manifest by the first promises, by the whole Law
(which as it is holy, and good, teaching us the will of God, righteousness,
and truth, so does it work anger, and stir up, not extinguish, sins in us,
not through it own fault, but by ours) and by Christ, ordained and exhibited
for this purpose.

Jesus Christ and those benefits which we reap by him.
THis Christ the true Son of God, being true God and true Artic. 11.
man, was made our brother, when, according tot the time appointed, he had
taken upon him whole man (that is, consisting of soul and body) and in one
indivisible person united two natures (yet were not these natures confounded)
that he might restore us being dead to life, and make us fellow heirs with
himself. He taking flesh of the most pure Virgin Mary, the holy Ghost working
together, flesh, I say, being sacred by the union of the Godhead, and like unto
ours in all things, sin only excepted (because it behooved our sacrifice to be
unspotted) gave the same flesh to death, for the purgation of all sin.

The same Christ as he is to us a full and perfect hope and trust of our
immortality, so he placed his flesh, being raised up from death into heaven,
at the right hand of his Almighty Father.

This Conqueror, having triumphed over death, sin, and all the infernal
devils, sitting as our Captain, Head, and chief high Priest, does defend and
plead our cause continually, till he do reform us to that Image after which
we were created, and bring us to the fruition of life everlasting, we look for
him to come in the end of the world, a true and upright Judge, and to give
sentence upon all flesh (being first raised up to that judgment) and to
advance the godly above the sky, and to condemn the wicked, both in soul and
body, to eternal destruction.

Who, as he is the only Mediator, Intercessor, Sacrifice, and also our high
Priest, Lord, and King, so we do acknowledge, and with the whole heart
believe, that he alone is our atonement, redemption, sanctification,
expiation, wisdom, protection, and deliverance, simply herein rejecting all
mean of our life and salvation, beside this Christ alone. The laetter part of
this Article we placed also in the second section, which entreats of the
only Mediator.

Out of the Confession of BASIL. Of Christ, being true God and true man.
WE believe and confess constantly, that Christ in the time hereunto
appointed, according to the promise of God, was given to us of the Father, and
that so the eternal word of God was made flesh, that is, that this Son of God,
being united to our nature in one person, was made our brother, that we through
him might be made partakers of the inheritance of God.

We believe that this Jesus Christ was conceived of the holy Ghost, borne of
the pure and undefiled Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, crucified,
and dead for our sins: and so by the one oblation of himself, he did satisfy
God our heavenly Father for us, and reconcile us to him, and so by his death he
did triumph, and overcame the world, death, and hell. Moreover, according to
the flesh he was buried, descended into hell, and the third day he rose again
from the dead. These things being sufficiently approoved, he in his soul and
body ascended into heaven, and sits there at the right hand, that is, in the
glory of God the Father Almighty: from thence he shall come to judge the
quick and the dead. Moreover, he sent to his disciples, according to his
promise, the holy Ghost, in whom we believe, even as we do believe in the
Father, and in the Son. We believe that the last judgment shall be, wherein
our flesh shall rise again, and every man, according as he has done in this
life, shall receive of Christ Romans 2. 2 Cor. 5. Joa. 5.
the Judge: to wit, eternal life, if he has showed forth the fruits of faith,
which are the works of righteousness, by a true faith, and unfeined love: and
eternal fire, if he has committed good or evil, without faith or love.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA. CHAP. 4. Toward the middle.
NEither has any man, of all things whatsoever, any thing at all whereby he
may deliver, set free, or redeem himself from his sins and condemnation,
without Christ, by whom alone, John 15.
they which truly believe, are freed from sin, from the tyranny and prison
of the devil, from the wrath of God, and from death and everlasting torments.
And a little after toward the end of the said fourth Chapter. Together with
this point, and after it, considering that both the matter it self, and order
of teaching so requires, the Ministers of the Church teach us after our fall
to acknowledge the promise of God, the true word of grace, and the holy
Gospel, brought to us from the privy counsel of the holy Trinity, concerning
our Lord Christ, and our whole salvation purchased by him.

Of these promises there be three principal, wherein all the rest are
contained. The first was made in Paradise in these words, I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed Genesis 3.
and her seed. He shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. The
second was made to Abraham, which afterward Jacob also and Moses did renew.
The third to David, which the Prophets recited and expounded. In these promises
are described and painted forth those most excellent and principal works of 2
King 7. 23.
Christ our Lord, which are the very groundwork whereon our salvation
stands, by which he is our Mediator and Savior: Psalm. 131. 89
namely, his conception in the womb of the Virgin Mary, and his birth of her
also, for he was made the seed of the woman: also Isa. 9. 11.
his afflictions, his rising again from death, his sitting at the right hand
of God, where he has obtained the dignity of a Priest and King: of which
thing the whole life of David was a certain type, for which cause the Lord
calls himself another David, Ephesians. 3. 4.
and a Shepherd. And this was the Gospel of those holy men before the Law was
given, and since. And Chapter the 6. a little from the beginning. For this is
very certain, that after the fall of Adam no man was able to set himself at
liberty out of the bondage of sin, death, and condemnation, or come to be
truly reconciled unto God, but only by that one Mediator between God and
man, Christ Jesus (through a lively faith in him) who alone by his death, and
bloodshedding, took from us that image of sin and death, and put upon us by
faith the image of righteousness and life. For he made unto us of God,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, 1 Cor. 2.
and redemption.

But first men are taught, that these things are to be believed concerning
Christ: namely, that he is eternal, and of the nature of his heavenly Father,
the only begotten Son, begotten from everlasting, and so together with the
Father and the holy Ghost John 1. Heb. 1. Coloss. 1.
one, true, and indivisible God, the eternal, not created word, the
brightness and the Image or engraven form of the person of his Father, by
whom all things, as well those things which may be seen, as those which can
not be seen, and those things which are in heaven, and those which are in the
earth, were made and created.

Moreover, that he is also a true and natural man, our brother in very deed,
who has a soul and a body, that is, true and perfect humane nature, which, by
the power of the holy Ghost, he took, without all sin, of Mary a pure Virgin:
according as Saint John says, The Word was made flesh. John 1.


And thus of these two natures, their properties not being changed nor
confounded, yet by a wonderful communication thereof, there is made one
indivisible person, one Christ, Immanuel, our King and Priest, our Redeemer,
our Mediator, and perfect Reconciler, full of grace and truth, so that of his
fullness we all do take grace for grace: For the Law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth, was given and exhibited, by Jesus Christ, being God and man in
one person: This grace and truth are our men taught to acknowledge, and by
faith to behold, in all those saving and wonderful works or affections of
Christ, which, according to the meaning of the holy Scripture, are by a
steadfast faith to be believed and professed: such as are his coming down from
heaven, his conception, birth, torments, death, burial, resurrection,
ascension unto heaven, sitting at the right hand of God, and his coming again
from thence to Judge both the quick and the dead. In these principal
affections, as in a chest wherein treasure is kept, are all those wholesome
fruits of our true justification laid up, and are taken out from thence for the
Elect and those which do believe, that in spirit and conscience they may be
partakers thereof through faith: which all hereafter, at the day of our joyful
resurrection, shall be fully and perfectly bestowed upon us. And toward the
end of that sixth Chapter, these words are added. In this Chapter also
particularly and for necessary causes, to shun and avoid many pernicious and
Antichristian deceits, it is taught concerning Christ his Look the first
obs^rvat. upon this confession.
presence, namely that our Lord Christ according to his bodily conversation is
not amongst us any longer in this world, neither will be unto the end of the
world, in such sort and manner as he was here conversant amongst us in his
mortality, and wherein he was betrayed, and circumcised, nor yet in the form
of his glorified body, which he got at his resurrection, and in the which he
appeared to his disciples, and the fortieth day after his resurrection,
departing from them, ascended manifestly into heaven. For after this manner of
his presence and company he is in the high place, and with his Father in
heaven, where all tongues profess him to be the Lord, and every faithful one
of Christ must believe that he is there, and worship him there, according to
the Scriptures, as also that part of the Catholic Christian faith does
expressly witness, which is this, He ascended into heaven, he sits at the
right hand of God the Father Almighty: Also that other Article: from thence
shall he come (that is from an higher place, out of heaven with his Angels) to
judge both the quick and 1 These. 4.
the dead. So does Paul also say, The Lord himself shall descend from heaven
with a shoute, and with the voice of an Archangel, and with the trumpet of God.
And Saint Peter says, Whom heaven must contain, Act 3. Mar. 16.
until the time that all things be restored. And the Evangelist Mark: But
when the Lord had spoken with them, he was taken up again into heaven, and
sits at the right hand of God. And the Angels which were there present, when
he was taken Acts 1.
up into heaven, said, This Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall
so come again, as you have seen him go into heaven.

Furthermore, this also do our men teach, that the self same Christ, very God
and very man, is also with us here in this world, but after a diverse manner
from that kind of presence which we named before, that is, after a certain
spiritual manner, not object to our eyes, but such a one as is hid from us,
which the flesh does not perceive, and yet it is very necessary for us to our
salvation, that we may be partakers of him, whereby he offers and
communicates himself unto us, that he may dwell in us, and we in him: and
this truly he does by the holy Ghost, whom in his own place (that is, instead
of his own presence, whereby he was bodily amongst us) he promised that he
would send unto his Church, and that he would still abide with it by the same
spirit in virtue, grace, and his wholesome truth, at all times, even until the
end of the world, when he said thus: It is good for you that I go Matthew. 28.
John 16. John 14.
hence, for except I go hence, the Comforter will not come unto you: but if I
go away, I will send him unto you. And again, I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, (that is, another kind of comforter then I
am) that he may abide in you for ever, even the spirit of truth, whom the world
cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him: but ye know him,
for he dwells in you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless,
but I will come to you, namely, by the self same spirit of truth.

Now then even as our Lord Christ by his latter kind of presence being not
visible, but spiritual, is present in the Ministers of the Church, in the
Word, and in the Sacraments; even so also by the self same Ministers, Word,
and Sacraments he is present with his Church, and by these means do the Elect
receive him through inward faith in their heart, and do therefore join
themselves together with him, that he may dwell in them, and they in him, after
such a sort, as is not apparent, but hidden from the world, even by that says
spiritually: that is to say, in their souls and hearts, by the spirit of truth,
of whom our Lord says, He abides with you, and shall be in you. And, I will
come again unto John 14.
you.

This judgment and declaration of our faith, is not new, or now first devised,
but very ancient. Now that this was commonly taught and meant in the Church of
old, it is plain and evident by the Writings of the ancient Fathers of the
Church, and by that Decree, wherein it is thus written, and they are the words
of S. Augustine: Our Lord is above until the end of the world, but the I^ Io.
Tract. 30.
truth of the Lord is here also: for the body of the Lord, wherein he rose
again, must of necessity be in one place, but his truth is dispersed every
where.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE believe, that whatsoever is requisite to our salvation, Artic. 13.
is offered and communicated unto us now at length in that one Jesus Christ, as
he who being given to save us, is also made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption, in so much as whosoever does swarve from him,
does renounce the mercy of the Father, that is, our only refuge.

We believe that Jesus Christ, being the wisdom, and eternal Artic. 14.
Son of the Father, took upon him our nature, so that he is one person, God
and man. Man, I say, that might suffer both in soul and also in body, and made
like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, for that his flesh was indeed
the seed of Abraham and David, howbeit by the secret and incomprehensible power
of the holy Ghost, it was conceived in due time in the womb of that blessed
Virgin. And therefore we detest, as contrary to that truth, all those heresies
wherewith the Churches were troubled in times past: and namely, we detest those
devilish imaginations of Servetus, who gave to our Lord Jesus Christ, an
imaginary Deity, whom he said to be the Idea and pattern of all things, and
the counterfeit or figurative Son of God: to conclude he framed him a body
compacted of three elements uncreated, and therefore he did mingle and
overthrow both his natures.

We believe that in one and the same person, which is Jesus Artic. 15.
Christ, those two natures are truly and inseperably so conjoined, that they be
also united, either of those natures nevertheless retaining it distinct
propriety, so, that even as in this divine conjunction the nature of the word
reteining it proprieties, remained uncreate, infinite, and filling all places;
so also the humane nature remained, and shall remain for ever, finite, having
it natural form, dimension, and also propriety, as from the which the
resurrection and glorification, or taking up to the right hand of the Father,
has not taken away the truth of the humane nature. Therefore we do so
consider Christ in his Deity, that we do not spoil him of his humanity.

We believe that God did declare his infinite love and goodness Artic. 16.
toward us in this, that he has sent his Son, who should die, and rise
again, and fulfill all righteousness, that he might purchase eternal life
for us.

We believe that by that only sacrifice, which Jesus Christ offered Artic. 17.
on the cross, we are reconciled to God, that we may be taken for just before
him, because we cannot be acceptable to him, nor enjoy the fruit of our
adoption, but so far forth, as he does forgive us our sins. Therefore we
affirm, that Jesus Christ is our entire and perfect washing, in whose death we
obtain full satisfaction, whereby we are delivered from all those sins
whereof we are guilty, and from the which we could not be acquitted by any
other remedy.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
WE believe, that Jesus Christ the only Son of the eternal Artic. 2.
Father (as long before it was determined before all beginnings) when the
fullness of time was come, did take of that blessed and pure Virgin, both
flesh, and all the nature of man, that he might declare to the world the secret
and hid will of his Father: which will had been laid up from before all ages
and generations: and that he might finish in his humane body the mystery of our
redemption, and might fasten our sins to the cross, and also that
handwriting, which was made against us.

We believe that for our sakes he died, and was buried, descended into hell,
the third day, by the power of his Godhead, returned to life and rose again,
and that the fourth day after his resurrection, whiles his disciples beheld and
looked upon him, he ascended into heaven, to fulfill all things, and did place
in Majesty and glory the self same body, where with he was borne, wherein he
lived on earth, wherein he was jested at, wherein he had suffered most painful
torments, and cruel kind of death, wherein he rose again, and wherein he
ascended to the right hand of the Father, above all rule, above all power, all
force, all Dominion, and above every name, that is named, not only in this
world, but also in the world to come: And that there he now sits, and shall
sit; till all things be fully perfected. And although the Majesty, and Godhead
of Christ be every where abundantly dispersed, yet we believe, that his body,
as S. Augustine says, must need be still in one place: and that Christ has
given Majesty unto his body, but yet has not taken away from it the nature of
a body, and that we must not so affirm Christ to be God, that we deny him to
be man: and as the Martyr Vigilius says, That Christ has left in, touching
his humane nature, but has not left us, touching his Divine nature: and that
the same Christ, though he be absent from us, concerning his manhead, yet is
ever present with us, concerning his Godhead.

From that place also we believe that Christ shall come again to execute that
general judgment, as well of them whom be shall find alive in the body, as
of them that shall be ready dead.

And therefore that our only succor, and refuge is to fly to the Artic. 18.
mercy of our Father by Jesus Christ, and assuredly to persuade our minds,
that he is the Obtainer of forgiveness for our sins: And, that by his blood,
all our spots of sin, be washed clean: That he has pacified, and set at one,
all things by the blood of his cross: That he by the same one only sacrifice,
which he once offered upon the Cross, has brought to effect, and fulfilled
all things, and that for that cause he said, when he gave up the Ghost, It is
finished, as though he would signify, that the price, and ransom was now
fully paid for the sin of mankind.

If there be any, that think this sacrifice not sufficient, let them Artic. 19.
go in Gods name and seek a better. We verily, because we know this to be the
Only sacrifice, are well content with it alone, and look for none other: and,
forasmuch as it was to be offered but once, we command it not to be renewed
again: and, because it was full, and perfect in all points, and parts, we do
not ordain in place thereof any continual succession of offerings.

To conclude, we believe that this our self same flesh, wherein Artic. 21.
we live, although it die, and come to dust, yet at the last shall return
again unto life, by the means of Christ's spirit, which dwells in us: and that
then verily, whatsoever we suffer here in the mean while for his sake, Christ
will wipe away all tears and heaviness from our eyes: and that we through him
shall enjoy everlasting life, and shall for ever be with him in glory. So be it.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe that our most mighty and graci^us God Artic. 17.
(when he saw that man had thus thrown himself into the damnation both of
spiritual and corporal death, and was made altogether miserable and accursed)
by his wonderful wisdom: and goodness, was induced both to seek him, when
through fear he had fled from his presence, and also most lovingly to comfort
him, giving unto him the promise of his own Son to be bo^^ of a woman, which
should break the head of the Serpent, and restore him to felicity and
happiness.

Moreover we confess, that God did then at the length fulfill his Artic. 18.
promise made unto the Fathers, by the mouth of his holy Prephets, when in his
appointed time he sent his only and etern^^ Son into the world, who took upon
him the form of a servant, being made like unto men, and did truly take unto
him the nature of man, with all infirmities belonging thereunto (sin only
excepted) when he was conceived in the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, by the
power of the holy Ghost, without any means of man. The which nature of man he
put upon him, not only in respect of the body, but also in respect of the
soul: for he had also a true soul, to the intent he might be true and perfect
man. For seeing that as well the soul, as the body of man, was subject to
condemnation, it was necessary that Christ should take upon him as well the
soul, as the body, that he might save them both together. Therefore contrary
to the heresy of the Anabaptists, which deny that Christ did take upon him the
flesh of man, we confess that Christ was partaker of flesh and blood, as the
rest of his brethren were, that he came from the loins of David, according to
the flesh, I say, that he was made of the seed of David according to the same
flesh, and that he is a fruit of the Virgins womb, borne of a woman, the
branch of David, a flower of the root of Iesse, coming of the tribe of Judah,
and of the Jews themselves, according to the flesh: and to conclude, the true
seed of Abraham and David, the which seed of Abraham he took upon him, being
made in all things like unto his brethren, sin only excepted, as has been
said before, so that he is indeed our true Emmanuel, that is, God with us.

We believe also that the person of the Son was by this conception Artic. 19.
inseparably united and coupled with the humane nature, yet so, that there be
not two Sons of God, nor two persons, but two natures joined together in one
person: both which natures do still retain their own proprieties. So that,
as the divine nature has remained always uncreated, without the beginning of
days, and term of life, filling both heaven and earth: so the humane nature
has not lost his proprieties, but has remained still a creature, having both
beginning of days and a finite nature. For whatsoever does agree unto a true
body, that it still retains, and although Christ by his resurrection has
bestowed immortality upon it, yet notwithstanding he has neither taken away
the truth of the humane nature, nor altered it. For both our salvation, and
also our resurrection depends upon the truth of Christ's body. Yet these two
natures are so united and coupled in one person, that they could not, no not in
his death, be separated the one from the other. Wherefore that, which in his
death he commended unto his Father, was indeed a humane spirit, departing out
of his body: but in the mean season the divine nature did always remain
joined to the humane, even then when he lay in the grave: so that his Deity
was no less in him at that time, then when as yet he was an infant, although
for a small season it did not show forth it self. Wherefore we confess that
he is true God, and true man: true God, that by his power he might overcome
death: and true man, that in the infirmity of his flesh he might die for us.

We believe that God, which is both perfectly merciful, and Artic. 20.
perfectly just, did send his Son to take upon him that nature, which through
disobedience had offended, that in the self same nature he might satisfy for
sin, and by his bitter death and passion pay the punishment that was due unto
sin. God therefore has declared and manifested his justice in his own Son
being laden with our iniquities: but has most mercifully powered forth and
declared his gracious goodness unto us guilty wretches, and worthy of
condemnation, whilst that in his incomprehensible love toward us, he
delivered up his Son unto death for our sins, and raised him up again from
death for our justification, that by him we might obtain immortality and life
everlasting.

We believe that Jesus Christ is that high Priest, appointed to Artic. 21.
that office eternally, by the oath of his Father, according to the order of
Melchisedech, which offered himself in our name before his Father with a full
satisfaction for the pacifying of his wrath, laying himself upon the altar of
the cross, and has shed his blood for the cleansing of our sins, as the
Prophets had foretold. For it is written, that the chastisement of our peace
was laid upon the Son of God, and by his wounds we are healed. Also that he
was carried as a sheep unto the slaughter, reputed amongst sinners and unjust,
and condemned of Pontius Pilate, as a malefactor, though before he had
pronounced him guiltless. Therefore he paid that which he had not taken, and
being just, suffered in soul and body for the unjust, in such sort, that
feeling the horror of those punishments that were due unto our sins, he did
sweat water and blood, and at length cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? All which he suffered for the remission of our sins. Wherefore we
do not without just cause profess with Paul, that we know nothing out Jesus
Christ, and him crucified, and that we do account all things as dung, in
respect of the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord, finding in his
wounds and stripes all manner of comfort, that can be deserved. Wherefore there
is no need, that either we should wish for any other means, or devise any of
our own brains, whereby we might be reconciled unto God besides this one
oblation once offered, by the which all the faithful, which are sanctified,
are consecrated, or perfected for ever. And this is the cause, why he was
called the Angel Jesus, that is to say, a Savior, because he shall save his
people from their sins.

Last of all we do believe out of the word of God, that out Artic. 37.
Lord Jesus Christ (when the time appointed by God, but unto all creatures
unknown, shall come, and the number of the elect shall be accomplished) shall
come again from heaven, and that after a corporal and visible manner, as
heretofore he has ascended, being adorned with great glory and majesty, that
he may appear as Judge of the quick and the dead, the old world being kindled
with fire and flame, and purified by it. Then Look the second observat. upon
this confession.
all creatures, and as well men, as women, and children, as many as have been
from the beginning, and shall be to the end of the world, shall appear before
this high Judge, being summoned thither by the voice of Archangels, and the
trumpet of God. For all that have been dead shall then rise out of the earth,
the soul and spirit of every one being joined and coupled together again to
the same bodies, wherein before they lived. They moreover, which shall be alive
at the last day, shall not die the same death that other men have done, but in
a moment and in the twinkling of an eye they shall be changed from corruption,
to an incorruptible nature. Then the books shall be opened, namely the books
of every man's conscience, and the dead shall be judged according to those
things which they have done in this world, either good or evil. Moreover, then
shall men render an account of every idle word which they have spoken, although
the world do now make but a sport and a jest at them. Finally, all the
hypocrisy of men, and the deepest secrets of their hearts shall be made
manifest unto all, so that worthily the only remembrance of this judgment
shall be terrible and fearful to the wicked and reprobate. But of the godly
and elect it is greatly to be wished for, and is unto them exceeding comfort.
For then shall their redemption be fully perfited and they shall reap most
sweet fruit and commodity of all those labors and sorrows, which they have
suffered in this world. Then, I say, their innocence shall be openly
acknowledged of all, and they likewise shall see that horrible punishment which
the Lord will execute upon those, that have most tyrannically afflicted them in
this world, with diverse kinds of torments and crosses. Furthermore the wicked
being convinced by the peculiar testimony of their own conscience, shall
indeed be made immortal, but with this condition, that they shall burn for
ever in that eternal fire, which is prepared for the devil. On the contrary
side the elect and faithful shall be crowned with the crown of glory and
honor, whose names the Son of God shall confess before his Father and the
Angels, and then shall all tears be wiped from their eyes. Then their cause,
which now is condemned of heresy and impiety by the Magistrates and Judges of
this world, shall be acknowledged to be the cause of the Son of God: And the
Lord shall of his free mercy reward them with so great glory, as no man's mind
is able to conceive. Therefore we do with great longing expect that great day
of the Lord, wherein we shall most fully enjoy all those things which God has
promised unto us, and through Jesus Christ our Lord, be put into full
possession of them for evermore.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
ALso they teach, that the word, that is, the Son of God took unto him man's
nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary, so that the two natures, the
divine and the humane, inseperably joined together in the unity of one person,
are one Christ, true God and true man: who was borne of the Virgin Mary, did
truly suffer, was crucified, dead, and buried, that he might reconcile his
Father unto us, and might be a sacrifice, not only for the Original sin,
but also for all actual sins of men. The same also descended into hell, and
did truly rise again the third day. Afterward he ascended into heaven, that
he might sit at the right hand of the Father, and reign for ever, and have
dominion over all the creatures, sanctify those that believe in him, by
sending the holy Spirit into their hearts, and give everlasting life to such as
he had sanctified. The same Christ shall openly come again, to judge them that
are found alive, and the dead raised up again, according to the Creed of the
Apostles.

In the end of this Article after these words (by sending his holy Spirit into
their hearts) these words are found in some Editions.
BY sending his Spirit into their hearts, which may reign, comfort, and
quicken them, and defend them against the Devil, and the power of sin. The same
Christ shall openly come again, to judge the quick and the dead, etc.
according to the Creed of the Apostles.

Also they teach, that in the end of the world Christ shall appear to
judgment, and shall raise up all the dead, and shall give unto men (to wit, to
the godly and elect) eternal life, and everlasting joys, but the ungodly and
the devils shall he condemn unto endless torments.

Also we condemn the Origenists, who imagined, that the devil and the damned
creatures should one day have an end of their pains.

After the first period of this Article, this is thus found elsewhere.
THey condemn the Anabaptists, that are of opinion, that the damned men and
the devils shall have an end of their torments. They condemn others also,
which now adays do spread abroad Jewish opinions, that before the resurrection
of the dead, the gody shall get the soveraigntie in the world, and the wicked
be brought under in every place.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY. Hitherto pertains a part of the third
Article.
THE Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Image of the eternal
Father, is appointed our Mediator, Reconciler, Redeemer, Iustifier, and
Savior. By the obedience and merit of him alone the wrath of God is pacified,
as it is said, Rom 3. Whom he set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in
his blood. And, Heb. 10. It is impossible, that the blood of Bulls should take
away sins. But he offering a sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at the right
hand of God, etc. And although we do not see as yet, Look the first observat.
upon this confession.
in this our infirmity, the causes of this wonderful counsel, why mankind
was to be redeemed after this sort, but we shall learn them hereafter in all
eternity, yet these principles are now to be learned. In this sacrifice there
are to be seen, justice in the wrath of God against sin, infinite mercy
toward us, and love in his Son toward mankind. The severitie of his justice
was so great, that there be no reconciliation, before the punishment was
accomplished. His mercy was so great, that his Son was given for us. There was
so great love in the Son toward us, that he derived unto himself this true
and exceeding great anger. O Son of God, kindle in our hearts, by thy holy
spirit, a consideration of these great and secret things, that by the knowledge
of this true wrath we may be sore afraid, and that again by true comfort we may
be lifted up, that we may praise thee for ever.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE.
WE believe and confess, that the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, begotten
of his eternal Father, is true and eternal God, consubstantiall with his
Father, and that in the fullness of time he was made man, to purge our sins,
and Look the 1. Observat. upon this confession.
to procure the eternal salvation of mankind: that Christ Jesus, being very
God, and very man, is one person only, and not two, and that in this one
person there be two natures, not one only, as by testimonies of the holy
Scripture, the holy Fathers have declared, in the Councels held at Nice,
Ephesus, and Chalcedon. Therefore we detest every heresy which is repugnant to
this doctrine of the Son of God.

Out of the Confession of SUEVELAND.
ALso we believe that our Savior Jesus Christ, being true God, was also made
true man, his natures not being confounded, but so united in one and the same
person, that they shall never hereafter be dissolved. Neither do we differ any
thing in those points, which the Church being taught out of the holy Gospels,
does believe, concerning our Savior Jesus Christ, conceived of the holy Ghost,
born of the Virgin Mary, and who at the length, after he had discharged the
office of preaching the Gospel, died on the cross, and was buried, and
descended into hell, and the third day he was called back from the dead unto
life eternal: the which life when he had by diverse arguments prooved unto
witnesses, hereunto appointed, he was carried up into heaven to the right hand
of his Father, from whence we look that he should come to judge the quick and
the dead. In the mean time let us acknowledge that he is nevertheless present
with his Church, that he does renew, and sanctify it, and as his only beloved
Spouse, beautify it with all sorts of ornaments of virtues: and in these
things we do nothing vary from the Fathers, nor from the common consent of
Christians: we think it sufficient, after this sort to testify our faith.

THE SEVENTH SECTION. OF THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA.
Of the Law of God. CHAP. 12.
WE teach, that the will of God is set down unto us in the Law of God, to wit,
what he would have us to do, or not to do, what is good and just, or what is
evil and unjust. We therefore confess that the Law is good and holy, and that
this Law is by the finger of God either either written in the hearts of men,
and so is called the law of nature, or engraven in the two Tables of Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 5.
stone, and more largely expounded in the books of Moses. For plainnes sake,
we divide it unto the moral law, which is contained in the commandments or the
two tables expounded in the books of Moses, and into the ceremonial, which
does appoint ceremonies and the worship of God, and into the judicial law,
which is occupied about political and domestical affairs.

We believe that the Look the 1. Observat. upon this confession. Deuteronomy. 4. and
12.
whole will of God and all necessary precepts for every part of this life is
fully delivered in this law. For otherwise the Lord would not have forbidden,
That any thing should by either added or taken away from this law. Neither
would he have commanded us to go straight forward in this, and Notto decline
out of the way either to the right hand or to the left.

We teach that this law was not given to men that we should be justified by
keeping it, but that by the knowledge thereof we might rather acknowledge our
infirmity, sin, and condemnation, and so dispairing of our own strength
might turn unto Christ by faith. For the Apostle says plainly, The law
works Romans 3. 4. Gal. 3.
wrath, and, by the law comes knowledge of sin. And, If there had been a
law given, which could have justified and given us life, surely righteousness
should have been by the law. But the spirit (to wit of the law) has concluded
all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given
to them which believe. Therefore the law was our Schoolmaster to Christ, that
we might be justified by faith. For neither could there ever, neither at this
day can Look the second observat. upon this confession. Romans 8.
any flesh satisfy the law of God, and fulfill it, by reason of the weakness
in our flesh, which remains and sticks fast in us, even to our last breath.
For the Apostle says again, That which the law could not perform, in as much
as it was weak through the flesh, that did God perform, sending his own
Son in similitude of flesh, subject to sin. Therefore Christ is the
perfiter of the law, and our fulfilling of it, who as he took away the curse
of the law, when he was made a curse for us, so does he communicate unto Gal. 3.
us by faith his fulfilling thereof, and his righteousness and obedience is
imputed unto us. The law of God therefore is Look the 3. Observ^tion on this
Confession.
thus far abrogated, as that it does not henceforth condemn us, neither
work wrath in us. For we are under grace, and not under the law. Moreover
Christ did fulfill all the figures of the law. Wherefore the shadow ceased,
when the body came: so that in Christ we have now all truth and fullness. Yet
we do not therefore disdain or reject the law. We remember the words of the
Lord, saying, I came not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill
them. We know that Look the 4. Observat.
in the law are described unto us the kinds of virtues and vices. We know that
the Scripture of the law Look the 5. Observat.
, if it be expounded by the Gospel, is very profitable to the Church, and that
therefore the reading of it is not to be banished out of the Church. For
although the countenance of Moses was covered with a veil, yet the Apostle
affirms, that the veil is taken away and abolished by Christ. We condemn
all things which the old or new heretics have taught against the law of God.

Of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and also of promises: of the spirit and of the
letter. CHAP. 13.
THe Gospel indeed is opposed to the law: for the law works wrath, and does
denounce a curse: but the Gospel does preach grace and a blessing, John says
also, The law was given by John 2.
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Yet notwithstanding it is
most certain, that they which were before the law, and under the law, were not
altogether destiture of the Gospel: For they had notable Evangelicall promises,
such as these are: The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head. In
thy seed Genesis 3. Genesis 22. Genesis 49. Deuteronomy. 18. Acts. 3.
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. The scepter shall not be taken
from Judah, until Silocome. The Lord shall raise up a Prophet from amongst his
own brethren, etc. And we do acknowledge that the fathers had two kind of
promises revealed unto them, even as we have. For some of them were of present
and transitory things, such as were the promises of the land of Canaan, and of
victories, and such as are now a days, concerning our daily bread. Othersome
there were then, and also are now, of heavenly and everlasting things, as of
Gods favor, remission of sins, and life everlasting, through faith in Jesus
Christ. Now the fathers had not only outward or earthly, but spiritual and
heavenly promises in Christ. For the Apostle Peter says, that the Prophets
which prophesied of the grace that should come to us, have searched and
inquired of this salvation. Whereupon the Apostle Paul also says, that the
Gospel of God was promised before by the Prophets of God in the holy
Scriptures. Hereby then it appears evidently, that the fathers were not
altogether destitute of all the Gospel.

And although after this manner our fathers had the Gospel in the writings of
the Prophets, by which they attained salvation in Christ through faith, yet the
Gospel is properly called that glad and happy tidings, wherein first by John
Baptist, then by Christ the Lord himself, and afterward by the Apostles and
their successors, is preached to us in the world, that God has now performed
that, which he promised from the beginning of the world, and has sent, yea and
given unto us, his only Son, and in him reconciliation with the Father,
remission of sins, all fullness, and everlasting life. The history therefore
set down by the four Evangelists, declaring how these things were done or
fulfilled of Christ, and what he taught and did, and that they which believed
in him had all fullness, this, I say, is truly called the Gospel. The
preaching also and Scripture of the Apostles, in which they expound unto us how
the Son was given us of the Father, and in him all things pertaining to life
and salvation, is truly called the doctrine of the Gospel, so as even at this
day it loses not that worthy name, if it be sincere.

The same preaching of the Gospel is by the Apostle termed the spirit, and the
ministry of the spirit, because it is living, and 2 Cor. 3.
working through faith in the ears, yea in the hearts of the faithful
thorough the illumination of the holy Spirit. For the letter, which is opposed
unto the spirit, does indeed signify every outward thing, but more specially
the doctrine of the Law, which without the spirit and faith works wrath, and
stirs up sin in the minds of them, that do not truly believe. For which
cause it is called by the Apostle, the ministry of death: for hitherto
pertains that saying of the Apostle, The letter kills, but the spirit
gives life. The false Apostles preached the Gospel, corrupted by mingling of
the law there with, as though Christ could not save without the law. Such also
were the Hebionites said to be, which came of Hebion the heretic: and the
Nazarites, which before time were called Myneans. All which we do condemn,
sincerely preaching the word, and teaching, that the believers are justified by
the spirit only, and not by the law. But of this matter there shall follow a
more large discourse in the title of justification.

And although the doctrine of the Gospel compared with the Pharisees doctrine
of the law might seem (when it was first preached by Christ) to be a new
doctrine, the which thing also Jeremy prophesied of the New Testament, yet
indeed it not only was, and as yet is (though the Papists call it new, in
regard of Popish doctrine, which has of long time been received) an ancient
doctrine, but also the most ancient in the world. For God 2 Timothy 1.
from all eternity foreordained to save the world by Christ: and this his
predestination and eternal counsel has he opened to the world by the Gospel.
Whereby it appears that the Evangelicall doctrine and religion was the most
ancient of all that ever were, are, or ever shall be: Wherefore we say that all
they err foully, and speak things unworthy the eternal counsel of God, who
term the Evangelicall doctrine and religion, a new start up faith scarce
thirty years old: to whom that saying of Isaiah does very well agree, Woe unto
them that speak good of evil, and evil of good, which put darkness for
light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
sour.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA.
THerefore in the whole Evangelicall doctrine, this ought first and chiefly to
be urged, that we are saved by the only mercy and grace of God, and by Christ
his merits: whereof that men may know how much they stand in need, their sins
must be very clearly laid open unto them, by the law, and by Christ his death.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA. Of the word of God, or the holy Gospel.
CHAP. 10.
ANd seeing that the administration of the New Testament, and also the Word and
Sacraments are lawfully committed to the Ministers of the Church, and their
lips ought to preserve 1 Cor. 4. 2 Cor. 3.
knowledge, that the law might be sought at their mouth, therefore in this
Chapter it is further taught, what the word of God, and the holy Gospel is. Now
the Preaching of the word of God and Malac. 2.
of the Gospel, is the true ministry of grace, instituted and commanded of
Christ our Lord, wherein the full and perfect will of God, touching eternal
reconciliation, necessary to salvation, and made manifest in the holy
Scripture, is declared and preached unto all people. This doctrine did Christ
give in charge unto his disciples in the words of this sentence, Go ye into
all the world, Mark. 16.
and preach the Gospel to every creature. This doctrine does Peter profess
before Cornelius, when he says, He commanded us to Acts 20.
preach unto the people, and to testify that this is he, that is ordained of
God to be the Judge of the quick and the dead. To him also give all the
Prophets witness, that through his name, all that believe in him, shall
receive remission of sins.

This ministry is more honorable, greater, and more necessary to salvation,
then are the sacraments: the which is proved by that sentence of the most
excellent Apostle Saint Paul, For Christ 1 Cor. 2.
sent me not to Baptize (that is, not chiefly to do this) but to preach the
Gospel. For only through the pure Gospel, and the preaching thereof, is says
sowed inwardly in the heart by the holy Ghost, and from thence also must we
conceive and seek the true meaning of God and Christ, touching all things
necessary to salvation, and also touching the sacraments themselves. Amongst
those, who by reason of their age are able to use their understanding, it is of
necessity, that the preaching of the Gospel go before the receiving of the
Sacraments. Whereof we may see an evident proof in those three thousand which
were converted by Peter: Acts 2. Acts 8.
also in Cornelius, and in the Chamberlain we may see, that, according to the
example of Philip, the question is thus to be made. Do thou believe with all
thy heart? Then it may be that thou who have true faith grafted in thy heart
may receive profit, by the participation of the Sacraments. For without the
hearing of the word of God, which is the saving power of God, no man shall Rom
1.
wittingly attain unto faith and salvation, according to that saying of Paul,
Therefore faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word Romans 10.
of God. And again, How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? Therefore herein our Preachers endeavor themselves most earnestly, that
in our Ecclesiastical meetings they may propound unto the people the sincere
word of God, without all mixture or inventions of men. For which cause also
they do, by an ancient custom, recite in the mother and vulgar tongue, which
may be understood of all, not only those Chapters which are appointed to be
read out of the Gospel at certain times, but also all other parts of holy
Scripture, and do exhort the people with an earnest desire to hear the word of
God, and to frequent those Ecclesiastical meetings, that by the diligent
teaching of the Gospel, and by often repeating it in their Sermons, they may
first teach the people repentance and faith, and then the use and
administration of the Sacraments, and by this means prepare them to the right
receiving of the Sacraments: and afterward also, both whilst the Sacraments
be administered, and after they be administered, they do conveniently instruct
them in all those things which the Lord commanded, and chiefly in those things
which do appertain to the leading of an honest life, and such a one, as
beseems a Christian profession, as Christ says, Teach them to keep Matthew 28.
all things which I have commanded you.

In this place also is taught very diligently and as the matter requires,
touching the difference, which is to be observed betwixt the word, or doctrine,
and work of the law, and betwixt the word and force of the holy Gospel. The
word or ministry of the law and of the old Testament, is the word of death,
fear, and of the letter, also the word of wrath and the word of malediction:
but the word of the New Testament, that is, of the holy Gospel, is the
ministry of says, and the spirit of clearenesse, or glory through our Lord
Jesus Christ, the word of grace, of the new covenant, the word of comfort, and
the messenger of peace. Of them both the Apostle writes thus, The letter
kills, but the spirit quickneth. And Christ says, The words which I speak,
are spirit and life. Also there is mention made of the use of the moral law,
in the fourth Chapter of this Confession (beginning with these words This
doctrine of the true knowledge of sin, etc) as is to be seen before 2 Cor.
3. John 6.
in the fourth Section, whereunto all that Chapter appertains.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE believe that all the figures of the law are taken away by the coming of
Christ, howbeit we are assured that the truth and substance of them does abide
in him, in whom they are all fulfilled. Yet we must use the doctrine of the
law, and the Prophets, both to frame our life aright, and also that we may so
much the more be confirmed in the promises of the Gospel.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe that all the ceremonies, figures, and shadows of the law, have
ceased at the coming of Christ, so that now even the use of them ought to be
taken away and abolished among Christians. Yet in the mean time, the truth and
substance of them does remain to us in Christ, in whom they are all fulfilled.
And therefore we do still use the testimonies of the Law and the Prophets, to
confirm our selves in the doctrine of the Gospel, and to lead an honest life,
unto Gods glory, according to his will.

THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE does by the way mention the doctrine of the Gospel,
and of the end thereof, in the fourth and fifth Articles, which we have placed
in the ninth Section, wherein justification, and remission of sins by faith
in Christ, is handled.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY.
ANd that the benefits of this Mediator might be known unto mankind, and
applied unto us, there was a promise given straight in the beginning after the
fall of our first parents, and afterward often times repeated, and by voice of
the Prophets declared; but most clearly was it recited by the very Son, and
after wards by the Apostles: And there was a ministry instituted to teach, and
to spread abroad that promise, also there was a Church made, and often renewed
by the same very voice, touching the Son of God our atonement. By this
Ministry the Son of God always was, is, and shall be effectual in the
believers, as it is said, Romans 1. The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation
to every one that believes. And he does renew this ministry, when he says,
As my Father sent me, so do I send you also. Go and preach repentance and
remission of sins in my name. He will that sin should be reproved in all
mankind, as he says, The spirit shall reprove the world of sin, because
they believe not in me. And Romans 1. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. God will have his wrath
to be acknowledged against all sin, and chiefly against the contempt of the
Son, as he says in the Psalm, Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and so ye
perish from the way, etc. He will have us truly to be put in great fear, by
the knowledge of our darkness, of our horrible wickedness, and our
stubbornness. And truly God himself does amaze our hearts with the sense of
his anger, as Ezekiah says, Like a Lion he brake all my bones. And to this
judgment he does not only use the voice of the ministry of the Law and of
the Gospel, but also all calamities be as it were the voice of the law,
admonishing us of the wrath of God, and calling us to repentance. Now when the
mind is terrified by this voice that reproves sins, then let it hear the
peculiar promise of the Gospel, touching the Son of God, and let him be
assured that his sins are freely remitted for the Son of God his sake, our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is our atonement, and that of mercy, not for any
contrition or love of ours.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE.
Of the Law. CHAP. 6.
WE acknowledge that the Law of God (whereof the Ten Commandments are an
abridgement) does command the best, the most just, and most perfect works, and
that man is not only bound to obey the moral precepts of the Law, but also if
he should do the works of the Ten Commandments, in such perfection and
integrity as the Law requires, that he should indeed be counted just before
God for his works, and should obtain eternal salvation by his merits. But
whereas some men do think, that man can come to that state in this life, as
to be able by his works not only to fulfill the ten Commandments, but also
to do more and greater works, then are commanded in the law, which they call
the works of supererrogation, it is contrary to the doctrine of the Prophets
and Apostles, and it is repugnant to the judgment of the true Catholic
Church. For the law was not given to this end, to signify, that man might
perfectly fulfill the Commandments thereof in this life, but to show to man
his imperfection, and to testify of the unrighteousness of man, and of the
wrath of God against all men, and to stir them up to seek remission of their
sins, righteousness, and salvation by faith in the only Son of God, our
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 3. By the law comes the knowledge of sin. And Romans
7. The law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin. And Romans 8. The
wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God. For it is not subject to the law
of God, neither indeed can be, And Gal. 3. Cursed is every man, that continues
not in all things which are written in the book of the law, to do them.
Augustine says, This De Spiritu and litera. cap. 36.
first commandment of justice, wherein we are commanded to love the Lord with
all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our mind, whereupon follows
that other commandment, of loving our neighbor, we shall fulfill in that
Life, where we shall see him face to face. But therefore it is even now also
commanded unto us, that we might be admonished, what is behooves us to riquire
by faith, whither to send our hope before hand, and by forgetting those things
which are behind, what fore things we should stretch our selves unto. And
hereby, so far as I can judge, he has profited much in this life, in that
righteousness which is to be perfited, who by profiting does know, how far
he is from the perfection of righteousness. And again, Charity is a virtue,
whereby that is loved which is to be beloved. This is in some greater, in
others lesser, and in some none at August. Icronim. Epist. 29.
all. But the most absolute love, which now cannot be increased, so long as a
man lives here, is not to be found in any man For so long as it may be
increased, that which is less then it ought to be, comes of our corruption:
by reason of which corruption there is not a just man in the earth, that does
good and sins not: by reason of which corruption no flesh living shall be
justified in the sight of God: for which corruptions sake, If we say that we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: for the which
also, though we profit never so much, yet it is necessary for us to say,
Forgive us on debts, although all our words, deeds, and thoughts are already
forgiven us in baptism. And again, All the Commandments of God Lib. 1.
Retract. cap. 19.
are counted as done, when as whatsoever is not done, is notwithstanding
pardoned. And Jerome says, This is only perfection unto men, if they know
that they are perfect. This is the true wisdom of man, to know that he is
imperfect and (that I may so speak) the perfection of all just men in the
flesh, is imperfect.

Of the Gospel of Christ. CHAP. 8.
ALthough many precepts of the law of God be contained in the writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and Christ himself does teach, that we must not
render evil for evil, nor lock upon a woman want only, and such like: yet we
must not think that the Gospel of Christ is a new law: whereby, as the fathers
in times past were saved under the Old Testament by the old law, so men now
under the New Testament should be saved by a new law. For except a man take the
name of the law generally for doctrine, as the Prophets now and then do use
the name of the law, certainly the Gospel of Christ, is not properly a law, as
Paul does commonly use the name of the law, but it is a good and joyful
message, touching the sionne of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, that he only is
the purger of our sins, the appeaser of the wrath of God, and our Redeemer
and Savior.

Neither are the commandments of the law, which are contained in the Apostles
writings, any new law, but they are an interpretation of the old law, according
to the judgment of the holy Ghost, which also were to be seen before, and
that not obscurely, in the writings of the Prophets. But they are repeated in
the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, that the severitie of the law of God,
and the corruption of our nature being declared, we might be stirred up to
seek and embrace Christ revealed in his Gospel, and that we may know after
what rule we are to frame our life through faith in Christ. Wherefore if we
will speak properly of the law of God, and Gospel of Christ, as of Christ we
are not to make a new lawgiver, seeing that he neither has made a new law, nor
instituted a new politic kingdom in this earth, so must we not make a new law
of the Gospel, which by more hard and severe commandments does bring eternal
salvation to the doers thereof. But we think it to be most certain, that the
natural or moral law of the old and new Testament is one and the same, and
that neither the men which lived under the old Testament, nor those which lived
under the new Testament, do obtain eternal salvation, for the merit of the
works of the law, but only for the merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, through
faith. Christ out of Isaiah does recite his office, for the which he was sent
into the earth: The Spirit of the Lord, says he, is upon me, because Luke 4.
he has anointed me: he has sent me to preach the Gospel to the poor, etc.
Here Christ teaches that his proper office is, not to make a new law, which
should terrify and kill miserable sinners, but to preach the Gospel, which
might comfort and quicken sinners. Gal. 4. When the fullness of time was come,
God sent his Son made of a woman, and made under the law, that he might redeem
them which were under the law, and that we by adoption might receive the right
of sons. And Acts 15. it is said, Why tempt ye God, to lay an yoke on the
Disciples necks, which neither our fathers, nor we, were able to bear? but we
believe through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ to be saved, even as they;
etc. And Augustine says, That people which received the old Testament, was
Contra Adimantum Manichaei discipulum cap. 3
held under certain shadows and figures of things before the coming of the
Lord, according to the wonderful and most orderly division of times. Yet
therein was so great preaching and foretelling of the new Testament, that in
the Evangelicall and Apostolic discipline (though it be painful and divine)
no commandments or promises can be found, which are wanting even in those old
boookes.

THE EIGHT SECTION, OF REPENTANCE AND THE CONVERSION OF MAN.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA CHAP. 14.
THe Gospel has the doctrine of repentance joined with it: for so said the
Lord in the Gospel, In my name must repentance and remission of sins be
preached Luke 24
among all nations. By repentance we understand the change of the mind in a
sinful man stirred up by the preaching of the Gospel and by the holy spirit,
received by a true faith, by which a sinful man dothest soones acknowledge his
natural corruption and all his sins, seeing them convinced by the word of
God, and is heartily grieved for them, and does not only be wail and freely
confess them before God with shame, but also does loath and abhor them with
indignation, thinks seriously of present amendment, and of a continual care
of innocence and virtues, wherein to exercise himself holily all the rest of
his life. And surely this is true repentance, namely an unfeigned turning unto
God and to all goodness, and a serious return from the devil and from all
evil. Now we do expressly say that this repentance is the mere gift of God,
and not the work of our own strength. For the Apostle does will the faithful
Minister diligently to Instruct those which withstand the truth, if that at any
time the Lord will give them repentance, that 2 Timothy 2.
they may acknowledge the truth. Also the sinful woman in the Gospel, which
washed Christ's feet with her tears, and Peter which bitterly wept and be
wailed his denial of his Master, do manifestly show, what mind the penitent
man should have, to wit, very earnestly lamenting his sins committed. Moreover
the Prodigal son, and the Publican in the Gospel that is compared with the
Pharisie, does set forth unto us a most fit patteme of confessing our sins to
God. The Prodigal son said, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and
against thee, I am not worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy
hiped servants. The Publican also not daring to lift up his eyes to heaven, but
knocking his breast, he cried, God be merciful unto me a sinner. And we doubt
not but the Lord received them to mercy. For John the Apostle 1 John 2.
says: If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to purge us from all iniquity. If we say we have not sinned, we
make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

We believe that this sincere confession which is made to God alone, either
privately between God and the sinner, or openly in the Church, where that
general confession of sins is rehearsed, is sufficient, and that it is not
necessary for the obteining of remission of sins, that any man should
confess his sins unto the Priest, whispering them into his cares, that the
Priest laying his hands on his head, he might receive absolution, because that
we find no commandment nor example thereof in the holy Scripture. David
protests and says, I made my fault known to thee, Psalm. 32.
and my unrighteousness did I not hide from thee. I said, I will confess my
wickedness to the Lord against my self, and thou have forgiven the
heinousness of my sin. Yea and the Lord teaching us to pray, and also to
confess our sins, said, So shall you pray, Our Father Matthew. 6.
which art in heaven, forgive us our debts, even as we forgive our debtors. It
is requisite therefore that we should confess our sins unto God, and be
reconciled with our neighbor, if we have offended him. And the Apostle James
speaking generally of confession, says, Confess each of you your sins one
to another. If so James 5.
be that any man being overwhelmed with the burden of his sins and trouble
some temptations will privately ask counsel, instruction, or comfort, either
of a Minister of the Church, or of any other brother that is learned in the law
of God, we do not mislike it. Like as also we do fully allow that general
and public confession, which is wont to be reheatsed in the Church and in holy
meetings (whereof we spoke before) being as it is agreeable with the Scripture.

As concerning the keys of the kingdom of heaven, which the All these things
which are spoken of the keys, do properly pertain to the 10. Sect.
Lord committed to his Apostles, they prate many strange things, and of these
keys they make swords, spears, scepters, and crowns, and full power over
mighty kingdoms, yea and over men's souls and bodies. But we judging uprightly
according to the word of God, do say that all Ministers truly called, have
and exercise the keys, or the use of them, when as they preach the Gospel,
that is to say, when they do teach, exhort, reprove, and keep in order the
people committed to their charge. For so do they open the kingdom of God to
the obedient, and shut it against the disobedient. These keys did the Lord
promise to the Apostles, in the 16. Chapter of Matthew, and delivered them in
John 20. Chapter, Mark 16. Luke the 24. when as he sent forth his disciples,
and commanded them To preach the Gospel in all the world, and to forgive
sins. The Apostle in the Epistle to the Corinthians, says, That the Lord
gave to his Ministers the ministry of reconciliaiton. 2 Cor. 5.
And what this was, he straight way makes plain, and says, The word or
doctrine of reconciliation. And yet more plainly, expounding his words he
adds, that the Ministers of Christ, Do as it were go an embassage in Christ
name, as if God himself should by his Ministers exhort the people to be
reconciled to God, to wit, by faithful obedience. They use the keys
therefore, when as they persuade to faith and repentance. Thus do they
reconcile men to God, thus they forgive sins thus do they open the kingdomne
of heaven, and bring in the believers: much differing herein from those, of
whom the Lord spoke in the Gospel, Woe be unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken
away the key of knowledge. You have not entered in your selves, and those that
would have entered, ye forbad. Rightly therefore and effectually do Ministers
absolve, when as they preach the Gospel of Christ, and thereby remission of
sins, which is promised to every one that believes, even as every one is
baptized, and do testify of it, that it does particularly appertain to all.
Neither do we imagine that this absolution is made any whit more effectual,
for that which is mumbled into some priests care, or upon some man's head
particularly: yet we judge that men must be taught diligently, to seek
remission of sins in the blood of Christ, and that every one is to be put in
mind, that forgiveness of sins does belong unto him. But how diligent and
careful every penitent man ought to be in the endeavor of a new life, and in
slaying the old man, and raising up the new man, the examples in the Gospel do
teach us. For the Lord says to him, whom he had healed of the palsy, Behold
thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. Likewise
to the adulteress John 5. John 8.
woman, which was delivered, he said, go thy way, and sin no more. By which
words he did not mean that any man could be free from sin, whiles he lived
in this flesh, but he does commend unto us diligence and an earnest care, that
we (I say) should endeavor by all means, and beg of God by prayer, that we
might not fall again into sin, out of which we are risen after a manner, and
that we may not be overcome of the flesh the world, or the devil. Zacheus the
Publican, being received into favor by the Lord, he cries out in the Gospel.
Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give Luke 9.
to the poor, and if I have taken from any man any thing by forged
cavillation, I restore him four fold. After the same manner we preach that
restitution and mercy, yea and giving of alms, are necessary for them which
do truly repent. And generally out of the Apostles words we exhort men,
saying, Let not sin reign in Romans 6.
your mertall body, that you should obey it through the lusts thereof. Neither
give ye your members as weapons of unrighteousness to sin: but give your
selves unto God, as they that are alive from the dead, and give your members as
weapons of righteousness unto God.

Wherefore we condemn all the ungodly speeches of certain, which abuse the
preaching of the Gospel, and say, To return unto God, is very easy, for
Christ has purged all our sins. For givenesse of sins is easily obtained:
What therefore will it hurt to sin? And, we need not take any great care for
repentance, etc. Notwithstanding we always teach, that an entrance unto God is
open for all sinners, and that this God does forgive all the sins of the
faithful, only that one sin excepted, which is committed against Mar. 3.
the holy Ghost. And therefore we condemn the old and new Novatians and
Catharines, and especially we condemn the Popes gainful doctrine of penance,
and against his Simonie and Simonaical indulgences we use that sentence of
Simon Peter, Thy Acts 8.
money perish with thee, because thou thoughtest that the gift of God might be
bought with money. Thou have no part or f^llowship in this matter for thy heart
is not upright before God. We also disallow those, that think that themselves
by their own satisfactions can make recompende for their sins committed. For
we teach that Christ alone by his death, and passion, is the satisfaction,
propitiation, and purging of all sins. Nevertheless we cease not to urge, as
was before said, the mortification of the flesh, and yet we add further, that
it must not be proudly thrust upon God, for a satisfaction Isa 53. 1 Cor. 1.
for our sins, but must humbly, as it becomes the sons of God, be performed,
as a new obedience, to shaw thankful minds for the deliverance and full
satisfaction obtained by the death and satisfaction of the Son of God.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA.
CHAP. 5.
NOw that we know what sin is, in the next place we are taught concerning
holy repentance: which doctrine does bring great comfort to all sinners, and
generally, it is very profitable and necessary to salvation, for all men, as
well for Christians which begin to learn, as for those which have profited,
yea even for sinners that have fallen, yet such which by the grace of God being
converted, do repent. Of this repentance John Baptist did preach, and after
him Christ, in these words, Repent, for the kingdom Matthew 3. Mar. 1.
of God is at hand. Afterward also the Apostles preached thereof throughout the
whole world, for so it is written, And thus it behoved, that repentance and
remission of sins should be preached Luke 24.
in his name among all nations. Now this repentance does wholly arise out of a
true knowledge of sin, and the wrath of God: And to attain unto this
knowledge, we must use the full and entire help of the Ministry, by
preaching to lay open unto us both the doctrine of repentance or the law,
touching that righteousness which is due unto God, and the sentence of God
pronounced against sin, and also of faith in Christ Jesus, and of that holy
satisfaction, which he has made for us, by suffering most grievous torments.
This repentance and saving conversion does our merciful God, by his peculiar
gift, offer and bestow, and he writes the same in the hearts of the faithful,
even as he says, I will give you Ezech. 36. Heb. 8. Ezech. 36. Ierem. 31.
a new heart, and I will put nay spirit in the midst of you, and I will cause
you to walk in my ways: Again That you may repent of your sins, and of your
Idolatry. And again, When I was converted, I did repent.

This saving repentance (which does differ very much from the repentance of
Esau and Judas) takes it true and right beginning from this gift of God, who
bestows it, and from the Sermons of the word of God, whereby sin is
reprooved: and it has this in order first, that it is a fear and terror of
the secret heart before God, and that by repenting and sorrowing it does
tremble at this just and severe judgment and revengement, whereupon arises a
heavy, trembling, and unquiet conscience, a troubled mind, a heart so
sorrowful, careful, and bruised, that a man can have no comfort with himself
and of himself, but his soul is full of all grief, sadness, anguish, and
terror, whereby he is much troubled, because of the fear of that burning
wrath, which he sees in the severe countenance of God. We have an example in
David, when he says, There is nothing sound in my flesh, because Psalm. 38.
of thine anger, neither is there rest in my bones, because of my sins. I am
become miserable, and crooked very sore: I go mourning all the day. Such a
terror and true sense of sin does work in the faithful an inward change of
the mind and the soul, and a constant detesting of sin and the causes and
occasions thereof. Hereunto it is straight way added, by ditigent teaching of
the troubled, terrified, and repentant, that such men ought, in a sincere
affection of the heart, with repentance, and an humble submission of the mind,
by their confession and invocation to turn unto the Lord, and by faith in
Jesus Christ our Lord to conceive sure and undoubted trust in his mercy, to
hold fast the apprehended promise, and to rely wholly thereon; and seeing they
have no righteousness of themselves, earnestly and faithfully to desire of the
Divine grace, that God would have mercy on them, and vouchsafe of his grace to
forgive them their sins, for the Son, and his precious merits sake, who was
made an atonement or reconciliation for sin, 1 John 2. Gal. 3.
yea also a curse, that he might make or consecrate us as holy unto God. For to
such men (that they may be stirred up to the greater confidence) that sure and
precious promise is propounded, and by preaching ought to be propounded,
whereby the Lord does say, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will
deliver thee: and this Psalm. 50.
they ought to do, as often as they have need, and so long as they live.
Hereof the judgment of St. Augustine is extant, Lib. 1. de Penitentia. Cap. 1.
No man can well meditate of repentance, except he be persuaded of the mercy of
God toward him, or, as he says, but he that shall hope for indulgence.

Now all men, which do truly repent them of their sins, and in regard thereof
are sorrowful, and mislike themselves, ought to cease from the committing of
evil, and learn to do that which is Isa. 1.
good: for so writes Esaias in that place, wherein he exhorts to repentance.
And John Baptist in the like sort admonishing the people, says, See that you
bring forth, or do, the fruits worthy of Luke 3. Coloss. 3. Ephesians. 4.
repentance: which does chiefly consist in mortification or putting off the old
man, and in putting on the new man, which after God is created righteousness,
etc. as the Apostolic doctrine does signify. Moreover, the penitent are
taught, Look the first observat. upon this confession.
to come to the Physicians of their souls, and before them to confess their
sins to God, yet no man is commanded or urged to tell and reckon up his sins,
but this thing is therefore used, that by this means every one may declare
their grief, wherewith they be troubled, and how much they mislike themselves
for their sins, and may peculiarly desire and know that they obtain of their
God counsel and doctrine, how they may hereafter avoid them, and get
instruction and comfort for their troubled consciences, and absolution by the
power of the Keys, and remission of sins, by the ministry of the Gospel
instituted of Christ: and when these things are performed to them of the
Ministers, they ought to receive them at their hands with confidence, as a
thing appointed of God, to profit and to do service unto them for their saving
health, and without doubting to enjoy the remission of their sins, according
to the word of the Lord, whose sins you remit, they are remitted. And Joh. 20.
they relying upon this undoubted faith, ought to be certain and of a resolute
mind, that through the ministry of those Keys, concerning the power of
Christ, and his word, all their sins be forgiven them. And therefore they
which by this means and order obtain a quiet and joyful conscience, ought to
show themselves thankful for this heavenly bountifulness in Christ, neither
must they receive it in vain, or return again to their sins according to that
faithful exhortation of Christ, wherein he commands us to take heed: Behold
thou art made whole, sin no more, lest Joh. 5. Joh. 8.
a worse thing happen unto the. And, see that thou sin no more. Now the
foundation, whereon the whole virtue and efficacy of this saving repentance
does stay it self, is the merit of the torments of the death, and resurrection
of our Lord and Savior, whereof he himself says, These things it behooved
Christ to suffer, and to rise again the third day, and that repentance and
remission Luke 24.
of sins should be preached in his name to all people. And again, Repent,
Mark. 1.
and believe the Gospel.

Also they teach, that they, whose sin is public, and therefore a public
offense, ought to give an Look the second observat. upon this confession.
external testimony of their repentance, when God does give them the spirit
of repentance, and that for this cause, that it may be an argument and
testimony, whereby it may be prooved or made evident, that the sinners which
have fallen, and do repent, do truly convert themselves: Mark. 5. and 18. 1 Timothy 5.
also that it may be a token of their reconciliation with the Church and their
neighbor, and an example unto others, which they may fear and reverence.

Last of all, the whole matter is shut up with this or such like clause of
admonition, That every one shall be condemned whosoever he be, which in this
life does not repent in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to that
sentence pronounced by Christ, Except ye repent, ye shall all in like sort
perish, as they did, who were slain with the fall of the tower of Silo.

Hither to also pertain th that part of the same confession, which treats.

Of the time of grace. CHAP. 20.
FVrthermore among all other things they teach, concerning the time of grace,
and the fatherly visitation, that men may learn to consider, that all that
time of age, they lead in this life, is given them of God to be a time of
grace, in the which they may seek their Lord and God his grace and mercy, and
that they may be loved of him, and by this means obtain here their salvation
in Christ; whereof the Apostle also made mention in his Sermon, which he
preached at Athens, saying, God has assigned unto man the times, which were
ordained before, and the bands of their habitations, Act. 17.
that they should seek the Lord, if so be they might have groped after him,
and found him. And by the Prophet Esaias the Lord says, In an acceptable time
have I heard thee, and in the day of salvation Isa. 49. 2 Cor 6.
have I helped thee. Behold now, says Saint Paul, is the acceptable time, now
is the day of salvation. Therefore at all times the people be admonished, that
whilst they live on the earth, and are in good health and have in their hands,
and do presently enjoy the time of grace offered by God, they would truly
repent, and begin the amendment of their life, and reconcile themselves to God:
that they would stir up their conscience by faith in Christ, and quiet it by
the ministry of the Gospel in the Church, and herein confirm themselves,
that God is merciful unto them, and remitteth all their sins for Christ his
sake. Therefore when they are confirmed in this grace which is offered them to
establish and confirm their calling, and do faithfully exercise themselves in
good works, then at the length they are also in an assured hope to look for a
comfortable end, and they must certainly persuade themselves, that they shall
assuredly be carried by the Angels into heaven, and eternal rest, as was the
soul of that godly Lazarus, that they may be there, where their Lord and
redeemer Jesus Luke 16. Joan. 12. and 14. and 17.
Christ is, and that afterward in the day of resurrection this soul shall be
joined again with the body, to take full possession of that joy and eternal
glory, which cannot be expressed in words. For they shall not come into
condemnation, but by making a way through Joan. 5.
it, they shall pass from death into life.

The Epistle to the Hebrews to stir us up to use such exhortations, says,
Exhort your selves among your selves, exhort ye one Heb. 4.
another daily, so long as it is said to day. Let no man among you be hardened
by the deceit of sin. For we enter into the rest, which have believed, that is,
which have obeyed the voice of God, while we had time given us. On the other
side we must also hold this most assuredly, that if any man, being polluted
with sins, and filthy deeds manifestly contrary to virtue, do in dying depart
out of this world without true repentance and faith, that his soul shall
certainly go into hell, as did the soul of that rich man, who wanted faith,
in the bottomless pit whereof there is no drop of grace, and that in the day
of judgment that most terrible voice of the Son of God sounding in his ears
shall be heard, wherein he shall say, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, which is prepared Matthew. 29. Joh. 5.
for the Devil and his Angels: for they which have done evil, shall come
forth to the resurrection of judgment.

Therefore in teaching they do continually urge this, that no man defer
repentance and turning unto God, till he come to be old, or till he lies sick
in his bed, and in the mean time do boldly practice his wantonness in
sins, and in the desires of the flesh and the world, because it is written,
Do not say, The abundant mercy of the Lord will purgo my sins: for mercy
and wrath do basten with him, and his indignation shall lie upon the sinners.
Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and put not off from day to day. For
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord brea^e forth, and in thy security thou
shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in time of vengeance. But that
especially is a most dangerous thing, if any man, after he has received the
gift of the grace of God (and that in the testimony of a good conscience) does
of set purpose, and wantonly sin, and contemn, and make no account of all
those exhortations and allurements, proceeding out of a loving heart, and that
to this end, that he may in time think on that which is for his health, and
repent, and moreover does persist in a bold and blind persuasion of the mercy
of God, and trusting thereto, does sin, and does confidently abuse it, and
goes forward in that sort without repentance, even unto the last pinch, and
then begins, being forced thereunto by the terrors of death and the fear
of infernal punishments, so late to convert himself, and to call for the
mercy of the Lord, as when the severe and intolerable anger of the Lord
waxes hot, and punishments rush and break forth, as does the great violence
of floods, which cannot be resisted Therefore of such a man, (which thing we
speak with sorrow) it is hard to believe that he can truly repent, and
therefore it is to be doubted, lest that be fulfilled in him, which the Lord
does threaten by the Prophet Micheas, That instead of grace he shall feel the
wrath of God, and that it will come to pass that the wrath of God shall slay
him. For in a fearful speech does he say thus, Then shall they cry unto the
Lord, but Mich. 3.
he will not hear them, but he will hide his face from them at that time,
because they have continually lived wickedly. Yea the Lord himself says,
Although they cry in mine ears with a loud Ezech. 8. Ier. 7. and 11. Isa. 65.
and 66.
voice, yet will I not hear them, seeing they would not hear my voice, when
as all the day long I spread out my hands unto them, and gave them large time
and space for grace. For the which cause the holy Ghost cries out, and says,
To day if ye will hear his Psalm 95. Heb. 3.
voice, harden not your hearts, as in the grieving in the day of that tentation
in the wilderness.

Therefore according to all these things, our men do diligently, and out of
the grounds of the Scripture, exhort, that every man do in time use and follow
this faithful counsel, and necessary doctrine, that so he may turn away the
fear of this most heavy danger, yea that he do not betray the health of his
own soul. For undoubtedly this horrible danger is greatly to be feared, lest
whatsoever he be that does rashly or stubbornly condemn or neglect this time
of grace, so lovingly granted of the Lord, he do receive, and that worthily,
that reward of eternal punishment, which is due thereunto: even as Saint
Ambrose also, amongst many other things, which he handles diversely to this Lib
3. de poenit qui Augustini esse putatur.
purpose, does thus write, and in these words: If any man at the very point of
death shall repent, and be absolved (fo this could not be denied unto him) and
so departing out of this life dies, I dare not say, that he departs hence in
good case, I do not affirm it, neither dare I affirm or promise it to any
man, because I would deceive no man, seeing I have no certainty of him. Do I
therefore say that he shall be damned? neither do I say that he shall be
delivered. For what other thing I should say, I know not. Let him be commended
to God. Will thou then, O brother, be freed from doubting? repent whiles thou
art in health. If thou will repent, when thou can not sin, thy sins have left
thee, and not thou thy sins. Yet that no man may despair, they teach this
also, that if any man, in the last hour of his life, show our signs of true
repentance, which thing does fall out very seldom (for that is certainly true
which is written in the Epistle to the Hebrews, And this will we also do, so
that God Heb. 6.
give us leave to do it) that such a one is not to be deprived of instruction,
comfort, absolution, or remission of sins. For the time of grace does last so
long as this life does last: wherefore, so long as we live here, it is meet
that we should think of that Prophetical and Apostolical sentence, To day,
seeing ye have heard his Heb 3.
voice, harden not your hearts. Now herein do our men labor, and endeavor
themselves most earnestly, that all men may obey this loving commandment and
counsel, and that they speedily repent, before the Sun be darkened after a
strange manner, and the hills be overwhelmed with darkness, and that laying
sin aside, they would turn themselves to God, by flying unto him in true
confidence, and with a constant invocation, from the bottom of the heart, and
that they do their faithful endeavor, that they be not repelled from the
glory of eternal life, but that they may live with Christ and his Church in
this life for a time, and in the other life for ever, Amen.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
TOuching Repentance they teach, that such as have fallen after Baptism may
find remission, at what time they return again. And that the Church is bound
to give absolution unto such, as return by repentance. Now repentance or the
conversion of the ungodly stands properly of these two parts. The one is
contrition, that is, a teriour stricken into the conscience through the
acknowledgement of sin, wherein we do both perceive Gods displeasure, and
are grieved that we have sinned, and do abhor and eschew sin, according as
Joel preaches, Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the
Lord your God, etc. The other part is faith, which is begotten in us, by the
Gospel or by absolution, and does believe that the sins are undoubtedly
forgiven for Christ sake, and does comfort the conscience, freeing it from
fears. Of which faith spoke Saint Paul when he says, Being lustified by faith
we have peace with God. Afterward there must follow the good fruits of
repentance, that is, obedience unto God, according to that saying, We are
debtors not to the flesh to live after the flesh. For if ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die. But if by the spirit ye mortify the works of the flesh,
ye shall live.

They condemn the Novatians which would not absolve them which have fallen
after Baptism returned to repentance. They condemn also those that teach not
that remission of sins comes freely by faith for Christ sake, but labor to
prove that remission of sins comes by the worthiness of contrition, of
charity, or of some other works, and would have men's consciences in time of
repentance to doubt, whether they may obtain remission, and do say plainly,
that this doubting is no sin. Likewise they condemn those which teach that
Canonical satisfactions are necessary to redeem eternal pains or the pains
of Purgatory. Though Look the 3. Observat.
we are of that mind that the calamities of this life may be assuaged by good
works, as Esaias teaches Chap. 58. Break thy bread unto the hungry, and the
Lord shall give thee rest continually. Besides they condemn Look the 4.
Observat.
the Anabaptists, who deny that they that are once justified can again lcose
the spirit of God. Also they condemn those that stiffely hold, that some may
attain to such a perfection in this life, as that they cannot sin any more.

This eleventh Article we find in some Editions placed in the twelfth place,
and after the first period we find these words.
Now repentance consists properly of these two parts, one is contrition or
terrors, stricken into the conscience through the sight of sin: The other is
faith, which is conceived by the Gospel or by absolution, and does believe that
for Christ sake the sins be forgiven, and comfort the conscience, and freeth
it from terrors. Then there must follow good works, which are fruits of
repentance.

They condemn the Anabaptists, who deny that men once justified can loose the
spirit of God, and do stiffely hold that some men may attain to such a
perfection in this life, that they can sin no more. In like case the Novatians
are condemned, which would not absolve such as had fallen after Baptism,
though they returned to repentance. They also that teach that remission of sins
is obtained for our own love or good works, and such as teach that Canonical
satisfactions are necessary to redeem everlasting or purgatory pains, are
wholly misliked of us.

Concerning confession of sins they teach, that private absolution is to be
retained still in Churches, though it be a needless thing in confession to
make a rehearsal of the sins. For it is an impossible thing to reckon up all a
man's offenses, according as the Psalmist says, Who does understand his faults,
etc.

This twelfth Article we find in the place of the eleventh, in some Editions,
and it is word for word the same, but that the last words are thus set down,
Though a reckoning up of all sins be not necessary. For it is impossible, as
the Psalmist says, etc.

Art. 3. Of abuses. Of Confession.
THE Divines and Canonists have cast a great miste of darkness chiefly upon
this point of Christian doctrine touching repentance: as not only their books
do testify, but also the consciences of all the godly, which do confess
that the intricate and endless disputations of the Divines, and the infinite
traditions about the matter of repentance, was even a fearful racking of
their consciences. For they do no where teach any certainty, how remission of
sins is obtained. And as for faith, there is no word amongst them. Yea they bid
men to be always in doubt of remission of sins. Afterward they torment men's
consciences, with a harsh reckoning up of their faults, and with satisfactions.
For what a snare unto a man's conscience was the tradition, which requires them
to reckon up all their sins?

As for satisfactions, they did obscure and darken the benefit of Christ,
because that even the learned among them did imagine that eternal death was
recompensed by them. But the unlearned were persuaded that forgiveness of the
fault was purchased by such deeds. What that their services for the most part
were not commanded of God? as babbling of prayers, invocation of Saints,
Pilgrimages, and such like stuff. Thus was the pure doctrine of repentance
overwhelmed with an huge heap of unprofitable and evil opinions. And it is
manifest that the godly in many ages past have greatly wished that this
doctrine had been more purely taught.

Furthermore, it is especially needful that the doctrine of repentance should
be taught in the Church most purely and sincerely. Therefore our Divines have
labored to clear this point as much as might be. And surely they have so
opened and cleared it, that the soundest even amongst our adversaries do
confess, that in this matter they have well deserved of the Church. For we do
simply and plainly without any Sophistry lay forth that, which tho Gospel
teaches touching repentance, that men may perceive how they must return unto
Christ, by what means remission of sins is obtained, what worship and what
works do please God. First we teach that Contrition is requisite, that is, the
true terrors and sorrows of the mind, which feels the wrath of God, is
grieved for sin committed, and cease to do evil. And though these sorrows
be requisite, yet must we know that remission of sins is not granted for the
worthiness of contrition, or of these sorrows, but we must join faith with
them, that is, a trust and confidence of mercy promised for Christ's sake, and
we hold, that our sins are freely forgiven for Christ's sake.

When we once are comforted in these terrors by faith, we do undoubtedly
obtain remission of sins, as we have said before. And this faith our minds
do conceive by the Gospel; also by the absolution, which preaches and
applies the Gospel unto the distressed consciences. And for this cause do our
Divines teach, Look the 5. Observat.
that private Absolution is to be retained in the Church, and they set out the
dignity of it, and the power of the Keys, with true and very large
commendations: namely, because the power of the Keys does dispense the Gospel
not only to all in general, but also to every * one in particular: as Christ
says, Thou have won thy brother, etc. and because we must believe the voice of
the Gospel, which is dispensed unto us in absolution by the ministry of the
Church, no otherwise then a voice sounding from heaven.

This whole benefit of absolution and of this ministry has heretofore been
wholly obseured with the false opinions of such, as taught, that absolution was
naught worth, without sufficient contrition, and did afterward will men to
misdoubt of absolution, because no man knew whether his contrition were
sufficient or not. What else was this but quite to take away from all
consciences the comfort of the Gospel, and to remoove out of the Church and
clean to abolish the ministry of the Gospel or the power of the Keys? Who
does not see that these pernicious errors are worthily reprooved?

Now seeing that confession yields a place where to bestow absolution in
private, and this custom does uphold the understanding of the power of the
Keys, and remission of sins, among the people; besides, seeing that this
conference avails much for admonishing and instructing of men, therefore we
do duly retain Confession in our Churches, yet so, as that we teach that
reckoning up of the faults is not necessary by Gods Law, and that men's
consciences are not to be clogged with it. For there is no commandment in all
the Apostles Writings sounding that way. Again, this rehearsing of all ones
sins is a thing impossible, according to that in the Psalm, Who can understand
his faults. And Jeremie says, The heart of man is corrupt and unsearchable.
But if no sins could be forgiven, but such as are reckoned up, men's consciences
could never be at rest, because they neither see, nor can call to mind the
greatest number of them. Whereby it may easily be gathered, that the ministry
of absolution and remission of sins does not depend upon the condition of
numbering them up all.

The ancient Writers also do testify that this counting of sins by tale is a
thing needless. Chrysostom on the Epistle to the Hebrews says, Let us reckon
of it, that we have sins, and let not the tongue alone utter it, but the
conscience within us also. And let us not barely say we are sinners, but let us
reckon up our sins particularly, I do not bid thee to bewray thy self openly,
nor to accuse thy self to other, but to follow the saying of the Prophet, Lay
open thy ways before the Lord confess thy sins before God, utter thy sins
with prayer before the true Judge, not remembering them with the tongue, but
with the conscience, and then indeed may thou hope to find mercy. That
Sermon of Chrysostomes, teaches not only what is to be thought of reckoning
up of sins, but does also very wisely join contrition and faith together, as
they are joined by us. First, he will have us acknowledge our sins unfainedly,
and abhor them from our hearts: In the next place he teaches to add
thereunto prayer and faith, which may assure us that we are forgiven. Else
where he says, Acknowledge thy sins that thou may do them away. If thou art
ashamed to show thy sins to any man, then utter them every day in thy heart: I
say not, go, confess thy sins to thy fellow servant, that may upbraid thee
with them, but confess them unto God that is able to cure them. The Gloss
upon the Decrees touching Penance, the 5. distinct. grants that Confession
was ordained of the Church, and is not commanded in the Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament: of the same judgment are many of the Doctors. Wherefore our
judgment touching the Doctrine of Confession is neither new nor without reason.

Lastly, there is most need of all that the godly should be admonished,
touching satisfactions. For there was more hurt and danger in them, then in
numbering up of sins, in as much as they darkened the benefit of Christ: because
that the unlearned thought they did obtain remission of the guilt of sin for
their own works sake: and besides men's consciences were much distressed if
ought were omitted that was enjoined for satisfaction. Again, ceremonies and
pilgrimages, and such like fruitless works, were thought meet for
satisfaction, rather then things commanded of God. And forsooth their teachers
themselves dreamed that eternal death was fully redeemed by them. Therefore we
thought it needful that godly minds should be set free from such errors, and
we teach that their Canonical satisfactions, which they call works not due,
etc. are neither availeable for the remission either of the fault or
everlasting punishment, nor yet necessary. It was a custom long since in the
Church, that in public penance such as had fallen and did return to the
Church again, should not be received without some punishment laid upon them
for examples sake from which custom these satisfactions did spring. But the
futhers mind was by such examples to fray the people from sins: they did not
account that Ceremony to be a just recompense for the fault, or for eternal
death, or for purgatory pains. These things were after wards coined by ignorant
and unlearned men. But those ancient customs Look the 6. Observat.
were in time worn out of use, and laid aside. As for us, we do not but then
men's conciences with satisfactions: but this we teach, that the fruits of
repentance are necessary, and that obedience, the fear of God, faith, love,
chastity, and the whole renewing of the spirit ought to increase in us.

We give men warning Look the 7. Observation.
of this also, that sins are eft-soones punished even by temporal punishments
in this life, as David, Manasses, and many others were punished, and we teach
that these punishments may be mitigated by good works, and the whole practice
of repentance, as Paul declares, If we would judge our selves we should not be
judged of the Lord. And repentance deserved (that is, obtained) that God should
alter his purpose, touching the destruction of Ninive.

Thus whereas before the disputations were intricate and endless, and full of
gross opinions, now that doctrine being purged is delivered to the people so,
as it may be understood, and avails much unto godliness. We do still hold and
set forth the true parts of Repentance, Contrition, Faith, Absolution,
Remission of sins, Amendment of the whole life, Mitigation of present
punishments: and we are in good hope, that the godly will not only not
reprehend any thing in this place, but also will give them thanks which have
purged this point of Christian doctrine, which is requisite and profitable in
all Churches to be expounded most plainly and set out most clearly. Christ
faith, that the Angels in heaven do rejoice whenever they see a sinner
repem. And therefore the Churches, and the Angels themselves do rejoice at the
pure doctrine of repentance thus set down.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY.
Hitherto pertain the first two last clauses of the third Article. Of the
remission of sins, etc. Which are thus set down.
IT is most certain, that the preaching of Repentance does pertain to all
men, and accuse all men. So also the promise is general, and offers
remission of sins to all, according to those general speeches, Matthew. 11. Come
unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
Also, Ioh. 3. That every one, which believes in him should not perish. Romans
10. Every one that believes in him, shall not be confounded. Again, He that
is Lord over all, is rich unto all, that call on him. Romans 11. The Lord has
shut up all under disobedience, that he might have mercy on all, Let every one
comprise himself in this general promise, and not give himself to distrust,
but let them strive, that they may assent to the word of God, and obey the holy
Ghost, and desire that they may be helped, as it is said, Luke 11. How much
more will he give the holy Ghost to them that ask it?

Of Repentance. Artic. 16.
BY the mercy of God this part of Doctrine specially is declared in our
Churches with great perspicuitie, whereas the Sententiaries have wrapped it in
most intricate Labyrinthes. First, we do openly condemn the catharans, and
the Novatians, who feigned that neither the elect could fall into sins against
their conscience, neither that they who had fallen after their amendment were
to be received again, and our confutations of these furies are extant. Neither
do we go about to make brawlings about the word Repentance: if any man like
it better, let him use the word Conversion, which word the Prophets also have
often used. Moreover, we do willingly retain the word Contrition, and we say
that the first part of Repentance or Conversion is Contrition, which is, truly
to tremble through the knowledge of the wrath of God against sins, and to be
sorry that we have offended God: and we say, that there must needs be some such
great fear and griefs in those that are converted, and that they do not
repent, which remain secure and without grief, as it is said, 2 Cor. 7. Ye
sorrowed to repentance: And, Ezech. 20. And ye shall mislike your selves in
your own sight, and acknowledge your selves to be worthy of punishment and
destruction. And these true griefs are a feeling of the wrath of God, as is
declared more at large in another place. But here we reproove our adversaries,
who feign that Contrition does deserve Remission of sins, and that
Contrition must be sufficient. In either error there be great mysts. For
remission is given freely for the Mediators sake, and what contrition can be
sufficient? Yea rather the more the sorrow increases without assurance of
mercy, so much the more men's hearts do fly from God, and no creature is able
to sustain the greatness of this sorrow, whereof Esaias speaks, Chap. 38. He
brake all my bones, like a Lion. But those idle dreams of the Writers do
declare, that they lead a careless life, and that they are unskilful in the
Gospel. Now these true sorrows do arise, when the sin of the contempt of the
Son of God (as is declared in the Gospel) is reprooved The spirit shall
reproove the world of sin, because they believe not in me. Ioh. 16. And by the
voice of the Moral law other sins are reprooved, as Paul says, Romans 3. By the
law came the knowledge of sin.

As touching private confession, to be made unto the Pastors, we affirm, that
the ceremony of Look the first observat. upon this confession.
private absolution is to be retained in the Church, and we do constantly
retain it for many weighty causes: yet withal we do teach, that men must
neither command; nor require the recital of offenses in that private talk,
because that recital of offenses is neither commanded of God, nor a thing
possible, and it makes godly minds to doubt, and it makes faith faint.

And this we do much more reprehend, that in the doctrine of Repentance or
Conversion, our adversaries do no where make mention of justifying faith,
(whereof we have spoken before) by which alone Remission of sins is truly
received, the heart is lifted up even when it has a feeling of the wrath of
God; and we are freed from the sorrows of hell, as it is written. Romans 5. Being
justified by faith, we have peace. Without this faith sorrows are no better
then the repentance of Saul, Judas, Orestes, and such like, as are mentioned in
Tragedies. Neither do our adversaries teach the Gospel, but the Law, and
humane traditions, either omitting this faith, else fighting against it. But
seeing that in a true Conversion there must be these changes, a mortification,
and a quickening, as it is said, Romans 6. and in diverse other places, for
doctrines sake we do divide conversion or repentance into three parts, into
contrition, faith, and new obedience: these things does true conversion
comprehend, as the voice of God, and the true experience of the Church do
declare. Yet do we not make contention either about the manner of speaking, or
about the number of the parts, but we wish that all men may see those things
which are necessary. And it is most necessary for the Church, that there should
be a true, plain, and most clear doctrine, touching the whole conversion,
which also is very often repeated in those Sermons, which are set down in the
Scriptures, and that with great perspicuitie, and without any intricate
labyrinthes, as the Baptist and Christ say, Matthew. 3. Repent, and believe the
Gospel. Again, Repent: Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of
the world. And Paul says, Romans 3. All men are deprived of the glory of God.
Here he speaks of contrition, afterward of remission: But we are justified
freely by his grace, through redemption that is in Christ Jesus by faith.
Therefore it is necessary, that in the doctrine of conversion or repentance
there should mention be made of faith. Neither is it sufficient that our
adversaries say, that they also do speak of faith, and that faith does go
before repentance. For they speak of the doctrine of knowledge, I believe the
forgiveness of sins, to wit, that they be forgiven to others, even as the
devils do know the Creed: but the Gospel does require this true faith, which
is an assurance of the mercy of God, promised for the Son of God his sake,
and resting in the Son of God, which faith, I believe that remission of sins
is given unto me also, and that freely, not for any Contrition, not for any my
merits, but for the Son of God, who by the infinite goodness and wisdom of
the Godhead is appointed a Mediator and Redeemer. I know that the commandment
of God is immutable, so that every one may determine in these griefs, that he
is assuredly received into favor for Christ his sake. This is the proper voice
of the Gospel: this Decree is brought by the Son out of the bosom of the
eternal Father, and is sealed up by his blood and resurrection. Not to assent
to this Will and Decree, is to contemn the Son of God: and concerning this
sin, John says, cap. 3. He that believes not the Son, the wrath of God
abides on him. But he that believes that his sins be forgiven for this
Mediators sake, he does now certainly receive remission of his sins for Christ
his sake, which is effectual in him, and quickneth and sanctifies him by his
holy Spirit: and being now reconciled, he is undoubtedly accounted just, for
the Mediators sake, and is heir of eternal life. Either to omit, or to
corrupt, or to dislike this necessary comfort, touching conversion, is as much
as manifestly to extinguish the gospel. As touching this faith, absolution
ought both to admonish us, and also to confirm it, as David was confirmed,
when he heard this absolution, 2 Reg. 12. The Lord has taken away thy sin.
So know thou that the voice of the Gospel does declare remission unto thee
also, the which remission is namely propounded to thee in absolution. Do not
thou feign, that the Gospel does nothing at all pertain to thee, but know
that it was therefore published, that by this means men embracing the Gospel
might be saved, and that it is the eternal and immutable commandment of God,
that thou should believe it. He that does not by this faith embrace the
Gospel, but is still doubting, he does in vain hear the absolution. When as by
this comfort the hearts are quickened, and are now made the dwelling places of
God. Then is it necessary that they should now begin a new obedience, as is
said before. But to return to wicked deeds, is to shake off God, and again to
lose that righteousness and life, as John says, 1 Ioh. 3. He that does
righteousness, is righteous, he that commits sin, is of the devil. But
we have before rehearsed the sum of the dectrine of new obedience.

Of Satisfaction. Artic. 17.
NOw what a confusion there is in their doctrine of Satisfactions, which they
term works not due, enjoined by the Church, it were long to rehearse, and
few before these times have understood it: but we doubt not but that this whole
part also is truly and clearly expounded in our Churches. It was a custom
among our first fathers, that they which defled themselves with murder, Idols,
or filthy lusts, should be barred their company, and chiefly from their
sacrifices. This custom both the Synagogue retained, and other nations also,
which were not altogether savage, in Asia and in Greece. In the mean time they
which were defiled, wandered up and down, being branded with the marks of
their guiltiness, as Orestes, Adrastus, and many others. This custom in the
beginning did the Church also keep. Those that were defiled, it severed from
the mutual society, afterward it did not suddenly receive those again that did
repent, that it might be known that they did unfainedly ask pardon, and for
examples it might profit others, but for certain days absolution was
deferred, that they might be seen to ask pardon publicly. So was that
incestuous Corinthian debarred, and afterward received again, not without
deliberation, 1 Cor. 5. This whole custom was appointed Look the 4.
observation.
for examples sake, and is political, nothing at all pertaining to the
remission of sins. But afterward through superstition it so increased, that
fasts and forbearing the company of man or wife, were enjoined for many years.
When these burdens had increased too much, the Bishops did release them
again, and this release of such rites was called Indulgence.

The Monks not considering the history of these things, feigned that eternal
punishment might be recompensed by the punishments of Purgatory, or other
punishments of this life: and they added, that Satisfactions were enjoined of
the Church, that those punishments might be mitigated: and that satisfactions
should be works not due by the law of God. We reject these Monkish fables,
which even they themselves do not understand, and we retain most sure rules,
to wit, That eternal punishments are remitted together with the fault, for the
Son his sake, not for any our satisfactions, according to that which is
written in Hosea, Chap. 13. O death, I will be thy death: O hell, I will be thy
destruction. Also, Romans 5. Being justified by faith, we have peace. Secondly we
say that these not due works, whereof these men speak, are not any worship of
God, or satisfactions, but that they do pertain to this saying, Matthew. 15.
They do in vain worship me with the commandments of men. And Look the fifth
observat. upon this confession.
certainly the power of the keys has no commandment to injoyne such
punishments. Also we fear that this applying of indulgences, by which the Pope
does apply the merits of Saints unto others, is but counterfeit, and that the
indulgences in times past were nothing else, but a releasing of the Canons,
which did nothing appertain to those satisfactions whereof the Monks do
speak. Now it is another thing to speak of satisfaction which is due, as of
the restoring of theft, of that which has been gotten by usury, of another
man's wife, or his good name.

This restitution is a work that is due, pertaining to new obedience, as Paul
says, Ephesians. 4. Let him that has stolen steal no more. He that withholdeth
another man's wise, has neither contrition, faith, nor new obedience. Neither
are the commandments of God, touching due satisfaction, which we say ought to
be made, to be mingled with those trifling songs of Popish satisfactions. Also
this we confess, that in this life many horrible punishments are spread over
the Church, over Empires, and over families, for certain sins of many men,
yea even of the Elect: as the sedition that was raised up against David, did
not lightly afflict that whole civil regiment, and many holy families.
Therefore we distinguish betwixt eternal punishment, and the punishment of
this life: and we say, that eternal punishment is remitted only for the Son
of God his sake, when we are justified and quickened by faith.

And albeit that even temporal punishments Lock the 6. Observat.
are chiefly mittigated for the Son of God his sake, who is the harbor for
the Church, because this weak nature cannot sustain the greatness of the
wrath of God, as Daniel prays, Chap. 9. For the Lords sake hear thou us, and
have an eye unto our help, etc. Yet we teach this also, that even for the very
conversions sake our punishments are mittigated, because that in the Saints the
legal promises being added to their works, are not without their effect, but
have their rewards: Such a promise is this: Give, and it shall be given unto
you. And when Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. If we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged, he speaks of whole repentance, not of those most vain
shadows, which they reason to prevail, although a man fall again into
mortal sin. And in this matter they have devised new juggling tricks. They
confess that these satisfactions are not recompenses, but they say, that we
must admit such satisfactions as chastisements, as Paul does punish the
Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5. That chastisement was excommunication: and we confess,
that they which are guilty of manifest heinous deeds, are by a lawful
judgment and order to be excommunicated, neither is just excommunication a
vain lightning. Yet notwithstanding the power of the Church does not punish by
corporal force, as by prison, or by hunger, but it does only Look the 7.
Obs^rvat.
pronounce this sentence; The prison and common punishments do pertain to
civil governors. But such is the frowardness of certain men, that although
they see themselves convinced by the evidence of truth, yet they seek to dally
by sophistry, lest if they should give place, they should be thought to have
betrayed their fellows. God, which sees the heart, knows, that with a
simple endeavor, we have sought out the truth.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGH.
Of Repentance. CHAP. 12.
SEeing that we must always acknowledge our sins, and believe that they be
forgiven for Christ his sake, we think it also meet that men should always
repent in this life. But diverse men expound repentance diversely; commonly they
make three parts of repentance, Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction. We
will severally and briefly run over these parts, that we may declare what we
may think to be in deed Catholic and Apostolic, in this doctrine of
Repentance.

Of Contrition. CHAP. 13.
WE call Contrition a feeling of the wrath of God, or a sorrow and great fear
of the mind, raised by the knowledge of the greatness of our sins, and the
weightinesse of the wrath of God. And we think that such a Contrition, as the
law of God does use to stir up in man, is necessarily required in true
repentance: but to teach that it does deserve remission of sins, or that it
is a purging of our sins before God, we think in contrary to the Apostolic
doctrine. God truly does not despise a contrite and an humble heart, as the
Psalm says: but therefore he does not despise it, because the Son of God
our Lord Jesus Christ took upon him a contrite and humble heart, by whose
only contrition and humiliation our sins are purged before God, and his wrath
is pacified. Now we are made partakers of this pacification, when with a
contrite and humble heart we believe, that Jesus Christ alone is our reconciler
with the heavenly Father, Isa. 53. He was wounded for our transgressions, he
was broken for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
by his stripes we are healed. 1 John 2. He is the propitiation for our sins.
Act. 10. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, all that
believe in him, shall have remission of their sins. Also the examples of
Cain, Esau, Saul, Judas Iscarioth, and such like, do witness, that Contrition
is not a merit of remission of sins. For these men, although they had so
great contrition, that it seemed to them a thing more tolerable to dispatch
their life either by strangling, or by thrusting themselves in with swords,
rather then to suffer those horrible griefs, yet could they not obtain
remission of their sins. The Gloss says, If we look narrowly to the
matter, remission of sins is to be attributed to the grace of God, not to
contrition. Wherefore we confess, that to show forth true repentance,
Contrition is necessary, yet not to this end, that it should be any merit or
purging of our sins before God: but that man, acknowledging the greatness of
his sins, should be stirred up to seek remission of sins and salvation, in
the only free clemency and mercy of God, and that only for Jesus Christ our
Lord his sake, by faith.

Of Confession. CHAP. 14.
THey call Confession a reckoning up of sins before a Priest. Therefore such
confession as has hitherto been used, as it was not commanded of God, so it
is manifest, that the ancient Church did not exact it with such severitie, as
if it had been necessary to obtain eternal salvation. And it is not to be
doubted, but that we ought to acknowledge our selves before God to be sinners,
and to confess our sins to God, yea the ancient Ecclesiastical writers do
grant, that it is free for any one to reckon up his sins before man, unless,
in some matter man be offended, and the truth, by lawful and divine calling,
is to be declared. Chrysostom says, I will thee, not to bewraie thy self
openly, nor to accuse Chrysostom. in cap. 12. ad Heb. in hom. 31. In Psalm.
Miserere. August. lib. 10. Confess. cap. 3.
thy self before others: but I counsel thee to obey the Prophet, saying, Open
thy way unto the Lord. And again, If thou art ashamed to show thy sins to any
man, then utter them every day in thine heart: I say not, go, confess the
sins, to thy fellow servant, that may upbraide thee with them, but confess
them unto God, that is able to cure them. Now although these words of
Chrysostom use to be expounded of those sins, which were before confessed to a
Priest, yet is this exposition a manifest wresting of the meaning of
Chrysostom: and the Eecclesiasticall history does evidently witness, that
this custom of confessing unto a Priest was abrogated in the Church of
Constantinople. Augustine says, What have I to do with men, that they should
hear my confessions, as if they were able Ambr. super Luc. de poeniten. Did.
1. Cap. Petrus.
to heal all my griefs? They are very curious to know an other man's life, and
very slow in amending of their own. Ambrose says, Peter sorrowed and wept,
because he erred as man: I do not find what he said, I know that he wept: I
read of his tears, I do not read of his satisfaction.

And although Look the first observat. upon this confession.
we think, that it is not necessary to salvation, to reckon up sins before a
Priest, and that it is not any merit of of remission of sins: yet we
endeavor, that a general confession of sins, so far as may be, and is
lawful, may be retained in our Churches, and that for two causes. One is, that
by this private conference, the ignorant may be admonished and instructed in
necessary matters: the other, that by this occasion, the Gospel of Christ,
touching remission of sins, may be heard privately (the which Gospel is the
true Key of the Kingdom of heaven, and absolution from sin) and that by the
hearing of the Gospel, or absolution, faith may be either conceived, or
confirmed. For, that we may truly repent, we think that there is nothing more
sure and certain, then that of necessity we should have faith, to this end,
that as the Gospel of Christ does declare it, so we may assuredly believe that
our sins are freely pardoned and forgiven for our Lord Jesus Christ his sake.

We are not ignorant, if we look unto our works, that we are not only to
doubt, but also to despair of our salvation, because that our works, seem
they never so good, cannot stand upright before the severe tribunal seat of
God. Neither are we ignorant, that some doubt of the mercy and favor of God
does always cleave to our flesh, so long as we live in the body. But seeing
that God does promise unto us his free mercy for Christ his Sons sake, and
does require of us, that we do obediently believe the Gospel of his Son, he
there with also does require, that we mortify the doubting of the flesh, and
have a most assured affiance in his mercy, that we do not accuse his promise
to be so full of deceit, as we are of doubting. And that we may conceive sure
confidence therein, he placed our salvation, not in the merits of our
righteousness, which is unperfect, but only in the merits of his Son our
Lord Jesus Christ: whose righteousness, as it is most perfect, so it is most
firm and constant in the judgment of God, Mar. 1. Repent, and believe the
Gospel. He commands us to believe the Gospel, which declares unto us the
certain favor of God toward us for Christ his sake: therefore he will not
have us to doubt of his favor toward us, but that we may conceive sure
confidence thereof, John 6. This is the work of God, that ye believe in him,
whom the Father has sent. If God require of us, that we believe in his Son,
certainly he would not have us to doubt, but that we put our sure confidence
in him. Jam. 1. If any of you want wisdom, let him ask of him which gives
it, namely of God, who gives, I say, to all men without exception, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, but let him ask with confidence
nothing doubting. Hilarie says, The kingdom of heaven, In Mat. cap. 5.
which the Prophets foreshewed, John preached, and our Lord professed to
consist in himself, he will have us to hope for, without any doubting of a
wavering will. Otherwise justification through faith is none In Manueli cap. 23.
at all, if faith it self be doubtful. And Augustine says, He that does
despair of the pardon of his sinnse, does deny that God is morcifull: he that
does distrust of the mercy of God, does great injury unto God, and, as much as
in him lies, he denies that God has love, truth, and power, in which things
all our hope does consist. Sixtus Sixtus Pontifex. Tom. 1. Epist. Sixti Pont
sicis.
says, He which is doubtful in faith, is an infidel. Wherefore we think
that they, who counsel us to doubt of the favor of God toward us, do not
only dissent from the true judgment of the Catholic Church, but also provide
very ill for the salvation of the Church.

Of Satisfaction. CHAP. 15.
AS touching satisfaction, we believe and confess, that the alone passion and
death of the only begotten Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ is a
satisfaction for our sins, and that this satisfaction of Christ is offered
and applied to us by the ministry of the Gospel, and is received of us by
faith. We also confess that after the satisfaction of Christ is applied, and
by faith received, we ought necessarily to do those good works, which God
has commanded: not that by them we might purge our sins before God, but that
we might bring forth good fruits of repentance, and testify our
thankfulness. For, as touching prayer, fasting, giving of alms, and such
like works, we think that they are diligently to be performed, yet that they
have a far other use, then that they should by their merits either satisfy
God for our sins or apply unto us the merit of Christ.

Out of the Confession of SVEVELAND. Of Confession. CHAP. 20.
SEeing that true confession of sins, and such as has it beginning from
godliness, can be performed of no man, whom his repentance and true sorrow of
mind does not force thereunto, it cannot be wrested out by any precept.
Wherefore neither Christ himself, nor the Apostles would command it. Therefore
for this cause our Preachers do exhort men to confess their sins, and there
withal they show what fruit arises hereof, that a man should secretly seek
for comfort, counsel, doctrine, instruction, and at the hands of a man, that
is a Christian, and wise, yet by commandment they urge no man, but do rather
affirm, that such commandments do hinder godliness. For that constitution
of confessing sins unto a Priest, has driven infinite souls unto
desperation, and is subject to so many corruptions, that of late it ought to
have been abrogated, and without doubt had been abrogated, if the governors
of Churches of late time had burned with so great a zeal to remove away
stumbling blocks, as in times past Nestorius the Bishop of Constantinople did
burn, who did utterly abolish secret confession in his Church, because that a
certain noble woman, going often to Church, under pretense of doing the works
of repentance, was deprehended to have to do with a Deacon. Infinite such
undoubted sins were committed every where. Moreover the Pontifical laws do
require that the hearer and judge of confession should be so holy, learned,
wise, merciful, that a man can hardly find out, especially among those that
are commonly appointed to hear confessions, to whom he might confess
himself. And now the Schoolmen do think, that it is better to confess
sins to a lay man, then to that Priest, by whom we may not look to be
edified in godliness. This is the sum: That confession brings more hurt
then profit, which sound repentance and true sorrow of the mind for sins
committed does not wring out. Therefore seeing this is the gift of God alone,
that we may repent of our sins, and be truly sorrowful for that we have
sinned, nothing, that may turn to salvation, can be done in this matter by
commandments, as has hitherto been too too manifest even by experience.

THE NINTH SECTION. OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH, AND OF GOOD Works, and their
Rewards.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA.
Of the true Justification of the faithful. CHAP. 15.
TO justify, in the Apostles disputation touching justification, does signify
to remit sins, to absolve from the fault, and the punishment thereof, to
receive into favor, to pronounce a man just. For the Apostle faith to the
Romans, God is he that justifies, Romans 8.
who is he that can condemn? Where to justify, and to condemn, are opposed.
And in the Acts of the Apostles, the Apostle says, Through Christ is preached
unto you forgiveness of sins, Acts 13.
and from all things (from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses)
by him, every one that believes, is justified. For in the Law also and in the
Prophets we read: that If a controversy were risen amongst any, and they came
to judgment, the Judge should Deuteronomy. 2. 5.
judge them that is, justify the righteous, and make wicked, or condemn the
wicked. And in the 5. Chapter of Isaiah, Woe to them which justify the wicked
for rewards. Now it is most certain, that we are all by nature sinners, and
before the Judgment seat of God convicted of ungodliness, and guilty of
death. But we are justified, that is, acquitted from sin and death by God the
Judge, through the grace of Christ alone, and not by any respect or merit of
ours. For what is more plain then that which Paul says? All have sinned, and
are destitute of the glory of God, and are justified Romans 3.
freely by his grace, through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. For
Christ took upon himself and bare the sins of the world, and did satisfy
the justice of God. God therefore is merciful unto our sins for Christ alone
that suffered and rose again, and does not impute them unto us. But he
imputes the justice of Christ unto us for our owe: so that now we are not
only cleansed 2 Cor. 3.
from sin, and purged, and holy, but also endued with the righteousness of
Christ, yea and acquitted from sin, death and condemnation: finally, we are
righteous, and heirs of eternal life. Romans 4.
To speak properly then, it is God alone that justifies us, and that only
for Christ, by not imputing unto us our sins, but imputing Christ's
righteousness unto us.

But because we do receive this justification, not by any works, but by faith
in the mercy of God and in Christ: therefore we teach and believe with the
Apostle that sinful man is justified only by faith in Christ, not by the
law, or by any works. For the Apostle says, We conclude that man is justified
by faith without the Romans 3. Romans 4. Genesis 15.
works of the law. If Abraham was justified by works, he has whereof to
boast, but not with God. For what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God,
and it was imputed to him for righteousness. But to him that works not, but
believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. And again, You are saved by grace through faith, and that not
of your selves: Ephesians. 2.
it is the gift of God. Not by works, lest any might have cause to boast, etc.
Therefore because faith does apprehend Christ our rigteousnesse, and does
attribute all to the praise of God in Christ, in this respect justification is
attributed to faith chiefly because of Christ, whom it receives, and not
because it is a work of ours. For it is the gift of God. Now, that we do
receive Christ by faith, the Lord shows at large, John 6. where he puts
eating for believing, and believing for eating. For as by eating we receive
meat, so by believing we are made partakers of Christ. Therefore we do not
part the benefit of justification, giving part to the grace of God or to
Christ, and a part to our selves, our charity, works, or merit, but we do
attribute it wholly to the praise of God in Christ, and that through faith.
Moreover, our charity and our works cannot please God if they be done of such
are not just: wherefore we must first be just, before we can love or do any
just works. We are made just (as we have said) through faith in Christ, by the
mere grace of God, who does not impute unto us our sins, but imputes unto
us the righteousness of Christ, yea and our faith in Christ he imputes for
righteousness unto us. Moreover the Apostle does plainly derive love from
faith, saying, The end of the commandment is love, proceeding 1 Timothy 1.
from a pure heart, a good conscience, and a faith unfeigned. Wherefore in this
matter we speak not of a fained; vain, or dead faith, but of a lively, and
quickening faith, which for Christ (who is life, and gives life) whom it
apprehends, both is indeed, and is so called, a lively faith, and does prove
it self to be lively, by lively works. And therefore James does speak
nothing contrary to this our doctrine, for he speaks of a vain and dead
faith, which certain bragged of, but had not Christ living within them by
faith. And James also says, that works do justify, yet he is not contrary
James 2.
to Saint Paul (for then he were to be rejected) but he shows that Abraham
did show his lively and justifying faith by works. And so do all the godly;
who yet trust in Christ alone, not to their own works. For the Apostle said
again, I live, Gal. 2.
howbeit not I, but Christ lives in me. But the life which now I live in the
flesh, I live through the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me. I do not despise the grace of God, for if righteousness be
by the law, then Christ died in vain, etc.

Of faith and good works: Of their reward and of man's merit. CHAP. 16.
CHristian faith is not an opinion or humane persuasion, but a sure trust, and
an evident and steadfast assent of the mind, to be brief, a most sure
comprehension of the truth of God set forth in the Scriptures and in the
Apostles Creed, yea and of God himself, the chief blessedness, and
especially of Gods promise, and of Christ, who is the consummation of all the
promises. And this faith is the mere gift of God, because God alone of his
power does give it to his elect, according to measure; and that when, to whom,
and how much he will, and that by his holy spirit, through the means of
preaching the Gospel, and of faithful prayer. This faith has also her
increases, which unless they were likewise given of God, the Apostle would
never have said, Lord Luke 11.
increase our faith. Now all these things which we have said hitherto of faith,
the Apostles taught them before us, even as we set them down: for Paul says,
Faith is the ground or sure subsistence Heb. 11.
of things hopeed for, and the evidence or clear and certain comprehension of
things which are not seen. And again he says, that all the promises of God
in Christ are yea, and in Christ are Amen. 2 Cor. 1.
And the same Apostle says to the Philippians, that it was given them to
believe in Christ. And also, God does distribute unto Romans 12. 2 Thessalonians. 2 and 3.
every man a measure of faith. And again, All men have not faith, and all do
not obey the Gospel. Besides Luke witnesses and says. As many as were
ordained to life, believed. And therefore he also calls faith, The faith of
Gods elect. And again, Faith comes by Acts 13. Romans 10.
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And in another place he wills men
to pray for faith. And the same also calls faith, Powerful, Tit. 1. Galat. 5.
and that shows it self by love. This faith does pacify the conscience, and
does open unto us a free access unto God, that with confidence we may come
unto him, and may obtain at his hands whatsoever is profitable and necessary.
The same faith does keep us in our duty which we owe to God and to our
neighbor, and does fortify our patience in adversity, it does frame and make
a true confession, and (in a word) it does bring forth good fruit of all sorts,
and good works which are good indeed do proceed from a lively faith, by the
holy Ghost, and are done of the faithful according to the will or rule of Gods
word. For Peter the Apostle says, Therefore giving all diligence thereunto,
join moreover virtue with your faith, and with virtue knowledge, and with
knowledge temperance, etc.

It was said before that the law of God, which is the will of God, did
prescribe unto us the pattern of good works. And the Apostle says, This is
the will of God, even your sanctisication, that 1 Thessalonians. 4.
you abstain from all uncleanness, and that no man oppress or deceive his
brother in any matter. But as for such works and worships of God as are taken
up upon our own liking, which Saint Paul calls wilworship, they are not
allowed, nor liked of God. Of such Coloss. 2.
the Lord says in the Gospel. They worship me in vain, teaching Matthew. 15.
for doctrine the precepts of men: We therefore disallow all such manner of
works, and we approve and urge men unto such as (...) according to the will
and commandment of God: Yea and these same works, that are agreeable to Gods
will, must be done, not to the end to merit eternal life by them, for life
everlasting, as the Apostle faith, is the gift of God: nor for ostentations
sake, which the Lord does reject, Matthew. 6. nor for lucre, which also he
misliketh, Matthew. 23. but to the glory of God, to commend and set forth our
calling, and to yield thankfulness unto God, and also for the profit of our
neighbors. For the Lord says again in the Gospel, Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your Mat. 5.
good works, and glrifie your Father which is in heaven. Likewise the Apostle
Paul says, Walk worthy of your calling: Al^o, Whatsoever Ephesians. 4. Coloss. 3.
you do, faith he, either in word, or indeed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father by him. Let no man seek his own but
every man his brothers. And, Let ours also learn to show forth good works for
necessary uses, that they be Phil. 4. Tit. 3.
not unprofitable. Notwithstanding therefore that we teach with the Apostle
that a man is justified by faith in Christ, and not by any good works, yet we
do not lightly esteem or condemn good works: because we know that a man is
not created or regenerated through faith, that he should be idle, but rather
that without ceasing he should do those things which are good and profitable.
For in the Gospel the Lord says, A good tree brings forth good fruit. And
again, Whosoever abides in me, brings forth good fruit. And lastly the
Apostle says, We are the workmanship of God, Matthew. 12. John ^5. Ephesians. 2.
Tit. 2.
created in Christ Jesus to good works, which God has prepared, that we
should walk in them. And again, Who gave himself for us, that he might
deliver us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people to
himself, zealous of good works. We therefore condemn all those, which do
contemn good works, and do babble that they are needless, and not, to be
regarded. Nevertheless, as was said before, we do not think, that we are
saved by good works, or that they are so necessary to salvation, that no man
was ever saved without them. For we are saved by grace, and by the benefit of
Christ alone. Works do necessarily proceed from faith: but salvation is
improperly attributed to them, which is most properly ascribed to grace. That
sentence of the Apostle is very notable, If by grace, then not of works: for
then grace were no Romans 11.
more grace: But if of works, then is it not of grace: for then works were no
more works.

Now the works which we do are accepted and allowed of God through faith,
because they which do them please God by faith in Christ, and also the works
themselves are done by the grace of God through his holy Spirit. For Saint
Peter says, that Of every nation, he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is Act. 10. Coloss. 1.
accepted with him. And Paul also, We cease not to pray for you, that you may
walk worthy of the Lord, and in all things please him, being fruitful in
every good work. Here therefore we diligently teach not false and
Philosophical, but true virtues, true good works, and the true duties of a
Christian man. And this we do, with all diligence and earnestness that we
can, inculcate and beat into men's minds, sharply reproving the slothfulness
and hypocrisy of all those, who with their mouths praise and profess the
Gospel, and yet with their shameful life do dishonor the same, setting
before their eyes in this case Gods horrible threatenings, large promises, and
bountiful rewards, and that by exhorting, comforting, and rebuking. For we
teach, that God does bestow great rewards on them that do good, according to
that saying of the Prophet, Refrain thy voice from weeping, because thy work
Isa. 4. Mar. 5. and 10.
shall have a reward. In the Gospel also the Lord said, Rejoice, and be glad,
because your reward is great in the heavens. And, He that shall give to one of
these little ones a cup of cold water, verily I say unto you he shall not loose
his reward: Yet we do not attribute this reward, which God gives, to the
merit of the man that receives it, but to the goodness or liberality, and
truth of God, which promises and gives it: who although he owe nothing unto
any, yet he has promised to give a reward to those that faithfully worship
him, notwithstanding that he do also give them grace to worship him. Besides
there are many things unworthy the majesty of God, and many unperfect things
are found in the works even of the Saints, and yet because God does receive
into favor, and embrace the works of them for Christ's sake, therefore he
performs unto them the promised reward. For otherwise, our righteousnesses
are compared to a menstruous Isa. 64.
cloth, yea, and the Lord in the Gospel says, When you have done all things
that are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants: Luke 17.
that which we ought to do we have done. So that though we teach that God does
give a reward to our good deeds, yet withal we teach with Augustine, that God
does crown in us, not our deserts, but his own gifts. And therefore
whatsoever reward we receive, we say that it is a grace, and rather a grace
then a reward: because those good things which we do, we do them rather by
God, then by our selves: and because Paul says, What have thou, that 1 Cor 4.
thou have not received? If thou have received it, Why do thou boast, as
though thou had not received it. And that which the blessed Martyr Cyprian
does gather out of this place, That we must not boast of any thing, seeing
nothing is our own. We therefore condemn those who defend the merits of men,
that they may make frustrate the grace of God.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA.
NOw we attain unto these so divine benefits, and the true sanctification of
the spirit of God, by Faith (which is the mere gift of God, not by any either
our strength, or merits:) which faith being a sure and undoubted substance, and
laying hold on things to be hoped for from the good will of God, does send out
of it self charity, and then very excellent fruits of all virtues: yet do we
not attribute any thing to these works, although they be the works of godly
men, but that salvation which we have obtained, we do wholly attribute to the
very grace of God. And this is indeed the only true worship of God, to wit, a
faith most fruitful of good works, and yet not putting any confidence in
works.

Out of the Confession of BASIL.
WE confess the remission of sins through faith in Christ crucified: and
though this faith does without intermission exercise, and show forth it self
in the works of charity, and by this means is tried, yet we do not
attribute righteousness and satisfaction for our sins unto works, which are
fruits of faith, but only to a true confidence and faith in the blood of the
Lamb of God shed for us. For we do unfainedly profess, that all things are
given us freely in Christ, who is our righteousness, holidesse, redemption,
way, truth, wisdom, and life. Therefore the faithful do work, not to
satisfy for their sins, but only that they may in some sort show themselves
thankful unto God our Lord for great benefits bestowed upon us in Christ. And
in the Margent upon the word Thankful. Thankfulness consists in requiting
of benefits received: but we can requite nothing to God, because he wants
nothing. Therefore we have an eye to those things which herequireth of us: and
those are, faith, and the works of charity: he requires faith toward
himself, Charity toward our neighbor.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA.
Of Christ our Lord, and of Justification by Faith. CHAP. 6.
THe sixth point of Christian doctrien in our Churches is, as touching sound
and lively faith in Jesus Christ our Lord, and of true Justification by this
faith. And a little after, Our men are taught to acknowledge this grace and
truth, and in all the saving and wonderful works which Christ brought to
effect, by faith to behold those things, which, according to the meaning of the
holy Scripture, are in a steadfast faith to be believed and professed: such are
these, The coming of Christ from heaven, his conception, nativitie, torments,
death, burial, resurrection, ascending into heaven, his sitting at the right
hand of God, and his coming again from thence to judge the quick and the
dead. In these principal effects, as in a chest wherein treasure is kept, are
all those saving fruits of true justification laid up, and from thence they are
taken for the Elect and faithful, that in spirit and conscience by faith they
may be made partakers thereof, all which shall hereafter be perfectly and fully
given unto them, in the day of that joyful resurrection. These things are also
found in the sixth Section, so far forth as they describe the works of
Christ, and the fruits thereof.

Out of this foundation, of this justifying faith, and of true and perfect
justification thereby, according to evident and clear testimonies in the
Scriptures, we are further taught; First, that no man by his own strength, or
by the power of his own will, or of flesh and blood, can attain unto, or have
this saving or justifying faith, except God of his grace, by the holy Ghost,
and by the ministry of the Gospel preached, do plant it in the heart of whom
he list, and when he list: so that that heart may receive all Romans 10. 2 Theff.
3.
things, which are offered to salvation, and made known touching the same, by
the public preaching of the word, and by the sacraments instituted of Christ.
Hereof holy John Baptist says, Man John 3.
can take nothing to himself, except it be given him from above. Also our Lord
Christ himself says, No man comes to me except the Father John 6.
which sent me, do draw him. And a little after, Except it be given him of my
Father, that is, from above, by the holy Ghost. And to Peter Christ said, Flesh
and blood has not revealed this unto thee. Matthew. 16.


Now this faith properly is an assent of a willing heart to the whole truth
delivered in the Gospel, whereby man is lightened in his mind and soul, that
he may rightly acknowledge and receive for his only Savior, his God, and Lord
Jesus Christ, and upon him, as on a true rock, he may build his whole
salvation, love, follow, and enjoy him, and repose all his hope and confidence
in him: and by this valiant confidence he may lift up himself, and trust, that
for him and his only merit, God is become to him, loving, gentle, bountiful,
and also that in him and for him he assiredly has, and shall have for ever,
eternal life, according to his true promise, which he confirmed with an oath,
saying, Verily I say un^o you, he that believes in me has John 6.
eternal life. And, This is the will of him that sent me, that he which sees
the Son, and believes in him, shall have eternal life, and I will raise him
up in the last day. Also, This is life eternal, that they know thee the true
God and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. And Isaiah, says, By his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many. This faith alone, and this inward
confidence of the heart in Jesus Christ our Lord does justify, or make a just
before God, without any works which he may add, or any merit of his: of which
Saint Paul says, But to him that works not at all, but believes in him Romans
4.
that justifies the wicked man, his faith is imputed for righteousness. And
before he said But now is the righteousness of God made manifest Romans 3.
without the law, having witness of the law and of the Prophets: to wit, the
righteousness of God, by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all
that believe. And in another place, He that believes Acts 13.
in him, is made righteous. And this righteousness or justification is the
remission of sins, the taking away of eternal punishment, which the severe
justice of God does require, and to be clothed with Christ's righteousness, or
with imputation thereof: also it is a reconciliation with God, a receiving into
favor, whereby we are made acceptable in the beloved, and fellow heirs of
eternal life. For the confirming of which things, and by reason of our new
birth or regeneration, there is an earnest added, to wit, the holy Ghost, who
is given and bestowed freely, out of Ephesians. 1.
that infinite grace, for Christ his death, blood shedding, and his
resurrection. All these things has Paul described very excellently in his
Epistle to the Romans, where he brings in Romans 4. Psalm. 32.
David speaking in this wise, Blessed are they whose iniquity is forgiven:
whereof he speaks in that whole Chapter. And to the Gal. 4. Romans 8.
Galathians he says, God sent forth his Son, that we might receive the
adoption. Now because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son,
crying in your hearts, Abba, Father. For, whomsoever God does justify, to them
he does give the holy Ghost, and by him he does first regenerate them, as he
promises by the Prophet; saying: I will give them a new heart, and I will put
my spirit Ezech 11. and 36. Rom 5.
in the midst of them, that as before sin had reigned in them to death, so
also then grace might reign by righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus
Christ. And this is the communion or participation of the grace of God the
Father, of the merit of Jesus Christ our Lord, and of the sanctification of the
holy Ghost: this is the law of faith, the law of the spirit, and life, written
by the holy Ghost.

But the lively and never dying spring of this justification, is our Lord Jesus
Christ alone, by those his saving works, that is, which give salvation, from
whom all holy men from the beginning of the world, as well before the law was
published, and under the law, and the discipline thereof, as also after the
law, have and do draw, have and do receive salvation, or remission of their
sins by faith in the most comfortable promise of the Gospel: and do apply, and
approper it as peculiar to themselves, only for the sole death of Christ, and
his bloodshedding, to the full and perfect abolishing of their sins, and the
cleansing from them all, whereof we have many testimonies in the Scripture.
Holy Peter before the whole country at Jerusalem, does prove by sound
arguments, that Salvation is not to be found in any other, then in Act. 4.
Christ Jesus alone, and that under this large cope of heaven, there is no
other name given unto men, whereby we may be saved And in another place he
appealeth to the consenting voices and testimonies of all the Prophets, who
spoke with one mind, and by one spirit, as it were by one mouth: and thus he
said, As touching this Jesus, Act. 10.
all the Prophets bear witness, that through his name, all that believe in
him, shall receive remission of sins. And to the Hebrews it is written, He has
by himself purged our sins: and again, We Heb. 1. Ephesians. 1. 1 J^h. 2.
have redemption through his blood, even the remission of sins. And St. John
says, We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he
is the propitiation or atonement for our sins, and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole world. And again to the Hebrews, We are
sanctified by the offering of the body Heb. 10.
of Jesus Christ once made: and a little after he adds, with one only
offering has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified, namely of God,
by the spirit of God. Therefore all sinners and such as are penitent ought to
fly incontinently through their whole life to our Lord Jesus Christ alone, for
remission of their sins, and every saving grace, according to that in the
Epistle to the Heb. 4.
Hebrews, Seeing that we have a great high Priest, even Jesus the Son of God,
which is entered into heaven, let us hold fast this profession, which is
concerning Christ our Lord: and straightway he adds, Let us therefore go
boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to
help in time of need. Also Christ himself crying out, says, He that
thirsts, let him come to Joh. 7.
me, and drink. And in another place, He that comes unto me, shall not
hunger: and he that believes in me, shall never thirst. Now they Joh. 6.
that attain to this justification by Christ our Lord, are taught, to take
unto themselves true and assured comfort, out of this grace and bounty of God,
to enjoy a good and quiet conscience before God, to be certain of their own
salvation, and to have it confirmed to them by this means, that seeing they are
here the sons of God, they shall also after death in the resurrection be made
heirs. In the mean time they ought both to desire to be brought Romans 8. Gal.
4.
to this, that they may receive the fruit of perfect salvation, and also
cheerfully to look for it, with that confidence, according to the promise of
the Lord, that such shall not come into judgment, Joh. 5.
but that by making away they have already passed from death into life. Of all
other points of doctrine we account this the chiefest and weightiest, as that
wherein the sum of the Gospel does consist, Christianity is founded, and
the precious and most noble treasure of eternal salvation, and the only and
lively comfort proceeding from God, is comprehended. Therefore herein our
Preachers do labor especially, that they may well instruct the hearts of men
in this point of doctrine, and so sow it, that it may take deep root.

Of goods works, and a Christian life. CHAP. 7.
IN the seventh place we teach, that they, who are made righteous and
acceptable to God, by faith alone in Christ Jesus, and that by the grace of God
without any merits, ought in the whole course of their life that follows both
altogether jointly, and every one particularly, according as the order,
condition, age, and place of every one does require, to perform and exercise
those good works, and holy actions, which are commanded of God, even as God
commands, when he says, Teach them to observe all things, which I have
commanded you. Now these good works or holy actions, are not certain
affections devised of flesh and blood (for such the Lord forbids) but they
are expressly showed and propounded unto us by the spirit of God, to do the
which God does bind us, the rule and chief square whereof God himself is in
his word: for so he says by the Prophet, Walk not in the Ezech. 20.
commandments of your Fathers, and keep no: their judgments, and defile not
your selves with their Idols: I am Jehovah your God, walk ye in my
commandments, and keep my judgments, and do them. Likewise Christ says,
Teach them those things, which I have Matthew 18.
commanded you. Therefore the ten commandments, and love, which by faith
works righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left hand, as well toward
God as toward our neighbor, is a certain sum, a most straight square, and a
most artificial shaping or description of all good works. Now an example of
this square is the most holy life of Christ, whereof he himself says, Learn
of me; because I am meek and humble in heart. And Matthew. 11.
what other thing would he teach, by uttering those eight sentences of
happiness, then to show what manner of life the true Matthew. 5.
children of God ought to lead, and what be the works which God has commanded.

Therefore according to these things they teach with all care and diligence,
touching the difference, which is to be known and kept, betwixt those works
which are devised and taught of men, and those which are commanded of God.
Those works which are commanded of God, ought not to be intermitted for humane
traditions. For Christ does grievously reprehend this in them that do
otherwise, and in the Pharisees, saying, Why do you transgress Matthew. 15.
the commandments of God for your traditions? And again, In vain do they
worship me, seeing they do only teach the commandments of men. Look the
first observat. upon this confession. Mark. 7. Isa 29. Isa. 1. and 6^.
But such works as are taught of men, what show soever they have even of
goodness, are in no case to be so highly esteemed, as those, which are
commanded of God. Yea, to say somewhat more, if they be not of faith, but
contrary to faith, they are of no value at all, but are an abomination and
filthiness before the face of God. Now all good works are divided, first,
generally, into those which pertain to all true Christians, according to the
unity of faith and Catholic salvation. Secondly, they are divided
particularly into those which are proper to the order, age, and place of every
man, as the holy Ghost does severally teach Elders, Masters, the common sort;
Parents, children, the married, the unmarried, and every one, what be their
proper bonds and works. Moreover, in this point men are diligently taught to
know, how, and wherein good works do please God. Truly, they please God no
otherwise, then in the only name of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whose name, they
ought to be done to the glory of God, according to the doctrine of Paul the
Apostle, who speaks thus, Whatsoever you do in words and in deeds, do all
in the Coliss. 3. 1 Cor. 10. Joh. 15.
name of our Lord Jesus. And the Lord himself says, Without me ye can do
nothing, that is, nothing that may please God, and be for your salvation. Now
to do good works in the name of Christ, is to do them, in a lively faith in
him, whereby we are justified, and in love, which is poured forth into our
hearts by the holy Ghost, in such sort that God loves us, and we again love
him and our neighbor. For the holy Ghost does sanctify, moove, and kindle the
hearts of them which are justified, to do these holy actions, as the Lord
says, He shall be in you: And the Apostle, The Joh. 14. 1 John 2.
anointing of God teaches you. These two, Faith and Love, are the fountain
and square of all virtues and good works, according to the testimony of the
Apostle, The end of the commandment is 1 Timothy 1. H^b. 11. 1 Cor. 13.
love out of a pure heart and a good conscience, and faith not feigned. And
again, Without faith it is not possible to please God. Also, without love
nothing does profit a man.

In the next place they teach, why and to what purpose or end, such good works,
as pertain to Christian godliness, ought to be done, to wit, not in this
respect, that men by these works should obtain justification or salvation, and
remission of sins (for Christ says, When you have done all those things which
were commanded Luke 1^.
you, say, we are unprofitable servants. Also Paul says, Not for the Tit. 3.
works of righteousness, which we have done, but through his mercy has he
saved us: wherewith all those words of David agree, when he prays, Lord enter
not into judgment with thy servant, Psalm. 143.
because that in thy sight shall no flesh living be justified.) But Christians
are to exercise themselves in good works, for these causes following. First,
that by this mean, they may prove and declare their faith, and by these works
be known to be true Christians, that is, the lively members and followers of
Christ, whereof our Lord says, Every tree is known by his own fruits. Indeed
good works Luke 6.
are assured arguments, and signs and testimonies, and exercises of a lively
faith, even of that faith, which lies hid in the heart, and to be short, of
the true fruit thereof, and such as is acceptable to God. Paul faith, Christ
lives in me: for in that I now live in the flesh, Gal. 2.
I live by faith in the Son of God. And truly it cannot be otherwise, but
that as sin does bring forth death, so faith, and justification, which
arises thereout, does bring forth life, inwardly in the spirit, and outwardly
in the works of charity. Secondly, we must therefore do good works, that
Christians might confirm and build up their Election and Vocation in
themselves, and preserve it Look the ^. observation upon this confession. 2
Pet. 1.
by taking heed that they fall not in mortal sins, even as Saint Peter
teaches, among other things writing thus: Wherefore brethren endeavor rather
to make your Election and Vocation sure, or to confirm it. And how this may be
done, he does briefly declare a little before. Therefore giving all diligence
thereunto, join virtue with your faith: and with virtue, knowledge: and with
knowledge, temperance: and with temperance, patience: and with patience,
godliness: and with godliness, brotherly kindness: and with brotherly
kindness, love. For if these things be among you, and abound in you, they will
make you that you neither shall be idle, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ. In which place Saint Peter does evidently show, that we
must endeavor to exercise our selves in good works, Look the 3 Observat.
first for this cause, lest that the grace of faith and a good conscience,
which we have, be either lost or defiled, but that it may rather be preserved.
(For Sap. 1. Matthew. 12. Luke 1^.
the holy Ghost does fly from Idolaters, and departs from profane men, and
the evil and unpure spirit does return into an empty and idle house. Also,
whosoever does either loose, or defile a good conscience, what commendable
thing, or what work can he do that is precious and acceptable to God? how
shall he give himself to prayer?) Secondly, for this cause, that we may profit
and increase more and more in this grace, and that we may gain unto the Lord,
by occupying those talents which are committed to our trust: whereof Saint Paul
says, Now we 2 Cor. 3.
all beholding, as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord with open face, are
changed into the same Image from glory to glory: that is, we behold Christ, who
is the Image and glory of the Father, and herein we endeavor, that we may be
conformed to the likeness of this Image, by the holy Ghost, which does kindle
us thereunto, till this Image does get her perfection, by the blessed
resurrection. Thirdly, we must do and exercise our selves in good works, as
well for the promises of this life, as also for the reward of eternal life
(whereof mention is made very often and at large in the holy Scripture) and
that by faith in Christ we may have a more easy entrance to the attaining of
those rewards, and to the eternal kingdom of heaven, as Saint Peter
testifyeth, saying, If 2 Pet. ^.
ye do these things, ye shall never fall. For by this means an entering shall
be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. But chiefly we must do the works of mercy, whereby we
may benefit our neighbor, whereby we provide and do for him and whereof he
stands in need, such as these be, to give alms, to visit the sick, to have
a care of them, or to be at hand to do them service, to teach the simple, by
counsel and labor to help others, to pardon offenses, and such like, which
all have the promises of the bountifulness of God and of rewards, to do the
which Christ our Lord does exhort in these words, Be ye merciful, as your
Father is merciful. Give, and it shall be given to you; forgive, and ye shall
Luke 6.
be forgiven. And in another place, Sell your goods, and give alms: Luk 12.
get you bags, which wax not old, a treasure that cannot fail in heaven,
where ^o thief comes, and where the moth corrupts nothing. Also, When thou
make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind, and thou shall
be blessed, because they cannot recompense Luke 14.
thee, for thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just. Also, I
was an hungered, I thirsted, I was a stranger, naked, sick, and in prison, and
in all things ye helped me by your service: Verily I say unto you, In as much
as you did these things to one of the least of my brethren, ye did them to me.
Come hither, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the king dome prepared for you
before the beginning of the world. By these it is plain and manifest, that
those works which proceed of faith, do please God, and are rewarded with
abundant grace, to wit, with the recompense of all kind of good things and
blessings, both in this life, and in the life to come.

Lastly, this doctrine is shut up with this or such like exhortation, that no
man can perfectly do these works of Christian godliness, or fully perform
the commandments of God, and that no man can be found, who does not fail in
any part hereof, and who is clean without sin: as it is written, There is
not a man Eccles. 7.
so just on the earth, who does uprightly, and not sin: and that therefore
every one ought to seek and to enjoy his perfection, in Christ Jesus, in his
grace, precious sacrifice and merit, by that faith and his justification, which
consists in the remission of sins, if he will not have any thing in himself
that may deserve damnation. For Christ alone is our perfection, and fulfilling
of the law, our life and righteousness, and whosoever receive him by faith,
and do wholly trust in him, these men have all their sins washed away in the
blood of Christ, so that afterward they need not to fear condemnation. For
thus Paul writes, Therefore now there is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, which do not Romans 8.
walk according to the flesh, but according to the spirit. For to these men
Christ is made of Godwisdome, righteousness, sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.
and redemption.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE believe that our whole righteousness does consist in Artic. 13.
the remission of our sins, which is also, as David does testify, our only
felicity. Therefore we do utterly reject all other means, whereby men do
think that they may be justified before God, and casting away all opinion of
virtues and merits, we do altogether rest in the only obedience of Jesus
Christ, which is imputed to us, both that all our sins may be covered, and also
that we may obtain grace before God. To conclude, we believe that we cannot
find where to rest our selves, if we decline never so little from this
foundation, but rather we shall be always unquiet, because we are not at peace
with God, till we be certainly persuaded, that we are loved in Jesus Christ,
because that in our selves we are worthy of all hatred.

We believe that by faith alone we are made partakers of this Artic. 10.
righteousness, as it is written, He suffered, to purchase salvation for us,
That whosoever believes in him should not perish. And this is therefore done,
because the promises of life offered to us in him, are then applied to our use,
and made effectual to us, when we do embrace them, nothing doubting but that
we shall enjoy those things, whereof the Lord by his own mouth has assured
us. Therefore that righteousness, which we obtain by faith, does depend upon
free promises, whereby the Lord does declare and testify, that we are beloved
of him.

We believe, that by the secret grace of the holy Ghost we Artic. 21.
are endued with the light of faith, which is the free gift of God, and is
proper to them alone, to whom it pleased God to give it, so that the faithful
have not whereof to boast in themselves, seeing that rather they are more then
double debtors, because they are preferred before others. And further we
believe, that faith is given to the Elect, not that they might once only be
brought into the right way, but rather that they may go forward therein unto
the end, because that as the beginning is of God, so is also the accomplishment.

We believe, that we, who by nature are the servants of sin, Artic. 22.
are regenerated unto a new life, by means of this same faith: and by this
faith we receive grace to live holily, whiles we do embrace that Evangelicall
promise, that the Lord will give unto us the holy Ghost. Therefore it is so
far, that faith should extinguish the desire to live well and holily, that it
does rather increase and kindle it in us: whereupon good works do necessarily
follow. Nevertheless, although God, that he may fully save us, do regenerate
us, and frame us to a holy life; yet we confess, that the good works which we
do, by the direction of his spirit, are not so regarded of God, as that we
should be justified thereby, or deserve to be counted the children of God,
because we should waver with a perpetual doubting and trembling, unless we
should rely upon that only satisfaction, whereby Christ Jesus has discharged
us of the punishment or forfeit for our offense.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
BEsides, though we say, we have no need at all by our own works, and deeds,
but appoint all the means of our salvation to be in Christ alone, yet say we
not, that for this cause men ought to live loosely, and dissolutely: nor that
it is enough for a Christian, to be Baptized only, and to believe: as though
there were nothing else required at his hand. For true Faith is lively, and can
in no wise be idle. Thus therefore teach we the people, that God has called
us, not to follow riot, and wantonness, but as Saint Paul says, Unto good
works to walk in them: That we are delivered from the power of darkness, to
the end that we should serve the living God: to cut away all the remnants of
sin, and to work our salvation in fear, and trembling, that it may appear
that the spirit of sanctification is in our bodies, and that Christ himself
dwells in our hearts.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe that the holy Ghost, dwelling in out hearts; does Artic. 22.
bestow upon us true faith, that we may attain unto the knowledge of this so
great a mystery. The which faith does embrace Jesus Christ with all his
merits, does challenge him unto it self as proper and peculiar, and does seek
for nothing besides him. For it is necessary that either all those things
which are required unto our salvation be not in Christ, or if all be in him,
that then he which by faith possesses Jesus Christ, has also perfect
salvation. Therefore it is an horrible blasphemy against God, to affirm that
Christ is not sufficient, but that we have need of other means besides him.
For there upon it should follow, that Christ is only in part our Savior.
Wherefore we do justly say with Saint Paul, that we are justified by faith
alone, or by faith without the works of the law. Yet to speak properly, we
do not mean, that faith by it self, or of it self does justify us, which
is but only as an instrument, whereby we apprehend Christ, which is our
justice. Christ therefore himself is our righteousness, which imputes all
his merits unto us: faith is but the instrument, whereby we are coupled unto
him, by a participation and communion of all his benefits, and whereby we are
kept in that fellowship. So that all those our effects are even more then
enough unto us for our absolution from all our sins.

We believe that all our felicity does consist in the remission of Artic. 23.
our sins, which we have by Jesus Christ, and that in it alone all our
righteousness before God is contained, as S. Paul teaches, out of the Prophet
David, who declares the happiness of those men to whom God imputes
righteousness without works. And the Romans 4. Psalm. 32. Romans 3
same Apostle says, that we are justified by the redemption made in Christ
Jesus. We therefore leanning upon this, as a sure foundation, do yield all
glory unto God, having a most base and humble opinion of our selves, knowing
full well who and what manner of creatures we be in deed. Therefore we do not
presume of our selves, or of any of our own merits, but being upholden by the
only obedience of Christ crucified, we do rest altogether in it* and to the
intent it may become ours, we believe in him. This righteousness alone is
all-sufficient, both to cover all our iniquities, and also to make us safe and
secure against all temptations. For it does drive from our consciences all
fear, all horror and dread, whereby we might be hindered from approaching to
God, and need not to imitate the example of our first father, who for fear
flying from the presence of God, went about to hide and cover himself with
fig leaves. And truly if we trusting unto our selves never so little, or to
any other creature, should present our selves before the Majesty of God, it is
certain we should by and by be overwhelmed with it. Therefore every one of us
must rather cry out with David, and say, Lord enter not into judgment with thy
servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.

We believe, that this true faith, being beilowed upon every Artic. 24.
one of us by the hearing of the word of God, and the operation of the holy
spirit, does regenerate us, and make us as it were new men, raising us up, unto
newness of life, and setting us free from the bondage of sin. Wherefore this
justifying faith is so far from withdrawing men from a right and holy kind
of living, or from making them more faint in godliness, that on the contrary
side no man, without it can perform any good thing, to this end, that God may
have the glory, but men do all things, either in regard of themselves, or else
for fear of just condemnation. Therefore it cannot be, that this holy faith
should be idle in a man. Neither do we speak of a vain and dead faith, but
only of that, which in the Scripture is said, to work by love, and which
mooveth a man to exercise himself in those works, which God himself has
commanded in his word. But these works which do come from the sincere root of
faith, are therefore good and acceptable unto God, because they be sanctified
by his grace, but are nothing aavailable to justify us. For we are justified
by says in Christ, yea even before such time, as we could bring forth any good
work, for our works before faith can no more be good, then the fruit of a good
tree, before that the tree it self be good. Therefore we do good works, yet
not to merit any thing by them. For what is it possible for us to merit? Nay
rather we, by reason of the good works, which we do (if we do any) are more
bound unto God, then God unto us: For God is he, which works in us both the
will and the deed, of his own free mercy. Whereupon it is our duties always
to have a regard unto that, which is written, When ye have done all that is
commanded you, say, that we are unprofitable servants, for we have that which
we ought to do. Furthermore, we do not hereupon deny, that God does
recompense good works in those that be his, but we affirm that this recompense
comes of his mere grace, because he crowns his own gifts in us. Yea
although we do good works, yet we do not put any hope of salvation in them.
For we are not able to bring forth any works, which are not polluted with the
corruption of our flesh, and for that cause be worthy of punishment: If it were
granted, that we were able to bring forth any such works, yet the bare
remembrance of our sins were sufficient to remoove that work out of the
sight of God. Therefore we should always stand in doubt, staggering as it were
this way, and that way, and our miserable consciences should be in continual
torment, unless they should rely upon the only merit of our Savior Christ
his death and passion, and rest in it alone.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
THat we might obtain these benefits of Christ's, namely, remission of sins,
justification, and life everlasting, Christ has given his Gospel: wherein
these benefits are laid forth unto us, as it is written in the last of Luke,
that repentance should be preached and remission of sins in his name among
all nations. For whereas all men borne after a natural manner have sin in
them, and cannot truly satisfy the Law of God, Lock the 1. Observat. upon
this confession.
the Gospel bewrays our sin, and shows us Christ the Mediator, and so
instructs us touching remission of sins. When as the Gospel does convict
us of sin, our hearts thereby terrified must firmly believe, that there is
given unto us freely for Christ's sake, that remission of sins, and
justification by faith, by the which we must believe and confess, that these
things are given us for Christ's sake, who was made an oblation, and has
appeased the Fathers wrath for us. Notwithstanding therefore that the Gospel
do require repentance, yet to the end that the remission of our sins may be
certain and undoubted, it teaches us, that remission is given us freely, that
is, that it does not depend upon the condition of our own worthiness, nor is
given for any works that went before, nor for the worthiness of such as follow
after. For then should remission be uncertain, if we should think, that then
only, we obtain remission of sins, when we had deserved it by our former
works, or when our repentance were well worthy of it. For in true terrors the
conscience finds no work which it may oppose against Gods wrath, but Christ
is given and set forth unto us to appease the wrath of God. This honor must
not be transferred from Christ unto our own works, therefore Paul says, Ye are
saved freely. Again, Therefore by faith, freely, that the promise might be
sure, that is, thus shall remission be certain, when we know that it depends
not upon the condition of our unworthiness, but is given us for Christ his
sake. This is a sure and necessary comfort to all godly minds, that are
terrified with the conscience of their sins. And thus do the holy fathers
teach, and there is a notable sentence in Saint Ambrose, worthy the remembering,
in these words. This God has appointed, that he which believes in Christ,
should be saved, without any work, by faith alone, receiving the remission of
sins. Now this word Faith, does not only signify a knowledge of the History
of Christ, but also to believe and assent unto this promise, that is proper
unto the Gospel, wherein remission of sins, justification, and life
everlasting are promised untous for Christ's fake. For this promise also does
pertain to the History of Christ, even as in the Creed unto the History is
added this article, I believe the remission of sins. And unto this one the
other articles, touching the History of Christ, are to be referred. For the
benefit is the end of the History: therefore did Christ suffer, and rise
again, that for him remission of sins and everlasting life might be given unto
us.

These things are found thus in another Edition.
ALso they teach, that men cannot be justified before God by Artic. 4.
their own power, merits, or works, but are justified for Christ's sake through
faith, when they believe that they are received unto favor, and their sins
forgiven through Christ, who by his death has satisfied for our sins. This
faith does God impute for righteousness unto them before himself, Romans 3. and
4.

For this cause Christ has appointed the ministry of teaching Artic. 5.
the Gospel, which preaches repentance and remission of sins: and the
preaching of either of these is general, and lays open the sins of all
men, and promises remission of them unto all that believe: for to the end that
remission might not be doubted of, out that all distressed minds might know
that they ought to believe, that remission of sins is undoubtedly granted
unto them for Christ, and not for their own merits or worthiness. All these
do certainly obtain remission of sins. And when as we do in this sort
comfort our selves by the promise of the Gospel, and do raise up our selves
by says, therewithal is the holy spirit given unto us. For the holy spirit is
given, and is effectual, by the word of God and by the Sacraments. When as we
do hear or meditate of the Gospel, or do receive the Sacraments, and comfort
our selves by faith, therewithal the spirit of God is effectual, according to
that of Saint Paul, Gal. 3. That the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ might
be given to them that believe. And to the Corinthians. The Gospel is the
ministry of the spirit. And to the Romans, Faith comes by hearing. When as
then we do comfort our selves by faith, and are freed from the terrors of sin
by the holy spirit, our hearts do conceive the other virtues, acknowledge
truly the mercy of God, and conceive the true love and the true fear of God,
trust, and hope of Gods help, prayer, and such like fruits of the spirit.

Such therefore as teach nothing concerning this faith, whereby we receive
remission of sins, but will have men's consciences stand in doubt, whether
they obtain remission or no, and do add further, that this doubting is no
sin, are justly condemned. And these also do teach, that men may obtain
remission of sins for their own worthiness: but they do not teach to
believe, that remission of sins is given freely for Christ sake. Here also
are condemned those fantastical spirits, which dream that the holy Ghost is
given, or is effectual without the word of God. Which makes them contemn the
ministry of the Gospel and Sacraments, and to seek illumination without the
word of God, and besides the Gospel. And by this means they draw away men's
minds from the word of God unto their own opinions, which is a thing very
pernicious and hurtful. Such were in old time the Manichees, and Enthusiasts.
And such are the Anabaptists now adays. These and such like frensies we do
most constantly condemn. For they abolish the true use of Gods word, and do
falsely imagine that the holy spirit may be received without the word, and
sticking too much to their own fancies, they invent wicked opinions, and are
the cause of infinite breaches.

These things are found thus in another Edition.
FOr the obtaining of this faith the ministry of teaching the Gospel Artic. 5.
and ministering of the sacraments was ordained. For by the word and Sacraments,
as by certain instruments, the holy Ghost is given, who works faith, where,
and when it pleases God, in those that hear the Gospel; faith I say, to
believe, that God, not for our own merits, but for Christ, does justify such
as believe, that they are received into favor for Christ's sake

They condemn the Anabaptists and others, who are of opinion, that the holy
Ghost is given unto men without the outward word, through their preparations
and works.

Also they teach, that when we are reconciled by faith, the righteousness
Artic. 6.
of good works, which God has commanded, must follow of necessity: even as
Christ has also commanded: If thou will enter into life, keep the
Commandments. But for so much as the infirmity of man's nature is so great,
that no man can satisfy the law, it is needful that men should be taught, not
only that they must obey the law, but also how their obedience pleases God,
lest that their consciences sink down into despair, when they see that they
do not satisfy the law.

This obedience therefore pleases God, not because it satisfies the law, but
because the person that performs it, is reconciled by Christ, through faith,
and believes that the relics of sin which remains in him be pardoned.
Wherefore we must always hold that we do obtain remission of sins, and
that a man is pronounced just, freely, for Christ, through faith. And afterward
that this obedience toward the law does also please God, and is accounted a
kind of justice and Look the 2. observation upon this confession.
deserves rewards. For the conscience cannot oppose it own cleanness or
works unto the judgment of God, as the Psalm. witnesses. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for no man shall be instified in thy sight: And
John says, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves: If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive our sins. And Christ
says, When ye have done all that ye can, say ye, we are unprofitable servants.
After that the person is reconciled and become just by faith, that is,
acceptable to God, his obedience pleases God, and is accounted for a kind of
justice, as Joh. says, Every one that abides in him, sins not, and 2 Cor.
1. Our rejoicing is this, the witness of our conscience. This obedience must
strive against evil desires, and daily by spiritual exercises become more
pure, always watching and careful to do nothing against conscience,
according to that saying, The sum of the law is love out of a pure heart, and
a good conscience, and faith unfeigned. But they which obey their wicked lusts,
and do against their own consciences, Look the 3. and 4 Obser.
living in mortal sin, do neither retain or hold the righteousness of
faith, * nor the righteousness of good works, according to the saying of Paul,
they which do such things shall not enjoy the kingdom of God.

These things are thus set down in another Edition.
ALso they teach, that this faith must bring forth good fruits, and that it is
behoovefull to do the good works commanded of God, because God requires them,
and not upon any hope to merit justification by them. For remission of sins and
justification is apprehended by faith, as Christ himself witnesses, When you
have done all these things, say, we are unprofitable servants, the same also
do the ancient Writers of the Church teach; for Ambrose says: This is
ordained of God, that he that believes in Christ, shall be saved, without
work, by faith alone, freely, receiving remission of sins.

Hitherto also appertains the 20. Article.
THat our adversaries do accuse us to neglect the doctrine of good works, it
is a manifest slander; for the books of our Divines are extant, wherein they
do godly and profitably teach, touching good works, what works in every
calling do please God. And whereas in most Churches there has been of a long
time no word of the most special works, namely, of the exercises of faith, and
of the praise of such works as pertain to Civil government, but for the most
part they spent all their Sermons in setting forth praises of humane
traditions, and in commending holy days, fastings, the state of Monks.
Fraternities, Pilgrimages, the worship of Saints, Rosiers, and other
unprofitable services, now by the goodness of God the Church is reclaimed unto
the true and profitable worship, which God does require and approove. The
Prophets do bewail this calamity of the Church in very vehement Sermons, that
the true worship of God being forgotten, men's ceremonies and a wicked
confidence in ceremonies should have place the chief in the Church. From this
error they revoke the Church unto the true service of God, and unto good works
in deed. What can be more forceably spoken, then that Sermon in the 49 Psalm.
The God of Gods, the Lord has spoken, and called the earth. Here God does
preach unto all mankind, condemning their vain trust in ceremonies, and
propounds another worship, giving them to understand, that he is highly
displeased with them, that in tho Church do so preach ceremonies, that they
overturne the true worship of God. Many such like Sermons are to be found in
the Prophets, as Esaias, Cap. 58. and Zachar. 7. Michah. Cap. 6. and Hosea
cries, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: and the knowledge of God, rather
then burnt offerings. And it is not unknown that many godly and learned men,
have heretofore greatly wished, that the doctrine touching the comfort of
consciences, and the difference of works, had been more sound. For both these
parts of doctrine ought always to be in the Church, namely, the Gospel of
faith, for to instruct and comfort the consciences, and also the doctrine that
declares which are good works indeed, and which is the true worship of God. As
for our adversaries, seeing that they do corrupt the doctrine of faith, they
cannot afford any sound comfort to the consciences: for they will have men to
stand in doubt of the remission of their sins and yet afterward they bid men
seek remission of sin by their own works: they devise Monkeries, and other
such works, and then they abolish the true worship of God: for prayer and other
spiritual exercises are laid aside, when men's minds are not established in a
sure trust in Christ. Moreover, their works of the second table cannot please
God, except faith go with them. For this obedience that is but begun, and is
unperfect, does please God for Christ sake alone. Thirdly, they debase the
works commanded of God, and prefer man's traditions far before them. These
they set out with most goodly titles, calling them the perfection of the
Gospel: but in the mean time, they speak so coldly of the duty of a man's
calling, of magistracy, of marriage, etc. that many grave men have doubted,
whether these states of life did please God or no. Therefore our Preachers have
with great care and study set forth these both kinds of doctrine, teaching
the Gospel concerning faith, and adjoining therewith a pure and holy doctrine
of works.

Of Faith.
FIrst, touching Faith and Justification, they teach thus. Christ has fitly
set down the sum of the Gospel, when as in the last of Luke he wills, that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name. For the
Gospel Look the 5. observation upon this consession.
reproves and convinces sins, and requires repentance, and withal
offers remission of sins for Christ sake, freely, not for our own
worthiness. And like as the preaching of repentance is general, even so the
promise of grace is general, and wills all men to believe and to receive the
benefit of Christ, as Christ himself says, Come unto me all ye that are
laden. And Saint Paul says, He is rich toward all, etc. Albeit therefore that
contrition in repentance be necessary, yet we must know that remission of sins
was given unto us, and that we are made just of unjust, that is, reconciled or
acceptable, and the sons of God, freely, for Christ, and not for the
worthiness of our Contrition, or of any other works, which either go before,
or follow after. But this same benefit must be received by faith, whereby we
must believe that remission of sins and justification is given us for Christ's
sake. This knowledge and judgment brings sure consolation unto troubled
minds, and how necessary it is for the Church, consciences that have had
experience can easily judge. There is in it no absurdity, no difficulty, no
crafty deceit. Look the sixth observat. upon this confession.
Here needs no disputations of predestination, or such like: for the promise
is general, and detracteth nothing from good works, yea rather it does stir
up men unto faith and unto true good works. For remission of sins is removed
from our works, and attributed unto mercy, that it might be an undoubted
benefit, not that we should be idle, but much more, that we should know how
greatly our obedience does please God even in this our so great infirmity. Now
for any man to despise or mislike this doctrine, whereby both the honor of
Christ is extolled, and most sweet and sure comfort offered unto godly minds,
and which contains the true knowledge of Gods mercy, and brings forth the
true worship of God and eternal life, it is more then Pharisaicall blindness.

Before time when as this doctrine was not set forth, many fearful consciences
assaied to ease themselves by works, some fled to a monastical life, others
did choose out other works, whereby to merit remission of sins and
justification. But there is no sure comfort without this doctrine of the
Gospel, which wills men to believe, that remission of sins and
justification are freely given unto us for Christ's sake, and this whole
doctrine is appointed for the true conflict of a terrified conscience. But we
will add some testimonies, Paul, Romans 3. We are justified freely, by his
grace, through redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth, to
be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. Romans 4. But to him that works
not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. Ephesians. 2. By grace ye are saved, through faith, not of your
selves. In these and such like sentences Paul does plainly teach, that
remission of sins and justification are given us freely, and not for the
worthiness of our works. And in the 4. to the Romans, he disputes at large,
why this consolation is needful for us, for if the promise did depend upon the
worthiness of our works, it should be uncertain. Wherefore to the end that we
may have sure and firm comfort against the fears of sin and death, and that
our faith may stand fast, it is needful, that it lean only upon the mercy of
God, and not upon our worthiness. Therefore Paul says, Therefore it is by
faith, according to grace, that the promise might be sure. For our works
cannot be set against the judgment of God, according to that saying, If thou
markest our iniquities, who shall endure it. And therefore Christ is given for
a Mediator to us, and this honor is not to be transferred unto our works.

When therefore we do say, that we are justified by faith, we do not mean,
that we are just for the worthiness of that virtue, but this is our meaning,
that we do obtain remission of sins, and imputation of righteousness by
mercy showed us for Christ's sake. But now this mercy cannot be received, but by
faith. And Faith does not here signify only a knowledge of the history, but
it signifies a belief of the promise of mercy which is granted us through our
Mediator Christ Jesus. And seeing that faith is in this sort understood of a
confidence or trust of mercy, Saint Paul, and Saint James, do not disagree.
For where James says, The Devils believe, and tremble, he speaks of an
historical faith, now this faith does not justify. For the wicked and the
devil are cunning in the history. But Paul when he says, Faith is reckoned
for righteousness, he speaks of a trust and confidence of mercy, promised
for Christ's sake: and his meaning is, that men are pronounced righteous, that
is reconciled through mercy promised for Christ's sake, whom we must receive by
faith. Now this noveltie of this figurative speech of Saint Paul, We are
justified by faith, will not offend holy minds, if they understand that it is
spoken properly of mercy, and that herein mercy is adorned with true and due
praises. For what can be more acceptable to an afflicted and fearful
conscience in great griefs, then to hear that this is the commandment of
God, and the voice of the Bridegroom Christ Jesus, that they should
undoubtedly believe, that remission of sins or reconciliation is given unto
them, not for their own worthiness, but freely through mercy, for Christ's
sake, that the benefit might be certain? Now Justification in these sayings of
Saint Paul does signify remission of sins, or reconciliation, or imputation
of righteousness, that is, an accepting of the person. And herein we do not
bring in a new found opinion into the Church of God. For the Scripture does set
down at large this doctrine touching faith, and Saint Paul does especially
handle this point in some of his Epistles: the holy Fathers do also teach the
same. For so says Ambrose in his book de vocat. Gent. If so be that
Justification, which is by grace, were due unto former merits, so that it
should not be a gift of the giver, but a reward of the worker, the redemption
by the blood of Christ would grow to be of small account, and the prerogative
of man's works would not yield unto the mercies of God. And of this matter
there be many disputations in Saint Augustine, And these are his words.
For So Much as by the law God shows to man his infirmity, that flying unto his
mercy by faith he might be saved. For it is said, that he carries both the law
and mercy in his mouth. The law to convict the proud: and mercy, to justify
those that are humbled. Therefore the righteousness of God through faith in
Christ is revealed upon all that believe. And the Milevitan Synole writes. Is
not this suficiently declared, that the law works this, that sin should be
known, and so against the victory of sin, men should fly to the mercy of
God, which is set forth in his promises, that the promises of God, that is the
grace of God, might be sought unto for deliverance, and man might begin to have
a righteousness, howbeit not his own, but Gods?

Of good works.
When as we do teach in our Churches the most necessary doctrine, and
comfort of faith, we join there with the doctrine of good works, to wit, that
obedience unto the law of God is requisite in them that be reconciled. For the
Gospel preaches newness of life, according to that saying, I will put my
laws in their hearts: This new life therefore must be an obedience toward
God. The Gospel also preaches repentance, and faith cannot be, but only in
them, that do repent, because that faith does comfort the hearts in contrition
and in the fears of sin, as Paul says, Being justified by faith, we have
peace. And of repentance he says, Romans 6. Our old man is crucified, that the
body of sin might be abolished, that we might no more serve sin. And Isaiah
says, Where will the Lord dwell? In a contrite and humbled spirit, etc.

Secondly, among good works, the chiefest, and that which is the chiefest
worship of God, is faith, which does bring forth many other virtues, which
could never be in men, except their hearts had first received to believe. How
shall they call on him, in whom they do not believe? So long as men's minds
are in doubt, whether God hears them or not, so long as ever they think that
God has rejected them, they do never truly call upon God. But when as once
we do acknowledge his mercy through faith, then we fly unto God, we love him,
we call upon him, hope in him, look for his help, obey him in afflictions,
because we do now know our selves to be the sons of God, and that this our
sacrifice, that is, our afflictions, does please God. These services does Faith
bring forth. Very well therefore said Ambrose, Faith is the mother of a good
will, and of just dealing. Our Adversaries will seem very honorably to set out
the doctrine of good works, and yet concerning these spiritual works, to wit,
faith, and the exercises of faith in prayer, and in all matters, counsels, and
dangers of this life, they speak never a word. And indeed none can ever speak
well of these exercises if the consciences be left in doubt, and if they know
not that God requires faith as a special worship of his. And when as that
huge show of outward works is cast (as a mist) before men's eyes, the minds,
especially such as be not well instructed, are led away from beholding these
inward exercises. Now it is very requisite, that men should be taught and
instructed, concerning these inward works and fruits of the spirit. For these
they be that make a difference between the godly and hypocrites. As for
exernall worship, external ceremonies, and other outward works, the very
hypocrites can perform them. But these services and duties belong only to the
true Church, true repentance, fear, faith, prayer, etc. These kinds of
worship are especially required, and commended in the Scripture, Psalm. 49.
Offer unto God the sacrifice of praise: and, Call on me in the day of trouble,
etc.

Thirdly, by this faith, which does comfort the heart in repentance, we do
receive the Spirit of God, who is given us to be our governor and helper, that
we should resist sin and the devil, and more and more acknowledge our own
weakness, and that the knowledge and fear of God, and faith may increase in
us: wherefore our obedience to God and a new life ought to increase in us, as
Saint Paul says, We must be renewed to the knowledge of God, that the new law
may be wrought in us, and his Image, which has created us, be renewed, etc.

Fourthly, we teach also how this obedience, which is but begun only and not
perfect, does please God. For in this so great infirmity, and uncleanness of
nature, the Saints do not satisfy the law of God. The faithful therefore
have need of comfort, that they may know how their slender and imperfect
obedience does please God. It does not please him, as satisfying his law, but
because the persons themselves are reconciled and made righteous through
Christ, and do believe that their weakness is forgiven them, as Paul
teaches, There is now no condemnation to them which are in Christ, etc. Albeit
then that this new obedience is far from the perfection of the law, yet it is
righteousness, and is worthy of a reward, even because that the persons are
reconciled. And thus we must judge of those works, which are indeed highly to
be commended, namely Look the 7. Observation.
that they be necessary, that they be the service of God, and spiritual
sacrifices, and do deserve a reward: Nevertheless this confolation is first to
be held touching the person, which is very necessary in the conflict of the
confcience, to wit, that we have remission of sins freely by faith, and that
the person is just, that is, reconciled, and an heir of eternal life through
Christ, and then our obedience does please God, according to that saying, Now
ye are not under the Law, but under grace. For our works may not be set
against the wrath and judgment of God: But the terrors of sin and death
must be overcome by faith and trust in the Mediator Christ, as it is written.
O death, I will be thy death. And John 6. Christ says, This is the will of the
Father, which sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes in
him, should have life everlasting. And Saint Paul, Being justified by faith, we
have peace with God. And the Church always prayed, for give us our trespasses.
And thus do the Fathers teach, concerning the weakness of the Saints, and
concerning Faith, Augustine in his exposition of the 30. Psalm, says, Deliver
me in thy righteousness. For there is a righteousness of God, which is made
ours, when it is given unto us. But therefore it is called the righteousness
of God, lest man should think that he had a righteousness of himself. For,
as the Apostle Paul says, To him that believes in him that justifies the
wicked, that is, that of a wicked makes a righteous man, If God should deal
by the rule of the law, which is set forth unto us, he must needs be condemned:
If God should as it were deal by the rule propounded in the law, whom should
he deliver? for he sindeth all men to be sinners. So says Paul: All have
sinned, and stand in need of the glory of God. What is this to stand in need
of Gods glory? That he should deliver thee, and not thou thy self. For thou
can not deliver thy self: Thou have need of a Savior. Why do thou vaunt
thy self? what makes thee to presume of the law and of righteousness? See
thou not that which does sight within thee? do thou not bear one that
striveth, and confesses his weakness, and desires aid in the battle? O
miserable man that I am? etc.

Now it may easily be perceived, how needful this doctrine is for the Church,
that men may know, that they do not satisfy the law of God and yet may have
true comfort, knowing how their imperfect obedience does please God. This
doctrine has been horribly darkened, and suppressed heretofore by certain
fond persuasions, wherein unlearned men have imagined against the authority of
the Scripture that they can fulfill the law of God, and that they are just
through the fulfilling of the law, etc. And that Monks are perfect, and do
perform more notable and worthy works, then the law does require. In the
mean while there is not a word, how the Mediator Christ is to be apprehended
by faith: but they willed man to doubt, or else to trust in his own works.
But as touching this obedience, we do teach, Look the third observat. upon
this confession.
that they which commit mortal sins are not just, because God requires this
obedience that we should resist sinful lusts. They then which strive not
against them, but obey them, contrary to the commandment of God, and do things
against their consciences, they are unrighteous, and do neither retain the
holy spirit, nor faith, that is, confidence and trust of Gods mercy. For
confidence, which seeks remission of sins, cannot so much as be in such, as
are delighted with their sins, and remain without repentance.

Fifthly, this point is needful also to be taught, by what means men may do
good works. We showed a little before how our works do please God. In this
place we add how they may be done. Look the 8. Observation.
Albeit that men by their own strength be able to do out ward honest deeds
in some sort, and must also perform this civil obedience, yet so long as men
are void of Faith, they are in the power of the devil, who drives them to
shameful sins, occupies their minds with wicked and blasphemous opinions,
for that is the kingdom and tyranny of the Devil. Look the 9. Observat.
Moreover, nature by it self is weak, and cannot without Gods help,
strengthen it self to the performance of any spiritual works. And for that
cause are men taught, that in the Gospel the holy Spirit is promised, who shall
aid and govern the minds of them, who do repent and believe the Gospel.
Wherefore in so great infirmity of nature, in the midst of these assaults of
Satan, and in all dangers, faith must be exercised in calling upon God, even
throughout our whole life, that we may continue always in the faith, and in
our obedience toward God. Therefore Zachary, says, I will pour forth the
spirit of grace, and of prayer, upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem. He calls him the spirit of grace, because the holy
spirit does confirm and comfort troubled minds, and bears record, that God
is pleased with us. He calls him the spirit of prayer, to the end we should
daily exercise our faith in prayer, that by these exercises our faith might be
confirmed, and a new life grow up and increase in us.

There is no doubt but true virtues are the gifts of God, such as are, faith,
cleerenesse of judgment in discerning of points of religion, courage of mind,
such as is requisite in them which teach and profess the Gospel, true care and
pains in governing of Churches, true humility, not to hunt after preferment,
not to be puffed up with popular praise, nor cast down with their disliking and
ill will, true charity, etc. These Princely virtues Paul calls Gods gifts,
Romans 12 Having diverse gifts, according to the grace that is given us. And of
these he says to the Corinthians, These things works one and the same
spirit, distributing to every one, according, etc.

Unto these gifts we must join our exercise which may both preserve the same,
and deserve an increase of them: according to the saying: To him that has,
shall be given. And it is notably said of Augustine, Love deserves an increase
of love, to wit, when it is put in use. For good works have rewards, as in
this life, so also after this life, in the everlasting life. Now because that
the Church in this life is subject to the cross, and to the death of the body,
therefore many rewards are deferred until the life to come, which though it be
undoubtedly bestowed through mercy for Christ's sake on those which are
justified by the faith of Christ, yet there is also a rewarding of good works,
according to that saying, Your reward is great it heaven. By this it is
evident, that the doctrine of good works, is through the goodness of God
purely and truly taught in our Churches. How full of obscurity and confusion
the doctrine of good works was in former times, all godly minds know full
well. There was none that put men in mind of the difference of man's traditions
and the law of God: none that taught, how good works did please God, in this
so great infirmity of ours. To be brief, there was not one word of faith,
which is most needful unto remission of sins. But now that these matters be
opened and unfolded, godly consciences lay hold of comfort, and of certain
hope of salvation, and do understand which is the true worship and service of
God, and know how it pleases God, and how it does merit at his hands.

This article is thus set down in another Edition.
Our Divines are falsely accused to forbid good works. For their writings
extant upon the ten Commandments, and others of the like argument, do bear
witness, that they have to good purpose taught, concerning every kind of life
and duties, what trades of life, and what works in every Calling do please
God. Of which things Preachers in former times taught little or nothing, only
they did urge certain childish and needless works. As keeping of holy days,
set fasts, fraternities, pilgrimages, worshipping of Saints, Friaries,
Monkeries, and such trash: whereof our adversaries having had warning, they do
now forget them, and do not preach so concerning these unprofitable works, as
they were went to do. Besides they begin now to make mention of Faith, which
they were wont to pass over with silence. But yet they cease not to obscure
and darken this doctrine of faith, while they leave the conscience in doubt and
would have men to merit remission of sins, by their works, and teach not
that we do by faith alone undoubtedly receive remission of sins for Christ's
sake. When as therefore the doctrine of faith, which should be especially above
others taught in the Church, has been so long unknown, as all men must needs
grant, that there was not a word of the righteousness of faith in all their
Sermons, and that the doctrine of works only was usual in the Churches, for
this cause our Divines did thus admonish the Churches. First that our works
cannot reconcile God unto us, or deserve remission of sins, grace, and
justification, at his hands. But this we must obtain by faith whiles we
believe that we are received into favor for Christ's sake who alone is
appointed the Mediator and Intercessour by whom the Father is reconciled to
us. He therefore that trusts by his works to merit grace, does despise the
merit and grace of Christ, and seeks by his own power, without Christ, to
come unto the Father, whereas Christ has said expressly of himself, I am the
way, the truth, and the life. This Doctrine of Faith is handled by Paul almost
in every Epistle, Ephesians. 2. Ye are saved freely by faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, etc. And lest any here should
cavil, that we bring in a new found interpretation, this whole cause is
underpropped with testimonies of the Fathers. Augustine does in many volumes
defend grace and the righteousness of faith against the merit of works. The
like does Ambrose teach in his book, De vocat. Gent. and else where: for thus
he says in the forenamed place, The redemption made by the blood of Christ
would be of small account, and the prerogative of man's works would not give
place to the mercy of God, if the justification which is by grace, were due to
merits going before, so as it should not be the liberality of the giver, but
the wages or hire of the labourer.

This doctrine though it be contemned of the unskilful sort, yet the godly and
fearful conscience does find by experience, that it brings very great
comfort: because that the consciences cannot be quieted by any works, but by
faith alone, when as they believe assuredly, that God is appeased toward them
for Christ's sake, as Paul teaches, Romans 5. Being justified by faith, we have
peace with God. This doctrine does wholly belong to the conflict of a troubled
conscience, and cannot be well understood, but where the conscience has felt a
conflict. Wherefore all such as have had no experience thereof, and all that
are profane men, which dream that Christian righteousness is naught else,
but a civil and phylosophicall justice, are evil judges of this matter. In
former ages men's consciences were vexed with the doctrine of works, they never
heard any comfort out of the Gospel. Whereupon conscience drove some into
Monasteries, hoping there to merit favor by a monastical life. Others found
out other works, whereby to merit favor, and to satisfy for sin. There was
very great need therefore to teach this doctrine of faith in Christ, and after
so long time to renew it, to the end that fearful consciences might not want
comfort, but might know, that grace and forgiveness of sins and
justification were apprehended and received by faith in Christ.

Another thing, which we teach men, is, that in this place the name of Faith
does not only signify a bare knowledge of the history, which may be in the
wicked, and as in the Devil, but it signifies a faith, which believes, not
only the history, but also the effect of the history, to wit, the article of
remission of sins, namely, that by Christ we have grace, righteousness, and
remission of sins. Now he that knows, that the father is merciful to him
through Christ, this man knows God truly: he knows that God has a care of
him, he loves God, and calls upon him: In a word, he is not without God in
the world, as the Gentiles are. As for the Devils, and the wicked, they can
never believe this article of the remission of sins. And therefore they hate
God as their enemy, they call not upon him, they look for no good thing at
his hands. After this manner does Augustine admonish his Reader touching the
name of faith, and teaches, that this word faith, is taken in Scriptures, not
for such a knowledge, as is in the wicked, but for a trust and confidence,
which does comfort and cheer up disquieted minds.

Moreover, our Divines do teach, that it is requisite to do good works, not
for to hope to deserve grace by them, but because it is the will of God that we
should do them. And because that the holy spirit is received by faith our
hearts are presently renewed, and do put on new affections, so as they are able
to bring forth good works. For so says Ambrose, Faith is the breeder of a
good will and of good actions. For man's powers, without the holy spirit, are
full of wicked affections, and are weaker then that they can do any good deed
before God. Besides, they are in the devils power, who drives men forward into
diverse sins, into profane opinions, and into very heinous crimes. As was to
be seen in the Philosophers, who assaying to live an honest life, could not
attain unto it, but defiled themselves with open and gross faults. Such is
the weakness of man, when he is without faith and the holy Spirit, and has
no other guide, but the natural powers of man. Hereby every man may see that
this doctrine is not to be accused, as forbidding good works, but rather is
much tobe commended, because it shows after what sort we must do good
works. For without faith the nature of man can by no means perform the
works of the first and second table. Without faith it cannot call upon God,
hope in God, bear the cross, but seeks help from man, and trusts in man's
help. So it comes to pass that all lusts and desires, and all humane
devises and counsels do bear sway, so long as faith and trust in God is
absent. Wherefore Christ says, Without me ye can do nothing. John 15. and the
Church sings, Without thy power there is naught in man, and there is nothing
but that which is hurtful.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY.
Of the remission of sins, and of Justification.
WE said before that these controversies do pertain to the interpreting of
two Articles of the Creed, I believe the remission of sins, and, I believe
the holy Catholic Church. Neither do we speak of not necessary or light
things. It is most necessary, that in the Church the doctrine touching sin
should be propounded, and that men should know what sin is, and that there
should be an evident difference between political judgments, and the
judgment of God. But seeing our adversaries do not teach aright, what sin
is, they confirm in men an evil security, and many false opinions. Again,
what can be more miserable, then either to obscure, or to be ignorant of this
great benefit, namely the remission of sins, and deliverance from eternal
death? seeing that there is no difference betwixt the Church and other men,
when as the light is extinguished, concerning free remission of sins, for the
Sons sake, and concerning Faith, whereby remission must be received: neither
is there any other comfort drawing us back from eternal death, neither can
there be any true Invocation, without this comfort: and God himself has so
often commanded, that his Son should be heard, and the Gospel kept, which is a
wonderful decree brought forth out of the secret counsel of the Godhead, when
it was hid from all creatures; therefore it is most necessary, that the true
doctrine, touching remission of sins, should be kept undefiled.

But in all ages, even from our first fathers time, the devils have scattered
subtle delusions, against the true doctrine, concerning the Son of God, and
especially in this article, whom notwithstanding God has oftentimes refuted
good teachers being again raised up, that the Church might not utterly perish.
Adam, Seth, Noe, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and others after them, did show
the true difference, betwixt the Church of God and other men, and taught that
to the Church was given the promise, touching the Mediator the Son of God,
and touching remission of sins, and that this remission is to be received
freely, for the Mediators sake: And they tied Invocation to this God, which
had manifested himself by giving a promise, concerning the Mediator, and they
had external rites given them of God, which were signs of the promise, and
the sinews of the public Congregation. These rites did a great part of the
multitude imitate, omitting the doctrine of the promises and faith: and when
they had devised this persuasion, that men by observing these rites might
deserve remission of sins, they heaped up many ceremonies, and by little and
little boldness went so far (as commonly it comes to pass) that diverse men
devised diverse gods. So the heathen departed from the true Church of God, and
from the knowledge of the true God, and the promise of the Redeemer.

The same thing also happened after Moses his time. Ceremonies were appointed for
this cause, that they should be admonitions of the Mediator, of the Doctrine
of Faith, of free remission for the Mediators sake. But they feigned that
sins were forgiven for those rites and sacrifices, and by this superstition
they heaped up sacrifices, and forgot the Mediator, and were without true
comfort, and without true invocation. The same thing happened also after the
Apostles time, the light of the Gospel being lost, wherein is propounded free
remission for the Mediators sake, and that to be received by Faith. They
sought remission by Monastical exercises, by single life, by diverse
observations, by the offering in the Mass, by the intercession of dead men,
and many monstrous superstitions were devised, as the histories of the whole
Church which succeeded the Apostles do declare. Against these errors the
infinite mercy of God has oftentimes restored the voice of the Gospel: And as
among the people of Israel he did often raise up Prophets, which should purge
the doctrine diligently; so in the Church, after the Apostles time, when the
writings of Origin and Pelagius, and the superstition of the people had
corrupted the purity of the Gospel, yet notwithstanding, as in a mist, the
light of the Gospel was again kindled by Augustine, and him followed Prosper,
Maximus, and others, who reproved the false opinions touching this Article.
Afterward when the Monks were sprung up, and that opinion, which feigneth men
to merit by their works, was a fresh spread abroad, yet there was some of a
better judgment, although they added stubble to the foundation: as Huge,
Bernard, Gilbert, William of Paris, Tauler, Ambrose, Wesell, and others in
other places. And now by the voice of Luther, the doctrine of the Gospel is
more cleared, and more evidently restored, and the Lamb showed unto us, as the
Baptist says, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
World. He that believes in the Son, has eternal life: he that believes
not, the wrath of God abides on him. The same voice of the Gospel our Churches
do publish, and that without corruption: and we do discern that discipline,
or righteousness, which a man not regenerate may perform, from the
righteousness of faith, and that newness, whereof the Gospel does preach.

We say that all men are to be restrained by discipline, that is, by that
righteousness, which even the unregenerate ought, and after a sort may perform,
which is an obedience in external actions, according to all the commandments
of God appertaining to all men. Look the 1. observation upon this confession.
Because that God left this liberty in man after his fall, that the outward
members might after a sort obey reason and the will, in stirring up or omitting
outward motions: as, Achilles may draw his sword, or put it up into the sheath:
Scipio may restrain his members, so that he meddle not with another man's wife,
as in their place these things are truly and copiously declared. Now it is
most certain, that this discipline is commanded of God, and that the breaking
thereof is punished with present and eternal punishments, even in those which
are not converted unto God, according to those sayings, The law was made for
the unjust. He that takes the sword, shall perish with the sword. Also,
Fornicatours and adulterers the Lord will judge. Also, We unto thee which
spoilest, because thou shall be spoiled. And although all men ought to govern
their manners by this discipline, and God does severely command that all
kingdoms should defend this discipline, and he by horrible punishments does
declare his wrath against this outward contumacie: yet this external
discipline, even where it is most honest, is not a fulfilling of the law,
neither does it deserve remission of sins, neither is it that righteousness,
whereby we are accepted before God, nor that light shining in the nature of
men, as righteousness shined in us in our creation, or as new righteousness
shall shine in us in the life eternal. But all this discipline, is an
external government, such as it is, like unto the leaf of a fig tree, where
with our first parents after their fall did cover their nakedness: neither
does it any more take away sin, and the corruption of nature and death, then
those fig leaves did. Hence it is, that Paul does so often cry out, that
sin is not taken away by the law, Romans 3. By the works of the law no flesh
shall be justified in his sight. And Romans 8. When it was impossible to the law
to justify, etc. And Gal. 2. If righteousness does come by the law, then
Christ died in vain. And Tit. 3. Not by the works of righteousness, which we
have done, but according to his mercy he has saved us. And it is a reproach
unto the Son of God, to imagine that any our works are merits, or the price
of remission of sins, and that they are propitiations for sins. Therefore
we do openly condemn those Pharisaicall and Pelagian doting dreams, which
feign that that discipline is a fulfilling of the law of God: also that it
does deserve remission, either of congruity, or of condignity, or that it is a
righteousness, whereby men are made acceptable to God.

And after a few pages in the same Article.
Seeing that the mind is raised up by this faith, it is certain that remission
of sins, reconciliation, and imputing of righteousness is given for the
merit of Christ alone, and that Christ is effectual in us, and does by his
holy spirit quicken the beleveers, and deliver us from eternal death, and
withal make us heirs of eternal life. So says Paul. Romans 3. We conclude
that man is justified by faith, without the works of the law. Also, we are
justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. And
Acts 10. To him give all the Prophets witness, that all that believe in him,
shall receive remission of sins.

Now the words are known and manifest. Faith does signify not only the
knowledge of the (history for that is also in the Devils, of whom it is said,
The devils do believe, and tremble) but it does signify, to embrace all the
Articles of Faith, and among those this article, I do believe the remission of
sins, neither do I believe that it is only given to others, but to me also.
This faith is also a confidence, resting in the Mediator, according to that,
Being justified by faith, we have peace. So that Paul speaks of faith, which
consenting to all the articles of the Creed, does behold and embrace the
promise: for it joyneth together faith and the promise, Romans 4. Therefore is it
by faith, that the promise might be sure.

In expounding the word Justified, it is usually said, To be Justified, does
signify, of unrighteous to be made righteous, which being rightly understood,
does agree also to our purpose. Of unrighteous to be made righteous, that is,
acquitted from the guilt, for the Son of God his sake, that is, laying hold
by faith upon Christ himself, who is our righteousness (as Jeremie and Paul
do say) because that by his merit we have remission, and God does impute his
righteousness to us, and for him does account us just, and by giving his holy
Spirit, does quicken and regenerate us, as it is said, John 5. This is life in
his Son: He that has the Son, has eternal life: he that has not the
Son of God, has not life. And Romans 3. That he may be just, and a iustifier,
And although newness is withal begun, which shall be perfect in the life
eternal, whereunto we are redeemed, yet neither for the new qualities, nor for
any works, is any man in this life made just, that is, acceptable to God, and
heir of eternal life, but only for the Mediators sake, who suffered, rose
again, reigns, and prays for us, shadowing and quickening us. For although
virtues are here begun, yet be they still imperfect, and the relics of sin
do stick in us. Therefore we must hold this comfort, that the person is
accepted for the Son of God his sake, his righteousness being imputed to us,
as it is said, Romans 4. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness. Also, Blessed are they, whose iniquities be forgiven, and whose
sins be covered. Therefore this saying must be understood correlatively, We are
justified by faith, that is, we are justified by confidence in the Son of God,
not for our quality, but because he is the reconciler, in whom the heart does
rest in confidence of the promised mercy for his sake. Which confidence he does
raise up in us by his holy Spirit, as Paul says, Ye have received the spirit
of the adoption of the sons, by whom we cry, Abba, father

Here also we must speak of the exclusive member. Paul does often repeat the
word Freely, by which it is most certain, that the condition of our merits is
excluded. Therefore it is said in our Churches, We are justified by Faith
above, which we so understand, and declare, Freely, for the only mediators
sake, not for our contrition, or other our merits, we have our sins forgiven
us, and are reconciled to God. For, although contrition and many other virtues
are together with Faith or with this confidence kindled in us, yet these
virtues are not the cause, or the merit of the Remission of sins, neither
does the person please God in regard of them, according to that saying, No man
living shall be justified in thy sight: but the person has remission, and does
certainly please God, by reason of the Mediator, who must be apprehended by
faith, as it is said, Ephesians. 3. By whom we have boldness, and entrance with
confidence, by faith in him. This whole doctrine is more manifest in the true
conversion and daily invocation of the godly. When we are in great fear by the
knowledge of the wrath of God, this one comfort is firm and sure, to fly to
the Son of God, who faith, Come unto me all ye that labor, and are laden, and
I will refresh you. Also, As I live, I will not the death of a sinner, but that
he return and live. Also, Grace abounds more then sin. In these griefs if
man be taught, to doubt of the remission of sins, sorrow will have the upper
hand, and then follow most grievous murmurings against God, and desperation,
and eternal death: but if man be caught, that doubting is to be overcome by
faith, then shall he understand, that by the word Faith, is not only signified
the knowledge of the story: he shall know that confidence does rely upon the
only Mediator, and he shall perceive what is meant by these words, Freely, for
the Mediators sake, remission is received by faith alone, and so the person is
made acceptable.

This wrestling has at all times instructed some. For though Origin, and many
other writers and sententiaries have brought forth an impure kind of doctrine,
yet in Augustine and certain others we read diverse sentences which show, that
they also received comfort out of these true fountains. Who although they do
sometime speak unproperly, or things unlike, because they were somewhat
negligent in speaking, yet we may easily gather what was their perpetual
judgment, if we will judge aright. Augustine upon the Psalm. 31. says. Who be
happy? not they in whom God shall not find sins, for those he finds in all
men. For all men have sinned, and are destitute of the glory of God. Therefore
if sins be found in all men, it is evident, that none are happy, but those
whose sins be forgiven. This therefore the Apostle did thus commend: Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Here certainly
Augustine by faith does understand confidence, which receives remission of
sins: and that which is said in Genesis, and in Paul, he does altogether
understand it, as we expound it. And in his book, De spiritu and litera, he
says, By the law we fear God, and by faith we fly to his mercy. Bernard in
his Sermon, De Annunciatione, says, First of all it is necessary to believe,
that thou can not have remission of sins, but by the mercy of God. But add
thereunto, that thou may also believe this, that through him thy sins be
forgiven thee. This is the witness which the holy Ghost does give in our
heart, saying: Thy sins be forgiven thee. For so does the Apostle think, that
a man is justified freely by faith. In this sentence the judgment of our
Churches is plainly and properly alleged, and like testimonies are to be
found in this author. Basil also, in his Sermon of Humility does most properly
set forth our judgment, in these words: He that rejoices, let him rejoice in
the Lord, saying, that Christ is made unto us of God, wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, as it is written, He that
rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord. For this is perfect and sound rejoicing
in God, when as a man is not puffed up by reason of his own righteousness, but
does acknowledge that he does stand in need of the true righteousness, and
that he is justified by faith alone in Christ.

Seeing therefore that by this which has been spoken it is manifest, what the
word Faith does signify, in this proposition, We are justified by Faith,
hereupon we may understand, that the Monks and others do dangerously err,
which do command those that are turned to God, to doubt whether they do
please God. This common error of doubting is evidently refuted by these words,
Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God. Also, Therefore is
righteousness of faith, that the promise might be sure. For so long as men's
hearts are tormented with doubting, they fly from God, they do not rest in
God, nor call upon him: and the promise becomes unto them but a vain sound,
because they give not consent unto it. To conclude, it is the eternal and
immutable commandment of God, that we should believe in the Son of God,
according to this saying, The spirit shall convince the world of sin, because
they believe not in me. Also 1 John 5. He that believes not God, makes him a
liar. Now it is a foolish cavil, when they say, that we must doubt, in respect
of our unworthiness, and not in respect of mercy. For the promise was
therefore given, therefore the Son of God was appointed our Mediator, because
we are unworthy: and that for his sake, having suffered, being raised up
again, and now making intercession for us, and dwelling in us, and clothing
us with his righteousness, the Father might undoubtedly be merciful to this
miserable lump of ours; being unworthy, and full of filthiness: according to
that saying, There is now no condemation to them which walk in Christ Jesus.
Also it is absurd which they say, that we must doubt, by reason of our
unworthiness. For we are not to doubt, whether our unworthiness do displease
God, but with true sighs let us confess that we are unworthy, and let us lay
to the promise, whereunto God has commanded us to assent. Neither is that
saying, Eccles. 9. fitly applied to this doubting, Man knows not whether he
be worthy of love, or of hatred. It is madness to imagine that Solomon should
have any such meaning, that neither the just, nor the unjust ought to determine
with themselves, whether they please or displease God, seeing it is most
certain, that they, which persevere in wicked deeds again their conscience,
do displease God. But Solomon does withdraw us from external shows to the
word of God: as though he should say: Do not determine with thy self, that by
reason of thy prosperity thou art in favor with God, or by reason of thy
adversity thou art out of favor with him. Alexander does not therefore please
God, because he is a Conqueror, and enjoys a large Empire. Let not Job in
his calamity, nor David in his exile think that they be forsaken of God,
because they be miserable; let them not judge according to these events or
outward shows, but by the word of God: and then even in the midst of our
misery we shall receive this comfort, As I live, I will not the death of a
sinner, etc. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that every one that believes in him should not perish, etc. To conclude, This
error of doubting, is altogether heathenish, and does abolish the Gospel, and
in true conversion takes away comfort from them that feel the wrath of God.
Men are rather to be taught, that this is undoubtedly the voice of the Gospel,
that we should believe the Son of God, and be assured, that grace does abound
much more then sin: and therefore let us withstand doubting, by wrestling get
the upper hand, and by faith overcome it, that we may have access to God:
invocate him, and give him thanks. These chief points of worship are
fearfully hindered, when men's minds are shaken with the waves of doubting, as
experience teaches. Hereof it is evident, why it is necessary, that the Decree
of the Tridentine Council, which confirms the error of doubting, should be
reprooved. Also, by all that which has been said, it may be understood, that
we do justly find fault with that Synecdoche, whereby some interpret Paul's
words after this sort, We are justified by Faith, that is, by a formed love, as
they speak. For they understand the word faith only of knowledge, and think
that this is the meaning; We are justified by Faith, that is, we are prepared
to righteousness, that is, to other virtues, to wit, obedience and fulfilling
of the Law. So this is it only which they say. Man is righteous for his own
virtues: then they will him to doubt, whether he be furnished with those
habits, whereof they speak.

Now we have declared before, that by Faith is signified a confidence resting
in the Son of God the Reconciler, for whom we are received, and do please
God, not for our virtues, or fulfilling the Law. And seeing that in this same
comfort, the confidence, whereby we do rest in the Son of God, is indeed a
motion, kindled by the holy Ghost, whereby the heart is quickened, and freed
from eternal death, this conversion is called regeneration, Ioh. 3. Except a
man be borne again of water, and of the spirit. And now man is made indeed the
dwelling place of God, who is effectual in him: as it is said, Ioh. 14. If any
man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him, and will dwell with him. The eternal Father and the Son, by the
holy Ghost, do quicken our hearts, when as by faith they are raised up in this
comfort, as Paul says Galat. 3. That ye might receive the promise of the
spirit through faith. Therefore we do not speak of an idle faith: and the
unskilful are deceived, whiles they think that remission of sins does
happen to such as are idle, without a certain motion of the mind, without
wrestling, and without a feeling comfort of in true griefs, in that age which
now is able to understand the voice of doctrine, according to that saying,
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And because that in
repentance we propound comfort unto the conscience, Look the 6. observation
upon the August confess.
we do not here add questions of predestination or of election, but we lead
all Readers to the word of God, and exhort them to learn the will of God out
of his word, as the eternal Father by express voice commanded. Hear him. Let
them not look for other revelations.

Hitherto also pertains the fifth Article. Of new obedience.
THE whole benefit of the Son of God is to be considered: for he will so take
away sin and death, and deliver us from the kingdom of the Devil, that
sin being altogether abolished, and death vanquished, he may restore unto us
eternal life, wherein God may communicate unto us his wisdom, righteousness,
and joy, and wherein God may be all in all. This great benefit he does begin in
this miserable lump of ours, in this life, as it is written, 2 Cor. 5. If so
be we shall be found clothed, and not naked. Also Matthew. 10. They that shall
continue to the end, shall be saved. Therefore when we receive remission of
sins, and are reconciled, and sealed by the holy Ghost, it is a horrible
madness to waste these good gifts, as these wasters are described in the
parable of the house, that was made clean, and in the second Epistle of Peter,
Chap. 2. it is said. If they after they have escaped from the filthiness of
the world, are yet tangled again therein, and overcome, the latter end is
worse with them then the beginning. Now these good gifts are wasted or powered
out, if a man do not hold the foundation, that is, the Articles of Faith, and
either willingly, or being deceived, imbraceth wicked opinions or Idols: also
if a man do fall grievously against his conscience. These rules are oftentimes
repeated, as Galat. 5. They which do such things shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. Therefore it is necessary to have a care to avoid such
falls. If this manifest necessity, the great punishment, to wit, the loss of
eternal life, being set before their eyes, do not moove some to do good
works, they show themselves to be of the number of those, of whom it is said, 1 John 3. He that commits sin, is of the Devil. Also, If any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is not his. And there be many causes of this necessity.
First, a debt, that is an immutable order, that the creatures should obey God.
Therefore Paul says, Romans 8. Ye are debtors. Also, lest the holy Ghost and
faith be shaken of, let there be a care to avoid present punishments: because
it is most certain, that many falls, even of the Elect, are fearfully
punished, in this life, as the Church speaks in Micheas, chap. 7. I will
bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. And the
Histories of all times do contain fearful examples of punishments, as
David, Solomon, Manasses, Josias, Nabuchodonozor, and innumerable others were
grievously punished. Wherein this is most to be lamented, that in the very
punishments many sins are heaped up: as in the sedition raised up against
David, and in the renting of the kingdom, for the sin of Solomon. And
touching the necessity of doing good works, the Lord says, Matthew. 5. Except
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and of the
Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. The necessity,
which is manifold, being thus considered, there questions ensue thereupon: what
works are to be done: How they may be done: In what sort they do please God:
What rewards they have: what is the difference of sins: Look the first
observat. upon this confession. in the fourth Section.
what sins do shake of the holy Ghost, and what not.

What works are to be done.
IT is the will of God, that Faith and works be governed by his word. Therefore
we must keep the rule, touching good works both internal and external,
contained in the commandments of God, which do pertain to us, as it is said,
Ezech. 23. Walk ye in my commandments. And these internal and external
works do then become the worship of God, when they be done in faith, and are
referred to this end, that God by this obedience may be glorified. Now we have
showed before, that even the unregenerate may perform this external obedience
or discipline: as Cicero lives honestly, and for his pains in government
deserves well of all mankind: but his mind is full of doubts, touching the
Providence of God, neither does he know, nor speak unto the true God in
invocation, neither does he know the promises, and he always doubts whether
he be heard, especially when he is in misery, and then is he angry with God,
and thinks that he is unjustly punished, seeing he was a honest Citizen, and
profitable for the Commonwealth. Such darkness in the mind, is great sin,
such as reason, not being illuminated by God, is is not able to judge of.

Therefore inward obedience, true knowledge of God, the fear of God, sorrows
in repentance, trust to obtain mercy promised for the Son of God,
invocation, hope, love, joy in God, and other virtues must be begun also in the
regenerate, and they must be referred to a proper end, to wit, that God may be
obeyed. These kinds of true worship cannot be given unto God, without the
light of the Gospel, and without faith: which our adversaries, who will seem
to be jolly preachers of good works, do neither understand, nor require:
seeing they omit the doctrine of faith, which is a confidence to obtain mercy,
resting in the Son of God, which is an especial work, and the chief
worship of God. Of works not commanded of God, we shall speak hereafter, and
we must hold fast that rule, Matthew. 15. In vain do they worship me with the
commandments of men. And in the Church in falls out oftentimes, that
ceremonies devised by men are more carefully kept, then the commandments of
God, yea the authority of Pharisaicall and unjust traditions is preferred
before the the commandment of God: as in many ages, for the unjust and wicked
commandment of single life, the commandment of God concerning true chastity,
was horribly violated. Therefore we must consider of the difference of the law,
whereof we will speak again hereafter.

How good works may be done.
GReat is the infirmity of man, and the devil a most cruel enemy, who for
the hatred he bears to God, rages against mankind, and does endeavor all
that he can, especially to destroy the Church, as it is written of Peter, 1
Pet. 5. Watch, because your adversary the devil goes about like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Look the 2. observation upon this
confession.
Therefore although men by their natural strength may after a sort perform
the external discipline, yet are they often overcome by this common
infirmity: and the devil also does oftentimes force men, not altogether
savage, to commit horrible facts, as he deceived Eve, and compelled the
brethren of Joseph, David, and others innumerable. Therefore what diligence, or
what advisement, can be sufficient for this most subtle enemy? Here let us lay
hold upon that most sweet comfort, The Son of God appeared to destroy the
works of the Devil, 1 John 3. The Son of God is the keeper of his Church, as
he says, Joh. 10. No man shall take my sheep out of my hands. He does protect
us, and also by his holy spirit does confirm our minds in true opinions: as
he does begin eternal life, so does he kindle in our hearts good motions,
faith, the love of God, true invocation, hope, chastity, and other virtues We
are not Pelagians, but we do humbly give thanks to the eternal God, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to his Son Jesus Christ, and to the holy
Ghost, both for the whole benefit of salvation restored again to mankind, and
also for this benefit, that the Son of God does dwell in the Church, and does
defend it with his right hand against the furies of the Devils and men, and
does drive away the devils from us, and does uphold us in this so great
infirmity of ours, and by his word does kindle in our minds the knowledge of
God, and does confirm and govern our minds by his holy spirit. We do
certainly know that these benefits are indeed given unto us, as it is said most
comfortably in Zachary, chap. 12. I will power out upon the house of David,
and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and prayers. He
names the spirit of grace, because that in this comfort, the Son of God,
sealing us by his holy spirit, does testify that we are in favor, and that we
are delivered from the pains of hell. Secondly, he names the spirit of
prayers, because that when we have acknowledged the remission of sins, we do
not now fly from God, we do not murmr against God, but we approach unto him
with true faith and hope, we do ask and look for help at his hands, we love
him, and submit our selves to him: and thus is the beginning of obedience
wrought. After that manner says the Lord, Ioh. 14. I will pray the Father, and
he will give you another Comforter, even the spirit of truth. The holy Ghost
does kindle the light of truth in our minds, and new motions in our hearts,
agreeable to the Law of God. Let us acknowledge this so great a gift, and let
us endeavor to keep it thankfully, and desire daily to be helped in so great
dangers of this life. The will is not idle, when it has received the holy
Ghost.

How our new obedience does please God.
THE Pharisee in Luke, chap. 18. does admire and please himself, being
bewitched with this persuasion, that he does satisfy the law, and for this
discipline, such as it is, does please God. Many such there be among men, who
think themselves secure, if they perform never so little though it be but a
shadow of discipline. But the heavenly voice does often times accuse the
arrogancy of these men: and therefore the Lord says, Luke 13. Except ye
repent, ye shall all in like sort perish, and 1 John 1. If we say we have no
sin we are liars. Therefore their imagination is vain, which think that
obedience does please God for it own worthiness, and that it is a merit of
Condignitie, as they speak, and such a righteousness before God, as is a
merit of eternal life. And yet afterward they do add, that we must always
doubt whether our obedience do please God, because it is evident, that in
every one there is much pollution, many sins of ignorance, and omission, and
many not small blemishes. Here it is necessary that men's consciences should be
instructed aright in either of these points, both concerning our infirmity,
and also concerning the comfort. It is necessary that the regenerate should
have the righteousness of a good conscience, and obedience begun in this life,
as has been said: yet nevertheless, in this life there is still remaining in
our nature, in our soul, and in our heart, very much pollution, which they do
the more see, and be wail, which have received more light then others, as the
Prophets and Apostles, according to that complaint of Paul, Romans 7. I see
another law in my members, which striveth against the law of my mind, and
makes me captive to the law of sin. There is as yet in every one a great
mist, manifold ignorance, and many sorrowful doubts, errors in counsels,
raised by distrust, by false opinions, and a vain hope, many vicious flames of
lusts, much neglect of duty, murmurings and indignations against God in his
punishments: to conclude it is unsensiblenesse and madness, not to be willing
to confess that the fear and love of God is much more cold in us, then it
ought to be. These confessions are repeated in the Sermons of the Prophets and
Apostles, Psalm 143. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified. And 1 John 1. If we say, that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. This confession is
necessary, and man's arrogancy to be reprooved. Also the error of our
adversaries, who feign, that men in this mortal life may satinfie the law of
God, and of those, who say, that the evil of concupiscence, which is bred with
us, is not sin, not an evil repugnant to the law or will of God, is to be
reprehended. These errors does Paul manifestly confute, Romans 7. and 8.

Then must comfort also be joined thereunto. First, let the regenerate person
assure himself, that he is reconciled to God, by faith alone, that is, by
confidence in the Mediator, and that the person is certainly accounted
righteous, for the Some of God the Mediator, and that freely for his merit.
Secondly, let us confess with true grief, that there remain as yet in the
regenerate man many sins, and much pollution, worthy of the wrath of God.
Thirdly, let him nevertheless know, that obedience, and the righteousness of
a good conscience, must be begun in this life, and that this obedience,
although it be very far from that perfection which the law requires, is
nevertheless, in the regenerate, acceptable to God, for the Mediators sake,
who makes request for us, and by his merit does cover our great and
unspeakable miseries. Thus for the Mediators sake, both the person is
received, and also our works do please God, that in either of them our faith
may shine. Therefore Peter says, 1 Pet. 2. Offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. This comfort is set forth. Romans 8. Now
there is no condemnation to them, which do walk in Christ Jesus. And, Romans 3.
Ye are not under the law, but under grace. In that place this question is
asked, whether our obedience do please God, seeing it does not satisfy the
law? Paul answers, that it does please God, Because we are not under the law,
that is, condemned by the law, but we are under grace, reconciled, or received
into favor. Romans 8. Who shall condem^e? Christ has died for us, and is risen
again, and sits at the right hand of God, and makes request for us: that
is, holy men do please God, for the Son his sake, who also offered his
obedience for us, and makes request for us. We must oppose these sayings to
doubting, lest faith and invocation be extinguished: for doubting does weaken
our invocation.

Seeing therefore that we know, both that new obedience as necessary, and that
help is certainly given us, and that this obedience does please God, although
it be unperfect and needy, let us acknowledge the infinite mercy of God, and
give thanks for it, and have a great care how to govern our actions, because
we know, that we are both helped, and that this obedience is acceptable to God
for the Sons sake. And let this necessity be always in our eyes, that if the
benefits of God, to wit, Justification, and Regeneration, be shaken of, we
loose eternal life, according to that saying, We shall be clothed, if so be
that we be not found naked. And, Romans 8. If any have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is not his. And always in Justification let there be also a beginning of
newness of life. The thief hanging on the cross, has good works, and those
both internal and external: it grieveth him that he had sinned, and he
confesses that he is justly punished: then by faith he does acknowledge the
Savior, and desires salvation of him, and therefore he hears express
absolution, and the preaching of eternal life, and the promise, and rests in
this voice of the Messiah, and submits himself to God, and does not bear
the punishment impatiently, but is eased by acknowledging the Messiah, and by
the hope of eternal life, and gives thanks to God: Moreover, to give an
evident token of his confession, he found fault with the other which cursed
Christ These things are done by him, because this very Messiah, being partner
with him in his punishment, in a word does teach his mind, and by the same
comfort the Word is effectual in him, and through him the eternal Father does
pour the holy Ghost into the heart of this hearer, that he may kindle in him,
joy, love, invocation, hope of eternal life, and other virtues.

Of Rewards.
PAul says, Romans 6. Eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord: and, they that are reconciled, or justified, Are heirs annexed with the
Son of God, and that for his sake, not for their own merits. Faith, receiving
remission of sins, and justification, and the hope of eternal life, do rely
upon the Son of God the Mediator, as it is said, Joh. 6. This is the will of
the Father, that every one that believes in him, should have eternal life.
And, Romans 5. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ: by whom we have access through faith unto this grace wherein we
stand, and rejoice under the hope of eternal life. He joyneth faith and hope
together, and affirms, that either of them does rely upon the Mediator: And
it is manifest, that hope ought not to rely on our works, because it is said,
Psalm. 142. No man living shall be justified in thy sight. But as they which
repent are accounted just by faith, for the only Son of God his sake, and
for him, and through him are quickened; so for him, and not for our merits, is
eternal life given unto us; as the thief on the cross hears this promise,
To day thou shall be with me in Paradise, Luk 23.

Neither must we dream, that the Son of God did merit, or give unto us, a
preparation only to eternal life: but let that most comfortable saying of
Hosea be always in our sight: O death, I will be thy death. O hell, I will be
thy destruction. For by the Son of God and through him, we are delivered from
eternal death, and translated into life eternal, as he says, I give unto
them eternal life. And, 1 John 5. He that has the Son, has life. And let
hope be sure and firm, as Peter says, 1 Pet. 1. Hope perfectly, that is,
look for eternal life, not with doubtful opinion, in an assured hope, to
wit, for the Mediators sake. And Augustine says well, in his book of
Meditations. The certainty of our whole confidence consists in the blood of
Christ. Let us hold both these points assuredly, that he which repents, does
freely by faith receive remission of sins, and justification for the Son of
God his sake, and that he is an heir of eternal life, as Paul says, Romans 8
As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. And if
they be children, they are also the heirs of God. Yet notwithstanding, this
also is true, Look the 1. observation upon this confession. in the 4. Sect.
that they, which do shake of the holy Ghost, falling from faith, or sinning
grievously against their conscience, and do not return unto God by
repentance, are not heirs, as it is said, Galat. 5. They which do such
things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And, 1 Timothy 2. Fight a good
fight, having faith and a good conscience, which some have put away, and as
concerning faith have made shipwreck. And, Matthew. 25. I was hungry, and ye
gave me not to eat. And, These shall go into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous shall go into life eternal. Now although life eternal is given to
the regenerate for the Son of God, yet withal it is also a reward of good
works, as it is said, Your reward is plentiful in heaven, as a patrimony is
the reward of the labors of a son, although it be given to the son for
another cause.

Moreoever, God has added unto good works certain promises of his, and
therefore even for the good works of holy men, God does give spiritual and
corporal gifts even in this life, and that diversely, as it seems good to his
unspeakable wisdom, 1 Timothy 4. Godliness has the promises of the life
present, and of that that is to come, Mark. 10. They shall receive a hundred
fold in this life (but with tribulation) and after this life, eternal life.
Matthew. 10. Whosoever shall give unto one of these little ones to drink a cup
of cold water only in the name of a disciple, he shall not loose his reward.
Luke 6. Give, and it shall be given to you. Exodus 20. Honor thy father and thy
mother, that thou may live long upon earth. Isa. 33. Bread shall be given
him, and his waters shall be sure: they shall see the King in his glory, that
is, for obedience and good works God does give quiet Commonweals, an honest
and meek government, etc. Isa. 58. Break thy bread to the hungry, and thou
shall be as a garden that is watered, etc. The example of the widow at Sarepta
is well known: and the Psalmist says, Substance and riches are in his house.
For seeing that God in this mortal and miserable life does gather his Church,
and will have it to be an honest congregation, he gives thereunto many places
of entertainment, he gives nests to godly poor families, for the bringing up
of their children, and for the spreading abroad of doctrine: to conclude, he
will preserve the society of mankind, households, and commonweals, and that
to this end, that a Church may be gathered. Therefore he gives sometime a
government not troublesome, peace, a fruitful land, and other good things, for
the prayers of holy men, for their diligence, and for common necessities sake:
as, for Joseph, Naaman, and Daniel, those kingdoms, wherein they lived,
flourished the more. And Jerem. 19. The Banished in Babylon are commanded, to
pray for the peace, and wholesome government of that place, where they were
entertained. So also oftentimes punishments are heaped up for the sins of the
Church, as is to be seen in the punishment of the tribe of Benjamin, David,
and others. Now God will have us to understand that these benefits are
necessary for the body, and to know that they be given of God: in asking of
them he will have our faith to be exercised, as we shall declare more at large
in a fit place. At this time we have therefore added these few things, that in
this confession there might be also a Testimony in our Churches, that this
true and necessary doctrine, touching good works, is faithfully laid open.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE.
Of Justification. CHAP. 5.
WE believe and confess, that to do and practice such righteousness, as is
acceptable to God, these virtues be necessary, Faith, hope, and love, and that
man cannot of himself conceive these virtues, but does receive them of the
favor and grace of God, and that faith does work by love. But we think that
their judgment does far disagree from the Apostolic and Catholic doctrine,
who teach, that man is made acceptable to God, and accounted just before God
for those virtues, and that when we come to stand before God in judgment, we
must trust to the merits of these virtues. For man is made acceptable to God,
and counted just before him, for the only Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ,
through faith: and when we appear before the judgment seat of God, we must
not trust to the merit of any of those virtues, which we have, but only to the
merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose merit is ours by faith. And because that
before the tribunal seat of God, where the question is of true and eternal
righteousness and salvation, there is no place at all for the merits of men,
but only for the mercy of God, and the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ alone,
who is received of us by faith, therefore we think that the ancient Fathers
our Elders said truly, that we are justified before God by faith alone, Romans 3.
All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God, and are justified freely
by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set
forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood, Galat. 3. The
Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by the Faith of
Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe. And, Chap. 5. We through the
spirit wait for the hope of righteousness through faith. For in Christ Jesus
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which
works by love. Hilarie says, It offends the Scribes, that man should
forgive sin (for they behold nothing but man in Jesus Christ) and that he
should forgive that, which the law could not release. For faith alone does
justify. Ambrose says. They are justified freely, because that working
nothing, nor requiting any thing, by faith alone they are justified, by the
gift of God. And again, They are evidently blessed, whose iniquities are
forgiven, without any labor or work, and whose sins are covered, no help of
repentance being required of them, but only this, that they believe. Many
places might be alleged as well out of the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, as out of the holy Fathers, whereby it is prooved, that not only in
the beginning, through the free mercy of God, these virtues, to wit, Faith,
hope, and love, are given unto us, but also afterward throughout our whole
life, and that in our extreme necessity, we are not able to stand before the
severe tribunal seat of God, but in the confidence of the only free favor of
God, showed unto us in Christ the Son of God. For this is that, both which Paul
teaches, and the Ecclesiastical writers do interpret, That we are justified
before God by faith alone.

Of good works. CHAP. 7.
WE say that good works, commanded of God, are necessarily to be done, and
that, through the free mercy of God, Look the 1. observation upon this
confession.
they do deserve certain their own, either corporal, or spiritual, rewards.
But we must not think, that in the judgment of God, where the question is,
concerning the purging of our sins, the appeasing of the wrath of God, and the
merit of eternal salvation, we should trust to those good works which we do.
For all the good works which we do, are unperfect, neither can they sustain
the severitie of the judgment of God, but all our confidence is to be placed
in the only mercy of God, for his Son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake. Psalm.
142. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for no flesh living shall be
justified in thy sight. Gal. 5. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other, so that ye
cannot do those things that ye would. Romans 7. I know, that in me, that is, in
my flesh, there dwells no good. Dan. 9. We do not present our supplications
before thee, for our own righteousness, but for thy great tender mercies.
Augustine says, Woe to the life of man, be it never so commendable, August.
confess. lib. 9. cap. 13. In Monuali. cap. 22.
if thou examine it, setting thy mercy aside. And again: All my hope is in
the death of my Lord. His death is my merit, my refuge, salvation, life, and my
resurrection. The mercy of the Lord is my merit, I am not without merit, so
long as the Lord of mercies is not wanting, And if the mercies of the Lord be
many, I abound in merits. Gregory says, Therefore our righteous Advocate
shall Greg. lib. 1. super Ezech. hom. 7. in fine. Bern. in Sermon. 1. annunciat.
B^^tae Mariae.
defend us in the day of judgment, because we know, and accuse our selves to
be unjust. Therefore let us not trust to our tears, nor to our actions, but to
the alleging of our Advocate. Bernard says, Our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, not such a testimony, as that proud Pharisee
had, his thoughts being seduced, and seducing him, giving witness of himself,
and his witness was not true. But then is the witness true, when the spirit
bears witness with our spirit. Now I believe that this testimony consists
in three things: For first of all it is necessary to believe, that thou can
not have remission of sins, but through the favor of God: Secondly, that thou
can have no good work at all, except he also give it to thee: Lastly, that
thou can not deserve eternal life by any works, except that also be given
thee freely.

Out of the Confession of SVEVELAND.
Of Justification, and of Faith. CHAP. 3.
OUR Preachers do some what differ from the late received opinions about those
things which the people were commonly taught, concerning the mean, whereby we
are made partakers of the redemption wrought by Christ, and touching the duties
of a Christian man. Those points which we have followed, we will endeavor to
lay open most plainly to your sacred Majesty, and also to declare very
faithfully those places of Scripture, by which we were forced hereunto. First
therefore, seeing that we were taught of late years, that works were
necessarily required to justification, our Preachers have taught, that this
whole justification is to be ascribed to the good pleasure of God, and to the
merit of Christ, and to be received by Faith alone. To this they were moved
especially by these places of Scripture. As many as received him, to them he
gave power to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in his name;
which are borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God. Ioh. 1. Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a man be borne
again a new, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Ioh. 3. No man knows the
Son, but the Father, neither knows any man the Father, but the Son, and
he to whom the Son will reveal him. Matt. 11. Blessed art thou, Simon, the
son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my
Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 16. No man can come to me, except my Father
draw him. Ioh. 6. By grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your
selves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast
himself. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has ordained, that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2. For seeing it is
our righteousness and eternal life, to know God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, and that is so far from being the work of flesh and blood, that it
is necessary to be borne again anew, neither can we come to the Son, except
the Father draw us, neither know the Father, except the Son reveal him unto
us: and Paul does write so expressly, Not of your selves, not of works: it is
evident enough, that our works can help nothing at all, that of unjust, such
as we are borne, we may become righteous: because that, as we are by nature the
children of wrath, and therefore unjust, so we are not able to do any thing
that is just, or acceptable to God: but the beginning of all our righteousness
and salvation, must proceed from the mercy of the Lord, who of his only
favor, and the contemplation of the death of his Son, did first offer the
doctrine of truth, and his Gospel, sending those that should preach it: and
secondly, seeing that natural man cannot, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. perceive
the things that are of God, he causes also the beam of his light to arise in
the darkness of our heart, that now we may believe the Gospel preached, being
persuaded of the truth thereof, by the holy Spirit from above, and then
forthwith trusting to the testimony of this spirit, in the confidence of
children to call upon God, and to say, Abba, Father, obtaining thereby true
salvation, according to that saying, Whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord, shall be saved.

Of good works, proceeding out of faith, through love.
THese things we will not have men so to understand, as though we placed
salvation and righteousness in the sloathfull thoughts of men, or in faith
destitute of love (which they call faith without form) seeing that we are
sure, that no man can be just or saved, except he do chiefly love, and most
earnestly imitate God. For those which he knew before, he also predestined to
be made like to the image of his Sin. But no man can love God above all
things, and worthily imitate him, but he which does indeed know him, and does
assuredly look for all good things from him. Therefore we cannot otherwise be
justified, that is, as to become righteous, so to be saved (for righteousness
is even our salvation) then by being endued chiefly with faith in him, by which
faith we believing the Gospel, and therefore being persuaded, that God has
taken us for his adopted children, and that he will for ever show himself a
loving Father unto us, let us wholly depend upon his pleasure. This faith Saint
Augustine does call, in his book De Fide and operibus, Evangelicall, To wit,
that which is effectual through love. By this faith we are borne again, and
the image of God is repaired in us. By this faith, whereas we are borne
corrupt, our thoughts, even from our childhood, being altogether bent unto
evil, we become good, and upright. For hereupon, we being fully satisfied with
one God (the spring of all good things that is never dry, but runs always
most plentifully) we do forthwith show our selves, as it were, Gods, toward
others, that is, toward the true sons of God, indevouring by love to profit
them, so much as in us lies. For, He that loves his brother, abides in the
light, and is borne of God, and is wholly given to the new, and to the old
commandment, touching mutual love. And this love is the fulfilling of the
whole law, as Paul says: The whole law is fulfilled in one word, namely this,
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, Gal. 5. For whatsoever the law
teaches, hitherto it tends, and this one thing it requires, that at the
length we may be reformed to the perfect image of God, being good in all
things, and ready and willing to do men good, the which we cannot do, except
we be adorned with all kinds of virtues. For who can purpose and do all
things (as the duty of a Christian does require, 1 Cor. 10.) to the true
edifying of the Church, and the sound profit of all men, that is, according to
the law of God, and to the glory of God, except that he both think, speak,
and do every thing in order, and well, and therefore be very familliarly
acquainted with the whole company of virtues.

To whom good works are to be ascribed, and how necessary they be. CHAP. 5.
But seeing that they, which are the children of God, are rather Romans 8.
led by the Spirit of God, then do work any thing themselves, And that Of him,
and through him, and for him, are all things, therefore Romans 11.
whatsoever things we do well, and holily, are to be ascribed to none other,
then to this one only spirit, the giver of all virtues. Howsoever it be, he
does not compel us, but does lead us being willing, Working in us both to
will, and to do, Philip. 2. Whereupon Saint Augustine writes very well, That
God does reward his works in us. And yet we are so far from rejecting good
works, that we do utterly deny, that any man can fully be saved, except he be
thus far brought by the spirit of Christ, that he find no want at all in him,
touching those good works, whereunto God has created him. For there be diverse
members of the same body, therefore every one of us have not the same office, 1
Cor. 12. It is so necessary, that the law should be fulfilled, that Heaven and
earth shall sooner pass away, then any one iotte, or the least point thereof
shall be remitted. Yet because God alone is good, has created all things of
nothing, and does by his spirit make us altogether new, and does wholly lead us
(for in Christ nothing avails but a new creature) none of all these things
can be ascribed to man's strength, and we must confess, that all things are the
mere gifts of God, who of his own accord, and not for any merit of ours does
favor and love us. By these things it may sufficiently be known, what we
believe justification to be, by whom it is wrought for us, and by what means it
is received of us: also by what places of Scripture we are induced so to
believe. For alalthough of many we have alleged a few, yet by these few, any
one, that is but meanly conversant in the Scripture, may fully perceive, that
they which read the Scriptures shall find every where such kind of sentences,
as do attribute unto us nothing but sin, and destruction, as Hosea says,
and all our righteousness and salvation to the Lord.

Of the duties of a Christan man. CHAP. 6.
NOw it cannot be doubted of, what be the duties of a Christian man, and to
what actions he ought chiefly to give himself, namely to all those, whereby
every one, for his part, may profit his neighbors, and that first, in things
pertaining to life eternal, that they also may begin to know, worship, and
fear God, and then in things pertaining to this life, that they may want
nothing which is necessary to the sustenance of the body. For as the whole law
of God, which is a most absolute commandment of all righteousness, is briefly
contained in this one word, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, so in
the performance of this love, it is necessary that all righteousness should
be comprised and perfited. Whereupon it follows, that nothing at all is to be
reckoned among the duties of a Christian man, which is not of force and effect
to profit our neighbor, and every work is so much the more belonging to the
duty of Christian man, by how much his neighbor may the more be profited
thereby. Therefore next after Ecclesiastical functions, among the chief
duties of a Christian man, we place the government of the Common weal,
obedience to Magistrates (for these be referred to the common profit) that care
which is taken for our wife, children, family, and the honor which is due to
parents, (because that without these the life of man cannot consist) and
lastly, the profession of good arts and of all honest discipline, because that
except these be had in estimation, we shall be destitute of the greatest good
things, which are proper to mankind. Yet in these, and all other duties
pertaining to man's like, no man must rashly take any thing to himself, but
with a right conscience consider, whereunto God does call him. To conclude, let
every man account that his duty, and that so much the more excellent a duty,
the more that he shall profit other men thereby.

THE TENTH SECTION. OF THE HOLY CATHOLIC CHVRCH.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA. Of the Catholic Church of God, and of the
head of the Church. CHAP. 17.
FOrasmuch as God from the beginning would have men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of the truth, therefore it is necessary that always from the
beginning, at this day, and to the end of the world, there should be a Church,
that is, a company of the faithful, called and gathered out of the world, a
communion (I say) of all Saints, that is of them, who do truly know, and
rightly worship and serve the true God in Jesus Christ the Savior, by the word
and the holy spirit, and which by faith are partakers of all those good graces,
which are freely offered through Christ. These all are Citizens of one and the
same City, living under one Lord, under the same laws, and in the same
fellowship of all good things, for so the Apostle calls them fellow Ephesians. 2.
1 Cor. 6.
Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, tearming the faithful
upon the earth Saints, who are sanctified by the blood of the Son of God. Of
these is that article of our Creed wholly to be understood, I believe the
Catholic Church, the communion of Saints. And seeing that there is always but
one God, and one Mediator between God and man, Jesus Christ: also, one
shepherd of the whole flock, one head of this body, and to conclude, one
spirit, one salvation, one faith, one Testament, or covenant, it follows
necessarily that there is but one Church, which we therefore call Catholic,
because it is universal, spread abroad through all the parts and quarters of
the world, and reaches unto all times and is not limited within the compass
either of time or place. Here therefore we must condemn the Donatists who
pinned up the Church within the corners of Afric, neither do we allow of the
Roman Clergy, who vaunt that the Church of Rom^ (...) in a manner is Catholic.

The Church is divided by some into diverse parts or diverse sorts: not that it
is rent and divided from it self, but rather distinguished, in respect of the
diversity of the members that be in it. One part thereof they make to be the
Church militant, the other the Church triumphant. The militant warreth still on
the earth and fights against the flesh, the world, and the prince of the
world, the devil, and against sin and death. The other being already set at
liberty, is now in heaven, and triumphs over all those being overcome, and
continually rejoices before the Lord. Yet these two Churches have
notwithstanding a communion and fellowship between themselves. The Church
militant upon the earth has evermore had in it many particular Churches, which
must all notwithstanding be referred to the unity of the Catholic Church.
This militant Church was otherwise ordered and governed before the law, among
the Patriarchs, otherwise under Moses, by the Law, and otherwise of Christ, by
the Gospel. There are but two sorts of people for the most part mentioned, to
wit, the Israelites, and the Gentiles, or they which of the Jews and Gentiles
were gathered to make a Church. There be also two Testaments, the Old and the
New. Yet both these sorts of people have had, and still have one fellowship,
one salvation in one and the same Messiah, in whom, as members of one body,
they are all joined together under one head, and by one faith are all partakers
of one and the same spiritual meat and drink. Yet here we do acknowledge a
diversity of times and a diversity in the pledges and signs of Christ
promised, and exhibited, and that now the ceremonies being abolished, the light
shines unto us more clearly, our gifts and graces are more abundant, and our
liberty is more full and ample.

This holy Church of God is called the house of the living God, builded of
living and spiritual stones, founded upon a rock, that cannot be removed,
upon a foundation, besides which none can be laid: Whereupon it is called the
pillar and foundation of the truth, that 2 Timothy 3.
does not err, so long as it relyeth upon the rock Christ, and upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. And no marvel, Look the first
observat. upon this confession.
if it do err, so often as it forsakes him, who is the alone truth. This
Church is also called a virgin, and the spouse of Christ, and his only
beloved. For the Apostle says, I have joined you unto one husband, that I
might present you a chaste virgin unto Christ. The Church is called a flock of
sheep under one shepherd, even Christ, Ezekiel. 34. and John 10. also the body
of Christ, because the faithful are the lively members of Christ, having him
for their head.

It is the head which has the pre-eminence in the body, and from whence the
whole body receives life, by whose spirit it is governed in all things, of
whom also it receives increase, that it may grow up. Also there is but one
head of the body, which has agreement with the body, and therefore the Church
cannot have any other head beside Christ. For as the Church is a spiritual
body, so must it needs have a spiritua I head like unto it self. Neither can
it be governed by any other spirit, then by the spirit of Christ. Wherefore
Paul says, And he is the head of his body the Coloss. 1.
Church, who is the beginning, the first borne of the dead, that in all things
he might have the pre-eminence. And in another place, Christ (says he) is the
head of the Church, and the same is the Savior of Ephesians. 5.
his body. And again, Who is the head of the Church, which is his Ephesians. 1.
body, even the fullness of him, which fills all in all things. Again, Let
us in all things grow up into him which is the head, that is Ephesians. 4.
Christ, by whom all the body being knit together receives increase. And
therefore we do not allow of the doctrine of the Romish Prelates, who would
make the Pope the general Pastor, and Supreme head of the Church of Christ
mi^itant here on earth, and the very Vicar of Christ, who has (as they say)
all fullness of power and sovereign authority in the Church. For we hold and
teach, that Christ our Lord is, and remains still, the only universal
Pastor, and highest Bishop, before God his Father, and that in the Church he
performs all the duties of a Pastor or Bishop, even to the worlds end: and
therefore stands not in need of any other to supply his room, for he is said
to have a substitute, which is absent. But Christ is present with his Church,
and is the head that gives life thereunto. He did straightly forbid his
Apostles and their successors all superiority or dominion in the Church. They
therefore that by gaine-saying set themselves against so manifest a truth, and
bring another kind of government into the Church, who sees not that they are
to be counted in the number of them, of whom the Apostles of Christ prophesied?
as Peter 2 Epist. 2. and Paul Act. 20. 2 Cor. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 2. and in many other
places.

Now by taking away the Romish head, we do not bring any confusion or disorder
into the Church: for we teach that the government of the Church which the
Apostles set down, is sufficient to keep the Church in due order, which from
the beginning, while as yet it wanted such a Romish head, as is now pretended
to keep it in order, was not disordered or full of confusion. That Romish head
does maintain indeed that tyranny and corruption in the Church, which was
brought into the Church: But in the mean time he hinders, resists, and with
all the might he can make, cutteth off the right and lawful reformation of
the Church.

They object against us, that there have been great strifes and dissentions in
our Churches, since they did sever themselves from the Church of Rome, and that
therefore they cannot be true Churches. As though there were never in the
Church of Rome any sects, any contentions and quarrels, and that in matters of
religion, maintained, not so much in the Schools, as in the holy chaires, even
in the audience of the people. We know that the Apostle said, God is not the
author of dissension, but of peace. 1 Cor. 11.
And Seeing there is amongst you emulation and contention, are you not carnal?
Yet may we not deny, but that God was in that Church, planted by the Apostle,
and that that Apostolic Church was a true church, howsoever there were strifes
and dissentions in it. The Apostle Paul reprehended Peter an Apostle, and
Barnabas Gal. 2. Acts 15.
fell at variance with Paul great contention arose, in the Church of Antioch,
between them that preached one and the same Christ, as Luke records in the
Acts of the Apostles. And there have at all times been great contentions in
the Church, and and the most excellent Doctors of the Church have about no
small matters differed in opinions, yet so, as in the mean time the Church
ceased not to be the church for all these contentions. For thus it pleases God
to use the dissentions that arise in the church, to the glory of his name, the
setting forth of the truth, and to the end that such as are not approved might
be manifest. Now as we acknowledge no other head of the Church then Christ, so
we do not acknowledge every church to be the true church which vaunteth her
self so to be: but we teach that to be the true Church indeed, in which the
marks and tokens of the true church are to be found. First and chiefly the
lawful or sincere preaching of the word of God, as it is left unto us in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, which do all seem to lead us unto
Christ, who in the Gospel has said, My sheep hear my voice, and I know them,
^ John 10.
and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life. A stranger they do
not hear, but fly from him, because they know not his voice. And they that
are such in the Church of God, have all but one faith, and one spirit, and
therefore they worship but one God. and him alone they serve in spirit and in
truth, loving him with all their hearts, and with all their strength, praying
unto him alone through Jesus Christ the only Mediator and Intercessour, and
they seek not life or justice but only in Christ, and by faith in him:
because they do acknowledge Christ the only head and foundation of his
Church, and being surely founded on him, do daily repair themselves by
repentance, and do with patience bear the cross laid upon them, and besides,
by unfeigned love joining themselves to all the members of Christ, do thereby
declare themselves to be the disciples of Christ, by continuing in the bond of
peace and holy unity: they do withal communicate in the Sacraments ordained
by Christ, and delivered unto us by his Apostles, using them in no other
manner, then as they received them from the Lord himself. That saying of the
Apostle Paul is well known to all, I received from the Lord that which I
delivered 1 Cor 11.
unto you. For which cause we condemn all such churches, as strangers from the
true church of Christ, who are not such, as we have heard they ought to be,
howsoever, in the mean time they brag of the succession of Bishops, of
unity, and of antiquity. Moreover we have in charge from the Apostles of
Christ, To shun Idolatry, and to come out of Babylon, and to have no
fellowship 1 Cor. 10. 1 John 5. Apoc. 18. 2 Cor. 6.
with her, unless we mean to be partakers with her of all Gods plagues laid
upon her. But as for communicating with the true church of Christ, we so highly
esteem of it, that we say plainly, that none can live before God, which do
not communicate with the true church of God, but separate themselves from the
same. For, as without the Arc of Noah there was no escaping, when the world
perished in the flood, even so do we believe, that without Christ, who in the
church offers himself to be enjoyed of the elect, there can be no certain
salvation: and therefore we teach that such as would be saved, must in no wise
separate themselves from the true Church of Christ.

But yet we do not so strictly shut up the church within those marks before
mentioned, as thereby to exclude all those out of it, which either do not
communicate in the Sacraments (by reason that they want them, or else not
willingly, nor upon contempt, but being constrained by necessity, do against
their wills abstain from them) or in whom faith does sometimes fail, though not
quite decay, nor altogether die: or in whom some slips and errors of
infirmity may be found: for we know that God had some friends in the world,
that were not of the common wealth of Israel. We know what befell the people of
God in the captivity of Babylon, where they wanted their sacrifices seventy
years. We know very well what happened to Saint Peter, who denied his Master, and
what is wont daily to fall out among the faithful and chosen of God, which go
astray and are full of infirmities. We know moreover what manner of Churches
the Churches at Galatia and Corinth were in the Apostles time: in which the
Apostle Paul condemns diverse great and heinous crimes, yet he calls them
the holy Churches of Christ. Yea and it falls out sometimes, that God in his
just judgment suffers the truth of his word, and the Catholic Faith, and
his own true worship to be so obscured and defaced, that the church seems
almost quite rased out, and not so much as a face of a church to remain, as we
see fell out in the days of Eliah, and at other times. And yet in 1 Reg. 19.
Apoc. 7.
the mean time the Lord has in this world, even in this darkness, his true
worshippers, and those not a few, but even seven thousand and more. For the
Apostle cries, The foundation of the 2 Timothy 2.
Lord stands sure and has this seal, the Lord knows who are his, etc.
Whereupon the Church of God may be termed invisible, not that the men, whereof
it consists, are invisible, but because it being hidden from our sight, and
known only unto God, it cannot be discerned by the judgment of man.

Again, not all, that are reckoned in the number of the church, are Saints,
and the lively and true members of the church: for there be many hypocrites,
which outwardly do hear the word of God, and publicly receive the
Sacraments, and bear a show to pray unto God alone through Christ, to confess
Christ to be their only righteousness: and do seem outwardly to worship
God, and to exercise the duties of charity to the brethren, and for a while
through patience to endure in troubles and calamities: And yet they are
altogether destitute of the inward illumination of the spirit of God, of faith,
and sincerity of heart, and of perseverance or continuance to the end. And
these men are for the most part at the length laid open what they be. For the
Apostle John says, They went out from among us, but they were not of us: 1
John 2.
for if they had been of us, they would have tarried with us. Yet these men,
whilst they do pretend religion, they are accounted to be in the church,
howsoever indeed they be not of the church. Even as traitors in a commonwealth
before they be detected are counted in the number of good Citizens: and as the
cockle and darnell and chafe are found amongst the wheat: and as wennes and
swellings are in a perfect body, when they are rather diseases and deformities,
then true members of the body. And therefore the Matthew. 13.
church is very well compared to a draw net, which draws up fishes of all
sorts: and to a field, wherein is found both darnell and good corn. We are to
have a special regard, that we judge not rashly before the time, nor go about
to exclude, cast off and cut away them, whom the Lord would not have excluded,
nor cut off, or whom without some damage to the church, we cannot separate from
it. Again we must be very vigilant, lest that the godly falling fast asleep,
the wicked grow stronger, and do some mischief to the church.

Further more we teach, that it is carefully to be marked, wherein especially
the truth and unity of the church consists, lest that we either rashly breed
or nourish schisms in the church, It consists not in outward rites and
ceremonies, but rather in the truth and unity of the Catholic faith. This
Catholic faith is not taught us by the ordinances or laws of men, but by the
holy Scriptures, a compendious and short sum whereof is the Apostles Creed.
And therefore we read in the ancient Writers, that there was manifold
diversities of ceremonies, but that was always free, neither did any man
think that the unity of the church was thereby broken or dissolved. We say
then that the true unity of the Church does consist in several points of
doctrine, in the true and uniforme preaching of the Gospel, and in such rites,
as the Lord himself has expressly set down: and here we urge that saying of
the Apostle very earnestly, As many of us therefore Phil. 3.
as are perfect, let us he thus minded, If any man think otherwise, the Lord
shall reveal the same unto him. And yet in that whereunto we have attained,
let us follow one direction, and all of us be like affected one toward another.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA. Of the Church.
THis we hold, that of such lively stones, being by this mean built upon this
lively rock, the Church, and the holy gathering together of all the Saints,
the Spouse of Christ (which being cleansed by his blood, he shall once in time
to come present without blot before his Father) is founded. The which church,
though it be manifest to the eyes of God alone, yet is it not only seen and
known, by certain outward rites, instituted of Christ himself, and by the
word of God, as by a public and lawful discipline; but it is so appointed,
that without these marks no man can be judged to be in this church, but by the
special privilege of God.

Out of the Confession of BASIL. Of the Church.
WE believe a holy Christian Church, that is, a communion Matthew. 1. Ephe. 1.
John 3. 2 Cor. 11. Ephesians. 5. Heb. 12. John 1. Galat. 5. Romans 1. John 1. 1 John
3.
of Saints, a gathering together of the faithful in spirit, which is holy, and
the Spouse of Christ: wherein all they be Citizens, which do truly confess,
that Jesus is the Christ, the Lamb that takes away the sins of the world,
and do show forth that faith by the works of love. And a little after. This
church of Christ does labor all that it can, to keep the bonds of peace and
love in unity. Therefore it does by no means communicate with Sects, and the
rules of orders, devised for the difference of days, meats, apparel, and
ceremonies.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA. Of the holy Church, and of the godly
institution and government thereof, and of Discipline. Also of Antichrist.
CHAP. 8.
IN the eighth place it is taught, touching the acknowledgeing of the holy
Catholic Christian Church. And first of all, that the foundation and head of
the holy Church is Jesus Christ himself alone, together with the whole merit
of grace and truth to life eternal, upon whom, and by whom, this church is at
all times built, by the holy Ghost, the word of God, and the Sacraments,
according to the meaning of that which Christ said unto Peter, Matthew. 16.
upon this rock, (to wit, whereof thou have made a true confession,) I will
build my Church. And Saint Paul says, Other foundation 1 Cor. 3.
can no man lay then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And in another
place. And has appointed him over all things to be Ephesians. 2.
the head of the Church, which is his body, and the fullness of him, which
fills all in all things.

Out of these things it is taught, that this is believed, held, and publicly
confessed, that the holy Catholic church, being present at every time, and
militant upon earth, is the fellowship of all Christians, and is here and there
dispersed over the whole world, and is gathered together, by the holy Gospel,
out of all nations, families, tongues, degrees, and ages, in one faith in
Christ the Lord, or in the holy Trinity according to that saying of Saint
John, who speaks thus, And I saw a great company which no man Apoc. 7.
can number, of all nations, peoples, and tongues, standing before the throne,
and before the lamb, This true church, although while it lies here in the
Lords stoore, to wit, in the wide world, and as it were in one heap confusedly
gathered together, contains in it as yet, as well the pure wheat, as the
chafe, the godly children of God, and the wicked children of the world, the
living and dead members, of the ministers, and of the people, yet where it is
least defiled, or most pure, it may be known, even by these signs that
follow: namely, wheresoever Christ is taught in holy assemblies, the doctrine
of the holy Gospel is purely and fully preached, the Sacraments are
administered, according to Christ's institution, commandment, meaning, and will,
and the faithful people of Christ does receive and use them, and by these
gathers it self together in the unity of faith and love, and in the bond of
peace, and joyneth it self in one, and builds it self hard together upon
Christ. There therefore is the holy church, the house of God, the temples of
the holy Ghost, lively members, the parts of the heavenly Jerusalem, the
spiritual body of Christ, and joints knit together, the which are joined and
coupled each with other, by one head Christ, one spirit of regeneration, one
word of God, the same and sincere Sacraments, one faith, one love and holy
communion, one bond of peace, order, discipline, and obedience, whether the
number of this people be great or small, as the Lord witnesses, Where two or
three are gathered together in my name Matthew. 15.
(in what country or nation, and in what place soever this be) there am I in
the midst of them: and contrarily, where Christ, and the spirit of Christ,
dwells not, and the holy Gospel cannot have any place granted unto it, etc.
but on the contrary side, manifest errors Look the 1. observation upon this
confession. Romans 5.
and heathenish life have their full course, and by getting the upper hand do
spread themselves far, there must also needs be a church so defiled, that
Christ will not acknowledge it for his welbeloved Spouse, seeing that none
belongs to Christ, who has not the spirit of Christ. Every Christian is also
bound with diligent care to seek after this and such a true part of the holy
church, and after he has found it, to join and maintain holy communion and
fellowship therewith, as the other part of that point of the Church in our
Christian Creed does declare, where we do profess, that we believe the
communion of Saints: and ought altogether, with this fellowship, or spiritual
company of Gods people, to maintain the true unity and concord of Christ's
spirit, to love and bear good will to all the members, to yield obedience
thereunto, and endeavor, by all means possible, to procure the profit and
furtherance thereof, and in truth to hold agreement therewith, and by no means
through stubbornness to move schisms, seditions and sects, against the truth.
To which thing the Apostle exhorts all men, where he says, So walk or Ephesians
4.
behave your selves, as worthy of the place or vocation whereunto ye are
called, with all humbleness and meekness, with a quiet mind, and long
suffering, for bearing one another, and endeavor ye to keep the unity of the
spirit, in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are
called in one hope of your vocation: there is one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, one God and Father of all. And again, Romans 15. Phil. 2. Romans 12. 1
Cor 12.
Let every man please his neighbor in that that is good to edification. Also,
Do nothing through strife, or for vain glory. Again, Let there not be
dissentions among you. He therefore that in this life walks according to
these commandments, he is a true and lively member of the holy Church, which
brings forth the fruit of Faith and love. Look the 2. observation upon this
confession. And the 1. Observat. upon the confession of Saxony, in the fourth
Section.
But he that loses the spirit of Faith and love in the holy fellowship, must
needs be a dead member.

Together with these things the Ministers of our Churches teach, that this is
to be thought of their fellowship, which is in like manner to be thought of any
other Christian fellowship, whether it be great, or small: to wit, that it
self alone is not that holy Catholic Christian Church, but only one part
thereof, as the Apostle writes of the church at Corinth, Ye are the body of
Christ, 1 Cor. 12.
and members of him, every one for his part. They teach also that there must be
a platform and certain order of government in the holy Church. Now without a
platform of order and outward government, it cannot be in good case or go
well with it, no more then it can with any other even the least society. But
this platform of order consists chiefly in this, that they be both
ordinarily called, and lawfully ordained, who execute due functions in the
same, beginning at the least, and proceeding to those that are of a mean sort,
and so forth even to the chiefest. The next point is, that every one do well
discharge that place, and as it were his ward, to which he is called, and use
watchfulness, and suffer nothing to be found wanting in himself, nor at his
own pleasure do closely convey himself out of the same, or go beyond the
bounds thereof, and meddle with other men's charges, and moreover, that all
among themselves submit themselves one to another, and all perform obedience
from the least to the greatest, every man in his own place, whereunto he is
called: and do it with the affection of love, and of his own accord, not of
constraint, even for Christ's sake, and for the care they have of eternal
salvation, according 1 Pet. 3. Phil. 2.
as the Apostles and other holy men have taught, concerning this matter, and
after their examples, by which they founded their Churches, and according to
that also that they brought old laws or decrees into subjection: the which
thing our Ministers among themselves do indeed declare and practice. This
laudable order of governing the Church together with lawful discipline, that
is, with the severitie of punishments appointed by God, which it has annexed
unto it, ought diligently to be exercised: to wit, so, that the wicked, and
such as abide in manifest sins without repentance, having their hearts
hardened, and such sinners, as give not obedience to God, and to his word, and
in the Church are authors of great offenses, and do not repent, or become
better, after due, faithful, and sufficient warning, that such, I say, may be
publicly punished, and be removed from the holy fellowship, by
Ecclesiastical punishment, which Look the 3. observat. upon this confession.
commonly is called abandoning, excommunication, or cursing, yet not by the
help of the civil power, but by virtue of the word and the commandment of
Christ. And that this punishment may indifferently be used toward all, no
regard or respect is to be had of persons, of what degree soever they be,
whether they be civil or Ecclesiastical persons, according to that sentence
of the doctrine of Christ, who says, If thy brother trespass against thee,
Look the 4 Observat. Mat. 18.
go and reprove him between him and thee alone: if he hear thee, thou have
won thy brother: if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two: If he
hear not these, tell it unto the Church: and if he hear not the Church, let
him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a Publican. And St. Paul, together with
his fellow Ministers, did in express words give a commandment hereof, writing
thus: We command you, brethren, 1 Cor. 5.
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every
brother that walks unordinately, and not after the instruction which he
received of us. And in another place he says, Put from among your selves that
wicked man. And yet this is not to be concealed, that at all times there have
been many in the Church, which seemed to be Christians, and yet were wicked
hypocrites, close sinners, far from repentance, and that there be, and shall
be such hereafter, even unto the end of the world: such as are neither
chastened by this discipline of Christ, neither can easily be excommunicated,
or altogether separated from the Church, but are to be reserved and committed
to Christ alone, the chief Shepherd, and to his coming: as the Lord himself
says of these men, that the Angels in the last day shall first separate such
from the righteous, and cast them into the fiery furnace, where shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth. Dan. 9. Matthew. 24. Mark. 12. 2 Thessalonians 2. 2 Pet. ^.


Here withal it is also taught, that that mischievous and wicked Antichrist,
shall sit in the Temple of God, to wit, in the Church, of whom the Prophets,
Christ our Lord, and the Apostles have foretold us, and warned us to take heed
of him, that the simple sort among the faithful might avoid him, and not
suffer themselves to be seduced by him. Now in Antichrist we are to
acknowledge a double overthwartnesse: to wit, dishonestie, and deceiving: the
first is an overthwartnesse of the mind or meaning, or a bringing in of false
doctrine, clean contrary to the meaning of Christ our Lord, and of the holy
Scripture: whereof the Apostle speaks after this sort: The time will come,
when 2 Timothy 4. 2 Pet. 3.
they will not suffer any longer the holy doctrine, but having their cares
itching, shall after their own lusts get them an heap of teachers, and shall
turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given unto fables. The other
evil or offense, that we are to consider in Antichrist, is a corrupt and
naughty life, giving unto others a very ill example, and is full of horrible
sins, hurtful filthiness, and all kind of vices, which in the
Antichristian church are openly practiced, and that freely, without any kind
of punishment: whereof the Apostle says, This know also, that in the last
days shall 2 Timothy 3.
come perilous times. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankefull,
profane, without natural affection, such as cannot be pleased, false
accusers, intemperate, fierce, not lovers or desirous of that which is good,
traitorous, headie, high minded, lovers of pleasure more then of God, having a
show of godliness, but have denied the power thereof: turn away therefore
from such. Of which time also Christ forespake in these words: And then many
shall be offended Matthew. ^4.
at these examples, and shall betray one another, and hate one another. And
many false Prophets shall arise, and deceive many. And because iniquity shall
increase many ways, the love of many shall be cold. But he that indureth to
the end, he shall be saved. These words are to be understood of them, which do
continue in the doctrine of Christ, enduring all adversities, where with they
are assaied. And in another place Christ cries out: Woe to the world, because
Mat. 18. Matthew. 11.
of offenses. And, Blessed is he that shall not be offended in me.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
THerefore we believe, that it is not lawful for any man, to Artic 26.
withdraw himself from the congregations, and to rest in himself, but rather
that all men are to defend, and to preserve the unity of the church,
submitting themselves to the common instruction, and to the yoke of Christ,
wheresoever God does appoint that true Ecclesiastical discipline, although the
Decrees of Magistrates do gainsay it: from which Order whosoever do separate
themselves, they do resist the ordinance of God.

We believe, that very carefully and wisely the true Church Artic. 27.
(the name whereof too many do abuse) is to be discerned. Therefore we affirm
out of the word of God, that the Church is a company of the faithful, which
agree together in following the word of God, and in embracing pure Religion,
wherein also they do daily profit, growing and confirming themselves mutually
in the fear of God, as they which have need daily to go forward and to
profit, and who, although they profit never so much, must notwithstanding of
necessity daily fly to the remission of sins. Yet we do not deny, but that
many Hypocrites and Reprobates are mingled with the faithful, but their
guilefull dealing is not able to take a way the name of the Church.

Therefore, seeing we believe this to be so, we withal boldly Artic. 28.
affirm, that where the word of God is not received, and where there is no
profession of that obedience which is due thereunto, nor any use of Sacraments,
there (if we will speak properly) we cannot judge any Church to be. Therefore
we condemn the Papisticall assemblies, because that the pure truth of God is
banished from them, and among them the Sacraments of Faith are corrupted,
counterfeited, and falsified, or altogether abolished, and to conclude, among
whom all Superstitions and Idolatries are in full force. And therefore we
think, that all they who join themselves to such actions, and communicate
there with, do separate themselves from the body of Christ. Yet
notwithstanding, because that in Papacle there be some small tokens of a
Church, and the substance especially of Baptism has remained, the efficacy
whereof does not depend upon him, by whom it is ministered, we confess, that
they which are there baptized, need not to be baptized the second time,
howbeit, by reason of the corruptions which are mingled therewith, no man can
offer Infants there to be baptized, but that he must defile himself.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
WE believe, that there is one Church of God, and that the same is not shut up
(as in times past among the Jews) into Artic. 4.
some one corner or kingdom, but that it is Catholic, and universal, and
dispersed throughout the whole world. So that there is now no nation, which may
truly complain, that they be shut forth, and may not be one of the Church and
people of God: and that this Church is the Kingdom, the Body, and the Spouse
of Christ: that Christ alone is the Prince of this Kingdom: that Christ alone
is the Head of this Body: and that Christ alone is the Bridegroom of this
Spouse.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe and confess, that there is one Catholic or Universal Artic. 27.
Church, which is the true Congregation or company of all faithful
Christians, which do look for their whole salvation from Christ alone, in as
much as they be washed in his blood, and sanctified and sealed by his spirit.
Furthermore, as this Church has been from the beginning of the world, so it
shall continue unto the end thereof. The which appears by this, that Christ
is our eternal King, who can never be without subjects. This Church God does
defend against all the fury and force of the world, although for a small time
it may seem to be very little, and as it were utterly extinguished, to the
sight of man: even as in the perilous time of Achab, God is said: to have
reserved to himself seven thousand men, which bowed not their knees to Baal.
To conclude, this holy Church is not situated or limited in any set or certain
place, nor yet bound and tied to any certain and peculiar persons, but spread
over the face of the whole earth, though in mind and will, by one and the same
spirit, through the power of faith, it be wholly joined and united together.

We believe, that seeing this holy Company and Congregation Artic. 28.
consists of those that are to be saved, and out of it there is no salvation,
therefore no man, of how great dignity and pre-eminence soever, ought to
separate and sunder himself from it, that being contented with his own
solitary estate, he should live apart by himself. But on the contrary side,
that all and every one are bound to associate themselves to this company,
carefully to preserve the unity of the Church, to submit himself both to the
doctrine and discipline of the same, finally to put his neck willingly under
the yoke of Christ, as common members of the same body, to seek the
edification of their brethren, according to the measure of gifts, which God
has bestowed upon every one. Moreover, to the end that these things may the
better be observed, it is the part and duty of every faithful man to separate
himself according to Gods word, from all those which are without the Church,
and to couple himself unto this company of the faithful, wheresoever God has
placed it, yea though contrary Edicts of Princes and Magistrates do forbid
them, upon pain of corporal death, presently to ensue upon all those, which
do the same. Whosoever therefore do either depart from the true Church, or
refuse to join themselves unto it, do openly resist the commandment of God.

We believe, that with great diligence and wisdom it ought to be searched and
examined by the word of God, what the true Artic. 29.
Church is, seeing that all the Sects, that at this day have sprung up in the
world, do usurp and falsely pretend the name and title of the Church. Yet
here we do not speak of the company of hypocrites, which together with the
good are mingled in the Church, though properly they do not pertain to the
Church, wherein they are only present with their bodies; but only of the
manner, how to distinguish the Body and Congregation of the true Church from
all other Sects, which do falsely boast that they be the members of the
Church. Wherefore the true Church may be discerned from the false by these
notes. First, if the pure preaching of the Gospel do flourish in it, if it
have the lawful administration of the Sacraments, according to Christ his
institution: if it do use the right Ecclesiastical discipline, for the
restraining of vice: Finally, to knit up all in one word, if it do square all
things to the rule of Gods word, refusing whatsoever is contrary to it,
acknowledging Christ to be the only head of the same. By these notes, I say,
it is certain that the true Church may be discerned. From the which it is not
lawful for any man to be severed. Now who be the true members of this true
Church, it may be gathered by these marks and tokens which be common to all
Christians: such is faith, by the virtue whereof, having once apprehended
Christ the only Savior, they do fly sin, and follow righteousness,
loving the true God, and their neighbors, without turning either to the right
hand, or to the left and do crucify their flesh with the effects thereof, not
as if no infirmity at all remained still within them, but because they do
fight all their life long against the flesh by the power of the spirit, having
often recourse unto the blood, death, passion, and obedience of our Lord
Christ, as unto a most safe refuge, in whom alone they are assured to find
redemption for their sins, through faith in him. But on the other side, the
false Church does always attribute more unto her self, to her own decrees
and traditions, then to the word of God, and will not suffer her self to be
subject to the yoke of Christ, neither does administer the Sacraments, so as
Christ has prescribed, but at her own will and pleasure, does one while add
unto them, another while detract from them. Furthermore, she does always lean
more to men, then to Christ: and whosoever do go about to lead a holy life,
according to the prescript rule of Gods Word, whosoever does rebuke and
reproove her faults, as her covetousness, and idolatry, those she does
persecute with a deadly hatred. By these marks therefore it is easy to
discern and distinguish both these Churches the one from the other.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
ALso they teach, that there is one holy Church, that shall continue always.
Now, to speak properly, the Church of Christ is a congregation of the members
of Christ, that is, of the Saints, which do truly believe, and rightly obey
Christ; though in this life there be many wicked ones and hypocrites mingled
with this company and shall be to the day of judgment. Now the Church
properly so called, has her notes and marks, to wit, the pure and sound
Doctrine of the Gospel and the right use of the Sacraments. And for the true
unity of the Church, it is sufficient, to agree upon the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and the administration of the Sacraments. Neither is it necessary that
humane traditions, or rites instituted by men, should be alike every where,
according as Saint Paul teaches. There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God, and Father of all.

These things are thus set down in another Edition.
ALso they teach, that there is one holy Church, which is to continue always.
Now the Church is a Congregation of Saints, in which the Gospel is purely
taught, and the Sacraments rightly administered. And unto the true Unity of the
Church, it is sufficient, to agree upon the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the
administration of the Sacraments. Neither is it necessary that humane
traditions, and rites or ceremonies ordained by man, should be alike in all
places, as Saint Paul says, There is one Faith, one Baptism, one God and
Father of all.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY. Of the Church.
GOd will have us to understand, that mankind is not borne by chance, but that
it is created of God, and created, not to eternal Artic. 11.
destruction, but that out of mankind he might gather unto himself a Church,
to the which in all eternity he might communicate his wisdom, goodness, and
joy: and he will have his Son to be seen, for whom and through whom, by his
unspeakable wisdom, and infinite mercy, he has repaired this miserable
nature of men. Therefore amongst men he would at all times have a company,
whereunto he delivered the doctrine, concerning his Son, and wherein the
Son himself did institute and preserve a ministry, to keep and spread
abroad that doctrine, by the which he has been, is, and will be effectual,
and has converted many to himself, as Paul does manifestly teach: The Gospel
is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes.

But it is to be marvelled at, and to be lamented, that the greatest part of
mankind, being carried away with a horrible rage, should contemn this voice,
and testimony of God, and the Son of God: and that in this company, which has
the name of the Church, there have been always many divisions, and that the
true Church has been overcome by foreign and domestical enemies. When men
do look upon these dissentions, and do see that they which embrace other
doctrines repugnant to the Gospel, do get the upper hand in kingdoms,
multitude, and glory, they doubt whether there be any Church of God, which it
is, what manner of Church it is, and where it should be. And for profane men
it is a hard matter to judge hereof: but the true Church does certainly know
out of the divine Testament, whence these so great furies of men do arise, and
yet that amongst them the Church of God is preserved; and does discern it from
other nations, and knows which is it, what manner of one it is, and where to
be found. Therefore that all godly men might be the better confirmed against
these doubts, This Article is set before them in the Creed: I believe the holy
Catholic Church. By this profession we affirm, that all mankind is not
rejected of God, but that there is, and shall remain, a certain true Church,
that the promises of God are sure, and that the Son of God does as yet
reign, receive, and save those that call upon him. And being raised up by this
comfort, we do give God thanks, and invocate him, we do desire, receive, and
look for eternal good things at his hand.

By reason of this admonition and comfort, the Article in the Creed is
rehearsed, seeing that the self same doctrine, touching the preserving of the
Church, is very often repeated in sundry Sermons in the book of God: as Isa.
59. This is my covenant with them, says the Lord: my Spirit, which is upon
thee, and my words, which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, says the Lord, from henceforth even
for ever. And Christ says, I am with you for ever, even to the end of the
world. Also this is a sweet comfort, that the heirs of eterna^l life are not
to be found else where, then in the company of those that are called, according
to that saying, Whom he has chosen, them he has also called. Let not
therefore men's minds go astray, beholding this ragged body of the Church, and
peradventure dreaming, that in other places some, which do not know the
Gospel, are notwithstanding holy, and the dwelling house of God, as Fabius,
Scipio, Aristides, and such like. But turn thou thy eyes hither: Know for a
certainty, that in this company of those which are called, some be chosen,
and jo^ne thy self to this company by Confession and Invocation: as David
says, Psalm. 26. One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that I do still
require, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to
behold the will of the Lord, and to visit his temple.

We do not therefore speak of the Church, as if we should speak of Plato his
Idaea, but we speak of such a Church, as may be seen and heard, according to
that saying, Their sound is gone forth into all the earth. The eternal Father
will have his Son to be heard among all mankind, as he says, H^are him. And
Psalm 2. I have set my King upon the holy hill of Sion: I will declare the
Decree. The Lord said to me, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.
Be wise now therefore ye Kings. We say therefore, that the visible Church in
this life is a company of those, which do embrace the Gospel of Christ, and
use the Sacraments aright, wherein God by the ministry of the Gospel is
effectual, and does renew many to life eternal. And yet in this company there
be many, which are not holy, but do agree together, concerning the true
doctrine, as in the time of Mary, these were the Church, to wit, Zachary,
Simeon, Joseph, Elizabeth, Mary, Anne, the teachers, and many other, who agreed
with them in the pure doctrine, and did not hear the Sadduces and the
Pharisees, but Zachary, Simeon, Anne, Mary, and such like, etc. For when the
company is very small, yet God does reserve some remnants, whose voice and
confession is heard, and he does oftentimes renew the ministry, according to
that saying: Except the Lord had left a seed unto us, we had been like to
Sodom, etc.

Therefore this description, taken out of the manifest testimonies of the
Scriptures, does declare, which is the Church, what it is, and where it is. We
may not doubt, that the Church is tied to the Gospel, as Paul says, If any
man teach another Gospel, let him be accursed. And, Joh. 10. My sheep hear
my voice. And, Joh. 14. If any man loves me, he hears my word, and my Father
shall love him, and we will come to him, and will dwell with him. And, Joh. 17.
Sanctify them with thy word, thy word is truth. Therefore the Sadduces, the
Pharisees, and such like Bishops, and others, who set forth an other doctrine,
differing from the Gospel, and do obstinately establish idolatry, are no
members of the Church of God, although they hold a title and dominions. But it
is manifest, that our adversaries teach and defend another kind of doctrine
differing from the Gospel, seeing they teach that the Law of God may be
fulfilled by our obedience in this life, and that this obedience does deserve
remission of sins: Also, that by this obedience men are made righteous before
God. Also that evil concupiscence is not sin, nor an evil resisting of the
law of God. Also, that they which are converted, must doubt, whether they be in
state of grace, and that this doubting is not sin. Also, that dead men are to
be prayed unto. Also, that difference of meats, monastical vows, and other
ceremonies, chosen without any commandment of God, are the service of God.
Also, that the sacrifice in the mass does deserve the remission of sins, and
other things, both for him that makes it, and also for others that are alive
or dead. Also, other manifold and horrible prophanations of the Sacraments.
Also, that Bishops may appoint services of God, and that the violating of those
services, which are appointed by them, is mortal sin. Also, that they may
enjoyne the law of single life, to any degree of men. Also, that the rehearsal
of all and every offense is necessary to the obtaining of remission of sins.
Also, that Canonical satisfactions do recompense the punishments of
Purgatory. Also, that those Synods wherein the Bishops alone do give their
judgment, cannot err. Also, they which do consecrate oils, and other
things, without the commandment of God, and do attribute thereunto a divine
power against sins, and Devils, and diseases: Also, they which allow of prayers
made to certain Images, as though there were more help to be had: Also, they
which do kill honest men, only for that they dislike these errors, and do
profess the truth: These things seeing they be altogether heathenish and
idolatrous, it is manifest, that the maintainers thereof, are not members of
the Church, but do rule and have soveraigntie, as the Pharisees and Saduces
did. Nevertheless there have been, are, and shall be in the Church of God,
such men as do keep the foundation, although some had, have, and shall have
more light, and others less. And sometimes also even the very Saints do build
stubble upon the foundation, especially seeing that the misery of these times
does not suffer those, which have the beginnings of faith, to be instructed,
and to confer with the better learned. Yet these are in the number of those,
whom the Lord commands to be spared, Ezech. 9. who sigh and are sorry,
because that errors are established.

Therefore chiefly by the voice of the Doctrine we may and ought to judge,
which, and where the true Church is, which by the voice of the true doctrine,
and then by the lawful use of the Sacraments, is distinguished from other
nations. And what is the voice of the true doctrine, the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, and the Creeds, do declare. In these the doctrine is
not doubtful, touching the foundation, to wit, touching the Articles of faith,
the essence and will of God, the Son the Redeemer, the Law, the Promises, the
use of the Sacraments, and the ministry. And it is manifest, that it is not
permitted to any creature, not to Angels, nor to men, to change that doctrine,
which is delivered of God.

Now what the Church is, the Son of God shows, saying, My kingdom is not
of this world. Also, As my Father sent me, so do I send you. By the voice of
the Ministers of the Gospel an eternal Church is gathered to God, and by this
voice God is effectual, and turns many to himself. This exceeding great
benefit of God, we ought to acknowledge, and thankfully to extol. And although
the Church be a company, that may be seen and heard, yet it is to be
distinguished from Political Empires, or those that bear the sword. Bishops
have not authority by the Law of God to punish the disobedient, neither do
they possess the kingdoms of the world, and yet in the Church there is an
order, according to that saying, He ascended, he gives gifts to Men, Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers. The Son of God is the high
Priest, anointed of the eternal Father, who, that the Church might not utterly
perish, has given unto it Ministers of the Gospel, partly called immediately
by himself, as the Prophets and Apostles, partly chosen by the calling of men.
For he does both allow of the choice of the Church, and of his infinite
goodness he is effectual, even when the Gospel does sound, by such as are
chosen by voices, or in the name of the Church.

Therefore we do retain in our Churches also the public rite of Ordination,
whereby the ministry of the Gospel is commended to those that are truly
chosen, whose manners and doctrine we do first thoroughly examine. And touching
the worthiness of the ministry, we do faithfully teach our Churches. No
greater thing can be spoken then that which the Son of God says: As my
Father sent me, so do I send you. He also declares what commandments he
gives, Preach ye the Gospel, and he affirms, that he will be effectual by
their voice, as the Father shows himself to be effectual by the Son. Also,
we set before men the commandments of God. He that hears you, hears me:
and he that despises you, despises me. Also, Obey them that have the
oversight of you. And yet these sayings do not erect a kingdom without the
Gospel: but they command an obedience which is due to the voice of the Gospel.
And these things pertain to the ministry: To teach the Gospel, to administer
the Sacraments, to give Absolution to them that ask it, and do not persevere
in manifest offenses: to ordain Ministers of the Gospel, being rightly called
and examined, to exercise the judgments of the Church after a lawful manner,
upon those Look the 1. Observat. upon this confession.
which are guilty of manifest crimes in manners or in doctrine, and to
pronounce the sentence of excommunication against them that are stubborn, and
again to absolve and pardon them that do repent. That these things may be done
orderly, there be also Consistories appointed in our Churches.

We said in the description of the Church, that there be many in this visible
Church, which be not holy, who notwithstanding in outward profession do
embrace the true Doctrine. We condemn the Donatists, who feigned that their
ministry is not effectual, which are not holy. Also we condemn that
Anabaptisticall filth, which feigned that to be the visible Church, wherein all
are holy. And we confess that we are so to think of the visible Church in
this life, as our Lord says. Matthew. 12. The kingdom of God, is like unto a
draw net, cast into the sea, wherein fishes are gathered both good and bad: but
yet they which become enemies to the true doctrine, cease to be members of this
visible congregation, according to this saying: If any man teach another
Gospel, let him be accursed.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE.
Of the chief Bishop.
THere be those that attribute this to the Bishop of Rome, that he is the head
of the Universal Church, and that he has power in earth, not only to ordain
civil kingdoms, and to govern all Ecclesiastical persons and matters, but
also to command the Angels in heaven, to deliver souls out of Purgatory, and
to bless, or deliver whom it pleases him. But we acknowledge, that if the
Bishop of Rome were a godly man, and did teach the Gospel of Christ, according
to the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, then he had a ministry of high
authority in this earth, to wit, a ministry of remitting and retaining
sins, then which ministry there is nothing greater or more excellent in
this earth. But he alone has not this ministry, but he has it in common
with all those, who by a lawful calling do preach the Gospel of Christ. For
the ministry of remitting or retaining sins, which otherwise is called the
Key of the kingdom of heaven, is not given to the free power of the person of
men, but it is so nearly annexed to the word of the Gospel, that so many as
do preach the Gospel, may truly be said to remit, and to retain sins, to
wit, to remit their sins, who by faith do receive the Gospel; to retain
theirs, that do contemn the Gospel. Mar. 16. Preach the Gospel to every
creature. He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that
will not believe, shall be damned. Hilarie, De Trinit. lib. 6. says. The
Father revealed it to Peter, that he should say, thou art the Son of God,
Therefore upon this rock of Confession is the Church builded: this faith is
the foundation of the Church: whatsoever this faith shall loose or bind in
earth, shall be loosed or bound in heaven. Chrysostom says: They which bear
the keys be the Priests, to whom the word of teaching, and interpreting the
Scriptures, is committed. Now the key is the word of the knowledge of the
Scriptures, by which key the truth is opened to men. Augustine, De Doctr.
Christ. Lib. 1. Cap. 18. says: These keys did he give to the Church, that
whatsoever it loses in earth, should be loosed in heaven: to wit, that
whosoever would not believe, that his sins are forgiven him in the Church,
they should not be forgiven to him: but whosoever should believe, and being
corrected does turn from his sins, being placed in the lap of the Church,
should, by the same faith and correction be healed. Ambrose says, Sins are
remitted by the word, whereof the Levite is the Interpreter or Expounder.
Bernard. in Epist. ad Eug. says: The true successor of Paul will say with
Paul, Not that we have dominion over your faith, but we are helpers of your
joy. The heirs of Peter will hear Peter saying: Not as though ye were Lords
over Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock. Thomas, in
Summa sua, part, 3. in addit. q. 6. art. 6. says: Because the Church is
founded upon Faith, and the Sacraments, therefore it does not pertain to the
Ministers of the Church to make new Articles of Faith, or to set apart those
which are made, neither to appoint new Sacraments, or to take away those, which
are appointed: but this is proper to that excellency of power, which is due to
Christ alone, who is the foundation of the Church. And therefore, as the Pope
cannot dispense, that any one may be saved without Baptism, so cannot he not
dispense with any to be saved without confession, because that he binds by
force of a Sacrament. And although Thomas have his opinions, touching
confession, yet this which he says, It does not pertain to the Ministers of
the Church (among whom he reckons the Pope) to make new Articles of Faith,
and to appoint new Sacraments, is indeed an Apostolic and Catholic judgment.
For no other ministry does pertain to the Ministers of the Church, which
have their calling from Christ, then that which we mentioned before, and which
the Apostles of Christ, themselves did execute, touching the remitting and
retaining of sins. Therefore if any thing more then this ministry be
attributed to the Bishop of Rome, this is either given unto him by man's
ordinances, or else it is feigned by the Monks and other flatterers, against
the authority of the word of God.

Of the Church.
WE believe and confess, that there is one holy Catholic, and Apostolic
Church, according to the Creed of the Artic. 32.
Apostles, and the Nicene Creed. 2. That this Church is so governed of the holy
Ghost, that although he suffer it to be weak in this earth, yet he does
always preserve it, that it do not perish either by errors, or by sins. 3.
That in this world many naughty men and hypocrites, are mingled with this
Church. 4. That these naughty men and hypocrites, if by a lawful calling they
shall take upon them the ministry of the Church, shall not of themselves any
whit hinder the truth of the Sacraments, except they pervert the ordinance of
Christ, and teach wicked things. 5. That in this Church there is true remission
of sins. 6. That this Church Look the 1. Observation upon this confess.
has authority to bear witness of the holy Scripture. 7. That this Church
has authority * to judge of all doctrines, according to that, Try the
spirits, whether they be of God. And, Let the other judge. 8. That this Church
has authority Look the 2. observation.
to interpret the Scripture.

But where this Church is to be sought, and whether her authority be limited
within certain bounds, diverse men do judge diversely. But we think, that men
are to judge, by the authority, both of the holy Scripture, and also of the
ancient Fathers, that the true Catholic, and Apostolic Church, is not tied to
one certain place or nation, nor to one certain kind of men, but that it is
in that place or nation, where the Gospel of Christ is sincerely preached, and
his Sacraments rightly administered, according to Christ his institution. Ioh.
10. I have said, ye are Gods: He called them Gods, unto whom the word of God
was given, etc. Therefore there is the people or Church of God, where the word
of God is preached. Joh. 15. Now you are clean, through the word, which I have
spoken to you. Therefore the word of Christ, which is the Gospel, does declare
where that Church is, which is clean in the sight of God: Romans 1. The
Gospel is the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes.
Therefore where the Gospel is, which is acknowledged by faith, there God has
his Church, wherein he is effectual unto eternal life. Chrysostom in his
Commentaries upon Matthew, Cap. 24 Hom. 49. says. Therefore at this time all
Christians must go to the Scriptures: because that at this time, since heresy
possessed those Churches, there can be no trial of true Christianity, neither
can there be any other refuge for Christians, that would willingly know the
truth of faith, but only the Divine Scriptures. And a little after, Therefore
he that will know which is the true Church of Christ, whence may he know it,
but only by the Scriptures? Augustine, Tom. 2. Epist. 166. says. In the
Scriptures we have learned Christ, in the Scriptures we have learned to know
the Church: these Scriptures we have in common: why do we not in them retain
in common both Christ and the Church? And again, Tom. 7. in Epist. contra
Epist. Petiliani Donatistae, cap. 2. 3. and 4. It is a question between us and
the Donatists, where the Church is What then shall we do? shall we seek the
Church in our own words, or in the words of her Head, in our Lord Jesus Christ?
I think that we ought to seek it rather in his words, who is the truth, and
does best of all know his body.

Now that which is affirmed, that the Church has authority to bear witness
of the holy Scripture, to interpret the Scripture, and to judge of all
doctrines, it is not so to be understood, that the Church has absolute
authority to determine what she lists, and also, if it please her, to change
the Scripture, and to feign a new doctrine, and to appoint new worships of
God; but that the Church, as the Spouse of Christ, ought to know the voice of
her husband, and that she has received of her husband a certain rule, to wit,
the Prophetical and Apostolical preaching, confirmed by miracles from heaven,
according to the which she is bound to interpret those places of the Scripture,
which seem to be obscure, and to judge of doctrines. Psalm. 119. Thy word is a
light unto my feet. Romans 3. Having gifts, that be diverse, according to the
grace that is given unto us, whether we have prophecy, according to the
proportion of Faith, etc. 2 Pet. 1. We have a more sure word of the Prophets,
to the which ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a
dark place, etc. Origin upon lerem Hom. 1. It is necessary for us to call the
holy Scriptures to witness: for our meanings and interpretations have no credit,
without these witnesses. Jerome upon Matthew. 23. That which is spoken without
authority of the Scriptures, is as easily contemned, as it is spoken. And
August. De Nupt. and Concup. Lib. 2. Cap. 23. says, This controversy seeks
a Judge. Therefore let Christ judge, and let him show, what thing it is that
his death does profit. This, says he, is my blood, And a little after:
Together with him let the Apostle judge, because that Christ himself also
speaks in the Apostle, he cries out and says touching God the Father, He
which spared not his own Son. etc. Wherethe Church has so far authority
to judge of doctrine, that notwithstanding she must keep her self within the
bonds of the holy Scripture, which is the voice of her husband, from which
voice it is not lawful for any man, no not for Angel, to depart.

Out of the Confession of SVEVELAND. Of the Church.
FVrthermore we will show, what is taught among us, both Artie. 15.
touching the Christian Church, and also touching the holy Sacraments: and
touching the Church, this is it that we teach. The Church or congregation of
Christ, (which as yet is in this world as a stranger from God) is the
fellowship and company of those, which addict themselves to Christ, and do
altogether trust and rest in his protection: among whom notwithstanding many
shall be mingled, even to the end of the world, who although they profess the
Christian faith, yet they have it not in deed. This has our Lord taught
sufficiently, Matthew. 13. by the parable both of the cockle, and of the Net cast
into the sea, in the which the bad fishes are caught with the good. Also,
Matthew. 22 by the parable of the King, inviting all men to the marriage of his
Son, and afterward, casting him out, being bound hand and foot, into utter
darknnes, which had not a wedding garment. Now these places of Scripture,
wherein the congregation of Christ is commended, to be the Spouse of Christ,
for the which he has given himself. Ephesians. 5. The house of God, the pillar and
ground of truth. 1 Timothy 3. Also, The holy hill of Sion, the City of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and congregation of the first borne, which are
written in heaven: I say, all these places of Scripture do properly pertain to
them, who for their sincere faith are truly, and in the sight of God, reckoned
among the children of God. For seeing that in these alone the Lord does fully
reign, these only, if we will speak properly, are called the Church of
Christ, and the communion of Saints, in which sense also the name of the Church
is expounded, in the common Articles of faith, those false Christians being
excluded, which are mingled amongst them. Furthermore, the holy Ghost himself
does govern this Church or congregation, and remains with it, as Christ does
even to the end of the world, and does sanctify it, that at the length he may
present it unto himself without spot or wrinckle, as it is said, Ephesians 5. Also
this is that Church which all men are commanded to hear, and he that will not
hear her, is to be counted as an Heathen and Publicane.

And although that, to wit, faith it self, cannot be seen, whereby this
Congregation has obtained, to be called the Church and company of Christ, yet
the fruits of that faith may be seen and known, and of them a certain
Christian conjecture be taken. These fruits be chiefly, a bold profession of
Faith, a true love offering it self to do humble service to all men, a
contempt of all things. Seeing therefore that these be the proper fruits,
wheresoever the holy Gospel and the Sacraments be exercised, thereupon it may
easily be known, where and who be the Christian Church; so much as is necessary
for us to preserve among us the Christian communion, and that in the same we
may be instructed, admonished, and help one another, according to the
commandment of Christ.

Furthermore, seeing this congregation is the very kingdom of God, wherein all
things ought to be appointed in best order, she has all kind of offices and
ministers: for she is the body of Christ himself, compacted of many members,
whereof every one have their proper work. Therefore whosoever do faithfully
discharge such functoins, and do earnestly labor in the word and doctrine,
they do represent the Church, and may do all things in the name thereof, so
that whosoever shall either despise them, or refuse to hear them, he may
worthily be said to despise the Church it self.

Now with what spirit or with what spiritual authority we do believe that
they are furnished, we have declared before, out of most firm foundations of
the Scripture, where we showed, what we thought of the spiritual or
Ecclesiastical offices, and dignity. For they cannot by any means represent
the Church of Christ, or do any thing in the name thereof, which are not
Christ's, and therefore propound no Christian things, but whatsoever is contrary
to the doctrine of Christ. For although it may be, that even the wicked may
teach some good thing, and may also prophecy in the name of Christ (after
their example, to whom the Lord himself does witness that he will once in
time to come say, ( That he never knew them.) Yet it cannot be, that they can
discharge the duty of the Church of Christ, and are to be heard, in his stead,
which do not propound the voice of their husband Christ, although otherwise
they should think aright of faith, and be counted amongst the members of the
Church, as it does oftentimes fall out, when as the very children of God are
wrapped in errors, and do also publish the same. For the Church of Christ is
wholly addicted to Christ himself. Therefore that cannot be counted a
doctrine, precept, or commandment of the true Church, except it be the same
with the doctrine, precept, and commandment of Christ himself. And whosoever
propounds any other thing in her name (although he were an Angel from heaven)
he is not to be heard: as also the Church in those things does represent
nothing less then the Church of Christ.

THE ELEVENTH SECTION. OF THE MINISTERS OF THE CHVRCH, and of their Calling and
Office.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA. Of the Ministers of the Church, their
Institution, and Offices. CHAP. 18.
GOD has always used his Ministers, for the gathering or erecting up of a
Church to himself, and for the governing and preservation of the same, and
still he does, and always will use them, so long as the Church remains on
the earth. Therefore the first beginning, institution, and office of the
Ministers, is a most ancient ordinance of God himself, not a new devise
appointed by men. True it is, that God can by his power, without any means,
take unto himself a Church amongst men, but he had rather deal with men by
the ministry of men. Therefore Ministers are to be considered, not as
Ministers by themselves alone, but as the Ministers of God, even such as by
whose means God does work the salvation of mankind. For which cause we give
counsel to beware, that we do not so attribute the things that appertain to
our conversion and instruction unto the secret virtue of the holy Ghost, that
we make frustrate the Ecclesiastical ministry. For it behooves us always to
have in mind the words of the Apostle, How shall they believe in him, of whom
they have not heard? and Romans 10.
how shall they hear without a Preacher? Therefore faith is by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God. And that also which the Lord says, in the Gospel.
Verily, verily I say unto you, he that receives John 3.
those that I shall send, receives me, and he that receives me, receives
him that sent me. Likewise that a man of Macedonia appeared in a vision to Paul
being then in Asia, and said unto him, Act. 16.
Come unto Macedonia, and help us. And in another place the same Apostle
says, We together are Gods laborers, and ye are his 1 Cor. 3.
husbandry, and his building. Yet on the other side we must take heed, that we
do not attribute too much to the ministers and ministry, herein remembering
also the words of our Lord in the Gospel: No man comes to me except the
Father, which has sent me, John 6.
draw him. And the words of the Apostle, Who then is Paul, and who 1 Cor. 3.
is Apollo, but the ministers by whom ye believed? and as the Lord gave unto
every one. Therefore neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that
waters, but God that gives the increase. Therefore let us believe that God
does teach us by his word outwardly by his ministers, and does inwardly move
and persuade the hearts of his Elect unto belief by his holy spirit: and that
therefore we ought to render all the glory of this whole benefit unto God. But
we have spoken of this matter in the 1 Chapter of this our declaration.

God has used for his ministers, even from the beginning of the world, the
best and most excellent men in the world (for howsoever diverse of them were but
simple, for worldly wisdom or Philosophy, yet sure in true divinity they were
most excellent) namely the Patriarks, to whom he spoke very often by his
Angels. For the Patriarks were the Prophets or teachers of their age, whom God
for this purpose would have to live many years, that they might be, as it were
Fathers, and lights of the world. After them followed Moses together with the
Prophets, that were most famous throughout the whole world. Besides after all
these our heavenly Father has sent his only begotten Son, the most absolute
and perfect teacher of the world, in whom is hidden the wisdom of God, and
from him derived unto us by that most holy, perfect, and most pure doctrine of
all other. For he chose unto himself Disciples whom he made Apostles. And they
going out into the whole world gathered together Churches in all places by the
preaching of the Gospel. And after they ordained pastors and Doctors in all
Churches, by the commandment of Christ, who by such as succeeded them, has
taught and governed the Church unto this day. Therefore God gave unto his
ancient people the Patriarchs, together with Moses and the Prophets: so also to
his people under the new covenant he has sent his only begotten Son, and
with him the Apostles and teachers of his Church.

Furthermore, the Ministers of the new covenant are termed by diverse names,
for they are called Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Bishops, Elders, Pastors,
and Doctors. The Apostles remained 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.
in no certain place, but gathered together diverse Churches throughout the
whole world: which Churches when they were once established, there ceased to be
any more Apostles, and in their places were particular parsons appointed in
every Church. The Prophets in old time did foresee and foretell things to come,
and besides did interpret the Scriptures, Look the 1. observation upon this
confession.
and such are found some amongst us at this day. They were called Evangelists,
which were the penners of the history of the Gospel, and were also Look the 2.
Observation.
preachers of the Gospel of Christ, as the Apostle Paul gives in charge unto
Timothy, To fulfill the work of an Evangelist. Look the 3. Observat.
Bishops were the overseers and the watchmen of the Church, which did
distribute food and other necessities of the Church. The Elders were the
ancients and as it were the Senators and Fathers of the Church, governing it
with the wholesome counsel. The Pastors did both keep the Lords flock, and
also Look the 4. Observat.
provide things necessary for it. The Doctors do instruct, and teach the true
faith and godliness. Therefore the Church Ministers that now are, may be
called Bishops, Elders, Pastors and Doctors. But in process of times there
were many more names of Ministers brought into the Church. For some were created
Patriarks, others Archbishops, others Suffragans, other Metropolitanes,
Archpriests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acoluthes, Exorcists, Queristers, Porters,
and I know not what a a rabble besides Cardinals, Provosts, and Priors, Abbots
greater and lesser, governors higher and lower. But touching all these we
pass not a rush what they have been in time past, or what they are now. It is
not sufficient for us, that, forasmuch as concerns Ministers, we have the
doctrine of the Apostles.

We therefore knowing certainly that Monks and the orders or sorts of them are
neither instituted of Christ nor of his Apostles, we teach that they are so
far from being profitable, that they are pernicious and hurtful unto the
Church of God. For although in former times they were somewhat tolerable (when
they lived solitarily, getting their livings with their own hands, were
burdensome to none, but did in all places obey their Pastors, even as lay
men, yet what kind of men they be now, all the world sees and perceives.
They pretend, I know not what vows, but they lead a life altogether
disagreeing from their vows: so that the very best of them may justly be
numbered among those, of whom the Apostle speaks: We hear say that 2 Thessalonians. 3.
there be some among you which walk inordinately and work not at all, but are
busy bodies, etc. Therefore we have no such in our Churches: and and besides
we teach, that they should not be suffered to rout in the Churches of Christ.

Furthermore, no man ought to usurp the honor of the Ecclesiastical
ministry, that is to say, greedily to pluck it to him by bribes, or any
evil shifts, or of his own accord. But let the ministers of the Church be
called and chosen by a lawful and Ecclesiastical election and vocation, that
is to say, let them be chosen religiously of the Church, or of those which are
appointed thereunto by the Church, and that in due order, without any tumult,
seditions, or contention. But we must have an eye to this, that not every one
that will, be elected, but such men as are fit, and have sufficient learning,
especially in the Scriptures, and godly eloquence, and wise simplicity, to
conclude, such men as be of good report for a moderation and honesty of life,
according to that Apostolic rule which Saint Paul gives in the 1 to Timothy,
3. cap. and 1 to Titus. And those which are chosen, let them be ordained of the
Elders, with public prayer, and laying on of hands. We do here therefore
condemn all those, which run of their own accord being neither chosen, sent,
nor ordained. We do also utterly disallow unfit Ministers, and such as are not
furnished with gifts requisite for a Pastor. In the mean time we are not
ignorant that the innocent simplicity of certain Pastors in the Primitive
Church, did sometimes more profit the Church then the manifold exquisite, and
nice learning of other some, that were over lofty and high minded. And for
this cause we also at this day do not reject the honest simplicity of
certain men, which yet is not destitute of all knowledge and learning.

The Apostles of Christ do term all those which believe in Christ, Priests,
but not in regard of their ministry, but because Exodus 19. 2 Pet. 1. Apoc. 1.
that all the faithful being made Kings and Priests by Christ, may offer up
spiritual sacrifices unto God. The ministry then and Priesthood are things
far different one from the other. For Priesthood, as we said even now, is
common to all Christians, so is not the ministry. And we have not taken away
the ministry from the Church, because we have thrust the Popish priesthood out
of the Church of Christ. For surely in the new covenant of Christ, there is no
longer any such priesthood, as was in the ancient Church of the Jews, which
had an external anointing, holy Heb. 4.
garments, and very many ceremonies, which were figures and tipes of Christ,
who by his coming fulfilled and abolished them. And he himself remains the
only Priest for ever: and we do not communicate the name of Priest to any of
the ministers, lest we should detract any thing from Christ. For the Lord
himself has not appointed in the Church any priests of the new Testament, who
having received authority from the Suffragane may offer up the host every
day, that is, the very flesh and the very blood of our Savior, for the quick
and the dead, but Ministers which may teach, and administer the Sacraments.
Paul declaring plainly and shortly, what we are to think of the Ministers of
the New Testament, or of the Church of Christ, and what we must attribute unto
them, Let a man, says he, thus account of us, as of 1 Cor. 4.
the Ministers of Christ, and dispensers of the mysteries of God. So that the
Apostle his mind is, that we should esteem of Ministers, as of Ministers. Now
the Apostle calls them as it were underrowers, which should only have an eye
unto their master and chief governor, and be as men that live not to
themselves, nor according to their own will, but unto others, to wit, their
Masters, at whose commandment and beck they ought to be. For the Minister of
the Church is commanded wholly and in all parts of his duty, not to please
himself, but to execute that only, which he has received in commandment from
his Lord. And in this same place, it is expressly declared, who is our Master,
even Christ, to whom the Ministers are in subjection in all the functions of
their ministry. And to the end that he might the more fully declare their
ministry, he adds further that the ministers of the Church are stewards and
dispensers of the mysteries of God. 1 Cor. 4.
Now the mysteries of God, Paul in many places, and especially in the third to
the Ephesians. does call the Gospel of Christ. And the Sacraments of Christ are
also called mysteries of the ancient Writers. Therefore for this purpose are
the ministers called, namely to preach the Gospel of Christ unto the faithful,
and to administer the Sacraments. We read also in another place in the Gospel,
of the faithful and wise servant, that his Lord set him over his family, Luke
12.
to give food unto it in due season. Again, (in an other place of the Gospel)
a man goes into a strange country, and leaving his house, gives unto his
servants authority therein, commits to them his substance, and appoints
every man his work.

This is now a fit place to speak somewhat also of the power and office of the
ministers of the Church. And concerning their power, some have entreated and
disputed overbusily, and would bring all things even the very greatest under
their jurisdiction, and Luc. 22. Mat. 18.
that against the commandment of God who forbad unto his all dominion, and
highly commends humility: indeed there is one kind of power which is a
mere and absolute power, called the power of right. According to this power
all things in the whole world are subject unto Christ, who is Lord of all: even
as he himself witnesses, saying: All power is given unto me in heaven Matthew.
28 21. Apoc. 23 and 22.
and in earth. And again, I am the first, and the last, and behold I live for
ever, and I have the keys of hell, and of death. Again, He has the key of
David, which opens, and no man shuts, shuts, and no man opens. This
power the Lord reserveth to himself, and does not transfer it to any other,
that he might sit idle by, and look on his ministers while they wrought. For
Isaiah says, I will put the keie of the house of David upon his shoulder. And
again, Whose government shall be upon his shoulders. For he does not lay the
government on other men's shoulders, but does still keep, and use his own power,
thereby governing all things, Furthermore, there is another power of duty, or
ministerial power limited out by him, who has full and absolute power and
authority. And this is more like a ministry then dominion. For we see that some
master does give unto the steward of his house authority and power over his
house, and for that cause delivers him his keys, that he may admit or
exclude such as his Master will have admitted, or excluded. According to this
power, does the minister by his office, that which the Lord has commanded him
to do, and the Lord does ratify and confirm that which he does, and will have
the deeds of his ministers to be acknowledged and esteemed as his own deeds
unto which end are those speeches in the Gospel: I will give unto thee the M^th
16.
keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest, or loosest in
earth, shall be bound, and loosed in heaven. Again, Whose sins soever ye
remit, they shall be remitted, and whose sins soever John 20.
ye retain, the shall be retained. But if the Minister deal not in all things
as his Lord has commanded him: but but pass the limits and bounds of faith,
then the Lord does make void that which he does. Wherefore the Ecclesiastical
power of the ministers of the Church, is that function whereby they do indeed
govern the Church of God, but yet so as they do all things in the Church as
he has prescribed in his word: which thing being so done, the faithful do
esteem them as done of the Lord himself: but touching the keys we have
spoken somewhat before.

Now the Look the 5. observation upon this confession.
power that is given to the Ministers of the Church is the same and alike in
all: and in the beginning the Bishops or Elders, did with a common consent and
labor, govern the Church, no man lifted up himself above another, none
usurped greater power or authority over his fellow Bishops, for they remembered
the words of the Lord, He which will be the chiefest among Luc. 20.
you, let him be your servant: they kept in themselves by humility, and did
mutually aid one another in the government and preservation of the Church.
Notwithstanding, for orders sake, some one of the ministers, called the
assembly together, propounded unto the assembly the matters to be consulted of,
gathered together the voices or sentences of the rest, and to be brief, as
much as lay in him, provided that there might arise no confusion. So did Saint
Peter, as we read in the Acts: who yet for all that was neither above the rest,
nor had greater authority then the rest. Very true therefore is that saying of
Cyprian the Martyr, in his book, De simpl. Cler. The same doubtless were the
rest of the Apostles that Peter was, having an equal fellowship with him both
in honor and power, but the beginning hereof proceeds from unity, to
signify unto us that there is but one Church. Saint Jerome upon the Epistle of
Paul to Titus has a saying not much unlike this. Before that by the instinct
of the Devil there was partaking in religion, the Churches were governed by
the common advice of the Priests: but after that every one thought, that those
whom he had baptized, were his own and not Christ's, It was decreed, that one
of the Priests should be chosen and set over the rest, who should have the care
of the whole Church laid upon him, and by whose means all schisms should be
removed. Yet Jerome does not avouch this as an order set down of God. For
straight way after he adds, Even as, says he, the Priests knew by the
continual custom of the Church, that they were subject to him that is set
over them: So the Bishop must know that they are above the priests, rather by
custom, then by the prescript rule of Gods truth, and they should have the
government of the Church in common with them. Thus far Jerome. Now therefore
no man can forbid by any right that we may return to the old appointment of
God, and rather receive that, then the custom devised by men.

The offices of the ministers are diverse, yet notwithstanding most men do
restrain them to two, in which all the rest are comprehended; to the teaching
of the Gospel of Christ, and to the lawful administration of the Sacraments.
For it is the duty of the Ministers to gather together a holy assembly,
therein to expound the Word of God, and also to apply the general doctrine to
the state and use of the Church, to the end, that the doctrine which they
teach, may profit the hearers, and may build up the faithful. The Ministers
duty, I say, is, to teach the unlearned, and to exhort, yea and to urge them
to go forward, in the way of the Lord, who do stand still or linger, and go
slowly forward: moreover to comfort, and to strengthen those, which are
fainthearted, and to arm them against the manifold temptations of Satan, to
rebuke offenders, to bring them home that go astray, to raise them up that are
fallen, to convince the gainsaiers, to chase away the wolf from the Lords
flock, to rebuke wickedness and wicked men, wisely and severely, not to wink
at, nor to pass over great wickedness, and besides to administer the
Sacraments, and to commend the right use of them, and to prepare all men by
wholesome doctrine to receive them, to keep together all the faithful in an
holy unity, and to meet with schisms. To conclude, to catechize the
ignorant, to commend the necessity of the poor to the Church, to visit and
instruct those that are sick or entangled with diverse temptations, and so to
keep them in the way of life. Lastly, to look diligently, that there be
public prayers, and supplications made in time of necessity, together with
fasting, that is, an holy abstinencie, and most carefully to look to those
things which belongs to tranquillity, safety, and peace of the Church. And to
the end that the Minister may perform all these things the better, and with
more ease, it is required in him that he be one that fears God, pray
diligently, gives himself much to the reading of the Scripture, and in all
things, and at all times is watchful, and does show forth a good example unto
all men of holiness of life. And seeing there must needs be a discipline in
the Church, and that among the ancient fathers excommunication was in use, and
there were Ecclesiastical judgments amongst the people of God, wherein this
discipline was exercised by godly men, it belongs also to the Ministers duty
for the edifying of the Church, to moderate this discipline, according to the
condition of the time and public estate, and according to necessity: whereas
this rule is always to be holden, that All things ought to be done to
edification, decently, honestly, without any oppression or tumult. For the
Apostle witnesses, that power was given to him of God, to edify and not to
destroy. 2 Cor. 10.
And the Lord himself forbad the cockle to be plucked up in the Lords field,
because there would be danger lest the wheat also should be plucked up with it.

But as for the error of the Donatists, we do here utterly detest it, who
esteemed and judged the doctrine and administration of the Sacraments to be
either effectual, or not effectual, by the good or evil life of the
Ministers. For we know that the voice of Christ is to be heard, though it be
out of the mouths of evil Ministers forasmuch as the Lord himself said, Do
as they Matthew. 22.
command you, but according to their works do ye not. We know that the
Sacraments are sanctified by their institution, and also by the word of Christ,
and that they are effectual to the Godly although they be administered by
ungodly Ministers. Of which matter Augustine, that blessed servant of God, did
reason diversely out of the Scriptures against the Donatists, yet
notwithstanding there ought to be a straight discipline amongst the Ministers.
For there must be diligent inquiry in the Synods touching the life and
Doctrine of the Ministers.

Those that offend are to be rebuked of the Seniours, and to be brought into
the way, if they be not past recovery, or else to be deposed, and as wolves to
be driven from the Lords flock, by the true Pastors, if they be incurable.
For, if they once be false teachers, they are in no wise to be tolerated:
neither do we disallow of general councels, if that they be taken up
according to the example of the Apostles, to the salvation of the Church and
not to the destruction thereof.

The faithful Ministers also are worthy (as good workmen) of their reward,
neither do they offend when as they receive a stipend and all things that be
necessary for themselves and their family. For the Apostle shows that these
things are for just cause offered of the Church, and received of the Ministers,
they are likewise of right, 1 Cor. 9. and 1 Timothy 5. and in other places also.

The Anabaptists, likewise are confuted by this Apostolical doctrine, who
condemn and rail upon those ministers which live upon the ministry.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA.
Of the Ministry of the Word.
WE confess that the Ministers of the Church, are (as Paul Artic. 15.
terms them) the fellow laborers of God, by whom he does dispense both the
knowledge of himself, and also remission of sins, turn men to himself,
raise them up, comfort them, and also terrify and judge them: yet so, that
notwithstanding we do ascribe all the virtue and efficacy that is in them
unto the Lord, and give a ministry only to the Ministers. For it is certain
that this virtue and efficacy is not to be tied to any creature at all, but is
to be dispensed by the free favor of God, in what manner and to whom it
pleases him. For he that waters is nothing, neither he that planteth, but
God that gives the increase.

Ecclesiastical power.
NOw the authority of the Word, and feeding the flock of the Artic. 16.
Lord (which properly is the power of the keys) prescribing * Look the 1.
observation upon this confession.
to all; as well high as low, what to do, ought to be sacred and inviolable:
and is to be committed only to those that are chosen and fit to discharge it,
and that either by the divine service of God, or by the certain and advised
suffrage of the Church, or by their sentence, to whom the Church has assigned
this charge.

The choosing of Ministers.
FOr this function is to be given to none; whom the Ministers, Artic 17.
and they to whom this charge is committed by the Church, do not find and
judge to be skillful in the law of God, to be of a blameless life, and to
bear a singular affection to the name of Christ, which, seeing it is the true
election of God, is rightly allowed by the consent of the Church, Look the 2.
observation upon this confession.
and by the laying on of the hands of the Priest.

The head and shepherd of the Church.
FOr Christ himself is the true head of his Church, and he alone Artic. 18.
is the Shepherd, who gives governors, Pastors, and Doctors, that by the
outward administration of the keys, they may rightly and lawfully use that
authority. Wherefore we do not acknowledge that those are Shepherds, and
that head of Rome, which have the bare title and nothing else.

The duties of Ministers.
THe chief duty of this function is, to preach repentance and Artic. 19.
remission of sins through Christ, without ceasing to pray for the people, to
give themselves very diligently without weariness to holy studies, and to the
word of God, and with the word of God, as with the sword of the spirit, and by
all kind of means to persecute Satan with deadly hatred, and to weaken his
force, to defend those Citizens of Christ which are sound, and to admonish,
reprehend, and punish those that are infected: and by a godly consent of them
which are chosen out of the ministers and the magistrates, by discipline to
shut out, or by some other fit means to mulct those, which proceed further in
wickedness, till such time as they do repent and may be saved. For that is
the returning to the Church for a diseased Citizen of Christ, if having changed
his mind and endeavor (whereunto all this discipline does tend) he
acknowledge and confess his error, and does now of his own accord require
wholesome discipline and by his new endeavor of godliness does rejoice all the
godly.

Out of the declaration of the same Confession, which Luther himself approved
by his letters, Anno 1537.
WE believe and confess, that mankind, by the only mercy of God, is
justified by faith through Christ, and that the Almighty God, by the outward
preaching of the Gospel, and the holy seals, does declare, and set before our
eyes that salvation and happiness, which Christ, without any work or merit of
ours, has purchased for us, and given freely unto us. But we are unjustly
suspected of some as though we did attribute nothing to the preaching of the
outward word, and to the Sacraments, or as though we did take that from them,
which the Lord himself does attribute unto them, and by this means should
overthrow and abolish the ordering and guiding of those things which pertain
to the Church: whereas on the contrary side we have a chief regard unto this
that we neither attribute too much nor too little to these things. For we have
learned both out of the holy Scriptures, and also out of the Catholic Doctor
Austin, That the soul is in miserable servitude if any man take or worship the
signs instead of the things which they signify. And again, That is an
error, if any man interpret them unfruitfully. We have learned also that the
external gifts are not to be despised, because of the internal gifts: knowing
that Cornelius the Centurion was taught of God, and that yet notwithstanding he
was put over to hear Peter the Apostle preach, and to be baptized of him.
Therefore that we may walk in the high and plain way, that is, that we may
detract nothing from the Word and Sacraments, which the Scripture does
attribute unto them, and again that we may not give that to the creature,
which is proper to the Creator, and that the ordinance of God may not be
disanulled, but all glory may be given to God alone: to conclude, lest that by
those external things instituted of God, we should too much tie the minds of
the faithful to things created, we so believe touching the Ministry of the
Word and the Sacraments, as we have professed, which thing also we do thus
declare by that which follows.

Of the ministry of the Word of God.
ALthough the Lord has expressly said, No man comes to me, except my. Father
which sent me, do draw him: Yet it was his will, that the Gospel of the
kingdom should be preached to all nations, and that Bishops should discharge
this duty of the Ministry, with great care and diligence, and with special
watchfulness, and be instant in season, and out of season, and by all means,
to gain many unto Christ. For therefore when he was ready to depart hence into
heaven in his body, he said to his disciples: Got ye into the whole world, and
preach the Gospel to every creature. After the which manner also Paul the
Apostle says, He that descended, is even the same that ascended far above
all heavens, that he might fill all things. And he gave some to be Apostles,
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers, for
the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for
the edification of the body of Christ.

Now the Lord does use these his Ministers to instruct his Church, so as he
uses meats to nourish us, the sower to sow seed, and Phisicians to heal our
bodies. For except himself do give power and virtue, whereby both the meat
may be turned into nourishment, and the seed may spring up, and also the
medicine may be made effectual, the outward work does nothing at all profit:
So except the Lord do give increase in the heart of the hearer, the doctrine
indeed in him which has not faith, is as it were a watering and planting, but
such as is without efficacy and unfruitful: but being received by faith into
good ground, and being trimmed by the inward husbandman the holy Ghost, does
work marvellously, and profit. Notwithstanding it has so pleased the Lord to
moderate the affairs of men, that although by his own power he does all
things in all men, yet he vouchsafes to use the Ministers as workers together.
For that saying of Paul is evident: For we together are Gods laborers, but he
adds: Ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods building: to wit, that we might give
unto God all the virtue, efficacy, accomplishing and perfiting of the work,
and to the Ministers a service only: whereupon we do truly say with Paul:
Who is Paul then? and who is Apollos? but the Ministers by whom ye believed?
and as the Lord gave to every man. I have planted, Apollos watered, but God
gave the increase. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither is
he that waters, but God that gives the increase. And in this sense we do
know, and willingly use these speeches, and testimonies of the holy Scripture:
I have begotten you in Christ by the Gospel; you are the Epistle of Christ,
written by us, not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God. And, Whose
sins you remitte, they are remitted to them. Again, Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. And again, I send thee to the
Gentiles, that thou may open their eyes. Also the Scripture says of John
Baptist, He shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, etc. For when
all these things be done (that is, when we are borne again, when the holy
Ghost is given to us, when our sins be forgiven us, when faith is given us,
and our eyes opened, and our hearts turned) one and the self same spirit, (as
the Apostle says) works them all, who by his grace does lighten their
hearts, and draw them unto him, and that after a common order and mean, to
wit, by the instrument or mean of his word: and yet he might draw us without
all means, and without any instrument, whether, as much, and whom it pleases
him. Therefore let no man glory in men, but in him that gives the increase.
Again, let no man despise men, which are sent of the Lord, of whom he
pronounces, He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you,
despises me. This is our opinion as touching the ministry of the word,
agreeable, as we hope, to the Scripture and sound writers: which also we have
found often in Luthers, and in his friends books.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA.
Of those that teach in the Church, and who they be that govern them. CHAP. 9.
IN the ninth place it is taught concerning the acknowledging of the shepherds
of souls or lawful Ministers of sacred functions in the holy Church:
according to the degrees and order of diverse cures, and first that these are
especial members of the holy Ecclesiastical communion, and Christ his Look
the 1. Observation upon this confess. Matthew. 10. Luke 10. John 13. 1 Cor. 4.
Vicegerents, that is, they who supply his place. He that hears them, hears
Christ, he that d^spiseth them, despises Christ, and his heavenly Father. For
to these is the ministry of the Word and Sacraments lawfully committed. But
Ministers ought not of their own accord to prease forward in that calling: but
ought according to the example of the Lord and the Apostles, to be lawfully
appointed, and ordained thereunto: and that after this manner, that from among
a Matt. 10. Mar. 1. 6. and 3. Act. 1.
people that is sound in religion and fears God, such men may be chosen and
called to the administration of holy functions, as are strong and mighty in
faith, fearing God, and having gifts requisite for the ministry, and be of an
honest and blameless life. And again, that above all things these be proved
and tried by examination weather they be such, and so afterward, prayers and
fastings 1 Timothy 2.
being made, they may be confirmed or approved of the Elders, Look the 2.
Observation. Heb. 5.
by laying on of hands. Look the 3. Observat.
Hereof speaks the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Every high Priest
is taken from among men (that is to say) from among the faithful, and such as
are a spiritual priesthood.) And Paul, laying before Timothy his own
example, says, What things thou have heard of me 2 Timothy 2.
before many witnesses, the same deliver to faithful men, which shall be able
to teach others also. Of such Priests or Ministers and of making, ordaining,
and consecrating them, and how the ordaining of them ought to be handled, the
Apostle teaches evidently and 1 Timothy 3. Titus 1.
plainly in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus.

Therefore it is not permitted to any among us to execute the office of the
ministry, or to administer holy functions of the Lords, unless, according to
this custom of the Primitive Church, and order appointed by God, he come to
this function, and be called and assigned thereunto: which thing may also
manifestly appear by the ancient Canons of the Church. Saint Cyprian has in
like sort set down the manner of ordaining Priests. According to these things,
the ministers of lower degree, especially they which are called Look the 4.
Observat.
Deacons, are a long time detained with our Elders, and kept in exercise: and
this thing they do very seriously, making a straight trial and examination of
their faith and diligence, following herein the example of the Primitive
Church, and also of Christ himself, who kept his Disciples with him for the
space of three years. Also the Apostles dealt so by others, to the to the end
that afterward godly men and such as were illuminated with the heavenly light,
might be taken and ordained from among them to higher degrees, and to the
executing of greater functions, and that they might have testimony as well
from the common sort, as from their Elders, that they were fit men, and worthy
of that place.

Together with these things it is taught, that by the executing of that charge
wherein they be lawfully placed, they are bound to this, that they take care
for the souls of men committed to their charge, and for their everlasting
salvation, and faithfully employ their service unto them, by teaching of the
Word of God and administering the Sacraments according to Christ his meaning and
ordinance, that they be an example and allurement to practiso all virtue, make
prayers for them, bring them out of sins and errors, and inquire after the
will of God, and search the same in the holy Scritures, by diligent reading and
continual meditation: as the Apostles also exhort men to these things: Saint
Peter writes 1 Pet. 5.
thus, Feed the flock of God which depends upon you, caring for it, not by
constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. In like
sort Paul writes to Timothy a Ruler, and 2 Timothy 4.
Bishop, But be thou sober, and watch in all things, suffer adversity, do the
work of an Evangelist, make thy ministry fully known, or with all diligence.
Again, Be thou an example to the faithful, in 1 Timothy 4.
speech, in conversation of life, in love, in the spirit, in faith, in
pureness. Till I come be instant in reading, exhorting, and teaching. Despise
not the gift of grace which is in thee, which was given to thee by prophecy
with the laying on of the hands, of the company of the Eldership. These things
exercise, and give thy self unto them, that 2 Timothy 3.
all men may see how thou profitest: take heed to thy self, and unto
learning, and abide in these things. For in doing this thou shall save both thy
self, and them that hear thee. Such ministers ought also to deliver sound and
wholesome doctrine such as they have received from Christ and the Apostles, out
of holy Scripture, and being all alike minded, through one spirit to teach the
same in their Sermons, according to the ordinance of Saint Paul, who writes
thus, Keep the true pattern of the whole some words, which 1 Timothy 1.
thou have heard of me, in faith and in love, which is in Jesus Christ. And
again, But abide thou in those things, that thou have learned, and are
committed unto thee, knowing of whom thou have learned them, and that thou have
known the holy Scriptures of a child, which are able to make thee wise unto
salvation, through the faith which is in Jesus Christ. And else where: charge
certain, says he, that they teach no other thing.

But peculiar mention is made thereof, that they which have the spiritual
government of the Churches, and do their endeavor in them, ought not
themselves, nor by others, to use civil power or constraint, to force men to
believe, or to exercise Lordly authority over the faith and people of God,
according to the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles. The Lord spoke thus to
the Apostles, and in them to all faithful and true Preachers of the Gospel, Ye
know that they who are rulers of the people have domination Matthew. 20.
over them whose rulers they are, and they that are great Lords exercise
authority over the people that are subject to them. But it shall not be so
among you. But if any man among you will be great, let him be your servant, and
he that will be chief among you or bear rule, let him be your minister. Even
as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but that he himself might
minister to others, and give his life, as a price, for the redemption of many.
Peter also 1 Pet. 5.
says, Not as being Lords over the people, or the Lords inheritance, but as
they who are an ensample to the flock. And Paul, Not that 2 Cor. 1.
we are Lords over your faith, but because we are helpers of your joy. But the
gainsayers are with a quiet mind to be forborne, and by reasons grounded on
the truth of holy Scripture to be refuted and convinced, and pains must be
taken that they may suffer themselves, to be bettered by wholesome doctrine as
the Apostle gives 2 Timothy 2. Tit. 3.
in charge touching this matter.

And after other things.
Besides it is taught, that all the people ought to perform obedience (and
that with a great affection of love toward them) to such lawful, godly, and
faithful Pastors of souls and that they ought to assure and undoubtedly to
persuade themselves very well of them, obey them, use their help in matters
pertaining to salvation, yield them due honor, and perform all convenient
duties, toward them, whereunto they are bound by Gods word and that according
to the Doctrine of Christ who says, He that Matthew. 10. Luke 10. John 13. Heb.
13.
receives you, receives me, and he that hears you, hears me. And also in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, Obey them that have the oversight of you, and
submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
account for them. And the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.
Elders that rule well, are worthy double honor, especially, they that are
occupied in the Word and Doctrine. Furthermore, they ought to be provided for,
that they may have a competent living, and such things as are needful for the
maintenance of the body, according to the Lords ordinance, whereof Paul
speaks after this sort, The Lord has so appointed that they which preach the
Gospel 1 Cor. 9.
should live of the Gospel.

And to the end that the danger of an idle, secure, and Look the 5. Observat.
upon this confession.
Sodomiticall life may be avoided, and so they may be an example to the flock,
whereof they have charge, and that by a feeling of the burdens of this common
life, they may learn to understand the misery of men, and may by this means
be touched and have compassion on the miseries of others, for these causes, I
say, this is taught, that they, whose ability of strength in such Look the 6.
Observation upon this confess.
, especially those, on whom as yet the greatest and painfullest charge of the
people, is not laid, should themselves with their own hands get their living,
that they be not a burden to the Churches, especially in the beginning of their
buildings, and reparations, or also in times of long persecution, or otherwise
by reason of the weaker sort, and that they give not place to vain 2 Cor. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
voluptuous, and riotous sloth, as those who faithfully follow Saint Paul's
doctrine, and who have the Lords speech before their eyes, saying, it is a more
happy thing to give, then to take. Acts 20.


And if so be that some one of these Pastors slip into sin or errors, or be
somewhat negligent in looking to this charge, he ought by the ordinary and
lawful discipline of the Church to be brought into the way again, and to be
chastised, but if he will not repent, nor be healed, then he ought first to be
remooved from the executing of his charge and from the ministry, and
afterward as an unprofitable servant, as a member which causes offense, a dry
branch, and unsavory salt to be cast out or banished from the fellowship of
the Church and enjoying of salvation, of whom the Lord says, that this salt is
henceforth good for nothing, that which Matthew. 5. Joh. 15. Matthew. 5. 1 Timothy 5.
Paul also teaches, when he says, Those that offend (meaning those that are
Elders) reproove or chastise before all men, that the rest also may stand in
fear. But the people ought so to behave themselves toward such Teachers,
either grown out of kind, or entangled with errors, or toward other Elders
also not repenting, and excommunicated, as the holy Scripture shows, and
first Christ says. Take ye heed of false Prophets, which come to you in Matthew.
7.
sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening woolves, ye shall know them by
their fruits, and Paul. Now I beseech you brethren, mark Romans 16.
those diligently which cause division and offenses, contrary to the doctrine
which ye have learned, and avoid them, for they that are such serve not our
Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellies.

Of the Keys of Christ. CHAP. 14.
THE fourteenth Chapter of Ecclesiastical doctrine is of the Lords Keys, of
which he says to Peter, I will give thee the Matthew. 16.
Keys of the kingdom of heaven, and these Keys are the peculiar Function or
Ministry and administration of Christ his power, and his holy Spirit, which
power is committed to the Church of Christ, and to the Ministers thereof, unto
the end of the world: that they should not only by preaching publish the holy
Gospel, although they should do this especially, that is, should show forth
that word of true comfort, and the joyful message of peace, and new tidings of
that favor which God offers: but also that to the believing and unbeleeving
they should publicly or privately denounce and make known, to wit, to them
his favor, to these his wrath, and that to all in general, or to every one in
particular, that they may wisely receive some into the house of God, to the
communion of Saints and drive some out from thence, and may so through the
performance of their ministry, hold in their hand the Scepter of Christ his
kingdom, and use the same to the government of Christ his sheep.

Therefore the condition, and proper office of the Keys is, first first to
open and loose, that is, in Christ to appease and still the conscience of the
faithful ones, and of those that turn again by repentance: to make it known
unto them that their sins be forgiven, and to strengthen them in a sure hope of
salvation: and by this means to open the kingdom of heaven unto them, to give
them courage against all temptations, and to stir upstedfastnesse and
cheerfulness in them. And all these things are done by the faithful
Shepherds of souls in the Lords stead, not doing this of themselves, but upon
Christ his commandment, not by their own and proper virtue, but by Christ's,
and by the efficacy of his Word and Sacraments, as those that are Stewards and
Dispensers of the mysteries of God, and Ministers only. In the administration
of which things, they may use some seemly and indifferent ceremonies, that is,
which are no way necessary, such as are Look the 6. observation. 1 Cor. 4. 2
Cor. 3. and 5.
to lay on hands, or to reach out the right hand, or else they may omit them.

On the other side the office and proper work of the Keys of Christ is, to
shut and bind, that is, by the commandment of Christ, and the authority of
this office given by him to the Church, which is his power and scepten, to
denounce against all stubborn impenitent, unbeleeving, and other such like
sinners, Gods horrible judgment and his intolerable wrath, which no nature
carrabide, and his severe sentence: and so by the word of Christ, according to
the quality of the offense to reproove sin, to sever them from the
fellowship of Christ our Savior, and from the fruit and participation of the
Sacraments, and to cast them out of the Christian Church, and in a word to shut
the kingdom of heaven upon them, and at the length to deliver them to Satan.

This power of his Scepter and spirit has the Lord granted and delivered to
the holy Apostles and in them to all Ministers of Churches, lawfully ordained
that they might exercise in hisstead: and he granted it to them by these words,
As the Father has John 20.
sent me, so do I send you also. And by and by he adds these words, Receive
ye the holy Ghost. If ye forgive any men their sins, they are forgiven them,
and if ye retain any man's sins, they are retained. Moreover a manifest example
of using the power of the Keys is laid out in that sinner of Corinth and
others, whom St. Paul, together with the Church of that place, by the power and
1 Cor. 5.
authority of our Lord Jesus Christ and of his spirit, threw out from thence
and delivered to Satan: and contrariwise, after that God gave him grace to
repent, he absolved him from his sins, he took him again into the Church to
the communion of Saints and Sacraments, 2 Cor. 2.
and so opened to him the kingdom of heaven again. By this we may understand
that these Keys, or this Divine Function of the Lords, is committed and
granted to those, that have charge of souls and Look the 7. observation
to each several Ecclesiastical Societies, whether they be small, or great.
Of which thing the Lord says to the Churches, Verily, I say unto you,
whatsoever things ye bind on earth, Matthew. 18.
shall be bound in heaven. And straight after: For where two or three be
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Moreover, this
is likewise taught Look the 8. Observation.
that every Christian, so often as he needs these Keys of the Lord, ought to
require them particularly for himself of the Pastors of souls of that Church or
fellowship, of which himself is a part, and to which he belongs, and that he
use them with full confidence, no otherwise then if he received them of Christ
himself, seeing that Christ has delivered them unto the Pastors and that he
by no means doubt, that by the ministry of these keys, through the virtue
and power of Christ his sins are forgiven him, and that he is freed from them,
according John 20. Luke 10. Matthew. 10. John 13.
to Christ his own saying, whose sins you forgive, etc. And, He that hears
you, hears me: and he that receives you (in the behalf, to wit, of the
Ecclesiastical ministry, and in his time of need) receives me: and
contrarily, He that despises you, despises me.

This is also taught and handled, Look the 9. Observation.
that the Priests ought not to use these keys of the Lord otherwise, then
according to the meaning and will of Christ, which is declared expressly in
his word, and according to the sure, flat, and express determinations of his
judgment: and that they do not any manner of way, according to men's opinions,
much less after their own mind or lust, abuse these keys: for so it would
come to pass, that the keys should swarve from their office. And this is to
be taken heed of, that it be not by this means fulfilled in the misusing of
them, which the Lord has said by the Prophet: For you, says be, is this
Malac. 2.
commandment, O ye Priests, if you will not hear it, nor consider it in your
hearts, to give glory to my name, says the Lord of Hrasts, I will send a curse
upon you, and will curse your blessings, as I have cursed them already, because
you regard not in your hearts the fear of the Lord.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
SEeing that we are not made partakers of Christ, but by the Artic. 25.
Gospel, we believe that that good order, which by the authority of the
Gospel is confirmed, ought to be kept sacred and inviolabl^: and that
therefore Pastors are necessarily required in the Church, upon whose shoulders
the burden of teaching the word, and administering of the Sacraments, does lie,
whom also we ought to honor and reverently to hear, if so be that they being
lawfully called, do discharge their duty: not as though God did stand in need
of such stays and inferior helps, but therefore rather, because that so it
seems good to him to govern us as it were by using this bridle. Therefore we
detest all those fanaticall spirits, who, as much as in them lies, desire that
both this sacred ministry or preaching of the word and the administration of
the Sacraments, were utterly abolished.

We believe that this true Church ought to be governed by that Artic. 29.
regiment or discipline, which our Lord Jesus Christ has established, to wit
so, that there be in it Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, that the purity of
Doctrine may be retained, vices repressed, the poor, and others that be in
misery, according to their necessity, may be provided for, and that there may
be holy meetings, for the edifying both of small and great.

We believe that all true Pastors, in what place soever they be Artic 30.
placed, have the same, and equal authority among themselves given unto them,
under Jesus Christ the only head, and the chief and alone universal Bishop,
and that therefore it is not lawful for any Church, to challenge unto it self
Dominion or Soveraigntie over any other Church.

We believe that it is not lawful for any man, upon his own Artic. 31.
authority, to take upon him the government of the Church, but that every one
ought to be admitted thereunto by a lawful election, so near as may be, and
so long as the Lord gives leave. And this exception we do expressly add,
because that sometime (as it fell our also in our days, the state of the
Church being disturbed) it was necessary, that some should be raised up of the
Lord extraordinarily, which should repair the ruins of the decayed Church.
Nevertheless, howsoever it be, we believe, that this rule is always to be
followed, that all Pastors and Elders should have a testimony of their
calling.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
FVrthermore (we believe) that there be diverse degrees of Ministers in the
Church: whereof some be Deacons, some Artic. 5.
Priests, some Bishops: to whom is committed the office to instruct the people,
and the whole charge, and setting forth of Religion. Yet notwithstanding, we
say, that there neither is, nor can be any one man, which may have the whole
superiority in this universal state: for that Christ is ever present to
assist his Church, and needs not any man, to supply his room, as his only
heir to all his substance, and that there can be no one mortal creature,
which is able to comprehend, or conceive in his mind the Universal Church,
that is to wit, all the parts of the world, much less able rightly, and duly
to put them in order, and to govern them. For all the Apostles, as Cyprian
says, were of like power among themselves, and the rest were the same, that
Peter was. And that it was said indifferently to them all, Feedye:
indifferently to them all, Go into the whole world. Indifferently to them all,
Teach ye the Gospel. And, as Hierome says, All Bishops wheresoever they be,
be they at Rome, be they at Eugubium, be they at Constantinople, be they at
Rhegium, be all of like preeminence, and of like Priesthood. And, as Cyprian
says, There is but one Bishopric, and a piece thereof is perfitly and wholly
holden of every particular Bishop. And according to the judgment of the Nicene
Council, we say, that the Bishop of Rome has no more jurisdiction over the
Church of God, then the rest of the Patriarks, either of Alexandria, or of
Antioch have. And as for the Bishop of Rome, who now calls all matters before
himself alone, except he do his duty, as he ought to do, except he minister
the Sacrament, except he instruct the people, except he warn them and teach
them, we say, that he ought not of right once to be called a Bishop, or so much
as an Elder. For a Bishop, as says Austine, is a name of labor, and not of
honor: that the man, that seeks to have preeminence, and not to profit, may
understand, himself to be no Bishop. And that neither the Pope, nor any other
worldly creature can no more be head of the whole Church, or a Bishop over all,
then he can be the Bridegroom, the light, the salvation, and life of the
Church. For these privileges, and names belong only to Christ, and be
properly, and only fit for him alone. And that no Bishop of Rome did ever
suffer himself to be called by such a proud name and title, before Phocas the
Emperors time, (who, as we know, by killing his own Sovereign Mauritius the
Emperor, did by a traiterous villainy aspire to the Empire.) Which was about
the sixth hundred and thirteenth year after Christ was borne. Also the
Council of Carthage did circumspectly provide, that no Bishop should be called
either the highest Bishop, or chief Priest. And therefore, sithence the Bishop
of Rome will now adays so be called, and challenges unto himself an
authority, that is none of his: besides that, he does plainly contrary to the
ancient Councels, and contrary to the old Fathers: We believe, that he does
give to himself, as it is written by his own companion Gregory. A
presumptuous, a profane, a sacrilegious, and an antichristian name: that he is
also the King of pride, that he is Look the 1. Observat. upon this confession.
Artic. 6.
Lucifer, which prefers himself before his Brethren: that he has forsaken
the faith, and is the forerunner of Antichrist.

Further we say, that the Minister ought lawfully, duly, and orderly to be
preferred to that office of the Church of God, and that no man has power to
wrest himself into the holy Ministry at his own pleasure. Wherefore these
persons do us the greater wrong, which have nothing so common in their
mouths, as that we do nothing orderly, and comely, but all things
troublesomely, and without order: And that we allow every man to be a Priest,
to be a Teacher, and to be an Interpreter of the Scriptures.

Moreover we say, that Christ has given to his Ministers power Artic. 7.
to bind, to loose, to open, to shut. And (we say) that the office of loosing
consists in this point: that the Minister, either by the preaching of the
Gospel, offers the merits of Christ, and full pardon to such as have lowly
and contrite hearts, and do unfainedly repent themselves, pronouncing unto the
same a sure, and an undoubted forgiveness of their sins, and hope of
everlasting salvation: Or else that the same Minister, when any have offended
their brothers minds with some great offense, or notable, and open crime,
whereby they have, as it were, banished, and made themselves strangers from the
common followship, and from the body of Christ, then after perfect amendment of
such persons, does reconcile them, and bring them home again, and restore them
to the company, and unity of the faithful. We say also, that the Minister
does execute the authority of binding and shutting, as often as he shuts up
the gate of the kingdom of heaven against unbeleeving, and stubborn persons,
denouncing unto them Gods vengeance, and everlasting punishment: Or else, when
he does quite shut them out from the bosom of the Church, Look the 1.
observation upon this confession.
by open excommunication. Out of doubt, what sentence soever the Minister of
God shall give in this sort, God himself does so well allow it, that,
whatsoever here in earth by their means is loosed, and bound, God himself will
loose, and bind, and confirm the same in heaven. And touching the Keys,
wherewith they may either shut or open the kingdom of heaven, we with
Chrysostom say, They be the knowledge of the Scriptures: with Tertullian we
say, They be the interpretation of the Law: and with Eusebius we call them the
word of God. Moreover that Christ's Disciples did receive this authority, not
that they should hear the private confessions of the people, and listen to
their whisperings, as the common massing Priests do every where now a days,
and do it so, as though in that one point lay all the virtue, and use of the
Keys: but to the end, they should go, they should teach, they should publish
abroad the Gospel, and be unto the believing a sweet savor of life unto life:
and unto the unbeleeving, and unfaithful, Look the 2. observation upon this
confession.
a savor of death unto death: and that the minds of godly persons being
brought low by the remorse of their former life and errors, after they once
begun to look up unto the light of the Gospel, and believe in Christ, might be
opened with the word of God, even as a door is opened with a Key.
Contrariwise, that the wicked and wilful, and such, as would not believe, nor
return into the right way, should be left still as fast locked, and shut up,
and, as Saint Paul says, wax worse, 2 Timothy 3.
and worse. This take we to be the meaning of the Keys: and that after this
sort men's consciences be either opened, or shut. We say that the Priest in deed
is a judge in this case, But yet has no manner of right to challenge an
authority or power, as Ambrose * Look the 3. Observavation.
says. And therefore our Savior Jesus Christ, to reproove the negligence of
the Scribes, and Pharisees in teaching, did with these words rebuke them,
saying: Woe be unto you Scribes, and Luke 11. Matthew. 21.
Pharisees, which have taken away the Keys of knowledge, and have shut up the
kingdom of heaven before men. Seeing then the Key whereby the way, and entry
to the kingdom of God is opened unto us, is the word of the Gospel, and the
expounding of the Law, and Scriptures, we say plainly, where the same word is
not, there is not the Key. And, seeing one manner of word is given Matthew. 16.
to all, and one only key belongs to all, we say, there is but one only
power of all Ministers, as concerning opening, and shutting. And, as Look the
4. Observat. upon this confession.
touching the Bishop of Rome, for all that his flattering Parasites sing these
words in his ears, To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
(as though these keys were sit for him alone, and for no body else) Look the
4. Observat. upon this confession.
except he go so to work, as men's consciences may be made pliant, and be
subdued to the word of God, we deny, that he does either open, or shut, or has
the keys at all. And although he taught, and instructed the people (as would
God he might ofice truly do, and persuade himself, it were at the least any
piece of his duty) yet we think his key to be never a whit better, or of
greater force, then other men's. For who has severed him from the rest? Who
has taught him more cunningly to open, or better to absolve, then his brethren?

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe, that this Church ought to be ruled and governed Artic. 30.
by that spiritual regiment, which God himself has delivered in his word, so
that there be placed in it Pastors and Ministers purely to preach, and rightly
to administer the holy Sacraments: that there be also in it Seniours and
Deacons, of whom the Senate of Church might consist, that by these means true
Religion might be preserved, and sincere doctrine in every place place retained
and spread abroad: that vicious and wicked men might after a spiritual manner
be rebuked, amended, and as it were by the bridle of discipline kept within
their compass: that the poor is like manner, and those that be afflicted, may
be releeved either with aid or comfort, according to the several necessity
of every one. For then shall all things in the Church be done in due and
convenient order, when faithful and godly men are chosen to have the
government of the same, even as St. Paul has prescribed in the first to
Timothy the 3. and the first to Titus.

We believe that the Ministers, Senours, and Deacons, ought Artic. 31.
to be called to those their functions, and by the lawful election of the
Church to be advanced into those rooms, earnest prayer being made unto God,
and after the order and manner, which is set down unto us in the word of God.
This especially every one ought to take diligent heed of, that he do not by
unlawful means thrust himself into those offices. For every one must wait,
until he be called of God himself, that he may have a certain testimony of
his vocation, and may know that it is from the Lord. Yet in what place of the
world soever the Ministers of the word of God do keep, they have all of them
the same and equal power and authority, being all of them equally the
Ministers of Christ the only universal Bishop and head of the Church.
Moreover, lest that this holy ordinance of God be despised and brought into
contempt, it is the duty of all men to have a very honorable and reverent
opinion of all the Ministers of the Word, and Seniours of the Church, even for
that works sake, wherein they do labor: also to be at peace and unity with
them, and as much as possibly may be, to abstain from all manner of
quarrellings and contentions one with another.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
COncerning Ecclesiastical Orders they teach, that no man Artic. 14.
should publicly in the Church teach or Minister the Sacraments, except he be
rightly called: according as Saint Paul gives commandment to Titus, To
ordain Elders in every City.

Out of the Articles concerning abuses.
Of the power Ecclesiastical.
THere have been great controversies touching the power and Artic. 7.
authority of Bishops, in which many have incommodiously mingled together the
Ecclesiastical power, and the power of the sword. And out of this confusion
there has sprung very great wars and tumults, while that the Popes, bearing
themselves bold upon the power of the keys, have not only appointed new kinds
of worship and service of God, and burdened men's consciences by reserving of
cases and by violent excommunications, but also have labored to transfer
worldly kingdoms from one to another, and to spoil Emperors of their power
and authority. These faults did godly and learned men long since reprehend in
the Church, and for that cause, our Divines were feign, for the comfort of men's
consciences, to show the difference between the Ecclesiastical and civil
powers. And they have taught that either of them, because of Gods commandment,
is dutifully to be reverenced, and honored, as the chiefest blessings of God
upon earth.

Now their judgment is this, that the power of the keys, or the power of the
Bishops, by the rule of the Gospel, is a power, or commandment from God, of
preaching the Gospel, of remitting or retaining sins, and of administering the
Sacraments. For Christ does send his Apostles with this charge, As the Father
has sent me, so send I you. Receive ye the holy Ghost: whose sins ye forgive,
they are forgiven them, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Mar. 16.
Go and preach the Gospel to every creature, etc. This power is put in
execution, only by teaching or preaching the Gospel, and administering the
Sacraments, either to many jointly, or to several persons, according to their
calling. For they be not corporal things but eternal, that are granted unto
us, as an eternal righteousness, the holy Ghost, life everlasting. These
things cannot be gotten but by the ministry of the Word and Sacraments. As
Paul says, The Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believes. Seeing then that the power Ecclesiastical concerns things
eternal, and is put in use only by the ministry of the word, it hinders not
the political government, Look the 1. observation.
no more then does the * skill of music or singing. For the civil government
is occupied about other matters, then is the Gospel Look the 2. observation.
the Magistrate is to defend, not the minds, but the bodies, and bodily
things, against manifest injuries, he restrains men by the sword and
corporal punishment, that he may uphold peace, and a civil justice. Wherefore
the Ecclesiastical and civil powers are not to be confounded. The
Ecclesiastical power has a peculiar commandment to preach the Gospel and
administer the Sacraments. Let it not by force enter into another charge, let
it not turn worldly kingdoms from the right owners. Let it not abrogate the
Magistrates laws, let it not withdraw from them lawful obedience, let it not
hinder judgments touching any civil ordinances and statutes, or contracts,
let it not prescribe laws to the magistrate, touching the form of a
commonwealth, as Christ says, My kingdom is not of this world. Again, Who
made me a judge over you. And Paul to the Philip. 3. Our conversation is in
heaven. 2 Cor. 10. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty in
God, to throw down the imaginations, etc. Thus do our Divines discern and
distinguish the duties of each power one from the other, and do warn all men
to honor both powers and to acknowledge both to be the good gift and blessing
of God.

Look the 3. observation upon this confession.
If so be that the Bishops have any power of the sword, they have it not as
Bishops by the commandment of the Gospel, but by man's law given unto them of
Kings and Emperors, for the civil government of their goods. Yet this is a
kind of function and charge diverse from the ministry of the Gospel.

Therefore when as the question is touching the jurisdiction of Bishops, rule
and dominion must be distinguished from Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Again,
by the Gospel, or as they term it, by Gods law, Bishops, as they be Bishops,
that is, such as have the administration of the word and Sacraments committed
to them, have no jurisdiction at all, but only to forgive sin, also to know
what is true doctrine, and to reject such doctrine as will not stand with the
Gospel, and Look the 4. Observation.
to debar from the communion of the Church such as are notoriously wicked,
not by humane force and violence, but by the word of God. And * herein of
necessity the Churches ought by the law of God to perform obedience unto them,
according to the saying of Christ, he that hears you, hears me. But when as
they teach or determine any thing contrary to the Gospel, then have the
Churches a commandment of God, which forbids obedience to them Matt. 7.
Beware of false Prophets, Gal. 1. If an Angel from heaven preach any other
Gospel, let him be accursed. 2 Cor. 13. We cannot do any thing against the
truth, but for the truth. Also, This power is given us to edify, and not to
destroy. So do the Canons command. 2. quaest. 7. Cap. Sacerdotes, and Cap.
Oves. And Augustine in his Treatise against Petilians Epistle says, Neither
must we subscribe to Catholic Bishops, if they chance to err or hold opinion
which be against the Scriptures. If so be Look the 6 Observat.
that they have any other power or jurisdiction, in hearing and understanding
certai^^ cases, as namely, of Matrimony and Tithes, etc. They hold it by man's
law: and that in such places where the ordinary judges failing, the Princes are
constrained, will they, nill they, to minister justice to their subjects for
maintaining of peace.

And a few lines after.
So often as we handle this place, by and by our Adversaries cry out, that the
Bishops authority being overthrown, there follows disorder, that the
peoples behavior cannot be ordered, that the common sort wax lusty and
unbridled, and in a word there follows a hellish life, such a one as is
painted out by Euripides in this verse. (...).

They complain also, that when as some laws are abrogated, the common people
takes it as a pattern, how to deal with all the rest. And so shaking off the
bonds and reins of discipline and order, they take an excessive liberty to
themselves, which breeds infinite offenses, breaches between Princes,
scattering of Churches, tumults, wars, and desolations. To conclude, they
tell us here, what an enemy to mankind want of government is, and how many
vices and calamities arising out of this fountain, do overflow the whole life
of man.

They advise therefore for the avoiding of these so great evils, to establish
the authority of Bishops to retain still the laws that have been in use
before, and also to bear with the inconveniences (if there be any in them) in
respect of the common weakness of men, and for quietness sake to dissemble
them: especially seeing there can no state or order be appointed which is
without all manner of faults. Here also they bring in that old saying. That an
evil well couched, is not to be stirred. They rehearse many examples, how
great overthrows followed upon the remooving of laws, and the change of the
form of government, in the Cities of Athens, Sparta, Rome, and diverse others.
At Rome how often did the dissentions of the Consuls and the Tribunes stir up
great civil wars?

Though these Senator like declamations be very plausible, and incense the
minds of many against us, yet they may be confuted by most true and
substantial arguments. First, therefore we desire that these our Accusers
would turn over the History of the Church from time to time, and that they
would not think that those notable men, the Prophets and Apostles, were withit
common sense and reason and so hard hearted, that they caned not for the peace
and quiet of their country, or so barbarous and cruel, that they made no great
account of the discipline, laws, and good order of the kingdom. For those
most wise, virtuous, and grave men, Esaias, Jonas, Jeremy, John Baptist, Look the
7. Observation.
Christ, Peter, James, and Paul, Did both know what a great good civil concord
is, and loved their country and countrymen, and also were greeved to behold
the discords and renting a sunder of those notable commonwealths. How often
did Christ weep, when he spoke of the discords and Tumults of his nation, and
the sacking of the City? Albeit therefore the Prophets and Apostles did very
well know and greatly like of those civil duties: Yet were they constrained by
the commandment of God to war against the devils kingdom, to preach
heavenly doctrine, to collect a Church unto God, and to employ their service to
the eternal salvation of a great number of men. These are the first laws that
ever were given, and are to be preferred before all other. Thou shall have no
other Gods. Thou shall not take the name of God in vain. And this concerning
the son, This is my beloved son, hear him. These laws must needs be
obeyed, The true doctrine of God and his true worship must needs be embraced
and received: and all errors, that tend to the dishonor of God, must be
abhorred and forsaken, though all the world should break and fall down. No
humane thing must be preferred before Gods commandment, not our life, not our
friends, not the concord and agreement of neighbors and countrymen. Moses a
very wise man, and no doubt a politic man, lays upon the tribe of Levi the
charg of teaching and knowing what great conflicts and dangers teachers shall
meet withal, he forewarneth them of that which he took to be most difficult
of all other. And charge them that the defense of true doctrine be most dear
unto them, for so he says, Deuteronomy. 33. These shall keep thy word, and shall
forget their Parents, children, and brethren. And hereof we have experience,
that it is no small burden that is laid upon the teachers of the word. Our men
are cruelly dealt with in many places. We are sore oppressed, and the discord
in our country brings no small grief unto us. But, as was said before, the
commandment of God concerning the embracing of the true doctrine of God and
renouncing of errors, must be preferred before these great inconveniences, We
are not ignorant what wise men have written, of changing and altering laws. We
remember well the saying of Plato that as the manners of doting parents, so the
customs and fashions of our country, though none of the wisest, are to be
borne with all, But these precepts have their bounds and limits, within which
they must be restrained. Bondage without impiety may be borne, but Idolatry is
not to be borne with, nor the light of the Gospel to be extinguished.

Again, why do our adversaries declaime of such a moderation, unto us, when as
they in the mean while murder the Citizens and members of Christ? They might
easily establish peace, and maintain the author of good order, if they would
abolish superstition and unjust laws. But now they contend not for the safety
of the Church, but for their own profits and pleasures. They would not have
the Idolatry of the Mass nor praying to the dead spoken against: because they
cannot abide that their gain should decrease. They forbid wandering lusts,
because the unmarried state is best for the keeping of their goods. These
things are in all men's eyes. Therefore let them leave of their Senator like
invectives wherein to use the old Poets words under a fair color they seek
to establish shameless facts. Hereto I adjoyne also the other part of our
defense both true and unfeigned. We do not shake of government to bring in
disorder. We teach that the ministry of the Gospel is most highly to be
reverenced and obeyed in those things, which (according to the gospel) do
properly belong to the ministry thereof. And he is a wicked and an accursed
wretch, that does not with reverence entertain as most beautiful the feet of
such as bring tiding of peace. And as for the civil power, which bears the
sword, it has been highly commended and approved in our writings. Wherefore it
is a vile slander that they object against us, that we be enemies of
government.

Hitherto also belongs the ss. in the end of this 7. Article.
THey allege against us also other sayings which command obedience, Obey
those that are set over you. How often must we answer, that obedience is most
necessary in such things, as belong properly to this ministry ordained of God.
For these sayings do not allot unto Bishops a kingdom without the Gospel.
Christ gave them certain commandments, and those he will have us obey. Again
he forbad that any new found worship should be set up in the Church, and such
he will not have us yield unto. There are certain bonds and limits prefixed,
within which both the Pastors authority and our obedience must contain it
self. But these limits do those Bishops most malapertly remove, who proudly
challenge to themselves a triple power, whereby they establish most pernicious
errors; to wit, a Princely and supreme power of interpreting the Scriptures.
Secondly a power of erecting new worship and service of God. Thirdly, a
sovereign power of making new laws. And thus they trans, form the Church
into an humane government. They imagine, forsooth, that as the Prince or
highest Judge in a Realm is to interpret the law, and as the Prince has power
to make new laws so the Bishops must have a power in the Church, not unlike
that. And they cannot abide that the Church should be governed by the dumb
writings (as they call them) of the Prophets and Apostles, which because
sometime they scarce make the matter plain enough, which they do set down, the
ambiguity breeds dissentions and discords. Here therefore there must needs be
say they a definitive voice of some sovereign or high Judge, to interpret that
which is ambiguous and doubtfully written. And except all be tied to stand to
their interpretation, there will be no end of strife and controversies. Again,
unless they may according as times and occasions require make laws, what a
disorder would there follow? These things are set out with big words, and
they carry a show of probability in them, because they are in imitation of the
civil government. And surely such conceits as these, have in all ages, from
the beginning of the world, hurt the Church greatly and still will hurt it. The
godly are therefore to be admonished, that they be not overtaken with these
subtilties and sleights. God will have his Church governed by his word, which
Christ and his Apostles have left unto the Church, and he will have this his
voice to sound in the Church by the mouths of his ministers. And though it do
contain a wisdom, that is far from reasons reach, yet the word of the
Prophets and Apostles is sure and not doubtful. Therefore Peter says, Ye do
well in attending to the word of the Prophets, as to a light in the darkness.
Besides the Church has the gift of interpretation, that is, the understanding
of the heavenly doctrine, but that is not tied to the name or degree of
Bishops: and therefore it is no power of interpreting like to the power of a
Prince or highest Judge. But those that are learned in the word of God and born
again by his spiritin what place soever they be, they assent unto the word of
God, and understand the same, some more some less. Men must therefore judge
wisely of those huge Bulwarks of the peoples power. Touching laws, to be made
by the Bishops, Peter says in a word, Why do ye tempt God, laying a yoke on
them, etc.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE. Of Order.
IT is evident by the holy Scriptures, that all they which are indeed Artic. 20.
Christians, are consecrated in baptism by Christ the Son of God, to be
spiritual priests, and that they ought always to offer up to God spiritual
sacrifices. Neither is it unknown, that Christ in his Church has instituted
ministers, who should preach his Gospel, and administer the Sacraments. Neither
is it to be permitted to every one, although he be a spiritual priest, to
usurp a public ministry in the Church, without a lawful calling. For Paul
says, Let all things be done honestly and decently among you. And again, Lay
hands suddenly on no man. Wherefore we do not account it an unprofitable
thing, to prove, as it were by certain steps, the faith of them that are to be
admitted to the public ministry of the Gospel. And it seems not a little
to further concord and unity, to keep a due order among the Ministers of the
Church.

But the holy Scripture does not teach us, that Christ has instituted in his
Church such priests, as should be Mediators between God and men, and pacify
the wrath of God toward men, by their sacrifices, and apply the merit of
Christ to the quick and the dead, without the preaching of the Gospel, and
administration of the Sacraments. For if we will speak of the great and true
Mediator, There is but one Mediator between God and men, Jesus Christ the
Son of God Look the 2. Observat. upon this confession.
. If we will speak of the Mediator of praying every godly man is made a
Mediator each for other through Jesus, because that their duty does require,
that they should commend one another health to God in their prayers: the which
duty also then every one does perform, when they say the Lords prayer in
faith. If we speak of the sacrifices which do purge our sins, and appease
the wrath of God, then is there one only sacrifice, which does purge us, and
reconcile God unto us, to wit, the sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
was once made on the Cross. And as Christ does die no more, death has no more
Dominion over him, so this sacrifice of his shall never be made again, but by
his one oblation, as it is written in the Epistle to the Hebrews, He has made
perfect for ever those that be sanctified. If we speak of the remembrance of
this one sacrifice, and of the applying of the merit thereof, then the public
ministers of the Church, which do teach the Gospel publicly, and administer
the Sacraments according to the institution of Christ, do not only make a
true and right remembrance of this purging sacrifice, but do also apply, by
their dispensation, the merit of this sacrifice to all those, that do receive
the Gospel and the Sacraments by faith. Therefore we cannot see what use there
is of those kind of men in the Church, which are ordained for this purpose,
that they may have authority to sacrifice for the quick and the dead. Paul,
when as in his Epistles to the Corinthians and Ephesians, he rehearses those
offices and ministeries which are necessary to the edifying and preserving of
the Church, he reckons Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, Doctors, and
such like: but in this rehearsal he makes no mention at all of private
Priests, of which sort the world is now full: neither is it like that he would
have omitted this kind of Priests, if either Christ had appointed it, or if it
had been profitable and necessary for the Church: And Paul writes that a
Bishop ought to be apt to teach: And Jerome teaches that A Priest and a Bishop
are all one. Therefore it is evident, that except a Look the 2. Observation
upon this confess.
Priest be ordained in the Church to the ministry of teaching, he cannot
rightly take unto him neither the name of a Priest, nor the name of a Bishop.

Out of the Confession of SUEVELAND. Of the Office, dignity, and power of
Ecclesiastical Persons.
TOuching the ministry, and dignity of the Ecclesiastical Order, Artic. 13.
we do thus teach: First, that there is no power in the Church, but that which
tends to edifying, 2 Cor. 10. Secondly that we must not think otherwise of
any man in this state, then Paul would have men to esteem, either of himself,
or of Peter and Apollo and others, As of the servants of Christ, and the
dispensers of the mysteries of God, in whom this is chiefly required, that they
be faithful. For these be they which have the keys of the kingdom of God,
and the power to bind and loose, and to remit or retain sins: yet that
power is so limited, that they be nevertheless the ministers of Christ, to
whom alone the right and authority to open heaven, and forgive sins, does
properly pertain. For neither he which planteth, nor he that waters, is any
thing, but God that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. Neither is any man of
himself fit to think any of those things as of himself, but if any man be
found fit thereunto, he has it all of God. Who gives to whom it pleases him,
to be the ministers, and preachers of the New Testament, to wit, so far forth
as he gives them a mind, faithfully to preach the meaning and understanding of
the Gospel, and uses them hereunto, that men may be brought by a true faith to
his new covenant of grace. Furthermore these be they, which do minister unto
us the dead letter (that is, such a doctrine of truth, as pearceth no further
then to humane reason) but the spirit which quickneth, and does so pearce into
our spirit and soul, that it does thoroughly persuade our heart of the truth.
These are the true fellow laborers of the Lord, 1 Cor. 3. opeaing indeed
heaven, and forgiving sins to those, to whom they declare the doctrine of
faith, by means of the grace and spirit of God. Whereupon Christ, sending out
his Apostles to exercise this duty, he breathed upon them, saying, Take ye the
holy Ghost. And furthermore he adds, whose sins ye remit, etc.

Hereof it is manifest, that the true and fit Ministers of the Church (such as
be Bishops, Seniors, anointed and consecrated) can do nothing but in respect
of this, that they be sent of God. For how shall they preach (says Paul)
except they be sent? That is, except they receive of God both a mind, and
power to preach the holy Gospel aright and with fruit, and to feed the flock
of Christ. And also, except they receive the holy Ghost, who may work together
with them, and persuade men's hearts. Other virtues where with these men must be
endued are rehearsed, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1. Therefore they which are in this sort
sent, anointed, consecrated and qualified, they have an earnest care for the
flock of Christ, and do labor faithfully in the word and doctrine, that they
may feed the people more fruitfully: and these are acknowledged and accounted,
of our preachers for such Bishops, as the Scripture every where speaks of:
and every Christian ought to obey their commandments. But they which give
themselves to other things, they place themselves in other men's seats, and do
worthily take unto themselves other names. Yet notwithstanding the life of any
man is not so much to be blamed, as that therefore a Christian should refuse to
hear him, if peradventure he teach something out of the chair of Moses or
Christ (that is, either out of the Law of God, or out of the holy Gospel) that
may serve for edification. They which bring a diverse or a strange voice,
whatsoever they be, they are in no account or estimation, with the sheep of
Christ, John 10. Look before the third Observation, upon the August.
confession. Also after sect. 17. 3. observat. upon the same confession of
August.
Yet they which have a secular power and soveraigntie, they have it of God
himself, howsoever they be called: therefore he should resist the ordinance of
God, whosoever should oppose himself to that temporal government.

These things do our Preachers teach, touching the authority of
Ecclesiastical persons: so that they have great injury offered to them in
that they are blamed, as though they sought to bring the authority of
Ecclesiastical Prelates to nothing, whereas they never forbad them that worldly
government and authority, which they have. But they have often wished, that
they would come nearer to the Ecclesiastical commandments, and that either
they themselves would instruct and faithfully feed the consciences of
Christians, out of the holy Gospel, or that at the leastwise they would admit
others hereunto, and ordain such as were more fit for this purpose. This is it,
I say, that our Preachers have oftentimes requested of the Prelates themselves,
so far they have been from opposing themselves at any time to their
spiritual authority.

But whereas we could not either bear any longer the doctrine of certain
Preachers, but being driven thereunto by necessity, we have placed others in
their room: or else have retained those also, which have renounced that
Ecclesiastical superiority: We did it not for any others cause but for that
these did plainly and faithfully declare the voice of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the other did mingle therewith all man's inventions. For so often as the
question is, concerning the holy Gospel, and the doctrine of truth, Christians
must wholly turn themselves to the Bishop of their souls the Lord Jesus
Christ, and not admit the voice of any stranger by any means, wherein
notwithstanding neither we, nor they do offer violence to any man: for Paul
says, All things are yours, whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the
world, or life, or death, whether they be things present, or things to come,
even all are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods. Therefore seeing that
Peter and Paul are ours, and we are not theirs, but Christ's, and that after the
same manner, that Christ himself is his Fathers, to wit, that in all things,
which we are, or may be, we might live to him alone. Furthermore, seeing to
this end we have power to use all things (yea even men themselves of what sort
soever they be) as though they were our own, and are not to suffer that any
man, or any thing should hinder us therein, no Ecclesiastical person may
justly complain of us, or object to us, that we are not sufficient by obedient
to them, or that we do derogate any thing from their authority, seeing that
the thing it self does witness, that we have attempted and done all those
things according to the will of God, which we have attempted against the will
of Ecclesiastical persons. These therefore be those things, which we teach,
touching the office, dignity, and power of the Ministers of the Church, whom
they call Spiritual: the which that we may credit, we are moved thereunto by
those places of Scripture, which for the most part we rehearsed before.

THE TWELFTH SECTION. OF TRVE AND FALSE SACRAMENTS IN GENERAL.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA. Of the Sacraments of Christ. CHAP. 19.
GOD even from the beginning added unto the preaching of the Word his
Sacraments or sacramental signs in his Church. And this does the holy
Scripture plainly testify. Sacraments be mystical signs or holy rites or
sacred actions ordained of God himself, consisting of his word, of outward
signs and of things signified: whereby he keeps in continual memory and
eftsoons calls to mind in his Church his great benefits bestowed upon man,
and whereby he seals up his promises and outwardly represents and as it
were offers unto our sight those things which inwardly he performs unto us,
and therewithal strengthens and increases our faith though the working of
Gods Spirit in our hearts: lastly, whereby he does separate us from all other
people and religions, and consecrateth and binds us wholly unto himself, and
gives us to understand what he requires of us.

These Sacraments are either of the Old Testament or of the New. The Sacraments
of the Old Testament were circumcision, and the Paschall Lamb, which was
offered up in sacrifice and for that cause is referred to the sacrifices which
were in use from the beginning of the world. The Sacraments of the New
Testament, are Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Some there are which reckon
seven Sacraments of the New Testament. Of which number we grant that
repentance, matrimony and the ordination of ministers (we mean not the Popish
but the Apostolical ordination) are very profitable ordinances of God but no
Sacraments. As for confirmation and extreme unction, they are mere devices of
men, which the Church may very well want without any damage or discommoditie at
all: and therefore we have them not in our Churches, because there be certain
things in them which we can at no hand allow of. As for that merchandise which
the Romish Prelates use in ministering their Sacraments we utterly abhor it.
The author and institutor of all Sacraments is not any man, but God alone, for
men can by no means ordain Sacraments, because they belong to the worship of
God, and it is not for man to appoint and prescribe a service of God, but to
embrace and retain that which is taught unto him by the Lord. Besides, the
sacramental signs have Gods promises annexed to them which necessarily
require faith, now faith stays it self only upon the word of God. And the
word of God is resembled to writings or letters, the Sacraments to seals,
which the Lord alone sets to his own letters: Now as the Lord is the Author
of the Sacraments, so he continually works in that Church, where they be
rightly used, so that the faithful when they receive them of the Ministers do
know that the Lord works in his own ordinance, and therefore they receive
them as from the hand of God: and the Ministers faults (if there be any
notorious in them) cannot hurt them seeing they do acknowledge the goodness
of the Sacraments to depend upon the ordinance of the Lord. For which cause
they put a difference in the administration of the Sacraments, between the
Lord and the Lords ministers, confessing that the substance of the Sacraments
is given them of the Lord, and the outward signs by the hands of the ministers.

Now the principal thing, that in all the Sacraments is offered of the Lord,
and chiefly regarded of the godly of all ages (which which some have called the
substance and matter of the Sacraments) is Christ our Savior, That only
sacrifice and the Lamb of God slain from the beginning of the world, the
rock also of which all our fathers drank, by whom all the elect are
circumcised with circumcision made without hands, through the holy spirit, and
are washed from all their sins, and are nourished with the very body and
blood of Christ unto eternal life.

Now in respect of that, which is the chief thing, and the very matter and
substance of the Sacraments, the Sacraments of both the Testaments are equal.
For Christ the only Mediator and Savior of the faithful is the chief thing
and substance in them both, one and the same God is author of them both. They
were given unto both Churches, as signs and seals of the grace and promises
of God, which should call to mind and renew the memory of Gods great benefits
to them, and should distinguish the faithful from all the religions in the
world: lastly, which should be received spiritually by faith, and should bind
the receivers unto the Church, and admonish them of their duty: In these, I
say, and such like things, the Sacraments of both Churches be not unequal,
although in the outward signs they be diverse.

And indeed we do yet put a greater difference between them: for ours are
more firm and durable, as those which are not to be changed to the end of the
world. Again, ours testify that the substance and promise is already
fulfilled and performed in Christ, whereas the other did only signify that
they should be performed. And ours are more simple, and nothing painful,
nothing so sumptuous, nor so full of ceremonies: Moreover they belong to a
greater people, that is dispersed through the face of the whole earth. Again,
because they are more excellent, and do (by the Spirit of God) stir up in us
a greater measure of faith, therefore a more plentiful measure of the spirit
does follow of them.

But now since that Christ the true Messiah is exhibited unto us, and the
abundance of grace is powered forth upon the people of the New Testament, the
Sacraments of the old law are surely abrogated and ceased, and in their stead
the Sacraments of the New Testament are placed: namely, for Circumcision,
Baptism, and for the Paschall Lamb and Sacrifices, the Supper of the Lord.

And as in the old Church the sacraments consisted of the word, the sign, and
the thing signified, so even at this day they stand as it were of the same
parts. For the word of God makes them Sacraments, which before were none: for
they are consecrated by the word, and declared to be sanctified by him who who
first ordained them. To fanctisse or consecrate a thing, is to dedicate it unto
God and unto holy uses, that is, to take it from the common and ordinary use,
and to appoint it to some holy use. For the signs that be in the Sacraments
are drawn from common use, to things eternal and invisible. As in baptism
the outward sign is the element of water, and that washing is visible, which
is done by the Minister. The thing Look the 1. observation upon this
confession.
signified is regeneration, and the cleansing from sin. Likewise in the Lords
Supper, the outward sign is bread and wine, taken from things commonly used
for meat and drink. The thing signified is the body of Christ, which was
given, and his blood which was shed for us, and the communion of the body and
blood of the Lord: wherefore, the water, bread, and wine, considered in their
own nature, and out of this holy use and institution of the Lord, they are
only that which they are called, and which they were said then to be. But let
the word of God be once added to them together with invocation upon his holy
name, and the renewing of their first institution and sanctification, and then
these signs are consecrated and declared to be sanctified by Christ. For
Christ's first institution and consecration of the Sacraments stands yet in
force in the Church of God, in such sort that they which celebrate the
sacraments, no otherwise then the Lord himself from the beginning has
appointed, have still even to this day the use and benefit of that first and
most excellent consecration. And for this cause in the administration of the
Sacraments the very words of Christ are repeated. And forasmuch as we learn
out of the word of God, that these signs were appointed unto an other end and
use, then commonly they are used unto, therefore we teach that they now in this
their holy use do take upon them the names of things signified, and are not
still called bare water, bread or wine, but water is called regeneration, and
washing of the new birth, and the bread and wine the body and blood of the
Lord, or the pledges and Sacraments of his body and blood, not that the signs
are turned into the things signified, or cease to be that which in their own
nature they are, (for then they could not be Sacraments, which should consist
only of the thing signified, and have no signs) but therefore do the signs
bear the names of the things, because they be mystical tokens of holy things:
and because that the signs and the things signified are sacramentally joined
together: joined together, I say, or united by a mystical signification, and
by the purpose and will of him, who first instituted them. For the water, bread
and wine, are not common, but holy signs. And he that instituted water in
Baptism, did not institute it with that mind and purpose, that the faithful
should only be dipped in the water of baptism: and he which in the Supper
commanded the bread to be eaten, and the wine to be drunk, did not mean that
the faithful should only receive bread and wine, without any further mystery,
as they eat bread at home in their own houses: but that they should
spiritually be partakers of the things signified, and by faith be truly purged
from their sin and be partakers of Christ also.

And therefore we cannot allow of them which attribute the consecration of the
Sacraments to I know not what syllables, to the rehearfall of certain words
pronounced by him that is consecrated, and that has an intent of consecrating,
or to some other accidental things, which are not left unto us either by the
word, of by the example of Christ or his Apostles. We do also mislike the
doctrine of those, that speak no other wise of the Sacraments then of common
signs, not sanctified, nor effectual. We condemn them also, who because of
the invisible things do despist the visible signs, and think them
superfluous, because they do already enjoy the things themselves: such were
the Messalians, as it is recorded. We do disallow their doctrine also, who
teach that grace and the things signified are to be so tied and included in the
signs, that whosoever do outwardly receive the signs, must needs inwardly
participate the grace and the things signified, what manner of men soever they
be.

Notwithstanding as we esteem not the goodness of the Sacraments by the
worthiness or unworthiness of the Ministers, so likewise we do not weigh
them by the condition of the receivers. For we know that the goodness of the
Sacraments does depend upon the faithfulness or truth and the mere goodness
of God. For even as Gods word remains the true word of God, wherein not only
bare words are uttered when it is preached, but there withal the things
signified by the words are offered of God, although the wicked and unbeleevers
hear and understand the words, yet they enjoy not the things signified,
because they receive them not by a true faith: Even so the Sacraments
consisting of the word, the signs, and the things signified, continue true and
perfect Sacraments, not only because they be holy things, but also for that
God also offers the things signified, howsoever the unbeleevers receive not
the things which are offered. This cernmeth to pass, not by any fault in God,
the author and offerer of them, but by the fault of men, who do receive them
without faith, and unlawfully, whose unbelief cannot make Romans 3.
the truth of God of none effect.

Now, forasmuch as in the beginning, where we showed what the Sacraments were,
we did also by the way set down to what end they were ordained, it shall not
be necessary to trouble our selves with repeating any thing which has been
already handled. Next therefore in order it remains to speak severally of
the Sacraments of the new Testament.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA. Of the force, and efficacy of the
Sacraments.
THe signs, which in the Church of Christ be called Sacraments, Artic. 20.
are two, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. These being tokens of secret things,
do not consist of bare signs, but of signs and things also. For in Baptism
water is the sign, and * the thing it self is regeneration, and to be taken
by adoption to be the people of God. In the Lords Supper, bread and wine be the
signs, Look the 1. and 2. Obser. upon this confession.
but the thing is the communication of the body of Christ, salvation purchased
for us, and the remission of sins. These things are received by faith, as the
signs be received with the corporal mouth, and the whole fruit of the
Sacraments is in the thing it self. Whereupon we affirm that Sacraments are
not only tokens of humane society, but also pledges of the grace of God, by
which the Ministers do work together with the Lord (to that end, which he
does promise, offer, and bring to pass) yet so (as we said before of the
ministry of the word) that all the saving power is to be ascribed to the Lord
alone.

Out of the declaration of the same Confession. Of holy signs.
SAcraments are visible paterns, instituted of God, of the grace, good will,
and promises of God toward us, sure testimonies, and holy remembrances, the
which under earthly signs do represent unto us, and set before our eyes
heavenly gifts, and do withdraw the mind from earthly to heavenly things
moreover, they be tokens of Christian brotherhood and fellowship. Therefore a
Sacrament is not only a sign, but it is made of two things, to wit, of a
visible or earthly sign, and of the thing signified, which is heavenly: the
which two although they make but one Sacrament, yet it is one thing which is
received with the body, another thing which the faithful mind, being taught
by the spirit of God, does receive. For the signs and the things signified by
the signs do cleave together only by a certain mystical mean, or as
others speak, by a Sacramental union: neither be they so made one, that one
in nature is made the other, or that one is contained in the other. For either
of them (the which thing also holy Gelasius did acknowledge) does keep it own
propriety. Therefore the outward signs are not the self same thing,
substantially and naturally, which they do signify, neither do they give it
of themselves, and by their own power, no more then the minister does, but the
Lord uses the minister, and the signs, and the word to this end, that of his
mere grace, when and so much as pleases him, he may represent, declare, Look
the 1. obs^rvat. upon this confession.
visibly show, and set before our eyes his heavenly gifts, and all this
according to his promise.

Now, as it does derogate nothing from the ministry of the word, when it is
said, that the out ward preaching of the word does profit nothing, except the
inward husband man do give the increase, (for Paul says, He that planteth,
and he that waters, is nothing, but God that gives the increase,) so he does
not make the Sacraments of no effect, which says, that not they, but God
himself does purge us, that is, which does attribute the force of the
Sacrament to the Creator. For Peter said, Baptism does save us: but he adds,
Not whereby the filth of the flesh is washed away, but in that a good
conscience makes request unto God. For as in other creatures, as in the Sun,
the Moon, the Stars, fire, precious stones, herbs, and such like things,
which God does use as instruments toward us, we ought not to put any
confidence, nor admire them as the causes of any benefit: so our trust ought
not to rest in outward signs, nor the glory of God be transferred unto them,
as they be outward signs (howbeit the Lord does use their help toward us, and
they be holy ordinances) but by them our trust must lift up it self to him,
being both the author of the Sacraments, and the Creator of all things. And
seeing that the Sacraments are the institution and work of the Lord himself,
the faithful do receive them, not as certain superfluous inventions of men,
as at the hand of men, but as his heavenly gifts, and that at the hand of the
Lord. For as touching the word of the Gospel, which he preached, the Apostle
writes thus: When ye received of us the word, whereby ye learned God, ye did
not receive it as the word of men, but, as it was indeed, as the word of God,
who also works in you that believe. The like reason is there of the
Sacraments. Therefore as a little before we testified, that we do, and always
did receive these sentences and speeches of Scripture, touching the ministry
of the word, Look the 2. observat. upon this confession.
the Minister does convert, remit sins, open the eyes and hearts of men, give
faith and the spirit: so, being well understood, we do acknowledge also these
speeches touching the Sacraments, the Minister through Baptism does regenerate
and wash away sins: he does distribute, and give the body and blood of the
Lord: For Ananias said to Paul, Arise and be baptized, wash away thy sins, by
calling on the name of Jesus. Also, Jesus took bread, gave it to his
Disciples, and said, this is my body. Also it is manifest, that the ancient
Fathers, did use such kind of speeches, because that by this means they would
propound and commend more royally the gifts of God. Moreover, seeing that the
institution and work of the word and of the Sacraments proceeds not from men,
but from God, we do here reject the error of the Donatists, and of the
Anabaptists, who esteemed the holy gifts of God according to the worthiness,
or unworthiness of the Minister.

Now in that heavenly gifts are represented unto us by earthly things, it
comes so to pass by a certain singular goodness of God, who by this mean
would help our weakness. For the weakness of man's wit does understand all
things the better, if they be resembled by visible things. Therefore the Lord
would by Sacraments set before the eyes of mortal men his heavenly gifts and
his promises, as it were a lively picture in a certain table: that is, those
things, which are perceived by the mind, he delivered to us in sensible things.

Whereupon we do gather, that the Sacraments do appertain to them which are
in the Church. For profane men do scoff at our Sacraments, insomuch as they
esteem them according to the external things only. But they which have
faith, understand the mysteries of the Sacraments: and they which receive them
in a true and lively faith, receive them with fruit: if they be received
without faith, they do hurt: not that the good gifts of God do hurt of
themselves, but because that they being not received aright, do hurt, through
our default. Furthermore, the Sacraments are badges of the people of God. For
by these we are gathered together into a holy company, and we profess our
faith. For it pleased the Lord by this mean to gather his people to himself,
and as it were to mark them with this sign, whereby also he might put every
one in mind of his duty.

Now of this kind there be two Sacraments in the Church of Christ, Baptism,
which is called the font of regeneration: and the Supper of the Lord, which is
called the body and blood of the Lord, or the communion of the body and blood
of the Lord. And now we will speak severally of them: for hitherto we have
discoursed of the Sacraments in general, as before God we do believe, and
wherein we hope that Luther will not think any thing wanting.

Out of the Confession of BASIL.
THE same Sacraments are used in the Church, to wit, Baptism Artic. 5.
at our entrance into the Church, and the Supper of the Lord in due time when
we are come to riper years, Look the 1. Observation upon this confession.
to testify our faith and brotherly charity, as in Baptism was promised.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA. Of Sacraments in general. CHAP. 11.
AS touching the Sacraments, we teach that they be external, earthly (as they
which consist of the elements) and visible signs, consecrated by the word of
God, and by his own mouth appointed hereunto, to signify and witness to us
that self same spiritual and invisible grace and truth, whereof they have the
name, and which they are also sacramentally. These Sacraments no man either
did, or can institute, but the Lord and God himself Christ Jesus, into whose
hands the Father has delivered Joh. 13.
all things. And he has instituted and appointed them for great and saving
causes, and such as are necessary for this Church and all those that believe:
to wit, that like as by the preaching of the word, so by the administration of
the visible Sacraments and the mysteries thereof, faith might be helped and
furthered, and that there might be an assured testimony and confirmation of
the favorable and well pleased will of God toward us, and that they might
give witness to that truth which is signified by them, and should reach it out
(as does the word) to be apprehended by faith, and that the minds of the
faithful, in the receiving of them, should by faith receive the grace and
truth whereof they be witnesses, and applying it unto themselves, should make
it their own, and confirm themselves therein, and on the other side, by giving
themselves to God, should consecrate, and as it were by an oath religiously
bind themselves, to serve him alone, and as it were be joined together among
themselves, by the joining and knitting, as of one spirit, so also of one body,
to wit, of the Church, Ephesians. 4.
of the fellowship of Saints, and of love.

And according to these things, the Sacraments (as in times past Circumcision
was) may be called the holy covenants of God Genesis 15.
with his Church, and of the Church with God, the Ministers of faith and love,
by which the joining and union of God and Christ our Lord; with these believing
people, and theirs again with Christ, is made and persited, and that among
themselves in one spiritual body of the Church: by which also, even as by the
word, Christ, and his spirit do cause in the faithful, that is, in those that
use them worthily, a precious participation of his excellent merit, neither
does he suffer them to be only bare and naked ministers and ceremonies, but
those things that they signify and witness outwardly, that does he work
inwardly, to salvation, profitably and effectually: that is, he cleanses,
nourishes, satisfies, loses, pays, remitteth, and confirms.

They therefore which contemn these Sacraments, and through stubbornness will
not suffer them to be of any force with themselves, and making small account of
them, do esteem them as trifles, or do otherwise abuse them, contrary to the
institution, will, or commandment of Christ, all these do grievously sin
against the author thereof, who has instituted them, and make a very great
hazard of their salvation. But if some man would willingly use these Sacraments
according to the institution of Christ, and yet cannot have leave Look the 1.
observation upon this confession.
either entirely, or without deceit, so to do as he would, as if peradventure
one that is taken be kept in prison, or if one should be hindered by sleknesse,
or should live in strange countries among the enemies of the truth: such a man,
in such a case, if he do wholly and truly believe the holy Gospel, may by
that faith be saved, although he have not the use of the Sacraments: wherefore
Augustine upon John cap. 16. has this worthy saying, Believe, and thou have
eaten: seeing that the Sacraments are not necessary to salvation, but only by
the addition of a certain condition.

Also we teach this, that the Sacraments of themselves, or by their own
virtue, for the works sake, or for the only outward action, that is, for the
bare participation, receiving and use thereof, cannot give grace, nor a
justifying or quickening faith to any, which before was not inwardly quickened by
the holy Ghost, and has no good motion within himself: I say, the Sacraments
cannot give to any such either grace, or justifying and quickening faith, and
therefore they cannot justify any man, nor inwardly quicken or regenerate any
man's spirit: for faith must go before, whereby the holy Ghost does inwardly
quicken, and lighten man, and stir up or cause good motions in the heart.
Without this faith there is neither any justification nor salvation: neither
do the Sacraments of, or by themselves help any whit hereunto, as in the holy
Scripture manifest examples of this matter are found in many places, especially
in Judas, who received the Sacrament of the Lord Christ himself, did also
execute the function John 13.
of a Preacher, and yet he ceased not to remain a devil, an hypocrite, and
the lost son: neither was he made better by the Sacrament, or by the use
thereof, neither did this profit him any Act. 5.
thing to salvation. Also in Ananias and his wife, who had been baptized of.
Apostles, and had also without doubt received the Lords Supper, and yet not
withstanding they did continue in their wickedness, injustice, and lies
against the holy Ghost, the Sacraments did neither take away their wickedness,
nor give them the saving or justifying faith, which makes the heart the better
by repenting, and gives it to God an upright and obedient heart, and does
appease the conscience. Therefore the Sacraments did not give this conscience
and this faith unto, them: as Circumcision, and the Sacrifices of the Old
Testament, did not give a lively and justifying faith, without the which faith
those things availed nothing to eternal salvation or justification. And so
does Saint Paul speak of all those things in his Epistle to the Romans, and
brings in the example of Abraham, and does witness, Romans 4.
that he had faith and righteousness, which is availeable with God, before
that he was circumcised. In like sort he writes of the people of Israel, that
they also were baptized, and they all did eat one and the same spiritual
meat, and did all drink one and the same spiritual drink: but with many of
them God was not pleased. And therefore, even in the abundance of all these
things, they were thought unworthy to be received, and they were rejected of
God. For if a dead man, or one that is unworthy, do come to the Sacraments,
certainly they do not give him life and worthiness, but he that is such a one
does load himself with a far greater burden of fault, and sin, seeing
that he is unworthy: the which thing the Apostle does expressly declare in the
doctrine touching the Supper of the Lord, where he says, Whosoever 1 Cor. 10.
does eat of this bread, or drink of this cup of the Lord unworthily, he is
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: Also, He does eat and drink
judgment to himself.

Lastly, this also must be known, that the verity of the Sacraments does
never fail them, so that they should become not effectual at any time: but in
the institution of Christ Look the 2. observation upon this confession.
they do always exercise their virtue and efficacy, in witnessing, sealing,
confirming, unto the worthy receivers, present grace and salvation, but unto
the unworthy, their fault and condemnation, whether they be administered by a
good and honest Priest, or by a close sinner. For so long as the
overthwartnesse of such wicked hypocrites is not as yet publicly known,
neither punished more gently or severely by the Ecclesiastical Discipline,
neither they which have behaved themselves more stubbornly have been
excommunicated, those Sacraments which th^^ do administer, may be received of
them, if so be that they do administer them, according to the will, mind, and
institution of Christ, the which thing also the constitutions of the ancient
Church do confirm. For the virtue and efficacy of the Sacraments, does
neither consist in him, nor depend on him, who does either administer them,
whosoever he be, or does receive them, but it consists in the institution,
and in the commandment that was most absolute and mighty in authority, and
in the word of the author of the Sacraments, to wit, of our Lord Jesus Christ,
on which one thing they they do rely, and have from thence whatsoever they
are able to do. Nevertheless the Ministers must thoroughly look to it, and
take good heed, lest whilst by their labor they be serviceable to others,
They themselves become 1 Cor. 9.
reprobates, or worthy to be rejected: and also lest they give holy things to
dogs, or cast pearls before swine. Also the people must endeavor Matthew. 7.
by all means to take heed, that they do not in any case receive the
Sacraments with the offense of the Church, and the proper danger of the
salvation of their souls, that is to their own fault and judgment, whereof we
made mention before.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE believe that there be Sacraments adjoined to the Artic. 34.
word, for the more ample confirmation thereof, to wit, that they may be
pledges and tokens of the grace of God, whereby our weak and rude faith may be
helped. For we confess that these outward signs be such, that God, by the
power of his holy Spirit, does work by them, that nothing may there be
represented to us in vain: yet we think that the whole substance and truth of
them is in Christ Jesus, from whom if they be separated, they be nothing else
but vain shadows and smoakes. Also Artic. 35. We acknowledge that there be
only two Sacraments, common to the whole Church, etc. That which follows,
pertains to the 13. Sect.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
MOreover we allow the Sacraments of the Church, that is to say, certain holy
signs, and Ceremonies, which Christ Artic. 10.
would we should use, that by them he might set before our eyes, the Mysteries
of our salvation, and might more strongly confirm the Faith, which we have in
his blood, and might seal his grace in our hearts. And these Sacraments,
together with Tertullian, Origin, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom,
Basil, Dionysius, and other Catholic Fathers, we do call Figures, Signs,
Marks, Badges, Prints, Copies, Forms, Seals, Signets, Similitudes, Patterns,
Representations, Remembrances, and Memories, and we make no doubt together with
the same Doctors, to say that these be certain visible words, Seals of
Righteousness and Tokens of Grace. And we do expressly pronounce, that in
the Lords Supper there is truly given unto the Believing, the body and blood
of our Lord, the Flesh of the Son of God, which quickens our souls, the
meat that comes from above, the food of Immortality, of Grace, Truth, and
Life, and that the same Supper is the Communion of the Body and Blood of
Christ: by the partaking whereof we be revived, strengthened, and fed unto
Immortality: and whereby we are joined, united, and incorporated unto Christ,
that we may abide in him, and he in us. Besides this, we acknowledge, that
there be two Sacraments, which, we judge, properly Artic. 11.
ought to be called by this name: that is to say, Baptism, and the Sacrament
of thankesgiving. For thus many we see were delivered and sanctified by Christ,
and well allowed of the old Fathers, Ambrose, and Augustine, and such others.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe, that God having regard to our dullness and Artic. 33.
infirmity, did institute Sacraments for us, that by them his promises might
be sealed to us, and that they might be most certain pledges of his heavenly
love toward us, and of his gifts bestowed upon us, for the cherishing and
sustaining of our faith. These Sacraments he added to the word of the Gospel,
that he might more lively set before our external senses, both those things
which he declares unto us in his word, and those also which he works
inwardly in our hearts: and to confirm more and more in us that salvation,
which he vouchsafes to communicate unto us. For the Sacraments are signs and
visible tokens of internal and invisible things, by the which, as by certain
means, God himself works within us, by the power of the holy Ghost. Therefore
they be not vain or idle signs, neither yet ordained of God to deceive or
frustrate us of our hope. For the truth of our Sacraments is Jesus Christ,
without whom they are of no value. Moreover, that number of Sacraments
suffices us, which Christ himself our true and only Doctor, has instituted:
and those are only two, to wit, the Sacrament of Baptism, and the Sacrament
of the holy Supper of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGH.
SEeing that in this life many evil ones and hypocrites are Artic. 8.
mingled with the Church, and have fellowship with it in the outward signs and
pledges, the Sacraments administered by such as are evil, may lawfully be used,
according to the saying of Christ, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
chair, etc. For the Sacraments, and the word of God are effectual, by reason
of the institution and commandment of Christ, though they be delivered by
wicked and evil men. They condemn the Donatists and such like, who said it
was not lawful for the people to use the ministry of evil men in the Church,
and held opinion, that the ministry of evil men was quite without fruit and
effect.

The beginning of this eighth Article is elsewhere thus set down.
THough the Church, to speak properly, be a Congregation of Saints and true
believers, yet seeing that in this life many hypocrites and evil men be
mingled with it, it is a lawful thing, to use the Sacraments, ministered by the
hands of evil men, etc.

Touching the use of the Sacraments they teach, that they were instituted, not
so much to be notes of profession amongst men, as to be signs and pledges of
Gods good will toward us, set before the eyes, to stir up and confirm faith
in them which use them. Therefore we must use Sacraments so, as we must join
faith with them, which may believe the promises that are offered and declared
unto us by the Sacraments. By this faith we receive both the grace promised,
which is represented by the Sacraments, and also the holy Ghost. Therefore they
condemn that Pharisaicall opinion of the Papists, which suppresseth the
doctrine of faith, and does not teach that faith, which believes that grace is
freely given us for Christ's sake, is necessary in the use of the Sacraments,
but imagines that men are just, for the very use of the Sacraments, even by
the work done, and that without any good affection of him that uses it.

This Article we find thus in another Edition.
COncerning the use of the Sacraments, they teach that they were ordained, not
so much to be marks and badges of profession amongst men, as that they should
be signs or testimonies of the will of God toward us, set forth unto us, to
stir up and confirm faith in such as use them. Whereupon they condemn those
that teach, that the Sacraments do justify by the work done, and do not
teach that faith to believe remission of sins is requisite in the use of
Sacraments.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY. Of the Sacraments.
THe Church also is discerned from other Gentiles by certain Artic. 12.
rites and ceremonies instituted of God, and usually called Sacraments, as are
Baptism, and the Lords Supper: which notwithstanding are not only signs of a
profession, but much more (as the ancient Fathers said) signs of grace: that
is, they be ceremonies added to the promise of the Gospel touching grace, that
is, touching the free remission of sins, and touching reconciliation, and the
whole benefit of our redemption: the which are so instituted, that every man
may use them, because they be pledges and testimonies, which declare that the
benefits promised in the Gospel do appertain to every one. For the voice of
the Gospel is general: this use does bear witness that this voice does
appertain to every one which uses the Sacraments.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE. Of the Sacraments.
THe word Sacrament, as also the word Mystery (which interpreters Artic. 9.
do expound Sacrament) is very large. But because some have thought it good to
restrain it to the number of seven Sacraments, we will briefly run over
every one, that we may show what we find wanting in the doctrine that some
have broached, and what may seem to be repugnant to the meaning of that
Church, which is indeed Catholic or Orthodoxe.

Out of the Confession of SUEVELAND. Of the Sacraments.
SEeing that the Church of Christ does live here in the flesh Artic. 16.
(howbeit not according to the flesh) it pleased the Lord also to teach,
admonish, and exhort it by the outward word. And that this might be done the
more commodiously, he would also have his to make much of an external society
among themselves. For which cause he gave unto them holy signs, among which
these are the chiefest, Baptism, and the Lords Supper: the which we do not
only think therefore to have had the name of Sacraments among the Fathers,
because they are visible signs of invisible grace (as Saint Augustine does
define them) but also for that purpose, because that by them we do consecrate
our selves unto Christ, and do bind our selves as it were by the oath or
Sacrament of faith.

THE THIRTEENTH SECTION OF THE SACRAMENT OF HOLY BAPTISM.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA. Of holy Baptism. CHAP. 20.
Baptism was instituted, and consecrated by God, and the first that baptized
was John, who dipped Christ in the water in Jorden. From him it came to the
Apostles, who also did baptize with water. The Lord in plain words commanded
them, To Matthew. 28.
preach the Gospel, and to baptize in the name of the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost. And Peter also, when diverse demanded of him, what they ought to
do, said to them, in the Acts, Act. 8.
Let every one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost.
Whereupon Baptism is called of some a sign of initiation of Gods people, as
that whereby the elected of God are consecrated unto God.

There is but one Baptism in the Church of God: for it is sufficient to be
once baptized or consecrated unto God. For baptism once received does continue
all a man's life, and is a perpetual fealing of our adoption unto us. For to be
baptized in the name of Christ, is to be enrolled, entered, and received into
the covenant, and family, and so into the inheritance of the sons of God, yea
and in this life to be called after the name of God, that is to say, to be
called the son of God, to be purged also from the flchinesse of sins, and
to be endued with the manifold grace of God, for to lead a new and innocent
life. Baptism therefore does call to mind, and keep in remembrance the great
benefit of God performed to mankind: for we are all borne in the pollution of
sin, and are the sons of wrath. But God, who is rich in mercy, does freely
purge us from our sins, by the blood of his Son, and in him does adopt us
to be his sons, and by an holy covenant does join us to himself, and does
enrich us with diverse gifts, that we might live a new life. All these things
are sealed up unto us in Baptism. For inwardly we are regenerated, purified,
and renewed of God through the holy Spirit: and outwardly we receive the
sealing of most notable gifts, by the water, by which also, those great
benefits are represented, and, as it were, set before our eyes to be looked
upon. And therefore are we baptized, that is, washed and sprinkled with
visible water. For the water makes clean that which is filthy, refreshes
things that fail and faint, and cools the bodies. And the grace of God
deals in like manner with the soul, and that invisibly, and spiritually.

Moreover by the Sacrament of Baptism God does separate us from all other
Religions of people, and does consecrate us a peculiar people to himself. We
therefore by being baptized, do confess our faith, and are bound to give unto
God obedience, mortification of the flesh, and newness of life, yea and we are
billed soldiers for the holy warfare of Christ, that all our life long we
should fight against the world, Satan, and our own flesh: Moreover, we are
baptized into one body of the Church that we might well agree with all the
members of the Church in the same religion and mutual duties.

We believe that Look the 1. observation upon this confession.
that of all other is the most perfect manner of baptism, where in Christ was
baptized, and which the rest of the Apostles did use in baptism. Those things
therefore which by man's device were added afterward, and used in the Church,
2. Observation.
we think them nothing necessary to the perfection of Baptism. Of which kind
is exorcisme, and the use of lights, oil; salt, spattle, and such other
things, as namely that baptism is twice every year consecrated with diverse
ceremonies. For we believe that the baptism of the Church, which is but one,
was sanctified in Gods first institution of it, and is consecrated by the word,
and is now of full force, by, and for the first blessing of God upon it.

We teach that Baptism should not be ministered in the Church by women or
midwives. For Paul secludeth women from Ecclesiastical callings: but Baptism
belongs to Ecclesiastical offices. We condemn the Anabaptists, who deny
that young infants, borne of faithful parents, are to be baptized. For
according to the doctrine of the Gospel theirs is the kingdom of God. And they
are written in the covenant of God. And why then should not the sign of the
covenant be given to them? Why should they not be consecrated by holy baptism,
who are Gods peculiar people, and in the Church of God? We condemn also the
Anabaptists in the rest of their opinions, which they peculiarly do hold
against the word of God. We therefore are not Anabaptists, neither do we agree
with them in any point that is theirs.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETEA. Of Baptism.
Baptism, according to the institution of the Lord, is the font Artis. 21.
of Regeneration, the which the Lord does give to his chosen in a visible
sign, by the ministry of the Church, in such sort, as we have declared
before. In which holy font we do therefore dippe our infants, because that it
is not lawful for us to reject them from the company of the people of God,
which are borne of us (who are the people of God) so long as they be not
pointed out by the voice of God, especially seeing that we ought godly to
presume of their election.

Out of the Declaration of the same Confession, sent unto Luther. Of Baptism.
Baptism is a Sacrament, wherein the Lord by a visible sign does testify his
grace unto us, whereby he does regenerate us, and cleanse us from our sins,
and also receive us to be his people, that we may live to Christ, die to the
old Adam, and be partakers of the good things of Christ. For we all are borne
sinners, whereupon we have need of regeneration, and the purging of our sins,
which comes to pass by the free mercy of God, whereby also we are received
into the covenant, that being buried into his death, we may rise again in
newness of life, the which thing is taught more at large in the Apostls
writings. But the goodness of God does in deed give unto us these heavenly
gifts, and also uses a sign hereunto, that it may declare these things unto
us, and by pouring them into our senses, might allure us to more excellent
things, that so the whole glory might be proper to God, and yet the holy
institution of the sign might not be made frustrate. For it is most truly
said, Baptism does save us: but it is added of Peter, Not that which washes
away the filth of the body. And the Baptist says, I indeed do baptize you
with water, but he (that is, Christ) shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and
with fire. Whereunto the holy Council of Nice having respect, did say, Our
Baptism is to be considered, not with sensible eyes, but with the eyes of the
mind.

Also Baptism is a badge: for it serves to our confession. For this we do
plainly confess in the Church, that we together with our children and all our
family do profess the Christian religion, that the members of that body
whereof Christ is the Head, to whom we have given our names, are received of
him into the number of those soldiers, who by the good guiding of Christ do
through all their life exercise a warfare against the world, Satan, and the
flesh.

Hitherto also appertains the 5. Art. ss. 2. of the confession of Basil,
which before was placed in the 12. Sect. Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA. Of
holy Baptism. CHAP. 12.
TOuching holy Baptism it is taught, that men must believe and profess, that
this is a Sacrament or wholesome ministry of the New Testament, instituted of
Christ the Lord, concerning which the faithful Ministers have in charge that
by the administration hereof, they benefit the holy Church. This Sacrament
consists of an outward washing, that is done with water, with calling on the
name of the holy Trinity (that of the element and word may arise and be jointly
withal made a Sacrament) August. he. in Joan. cap. 13.
and that washing is used both to signify, and to witness a spiritual
washing, and inward cleansing of the holy Ghost from the disease of hereditarie
sin, and from other sins, the guilt of which is here forgiven and taken
away, and to the attaining of a new manner of birth, or regeneration: whereupon
it is called the Sacrament of the new birth, that is, of regeneration, or a
washing with water in the word of life. For we believe that whatsoever Act. 2.
and 22.
by Baptism, as by a Sacrament added to the word of the Gospel, is in the
outward ceremony signified and witnessed, all that does the Lord God work and
perform inwardly: that is, that he washes John 3. Tit. 3. Ephesians. 5. Galat. 3.
Romans 6. 1 Pet. 3.
away sin, begets a man again, and bestows salvation upon him, and
through the washing of water, cleanses by the word the society of his Church,
cloatheth and apparelleth it with his Son, burieth and takes away sin, and
gives testimony to, and seals the peace of a good conscience. For Baptism
is not a washing away of the outward filth of the flesh, but the stipulation or
promise that a good conscience makes unto God. For the bestowing of these
excellent fruits was holy Baptism given and granted to the Church, which the
faithful shepherds of souls ought to administer, and which the faithful
people of Christ, touching the receiving thereof, ought to use lawfully but
once only: yet, in deed and truth, throughout their whole life.

And although Baptism in the Primitive Church was for the most part ministered
to such, as were well grown and of discretion, after a confession of faith made
by them, according to Christ's commandment: yet this is taught, that young
children also, who are reckoned in the number of Gods people, in like sort are
by this ministry to be benefited toward the attaining of salvation, that they
likewise may be consecrated and dedicated to Christ, according to this
commandment, when he says, Suffer ye the Matthew. 16.
little ones to come to me, and forbid them not: because unto such belongs
the kingdom of God. Therefore according to the word of the Lord, and many
other testimonies and other promises made to this beloved age of children,
especially when as also there is extant an example of that ancient ministry
ordained of God, to Genesis 17.
wit, Circumcision, which by reason of the covenant belonged not only to those
of discretion, but therewithal also to young children. For these causes do
our Ministers without any doubt, and boldly, baptize children in the name of
the holy Trinity, applying unto them a sign of most effectual virtue, and a
most sure witnesbearing of that thing which by Christ's own words is assigned
to this age, and is imparted unto it. For so Christ in general, and without
exception, gives in charge, not touching some, but touching all, Teach ye all
nations, and baptize them, in the name Matthew. 28. Act. 4.
of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. And so over children this most
holy name is called upon, in which alone there is salvation.

This is further also taught, that they who are once lawfully and truly
baptized, when they come to years, ought to do their endeavor, that they may
learn to acknowledge and know what holy Baptism is, and therewithal the
Catholic and Christian faith (without which Baptism avails nothing) to the
end that afterward when they do desire to be partakers of the Lord his Supper,
they may with their own mouths, and of their own accord, make profession of
their faith, and may renew their sanctification, by which they were consecrated
to the Lord. And such, that is, which are thus instructed, our ministers
receive unto this covenant of holy baptism, and Look the 1. Observation upon
this confession.
by the laying on of hands do testify to them, that grace is contained in
baptism to strengthen them to the warfare of faith, and so after a convenient
and godly manner, and with use of pure ceremonies, and such as are profitable
to edifying, they bring them to the sacrament of the L. Supper, without any
reiteration of baptism, as there are evident tokens and examples to be seen of
this matter in the Primitive Church, which is the true and best maistresse of
the posterity, and going before leads us the way. For if so be that a man
should even after a true manner enjoy the Baptism of Christ, and should by
means here of be buried with Christ into his death to newness of life, if
afterward, his life being prolonged, he should not, according to the doctrine
of the holy Gospel, show forth a true and lively faith in Jesus Christ,
brotherly love toward all those, that are consecrated to the Lord, and so
should lead a life unworthy his place or calling, and unworthy of God and his
neighbor, and should not in baptism conceive a lively hope of life
everlasting; such a one should assuredly give certain testimony of himself,
that he had in vain received grace in holy Baptism, wherein the name of the
holy Trinity was called on over him, the which thing God the Lord, as his word
declares, suffers Exodus 20.
by no means to escape unrevenged or unpunished.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE acknowledge that there be two only Sacraments Artic. 35.
common to the whole Church: whereof the first is Baptism, the which is given
to us to testify our adoption, because that therein we are ingrafted into
Christ's body, that being washed in his blood, we may also be renewed to
holiness of life by his Spirit. This also we say, Although we are baptized but
once, yet the fruit of baptism does pertain to the whole course of our life,
that this promise, to wit, that Christ will be always unto us sanctification,
and justification, may be sealed up in us with a sure and firm seal.
Furthermore, although Baptism be a Sacrament of faith and repentance, yet
seeing that God does together with the Parents account their posterity also to
be of the Church, we affirm, that infants, being borne of holy parents, are by
the authority of Christ to be baptized.

We say therefore that the element of water, be it never so Artic. 38.
frail, does notwithstanding truly witness or confirm unto us the inward
washing of our souls in the blood of Jesus Christ, by the virtue and efficacy
of the holy Ghost.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
WE say, that Baptism is a Sacrament of the remission of Artic. 12.
sins, and of that washing, which we have in the blood of Christ: and that no
person, which will profess Christ's name, ought to be restrained, or keept
back therefrom: no not the very babes of Christians: for so much as they be
borne in sin, and pertain unto the people of God.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe and confess, that Jesus Christ, which is the end of the law, has
by his own blood sheading made an end of all other propitiatory sacrifice for
sins. Also that Circumcision, which was done by blood, being abolished, he
has instituted Baptism in the place thereof, whereby we are received into the
Church of God, and separated from all other nations, and all kind of strange
religions, being consecrated unto him alone, whose badge and cognizance we
wear. Finally, Baptism is a token unto us, that he will be our God for ever,
who also is our gracious Father. Therefore the Lord has commanded all his to
be baptized with pure water, In the name of the Father, the Sonue, and the holy
Ghost, To signify that the blood of Christ does internally, through the
operation of the Spirit, perform and effect that in the soul, which water
does externally work in the bodies. For as water being poured upon us, and
appearing in the body of him that is baptized, moistning the same does wash
away the filthiness of the body, so the blood of Christ, washing the soul, does
cleanse it from sin, and does make us the sons of God, which before were
the children of wrath. Not that this material water does these things, but the
sprinckling of the precious blood of the Son of God, which is unto us as the
red sea, wherethrough we must pass, that we may depart from the tyranny of
Pharaih, that is, the Devil, and enter into the spiritual land of Canaan.
Therefore the ministers verily do deliver unto us the Sacraments, and the
visible thing, but it is the Lord himself that gives it unto us, that is
represented by the Sacrament, namely, the gifts and invisible graces, washing,
purifying, and cleansing our souls from all spots and iniquities, renewing in
like manner, and filling our hearts with all comfort, and to conclude, giving
unto us a certain persuasion of his Fatherly goodness, clothing us with the
new man, and putting off the old man, with all his deeds. For these causes we
do believe, that every one that desires to obtain eternal life, ought to be
baptized with one baptism, and that once alone, which never afterward is to
be itcrated, seeing that we cannot be borne twice.

Neither does this Baptism profit us only at that moment, when the water
rests upon us, and when we are sprinkled with it, but it is available
throughout the whole time of our life. Therefore here we do detest the error
of the Anabaptists, who are not only content with one only Baptism, and that
once received, but do also condemn the Baptism of infants, yea of those that
be borne of faithful parents: but we by the same reason do believe that they
ought to be baptized and sealed with the sign of the covenant, for the which
in times past the infants amongst the Israelites were circumcised, that is, by
reason of the same promises made unto our infants, that were made unto others.
And verily Christ has no less shed his blood to wash the infants of the
faithful, then he did for the washing of those that are of riper years.
Therefore it is meet that they should receive the sign or Sacrament of the
thing which Christ has wrought for their sakes, as in the law the Lord
commands, that the sacrament of the death and passion of Christ should be
Levit. 12. 6.
communicated to children newborn, by offering up the lamb for them, which
was a sacrament of Christ to come. Furthermore, that which Circumcision did
perform to the people of the Jews, the same does Baptism perform to the
children of the faithful. For the which cause Paul calls Baptism, The
circumcision of Christ.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
COncerning Baptism they teach, that it is Look the 1. observation upon this
confession.
necessary to salvation, Artic. 9.
as a ceremony ordained of Christ. Also, that by Baptism the grace of God is
offered. And that young infants are to be baptized, and that they being by
baptism commended unto God, are received into Gods favor, and are made the
sons of God, as Christ witnesses, speaking of little children in the Church.
Mat. 18. It is not the will of your heavenly Father, that any of these little
ones should perish. They condemn the Anabaptists, which allow not the baptism
of infants, and Look the 1. Observat. upon this confession.
hold that infants are saved, though they die without baptism, and be not
within the Church of God.

This in another Edition is set down in this sort.
TOuching Baptism they teach, that it is Look the 2. observation.
necessary to salvation, and that by Baptism the grace of God is offered.
That childreu are to be baptized, and such as by baptism be presented to God,
are received into his favor. They condemn the Anabaptists, that allow not of
childrens Baptism, and hold that children are saved without Baptism.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY.
Baptism is an entire action, to wit, a dipping, and the pronouncing Artic. 13.
of these words, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost. We do often expound the sum of the doctrine of the
Gospel comprehended in these words. I baptize thee, that is, I do witness,
that by this dipping thy sins be washed away, and that thou art now received
of the true God, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has redeemed
thee by his Son Jesus Christ, and does sanctify thee by his holy Spirit. I
baptize thee into the name, that is, invocating of this true God, whom thou
shall acknowledge, and invocate and distinguish from all other feigned gods,
and shall assure thy self, that those benefits are given to thee, which he
promised in the Gospel: that thou art a member of the Church of God, which is
redeemed by the Son, and sanctified by the holy Ghost. Let them remember this
meaning of this covenant, who by reason of their age are capable of doctrine,
and being confirmed by this testimony, let them believe that their sins be
forgiven them, and that they are indeed members of the Church of God, and let
them in a true faith invocate the true God: as Abraham considering of
Circumcision, did behold the promise of the seed to come, understand that he
was a member of the Church of God, and that the curse was taken away from him
also, by that seed, of whom it was said in the promise, Genesis 12. In thy seed
shall all nations be blessed. So also does Peter teach, 1 Pet. 3. That Baptism
is a stipulation or promise that a good conscience makes unto God, by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, which is at the right hand of God. He does namely
call it a stipulation, whereby God does make a covenant with thee, and receives
thee into favor, the wounds of thy conscience being healed, and thou in like
sort do make a covenant with God, to invocate this true God, and to believe
that thou art saved by the Son of God, who is raised up from death, and now
does reign. So this Son of God, sitting at the right hand of the eternal
Father, is effectual in thee, as also Paul says to the Gal. You that are
baptized, have put on Christ. And Look the 1. Observation upon this confession.
that the holy Ghost is given in baptism, Paul affirms it in his Epistle to
Titus, saying. By the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost. And in John it is said, Except a man be borne again of water and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Therefore we teach Look
the 2. observation upon this confession.
that baptism is necessary: and we do once only baptize every one, as every
one was but once only circumcised: but we do often make mention of the most
profitable doctrine, touching the signification thereof, and the mutual
covenant.

We do also baptize infants, because it is most certain that the promise of
grace does pertain also of infants, Look the 3. Observation.
and to those only, which are ingrafted into the Church: because that of these
it is said, Suffer little ones to come unto me, because that to such
appertains the kingdom of heaven. And Origin writes upon the sixth to the
Romans, That the Church received the custom of baptizing infants from the
Apostles. Neither do we think that this custom is only an idle ceremony,
but that the infants are then in deed received and sanctified of God, because
that then they are grafted into the Church, and the promise pertains to such.
And of this matter there be many things written and published in our Churches,
whereby the Anabaptists are refuted.

Also out of the 19. Art. Of Confirmation.
IT is well known, that the manner of consecrating oil was magical and
execrable: and therefore these annointings, wherein there is use of oil, are
not to be tolerated, and in old time they used these ceremonies otherwise then
now they be used. In the ceremony of confirmation there was a trial of
doctrine, wherein every one did rehearse the form of doctrine, and did openly
profess that they did mislike the madness of the Heathen, and of Heretics,
and that they would be and remain members of the true Church, and never
forsake that true opinion which they did then profess. This custom was
profitable to instruct men, and to keep them in the true knowledge of God. And
in our Churches the like things be done in Catechizing the younger sort, Look
the 2. observation upon this confession of Bobem. Sect. 8
and in private confession, wherein the Pastors do examine the doctrine of
the people. But as touching the ceremony of confirmation, which the Bishops
do now retain, what else is it, but a vain shadow?

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE.
Of Baptism. CHAP. 10.
WE acknowledge that Baptism is to be ministered, as well to infants, as to
those that are grown to full age, and that it is to be used in the Church,
even to the end of this world, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost, according to Christ his institution.

Also we believe and confess, that Baptism is that Sea, into the bottom
whereof, as the Prophet says, God does cast all our sins, and forgive them for
Christ his Sons sake, through faith. But whereas some affirm, that sin
remaining in man after Baptism, is not indeed sin of it own nature, we
think it to be a more pernicious error, then the common sort of men does
judge it to be: For, although we do not doubt, but that sin which remains
after baptism, is forgiven to the faithful for Christ, and by the free mercy
of God, is not imputed any longer before the tribunal seat of God; yet if a
man weigh and consider the nature thereof, it is in deed in it self sin, by
reason whereof, as Augustine said before, No man living is justified in the
sight of God; and, there is not a just man in the earth, which does good, and
sins not. Romans 7. I see another law in my members, rebelling against the law
of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is in my
members. Here Paul speaks of sin, which remains after baptism, and he
affirms, that it does rebel against the law of his mind, that is, against
the affection of the holy Ghost. Now, that which rebelleth against the holy
Ghost, undoubtedly it is necessary, that it be very sin indeed. For this is
the nature of sin, that it strive against the holy Ghost. And, Galat. 5. it
is said: The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the
same things that ye would. Here again Paul speaks of sin remaining after
Baptism: and does manifestly attribute it to the nature of sin, to wit, to
lust against the spirit, to be contrary to the Spirit, and to hinder, that
righteousness may not be perfect in man. Therefore sin remaining after
baptism, of it nature is indeed sin, although it be not imputed to him that
believes, but is forgiven for Christ. And therefore Augustine in his Book, De
Nupt. and Concap. ad Valor. Lib. 1. Cap. 25. says, It is answered, that the
concupiscence of the flesh is forgiven in Baptism, not that there should be no
concupiscence, but that it should not be imputed to sin. For although the
guilt be already discharged, yet the sin remains, till all our infirmities
be healed, etc. And again, De Baptis. parnulorum, and de Cons. Did. 4. Cap.
Per Baptismum: Through Baptism it is brought to pass, that the flesh of sin
be made void, yet it is not so made void, that ingendered concupiscence
should not remain in the flesh, but that it should not hurt.

Moreover we teach, that he that is baptized in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost, is sprinkled with a spiritual anointing,
that is, is made a member of Christ through faith, and endued with the holy
Ghost, that the ears of his mind may be opened, and the eyes of his heart
lightened, to receive and understand heavenly things. And it is evident, that
the use of the outward anointing was lawful in that government which Moses
instituted, and that outward anointing was used also in the Church, after that
the Gospel was published. But it is also evident, that in the law of Moses,
there was a time for shadows, but now, Christ being revealed, It is the time
of truth, and the use of external anointing pertains to the rudiments of the
world. Concerning the abrogating of these rudiments, Paul says, Col. 2. If ye
be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though ye lived in
the world, are ye burdened with traditions. And Dyonisius, whom they call
Areopagita, I^ Caelest Hicra^. De Baptis.
and whom they think to have written out the ceremonies, which the Apostles
delivered to the Church, does insinuate, that an outward anointing was used in
the Church, but withal he does insinuate, and that not obscurely, that this
ceremony was taken partly from the heathenish anointings which wrestlers did
use, and partly out of the law of Moses. But by what authority, or with what
profit, we may take examples of the Heathen, how to worship God, and to
administer his Sacraments, that saying of Moses, Deuteronomy. 12. does witness, Take
heed that thou do not imitate the heathen, and enquire after their ceremonies,
saying, As these nations worshipped their Gods, so will I do likewise, Ye
shall not so do unto the Lord your God. And that saying of Christ, Mat. 15. In
vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrine, the precepts of men. And it
is not to be doubted, that the ceremonies of Moses, whereof one part is the use
of external anointing, do pertain to the rudiments of this world, to whose
decrees Paul said before that we are not tied: and whereof he says in another
place, Seeing that ye know God, yea, rather are known of God, how turn ye
again unto impotent and beggarly rudiments, whereunto as from the beginning,
ye will be in bondage again? Furthermore, how can it truly be affirmed, as
Fabianus writes, that the making or ceremony of the outward anointing, should
be taught of the Apostles, seeing that the Acts of Councels do witness, that
this Ceremony was instituted of Sylvester? And the Ecclesiastical History
does show, that the Apostles had no purpose to make laws concerning holy
days, but to teach men true godliness, and an upright conversation: how much
less did they purpose, to institute external anointings in the Church, and to
bring in shadows, where the Sun does shine most clearly.

There were added unto Baptism certain other Ceremonies also, of salt, dirt,
apparel: but because these are not thought necessary, no not of themselves,
amongst whom they are used, and are in some sort an idle imitation of those
ceremonies, which Christ sometime used in doing miracles, there is no cause why
we should take any care for them, whilst we are conversant in so many
necessary things.

Of Confirmation. CHAP. 11.
WE do not doubt, but that the Apostles in the beginning, when the Gospel was
revealed, and confirmed in the day of Penticost, did by the laying on of hands,
give unto the believers in Christ that wonderful gift of the holy Ghost, to
wit, that they might speak with tongues. But of a personal and temporal fact
of the Apostles, a general and temporal sacrament cannot be ordained in the
Church, without the special commandment of God. And it is a horrible thing to
be heard, that the Sacrament of Confirmation (such as the Bishops Suffragans
use to give unto Children) should excel in dignity the Sacrament of Baptism.
For thus some of them are not ashamed to write of the Sacrament of
Confirmation: As one thing, say they, is done of the greater, that is, of the
chief Bishops, which In decret. epist. Me^tiadis. To. in Actis Council.
cannot be done of the lesser: so is it to be worshipped, and embraced with
greater reverence. For to the Apostles it was commanded of God, that by the
laying on of hands, they should give, to those that believe in Christ, the
gifts of the holy Ghost. Now we must not understand this properly of those
private gifts of the holy Ghost, which are necessary to every one unto
salvation (for those the faithful receive by the preaching of the Gospel, and
by Baptism) but we must understand it of the public gifts of the holy Ghost,
to wit, speaking with diverse tongues, and other gifts, which then were
necessary for the public Confirmation of the Gospel touching Christ.
Therefore after that the authority of the Gospel was sufficiently confirmed by
such miracles, as that wonderful gift of tongues did cease, so also the
ceremony of laying on of hands, whereby that gift was given, didaltogether, as
touching this thing cease. Otherwise of a shadow we must make a general
Sacrament of the Church, and those that are sick, must be shadowed over,
because that many were healed by the shadow of Peter. In like sort we must make
a general Sacrament of the layhing one of napkins, because that many were
healed of their diseases, when Paul's napkins were laid upon them: and we must
lie upon the dead, because that Paul by stretching himself upon a young man,
did raise him up from death. And yet the Pastors of Churches must not have
liberty, to have no regard to instruct children and youth in that doctrine
which is indeed Codly, but they must be forced hereunto, to teach the
Catechism very diligently.

Out of the Confession of SUEVELAND. Of Baptism. CHAP. 17.
AS touching Baptism we confess, that which the Scripture does in diverse
places teach thereof, that we by it are buried into the death of Christ, made
one body, and do put on Romans 6. 1 Cor. 12. Gal 3. Tit. 3. Act 22. 1 Pet 3.
Christ: that it is the font of regeneration, washes away sins, and saves
us. But all these things we do so understand, as Saint Peter has interpreted
them, where he says, To the figure whereof, Baptism, that now is, answering,
does also save us, not by putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the
profession of a good conscience toward God. For without faith it is impossible
to please God. And, we are saved by grace, and not by our works. And seeing
that Baptism is a Sacrament of that covenant, which God has made with those
that be his, promising that he will be their God, and the God of their seed,
and that he will be a revenger of wrongs, and take them for his people; to
conclude, seeing it is a token of the renewing of the Spirit, which is wrought
by Christ: therefore our Preachers do teach, that it is to be given to Infants
also, as well as that in times past under Moses they were circumcised: For we
are indeed the children of Abraham, and therefore that promise, I will be thy
God, and the God Gal. 3.
of thy seed, does no less pertain unto us, then it did to that ancient
people.

THE FOVRTEENTH SECTION. OF THE HOLY SUPPER OF THE LORD.
The latter Consission of HELVETIA. Of the holy Supper of the Lord. CHAP. 12.
THE Supper of the Lord (which is also called the Lords Table, and the
Eucharist, that is, a thankesgiving) is therefore commonly called a supper,
because it was instituted of Christ in that his last Supper, and does as yet
represent the same, and in it the faithful are spiritually fed and nourished:
For the author of the Supper of the Lord, is not an Angel or man, but the very
Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, who did first of all consecrate it to his
Church. And the same blessing and consecration does still remain amongst all
those who celebrate no other supper, but only that, which the Lord did
institute, and at that do recite the words of the Supper of the Lord, and in
all things look unto Christ only by a true faith, at whose hands as it were
they do receive that which they do receive, by the ministry of the
ministers of the Church. The Lord by this sacred rite would have that great
benefit to be kept in fresh remembrance, which he did for mankind, to wit,
that by giving up his body to death, and shedding his blood, he has forgiven
us all our sins and redeemed us from eternal death and the power of the
Devil, and does now feed us with his flesh, and gives us his blood to drink,
which things being apprehended spiritually by a true faith, do nourish us up
to life everlasting. And this so great a benefit is renewed, so often as the
Supper is celebrated. For the Lord said, Do this in remembrance of me.

By this holy Supper also it is sealed up unto us, that the very body of Christ
was truly given up for us, and his blood was shed for the remission of our
sins, lest that our faith might somewhat waver. And this is outwardly
represented unto us, by the minister, in the Sacrament, after a visible manner,
and as it were laid before our eyes to be seen, which is inwardly in the font
invisibly performed by the holy Ghost. Outwardly bread is offered by the
minister, and the words of the Lord are heard, Receive, eat, this is my body,
take it, and devide it amongst you: drink ye all of this, this is my blood.
Therefore the faithful do receive that which is given by the minister of the
Lord, and do eat the bread of the Lord, and drink of the Lords cup. But yet
by the working of Christ through the holy Ghost, they receive also the flesh
and blood of the Lord, and do feed on them to life everlasting. For the flesh
and blood of Christ is true meat and drink unto everlasting life, yea Christ
himself, in that he was delivered for us, and is our Savior, is that special
thing and substance of the Supper, and therefore we suffer no thing to be put
in his place.

But that it may the better and more plainly be understood, how the flesh and
blood of Christ are the meat and drink of the faithful, and are received by
the faithful to life everlasting, we will add moreover these four things.
Eating is of diverse sorts: for there is a corporal eating, whereby meat is
taken into a man's mouth chewed with the teeth, and is swallowed down into the
belly. After this manner did the Capernaites in times past think, that they
should eat the flesh of the Lord, but they are confuted by him, John 6. For as
the flesh of Christ cannot be eaten bodily without great wickedness and
cruelty, so is it not meat for the belly, as all men do confess. We
therefore disallow that Canon in the Popes decrees, Ego Berengarius, de
consecrat. Distinct. 2. For neither did godly antiquity believe, neither yet
do we believe, that the body of Christ can be eaten corporally, and
essentially, with a bodily mouth.

There is also a spiritual eating of Christ's body, not such a one, whereby it
may be thought, that the very meat is changed into the spirit, but whereby (the
Lords body and blood remaining in their own essence and propriety) those
things are spiritually communicated unto us, not after a corporal, but after a
spiritual manner through the holy Ghost, who does apply and bestow upon us
those things (to wit, remission of sins, deliverance, and life everlasting,
which are prepared for us by the flesh and blood of our Lord, which were given
for us: so as Christ does now live in us, and we live in him, and does cause us
to apprehend him by a true faith, to this end, that he may become unto us such
a spiritual meat and drink, that is to say, our life. For even as corporal
meat and drink do not only refresh and strengthen our bodies, but also do
keep them in life, even so the flesh of Christ delivered, and his blood shed
for us, do not only refresh and strengthen our souls, but also do preserve
them alive, not because they be corporally eaten and drunken, but for that they
are * Look the 1. observat. upon this confession.
communicated unto us spiritually by the Spirit of God, the Lord saying, The
bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of this
world: also, my flesh (to wit, corporally eaten) profits nothing, it is the
Spirit which gives life. And, the words which I speak to you, are spirit and
life. And as we must by eating receive the meat into our bodies, to the end
that it may work in us, and show his force in our bodies, because while it is
without us, it profits us not at all; even so it is necessary, that we
receive Christ by faith, that he may be made ours, and that he may live in us,
and we in him. For he says, I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall
not hunger, and he that believes in me, shall not thirst any more. And also,
He that eats me, shall live through me, and he abides in me, and I in him.
By all which it appears manifestly, that by spiritual meat we mean not, an
Imaginary, but the very body of our Lord Jesus, given to us, which yet is
received of the faithful, not corporally, but spiritually, by faith: in which
point we do wholly follow the doctrine of our Lord and Savior Christ, in the
sixth of John. And this eating of the flesh, and drinking of the blood of the
Lord, is so necessary to salvation, that without it no man can be saved. This
spiritual eating and drinking is also without the Supper of the Lord, even so
often as, and wheresoever a man does believe in Christ. To which purpose that
sentence of Saint Austin does happily belong. Why do thou prepare thy teeth
and belly? Believe, and thou have eaten.

Besides that former spiritual eating, there is a sacramental eating of the
body of the Lord, whereby the faithful man is partaker, not only spiritually
and internally, of the true body and blood of the Lord, but also outwardly, by
coming to the table of the Lord, does receive the visible Sacrament of the
body and blood of the Lord. True it is, that a faithful man by believing did
before receive the food that gives life, and still receives the same, but yet
when he receives the Sacrament, he receives something more. For he goes on
in continual communication of the body and blood of the Lord, and his faith is
daily more and more kindled, more strengthened, and refreshed, by the
spiritual nourishment. For while we live, faith has continual encreasings:
and he that outwardly does receive the Sacraments with a true faith, the same
does receive not the sign only, but also does enjoy (as we have said) the
thing it self. Moreover, the same man does obey the Lords institution and
commandment, and with a joyful mind gives thanks for his and the redemption
of all mankind, and makes a faithful remembrance of the Lords death, and
does witness the same before the Church, of which body he is a member. This
also is sealed up to those which receive the Sacraments, that the body of the
Lord was given and his blood shed, not only for men in general, but
particularly for every faithful communicant, whose meat and drink he is to
life everlasting. But as for him that without faith comes to this holy table
of the Lord, he is made partaker of the Sacrament only, but the matter of the
Sacrament, from whence comes life and salvation, he receives not at all: And
such men do unworthily eat of the Lords table. Now they which do unworthily
eat of the Lords bread and drink of the Lords cup, they are guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord, and they eat and drink it to their Judgment. For
when as they do not approach with true faith, they reproach and despite the
death of Christ, and therefore eat and drink condemnation to themselves.

We do not then so join the body of the Lord and his blood with the bread and
wine, as though we thought, that the bread is the body of Christ, more then
after a sacramental manner, or that the body of Christ does lie hid corporally
under the bread, so as it ought to be worshipped under the forms of bread, or
yet that he which receives the sign, receives the thing it self. The body
of Christ is in the heavens, at the right hand of his Father. And therefore our
hearts are to be lifted upon high, and not to be fixed on the bread, neither is
the Lord to be worshipped in the bread, though notwithstanding the Lord is not
absent from his Church, when as they celebrate the Supper. The Sun being absent
from us in the heavens, is yet notwithstanding present amongst us effectually.
How much more Christ the Sun of righteousness, though in body he be absent
from us in the heavens, yet is present amongst us, not corporally, but
spiritually, by his lively operation, and so, he himself has promised in his
last Supper to be present amongst us. Joh. 14. 15. and 16. Whereupon it
follows, that we have not the Supper without Christ, and yet have an unbloody
and mystical Supper, even as all antiquity called it.

Moreover, we are admonished, in the celebration of the Supper of the Lord, to
be mindful of the body whereof we are made members, and that therefore we be
at concord with all our brethren, that we may live holily, and not pollute our
selves with wickedness, and strange religions, but persevering in the true
faith to the end of our life, give diligence to excel in holiness of life. It
is therefore very requisite, that purposing to come to the Supper of the Lord,
we do try our selves, according to the commandment of the Apostle, first
with what faith we are endued, whether we believe that Christ is come to save
sinners, and to call them to repentance, and whether each man believe that he
is in the number of them, that being delivered by Christ, are saved, and
whether he have purposed to change his wicked life, to live holily, and
persevere through Gods assistance in true religion, and in concord with his
brethren, and to give worthy thanks to God for his delivery, etc.

We think that rite, manner, or form of the Supper to be the most simple and
excellent, which comes nearest to the first institution of the Lord, and to
the Apostles doctrine. Which does consist, in declaring the word of God, in
godly prayers, the action it self that the Lord used, and the repeating of it,
the eating of the Lords body and drinking of his blood, the wholesome
remembrance of the Lords death, and faithful giving of thanks, and in an holy
fellowship in the union of the body of the Church. We therefore disallow them,
which have taken from the faithful one part of the Sacrament, to wit, the
Lords cup. For these do very grievously offend against the institution of the
Lord, who says, drink you all of this, which he did not so plainly say of the
bread. What manner of Mass it was, that the Fathers used, whether it were
tolerable, or intolerable, we do not now dispute. But this we say freely,
that the Mass (which is now used throughout the Romish Church) for many and
most just causes, is quite abolished out of our Churches, which particularly we
will not now recite for brevities sake. Truly we could not like of it, because
that of a most wholesome action, they have made a vain spectacle, also because
it is made a meritorious matter, and is said for money: likewise because that
in it the Priest is said to make the very body of the Lord, and to offer the
same really, even for the remission of the sins, of the quick and the dead.
Add this also, that they do it for the honor, worship, and reverence of the
Saints in heaven, etc.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA.
Of the Lords Supper.
WE say that the Supper is a mystical thing, wherein the Artic. 22.
Lord does indeed offer, unto those that are his, his body, and blood, that is,
himself, to this end, that he may more and more live in them, and they in him:
not that the body and blood of the Lord are either naturally united to bread
and wine, or be locally here enclosed, or be placed here by any carnal
presence, but that bread and wine, by the institution of the Lord, are signs,
whereby the true communication of his body and blood is exhibited of the Lord
himself, by the ministry of the Church, not to be meat for the belly, which
does perish, but to be nourishment unto eternal life. We do therefore use
this holy meat oftentimes, because that being admonished hereby, we do with
the eyes of faith behold the death and blood of Christ crucified, and
meditating upon our salvation, not without a taste of heavenly life, and a true
sense of life eternal, we are refreshed, with this spiritual, lively, and
inward food, with an unspeakable sweetness: and we do rejoice with a joy that
cannot be expressed in words, for that life which we have found, and we do
wholly, and with all our strength, power out thankesgiving for so wonderful a
benefit of Christ bestowed upon us. Therefore we are most unworthily charged of
some, who think that we do attribute very little to these holy signs. For
these things Look the 1. Observation upon this confession.
be holy, and to be reverenced, as those which were instituted and received, of
our high Priest Christ, exhibiting unto us, after their manner, as we have
said, the things signified, giving witness of the things done, representing very
difficult things us and by a certain wonderful Analogy of things signified,
bringing light to those most evident mysteries. Moreover, they minister aid
and help even to faith it self: and, to conclude, they do serve in stead of
an oath, to bind him that is entered into the profession of Christianity.
Thus holily do we think of the sacred signs. But we do always attribute
the force and virtue of quickening and sanctifying to him, who is life it self,
to whom be praise for ever. Amen.

Out of the declaration of the same confession. Of the holy Supper of the Lord.
THE Supper of the Lord is a Sacrament, to wit, the holy institution of the
Lord, whereby he does renew and witness unto us his bountifulness, to wit,
the communion of his body and blood, and that by a visible sign. For by bread
and wine he does declare unto us what he gives, namely himself, to be the
nourishment of our life: for he by his body and blood does feed us to life
eternal. Therefore the very gift of God (that is, the body and blood of the
Lord, to wit, the body of the Lord delivered unto death for us, and his blood
shed for the remission of sins) is the chiefest part of this Sacrament. For
the body and blood of Christ is thus made or prepared to be the lively meat of
our souls. The Son of God does die in the flesh for us, that he might quicken
us, he pours out his blood, that he might cleanse us from our sins. To
conclude, he raises up his body from the dead, that our bodies may receive
hope, and strength to rise again. Thus therefore does the Lord offer himself
to be eaten and possessed of us, and not a certain false imagination of a man,
or an idle picture, in his stead. For, beside him there is nothing in heaven,
or in earth, that may feed and satiate our souls. Now we do indeed eat the
body, and we do indeed drink the blood of our Lord, but not so rawly, as the
Papists have hitherto taught, to wit, the bread being changed into natural
flesh, substantially (that is, corporally, or carnally) or the body being
included in the bread, but spiritually, that is after a spiritual manner, and
with a faithful mind. The Lord is eaten indeed, and with fruit, by faith,
that now he may live whole in his, and his in him.

Moreover, these holy gifts of God (which are not given of any other, then of
the Lord himself) according to the institution of the Lord, are represented
unto us by visible signs, to wit, bread and wine, and offered to our senses,
not that we should rest in them, but that our weakness may be helped, and we
may lift up our hearts unto the Lord, knowing that here we must think upon
greater things, to wit, not of eating bread, or drinking wine, but of receiving
the Lord himself, with all his gifts, by a faithful mind. Therefore when the
guests see the bread on the board, they set their minds upon the body of
Christ, when they see the cup, they set their minds upon the blood of Christ:
when they see the bread broken, and the wine poured out, they consider how that
the body of Christ was tormented, and his blood poured out for their sakes: as
by bread the bodies are nourished and strengthened, as by wine the minds are
made merry; so the godly do believe, that by the body of the Lord, delivered
unto death for them, they are fed to everlasting life: also, that by his blood
poured out upon the cross, their consciences are renewed: to conclude, they
do feel the quickening power of Christ, which does confirm them. In this sort
is the Supper of the Lord accomplished spiritually, thus are the bread and wine
a Sacrament unto us, and not bare and naked signs. Hereupon now arises a very
great rejoicing, and thanksgiving, for so great benefits; also a praising, and
confessing of the name of God: here those works, which the Lord once finished,
are renewed, and represented: but especially the death of the Lord is repeated,
which although it once happened, and now is past, yet unto the faithful it is as
yet fresh and present. For the remembrance of the death of Christ, which we
make in the Supper, is far more noble and holy, then theirs, who in some
profane banquet are mindful of their companion, when they drink the wine
that he gave them. For among these, he that is absent works nothing: but in
this holy Supper of the faithful the Lord is present, and does work
effectually by the spirit in the hearts of them, as he, who, according to his
promises, is in the midst of them.

By these things it is most evident, that in the holy Supper, we do not take
away our Lord Christ from his Church, not deny that his body and blood is there
received to be our nourishment unto life eternal: but we together with our
predecessors, and the chief Prelates of our Religion, did, and as yet to this
day, do deny, that the very body of Christ is eaten carnally, or that it is
present every where corporally, and after a natural manner. For we do openly
confess, according to the Scriptures, and with all the holy Fathers, that
Jesus Christ our Lord left this world, and went to his Father: and that he now
sits at the right hand of his Father in heavenly glory, from whence he shall
never descend, or be drawn down into this earthly and transitory world. For
the true presence of Christ in the Supper, is heavenly, not earthly, or
carnal. Also we deny that the bread is turned into the body of Christ
miraculously, so that the bread should become the very body of Christ
naturally, and substantially, yet after a spiritual manner. To conclude, we
deny that the body of Christ is united with the signs, by any other then a
mystical mean, whereof we have spoken sufficiently in the general
consideration of a Sacrament. Seeing therefore we have expressly said and
written with the holy Fathers, Tertullian, H^erome, Ambrose, and Augustine,
that the bread is a figure, token, and sign of the body of Christ and also,
that by bread and wine the body and blood of the Lord are signified, This is it
which we would make manifest, to wit, that the bread is not the very body of
the Lord, but a token, or a Sacrament of his body. And yet we do not therefore
speak these things, as though we did simply deny all kind of the presence of
Christ in the Supper: for that kind of presence which now we have confessed,
does remain true, without any prejudice to these kind of speeches. Moreover,
the word This, in this sentence, This is my body, does not only show bread
unto our corporal eyes, but therewith also it she weth the very body of Christ
unto the eyes of our mind.

Also we confess, that this use of the Supper is so holy, and profitable, that
whosoever shall worthily, that is, with a true faith, eat of this bread, and
drink of this Cup of the Lord, he does receive heavenly gifts from the Lord:
but Whosoever shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup; unworthily,
that is, without faith, (by which alone we are made partakers of the Lord, and
of salvation) He does eat and drink judgment unto himself, as Paul wrote to
the Corinthians. Wherefore we do often put this diligently into the heads of
our people, that they take heed, that none of them abuse the Lords table, but
that every one examine himself, and then eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup. Also, the Lords Supper is a badge unto us; for as one loaf, and one
wine, are made of many grains and grapes, so we, being the whole multitude of
the faithful, are gathered together to be one bread, and one body. By this we
testify in an outward profession, that we are redeemed by the blood of Christ,
and made the members of Christ, to whom we give thanks, in whom we are
confederates, and do promise to perform mutual duties one toward another.

Out of the Confession of BASIL. Of the Supper of the Lord.
WE confess that the Lord Jesus did institute his holy Supper, Artic. 6.
that his holy passion might be remembered with thanksgiving, his death
declared, and Christian charity and unity, with true faith testified. And as
in Baptism (wherein the washing away of our sins is offered by the Minister of
the Church, and yet is wrought only by the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost,) true water remains; so also in the Supper of the Lord (wherein
together with the bread and wine of the Lord, the true body and the true blood
of Christ is offered by the Minister of the Church) bread and wine remains.
Moreover, we do firmly believe, that Christ himself is the meat of faithful
souls unto life eternal, and that our souls by faith in Christ crucified,
are fed and moistened with the flesh blood of Christ; so that we, being Joh. 11.
Ephesians. 1. 4. and 5. Col. 1.
members of his body, as of our only head, do live in him, and he in us,
wherein at the last day, through him, and in him, we shall rise again to
eternal joy and blessedness.

And in the marginall note, upon these words, Our souls.

For it is a spiritual meat, and therefore it is received of a faithful
soul, that is, the souls are made full, strong, mighty, peaceable, quiet,
merry, and lively to all things, as the body is by the corporal meat. Also
upon those words, The members of the head. And so man is made a spiritual
member of the spiritual body of Christ. And in the margent upon these words,
To be present: to wit, Sacramentally, and by a remembrance of faith, which
lifts up a man's mind to heaven, and does not pull down Christ, according to
his humanity, from the right hand of God.

Now we do not include into the bread and drink of the Lord, the natural,
true, and substantial body of Christ, which was borne of the pure Virgin Mary,
suffered for us, and ascended into heaven. Therefore we do neither worship
Christ in the signs Col. 3. Heb. 1 and 10. Acts 3. 2 Timothy 4.
of bread and wine, which we do commonly call the Sacraments of the body and
blood of Christ: but in heaven, at the right hand of God the Father, from
whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA. Of the holy Supper of the Lord. CHAP. 13.
IN the thirteenth place we teach, touching the Supper of the Lord instituted
in the new Testament, that we must believe with the heart, and profess with
the mouth, that it is a Sacrament instituted of Christ our Lord, in his last
Supper, and that in express form of words; that is, that concerning bread and
wine, he has pronounced, that they be his body, and his blood, and that Matthew.
26. Mark. 14. Luke 22.
they were delivered to his Apostles, and so in like sort to the whole
universal Church, for a monument of his death, and that all men should
lawfully use the participation thereof, even to the end of the world. Of this
Sacrament the Evangelists do write, and especially Saint Paul, whose words
even to this day are thus read in the Church: I have received of the Lord, that
1 Cor. 11.
which I also have delivered unto you, to wit, that the Lord Jesus, in that
night, wherein he was betrayed, took bread, etc. And a little after, When ye
come together (to wit, to the Supper of the Lord) Let one tarry for another.
Therefore according to these things, we believe with the heart, and confess
with the mouth, that this bread of the Lords Supper is the body of the Lord
Jesus Christ, delivered for us: and that this Cup, or the wine in the Cup, is
likewise shed for us for the remission of sine. And this we affirm according
to the express words of Christ, wherein he says, This is my body, This is my
blood. Which words may not be taken or understood of any other thing, nor be
otherwise referred, then only to the bread, and cup of the Lord: and the body
and blood of the Lord cannot be understood of any other, then of the only true
and proper body of Christ (which he made meat by his torments) and of his
blood, which being largely poured out of his body, he appointed to be drink
for his Church: for he had not a natural body, and another blood. Therefore
our Ministers do teach, that to these certain words pronounced by Christ our
Lord, (wherein he does peculiarly pronounce, witness, and institute bread to
be his body, and wine to be his blood) I say, to these words no man may add
any thing, no man may detract any thing from them: but every man in these words
is to believe Look the 1. observat. upon this confession.
that, which of themselves they signify, and that no man ought to turn from
them, either to the right hand, or to the left.

Yet to expound the meaning of this faith, we do further teach, that although
the bread be the body of Christ, according to his institution, and wine be his
blood, yet neither of these do leave it nature, or change or lose it
substance, but that the bread is, and does remain bread, and that the wine is,
and does remain wine, as also the holy Scripture does give this it own name
to either of them. Otherwise, if it should cease to be an August. in Joan.
Tract. 80. and Epist. 23. ad Bonifa.
element, it should not be a Sacrament, seeing that a Sacrament is then made,
when the word is added to the element. Neither could it signify, or bear
witness, if it had nothing in stead of that thing, whereof it is a Sacrament,
or if the thing signified should have any other manner of presence, then that
which is Sacramental. Wherefore this speech, Bread is the body, and Wine is
the blood of Christ, is a sacramental speech, to wit, that these two distinct
things, do remain the self same thing, which in their own nature they be,
and yet by reason of a Sacramental union, or Sacramentally, they be that also,
which they do signify, and whereof they do testify, and yet not in their
own nature, or after a natural manner, but by the institution, pronouncing,
or witnessing of the author, as Paul does excellently expound this, where he
thus writes, The cup which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? the bread which we break, 1 Cor. 10.
is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

Now, both the good, and the wicked do use this Sacrament, and yet the true
believers do receive it to life, and those which do not believe, do receive
it to judgment and condemnation. And although either of them do receive this
Sacrament, and Look the 2 Observat. upon this confession.
the truth thereof sacramentally and outwardly, yet the believers do receive
it spiritually, and so to their salvation: without which spiritual receiving,
there is no worthy receiving in the Sacramental use. For by this mean we are
ingrafted into Christ, and into his body, and by this mean is that true union,
and communion of Christ with his Church, made: and in like sort by this mean
is the communion of the holy Church, which is a certain spiritual body, made
amongst and with themselves, whereof the Apostle writes, There is one bread,
and we being many are one body, seeing we are all made partakers of one bread.
1 Cor. 10.


Moreover, we are further taught, that with this ministry, or Sacrament of
the Lord, no other thing ought to be done, or taken in hand, then that one
thing, which was showed, ordained, and expressly commanded of Christ himself,
as when he reached bread, severally, and peculiarly, to his Disciples, and in
express words, said, Take, eat, this is my body: and in like sort, when he
reached to them the cup severally, and peculiarly, saying, Drink ye all of
this, This is my blood: Thus therefore, according to this commandment, the
body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ must be distributed only, and be
received in common of the faithful, or believing Christians: but it must not
be sacrificed, or set before them, or lifted up, or showed forth, to this end,
that there it may be worshipped, or kept, or carried about. And both these must
be received in several elements, the body peculiarly and severally, and also
his holy blood severally, as either of them were of the Lord instituted,
reached forth, and given in common to all his Disciples, severally. And this
doctrine was used in the first holy Church, and this Sacrament was wholly
distributed in both parts and so received. But he that beside, or contrary to
these commandments, and institution of Christ, dare bring in any other thing,
or somewhat more, and use it with this Sacrament, or wantonly invent therein at
his pleasure, he does manifestly, and malapertly against our Lord, who
instituted this Sacrament, and commits a thing clean contrary to his holy
Testament, and last will, which was declared in his own words, and that
expressly.

Also this Sacrament ought to be received and administered, without adoration,
and without that worship which is due to God alone: yet with a due kind of
religion, and reverence, and chiefly with that, which is the chiefest of all,
namely with faith and examination of himself, which in this action is most
acceptable to Christ our Lord, and most profitable for men, which also St. Paul
taught the first Church, and exhorted it hereunto, saying, 1 Cor. 11.
Let every man try or examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup. For he that eats, and drinks unworthily, does eat and
drink his own judgment, or condemnation, because he discerns not the Lords
body. And in another place, Prove your selves, whether ye are in the faith:
examine your selves: 2 Cor. 13.
know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? Now I pray unto God, that ye do no evil. If so be that any man
approach to this table, without such a trial, and not making himself worthy,
who has not first examined himself, what manner of faith he has, with what
purpose he came to this Sacrament, or how he had prepared himself hereunto: I
say, such a man should greatly profane and reproach this Sacrament, yea the
whole institution hereof appointed by Christ. For which cause the Ministers of
our Churches do admit none to this Sacrament, neither give it unto any, but to
such as are noted to come unto it seriously, and do, so much as in them lies,
prepare themselves hereunto after such a manner, as becomes Christian
godliness.

Now when the Congregation does come together to celebrate the use of the Lords
Supper, and be partakers thereof, then according to the example of the
Primitive Church, our Ministers do teach in their holy Sermons concerning
Christ, and concerning the grace, which through him, and in him is given to
sinners, and especially concerning his death, the sheading of his blood, and
the redemption and salvation purchased thereby. After that the whole Church
does join together in faithful prayers unto God, to obtain this, that they
may indeed use this Sacrament worthily. Look the 3. Observat.
Moreover, in the next place absolution from sins is lawfully administered,
the words of the institution are rehearsed, and the people by exhortation is
stirred up, to a reverent consideration of this mystery, and to a cheereful
and serious contemplation of the benefits of God, the Sacrament is reverently
with all godliness distributed, and the people of the faithful, Look the 4.
Observat.
most commonly falling down on their knees, do receive this Sacrament with
thankesgiving, with gladness, with singing of hymns, or holy songs, and they
show forth the death of the Lord, and admonish themselves of all his benefits,
to the confirmation of their faith, in a true communion with Christ, and his
body. And all this we do, according to the meaning of those things, which are
commanded in the holy Scripture, especially according to the saying of Christ,
Do this in remembrance Luc. 22. 1 Cor. 11.
of me, and Paul says, So often as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup, ye shall show forth the death of the Lord, till he come.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE affirm that the holy Supper of the Lord, to wit, the Artic. 36.
other Sacrament, is a witness to us of our uniting with our Lord Jesus
Christ, because that he is not only once dead, and raised up again from the
dead for us, but also he does indeed feed us, and nourish us with his flesh and
blood, that we being made one with him, may have our life common with him. For
although, he be now in heaven, and shall remain there, till he come to judge
the world; yet we believe, that by the secret and incomprehensible virtue of
his Spirit, he does nourish, Look the 1. observation upon this confession.
and quicken us with the substance of his body and blood being apprehended by
faith. But we say, that this is done spiritually, not that we may counterfeit
an imagination or thought instead of the efficacy and truth, but rather,
because this mystery of our union with Christ is so high a thing, that it
surmounteth all our senses, yea and the whole order of nature: to conclude,
because that it being divine and heavenly, cannot be perceived nor apprehended,
but by faith.

We believe, as was said before, that as well in the Supper, as Artic. 37.
in Baptism, God does in deed, that is, truly and effectually give, whatsoever
he does there sacramentally represent: and therefore with the signs we join
the true profession and fruition of that thing, which is there offered unto us:
Therefore we affirm, that they which do bring pure faith, as it were a
certain vessel, unto the holy Supper of the Lord, do indeed receive that,
which there the signs do witness, namely, that the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, are no less the meat and drink of the soul, then bread and wine are
the meat of the body. Also out of the 38. Art. a little after the beginning.
And also that that bread and wine, which is given us in the Supper, is indeed
made unto us spiritual nourishment, in as much as they do offer unto our eyes
to behold, that the flesh of Christ is our meat, and that his blood is our
drink. Therefore we reject all those fantastical heads, which do refuse
these fignes and tokens, seeing that Christ our Lord has said, This is my
body: and, This cup is my blood.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
WE say, that Eucharistia, that is to say, the Supper of the Artic. 12.
Lord, is a Sacrament, that is, an evident Representation of the body, and
blood of Christ, wherein is set, as it were, before our eyes, the death of
Christ, and his Resurrection, and whatsoever he did, whilst he was in his
mortal body: to the end we may give him thanks for his death, and for our
deliverance: and that by the often receiving of this Sacrament, we may daily
renew the remembrance thereof, to the intent, we being fed with the body and
blood of Christ, may be brought into the hope of the Resurrection, and of
everlasting life, and may most assuredly believe, that, as our bodies be fed
with bread, and wine, so our souls be fed with the body, and blood of Christ.
To this Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. s^rm. 3. cap. 1.
Banquet we think the people of God ought to be earnestly bidden, that they
may all communicate among themselves, and openly declare, and testify both the
godly society, which is among them, and also the hope which they have in Christ
Jesus. For this cause, if there had been any, which would be but a looker De
consecr. Did. 1. cap. omnes.
on, and abstain from the holy Communion, him did the old Fathers, and Bishops
of Rome in the Primitive Church, before private Mass came up, excommunicate,
as a wicked person, and as a Pagane. Neither was there any Christian at that
time which did communicate alone, whiles other looked on. For so did Calixtus
Distinct. 2. cap. seculares.
in times past decree, That after the Consecration was finished, all should
communicate, except they had rather stand without the Church doors. For thus
(says he) did the Apostles appoint, De conscer. Did. 2 cap. Peract.
and the same the holy Church of Rome keeps still. Moreover, when the people
comes to the holy Communion, the Sacrament ought to be given them in both
kinds: for so both Christ has commanded, and the Apostles in every place have
ordained, and all the ancient Fathers and Catholic Bishops have followed the
same. And who so does contrary to this he (as Gelasius says) commits
Sacrilege. And therefore we say, that our adversaries De cons did. 2. cap.
comperimus.
at this day, who having violently thrust out, and quite forbidden the holy
Communion, do without the word of God, without the authority of any ancient
Council, without any Catholic Father, without any example of the Primitive
Church, yea and without reason also, defend and maintain their Private Masses,
and the mangling of the Sacraments, and do this, not only against the plain
express commandment of Christ, but also against all antiquity, do wickedly
therein, and are very Churchrobbers.

We affirm, that the bread, and wine are the holy, and heavenly mysteries of
the body, and blood of Christ, and that by them, Christ himself, being the
true bread of eternal life, is so presently given unto us, as that by faith we
verily receive his body, and blood. Yet say we not this so, as though we
thought, that the nature, and substance of the bread and wine, is clearly
changed, and goes to nothing, as many have dreamed in these latter times, and
yet could never agree among themselves upon their own dreams. For that was
not Christ's meaning, that the wheaten bread should lay apart his own nature,
and receive a certain new Divinity: but that he might rather change us, and
(to use Theophilacts words) might transform us into his body. For what In Ioa
cap. 6.
can be said more plainly, then that, which Ambrose says, Bread and Wine
remain still the same they were before: and yet are changed De sacra. lib. 4.
cap. 4.
into another thing: Or that which Gelasius says, The substance of the bread,
or the nature of the wine cease not to be: Or that which Theodoretus says,
After the consecration, the mystical In Dialogis. 1. and 2.
signs do not cast off their own proper nature: for they remain still in
their former substance, form or kind: Or that which Augustine In sermon. ad
Infantes. De cons did. 2. cap Qui ma' d^casti. In Matthew 15.
says, That which ye see, is the Bread, and Cup, and so our eyes do tell us:
but that which your faith requires to be taught, is this: The bread is the
body of Christ, and the cup is his blood: Or that which Origin says, The bread,
which is sanctified by the word of God, as touching the material substance
thereof, goes into the belly, and is cast out into the privy: Or that which
Christ himself said, not only after the blessing of the cup, but also after he
had ministered the communion: I will drink no more of this fruit of the Vine. It
is well known, that the fruit of the Vine is wine, and not blood. Luc. 22.
And in speaking thus, we mean not to abase the Lords Supper, or to teach, that
it is but a cold ceremony only, and nothing to be wrought therein: (as many
falsely slander us, we teach) For we affirm, that Christ does truly, and
presently give himself wholly in his sacraments: In Baptism, that we may put
him on: and in his Supper, that we may eat him by Faith, and Spirit, and may
have everlasting life by his Cross and blood. And we say not, this is done
slightly, or coldly, but effectually, and truly. For although we do not touch
the body of Christ with teeth and mouth, yet we hold him fast, and eat him by
faith, by understanding, and by Spirit. And it is no vain faith, that
comprehends Christ: neither is it received with cold devotion, that is
received with understanding, Faith, and the Spirit. For Christ himself
altogether is so offered, and given us in these mysteries, that we may
certainly know we be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones: and that Christ
continues in us, and we in him.

And therefore in celebrating these mysteries, the people are to good purpose
exhorted, before they come to receive the holy communion, to lift up their
hearts, and to direct their minds to heaven De co^s did. 1. cap. Quaedo.
wards: because he is there, by whom we must be fed, and live. Cyrillus says,
when we come to receive these mysteries, all gross Imaginations must quite be
banished. The Council of Nice, as it is alleged by some in Greek, plainly
forbids us to be basely affectioned, or bent toward the Bread and Wine,
which are set before us. And, as Chrysostom very aptly writes, we say, That
the body of Christ is the dead carcass, and we our selves must be the Eagles:
meaning thereby, that we must fly on high, if we will come to the body of
Christ. For this Table, as Chrysostom says, is a Table of Eagles, and not of
Jaies. Cyprian also: This bread, says he, is the food of the soul, and not
the meat of the De caena Domins.
belly. And Saint Augustine says, How shall I hold him, being absent? How
shall I reach my hand up to heaven, to lay hold upon him sitting there? He
answers, Reach thither thy faith, and then In Joan. tract. 50.
thou have laid hold on him.

Neither can we away in our Churches with these shows, and sales, and markets
of Masses, nor with the carrying about, and worshipping of the bread, nor with
such other Idolatrous and Blasphemous fondness: which none of them can prove,
that Christ or his Apostles ever ordained, or left unto us. And we justly blame
the Bishops of Rome, who without the word of God, without the authority of the
holy Fathers, without any example of antiquity, after a new guise, do not
only set before the people the sacramental bread to be worshipped as God, but
do also carry the same about upon an ambling Palfraie, whither soever
themselves journey, in such sort, as in old times the Persians fire, and the
Relics of the Goddess Isis were solemnly carried about in Procession: and
have brought the Sacraments of Christ to be used now as a Stage Play, and a
solemn sight: to the end, that men's eyes should be fed with nothing else,
but with mad gasings, and foolish gaudies, in the self same matter, wherein
the death of Christ ought diligently to be beaten into our hearts, and wherein
also the mysteries of our Redemption ought with all holiness, and reverence,
to be executed. Besides, where they say, and sometime do persuade fools, that
they are able by their Masses to distribute, and apply unto men's commodity all
the merits of Christ's death, yea, although many times the parties think
nothing of the matter, and understand full little what is done, this is a
mockery, a heathenish fancy, and a very toie. For it is our faith, that
applies the death, and cross of Christ to our benefit, and not the act of the
Massing Priest. Faith had in the Sacraments (says Augustine) does justify,
and not the Sacraments. And Origin says: Christ Ad Romans cap 3. lib. 3.
is the Priest, the Propitiation, and Sacrifice: which propitiation comes to
every one by mean of faith. And so, by this reckoning, we say, that the
sacraments of Christ, without faith, do not once profit those, that be alive: a
great deal less do they profit those that be dead.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe and confess, that Jesus Christ our Lord Artic. 35.
and Savior has instituted the holy Sacrament of his Supper, that in it he
might nourish and sustain those, whom he has regenerated and engrafted into
his family, which is the Church. But those which are regenerate, have in them a
double life, the one carnal and temporal, which they brought with them from
their first nativitie, the which is common unto all: the other spiritual and
heavenly, bestowed upon them in their second nativitie, which is wrought in
them by the word of the Gospel, in the union of the body of Christ, the which
is peculiar to the elect alone. And as God has appointed earthly and material
bread, fit and convenient for the preservation of this carnal life, which,
even as the life it self, is common unto all: so for the conservation of that
spiritual and heavenly life, which is proper to the faithful, God has sent
lively bread, which came down from heaven, even, Jesus Christ, who nourishes
and sustaineth the spiritual life of the faithful, if he be eaten, that is,
applied and received by faith, through the Spirit. But to the intent that
Christ might figurate and represent unto us this spiritual and heavenly bread,
he has ordained visible and earthly bread and wine for the Sacrament of his
body and blood: whereby he testifies, that as truly as we do receive and hold
in our hands this sign, eating the same with our mouths, whereby afterward
this our life is sustained; so truly we do by faith (which is in stead of our
soul, hand, and mouth) receive the very body and true blood of Christ our
only Savior, in our selves, unto the conservation and cherishing of a
spiritual life within us. And it is most certain, that Christ, not without
good cause, does so carefully commend unto us this his Sacrament, as one that
does indeed work that within us, whatsoever he represents unto us by these
his holy signs: although the manner it self, being far above the reach of
our capacity, cannot be comprehended of any: because that all Look the 1.
Observation upon this confession.
the operations of the holy Ghost are hidden and incomprehensible. Neither
shall we err in saying, that, Look the 2. observation upon this confession.
that which is eaten, is the very natural body of Christ, and that which is
drunk, is the very blood of Christ: yet the instrument or means, whereby we
do eat and drink them, is not a corporal mouth, but even our soul and
spirit, and that by faith. Christ therefore sits always at the right hand
of his Father in heaven, and yet for all that does not any thing the less
communicate himself unto us by faith. Furthermore, this Supper is the
spiritual table, wherein Christ does offer himself to us, with all his
benefits, to be participated of us, and brings to pass, that in it we are
partakers, as well of himself, as of the merit of his death and passion. For he
himself, Look the 3. observat. upon this confession.
by the eating of his flesh, does nourish, strengthen, and comfort, our
miserable, afflicted, and comfortless soul, and in like manner, by the
drinking of his blood, does refresh and sustain the same. Moreover, Look the
4. Observat.
although the signs be coupled with the things signified, yet both of them are
not received of all. For an evil man verily receives the Sacrament unto his
own condemnation, but the thing or truth of the Sacrament he receives not. As
for example, Judas, and Simon Magus, does of them did receive the Sacramental
sign, but as for Christ himself signified thereby, they received him not. For
Christ is communicated to the faithful only. Last of all, we with great
humility and reverence do communicate the holy Sacrament in that assembly of
Gods people celebrating the memorial of our Savior Christ's death with
thankesgiving and making there a public confession of Christian faith and
religion. No man therefore ought to present himself at this holy Supper, which
has not first examined himself, lest that eating this bread, and drinking of
this cup, he do not eat and drink his own damnation. Moreover, by the use
of this Sacrament, a most ardent love is kindled within us, both toward God
himself, and also toward our neighbor. Therefore here we do worthily
reject, as a mere profanation, all the toies, and damnable devises of men,
which they have presumed to add and mingle with the Sacraments: affirming that
all the godly are content with that only order and rite, which Christ and his
Apostles have delivered unto us, and that they ought to speak of these
mysteries after the same manner, as the Apostles have spoken before.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
The second Article, out of the Edition of Wirtemberge, Anno. 1531.
TOuching the Supper of the Lord, they teach, that the body and blood of Christ
are there present Look the 1. observation upon this confession.
indeed, and are distributed to those that eat of the Lords Supper, and they
condemn those that teach otherwise.

The same tenth Article in the Edition newly corrected, Anno. 1540. is thus set
down.
TOuching the Supper of the Lord they teach, that together with the bread and
the wine the body and blood of Christ are truly exhibited to them that eat of
the Lords Supper.

Hitherto also pertains the first Article, of the abuses, which are changed
in the outward rites and ceremonies. This Article is, of the Mass.
Our Churches are wrongfully accused, to have abolished the Mass. For the
Look the 2. Observat.
Mass is retained still among us, and celebrated with great reverence. Yea and
almost all the ceremonies that are in use, saving that, with the songs in
Latin we mingle certain Psalms in Dutch here and there, which be added for
the peoples instruction. For therefore we have need of ceremonies, that they
may teach the unlearned, and that the preaching of Gods word may stir up some
unto the true fear, trust, and invocation of God. This is not only commanded
by Saint Paul, to use a tongue that the people understand, but man's law has
also appointed it. We use the people to receive the Sacrament together, if so
be any be found fit thereunto. And that is a thing that does increase the
reverence and due estimation of the public ceremonies. For none are admitted,
except they be first proved, and tried. Besides we use to put men in mind of
the worthiness and use of a Sacrament, what great comfort it offers unto
them, which repent, to the end that men may learn to fear God, and believe in
him, and to use prayer and supplication unto him, looking for all good things
at his hands. This is the true worship of Christians. These services, of fear,
faith, prayer, hope, etc. God does like of. When therefore these services are
performed, and exercised in the use of Ceremonies, then does the using of the
Sacraments please God. So that when as the people is used to the ceremony, and
advertised of the true use thereof, the Masses are said with us after meet and
godly manner. And thus all things are ordered in the Church with greater
gravitie and reverence, then in times past. It is not unknown that these many
ages past there has been common and open complaintmade by good men, of the
abuse and profaning of Masses. For it is easy to be seen, how far this
abuse has spread it self in all temples and Churches, what kind of men they
are that say the Masses, flat contrary to the prescript of the Canons. Also how
shamefully they are turned to a matter of cursed lucre. For many there be that
say Masses, without repentance, only for the bellies sake. These things are
too open and manifest to be kept any longer in hugger mugger. Surely it seems
that never any religious thing since the world began was so commonly turned
into gain, as the Mass. But Saint Paul does fearfully threaten them, which
deal otherwise with these Sacraments, then is beseeming the dignity of them,
where he says, He that eats this bread and drinks this cup unworthily, is
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. And in the Ten Commandments, it is
written, He that abuses Gods holy name, shall not escape unpunished. As
therefore the world has of thereto fore been justly punished for I dolatrie,
doubtless this shameless profaning of Masses will be fearfully revenged with
grievous plagues. And it may well be that the Church in these latter times is
punished with blindness, discord, and wars, and many other plagues, chiefly
for this one cause. And yet these open and gross abuses have the Bishops (who
cannot be ignorant of them) not only borne with all, but also smoothly laughed
at them. And now all, too late, they begin to complain forsooth of the
calamity of the Church, when as no other thing has been the occasion of the
broiles of these times, but the abuses themselves, which were now become too
open and evident, that modest men could no longer bear them. I would to God
that the Bishops had (as by their office they might have) long before this
bridled, and restrained the covetousness or impudency, whether of Monks, or
of some others, who changing the manner of the old Church, have made the Mass
a money matter.

But it shall not be amiss now to show, whence these abuses did spring at the
first. There is an opinion spread abroad in the Church, that the Supper of the
Lord is a work, which being once done by the Priest, deserves remission of
sins, both of the fault, and of the punishment, not only for him that does it,
but also for there is: and that because of the work done, although it be done
without any good intent of the doer. Likewife, that if it be applied in the
behalf of the dead, it is satisfactorie, that is, it deserves remission of
the pains of purgatory. And in this meaning they take the word Sacrifice,
when they call the Mass a sacrifice, namely a work, that being done in the
behalf of some others, does merit for them both remission of the fault, and of
the punishments, and that because of the very work done, even without any good
intent of him that uses it. Thus they mean, that the Priest in the Mass does
offer a sacrifice for the quick and the dead. And after this persuasion was
once received, they taught men to seek forgiveness of sins, and all good
things, yea and that the dead were freed from punishments, by the benefit of
the Mass. And it made no matter, what kind of men they were, that said the
Masses: for they taught that they were very available for others, without any
good motion of the user. Afterward a question arose, whether one Mass said for
many, was as available, as several Masses for several persons. And this
disputation did augment the number of Masses, and the gain that came in by
them, out of measure. But we dispute not now of the gain, we only accuse the
impiety of them. For our Divines do prove plainly, that this opinion, of the
meriting and applying of the Mass, is both false and impious. This is the
state of this controversy between us and them.

And it is no hard matter for the godly to judge of this point, if a man will
but weigh the arguments that follow. First, we have proved before, that men do
obtain remission of sins freely by faith, that is, by sure trust to obtain
mercy for Christ's sake. It is then impossible for a man to obtain remission of
sins for another man's work, and that without any good motion, that is,
without his own faith. This reason does very evidently overthrow that
monstrous and impious opinion, touching the merit and application of the Mass.

Secondly, Christ's passion was an oblation and satisfaction not only for
original sin, but also for all other sins, as it is written in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, We are sanctified by the oblation of Christ once offered.
Again, By one oblation he has made perfect for ever those that are
sanctified. To conclude, a good part of the Epistle to the Heb. is spent in
confirming this point, that the only sacrifice of Christ did merit remission
of sins, or reconciliation, for others. Therefore (says he) The Leviticall
sacrifices were often times offered in one manner, because they could not take
away sins, But Christ by his sacrifice has at once satisfied for the sins
of all men. This honor of Christ's sacrifice must not be transferred from him
to the work of a Priest. For he says expressly, that by one oblation the
Saints are made perfect. Besides, it is a wicked thing to place that trust in
the work of a Priest, which should only lean and stay it self upon the
oblation and intercession of Christ the high Priest.

Thirdly, Christ in the institution of the Lords Supper, does not command the
Priests to offer for others, either quick or dead: upon what ground then or
authority was this worship ordained in the Church, as an offering for sins,
without any commandment of God? But that is yet more gross and far from all
reason, that the Mass should be applied to deliver the souls of such as are
dead. For the Mass was ordained for a remembrance, that is, that such as
received the Supper of the Lord, should stir up and confirm their faith, and
comfort their distressed consciences, with the remembrance of Christ's benefits.
Neither is the Mass a satisfaction for the punishment, but it was instituted
for the remission of the fault, to wit, not that it should be a satisfaction
for the fault, but that it might be a Sacrament, by the use whereof, we might
be put in mind of the benefit of Christ, and the forgiveness of the fault.
Seeing therefore that the applying of the Supper of the Lord for the
deliverance of the dead, is received without warrant of Scripture, yea quite
contrary to Scripture, it is to be condemned, as a new and ungodly worship or
service.

Fourthly, a Look the 3. observat. upon this confession.
Ceremony, in the new covenant, without faith meriteth nothing, neither for
him that uses it, nor for others. For it is a dead work, according to the
saying of Christ, The true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and
truth. The same does the 11. Chap. to the Heb. throughout prove. By faith Abel
offered a better offering unto God. Also, without faith it is impossible to
please God. Therefore the Mass does not merit remission of the fault, or of
the punishment, even for the works sake performed. This reason does evidently
overthrow the merit, as they call it, which arises of the very work that is
done.

Fifthly, the applying of the benefit of Christ is by a man's own faith, as Paul
witnesses, Romans 3. Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through
faith in his blood, and this applying is made freely: And therefore it is not
made by another man's work, nor for another man's work. For when we use the
Sacrament, this application is made by our own work, and by our own faith, and
not by another man's work. For surely if we could have no remission, but by
applying of of Masses, it should be very uncertain, and our faith and trust
should be transferred from Christ unto the work of a Priest, and so is it come
to pass, as all men see. Now faith placed in the work of a man is wholly
condemned. These arguments with sundry other do witness for us, that the opinion
of the merit and applying of the Mass for the quick and the dead, was for good
causes misliked and reproved. Now if we would stand to consider, how far this
error is spread in the Church, how the number of Masses increased, and how
through this sacrifice, forgivenes both of the fault, and of the punishment, is
promised to the quick and the dead, it will appear that the Church is
disfigured with shameful blots by this profanation. There never fell out a
waightier cause in the Church, O noble Emperor, or more worthy for good and
learned men to debate of; it is the duty of all the godly, with most fervent
prayers to crave at Gods hand, that the Church might be delivered from these
foul enormities. All Kings and Bishops must with all their might endeavor,
that this whole matter may be rightly laid forth, and the Church purged.

Sixthly, the institution of a Sacrament is contrary to that abuse. For there is
not a word set down of any oblation for the sins of the quick and the dead,
but a commandment to receive the body and blood of Christ: and, to do it in
the remembrance of the benefit of Christ. This remembrance does signify, not a
bare representing of the history, as it were in a show, as they dream that are
the Patrons of merit, by reason of the work wrought, but it signifies by faith
to remember the promise and benefit, to comfort the conscience, and to render
thanks for so great a blessing. For the principal cause of the institution
was, that our faith might then be stirred up and exercised, when we do receive
this pledge of Gods grace. Besides, the institution ordains, that there
should be a communication, that is, that the Ministers of the Church should
give unto others, the body and blood of the Lord. And this order was observed
in the Primitive Church. Saint Paul is witness to the Corinths: when as he
commands, That one should stay for another, that there might be a common
partaking of the Sacrament.

Now that the abuses of the private Mass be discovered, for as much as they
all for the most part were used for the application for the sins of other
men, and do not agree with the institution of Christ, therefore they are left
off in our Churches, And there is one common Mass appointed, according to the
institution of Christ, wherein the Pastors of the Churches Look the 4.
Observat. upon this confession.
do consecrate themselves, and give unto others, the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ: and this kind of Mass is used every Look the 5. observation
upon this confession.
holy day, and other days also, if any be desirous to use the Sacrament. Yet
none are admitted to the communion, except they be first tried, and examined.
We adjoyne moreover godly Sermons, according as Christ commanded, that there
should be Sermons, when this Ceremony is used. And in such Sermons, men are
both taught diligently in other Articles and Precepts of the Gospel, and also
put in mind, for what use the Sacrament was instituted, to wit, not that this
Ceremony could merit for them remission of sins, by the work done, but that
the Sacrament is a testimony and a pledge whereby Christ witnesses unto us,
that he performs his promises. And in our Sermons as men are taught
diligently concerning other articles and precepts of the Gospel, so are they
also put in mind, for what use the Sacraments were instituted, to wit, not
that the ceremony should merit remission of sins by the bare work wrought: but
that the Sacrament should be a testimony and a pledge, whereby Christ does
testify, that he performs his promise, and that his promises pertain unto
us, that Christ gives us his body, to testify that he is effectual in us, as
in his members, and his blood, for a witness unto us, that we are washed with
his blood. The Sacrament therefore does profit them, that do repent, and seek
comfort therein, and being confirmed by that testimony, do believe that
remission of sins is given them indeed, and are thankful unto Christ for so
great a benefit. And so the application of the benefit of Christ is not by an
other man's work, but by every man's own faith, and his own use of the
Sacrament. For when we in our own persons use the Sacrament, Christ's
institution of it does belong unto us. This kind of use of the Sacrament is
holy, and to be taught in the Churches, which does give light unto the doctrine
of faith, and of the spiritual exercises, and true worship, and brings unto
the consciences of the godly very great comfort and strength of faith. Before
these days the Church has been far otherwise taught, touching the use of
the Sacrament, there was no word of any thing, but that this work was to be
done. But no man spoke any thing of faith, or the comfort of consciences. And
men's consciences were racked with over great care and pains of confessing
themselves. This they took to be the purity which the Gospel requires,
whereas the Gospel does require true fear, true faith, and trust, comfort
us by the use of this Sacrament, that they which do truly repent may assuredly
believe, that God is become merciful unto them by Christ, though that our
nature be frail and unclean, and though that this our imperfect obedience be
far from the perfection of the Law.

By all this that has been said, it is clear that the Mass that is in use
amongst us, does agree with the institution of Christ, and the manner of the
Primitive Church. And besides it does notably lay open the true use of the
Sacrament. Such a common work was there in the Church of old time, as
Chrysostom does witness, who says, that the Priest did stand at the Altar,
and call some unto the communion, and put back others. And by the decrees of
the Nicen Synod it is ^vident, that some one did celebrate the Liturgy, as
the Grecians call it, and did minister the body and blood of the Lord to all
the rest. For these are the words of the Decree. Let the Deacons in their order
after the Priests receive the holy communion of a Bishop, or of a Priest. Here
he does expressly say, that the Priests did receive the Sacrament of some one,
that ministered it. And before Gregory's time there is no mention of any private
Mass. But as often as the old Writers speak of a Mass, it is evident that they
speak of a Mass, that was common. Seeing therefore that the rite and manner
of the Mass used with us has authority out of Scripture, example from the
old Church, and that we have only rejected certain intolerable abuses, we
hope that the use of our Churches cannot be misliked. As for other indifferent
rites and ceremonies, they are for the most part observed according to the
usual manner. But the number of Masses is not alike. Neither was it the use in
the old times, in the Churches whereunto was greatest resort, to have Mass
every day, as the Tripartite history. lib. 9. cap. 38. does witness. Again
(says he) in Alexandria every fourth and sixth day of the week the Scriptures
are read, and the Doctors do interpret them, and all other things are done
also, except only the solemn mannerof oblation or offering.

This Article we find elsewhere placed in the third place, among those wherein
the abuses that be changed are reckoned up in this manner.

Of the Mass. Art. 3.
Our Church is wrongfully accused, to have abolished the Mass. For Look the 2.
Observation.
the Mass is retained still among us, and celebrated with great reverence. Yea
and almost all the ceremonies that are in use, saving that, with the songs in
Latin we mingle certain Psalms in Dutch here and there, which be added for
the peoples instruction. For therefore we have need of ceremonies, that they
may teach the unlearned, and that the Preaching of Gods word may stir up some
unto the true fear, trust, and invocation of God. This is not only, commanded
by Saint Paul, to use a tongue that the people understand, but man's law has
also appointed it. We use the people to receive the Sacrament together, if so
be any be found fit thereunto. And that is a thing that does increase the
reverence and due estimation of the public ceremonies. For none are admitted,
except they be first proved, and tried. Besides we use to put men in mind of
the worthiness and use of a Sacrament, how great comfort it brings to
fearful consciences, that they may learn to believe God, and to look for
and crave all good things at his hands. This worship does please God, such an
use of the Sacrament does nourish piety toward God. Therefore it seems not
that Masses be more religiously celebrated among our adversaries, then with us.
But it is evident, that of long time this has been the public, and most
grievous complaint of all good men, that Masses are filthily profaned, being
used for gain. And it is not unknown, how far this abuse has spread it
self in all Churches, of what manner of men Masses are used, only for a
reward, or for wages, and how many do use them, against the prohibition of the
Canons. And Paul does grievously threaten those, which handle the Lords Supper
unworthily, saying, He that shall eat this bread, or drink the cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Therefore,
when we admonished the Priests of this sin, private Masses were laid aside
among us, seeing that for the most part, there were no private Masses, but
only for lucres sake. Neither were the Bishops ignorant of these abuses, who
if they had amended them in time, there had now been less dissension.
Heretofore, by their dissembling, they suffered much corruption to creep into
the Church: now they begin, though it be late, to complain of the calamities
of the Church, seeing that this hurly burly was raised up by no other mean,
then by those abuses, which were so evident, that they could no longer be
tolerated. There were many dissentions, concerning the Mass, and as touching
the Sacrament. And peradventure the world is punished, for so long a profaning
of Masses, which they, who both could, and ought to have amended it, have so
many years tolerated in their Churches. For in the ten commandments it is
written, He that abuses the name of the Lord, shall not escape unpunished. And
from the beginning of the world, there neither was, nor is any divine thing,
which might seem so to be employed to gain, as is the Mass.

There was added an opinion, which did increase private Masses infinitely, to
wit, that Christ by his passion did satisfy for Original sin, and appointed
Mass, wherein an oblation should be made for daily sins, both mortal, and
venial. Hereupon a common opinion was received, that Mass is a work, that
takes away the sins of the quick and the dead, and that for the doing of the
work. Here men began to dispute, whether one Mass said for many, were of as
great force, as particular Masses said for particular men. This disputation
has brought forth an infinite multitude of Masses. Concerning these opinions
our preachers have admonished us, that they do disagree from the holy
Scriptures, and hurt the glory of the passion of Christ. For the passion of
Christ was an oblation and satisfaction, not only for Original sin, but
also for all other sins, as it is written in the Epistle to the Hebrews: We
are sanctified by the oblation of Jesus Christ once made. Also, By one oblation
he has made perfect for ever those that are sanctified. Also the Scripture
teaches, that we are justified before God through faith in Christ, when we
believe that our sins are forgiven for Christ his sake. Now, if the Mass do
take away the sins of the quick and the dead, even for the works sake that is
done, then justification comes by the work of Masses, and not by faith, which
the Scripture can not away withal. But Christ commands us to do it in
remembrance of himself: therefore the Mass is instituted, that faith, in them
which use the Sacrament, may remember what benefits it receives by Christ, and
that it may raise up, and comfort a fearful conscience. For this is to
remember Christ, to wit, to remember his benefits, and to feel and perceive,
that they be in deed exhibited unto us. Neither is it sufficient to call to
mind the history, because that the Jews also, and the wicked can do that.
Therefore the Mass must be used to this end, that there the Sacrament may be
reached unto them, that have need of comfort, as Ambrose says, Because I do
always sin, therefore I ought always to receive a medicine. And seeing that
the Mass is such a communion of the Sacrament, we do observe one common Mass
every Holiday, and on other days, if any will use the Sacrament, when it is
offered to them, which desired it. Neither is this custom newly brought into
the Church. For the ancient Fathers before Gregory's time make no mention of
any private Mass: of the common Mass they speak much. Chrysostom says,
That the Priest did daily stand at the Altar, and call some unto the Communion,
and put back others. And by the ancient Canons it is evident that some one did
celebrate the Mass, of whom other Priests and Deacons did receive the body of
the Lord. For so the words of the Nicen Canon do sound: Let the Deacons in
their order after the Priests receive the holy communion of a Bishop, or of a
Priest. And Paul concerning the communion commands, that one tarry for
another, that so there may be a common participation. Seeing therefore that
among us the Mass has the example of the Church out of the Scripture, and the
Fathers, we hope that it cannot be disliked, especially for that our public
ceremonies are kept of us for the most part alike unto the usual ceremonies:
only the number of Masses is not alike, the which, by reason of very great and
manifest abuses, it were certainly far better to be moderated. For in times
past also in the Churches, whereunto was greatest resort, it was not the use to
have Mass said every day, as the Tripartite history. lib. 9. cap. 38. does
witness. Again (says he) in Alexandria every fourth and sixth day of the
week the Scriptures are read, and the Doctors do interpret them, and all
other things are done also, except only the solemn manner of oblation or
offering.

Of both kinds of the Sacrament,
ANd because that we do celebrate the common Mass, that Artic. 2.
the people may understand, that they also are sanctified through the blood of
Christ, and learn the true use of this ceremony, either part of the Sacrament
in the Supper of the Lord is given to the Laity, because the Sacrament was
instituted, not only for a part of the Church, namely for Priests, but also
for the rest of the Church. And therefore the people does use the Sacrament, as
Christ appointed it. And certainly Christ says, Matthew. 26. Drink ye all of
this, where he says manifestly, concerning the cup, that all should drink.
And that no man might cavil, that it does only appertain to the Priests, the
ordinance of Paul to the Corinthians does witness, that the whole Church did
in common use either part. This custom remained a long time even in the latter
Churches, neither is it certain, when, or by what author it was changed.
Cyprian in certain places does witness, that the blood, was given to the
people: for thus he writes to Cornelius the Pope: How do we teach, or provoke
them, to shed their blood, in the confession of his name, if we deny the blood
of Christ to them, which are in this warfare? or how shall we make them fit for
the cup of Martyrdom, if we do not first admit them, by the right of
communidation, to drink in the Church the cup of the Lord? And Hierome says,
The Priests do minister the Eucharist, and devide the blood of the Lord to the
people. In the Decrees there is a Canon of Pope Gelasius, which forbids the
Sacrament to be divided: these be the words: We do understand, that certain
men, having received the portion of the holy body only, do abstain from the
Cup of the holy blood: who, because that I know not by what superstition they
are taught to be tied hereunto, either let them unfeignedly receive the whole
Sacraments, or let them be put back from the whole Sacraments, because that
one, and the self same mystery cannot be divided, without great sacrilege. In
the Tripartite History it is written, in the reprehension of Theodosius the
Emperor (whom Ambrose would not admit to the communion, without repentance,
because that at Thessalonia he had too grievously revenged the death of a few
Soldiers which were slain in an uproare, and had murdered seven thousand
Citizens) here, says Ambrose, How caust thou with these hands receive the holy
body of the Lord? with what rashness can thou take into thy mouth the Cup of
that holy blood? etc. Therefore it is evident, that it was the custom of the
ancient Church, to give either part of the Sacrament, to the people: only a
new start up custom does take away one part from the people. Here we will not
dispute, what men are to think, concerning a received custom, contrary to the
authority of the Apostolic Scripture, contrary to the Canons, and contrary to
the example of the Primitive Church. For all godly men do understand, that,
touching Christian doctrine, consciences are to ask counsel at the word of
the Lord, and that no custom is to be allowed, which is contrary to the word
of God. And although in the Latin Church custom has changed the ancient
manner, yet it does not disallow, or forbid it: neither in deed ought humane
authority to forbid the ordinance of Christ and the most received custom of
the ancient Church. Therefore we have not thought it good, to forbid the use of
the whole Sacrament: and in that ceremony, which ought to be the covenant of
mutual love in the Church, we would not, contrary to charity, be hard to
other men's consciences, which had rather use the whole Sacrament, neither did
we think, that any cruelty should be used in that matter: but so much as in
us lies, together with the ceremony, we have restored the holy doctrine
touching the fruit of the ceremony, that the people may understand, how the
Sacrament is laid before them, to comfort the consciences of them that do
repent. This doctrine does allure the godly to the use and reverence of the
Sacrament. For not only the ceremony, was before maimed, but also the chief
doctrine, touching the fruit thereof, was utterly neglected. And peradventure
the maiming of the ceremony did signify, that the Gospel touching the blood
of Christ (that is, the benefit of Christ his death) was obscured. Now, by the
benefit of God, the pure Doctrine concerning faith, together with this
ceremony, is renewed, and restored.

This Article we find placed elsewhere in the first place, amongst those,
wherein the abuses, which are changed, are reckoned, after this manner.
EIther kind of the Sacrament in the Lords Supper is given to the laity,
because that this custom has the commandment of the Lord, Matthew, 26. Drink
ye all of this: where Christ does manifestly command, concerning the cup, that
all should drink. And that no man might cavil, that it does only appertain
to the Priests, the example of Paul to the Corinthians does witness, that the
whole Church did in common use either part. This custom remained a long time
even in the latter Churches, neither is it certain, when, or by what author it
was changed. Cyprian in certain places does witness, that the blood, was
given to the people: The same thing does Hierome testify: saying, The Priests
do minister the Sacrament, and distribute the blood of Christ to the people.
Yea, Gelasius the Pope commands, that the Sacrament be not divided, Did. 2.
de consecr. cap. Comperimus. Only a new custom, brought in of late, does
otherwise. But it is manifest, that a custom brought in, contrary to the
commandments of God, is not to be allowed, as the Canons do witness. Did. 8.
Cap. Veritate, with that which follows. Now this custom is received, not
only against the Scripture, but also against the true Canons, and the examples
of the Church. Therefore if any had rather use both parts of the Sacrament,
they were not to be compelled to do otherwise with the offense of their
conscience. Look the 1. observation.
And because that the parting of the Sacrament does not agree with the
institution of Christ, we use to omit that procession, which hitherto has been
in use.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY.
Of the holy Supper of the Lord.
BOth Baptism and the Supper of the Lord are pledges, and testimonies of
grace, as was said before, which do admonish us of the promise, and of our
whole redemption, and do show, that the benefits of the Gospel do pertain to
every one of those, that use these ceremonies. But yet here is the difference:
by Baptism every one is ingrafted into the Church: but the Lord would have the
Supper of the Lord to be also the sinew of the public congregation, etc.

The rest that follows, pertains to the 15. Sect. till you come to these
words that follow. Even as also in the very words of the Supper there is a
promise included, seeing he commands that the death of the Lord should be
showed forth, and this Supper distributed, till he come. That therefore we may
use this Sacrament with the greater reverence, let the true causes of the
institution thereof be well weighed, which pertain to the public
Congregation, and to the comfort of every one. The first cause is this: The Son
of God will have the voice of his Gospel to sound in a public congregation,
and such a one as is of good behavior: the bond of this congregation he will
have this receiving to be, which is to be done with great reverence, seeing
that there a testimony is given of the wonderful conjunction betwixt the Lord
and the receivers: of which reverence Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 11. saying. He that
receives unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
Secondly, God will have both the Sermon, and the ceremony it self to be
profitable, both for the preservation, and also for the propagation of the
memory of his passion, resurrection, and benefits. Thirdly, He will have every
receiver to be singularly confirmed by this testimony, that he may assure
himself, that the benefits of the Gospel do pertain to him, seeing that the
Sermon is common: and by this testimony, and by this receiving he shows that
thou art a member of his, and that thou art washed in his blood, and that he
does make this covenant with thee, Joh. 15. Abide in me, and I in you. Also, I
in them and they in me. Fourthly, he will have this public receiving, to be a
confession, whereby thou may show, what kind of doctrine thou do embrace,
and to what company thou docst join thy self. Also he will have us to give
thanks publicly, and privately in this very ceremony, to God the eternal
Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, both for other benefits, and
namely for this infinite benefit of our redemption and salvation. Also he will
that the members of the Church should have a bond of mutual love among
themselves. Thus we see that many ends do meet together. By the remembrance of
these weighty causes, men are invited to the reverence and use of the
Sacrament: and we teach how the use may be profitable. We do plainly condemn
that monstrous error of the Monks, who have written, that the receiving does
deserve remission of sins, and that for the works sake, without any good
motion of him that uses it. This Pharisaicall imagination is contrary to that
saying, Habac. 2. The just shall live by his faith. Therefore we do thus
instruct the Church, that they which will approach to the Supper of the Lord,
must repent or bring conversion with them, and having their faith now kindled,
they must here seek the confirmation of this faith, in the consideration of
the death, and resurrection, and benefits of the Son of God: because that in
the use of this Sacrament, there is a witness bearing, which declares that
the benefits of the Son of God do pertain to thee also: also there is a
testimony, that he joyneth thee as a member to himself, Look the 1.
observation upon this confession.
and that he is in thee, as he said, Joh. 17. I in them, etc. Therefore we give
counsel, that men, do not think, that their sins be forgiven them for this
works sake, or for this obedience, but that in a sure confidence they behold
the death and merit of the Son of God, and his resurrection, and assure
themselves that their sins are forgiven for his sake, and that he will have
this faith to be confirmed by this admonition, and witness bearing: when as
faith, comfort, the joy of conscience, and thanksgiving do after this sort
increase, the receiving is profitable. Neither are any Look the 2. Observation.
admitted to the Communion, except they be first heard, and absolved of the
Pastor, or his fellow Ministers. In this trial the ruder sort are asked, and
oftentimes instructed, touching the whole doctrine, and then is absolution
published.

Also men are taught, that Sacraments are actions, instituted of God, and that
without the use whereunto they are ordained, the things themselves are not to
be accounted for a Sacrament: but in the use appointed, Christ is present in
this communion, Look the 3 and 4. Observe.
truly and substantially, and the body and blood of Christ is in deed given to
the receivers: in that Christ does witness that he is in them, and does make
them his members, and that he does wash them in his blood, as Hilarie also
says, These things being eaten and drunk, do cause, both that we may be in
Christ, and that Christ may be in us. Moreover in the ceremony it self we
observe the usual order of the whole ancient Church, both Latin and Greek.
We use no private Masses, that is, such wherein the body and blood of Christ
was not distributed; as also the ancient Church, for many years after the
Apostles times, had no such Masses, as the the old descriptions, which are to
be found in Dionysius, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Augustine, and others, do show.
And Paul 1 Cor. 11. Does command, that the Communion should be celebrated when
many do meet together. Therefore in the public congregation, and such as is of
good behavior, prayers, and the creed, are rehearsed or sung, and Look the 5.
Observat.
lessons appointed usually for holy days, are read. After that there is a
Sermon of the benefits of the Son of God, and of some part of doctrine: as the
order of time does minister an argument. Then the Pastor does rehearse a
thanksgiving, and a prayer for the whole Church, for them that are in
authority, and as the present necessity requires: and he prays to God,
that for his Sons sake, whom he would have to be made a sacrifice for us, he
would forgive us our sins, and save us, and gather, and preserve a Church. Then
he rehearses the words of Christ, concerning the institution of the Supper,
and he himself takes, and distributeth to the receivers, the whole Sacrament:
who come reverently thereunto, being before examined and absolved, and there
they join theirs with the public prayers. In the end they do again give
thanks. All men, which are not altogether ignorant of antiquity, do know that
this rite, and this Communion, does for the most part agree with the writings
of the Apostles, and with the custom of the ancient Church, even almost to
Gregory's time: which thing being so, the custom of our Churches is to be
approved, not to be disallowed, but our Adversaries misliking our custom, do
defend many errors, some more foul and gross, others colored with new
deceits.

Many heretofore have written, that in the mass there is an oblation made for
the quick and the dead, and that it does deserve remission of sins, both for
him that makes it, and for others, even for the works sake. And thus were most
of them persuaded, and as yet are like unto the Pharisees, and the heathen. For
after the same manner the Pharisees and the Heathen did dream, that they for
the works sake, did deserve, for themselves, and for others, remission of
sins, peace, and many other good things. Or although those, which were not so
blind, did speak more modestly, and said, that they did deserve, but not
without the good intention of the sacrificer, yet they imagined that those
sacrifices were merits, and a ransom. By reason of this opinion there were a
multitude of sacrifices, and the crafty means of gain were increased. Such
is the merchandise of Masses, and the profanation of the Lords Supper, almost
throughout the whole world. But God will have corrupt kinds of worship to be
reproved, and abolished. Therefore we do simply and in deed propound the voice
of God, which does condemn those errors, and with all our heart we affirm
before God; and the whole Church in heaven and in earth, that there was one
only sacrifice propitiatory, or whereby the wrath of the eternal Father
against mankind is pacified, to wit, the whole obedience of the Son of God,
our Lord Jesus Christ, who was crucified, and raised up again. This is that
only Lamb, which takes away the sins of the world, Ioh. 1. Of this only
sacrifice mention is made, Heb. 10. By one only sacrifice he made perfect for
ever those that are sanctified. And this sacrifice is applied to every one, by
their own faith, when they hear the Gospel, and use the Sacraments, as Paul
says, Romans 3. Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in
his blood. And Habac. 2. The just shall live by his faith. And, 1 Pet. 1. Being
sanctified in the spirit, unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus
Christ. Other Sacraments in the old Testament were typical: whereof we shall
speak more at large in their place, and they did not deserve any remission of
sins: and all the righteousness of holy men at all times, were, are, and shall
be sacrifices of praise, which do not deserve remission, either for them that
did offer them, or for others, but they are services which every one ought to
perform: and are acceptable to God for the Mediators, and our high Priest the
Son of God his sake, as it is said, Heb. 13. By him we offer the sacrifice of
praise always to God.

That this is an unchangeable and eternal truth, it is most manifest. And
whereas certain fragments, which they call the Canons of the Mass, are
alleged against this so clear light of the truth, it is also manifest that
the Greek and Latin Canons are very unlike the one to the other, and that the
Greek Canons do disagree among themselves in a most wrightie matter: and it
appears that in the Latin Canon many jagges and pieces were by little and
little patched together of ignorant authors. The ancient Church does use the
names of Sacrifice and oblation: but thereby it understands the whole action,
prayers, a taking of it, a remembrance, faith, a confession, and thankesgiving.
This whole inward and outward action, in every one that is turned to God, and
in the whole Church, is indeed a sacrifice of praise, or thankesgiving and a
reasonable service. And when the Lord says, Ioh. 4. The true worshippers shall
worship the Lord in spirit and in truth, he affirms that in the New Testament
outward sacrifices are not commanded, which of necessity should be made,
although there were no motions of the holy Ghost in the heart, as in the law it
was necessary, that the ceremony of the Passover should be kept. But
touching the Supper of the Lord it is said, 1 Cor. 11. Let every man examine
himself, etc. So the Supper of the Lord does profit him that uses it, when as
he brings with him repentance and faith, and another man's work does nothing
at all profit him.

Furthermore, concerning the dead, it is manifest, that all this show is
repugnant to the words of the institution of the Supper, wherein it is said,
Take ye, eat ye, etc. Do ye this in remembrance of me. What does this appertain
to the dead, or to those that be absent? and yet in a great part of Europe many
masses are said for the dead: also a great number not knowing what they do,
do read Masses for a reward. But seeing that all these things are manifestly
wicked, to wit, to offer, as they speak, to the end that they may deserve for
the quick and the dead: or for a man to do he knows not what, they do
horribly sin, that retain and defend these mischievous deeds. And seeing that
this ceremony is not to be taken for a Sacrament, without the use whereunto it
was ordained, what manner of Idol worship is there used, let godly and learned
men consider. Also it is a manifest profanation, to carry about part of the
Supper of the Lord, and to worship it: where a part is utterly transferred to
an use clean contrary to the first institution, whereas the Text says, Take,
eat: and this show is but a thing devised of late. To conclude, what be the
manners of many Priests and Monks in all Europe, which have no regard of this
saying, 1 Cor. 11. Let every man examine himself? Also, Whosoever takes it
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Every man of
him-self does know these things.

Now, although the chief Bishops and hypocrites, who seek delusions to
establish these evils, do scoff at these complaints, yet it is most certain,
that God is grievously offended with these wicked deeds, as he was angry with
the people of Israel for their prophanations of the sacrifices. And we do see
evident examples of wrath, to wit, the ruins of so many kingdoms, the spoil
and waste that the Turks do make in the world, the confusions of opinions, and
many most lamentable dissipations of Churches. But O Son of God, Lord Jesus
Christ, which wast crucified and raised up again for us, thou which art the
high Priest of the Church, with true sighs we beseech thee, that for thine,
and thy eternal Fathers glory, thou would take away idols, errors, and
abominations: and, as thou thy self did pray, Sanctify us with thy truth,
and kindle the light of thy Gospel, and true invocation, in the hearts of many,
and bow our hearts to true obedience, that we may thankefully praise thee in
all eternity. The greatness of our sins, which the profanation of the Supper
of the Lord these many years has brought forth, does surpass the eloquence of
Angels and men. We are herein the shorter, seeing that no words can be devised
sufficient, to set out the greatness of this thing, and in this great grief
we beseech the Son of God, that he would amend these evils, and also for a
further declaration, we offer our selves to them, that will hear it. But in
this question we see that to be chiefly done, which Solomon says, He that
sings songs to a wicked heart, is like him that powers vinegar upon nitre.

Our Adversaries know, that these persuasions of their sacrifice, are the
sinews of their power and riches: therefore they will hear nothing that is
said against it. Some of them do now learn craftily to mitigate these things,
and therefore they say, The oblation is not a merit, but an application: they
deceive in words, and retain still the same abuses. But we said before, that
every one does by faith apply the sacrifice of Christ to himself, both when he
hears the Gospel, and then also, when he uses the Sacraments: and it is
written, 1 Corinthians. 11. Let every man examine himself. Therefore Paul does not
mean, that the ceremony does profit another that does not use it. And, the
Son of God himself did offer up himself, going into the holy of holies, that
is, into the secret counsel of the Divinity, seeing the will of the eternal
Father, and bearing his great wrath, and understanding the causes of this
wonderful counsel: these weighty things are meant, when the text says, Heb.
9. He offered himself. And when Esaias says, Cap. 53. He will make his soul an
offering for sin. Now therefore what do the Priests mean, who say, that they
offer up Christ? and yet antiquity never spoke after this manner. But they do
most grievously accuse us. They say, that we do take away the continual
sacrifice, as did Antiochus, who was a type of Antichrist. We answered before,
that we do retain the whole ceremony of the Apostolic Church: and this is
the continual sacrifice, That the sincere doctrine of the Gospel should be
heard, that God should be truly invocated: to conclude, as the Lord says, Joh.
4. It is to worship the Father in spirit and truth: we do also herein
comprehend the true use of the Sacraments. Seeing that we retain all these
things faithfully, we do with great reverence retain the continual
sacrifice, they do abolish it, who many ways do corrupt true invocation, and
the very Supper of the Lord, who command us to invocate dead men, who set out
Masses to sale, who boast, that by their oblation they do merit for others,
who do mingle many mischievous errors with the doctrine of Repentance and
remission of sins, who will men to doubt, when they repent, whether they be in
favor, who defile the Church of God with filthy lusts and Idols. These men be
like unto Antiochus, and not we, who endeavor to obey the Son of God, who
says, Joh. 4. If any man loves me, he will keep my word.

Of the use of the whole Sacrament.
LEt Sophistry be remooved from the judgments of the Church. All men know,
that the Supper of the Lord is so instituted, that the whole Sacrament may be
given to the people, as it is written, Drink ye all of this. Also the custom
of the ancient Church, both Greek and Latin, is well known. Therefore we
must confess that the forbidding of one part is an unjust thing. It is great
injury to violate the lawful Testament of men: Why then do the Bishops
violate the Testament of the Son of God, which he has sealed up with his own
blood? But it is to be lamented, that certain men should be so impudent, as to
feign feign sophistry against this so weighty an argument, that they may
establish their prohibition; the refutation of whom, the matter being so clear
and evident, we do omit.

In another place this Article is not distinguished from that which went
before, but is thus joined with it: To conclude, we must also speak in few
things of the use of the whole Sacrament. Let sophistry be remooved, etc.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE. Of the Eucharist. CHAP. 9.
WE believe and confess that the Eucharist (for so it pleased our forefathers
to call the Supper of the Lord) is a Sacrament, instituted of Christ himself,
and that the use thereof is commended to the Church, even to the latter end of
the world. But because the substance is one thing, and the use thereof another
thing, therefore we will speak of these in order. Touching the substance of
the Eucharist, we thus think and teach, Look the 1. observation upon this
confession.
that the true body of Christ, and his true blood is distributed in the
Eucharist: and we refute them that say, that the bread and wine of the
Eucharist, Look the 2. Observat.
are signs of the body and blood of Christ being only absent. Also we believe
that the omnipotency of God is so great, that in the Eucharist he may either
annihilate the substance of bread and wine, Look the 3. observation.
or else change them into the body and blood of Christ: but that God does
exercise this his absolute omnipotency in the Eucharist, we have no certain
word of God for it, and it is evident, that the ancient Church was altogether
ignorant of it. For as in Ezech. where it is said of the City of Jerusalem,
described on the out side of a wall, This is Jerusalem, it was not necessary
that the substance of the wall should be changed into the substance of the
City of Jerusalem; so when it is said of the bread, This is my body, it is
not necessary that the substance of bread should be changed into the substance
of the body of Christ: Look the 4. observation.
but for the truth of the Sacrament it is sufficient, that the body of Christ
is in deed present with the bread: and in deed the very necessity of the truth
of the Sacrament does seem to require, that true bread should remain, with
the true presence of the body of Christ. For as to the truth of the Sacrament
of Baptism it is necessary, that in the use thereof there should be water, and
that true water should remain; so it is necessary in the Lords Supper, that
there should be bread in the use thereof, and that true bread should remain,
whereas if the substance of bread were changed, we should have no proof of the
truth of the Sacrament. Whereupon both Paul, and also the ancient
Ecclesiastical Writers do call the bread of the Eucharist, even after
consecration, bread. 1 Cor. 11. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat
of that bread, etc. And, Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup
of the Lord unworthily, etc. And Augustine in his Sermon to young children
says: That which you have seen, it is the bread, and the cup, the which thing
also your eyes do witness unto you: but that which your faith desires to
learn, is this: the bread, is the body of Christ, the cup, is his blood.

Now as touching the use of the Eucharist, first, although we do not deny,
Look the 5. observation.
but that whole Christ is distributed, as well in the bread, as in the wine of
the Eucharist: yet we teach, that the use of either part ought to be common to
the whole Church. For it is evident, that Christ being nothing at all terrified
by any dangers, which afterward humane superstition invented, or by other
devises, gave unto his Church both parts to be used. Also it is evident, that
the ancient Church did use both parts for many years. And certain Writers do
clearly witness, that they which do receive bread alone, do not receive the
whole Sacrament Sacramentally (for so they speak) and that it is not possible
to devide one and the self same mystery, without great sacrilege. Wherefore we
think that the use of both parts is in deed Catholic and Apostolic, and that
it is not lawful for any man, at his pleasure to change this institution of
Christ, and a ceremony of such continuance in the ancient and true Church, and
to take away from the Laity, as they call them, one part of the Eucharist. And
it is to be marvelled at, that they who profess themselves to defend the
ceremonies of the ancient Church, should so far swarve from the ancient
Church in this point. Moreover, seeing that the word Sacrifice is very large,
and does generally signify a holy worship, we do willingly grant, that the
true and lawful use of the Eucharist may in this sense be called a Sacrifice:
howbeit the Eucharist, according to the institution of Christ, is so
celebrated, that therein the death of Christ is showed forth, and the Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ is distributed to the Church, and so it is
truly called an applying of the merit of the passion of Christ, to wit, to
them, which receive the Sacrament.

Neither do we condemn godly lessons, and prayers, which use to go before,
and to follow consecration, as they call it, and the dispensation of the
Eucharist: yet in the mean time it is not lawful for us, to dissemble, or to
allow of those errors, which have been added to this holy Sacrament, rather by
the ignorance of private men, then by any lawful consent of the true Catholic
Church. One error is this, that of the worship, which ought to be common to
the Church, there is made a private action of one Priest, who as he does alone
to himself mumble up the words of the Lords Supper, so also he alone does
receive the bread and wine. For Christ did institute the Eucharist, not that it
should be a private action of one man, but that it should be a communion of the
Church. Look the 6. observation.
Therefore to the right action of the Eucharist, two things at the lest are
requisite, to wit, the Minister of the Eucharist, who blesses, and he, to whom
the Sacrament of the Eucharist is dispensed. For when Christ did institute this
Sacrament, he did not eat thereof alone, but he did dispense it to his Church,
which then was present with him, saying, Take ye, eat ye, etc. And, Drink ye
all of this, etc. This institution of Christ the ancient and true Catholic
Church did so severely observe, that it excommunicated them, which being
present whilst this holy Sacrament was administered, would not communicate with
others. Anacletus in his first Epistle says, After that consecration is
finished, let all communicate, except they had rather stand without the Church
doors. And he adds, For so both the Apostles appointed, and the holy Church
of Rome keeps it still. Also, the Antiochian Council, cap. 2. says: All
those which come into the Church of God, and hear the holy Scriptures, but do
not communicate with the people in prayer, and cannot abide to receive the
Sacrament of the Lord, according to a certain proper discipline, these men
must be cast out of the Church. Dionysius in his book, De Eccles. Hierarc.
says; The Bishop, when he has praised the divine gifts, then he makes the
holy, and most excellent mysteries: and those things which before he had
praised, being covered and hid under reverent signs, he brings into sight,
and reverently showing forth the divine gifts, both he himself does turn to
the holy participation thereof, and does exhort the others to participate them:
to conclude, when the holy communion is received, and delivered to all, he
rendering thanks, does make an end of these mysteries. Therefore we think it
necessary, to the remining of the institution of Christ in the celebration of
the Eucharist, and that we may follow the example of the ancient and true
Catholic Church, that the private Masses of the Priests may be abrogated, and
that the public communion of the Lords Supper may be restored.

Another error is this, that the Eucharist is such a sacrifice, as ought to be
offered daily in the Church, for the purging of the sins of the quick and
the dead, and for the obtaining of other benefits, both corporal and
spiritual. This error is evidently contrary to the Gospel of Christ, which
witnesses; That Christ, by one oblation, once only made, has made perfect
for ever those that be sanctified. And, because that Christ by his passion and
death, has purchased remission of sins for us, which also is declared unto
us by the Gospel in the new Testament, therefore it is not lawful to sacrifice
any more for sin: for the Epistle to the Hebrews says, Where there is
remission of sins, there is no further oblation for sin. For whereas Christ
says, Do this in remembrance of me, he does not command to offer his body and
blood in the Supper unto God, but to the Church: that the Church, by eating the
body, and drinking the blood of Christ; and by showing forth the benefit of
his death, may be admonished of that oblation of the body and blood of Christ
which was made once only on the Cross for the purging of our sins. For so
Paul does interpret this saying of Christ, saying, So often as ye shall eat
(he does not say, offer) this bread, and drink this cup, show ye forth the
death of the Lord, till he come. And truly we confess, that the ancient
Ecclesiastical writers did call the Eucharist a sacrifice, and an oblation:
but they expound themselves, that by the name of Sacrifice they mean a
remembrance, a showing forth or a preaching of that Sacrifice, which Christ did
once offer upon the Cross as also they call the memorial of the Passover,
and of Pentecost, the Passover and Pentecost it self.

The third error is this, that many do think, that the oblation (as they
call it) of the Eucharist, is not of it self a propitiation for sins, but
that it does apply the propitiation and merit of Christ to the quick and the
dead. But we have already showed, that the Eucharist properly is not an
oblation, but is so called, because it is a remembrance of the oblation, which
was once made on the Cross. Moreover, the application of the merit of Christ,
is not made by any other outward instrument, then by the preaching of the
Gospel of Christ, and by dispensing those Sacraments, which Christ has
instituted for this use: and the merit of Christ being offered, and applied, is
not received but by faith, Mark 16. Preach the Gospel to every creature. For by
the ministry of the Gospel the benefits of Christ be offered, and applied to
creatures, that is, either to the Jews, or to the Gentiles. And it follows,
He that shall believe, and be baptized, he shall be saved: because that by the
receiving of the Sacrament, and by faith, the benefits offered, and applied, be
received, Romans 1. The Gospel is the power of God to salvation, to every one
that believes: that is, the ministry of the Gospel is the instrument ordained
of God, whereby God is able and effectual, to save all those, which believe
the Gospel. Therefore the preaching of the Gospel does offer, or, if it likes
any man so to speak, does apply salvation to all men, but faith does receive
salvation offered and applied. Now in the private Mass, bread and wine are so
handled, that the Priest does neither publicly declare the Gospel of Christ,
but does softly mumble up to himself certain words, and especially the words
of the Supper, or of consecration: neither does he distribute bread and wine to
others, but he alone takes them: therefore there can be no applying of the
merit of Christ in the private Mass. This did our true Catholic Elders well
perceive, who, as we have declared before, did so severely require, that they
which were present at the Mass, and did not communicate, should be
excommunicated.

The fourth error is this, which we have already touched, in that they do
require, that the words of the Supper, or of consecration, may be rehearsed
softly in the Eucharist, seeing that these words are a part of that Gospel,
which according to the commandment of Christ, is to be preached to all
creatures. For although our Ancestors did sometimes call the Eucharist a
mystery, yet they did not so call it with this purpose, that they would not
have the words of the Supper to be rehearsed before the Church in the Eucharist
publicly, and in a tongue commonly known, but because that in the Eucharist
one thing is seen, and another thing understood. For Christ himself is also
called a mystery, who nevertheless is not to be hid, but to be preached to
all creatures. And because that in the receiving of the Sacrament it is
necessarily required, that we should have faith, and faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the wora of God, it is most necessary, that in the Eucharist
the word of the Supper, that is, the word of the Son of God, should be
publicly rehearsed: for this word is the preaching of the Gospel, and the
showing forth of the death of Christ. Therefore that the Church may understand
what is done in the Eucharist, and what is offered unto her to be received, and
that she may confirm her faith, it is necessary, that in the Eucharist the
words of the Lords Supper should be rehearsed publicly.

The fifth error is this, that one part of the Eucharist is used in show of a
singular worship of God, to be carried about, and to be laid up. But the holy
Ghost does forbid, that any worship of God should be appointed without the
express commandment of God. Deuteronomy. 12. You shall not do every one of you,
that which seems good in his own eyes. And again, That which I command
thee, that only shall thou do to the Lord: see that thou add nothing
thereunto, nor detract any thing from it. And Matthew. 15. In vain do they
worship me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of men. Clemens in his second
Epistle to James, and in three Chapters, De Consecr. Did. 2. says, Certainly
so great burnt offerings are offered on the Altar, as may be sufficient for the
people: if so be that any thing remain till the next day, let them not be
kept, but with fear and trembling, by the diligence of the Clearkes, let them
be consumed. We are not ignorant, how they use to delude these words of
Clemens, by feigning a difference betwixt the work of those that are ready to
die, and those that be ready to consecrate. But it is evident, that the bread,
which uses to be carried about, and to be laid up to be adored, is not
reserved for those that be weak, but in the end is received of them that do
consecrate. Cyrill, or, as others think, Origin, upon the seventh Chapter of
Levit. says, For the Lord concerning that bread, which he gave to his
Disciples, said unto them, Take it, and eat it, etc. He did not differ it,
neither did he command it to be reserved till the next day. Peradventure there
is this mystery also contained therein, that he does not command the bread to
be carried in the high way, that thou may always bring forth the fresh
loaves of the word of God, which thou carriest within thee, etc.

Out of the Confession of SUEVELAND.
Of the Eucharist. CHAP. 18.
AS touching this reverent Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, all those
things which the Evangelists, Paul, and the holy Fathers have left in writing
thereof, our men do sincerely teach, commend, and inculcate: and thence they
do with a singular endeavor always publish this goodness of Christ toward
his, whereby he does no less at this day, then he did in that his last Supper,
vouchsafe to give, by the Sacraments his true body, and his true blood, to be
eaten, and to be drunk, indeed, as the meat and drink of their souls,
whereby they may be nourished unto life eternal: he gives it, I say, to all
those, who from their hearts have their names, to be reckoned among his
disciples, when as they do receive this Supper, according to his institution:
so that now he may live and abide in them, and they in him, and be raised up by
him in the last day, to a new, and immortal life, according to those words of
eternal truth. Take, and eat, This is my body, etc. Drink ye all of this,
This cup is my blood, etc. Now, our Preachers do most diligently withdraw the
minds of the people, both from all contention, and also from all superfluous
and curious inquiry, unto that which only is profitable, and whereunto only
Christ our Savior had respect: to wit, that being fed with him, we may live in
him, and through him, and lead such a life, as is acceptable to God, holy, and
therefore everlasting and blessed: and withal, that we among our selves may be
one bread, and one body, which are partakers of one bread in that holy Supper.
Whereby it comes to pass, that we do very religiously, and with a singular
reverence both administer, and receive the Divine Sacraments, that is, the holy
Supper of Christ. By these things which are thus indeed, as we have set them
down, your sacred Majesty, O most gracious Emperor, does know, how falsely
our adversaries do boast, that our men do change the words of Christ, and
tear them in pieces by humane glosses, and that in our Suppers nothing is
administered but mere bread, and mere wine, and also that among us the Supper
of the Lord is contemned, and rejected. For our men do very carefully teach
and exhort, that every man do in a simple faith embrace these words of the
Lord, rejecting all devises of men, and false glosses, and removing away all
kind of wavering, do wholly addict their mind to the true meaning thereof:
and to conclude, do oftentimes, with as great reverence as they may, receive
the Sacraments, to be the lively food of their souls, and to stir up in them
a grateful remembrance of so great a benefit: the which thing also uses now
to be done among us, much more often and reverently, then heretofore was used.
Moreover, our Preachers have always hitherto, and at this day do offer
themselves with all modesty and truth, to render a reason of their faith and
doctrine, touching all those things which they believe and teach, as well about
the Sacrament, as about other things, and that not only to your Sacred
Majesty, but also to every one that shall demand it.

Of the Mass. CHAP. 19.
FVrthermore, seeing that after this manner, Christ has instituted his Supper,
which afterward began to be called the Mass, to wit, that therein the
faithful being fed with his body and blood, unto life eternal, should show
forth his death, whereby they are redeemed; our Preachers by this mean giving
thanks, and also commending this salvation unto others, could not choose but
condemn it, that these things were every where neglected. And on the other
side, they which do celebrate the Masses, do presume to offer up Christ unto
his Father, for the quick and the dead, and they make the Mass, to be such a
work, as that by it alone almost, the favor of God and salvation is obtained,
howsoever they do either believe, or live. Whereupon that most shameful and
twice and thrice impious sale of this Sacrament has crept in, and thereby it
is come to pass that nothing at this day, is more gainefull then the Mass.
Therefore they rejected private Masses, because the Lord did commend this
Sacrament to his Disciples to be used in common. Whereupon Paul commands the
Corinthians, when they are to celebrate the holy Supper, to stay 1. Cor. 11.
one for another, and denies that they do celebrate the Lords Supper, when as
every man takes his own Supper whilst they be eating. Moreover, whereas they
boast, that they do offer up Christ instead of a sacrifice, they are therefore
condemned of our men, because that the Epistle to the Hebrews does plainly
witness, that as men do once die, so Christ was once offered that he Heb. 5.
might take away the sins of many, and that he can no more be offered again,
then he may die again: and therefore having offered one sacrifice for sins,
he sits for ever at the right hand of God, waiting for that which remains,
to wit, that his enemies, as it Heb. 10.
were a footstool, may be trodden under his feet. For with one oblation has
he consecrated for ever them, that are sanctified.

And whereas they have made the Mass to be a good work, whereby any thing may
be obtained at Gods hands, our Preachers have taught, that it is repugnant to
that, which the Scripture does teach in every place, that we are justified, and
receive the favor of God, by the spirit of Christ and by faith: for which
matter we alleged before many testimonies out of the Scriptures. So in that
the death of the Lord is not commended to the people in the Mass, our
Preachers have showed that it is contrary to that, that Christ commanded, to
receive these Sacraments, in remembrance of himself: and Paul, that we might
show forth the death of Christ, till he come. And whereas many do commonly
celebrate the Masses, without all regard of godliness, only for this cause,
that they may nourish their bodies, our Preachers have showed, that that is so
execrable a thing before God, that if the Mass of it self should nothing at
all hinder godliness, yet worthily and by the commandment of God, it were to
be abolished: the which thing is evident even out of Esaias only. For our God is
a Spirit, and truth, and therefore he cannot Isa. 2.
abide to be worshipped, but in Spirit and truth. And how grievous a thing this
unreasonable selling of the Sacraments is unto the Lord, our Preachers would
have men thereby to conjecture, that Christ did so sharply, and altogether
against his accustomed manner, taking unto himself an external kind of
revengement, cast out of the temple those that bought and sold, whereas they
might seem to exercise merchandise, only in this respect, that they might
further those sacrifices, which were offered according to the law.

Therefore, seeing that the rite of the Mass, which was wont to be celebrated,
is so many ways contrary to the Scripture of God, as also it is in every
respect diverse from that, which the holy Fathers used, it has been very
vehemently condemned amongst us out of the pulpit, and by the word of God it is
made so detestable, that many of their own accord have altogether forsaken it:
and else where, by the authority of the Magistrate, it is abrogated. The which
thing we have not taken upon us for any other cause, then for that throughout
the whole Scripture, the Spirit of God does detest nothing so much, neither
command it so earnestly to be taken away, as a feigned and false worship of
himself. Now, no man that has any spark of religion in him, can be ignorant,
what an inevitable necessity is laid upon him that fears God, when as he is
persuaded, that God does require a thing at his hands For any man may easily
foresee, how many would take it at our hands, that we should change any thing
about the holy rite of the Mass, neither were there any, which would not
rather have chosen in this point, not only not to have offended your sacred
Majesty, but even any Prince of the lowest degree. But when as herewithall
they did not doubt, but by that common rite of the Mass, God was most
grievously provoked, and that his glory, for the which we ought to spend our
lives, was darkened, they could not but take it away, lest that they also, by
wincking at it, should make themselves partakers with them in diminishing the
glory of God. Truly if God is to be loved, and worshipped above all, godly men
must bear nothing less, then that which he does hate and detest: And that
this one cause did constrain us to change certain things in these points, we
take him to witness, from whom no secret is hid.

THE FIFTEENTH SECTION. OF ECCLESIASTICAL MEETINGS.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA.
Of holy and Ecclesiastical meetings. CHAP. 22.
ALthough it be lawful for all men, privately at home to read the holy
Scriptures, and by instruction to edify one another in the true Religion, yet
that the word of God may be lawfully preached to the people, and prayers and
supplications publicly made, and that the Sacraments may be lawfully
ministered, that that collection be made for the poor, and to defray all
necessary charges of the Church, or to supply the wants, it is very needful
there should be holy meetings and Ecclesiastical assemblies. For it is
manifest that in the Apostolic and Primitive Church there were such assemblies
frequented of godly men. So many then as do despise them, and separate
themselves from them, they are contemners of true Religion, and are to be
compelled by the Pastors and godly Magistrates, to surcease stubbornly to
separate and absent themselves from sacred assemblies. Now Ecclesiastical
assemblies must not be hidden and secret, but public, and common, except
persecution by the enemies of Christ and the Church will not suffer them to be
public. For we know what manner assemblies the Primitive Church had
heretofore in secret corners, being under the tyranny of Roman Emperors. Let
those places where the faithful meet together be decent, and in all respects
fit for Gods Church. Therefore let houses be chosen for that purpose, or
Churches that are large and fair, so that they be purged from all such things,
as do not beseem the Church. And let all things be ordered, as is most meet
for comeliness, necessity, and godly decency, that nothing be wanting which
is requisite for rites and orders, and the necessary uses of the Church.

And as we believe that God does not dwell in temples made with hands, so we
know that by reason of the word of God, and holy exercises therein celebrated,
places dedicated to God and his worship are not profane, but holy, and that
therefore such as are conversant in them, ought to behave themselves reverently
and modestly, as they which are in a sacred place, in the presence of God and
his holy Angels. All excess of apparel therefore is to be abandoned from
Churches and places where Christians meet in prayer, together with all pride,
and whatsoever else does not beseem Christian humility, decency, and
modesty. For the true ornament of Churches does not consist in Ivorie, gold,
and precious stones, but in the sobriety, godliness, and virtues of those,
which are in the Church. Let all things be done comely and orderly in the
Church: to conclude, Let all things be done to edifying. Therefore let all
strange tongues keep silence in the holy assemblies, and let all things be
uttered in the vulgar tongue, which is understood of all men in the company.

Of prayer, singing, and Canonical hours. CHAP. 23.
TRue it is, that a man may lawfully pray privately in any tongue that he does
understand: but public prayers ought in the holy assemblies to be made in the
vulgar tongue, or such a language as is known to all. Let all the prayers of
the faithful be powered forth to God alone through the mediation of Christ
only, out of a true faith and pure love. As for invocation of Saints, or using
them as intercessors, to entreat for us, the Priesthood of our Lord Christ and
true religion will not permit us. Prayer must be made for Magistracy, for
Kings and all that are placed in authority, for Ministers of the Church, and
for all necessities of Churches in any calamity, and specially in the calamity
of the Church, prayer must be made both privately, and publicly, without
ceasing. Moreover we must pray willingly, and not by constraint, nor for any
reward: neither must we superstitiously tie prayer to any place, as though it
were not lawful to pray but in the Church. There is no necessity, that public
prayers should be in form and time the same or alike in all Churches. Let all
Churches use their liberty. Socrates in his history says, In any country or
nation wheresoever, you shall not find two Churches which do wholely agree in
prayer: The authors of this difference I think were those which had the
government of the Churches in all ages. If so be any do agree, it deserves
great commendation, and is to be imitated of others.

Besides this, there must be a mean and measure, as in every other thing, so
also in public prayers, that they be not overlong, and tedious: let therefore
the most time be given to teaching of the Gospel, in such holy assemblies: and
let there be diligent heed taken, that the people in the Assemblies be not
wearied with overlong prayers, so as when the preaching of the Gospel should be
heard, they through wearisomnesse either desire to go forth themselves, or to
have the assembly wholly dismissed. For unto such the Sermons seem to be
overlong, which otherwise are brief enough. Yea and the Preachers ought to
keep a mean. Likewise the singing in sacred assemblies ought to be moderated,
where it is in use. That song, which they call Gregory's song, has many gross
things in it. Wherefore it is upon good cause rejected of ours, and of all
other reformed Churches. If there be any Churches which have faithful prayer
in good manner, and no singing at all, they are not therefore to be condemned:
for all Churches have not the commodity and opportunity of singing. And
certain it is by testimonies of antiquity, that as the custom of singing
has been very ancient in the East Churches, so it was long or it was received
in the West Churches.

In ancient time there were Canonical hours, that is, known prayers framed
for certain hours in the day, and chanted therein, often repeated, as the
Papists manner is: which may be proved by many of their lessons appointed in
their hours and diverse other arguments. Moreover they have many absurd things
(that I say no more) and therefore are well omitted of our Churches, that have
brought in their stead matters more wholesome for the whole Church of God.

Hitherto also pertains the beginning of the 25. Art. Of Catechizing.
THe Lord enjoined his ancient people to take great care and diligence in
instructing the youth well, even from their insancie, and moreover commanded
expressly in his Law, that they should teach them, and declare the mystery of
the Sacraments unto them. Now for as much as it is evident by the writings of
the Evangelists and Apostles, that God had no less care of the youth of this
new people, seeing he says, Suffer little children to come unto me, for of
such is the kingdom of heaven; Therefore the Pastors do very wisely, which
do diligently and betimes Catechize their youth, laying the first grounds of
faith, and faithfully teaching the principles of our Religion, by expounding
the Ten Commandments, the Apostles Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the doctrine
of the Sacraments, with other like principles and chief heads of our Religion.
And here let the Church perform her faithfulness and diligence in bringing
the children to be Catechized, as being desirous and glad to have her children
well instructed. That which follows in this Article, is contained in the
sixteenth Section.

Also, CHAP. 28. Of the goods of the Church, and right use of them.
THe Church of Christ has riches through the bountifulness of Princes, and
the liberality of the faithful, who have given their goods to the Church: for
the Church has need of such goods: and has had goods from ancient time, for
the maintenance of things necessary for the Church. Now the true use of the
Church goods, was, and now is, to maintain learning in Schools, and in holy
assemblies, with all the service, rites, and buildings of the Church: finally
to maintain teachers, scholars, and ministers, with other necessary things,
and chiefly for the succor and relief of the poor. But for the lawful
dispensing of these Ecclesiastical goods, let men be chosen that fear God,
wise men, and such as are of good report for government of their families. But
if the goods of the Church by injury of the time, and the boldness,
ignorance, or covetousness of some turned to any abuse, let them be restored
again, by godly and wise men, unto their holy use: for they must not wink at
so impious an abuse. Therefore we teach that Schools and Colleges, whereinto
corruption is crept in doctrine, in the service of God, and in manners, must be
reformed, that there must order be taken, godly, faithfully, and wisely, for
the relief of the poor.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA.
Holy meetings.
WE think that holy meetings are so to be celebrated, that Artic. 23.
above all things the word of God be propounded Look the 1. observation upon
this confession.
to the people every day publicly, in a public place, and appointed for
holy exercises: also that the hidden things of the Scripture may daily be
searched out and declared, by those that are fit thereunto: that the faith of
the godly may be exercised, and that we may continually be instant in prayer,
according as the necessity of all men requires. As for other unprofitable and
innumerable circumstances of ceremonies, as vessels, apparel, vials, torches
or candles, altars, gold and silver, so far forth as they serve to pervert
religion; but especially Idols, which are set up to be worshipped, and give
offense, and all profane things of that sort, we do remove them far from
our holy meeting.

Of Heretics and Schismatiks.
ALso we remove from our holy meetings all those, who forsaking Artic. 24.
the property of the holy Church, do either bring in, or follow strange, and
wicked opinions, with which evil the Catabaptists are chiefly infected: who,
if they do obstinately refuse to obey the Church and the Christian
instruction, are in our judgment to be bridled by the Magistrate, lest by
their contagion they infect the flock of Christ.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA. Of Catechizing. CHAP. 2.
IN the second place they teach the Christian Catechism, that is, a Catholic
doctrine, and an instruction made with the mouth, which agrees in
Christianisme, with the ancient Church and holy fathers: and this doctrine or
instruction is the inward or secret thing, and the marrow, and the keie to the
whole holy Scripture, and contains the sum thereof: It is comprehended in
the Ten Commandments, in the Catholic, Christian, and Apostolic Creed,
wherein be 12. Articles, which are expounded and confirmed, by the Nicene and
Athanasius his Creed, and by godly, Catholic, and general Councels: also, in
the form of prayers, to wlt, of that holy prayer which the Lord appointed, and
in a summarie doctrine touching the Sacraments, and such duties, as we owe, or
be proper, regard being had to every man's place and order, in diverse and
distinct kinds of life, whereunto he is called of God: and there is an open
confession and profession made, that this Christian doctrine is that true,
full, perfect, and well pleased will of God, necessary to every faithful
Christian unto salvation.

This Catechism, which does contain in it the full and Catholic doctrine of
Christianisme, and the knowledge of most weighty things spoken of before, our
Preachers do use in stead of a sure rule, method, and table of all those things
which they teach, and of all their sermons and writings: and this they do
faithfully care for, and bestow all their labor therein, that this whole
ordinary doctrine of the principles of true faith, and Christian godliness,
and the doctrine of the foundation, may be imprinted in the bottom of the
hearts of Christians, and thoroughly ingrafted in the minds and life of the
hearers, and that after this manner. First that all may know, that they are
bound to yield an inward and outward obedience to the law: and therefore they
must endeavor to perform and fulfill the commandments of God, both in their
heart, seeing that the law is spiritual, and in their deeds, by loving God
above all things, and their neighbor as themselves.

Secondly, they must well learn and bear in mind, and be able readily to
rehearse, and to believe from the heart, to keep, and to profess with the
mouth, the chief points of the Catholic, Christian, and Apostolic Creed, and
to testify a Christian pictie by actions, or manners, and a life which may
beseem it. Therefore they do also in their sermons, by expounding it, lay open
the true and sound meaning, and every mystery, which is necessary to eternal
salvation, and is comprehended in the articles of faith, and in every part
thereof, and confirm it by testimonies taken out of the holy Scriptures, and
by these holy Scriptures, they do either more largely or briefly declare,
expound, and lay open the meaning, and the mysteries. And in all these things
they do so behave themselves, that concerning the order which the Apostles
brought in and propounded, they labor to instruct not only those which be of
riper years, who being come to lawful age, are able presently to understand;
but also to teach little children, that they being exercised, even from their
childhood, in the chief points of the covenant of God, may be taught to
understand the true worship of God. For this cause, there be both peculiar
Ecclesiastical assemblies with children, which do serve for the exercise of
catechizing: and also the parents, and those that are requested of the parents,
and used for witnesses (who are called godfathers, and godmothers) at Baptism,
are put in mind of the duty, and faith, which they owe, that they also may
faithfully instruct their beloved children, train them up in the discipline of
the Lord, and from the bottom of their hearts, Ephesians. 6. Col. 3.
pray unto God for these, and all other the children of the faithful of
Christ. But chiefly they which are newly instructed, before they be lawfully
admitted to the Supper of the Lord, are diligently taught the Christian
Catechism, and the principles of true religion, and by this means they are
furthered toward the obtaining of saving repentance, virtue, and the efficacy
of faith. Afterward, all the rest are also instructed, that all together being
lightened with the knowledge of God, and of the Saints, every man may walk, with
all honesty and godliness, in his place, and in that order, whereunto he is
called of God, and may by this means sanctify the name of God, and adorn the
true doctrine.

Thirdly, in the Catechism these things are taught, to invocate one true God
in a sure confidence, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to pray, and that
not for themselves only, and their private affairs, but also for the whole
Christian Church, in all countries, for the Ministers of the Church, and also
for the civil Magistrate, who is ordained of God, and chiefly for the
Emperors and your Princely Majesty, for his most noble children, and whole
posterity, for his counselors, and all those that be subject to his
government, praying, that it would please our gracious God to grant and to give
unto your Princely and his Royal Majesty, a long life, heaped with all good
things, and a happy government, and also a benign, gentle, and fatherly mind
and affection of heart toward all those that behave themselves uprightly, are
well affected, do humbly obey, do show themselves faithful and loving
subjects, and those that do in truth worship God the Father, and his Son
Jesus Christ. And, to be brief, we teach, that prayers may be made faithfully
for all men, for 1 Timothy 2.
our friends and enemies, as the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ and his
Apostles does command us, and as examples do show, that the very first and
holy Church did. For which cause, we are also instant with the people, that
they would diligently and in great numbers frequent the holy assemblies, and
there be stirred up, out of this word of God, to make earnest and reverent
prayers.

Now whatsoever is contrary to this Catholic and Christian kind of
Catechizing, all that we do forsake and reject, and it is strongly confuted by
sure reasons, and such as do lean unto the foundations of the holy Scripture,
so far forth as God does give us grace hereunto, and the people is admonished
to take heed of such.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE believe because Jesus Christ is only Advocate given Artic. 24.
unto us, who also commands us to come boldly unto the Father in his name,
that it is not lawful for us to make our prayers in any other form, but in
that which God has set us down in his word: and that whatsoever men have
forged of the intercession of Saints departed, is nothing but the deceits and
slights of Satan, that he might withdraw men from the right manner of praying.

These things were also set down in the 2. Section but for an other purpose and
the other part of this Article is to be found in the 16. Section.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
WE make our prayers in that tongue, which all our people, Artic. 16.
as meet is, may understand, to the end they may (as Saint Paul counsels us)
take common commodity by common prayer: even as all the holy Fathers, and
Catholic Bishops, both in the old and new Testament, did use to pray
themselves, and taught the people to pray too: lest, as Saint Augustine says,
Like Parets, and Owls we should seem to speak that we understand not.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY.
Article 14. which is entitled, of the Supper.
GOd will have the ministry of the Gospel to be public, he will not have
the voice of the Gospel to be shut up in corners only, but he will have it to
be heard, he will have him self to be known and invocated of all mankind.
Therefore he would that there should be public and well ordered meetings, and
in these he will have the voice of the Gospel to found, there he will be
invocated, and praised. Also he will that these meetings, should be witnesses
of the confession and severing of the Church of God from the sects and opinions
of other nations. John assembled his flock at Ephesus, and taught the Gospel:
and by the use of the Sacraments, the whole company did declare, that they
embraced this doctrine, and did invocate this God, who delivered the Gospel,
and that they were separated from the worshippers of Diana, Jupiter, and other
Idols. For God will be seen, and have his Church heard in the world, and have
it distinguished by many public signs from other nations. So no doubt the
first Fathers, Adam, Seth, Enoch, Noe, Sem, Abraham, had their meetings: and
afterward the civil government of Israel had many rites, that their separation
from the Gentiles might be more evident. Also God gave a peculiar promise to
his congregation, Matthew. 18. Wheresoever two or three be gathered together in
my name, I will be in the midst of them. Also, Whatsoever they agreeing
together, shall desire, it shall be done to them. And in the 149. Psalm, His
praise is in the Church of the Saints. And the promises, wherein God does
affirm that he will preserve his Church, are so much the sweeter, because we
know that he does preserve, and restore the public ministry in well ordered
meetings: as also in the very words of the Supper this promise is included,
where he commands, that The death of the Lord should be showed forth, and
this Supper distributed, till he come, etc.

Hitherto also pertains the last part of the 12. Article of this Confession,
where these things are found, touching the revenues of Monastories.
IN many places the Churches want Pastors, or else Pastors want living. These
men ought chiefly to be relieved, out of the revenues of rich Monasteries: then
the studies of those which be poor must thereby be furthered, and in some
places Schools may be erected, especially seeing that it is necessary that the
Church should discharge the expenses of many poor, that they might learn,
that so out of that number Pastors and Ministers may be chosen, to teach the
Churches. Also hospitals are thence to be relieved, wherein it is necessary,
that the poor, which have been sick a long time, should be nourished. A great
part of the revenues in these countries is by the goodness of God transferred
to such uses, which are indeed godly, to wit, to nourish Pastors, the poor,
and Scholars, to erect Schools, and to relieve Hospitals: that which
remains is bestowed in every Monastery upon the guiding and ordering of
things pertaining to their houses: and to think that this is not very
sumptuous, it is but foolishness. As for the richer Abbots in these days,
upon what uses they lavish out the revenues, the examples of many do declare,
whom we could name, who do both hate learning, Religion, and virtue, and do
waste these alms ravenously, and either set no Pastors over their Churches,
or if they have any, they suffer them to starve.

Out of the Confession of WIETEMBERGE.
Hitherto pertains first the 11. Article, Of this Confession.
WE think that it is most profitable, that children and young men be examined
in the Catechism by the Pastors of their Church, and that they be commended,
if they be godly and well instructed, and that they be amended, if they be ill
instructed. The rest is to be seen in the 14. Sect. where the confirmation
used in Papisticall Baptism is handled.

Hitherto also pertains the 16 Art. ss. 2. Of Prayer.
BY Prayer God is invocated, and true invocation is a work of faith, and
cannot be done without faith. Now faith does behold Christ, and rely upon his
merits only. Wherefore, except thou shall apply unto thy self the merit of
Christ by faith, prayer will stand thee in no stead before God. Now prayer is
necessarily required for this purpose, that by a due consideration of the
promises of God, faith may be stirred up and kindled in us. Therefore it is not
absurdly said, that sins are clean taken away by prayer: yet must it not so be
understood, as though the very work of prayer, of it own merit, were a
satisfaction for sins before God; but that by prayer faith is stirred up and
kindled in us, by which faith we are made partakers of the merit of Christ, and
have our sins forgiven us, only for Christ his sake. For before that we do
by prayer invocate God, it shall be necessary, to have the merit of Christ
applied to us, and received by faith. Therefore it cannot be, that prayer
should be such a work, as that for the merit thereof we might obtain
remission of our sins before God. Psalm 108. Let his prayer be turned into
sin. But it is not possible that prayer should be turned into sin, if of it
self it were so worthy a work, as that sin thereby should be purged, Isa.
1. When you shall stretch out your hands, I will turn my eyes from you: and
when you shall multiply your prayers, I will not hear you. But God would not
turn away his eyes from prayer, if of it own worthiness it were a
satisfaction for our sins. Augustine upon the 108. Psalm. says: That prayer
which is not made through Christ, does not only not take away sin, but also
it self is made sin. Bernard de Quadrages. Ser. 5. says: But some
peradventure do seek eternal life, not in humility, but as it were in
confidence of their own merits. Neither do I say this, let grace received give
a man confidence to pray: but no man ought to put his confidence in his prayer,
as though for his prayer he should obtain that which he desires. The gifts
which are promised do only give this unto us, that we may hope to obtain even
greater things, of that mercy which gives these. Therefore let that prayer,
which is made for temporal things, be restrained in these wants only: also
let that prayer, which is made for the virtues of the soul, be free from all
filthy, and unclean behavior: and let that prayer, which is made for life
eternal, be occupied about the only good pleasure of God, and that in all
humility, presuming, as is requisite, of the only mercy of God.

Of Alms. CHAP. 18.
WE do diligently commend alms, and exhort the Church, that every man help
his neighbor, by every duty that he may, and testify his love. But whereas
it is said in a certain place, That alms do take away sin, as water does
quench fire, we must understand it according to the analogy of faith. For what
need was there, to the taking away of our sins, of Christ his passion and
death, if sins might be taken away by the merit of alms? And what use were
there of the ministry of the Gospel, if alms were appointed of God for an
instrument, whereby the death of Christ might be applied to us? Therefore, that
Christ his honor may not be violated, and the ministry of the Gospel may
retain it lawful use, we teach, that alms does thus take away sin, not
that of it self it is a worthy work, whereby sin may either be purged, or
the merit of Christ applied, but that it is a work and fruit of charity
toward our neighbor, by which work we do testify our faith and obedience,
which we owe unto God. Now where faith is, there Christ alone is acknowledged
to be the purger of sins. Therefore, seeing that alms does testify, after
their manner, that Christ does dwell in the godly, it does also testify that
they have remission of sins. For except alms be a work of charity, which
may bear witness to faith in Christ, it is so far from signifying, that man
has remission of sins through Christ, that it does even stink in the sight of
God. If I shall distribute (says Paul) all my substance, that it may be meat
for the poor, and shall not have love, it profits me nothing. Therefore we
teach, that good works must be done necessarily, that God is to be invocated,
and that alms is to be given, that we may testify our faith and love, and
obey the calling of God. But in true repentance, we teach, that we obtain
remission of sins, only for the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ his sake,
through faith, according to that which Peter says, To him do all the Prophets
bear witness, that through his name, every one that believes in him does
receive remission of sins.

Of Canonical hours. CHAP. 27.
AVgustine writes in a certain place, that Ambrose the Bishop of Millane, did
ordain, that the assemblies of the Church should sing Psalms, whereby they
might mutually comfort themselves, whilst they looked for adversity, and
stir up themselves to bear the cross: lest the people, says he, should
pine away with the irksomeness of mourning. This singing, because it was used
in a tongue commonly known, it had both a godly use, and deserved great praise.
And by the Canonical decree it appears, that those hours, which they call
Canonical, were an appointment of certain times, wherein the whole holy
Scripture should be publicly overrun every year, as in the schools there be
certain hours appointed for interpreting of authors. Such a distribution of
hours was peradventure not unprofitable for that time, and in it self it is
not a thing to be condemned. But to appoint a special kind of priests, to
chaunt but those Canonical hours, and to sing them in a strange tongue, which
commonly is not known to the Church, or is not our country tongue, and that in
some place in the night, and in the day time without any intermission, new
singers very often taking one another course, and to make hereof a worship,
not to this end, that by patience, and the comfort of the Scripture we might
have hope, as Paul says, but that by the merit of this work a man might
mitigate the wrath of God, and purge the sins of men before God; this is it
that is contrary to the meaning of that Church, which is indeed Catholic. 1
Cor. 14. When ye come together, according as every one of you has a Psalm, or
has doctrine, or has a tongue, or has revelation, or has interpretation,
let all things be done unto edifying. Hierome upon the Epist. to the Ephesians.
Chap. 5. says, Singing and making melody to the Lord in your hearts. Let young
men hear these things, let them hear, whose office it is to sing in the
Church, that we must sing to God, not with the voice, but with the heart, and
that the threat and the jaws are not to be greased with some sweet liquor, as
they use to do, that play in Tragedies, etc.

Now that which was spoken, touching the use of a tongue that is commonly
known, it must be understood not, only of the singing of Psalms, but also of
all the parts of Ecclesiastical ministry. For as Sermons and prayers are to
be made, in a well known tongue to the Church, so also must the Sacraments be
dispensed in a speech that is known. For, although it be lawful at some time
to use a strange tongue, by reason of the learned, yet the consent of the
Catholic Church does require this, that the necessary ministeries of the
Church be executed in our country speech, 1 Cor. 14. I had rather in the
Church to speak five words with my understanding, that I may also instruct
others, then ten thousand words in a strange tongue. Innocentius the third, De
offi. Iud. Ord. C. Quoniam, says: Because that in many parts within one City
and Diocese, there be people of diverse languages mingled together, having
under one faith diverse rites and customs, we do straightly command, that the
Bishops of such Cities, or Diocesses, do provide fit men, who, according to
the diversity of ceremonies, and language, may execute among them the divine
duties, and minister the Ecclesiastical Sacraments, instructing them both by
the word, and by their example Therefore they are to be said to do godly and
Catholikely, who do so appoint the dispensation of the Sacraments, the singing
of Psalms, and the reading of holy Scripture, that the Church may understand
that which is said, read, or sung, and the spirit may receive fruit, thereby to
comfort the mind, and to confirm the faith, and to stir up love.

Out of the Confession of SVEVELAND. Of the singing and prayers of
Ecclesiastical men. CHAP. 21.
ANd for that cause, to wit, that men should not wink at that offending of
God, which might be committed under a color of his service, then which nothing
can offend him more grievously, our Ministers have condemned the most of those
things, which were used in the singings and prayers of Ecclesiastical men. For
it is too too manifest that these have degenerated from the first appointment
and use of the Fathers. For no man, which understands the writings of the
ancient Fathers, is ignorant of this, that it was a custom among them, wisely
to rehearse, also to expound a few Psalms with some Chapter of the Scripture,
whereas now adays many Psalms are chaunted, for the most part without
understanding, and of the reading of the Scripture, there be only the
beginnings of Chapters left unto us, and innumerable things are taken up one
after another, which serve rather for superstition, then for godliness.
Therefore our Ministers did first of all detest this, that many things, which
were contrary to the Scriptures, are mingled with holy prayers and songs: as
that those things are attributed to Saints, which are proper to Christ alone;
namely to free us from sin, and other discommodities, and not so much to
obtain, as to give us the favor of God, and all kind of good things.
Secondly, because they are increased so infinitely, that they cannot be sung,
or rehearsed with an attentive mind. Now it is nothing but a mocking of God,
whatsoever we do in his service without understanding. Lastly, because that
these things also were made meritorious works, and to be sold for no small
price, that we may say nothing hereof, that against the express commandment
of the holy Ghost, all things are there said and sung in that tongue which not
only the people does not understand, but many times also, not they themselves,
which do live of those kinds of singing and prayers.

THE SIXTEENTH SECTION. OF HOLY DAYS, FASTS, AND THE CHOICE OF MEATS, AND OF
THE VISITATION of the sick, and the care that is to be had for the dead.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA.
Of Holidaies, Fasts, and choice of meats. CHAP. 24.
ALthough Religion be not tied unto time, yet can it not be planted and
exercised, without a due dividing and allotting out of time unto it. Every
Church therefore does choose unto it self a certain time, for public
prayers, and for preaching of the Gospel, and for the celebration of the
Sacraments: and it is not lawful for every one to over throw this appointment
of the Church at his own pleasure. For except some due time and leisure were
allotted to the outward exercise of religion, out of doubt men would be quite
drawn from it by their own affairs. In regard hereof we see that in the
ancient Churches, there were not only certain set hours in the week
appointed for meetings, but that also even the Lords day, ever since the
Apostles time, was consecrated to the religious exercises, and unto a holy
rest, which also is now very well observed of our Churches, for the worship of
God, and increase of charity. Yet herein we give no place unto the Jewish
observation of the day, or to any superstitions. For we do not account one day
to be holier then another, nor think that resting of it self is liked of God.
Besides we doc celebrate and keep the Lords day, and not the Sabbath, and that
with a free observation.

Moreover, if the Churches do religiously celebrate the memory of the Lords
nativitie, circumcision, passion and resurrection, and of his ascension into
heaven, and sending the holy Ghost upon his Disciples, according to Christian
liberty, we do very well allow of it. But as for festival days ordained to
men, or the Saints departed, we cannot allow of them. For indeed such feasts,
must be referred to the first Table of the Law, and belong peculiarly unto God.
To conclude, these festival days which are appointed to Saints, and abrogated
of us, have in them many gross things, unprofitable, and not to be tolerated.
In the mean time we confess, that the remembrance of Saints, in due time and
place, may be to good use and profit commended unto the people in Sermons, and
the holy examples of holy men set before their eyes, to be imitated of all.

Now, the more sharply that the Church of Christ does accuse surfeiting,
drunkenness, all kind of lusts and intemperancie, so much the more earnestly
it does commend unto us Christian fasting. For fasting is nothing else but an
abstaining and temperancie of the godly, and a watching and chastising of our
flesh, taken up for the present necessity, whereby we are humbled before God,
and withdraw from the flesh those things, whereby it is cherished, to the end
it may the more willingly and easily obey the spirit. Wherefore they do not
fast at all, that have no regard of those things, but do imagine that they
fast, if they stuff their bellies on a day, and for a set or prescribed time
do abstain from certain meats, thinking that by this very work wrought they
shall please God, and do a good work. Fasting is a help of the prayers of
the Saints, and of all virtues. But the Fasts, wherein the Jews fasted from
meat, and not from wickedness, pleased God nothing at all, as we may see in
the book of the Prophets.

Now fasting is either public or private. In old time they celebrated public
fasts in troublesome times, and in the affliction of the Church. Wherein they
abstained altogether from meat unto the evening, and bestowed all that time in
holy prayers, the worship of God, and repentance. These differed little from
mournings, and lamentations, and of these there is often mention made in the
Prophets, and especially in the second Chapter of Joel. Such a fast should be
kept at this day, when the Church is in distress. Private fasts are used of
every one of us, according as every one feels the spirit weakened in him. For
so far forth he withdraws that which might cherish and strengthen the
flesh. All fasts ought to proceed from a free and willing spirit, and such a
one as is truly humbled, and not framed to win applause and liking of men, much
less to the end that a man might merit righteousness by them. But let every
one fast to this end, that he may deprive the flesh of that which would cherish
it, and that he may the more zealously serve God.

The fast of Lent has testimony of antiquity, but none out of the Apostles
writings: and therefore ought not nor cannot be imposed on the faithful. It is
certain that in old time there were diverse manners and uses of this fast,
whereupon Ireneus, a most ancient Writer, says, Some think that this fast
should be observed one day only, others two days, but others, more, and some
forty days. Which variety of keeping this fast began not now in our times,
but long before us, by those, as I suppose, which not simply holding that,
which was delivered them from the beginning, fell shortly a^fter into another
custom, either through negligence, or ignorance. Moreover, Socrates, the
Writer of the History, says, Because no ancient record is found, concerning
this matter, I think the Apostles left this to every man's own judgment, that
every one might work that which is good, without fear, or constraint.

Now as concerning the choice of meats, we suppose that in fasting, all that
should be taken from the flesh, whereby it is made more lusty and untamed, and
wherein it does most immoderately delight, whereby the flesh is most of all
pampered, whether they be fish, spices, drinties, or excellent wines. Otherwise
we know that all the creatures of God were for the use and service of men. All
things which God made are good, and are to be used in the fear Genesis 2.
of God, and due moderation, without putting any difference between them. For
the Apostle says, To the pure, all things are Tit. 1.
pure. And also, whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat ye, and ask 2 Cor.
11.
no question, for conscience sake. The same Apostle calls the Doctrine of
those which teach to abstain from meats, The doctrine 1 Timothy 4.
of Devils. His reasons be these, that God created meats to be received of the
faithful and such as know the truth, with thankesgiving: because that
whatsoever God has created, it is good, and is not to be refused, if it be
received with giving of thanks. The same Apostle to the Colossians reproves
those, which by an over much abstinence will get unto themselves an opinion of
holiness. Therefore we do altogether mislike the Tatians, and the Encratites,
and all the disciples of Eustathius, against whom the Council of Gangrya was
assembled.

Also out of the 25. Chapter toward the end. Of comforting and visiting the
sick.
SEeing that men do never lie open to more grievous temptations, then when
they are exercised with infirmities, or else are sick and brought low with
diseases, it behooveth the Pastors of the Churches, to be never more vigilant
and careful for the safety of the flock, then in such diseases and
infirmities. Therefore let them visit the sick betimes, and let them be
quickly sent for of the sick, if the matter shall so require. Let them comfort
and confirm them in the true faith. Finally, let them strengthen them against
the dangerous suggestions of Satan: In like manner let them pray with the sick
person at home in his house, and if need be, let them make prayers for the
sick, in the public meeting. And let them be careful, that they may have a
more happy passage out of this life. As for popish visiting with the extreme
unction, we have said before, that we do not like of it, because it has many
absurd things in it, and such as be not approved by the Canonical Scriptures.

Of the burial of the faithful, and of the care which is to be had for such
as are dead, of purgatory, and the appearing of spirits.
THe Scripture wills that the bodies of the faithful, as being temples of
the holy Ghost, which we truly believe shall rise again at the last Day,
should be honestly without any superstition committed to the earth, and besides
that we should make honorable mention of them which have godlily died in the
Lord, and perform all duties of love to such as they leave behind them, as
their widows and fatherless children. Other care to be taken for the dead, we
teach none. Therefore we do greatly mislike the Cynikes, who neglected the
bodies of the dead, or did very carelessly and disdainfully cast them into the
earth, never spoke so much as a good word of the dead, nor any whit regarded
those whom they left behind them. Again, we condemn those which are too much
and preposterously officious toward the dead, who like Ethnikes do greatly
lament and bewail their dead (we do not discommend that moderate mourning,
which the Apostle does allow, 1 Thessalonians. 4. but judge it an unnatural thing, to
be touched with no sorrow) and do sacrifice for the dead, and mumble certain
prayers, not without their penny for their pains, thinking by these their
duties, to deliver these their friends from torments, wherein they being
wrapped by death, they suppose they may be rid out of them again by such
lamentable songs. For we believe, that the faithful, after the bodily death,
do go directly unto Christ, and therefore do not stand in need of the help
or prayers for the dead, or any other such duty of them which are alive. In
like manner we believe, that the unbeleevers be cast headlong directly into
hell, from whence there is no return opened to the wicked, by any duties of
those which live.

But as concerning that which some teach concerning the fire of Purgatory, it
is flat contrary to the Christian faith, ( I believe the remission of sins, and
life everlasting) and to the absolute purgation of sins made by Christ: and to
these sayings of Christ our Lord: Verily, verily I say unto you, he that
hears my word, and John 5.
believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come unto
condemnation: but has passed from death unto life. Again, He that is washed,
needs not save to wash his feet, but is Ioh. 13.
clean every whit, and ye are clean. Now that which is recorded of the
spirits or souls of the dead, sometime appearing to them that are alive, and
craving certain duties of them, whereby they may be set free, we count those
apparitions among the delusions, crafts and deceits of the devil, who as he
can transform himself into an Angel of light, so he labors tooth and nail
either to overthrow the true faith, or else to call it into doubt. The Lord in
the Old Testament forbad to enquire Deuteronomy. 18.
the truth of the dead, and to have any thing to do with spirits. And to the
glutton, being bound in torments, as the truth of the Gospel does declare, is
denied any return to his brethren. The Lord by his word pronouncing and
saying. They have Moses Luke 16.
and the Prophets, let them hear them: if they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they believe, if one shall arise from the dead.

Out of the Confession of BASIL.
THe Church of Christ does herein labor all that she can, to Artic 5.
keep the bonds of peace and love in unity. Therefore she does by no means
communicate with sects, and the rules of orders, devised to make a difference
of days, meats, apparel, and ceremonies.

No man can prohibit that, which Christ himself has not prohibited. Art. 10
ss. 1. and 2.
For this cause we know that auricular confession, holy days dedicated to
Saints, and such like things, had their beginning of men, and were not
commanded of God, as on the other side we know, that the marriage of Ministers
was not forbidden.

And again, No man can forbid those things which God has Art. 10. ss. 4. etc.
permitted: therefore we think, that it is not by any means forbidden to
receive meats with thanksgiving.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA.
Hitherto pertain, first, those things which are to be found in the 15. Chap.
about the midst, concerning the keeping of holy days and fasts.
IN like sort many of the ancient ceremonies, and such as were brought in by
custom, so near as may be, are retained among us even at this day: Look the
1. observation upon this confession.
of this sort be certain days appointed for feasts and holy days, the
mattens, that is, morning Sermons, evening assemblies, the Lords days, which
be holy days, and special feasts days added thereunto, which are consecrated
to the celebrating of the works of Christ, as to his Nativitie, his Passion,
Resurrection, etc. Look the 1. observation.
and such as be dedicated to the remembrance of holy men, as of the Virgin
Mary, of the Apostles, and of other Saints, and chiefly of those Saints, of
whom there is mention in the holy Scriptures: and all these things be done of
us, that the word of God may be taught, that God may be worshipped and served,
and that he may be glorified among us.

That which follows, and is to be referred, to this place, is taken out of
the 17. Chap.
IN like sort also our Ministers (as it is meet for Christian men to do) to
the glory and praise of God, do celebrate holy days consecrated to the
Virgin, and the remembrance of her, Look the 2. observation upon this
confession, and the whole 2. Sect. wherein is entreated of the lawful honor
of Saints.
do make and sing godly and Christian songs of her, and with pleasure both
diligently, and that they may confirm themselves, rehearse those great things
wherewith God has adorned her above all other women, and they all rejoice one
with another, and show themselves most thankful for the salvation which is
purchased to mankind, and with all Christian people they confess and
profess, that she is happy, and they praise God for all these things: and so
much as lies in them, they do faithfully follow and imitate the holy life and
good manners of that Virgin, and they do indeed execute that, which she
commands to them that ministered in the Marriage at Cana, and do always
desire to be in heaven with her. And all these things they do according to the
meaning of the holy Scriptures.

And a little after.
And thus do we teach that the Saints Look the 1. observation.
are truly worshipped, when the people on certain days, at a time appointed,
do come together to the service of God, and do call to mind and meditate upon
the benefits of God, which he has bestowed upon holy men, and through them
upon his Church, and there withal does admonish it self, concerning their
calling, or place which they held, their doctrine, faith, life, and exercises
of godliness, and the last end of their life, to the end that it may be as it
were built up in the same truth by the word of God, and may praise God, and
give him thanks for those men, and in their name, and may sing Look the 2.
observation.
profitable songs, and such as are free from superstition, and may raise and
stir up themselves to the like obedience, imitation of their faith, works,
and deeds, godliness, holiness, and honesty: and that they may call upon
God, that he would vouchsafe to give unto them, to enjoy their company and
fellowship, as well here in the time of grace, as hereafter in eternal glory.
All which things are in few words comprehended in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
where it is said. Remember them which have the Heb. 13.
over sight over you, which have declared unto you the word of God: whose faith
follow, considering what has been the end of their conversation.

Of Fasting. CHAP. 18.
TOuching true and Christian fasting, we teach, that it is an outward work of
faith, comprehending in it worship, which is done by exercising the body to
abstinencie, joining there withal Matthew 6.
prayers, and giving of alms, and that it is due to God alone: and that among
Christians, according as their strength will suffer, and their affairs and
business desire and permit, at what time soever they use it, in any society
either general, or particular, it must be done without hypocrisy or
superstition, as the holy Scriptures do witness: and Paul among other things,
does thus write of it, Let us approve our selves as the Ministers of God, by 2
Cor. 6. Luke 5. 1 Cor. 7.
fasting, etc. And Christ says, Then they shall fast. And again, Paul says in
another place, That ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer. Now fasting
does not consist in the choice of meat, which a man uses, but in the moderate
use of meat, and in exercising, chastising, and bringing under the unruly flesh
before God: and chiefly the matter consists in the spirit and in the heart,
to wit, how, for what cause, with what intent and purpose a man does fast, and
how, and by what mean the godly may exercise a wholesome and acceptable fast
unto God: and on the other side, to know when they should not fast, but rather
take heed that they do not fast, it is expressed in the Prophet, and
manifestly taught Isa. 56. Matthew. 6.
of Christ himself.

What is to be thought of the choice and difference of meats, every man ought
to learn out of the doctrine of Christ, that by this mean what doubt soever
is in this point, it may be taken away, and decided, The^ Christ called the
multitude unto him, Matthew. 15.
and said: Hear, and understand. That which goes into the mouth Mark. 7.
defiles not the man, but that which comes out of the mouth, that defiles
the man, that is, makes him guilty. Also, out of the doctrine of the Apostle,
whose words are thus: I am persuaded Romans 14.
through the Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean of it self, but unto him,
that judges any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean. But if thy
brother be grieved for the meat, now walk not thou charitably: Destroy not
him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. For the kingdom of God is not meat
nor drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.
Christians indeed are not tied to any law in this case, yet so, that they be
not an offense to the weaker sort: therefore the Apostle adds: All things
indeed 1 Cor. 8.
are pure, but it is evil for the man which eats with offense: And in
another place he writes: Meat does not make men acceptable to God: for neither
if we eat, have we the more; neither if we eat not, have we the less.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
TO conclude, we think that Purgatory is a feigned thing, Artic. 24.
coming out of the same shop, whence also Monastical Vows, Pilgrimages, the
forbidding of marriage, the use of meats, a ceremonial observation of certain
days; auricular confession, indulgences, and such like things have proceeded,
by which things certain men have thought that they do deserve favor, and
salvation. But we do not only reject all those things, for a false opinion of
merit added thereunto, but also because they are inventions of men, and a yoke
laid upon the consciences of men, by men's authority.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
ANd as for their brags, they are wont to make of their Purgatoris, Artic. 14.
though we know, it is not a thing so very late risen amongst them, yet is it
no better then a blockish, and an old wives devise. Augustine indeed sometime
says, there is such a certain place; sometime he denies not, but there may
be such a one, sometime he doubts: sometime again he utterly denies, that
there is any at all, and thinks, that men are therein deceived by a certain
natural good will, they bear their friends departed. But yet of this one
error has there grown up such a harvest of those Massemongers, that the
Masses being sold abroad commonly in every corner the Temples of God became
shops, to get money: and seelyfouls were borne in hand, that nothing was more
necessary to be bought. In deed there was nothing more gainful for these men
to sell.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
Of abuses that be taken away. Of putting difference between meats, and such
like Popish traditions.
IN this corporal life, we have need of traditions, that is, of the Artic. 4.
distinctions of times and places, that all things may be done orderly in the
Church, as Paul wills: Let all things be done in order, and so as is meet and
decent. Therefore the Church has her traditions, that is, she appoints at
what times, and where, the Church shall come together. For this civil end it
is lawful to make traditions. But men that are not acquainted with the
doctrine of Christ, are not content with this end, but they join superstitious
opinions unto traditions, and by superstition multiply traditions out of
measure. Of this there has been complaint made in the Church not only by late
Writers, as Gerson, and others, but also Saint Augustine. Wherefore it is
needful to admonish the people, what to think of the traditions which are
brought into the Church by man's authority. For it is not without cause, that
Christ and Paul do so often speak of traditions, and admonish the Church to
judge wisely of traditions. There was a common opinion, not of the common sort
alone, but also of the Teachers in the Church, that the difference of meats and
such like works, which the Eccl^siasticall traditions do command, are services
of God, which deserve remission of sins: Also that such kinds of worship,
are Christian righteousness, and as necessary, as the Leviticall ceremonies in
the Old Testament ever were; and that they cannot be omitted without sin, no
not then, when they might be omitted without danger of giving offense. These
persuasions have brought forth many discommodities. First the doctrine of the
Gospel is hereby obscured, which teaches, that sins are forgiven freely by
Christ. This benefit of Christ is transferred unto the work of man. And by
reason of this opinion, traditions were especially increased, because that
these works were supposed to deserve remission of sins, to be satisfactions,
and to be Christian righteousness. Moreover, for this cause especially does
Saint Paul so often, and so earnestly give us warning, to beware of traditions,
lest that Christ's benefit should be transferred to traditions, lest the glory
of Christ should be obscured, lest that true and found comfort should be
withheld from men's consciences, and in a word, lest that faith, that is, trust
of the mercy of Christ, should be quite smothered. These dangers Saint Paul
would have avoided. For it is greatly needful that the pure doctrine of the
benefit of Christ, of the righteousness of faith, and of the comfort of
consciences, should be continued in the Church.

Secondly, these traditions have obscured the Commandments of God: for this
kind of schooling was thought to be spiritual, and the righteousness of a
Christian man. Yea, the traditions of men were set aloft above the
commandments of God. All Christianity was placed in the observation of
certain festival days, rites, fasts, and form of apparel. These beggarly
rudiments carried goodly titles, namely, that they were the spiritual life,
and the perfection of a Christian. In the mean while, the commandments of God
touching every calling were of small estimation: that the Father brought up his
children, that the Mother bare them, that the Prince governed the
Commonwealth, these works were little set by. They were not taken to be any
service of God. The minds of many stood in a continual mamering, whether
marriage, magistracy, and such like functions of a civil life, did please God
or no. And this doubtfulnesse did trouble many very much, Many forsaking their
callings, leaving the Commonwealth, did shut up themselves in Monasteries,
that they might seek that kind of life, which they thought did more please
God, yea which they supposed, to merit remission of sins.

Thirdly, the opinion of necessity did much vex and disquiet the consciences.
Traditions were thought necessary. And yet no man, though never so diligent,
did ever observe them all, especially for that the number of them was infinite.
Gerson writes, That many fell into desperation, some murdered themselves,
because they perceived well, that they could not observe the traditions. And
all this while they never heard one comfortable word of grace and of the
righteousness of faith.

We see that the Summists and Divines gather together the All this matter of
the ceremonies and traditions in general does properly belong to the 17.
Section next following: but for as much as here is entreated of days, meats,
and fasts, it was requisite that it should be brought in this Section because
the generals cannot well be severed from particulars.
traditions, and seek out qualifications of them, for the unburdening of men's
consciences: but even they cannot satisfy themselves, nor wind themselves
out: and sometimes also their very interpretations themselves do snare men's
consciences. The Schools also and Pulpits were so busied in numbering up the
traditions, that they had no leisure to handle the Scripture, or to search out
more profitable doctrine of faith, of the Cross, of Hope, of the excellency
of civil affairs, or of the comfort of men's consciences in sore tentations.
Wherefore many good men have often complained, that they were hindered by these
contentions about traditions, that they could not be occupied in some better
kind of doctrine. When as therefore such superstitious opinions did cleave
fast unto the traditions, it was necessary to admonish the Churches, what they
were to judge of traditions, to free godly minds from error, to cure wounded
consciences, and to set out the benefit of Christ. We do not go about to
weaken the authority of Ecclesiastical power, we detract nothing from the
Look the 3 and 4 Observe. upon this confession. in the 11. Sect.
dignity of Bishops: we do not disturb the good order of the Church.
Traditions rightly taken, are better liked: but we reprove those Jewish
opinions only.

Thus therefore we teach, touching ceremonies brought into the Church by man's
authority. First, touching traditions, which are opposed to the commandment
of God, or cannot be kept without sin, the Apostles rule is to be followed:
We must obey God rather then men. Of this sort is the tradition of single life.
Secondly, touching other ceremonies, which are in their own nature things
indifferent, as Fasts, Festival days, difference of apparel, and the like,
we must know that such observations do neither merit remission of sins,
neither yet are they the righteousness or perfection of a Christian, but that
they are things indifferent, which where is no danger of giving offense, may
well be omitted.

This judgment of ours has these evident and clear testimonies in the
Gospel, to the end that it may admonish the Church, that the Gospel be not
oppressed and obscured by superstitious opinions. Romans 14. The kingdom of God
is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.
Here Paul teaches plainly, that a Christians righteousness is the spiritual
motions of the heart, and not the outward observation of meats and days, etc.
Coloss. 2. Let no man judge you in meat, drink, or a part of a holyday. He
forbids that their consciences should be judged, that is, that their
consciences should be condemned in the use of such things: but will have them
counted altogether indifferent things, and such as pertain not to the
righteousness of the Gospel. Then there follows a long and a weighty
speech, both of the rites of Moses, and of the ceremonies appointed by the
authority of man. For Paul speaks namely of both kinds, denying them to be
the righteousness of a Christian, and forbidding to burden the consciences
with such traditions. If ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
world: why, as though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened with traditions?
Touch not, taste not, handle not. Matt. 15. All that enters into the mouth,
defiles not the man, And in that place Christ excuses his Disciples, that had
broken a tradition, that was in use among them, and he adds a notable saying,
They worship me in vain with the commandments of men. He denies man's
precepts to be true duties availeable unto righteousness before God. Wherefore
they are not the righteousness of a Christian, nor yet necessary duties.

Yet for all that, it is apparent, how wonderfully the services invented by man
have multiplied and increased in the Church unto this day. The Monks did daily
heap up ceremonies both with new superstitions, and also with new ways to
bring in money. And these trifles were thought to be the chiefest worship of
God, and the greatest godliness, whereas Christ does by a most grave and
weighty Oracle forbid, that such ceremonies should be accounted for services
of God. For he does not forbid the appointing of traditions unto a civil end
and use, that is, for good orders sake, but he denies that any such be any
worship of God, in saying, In vain do they worship me. And he teaches that
true worships be works commanded of God, as fear, faith, love, patience,
chastity, walking in ones calling, doing of ones duty, etc. Acts 15. Peter
says, Why do ye tempt God, laying a yoke on the Disciples neck, which
neither we, nor our Fathers were able to bear? but by the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ we believe to be saved, as do also they. Here Peter shows, that
remission of sins and salvation comes to us by Christ and not by the rites
of Moses, or the law; and does also give us to understand, that such do
grievously sin, which do burden men's consciences with such ordinances. For
it is no slight reproof, when he says, Why tempt ye God? And, 1 Timothy 4. He
terms the forbidding of of meats, marriages, and such like traditions,
doctrines of Devils. But why does he use such a sharp speech? His meaning was
not that there should be no ordinances at all, or that no differences of places
and times should be observed: but then he accounts them to be doctrines of
Devils, when as the benefit of Christ is attributed unto them, when they are
reputed for righteousness, and for necessary services of God, when an opinion
of necessity is fastened to them, and men's consciences are racked, and faith
made of no force by them. These discommodities Christ and his Apostles would
have to be diligently avoided, and for that cause they cry out so often, and so
earnestly against traditions. And it is a wonder, that the patrons of such
superstitious opinions about traditions, are no whit moved with such thundering
speeches.

Now as for us, we teach that those traditions are not to be condemned, which
command nothing against the laws of God, and have a civil use and end, namely,
such as are ordained to this end, that things might be done orderly in the
Church. Of which sort are the traditions about holy days, the Lords day, the
Nativitie, Passover, and the rest: also about the holy readings and lessons,
and such like. Now all rites of this kind we retain very willingly in our
Churches. And yet the Church is taught, to know, what to think of such
customs, to wit, that they do not merit remission of sins, that they are
not the righteousness of a Christian, nor necessary duties unto Christian
righteousness, but indifferent things, which a man may omit, where there is no
danger of giving offense. This qualifying of traditions does set free the
consciences from superstitious opinions, and from that old torture and racking.
And yet it brings great commendation to traditions, because it shows the
true use of them. All modest men will more willingly obey the traditions, after
they understand that their consciences are set free from danger in private, and
that they must so far obey, as that the common peace be not disturbed, nor the
weak ones hurt. Again, this interpretation does defend and preserve public
good manners and discipline, because it commands to avoid offenses. Also to
observe public holy days, the meetings in the Churches, readings, etc. do
serve for examples, and to accustom the youth, and the common sort thereto.
Therefore such ordinances are not to be broken, but rather with common care and
travel to be furthered.

These be the true and meet commendations of traditions, which no doubt do
greatly stir up such as are godly and stayed, to love, defend, and adorn the
public orders. The Gospel teaches to think reverently, not only of other
civil laws and orders, but also of Ecclesiastical, and seeks the true use
of them. Yet notwithstanding it appoints degrees, and will have the doctrine
touching Christ, and things that are heavenly and everlasting, discerned from
the schooling, or Pedagogie of the Church. This liberty, whereof we speak
now, was not unknown to the Fathers. For Augustine says, This whole kind of
things has free observations; and to this purpose he discourses at large.
Irenaeus says, The disagreement in fasting does not break off the agreement in
faith. The Tripartite history gathers together many examples of rites
disagreeing one from the other, and in the end adds a notable saying, It was
not the Apostles mind, to prescribe any thing touching holy days, but to
preach godliness, and a good conversation. But in so manifest a matter, it is
needles to heap up many testimonies.

But our adversaries do here make great outcries, That by this doctrine
public discipline and order is overthrown, and disorder and anarchie brought
in. Likewise, that good works and mortification of the flesh are abolished,
according to Jovinians surmise. These slanders we have partly refuted already:
there is no confusion or anarchie brought in, nor the public discipline
overthrown, when as we teach, that traditions, which have a civil end and
use, ought to be observed. And we teach also that offenses must be foreseen
and avoided. But touching mortification, we answer thus: True and unfeigned
mortification is to bear the cross, to endure dangers, troubles, and
afflictions. This kind of obedience is the worship of God, and a spiritual
work, as the Psalm teaches: A sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit, etc. We
teach moreover that another kind of exercise is necessary. It is the duty of
every Christian to bridle his flesh, even by bodily discipline, labors,
temperancie, meditation of heavenly things, and such other exercises, fit for
his age. The nearest and proper end whereof must be this, that fullness and
idleness do not prick him forward to sin, and that his mind may be
stirred up, and made more apt for heavenly affections. It is not to be
thought, that these exercises are a worship of God, that deserve remission of
sins, or that they be satisfactions, etc. And this discipline must be
continual: neither can certain days be set and appointed equally for all. Of
this discipline Christ speaks: Beware that your bodies be not oppressed with
surfet^ing. Again, This kind of Devils does not go out, but by fasting and
prayer. And Paul says, I chastise my body, and bring it in bondage. Wherefore
we do not mislike fastings, but superstitious opinions, which be snares for
men's consciences, that are put in traditions. Moreover, these exercises, when
as they are referred unto that end, that we may have our bodies fit for
spiritual things, and to do our duties, according to a man's calling, etc.
they are good in the godly, and Look the 1. Observation upon this confession.
meritorious works, as the example of Daniel does testify. For they be works,
which God requires to this end, that they may subdue the flesh.

This former Article we found placed elsewhere in the fifth place among those,
wherein the abuses, that are changed, are reckoned up.

Of the difference of meats.
Artic. 5. This Treatise of ceremonies repeated generally does properly
pertain unto the Section next following, and unto this Section the next must
be added, because here is special mention of fastings and holy days, as we
mentioned in the former Article.
IT has been a common opinion, not of the common sort alone, but also of such
as are teachers in the Churches, that the differences of meats, and such like
humane traditions, are works available to merit remission both of the fault,
and of the punishment. And that the world thus thought, it is apparent by this,
that daily new ceremonies, new orders, new holy days, new fasts, were
appointed: and the teachers in the Churches, did exact these workse, at the
peoples hands, as a service necessary to deserve justification by, and they did
greatly terrify their consciences, if ought were omitted. * Of this persuasion
of traditions many discommodities have followed in the Church. For first the
doctrine of grace, is obscured by it, and also the righteousness of faith,
which is the most especial point of the Gospel, and which it behooves most of
all to be extant, and to have the pre-eminence in the Church, that the merit of
Christ may be well known, and faith, which believes that sins are remitted
through Christ, and not for any works of ours, may be exalted far above
works. For which cause also Saint Paul labors much in this point: he
removes the law and humane traditions, that he may show that the
righteousness of Christ is a far other thing, then such works as these be,
namely, a faith, which believes that sins are freely remitted through Christ.
But this doctrine of S. Paul is almost wholly smothered by traditions, which
have bred an opinion, that by making difference in meats and such like
services, a man must merit remission of sins and justification. In their
doctrine of repentance there was no mention of faith: only these satisfactory
works were spoken of: Repentance seemed to stand wholly in these.

Secondly, these traditions obscured the Commandments of God, that they could
not be known, because that traditions were preferred far above the
Commandments of God. All Christianity was thought to be an observation of
certain holy days, rites, fasts, and attire. These observations carried a
goodly title and name, that they were the spiritual life, and the perfect
life. In the mean season Gods Commandments touching every man's calling, were
of small estimation. That the father brought up his children, that the mother
bare them, that the Prince governed the common wealth, these were reputed
worldly affairs, and unperfect and far inferior to those glistering
observations and orders. And these errors did greatly torment good minds,
which were grieved that they were handfasted to an unperfect kind of life, in
marriage, in Magistracy, and in other civil functions. They had the Monks and
such like men in admiration, and falsely imagined, that their orders did more
deserve remission of sins and justification.

Thirdly, traditions brought great danger to men's consciences, because it was
impossible to keep them all, and yet men thought the observation of them to be
necessary duties. Gerson writes, that many fell into despair, and some
murdered themselves, because they perceived that they could not keep the
traditions: and all this while they never heard the comfort of the
righteousness of faith, or of grace. We see the Summists and Divines gather
together the traditions, and seek qualifications of them, to unburden men's
consciences: and yet all will not serve, but sometimes they bring more snares
upon the conscience. The Schools and Pulpits have been so busied in gathering
together the traditions, that they had not leisure once to touch the Scripture,
and to seek out a more profitable doctrine, of faith, of the Cross, of hope,
of the dignity of civil affairs, of the comfort of consciences in perilous
assaults. Wherefore Gerson and some other Divines have made grievous complaints
that they were hindered by braules about traditions, that they could not be
occupied in some better kind of doctrine. And Saint Augustine forbids that
men's consciences should be burdened with such kind of observations, and does
very wisely warn Januarius to know, that they are to be observed
indifferently: for he so speaks: Wherefore our Ministers must not be thought,
to have touched this matter unadvisedly, for hatred of the Bishops, as some do
falsely surmise. There was great need to admonish the Churches of those errors,
which did arise from mistaking of traditions: for the Gospel drives men to
urge the doctrine of grace, and the of righteousness of faith, in the Church:
which yet can never be understood, if men suppose that they can merit remission
of sins, and justification, by observation of their own choice. Thus
therefore they have taught us, that we can never merit remission of sins and
justification, by the observation of man's traditions: and therefore that we
must not think, that such observations are necessary duties. Hereunto they
add testimonies out of the Scriptures. Christ excuses his disciples, Matthew.
15. which kept not the received tradition, which yet seemed to be about a
matter not unlawful, but indifferent, and to have some affinity with the
washings of the law, and says, They worship me in vain with the precepts of
men. Christ therefore requires no unprofitable worship: and a little after, he
adds, All that enters in at the mouth defiles not the man. Again, Romans
14. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink. Col. 2. Let no man judge you in
meat, or drink, in a Sabbath, or in an holy day. Again, If ye be dead with
Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though ye lived in the world,
are ye burdened with traditions, Touch not, taste not, handle not? Act. 15.
Peter says, Why tempt ye God, laying a yoke upon the necks of the disciples,
which neither we, nor our fathers were able to bear? but by the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, we hope to be saved, as did also they. Here Peter forbids
to burden the consciences with many rites, whether they be of Moses, or of any
others appointing: and 1 Timothy 4. he calls the forbidding of meats, a doctrine
of devils: because that it is flat against the Gospel, to appoint or do such
works, to the end that by them we may merit remission of sins or
justification, or because that there could be no Christianity without them.

Here our adversaries object against us, that our Ministers hinder all good
discipline and mortification of the flesh, as lovinian did. But the contrary
may be seen by our men's writings. For they have always taught, touching the
Cross, that Christians must suffer afflictions. This is the true, earnest, and
unfeigned mortification, to be exercised with diverse afflictions, and to be
crucified with Christ. Moreover they teach, that every Christian must so by
bodily discipline, or bodily exercises and labor, exercise and keep under
himself, that fullness and sloth do not prick him up to sin, not that he may
by such exercises merit such remission of the fault, or of eternal death: and
this corporal discipline must always be plied, not only to a few, and those
set days, according to the commandment of Christ, Take heed that your bodies
be not oppressed with surfeiting. Again, This kind of devil is not cast out
but by fasting and prayer: And Paul says, I chastise my body, and bring it
under subjection. Where he plainly shows, that he did therefore chastise his
body, not that by discipline he might merit remission of sins, but that his
body might be apt, and fit for spiritual things, and to do his duty, according
to his calling. Therefore we do not condemn fasts themselves, but the
traditions, which prescribe certain days and certain meats, with danger to
the consciences, as though such works as these were necessary duties.

Yet many of the traditions are observed among us, which tend unto this end,
that things may be done orderly in the Church, as namely the Look the 1.
observation upon this confession.
order of lessons in the Mass, and the chiefest holy days. But in the mean
time men are admonished, that such a service does not justify before God, and
that there is no sin to be put in such things, if they be left undone, so it
be without offense. This liberty in humane rites and ceremonies was not
unknown to the fathers. For in the East Church they kept Easter at another
time then they did in Rome: and when as they of the Church of Rome accused the
East Church of Schism for this diversity, they were admonished by others,
that such fashions should not be alike every where. And Ireneus says: The
disagreement about facting does not break off the agreement of faith. Besides,
Pope Gregory in the 12. distinction insinuates, that such diversity does not
hurt the unity of the Church: and in the Tripartite history lib. 9. many
examples of different rites are gathered together, and these words are there
rehearsed, The mind of the Apostles was, not to give precepts of holy days,
but to preach godliness and a good conversation.

What is then to be thought of the Lords day, and of such like rites used in
Churches? Hereunto they answer, that it is lawful for the Bishops or Pastors
to appoint ordinances, whereby things may be done in order in the Church, not
that by them we should merit remission of sins, or satisfy for sins, or that
men's consciences should be bound to esteem them as necessary services, and
think that they sin, when they violate any one of them, though it be without
the offense of others. So Paul ordained, that women should cover their heads in
the congregation, that the Interpreters of Scripture should be heard in course
or order in the church.

Such like ordinances it behooves the Churches to keep for charity, and
quietness sake, so far forth, that one offend not another, that all things
may be done in order, and without tumult in the Church: but yet with this
caution, that men's consciences be not burdened, so as they should account them
as things necessary to salvation, and think they did sin, when they brake any
one of them without offense of others: as no man would say that a woman does
offend, if she come abroad with her head uncovered, without the offense of any.

Of this sort is the observation of the Lords day, of Easter, of Pentecost, and
such like holy days, and rites. For they that think, that the observation of
the Lords day was appointed by the authority of the Church instead of the
Sabbath, as necessary, they are greatly deceived. The Scripture requires that
the observation of it should be now free: for it teaches that the Mosaicall
ceremonies are not needful after the Gospel is revealed. And yet because it
was requisite to oppoint a certain day, that the people might know when to come
together, it seems that the Church did for that purpose appoint the Lords
day: which day for this cause also seemed to have better liked the Church, that
in it men might have an example of Christian liberty, and might know, that the
observation, neither of the Sabbath, nor of any other day, was of necessity.

There are extant certain monstrous disputations touching the changing of the
law, and the ceremonies of the new law, and of the change of the Sabbath, which
did all spring up of a false persuasion, that there should be a worship in the
Church, like to the Leviticall worship: and that Christ gave the charge of
devising new ceremonies, which should be necessary to salvation, to the
Apostles and Bishops. These errors crept into the Church, when as the doctrine
of faith was not plainly enough taught. Some dispute, that the observation of
the Lords day is not indeed of the law of God, but as it were of the law of
God: and touching holy days, they prescribe, how far it is lawful to work in
them. What else are such disputations, but snares for men's consciences?

Out of the Confession of SAXONY.
Of Anointing.
MOreover, that which now is called, Extreme anointing, was in times past a
kind of healing, as it is evident out of Art. 19. ss. 2.
the Epistle of Saint James, cap. 5. Now is it become a show full of
superstition. They say that sins be forgiven through these anointings, and
they add thereunto invocation of the dead, which also must of necessity be
disliked. Therefore these ceremonies are not kept in our Churches, neither in
times past did the Church think that they were necessary. But for the sick we
do make godly prayers, publicly, and privately: as also the Lord has
promised, that he will assuage even corporal griefs in them that ask it of
him, according to that saying, Psalm 49. Call upon me in the day of trouble,
and I will deliver thee. Also we use burials, having thereat a decent assembly,
godly admonitions, and songs, etc.

The first part of this 19. Article, which is of confirmation, was placed in
the 13. Section. Hitherto also pertains the beginning of the 20. Article so
far as it speaks of a certain time appointed for the service of God.
Natural reason does know that there is an order, and the understanding of
order, is an evident testimony of God: neither is it possible that men should
live without any order, as we see that in families there must be distinct times
of labor, rest, meat, and sleep: and every nature, as it is best, so does it
chiefly love order throughout the whole life. Also Paul commands, That all
things in the Church be done decently and in order. Therefore there has been
at all times, even from the beginning of mankind, a certain order of public
meetings, there has been also a certain distinction of times, and certain
other ceremonies, and that without doubt full of gravitie, and elegancie, among
those excellent lights of mankind, when as in the same garden or cottage there
sat together, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, and their families: and when as that Sermon
which Sem made, concerning the true God, the Son of God, the distinction of
the Church, and other nations, being heard, afterward they together used
invocation.

That which follows, because it treats of indifferent Traditions in
general, is placed in the next Section.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE.
Of Fasting.
WE think that Fasting is profitable, not to this end, that Artic. 17.
either by the merit of it work it might purge sins before God, or apply the
merit of Christ to him that does fast; but that, by sobriety it may bridle the
flesh, lest that man being hindered by surfeiting, and drunkenness, he be the
less able to obey the calling of God, and discharge his duty negligently. But
we shall have a fit place hereafter to speak of Fasting.

Also, Article 28. Of Fasting.
FAsting has it praise and use. But now we do not speak either of necessary
fasting, when a man must needs fast for want of meat, or of an allegorical
fasting, which is to abstain from all vices: but we are to speak of two usual
kinds of fasting, whereof the one is a perpetual fast, and this is a
sobriety, which is always to be kept, in meat and drink, throughout the whole
course of a man's life: for it is never lawful for us to ravine, and to follow
surfeiting, and drunkenness. There is another fast, which is for a day, when
as sometimes we abstain from meat the whole day, such as was used in the Old
Testament, Levit. 16. Also the examples of Jehosaphat, of the Ninivites, and
others, do witness the same thing. This kind of fasting was also used after
the publishing of the Gospel, as appears, Act. 13. 14. But afterward there
followed a great difference in Churches touching the observation of such a
kind of fasting: and as this difference brought no discommoditie to the
Church, so it testified, that the use of this fasting was free. And there is a
worthy saying among the ancient fathers, touching this variety: The
difference, say they, of fastings does not break off the agreement of faith.

Now although some men do think, that Christ by his example did consecrate,
the fast of Lent, yet it is manifest, that Christ did not command this fast,
neither can the constitution of our nature abide it, that we should imitate the
example of Christ his fasting, who did abstain full 40. days, and 40. nights,
from all meat and drink. Also Eusebius does declare, and that not obscurely,
That the use of this Lenten fast was very free in the Church. Moreover
Chrysostom, in Genesis cap. 2. Hom. 11. says, If thou can not fast, yet thou
may abstain from sins: and this is not the least thing, nor much differing
from fasting, but fit to overthrow even the fury of the Devil.

Neither was there any choice of meats appointed, because the Apostle had said,
To the clean, all things are clean. But in the observation of such fasts, we
must chiefly mark the end. The ancient fathers did sometimes fast whole days
together, that they might give themselves to public prayer, and by this
discipline might admonish their Church, and especially the youth of dangers
that were past or present, or hanging over their heads, and might stir them up
to repentance, whereby the wrath of God might be assuaged. This is the godly
and profitable end of these fastings.

Others do fast, That by the merit of this work, they may purge their sins
before God, or, as some do speak, Apply unto themselves the merit of Christ,
by their fasting. But this end is utterly to be condemned. For first, the only
death of Christ is the purging of our sins. Secondly, fasting was not
ordained for this use, that it should be a work, whereby, the merit of Christ
may be applied to us. For, fasting is either joined with true repentance, and
then the merit of Christ is applied to him that repents by faith, which is
the chief part of repentance, before a man does begin or end his fasting: or
else fasting is without repentance, and then it is abominable in the sight of
God, so far is it from applying the merit of Christ to him that fasteth. Isa.
58. Is it such a fast that I have chosen, that a man should afflict his soul
for a day, and to bow down his head as a bulrush? Augustine Epist. 86. ad
Casulanum, says, I revolving that in my mind, which is written in the
Evangelicall and Apostolic Scriptures, and in that whole instrument which
they call the New Testament, do see that fasting is commanded. But on what
days we ought not to fast, and on what days, we ought to fast, I do not see
it defined, either by the commandment of the Lord, or of the Apostles. And by
this I think, that rather a releasing, then a binding to fasting, is the more
fit and apt, not to obtain righteousness, (wherein the beauty of the Kings
daughter does consist inwardly) which is obtained by faith, but yet, to
signify a perpetual rest. And Chrysostom, Tom. 4. de Iejun. Quadrag. Hom. 73.
says: If we come daily hither, and fast the whole Lent, and do not change our
life to the better, it will be an occasion of our greater condemnation. By
these testimonies it is evident, that it is neither Apostolic, not
Catholic, to think that fasting is a work, whereby either sins are purged
before God, or the merit of Christ is applied.

Hitherto also appertains the 29. Article.

Of the consecrating of water, salt, wine, and other things.
WE confess, that the forbidding of water, whereby the Leviticall uncleannes
was purged, was ordained of God in the Old Testament. Also we acknowledge that
miracle whereby the Prophet Elizeus did heal the barren waters of Jericho, by
casting in of salt. And we embrace that, which Paul writing to Timothy, says,
Every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, which is received
with thankesgiving: for it is sanctified by the word of God, and by prayer. But
whereas in the new Testament, water is consecrated, which they call holy water,
by the sprinkling whereof venial sins are taken away, and Devils are driven
away: and whereas salt also is consecrated, to make things wholesome, which
otherwise be hurtful, it seems neither to be Apostolic, nor Catholic. For
we are not commanded by the word of God to imitate the Leviticall sprinkling,
or Eilezeus his miracle, but it was used by man's arbitrament and pleasure: and
therefore it appertains to this saying of Christ, In vain do they worship
me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of men. And it is evident that the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ, which is made by the word of the Gospel, by
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and received by says, does purge us from our
sins. That therefore which is proper to the blood of Christ, which by the
ordinance of God was shed for our sins, ought not to be attributed to water,
consecrated by the appointment of man. And as touching that Elizeus did heal
the barren waters by salt, there is a miracle set before our eyes, that thereby
we may confirm that credit, which we ought to give to the preaching of the
Prophet; but it is not set before us to be imitated without a special calling
of God: because the miracles of the Saints use not to be general, but
personal.

And as touching that which Paul says, that creatures are sanctified by the
word of God, and by prayer, he means not that creatures, as for example,
salt, flesh, eggs, herbs, are to be conjured, that Satan by the use of them
may be driven away; but that all creatures are by the word of God every one
appointed to their outward use, which then serve for our good, when we use them
well, by faith, and praying unto God. So God created salt, to season meat, and
to preserve flesh from putrefying: he created water, to serve for drink, or
washing, or watering, and not to drive away the devil. Indeed in Baptism, he
ordained Look the 1. Observation upon the confession of Saxony, Sect. 13.
water to wash away sins: but this is not the general end why water was
created, but a special ordinance, appointed by a special word of God. For, as
touching the general creation and sanctification of God, there is no word of
God, that does witness, that the creatures, which we before have rehearsed, by
conjurings are made profitable hereunto, that they may take away sins, and
chase away the devils. Now that which is brought in without the word of God, to
another use then God has ordained it unto, it cannot be done in faith, but it
becomes an abuse, and does rather bring destruction, then salvation, Romans 14.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. And Cyprian, Epist. 2. Lib. 2. says, If
Christ alone is be heard, we are not to consider what any other before us has
thought good to be done, but what Christ, who is before all, has done: for we
ought not to follow the custom of men, but the truth of God, etc.

Hitherto also pertains Chap. 22. of the same confession. Of extreme unction.
WE confess that the Apostles anointed the sick with oil, and that the sick
recovered their bodily health. Also we confess, that the Epistle, which
bears the name of James, does command, that the Elders of the Church be
called unto the sick, that they may anoint them with oil, and pray for them,
that they may obtain health. But these things were then practiced profitably,
when as yet the Ministers of the Church were endued with the gift of healing
the sick corporally, and wonderfully. But after that this gift ceased, the
Gospel being confirmed in the Church, the thing it self does witness, that
this ceremony of anointing is now idly, and unfruitfully used. For they
which now are anointed, use not by this anointing to recover their bodily
health: yea this anointing is not used, but on them, of whose bodily health men
do despair. Neither is there any word of God, which does promise, the Gospel
of Christ being published, that this outward anointing should be of any force
to take away sins, and to give a spiritual and heavenly health.
Notwithstanding the Ministers of the Church are bound by duty, to visit the
sick, and to pray together with the Church for their health, Look the 1.
observation upon this confession.
and to comfort them as well by the preaching of the Gospel, as by dispensing
of the Lords Supper. And this is a godly anointing, whereby the holy Ghost is
effectual in the believers.

CHAP. 24. Of the remembrance of the dead.
ALthough indeed there is no difference, between a Saint resting in Christ,
and a faithful man departed (for every one which dies in the faith of
Christ, is a Saint) yet because it has pleased some to put a difference
betwixt these two, we also thought it good to make two several Chapters
thereof. And first, we think, that it belongs to a godly mind, to made
decent mention of his elders which have died in the faith of Christ, and to
show forth toward their posterity and friends which are alive, in all dutiful
manner that we can, that thankfulness, which is due to those benefits, which
we received of them. Secondly, faith requires of us, that we do not think
that the dead are nothing, but that they do indeed live before God: to wit,
that the godly do live blessedly in Christ: and that the wicked do live in an
horrible expectation of the revelation of the judgment of God. Also, charity
requires, that we should wish all peace and happiness to them that are dead
in Christ. This also is to be added, that, to testify the hope of our
resurrection, we must bury our dead decently, so near as may be, and as the
time, and conditions of men will suffer. Look the 2. Observation upon this
confession.
Therefore we think it is a profitable thing, that at burials those things be
rehearsed, and expounded out of the holy Scriptures, which do serve to
strengthen our faith in the horror of death, and to confirm our hope of the
resurrection.

But that the dead are helped by those usual watchings, prayers, and
sacrifices, and that by the merits thereof, they be either delivered from their
pains, or obtain a greater felicity which is in heaven, there is no
testimony out of that doctrine which is indeed Prophetical and Apostolical.
For there is one only merit of eternal life, and we have one only redemption
and deliverance; to wit, Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ: and this merit is
made ours, when we believe in Christ, and we have nothing to do with it, when
we do not believe the Gospel of Christ, John 3. God sent not his Son into
the world, that he should condemn the world, but that the world through him
might be saved. He that believes in him, shall not be condemned: but he that
believes not, is condemned already, because he believes not in the only
begotten Son of God. Therefore if any man shall depart out of this life in
the faith of Christ, he has a I the merit of Christ, and needs none other.
For God which gave his Son, does also give all things with him, as Paul
says. But he that departs hence without Christ, cannot be helped by any
merits of men, because that without Christ there is no salvation. Cyprian
against Demet. Tract. 1. says: When a man is once departed hence, there is no
place left for repentance, there is no effect of satisfaction: here life is
either lost, or held fast: here we must provide for eternal salvation, by the
service or worship of God, and by the fruit of faith. And Hierome upon the
Epistle to the Gal. Chap. 6. says: We are taught by this small sentence,
though obscurely, a new point of doctrine lies hid, to wit, that whilst we be
in this present world, we may help one another, either by prayers, or by
counsel: but when we shall come before the tribunal seat of Christ, it is not
Job, nor Daniel, nor Noe, that can entreat any thing for us, but every man
shall bear his own burden. For, as touching that which is cited out of the
Maccabees, That sacrifices were offered for the sins of the dead, the Author
himself of the book does doubt, in the end of the book, whether he has
written well, etc. craveth pardon, if in any point he has erred. Therefore let
us pardon him that without any authority of the holy Scripture he affirms,
that the dead are freed from their sin by the sacrifices, and prayers of them
that be alive. And Tertullian says, Oblations are made one day every year for
them that are dead: But this was either received without authority of the word
of God, from the customs of the heathen, as many other things were; or by the
name of Oblation we must understand a public remembrance of those which died
in the faith of Christ, and a thanksgiving for those benefits, which God
bestowed upon them.

CHAP. 25. Of Purgatory.
ALthough we ought not to doubt, but that the Saints have their Purgatory fire
in this life, as the examples of David, Ezechias, Jonas, and others do
witness, yet it is not without cause doubted, whether that after this life
there be such a Purgatory, as the common sort of men do think there is,
wherein the souls be so long tormented, till either by their punishment they
do satisfy for their sins, or be redeemed by Indulgences. For if Purgatory
be such a thing, it is much to be marvelled at, that neither the Prophets, nor
the Apostles have in their writings delivered unto us any thing thereof
certainly, and plainly, but rather do teach, and that not obscurely, the
clear contrary, Mark 16. Preach ye the Gospel to every creature: he that
shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not believe
shall be condemned. Here be two degrees of men placed: the one of them, which
believe the Gospel, and they are pronounced, saved: the other of them, which
do not believe the Gospel, and these are pronounced, condemned: there is no
mean betwixt these two. For either thou do depart out of this life in the
faith of Jesus Christ, and then thou have remission of thy sins for Christ
his sake, and the righteousness of Christ is imputed to thee. Therefore he
which dies, being accompanied with Christ, he wants nothing toward the
obtaining of true and eternal life: but he which departs from hence without
Christ, goes into eternal darkness.

If beside these two degrees there were some other third state of souls in
another world, certainly Paul, Who was taken up into Paradise, and into the
third heaven, and saw many secret things, would not have envied the Church this
knowledge. But see, when he does of set purpose write to the Thessalonians,
concerning Christians that sleep, he makes no mention at all of any
Purgatory, but rather wills them, Not to be sorrowful, even as others which
have no hope. Therefore if there were any such state of souls in another world,
as the common people thinks there is. Paul could not be withheld, but in so
fit a place he would plainly have declared this state of souls, and would have
prescribed a mean unto the Church, whereby miserable souls might be delivered
from their torment. But the true and Catholic Church in deed, has plainly
showed that she has no certainty at all concerning this third kind of the
state of souls in another world. Chrysostom in his second Sermon of Lazarus,
says. If thou have violently taken any thing from any man, restore it, and
say, as does Zacheus, If I have taken from any man by forged cavillation, I
restore fourefold. If thou art become an enemy to any man, be reconciled
before thou come to judgment. Discharge all things here, that without grief
thou may behold that tribunal seat. Whilst we be here, we have many
excellent hopes. But so soon as we depart thither, it is not then in our power
to repent, nor to wash away our sins. And again, He that in this present life
shall not wash away his sins, shall not find any comfort afterward.

Augustine, although he place certain men in the midst, betwixt them, that
be very good, and those that be very evil, to the one sort whereof he seems
to assign the place of Purgatory, yet in other places he doubts of that
matter, and does not define any certainty. Therefore we must so think of this
opinion of Augustine, as he requires, that is, we must receive that, which is
confirmed, either by the authority of the Scripture, or by probable reason.
But it is evident, that those places of the Scripture, which are commonly
cited, to establish Purgatory, are wrested from the natural, to a strange
sense, and are far otherwise expounded, even of the ancient Writers
themselves. And those reasons which Augustine brings for his opinion, do
seem to lean to this foundation, That we obtain remission of our sins and
life, not only for Christ his sake, through faith, but also for the merits of
our works. But how this agrees with the true Apostolic doctrine, we have
before declared. Wherefore we think, that this speculation of Purgatory fire,
is to be left to it own authors, and that we must chiefly do this, as Paul
exhorts us, that we may confirm our selves one another with speeches
touching the assured faith of our resurrection, and salvation in Christ Jesus,
for whose sake God does so favor the faithful, that in the midst of death
he preserves them, and gives them true peace.

Out of the Confession of SVEVELAND.
Of Prayers and fastings. CHAP. 7.
WE have among us Prayers and Religious Fasts, which are These things which
are mingled in this 7. and after in the 10. Chapt. touching Prayers, did
appertain to the 15. Sect. if they might fitly have been separated.
most holy works, and such as do very much beseem Christians: whereunto our
Preachers do most diligently exhort their hearers. For true fasting is as it
were a renouncing of this present life, which is always subject to evil lusts
and desires, and a meditation of the life to come, which is free from all
perturbation. And prayer is a lifting up of the mind unto God, and such a
familiar speech with him, as no other thing can so greatly set a man on fire
with heavenly affections, and more mightily make the mind comformable to the
will of God. And though these exercises be never so holy, and necessary for
Christians, yet seeing that a man's neighbor is not so much benefited by them,
1 Cor. 13.
as man is prepared, that he may with fruit and profit have regard of his
neighbor, they are not to be preferred before holy doctrine, godly exhortations
and admonitions, and also other duties, whereby our neighbor does presently
receive some profit. Whereupon we read of our Savior, that in the night time
he gave himself to prayer, and in the day time to doctrine, and to heal the
sick. For as love is greater then faith and hope, so to believe those things,
which come nearest unto love, to wit, such as bring assured profit unto men,
are to be preferred before all other holy functions: whereupon S. Chrysostom
writes, that Among the In Matthew. Hom. 48.
whole company of virtues, fasting has the last place.

Of the commanding of Fasts. CHAP. 8.
But because that no minds, but these that be ardent, and peculiarly stirred
up by the heavenly inspiration, can either pray, or fast aright, and with
profit, we believe that it is far better, after the example of the Apostles,
and the former and more sincere Church, by holy exhortations to invite men
hereunto, then to wring them out by precepts, such especially, as do bind men
under pain of deadly sin: the which thing the Priests that were of late took
upon them to do, when as then the order of Priests had not a little
degenerated. But we had rather leave the place, time, and manner, both of
praying, and also of fasting, to the arbitrament of the holy Ghost, then to
prescribe them by certain laws, especially such, as may not be broken without
some sacrifice of amends. Yet for their sakes that be the younger, and more
imperfect sort, our Preachers do not dislike, that there should be an
appointed time and means, both for prayer, and also for fasting, that as it
were by these holy introductions to exercises they might be prepared hereunto,
so that it be done, without binding of the conscience. We were induced thus to
think, not so much for that all compulsion being against a man's will, is
repugnant to the nature of these actions, but rather, because that neither
Christ himself, nor any of his Apostles, have in any place made mention of
such kind of precepts: and this does Chrysostom also witness, saying: Thou
see that an upright life does help more then all other things. Now I term
an upright life not the labor of In Matthew. Hom. 47.
Fasting, nor the bed of hair, or ashes, but if thou do despise money, no
other wise then it becomes thee, if thou burn with charity, if thou nourish
the hungry with thy bread, if thou overcome thy anger, if thou do not desire
vain glory, if thou be not possessed with envy: for these be the things that
he teaches, for he does not say, that he will have his fast to be followed,
howbeit, he might have proponed those forty days unto us: but he says,
Learn of me, because I am meek, and lowly in heart. Yea rather on the
contrary side, says he, eat all that is set before you.

Moreover, we do not read, that any solemn or set fast was enjoined to the
ancient Church, but that fast of one day. For those fasts, which as the
Scripture does witness, were ordained of Prophets, and of Kings, it is
certain, that they were no set fasts, but enjoined only for their time, to
wit, when as evident calamities, either hanging over their heads, or presently
pinching them, did so require it. Seeing therefore that the Scripture, as,
Saint Paul does affirm, does instruct a man to every good work, and yet is
ignorant of these fasts which are extorted by precepts, we do not see, how it
could be lawful for the successors of the Apostles, to overcharge the Church
with so great and so dangerous a burden. Truly, Ireneus does witness, that in
times past the observation of fast in Churches was diverse, and free, as it is
read in the Ecclesiastical history, lib. 8. cap. 14. In the same book
Eusebius makes mention, that one Apollonius, an Ecclesiastical Writer among
other arguments used this for one, to confute the doctrine of Montanus the
heretic, Because he was the first that made laws for fasts. Thereupon
Chrysostom says in a certain place, Fasting is good, but let no man be
compelled thereunto. And in another place he exhorts him that is not able to
fast, to abstain from dainties, and yet affirms, that it does not much
differ from fasting, and that it is a strong weapon to repress the fury of
the Devil. Moreover, experience also it self does more then prove, that these
precepts concerning fasts, have been a great hinderance to godliness.

Therefore when we saw it very evidently, that the chief men in the Church, did
beside the authority of the Scripture, take upon themselves this power, so to
enjoyne fasts, as to bind men's consciences under pain of deadly sin, we did
loose the consciences out of these snares, but by the Scriptures, and chiefly
by Paul's writings, which do with a singular endeavor remove these rudiments
of the world from the necks of Christians. For we ought not lightly to account
of that saying of Paul: Let no man condemn you in meat and drink, or in
respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days. And
again, Therefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world,
why, as though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened with traditions? For if
Saint Paul, then whom no man at any time did teach Christ more certainly, do
earnestly affirm, that through Christ we have obtained such liberty in
outward things, that he does not only not give authority to any creature, to
burden those which believe in Christ, no not so much as with those ceremonies
and observations, which notwithstanding God himself appointed, and would have
to be profitable in their time; but also denounces, that they be fallen away
from Christ, and that Christ shall nothing at all profit them, who suffer
themselves to be addicted thereunto; what shall we then think of those
commandments, which men have devised of their own brain, not only without
any oracle, but also without any example worthy to be followed, and which are
therefore made unto many not only beggarly and weak, but also hurtful, not
elements, that is, rudiments of holy discipline, but also impediments of true
godliness? How much more unjustly shall any man take unto himselfe-authoritie
over the inheritance of Christ, to oppress him with such kind of bondage? and
how far shall he remove us from Christ, if we submit our selves unto him? For
who does not see, the glory of Christ, to whom we ought wholly to live, whom he
has wholly redeemed to himself, and restored to liberty, and that by his
blood, to be more obscured, if beside his authority, we do bind our
conscience to those laws, which are the inventions of men, then to those which
have God for their Author, although they were to be observed, but only for
their time? Certainly, it is a less fault to play the Jew, then the Heathen.
Now it is the manner of the Heathen; to receive laws for the worship of God,
which have their beginning from man's invention only, God never being asked
counsel of in the matter. Wherefore if in any matter at all, certainly here
that saying of Paul takes place: Ye are bought with a great price, be not made
the servants of men. 1 Cor. 7.


Of the choice of meats. CHAP. 9.
FOr the same cause was that forbearing and choosing of meats enjoined and tied
to certain days, which Saint Paul, writing to Timothy, calls the doctrine
of Devils. Neither is their answer sufficient. Who say that these things be
spoken only against the Manichies, Encratites, Tatians, and Marcionites, who
did wholly forbid certain kinds of meats and marriage. For the Apostle in
this place has condemned those, which command to abstain from meats, which
God has created to be taken with thankesgiving, etc. Now they also which do
but forbid to take certain meats, on certain days do nevertheless command
men to abstain from those meats, which God has created to be taken, and are
cousin germans to the doctrine of the Devils, the which also is evidently
seen by the reason, which the Apostle adds. For, says he, Whatsoever God
has created, it is good, and nothing is to be refused, that is received with
giving of thanks. Here he does not take exception against any times, although
no man favored frugalitie, temperance, and also choice chastisements of the
flesh, and lawful fasting, more greatly then he did. Certainly a Christian
must be frugall, and sometime the flesh must be chastised by diminishing the
daily and accustomed portion or diet, but base meats, and a mean, does serve
better to this purpose, then any kind of meats: to conclude, it is meet for
Christians, now and then to take upon them a lawful fast, but that must not be
an abstinence from certain, but from all meats, nor from meats only, but also
from all the dainties of this life whatsoever. For, what kind of fast is this?
what abstinence? only to change the kind of dainties, (the which thing at this
day they use to do which are counted more religious then others) seeing that
S. Chrysostom does not account it to be a fast, if we continue wholly without
meats, even unto the evening, except together with abstaining from meats, we
do also contain our selves from those things which be hurtful, and bestow
much of that leisure upon the study and exercise of spiritual things.

That by Prayers and Fasts we must not look to merit any thing. CHAP. 10.
MOreover, our Preachers have taught, that this fault is to be a amended in
prayers and fasts, that commonly men are taught to seek to obtain, I know not
what merit, and justification by these works. For, As we are saved by grace,
through faith, so also are we justified. And touching the works of the law
(among the which prayers and fasts are reckoned) Paul writes thus: For we
through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness Gal. 5.
through faith. Therefore we must pray, but to this end, that we may receive of
God, not that we may hereby give any thing unto him. We must fast, that we may
the better pray, and keep the flesh within the compass of it duty, and not
before God to deserve any thing for our selves. This only end and use of
prayers, both the Scripture, and also the writings and examples of the Fathers
do prescribe unto us. Moreover, the case so stands with us, that although we
could pray and fast so religiously, and so perfectly do all those things which
God has enjoined us, that nothing could more be required of us (which hitherto
no mortal man has at any time performed) yet for all this we must confess,
that we are unprofitable servants. Therefore what merit can we dream of.

THE SEVENTEENTH SECTION. OF CEREMONIES, AND RITES, WHICH ARE INDIFFERENT, IN
GENERAL.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA. Of Rites, Ceremonies, and indifferent
things. CHAP. 27.
Unto the ancient people in old time were given certain ceremonies, as a kind
of schooling or pedagogie, to those which were kept under the law, as under a
Schoolmasters, or Tutor: but Christ the deliverer being once come, and the law
taken away, we which believe are no more under the law, and the ceremonies are
vanished and worn out of use. And the Apostles were so far from retaining
them in the Church of Christ, or repairing them, that they witnessed plainly,
that they would not lay Romans 6.
any burden upon the Church. Wherefore we should seem to bring in, and set up
Iudaisme again, if so be we should multiply Ceremonies, or Rites in the
Church, according to the manner of the old Church. Therefore we are not of
their judgment, who would have the Church of Christ kept in with many and
diverse Rites, as it were with a certain schooling or pedagogie. For if the
Apostles would not thrust upon the Christian people the ceremonies and rites,
which were appointed by God, who is there (I pray you) that is well in his
wits, that will thrust upon it the inventions devised by man. The greater that
the heap of ceremonies is in the Church, so much the more is taken, not only
from Christian liberty, but also from Christ and from faith in him: whilst
the people seek those things in ceremonies which they should seek in the
only Son of God Jesus Christ, through faith. Wherefore a few, moderate, and
simple rites, that are not contrary to the word of God, do suffice the godly.
And that there is found diversity of rites in the Churches, let no man say
therefore that the Churches do not agree. Socrates says, That it were not
possible to set down in writing all the ceremonies of the Churches, which are
throughout Cities and Countries. No Religion does keep every where the same
ceremonies, although they admit and receive one and the self same doctrine
touching them: for even they which have one and the self same faith do disagree
among themselves about ceremonies. Thus much says Socrates, and we at this day
having diverse rites in the celebration of the Lords Supper, and in certain
other things, in our Churches, yet we do not disagree in doctrine and faith,
neither is the unity and society of our Churches rent asunder. For the
Churches have always used their liberty in such rites, as being things
indifferent, which we also do at this day.

But yet notwithstanding we admonish men to take heed, that they count not
among things indifferent such as indeed are not indifferent, as some use to
count the Mass, and the use of Images in the Church, for things indifferent.
That is indifferent, (says Jerome to Augustine) which is neither good, nor
evil, so that whether you do it, or do it not, you are never the more just,
or unjust, thereby. Therefore, when things indifferent are wrested to the
confession of says, they cease to be free, as Paul does show, that it is
lawful for a man to eat flesh, if no man do admonish him that it was offered
to idols: for then it is unlawful, because he that eats it, does seem to
approve idolatry by eating of it.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA. Of things indifferent.
THose things which be called, and are properly things indifferent, Artic. 25.
although a godly man may in all places, and at all times use them, freely, yet
he must only use all things according to knowledge, and in charity, to wit,
to the glory of God, and to the edifying of the Church, and his neighbors.

Out of the Confession of BASIL.
IN this Section also may the tenth Article of this confession be placed, which
we have partly referred to the first Section, where mention is made of humane
traditions, partly to other Sections, as occasion served.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA. Of accessories or things indifferent, to
wit, of Ecclesiastical traditions, constitutions, rites, and ceremonies, and
of Christian liberty. CHAP. 15.
TOuching this accessorie kind, humane traditions, constitutions, and
ceremonies brought in by a good custom, men are taught that these be things
inferior in degree, and less necessary, then are the gifts of the ordinary
Ministry: yea, that they be instituted and appointed in regard of the
Ecclesiastical ministry, and to serve thereunto: and yet that they are with
an uniforme consent to be retained in the Ecclesiastical assemblies of
Christian people at the common service of God, according to the doctrine of the
holy Apostles: Let all things be done in your meeting (to wit in the Church)
decently, and in order. Also, God is not the author of Confusion, but of peace.
But they must always be kept with this caveat, and within these bounds, that
they be not taken for foundations, whereupon salvation must stay it self, or
for a worship, which is appointed of God without any difference; and that they
do not rather, or more straightly bind the consciences of men, then the
commandments of God do; and that they be not lifted up or preferred before
them, but that they be taken for an ornament, decency, honest show, and
laudable discipline; and so, that they do not violate the Christian liberty
of the Spirit of God, and of faith, nor disturb charity: and on the other
side, that no man, by pretending a show of Christian liberty, do withdraw
himself from such constitutions, as be godly, and serve to a good use.

Now by the name of Christian liberty is chiefly understood Ioh. 8. Romans 6.
Romans 8. Act. 15. Psalm. 18. and 110.
that liberty, whereby through Christ we are freed from sin, and the curse,
and the yoke of the law: secondly, the receiving of the Spirit of a ready will,
or of the voluntary Spirit of the sons of God, whereby they do earnestly, and
with pleasure, and of their own accord, exercise the works of faith toward
God, and charity toward Romans 8. 2 Timothy 1. Iac. 1.
their neighbor; and by the law of charity, the mind is stirred up to
perform these things, rather of love, then of debt, or any compulsion: Also,
whereby we are made free from all bond of conscience to any humane traditions,
that a man may not be tied in such sort, or rather more strictly, unto these,
then to the commandments of God: And lastly, that no man may suffer his
conscience to be seared thereby, as with an hot iron. Therefore according to
these things, all those humane traditions and ceremonies, which do obscure or
take away the glory, honor, worship, and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
do withdraw the people from true and sincere faith, and in a word, in respect
whereof the commandments of God are broken, neglected, and lightly regarded,
and the word of God is not exercised, or handled according to its own
sincerity and truth, they are not only not to be observed, but to be avoided.
For Christ our Lord does sharply reproove those Pharisees, and Masters of the
Jews, by the name of such rites and traditions, and for that they do observe
such, Matthew. 7. Isa. 29.
when he says, Very well has Esaias prophesied of you, hypocrites, as it is
written: This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far
away from me. But they worship me in vain, seeing that they teach such
doctrine, as is delivered, and brought in by men. For ye lay the commandments
of God apart, and observe the traditions of men. And holy Paul does admonish
us, to take heed of such toys devised by men, when he says, Beware, lest
there be any that spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, through the
traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ. Whereof also there be Canons extant in the Canon law, Did. 8. and 11.
cap consu^tud.
and the words be these. We praise custom, yet that only which is known to
use nothing contrary to the Catholic faith. Wherefore those rites only, and
those good ceremonies are to be observed, which among the people of God, do
build up one only, and that a true faith and a sincere worship of God,
concord, charity, and true and Christian, or religious peace. Therefore,
whether they have their beginning and be brought in of Bishops, or of
Ecclesiastical Councels, or of any other Authors whatsoever, the simpler sort
are not to care for it, neither to be moved or disquieted, but to use them to
good, because they are good, and to observe this only rule therein, as always
to put their greatest confidence in those things only, which are of God,
settle their only and chief refuge in those things, and withal diligence
take heed, that they be not withdrawn by such ceremonies from those things,
which are the chiefest of all, and wherein religion is founded, and so by
consequent from the things themselves. For those divine and wholesome things are
to be preferred in every respect, before all other things of all men, and the
conscience ought to be bound to them alone. For the Lord himself did pronounce
a woe against those Elders of the Jews, who preferred their own traditions
before the commandments of God, and those which were the lesser before things
of greater weight: You leave, says he, the weightiest matters of the law, as
judgment, Matthew. 13.
and mercy, and fidelity. These ought ye to have done, and not to Luke 11.
have left the other.

And although our Preachers do not keep all rites alike with other Churches,
the which thing neither can be, neither is necessary to be done, that in all
places, where there be Christian assemblies one and the same ceremonies should
be used, yet they do not withstand, or oppose themselves to any good and godly
constitution, neither are they so minded, as that for the ceremonies sake they
would raise up any dissensions, although they should think that some of them
were not very necessary, so that they be not found to be contrary to God, and
to his worship, and glory, and be such, as do not diminish true faith in Jesus
Christ, which alone does purchase righteousness. How be it in this place, and
in this point, it must not be passed over with silence, to wit, that we ought
by no means to burden the people with many superfluous, and grievous
traditions, such as the Mosaicall traditions were under the law. For the
Apostles forbad that this should be done, as also holy Peter said unto certain
concerning this matter: Why do ye tempt God in laying a yoke upon the necks of
the disciples? Also, Gal. 5.
Be ye not, says Paul, entangled with the yoke of bondage. For which cause
also Christ did vehemently inveigh against the Scribes, saying, Woe also be to
you Scribes, for ye lay burdens upon men's shoulders, which can scarce be borne.
Luke 11.


Also men are taught to acknowledge this, that humane tradittions do not
contain a perpetual and immutable law, but as they are for just causes
instituted of men, so also they may upon just and weighty causes, and if the
matter so require, be broken, abrogated, and changed without any sin, according
to the example of the Apostles. who did transgress the traditions of the
Elders, when as they did eat bread with unwashed hands, and did not observe
the Matthew. 15. Mark. 7.
same fasts with others, and yet they were not by this means guilty of any
sin: also according to the example of the first and holy Church, upon which the
Apostles, and the whole Council laid this commandment by the holy Ghost,
that they should abstain Acts 15.
from the eating of those things which were sacrificed to Idols, and of blood,
and of that which is strangled. Notwithstanding, after that the causes and
occasions, for the which this decree was made, in process of time did vanish
away, even this Apostolical constitution did grow out of use. Neither in these
things ought we to care for the offense of the wicked, who are offended with
this thing, as the Lord faith, Let them alone, they be blind, and guides of
Matthew. 15.
the blind. And on the other side, we must take diligent heed hereunto, that no
offense be given to little ones, by a rash, froward, Rom 14. 1 Cor. 8. Matthew.
15.
and wicked using of Christian liberty: for this also the Lord says, Woe be
to that man by whom offense comes.

Now if so be that there be any unlikenesse in traditions, and external
ceremonies, and if any diversity which is not hurtful be found in
Ecclesiastical assemblies, certainly no man ought to be so ignorant in these
things, as for this cause to be offended therewith, or to take offense at
others, and in this respect to reproach or hurt others, or to be an author of
sects and also of factions, seeing that there was never in all places one, and
the same form of an Ecclesiastical constitution in this point, neither is at
this day the same. The which thing also is mentioned in the books of the Canon
law in these words: The holy Church of Rome does know, Did. 12 Cap. Scit.
that constitutions, and customs being diverse, according to time and place, do
nothing at all hinder the salvation of the faithful if the Canonical
authority be not against them. Rather it becomes every sound Christian to be
content in his conscience to rest in that, if he see Christians to have the one
spirit of Christ, and with agreeing Phil. 2. Ephesians. 4.
minds to hold and follow his true meaning, and one and the same doctrine, in
all these things, and chief points of says. For he that has not this Spirit
of Christ, he is not Christ's, as the Apostle Romans 8.
does witness, although he use all, and every kind of ceremonies, or
constitutions. Therefore whosoever be Christ's, this is their duty, as in all
other such like things, that as members of one body, they do suffer, and bear
one with another in charity, without 1 Cor. 13.
the which no thing can profit any whit, according to the meaning of the
Apostolic doctrine.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE believe that it is expedient, that they which be chosen Artic. 32.
to be governors in any Church, do wisely look unto it among themselves, by
what means the whole body may conveniently be ruled, yet so that they do never
swarve from that which our Lord Jesus Christ has instituted. Yet this does not
hinder, but that every place may have their peculiar constitutions, as it shall
seem convenient for them.

But we exclude all humane devises, and all those laws, which Artic. 32.
are brought in to bind men's consciences under pretense of the word of God:
and we do only like of those, which serve for the nourishing of concord, and
to keep every one in due obedience, wherein we think that we are to follow
that, which our Lord Jesus Christ appointed touching excommunication, which *
Look the 1. Observation upon this confession.
we do allow of, and together with it additions, think to be * necessary.

Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
AS touching the multitude of vain and superfluous Ceremonies, Artic. 15.
Epist. ad Ianuar. 119.
we know, that S. Augustine did grievously complain of them in his own time:
and therefore have we cut of a great number of them: because we know, that men's
consciences were encumbred about them, and the Churches of God overladen with
them. Nevertheless we keep still, and esteem not only those Ceremonies, which
we are sure were delivered to us from the Apostles, but some others too
besides, which we thought might be suffered without hurt to the Church of God:
for that we had a desire that all things in the holy congregation might, as
Saint Paul commands, be done with comeliness, and in good order. But as for
all those things, which we saw were, either very superstitious, or utterly
unprofitable, or noisome, or mockeries, or contrary to the holy Scriptures, or
else unseemely for sober and discreet people, whereof there be infinite numbers
now adays, where the Roman Religion is used, these, I say, we have utterly
refused without all manner exception, because we would not have the right
worshipping of God to be any longer defiled with such foilies.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
IN the mean time we believe that it is in deed profitable, that Artic. 32.
the Elders which do govern in Churches, should appoint some order among
themselves, so that they do diligently take heed, that in no case they do
swarve, or decline from those things, which Christ himself, our only Master,
has once appointed. Therefore we do reject all humane inventions, and all
those laws, which were brought in to be a worship of God, that men's consciences
should any way thereby be snared or bound: and we receive those only, which
are fit, either to cherish, or maintain concord, or to keep us in the
obedience of God. And hereunto Look the 1. observation. upon this conf^ssion.
excommunication is chiefly necessary, being used according to the commandment
of the word of God, and other additions of Ecclesiastical discipline annexed
thereunto.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
Artic. 15.
COncerning Ecclesiastical rites, which are ordained by man's authority, they
teach, that such rites are to be observed, as may be kept without sin, and do
tend to quietness, and good order in the Church: as namely, set holidaies, and
certain godly Psalms, and other such like rites. But yet touching this sort of
rites they teach, that men's consciences are not to be burdened with
superstitious opinions of them, that is, it must not be thought that these
humane ordinances are righteousness before God, or do deserve remission of
sins, or are duties necessary unto the righteousness revealed in the Gospel.
But this is to be thought of them, that they are indifferent things, which
without the case of offense may be omitted. But such, as break them with
offense, are faulty as those which do rashly disturb the peace of the
Churches.

Such traditions therefore, as cannot be observed without sin, are rejected
of us, as the tradition of single life. We reject also that impious opinion of
traditions and vows, wherein they feign, that worships invented by man's
authority do merit remission of sins, and are satisfactions for sin, etc. Of
which like false opinions, touching vows and fastings, not a few have been
spread abroad in the Church by unlearned men.

This Article is thus to be found in another Edition.
COncerning Ecclesiastical rites, they teach, that those rites are to be
observed, which may be kept without any sin, and are availeable for
quietness and good order in the Church, such as as are set holydaies, feasts,
and such like.

Again out of the 7. Article, touching abuses of the same confession, These
words that follow pertain to this place, and the rest unto the eleventh
Section.
Of the authority of the Ministers.

BEsides these things, there is a controversy, whether Bishops Here also be
many things which might very fitly have been referred to the former Sect. by
reason of special examples of meats, and holy days, here rehearsed: but
seeing that the title or this page is general, it could not here be
pretermitted.
or Pastors have power to ordain ceremonies in the Church, and to make laws
of meats, and holidaies, and degrees, or orders of Ministers. They that ascribe
this power to the Bishops, allege this testimony for it. I have yet many
things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them away now. But when that
spirit of truth shall come, he shall teach you all truth: They allege also the
examples of the Apostles, which commanded the Christians to abstain from
blood, and that which was strangled. They allege the change of the Sabbath
into the Lords day, contrary as it seems to the moral law, and they have no
examples so often in their mouths, as the change of the Sabbath. They will needs
have the Churches power and authority to be very great, because it has
dispensed with a precept of the moral law. But of this question our men do
thus teach, that the Bishops have no power to ordain any thing contrary to the
Gospel, as was showed before. The same also do the Canons teach. distinct. 9.
Moreover it is against the Scripture, to ordain or require the observation of
any traditions, to the end that we might merit remission of sins, and
satisfy for sins by them. For the glory of Christ's merit receives a blow,
when as we seek by such observations to merit remission of sins and
justification. And it is very apparent, that through this persuasion traditions
grew into an infinite number in the Church. In the mean while the doctrine of
faith, and of the righteousness of faith, was quite smoothered: for ever and
anon there were new holidaies made, new fasts appointed, new ceremonies, new
worships for Saints ordained, because that the authors of such gear supposed
by these works to merit remission of sins and justification. After the same
manner heretofore did the penitential Canons increase, whereof we still see
some footings in satisfactions.

Again, many writers imagine, that in the New Testament there should be a
worship like to the Leviticall worship, the appointing whereof God committed to
the Apostles and Bishops, wherein they seem to be deceived by the example of
the law of Moses, as if the righteousness of the New Testament were the
outward observing of certain rites, as the justice of the law was. Like as
therefore in the law it was a sin to eat swines flesh, etc. so in the New
Testament they place sin in meats, in days, in apparel, and such like
things: and they hold oppinion, that the righteousness of the New Testament
can not stand without these. From hence are those burdens, that certain meats
defile the conscience, that it is a mortal sin to omit the canonical
hours, that fastings merit remission of sins, because they be necessary to
the righteousness of the New Testament, that a sin in a case reserved, cannot
be pardoned, but by the authority of him that reserved it: whereas the Canons
speak only of reserving of Canonical punishments, and not of the reserving
of the fault. Whence then have the Bishops power and authority of imposing
these traditions upon the Churches, for the burdening of men's consciences? For
there are diverse clear testimonies which inhibit the making of such
traditions, either for to deserve remission of sins, or as things necessary
to the righteousness of the New Testament, or to salvation. Paul to the
Coloss. 2. Let no man judge you in meat, drink, or a piece of a holy day, in
the new moon, or in the Sabbath. Again, If ye be dead with Christ, from the
rudiments of the world, why as though ye lived in the world, are ye burd^ned
with traditions, as: Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all do perish
with the using, and are the precepts and doctrines of men, which have a show of
wisdom. And to Titus, he does plainly forbid traditions. For he says, Not
listening to Jewish fables, and to the precepts of men, that abhor the truth.
And Christ, Matthew. 15. says of them, which urge traditions, Let them alone
they be blind leaders of the blind. And he condemns such worships, Every
plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. If Bishops
have authority to burden the Churches with innumerable traditions, and to
snare men's consciences, why does the Scripture so often forbid to make and to
listen to traditions? why does it call them the Devils traditions? has the
holy Ghost warned us of them to no purpose?

It remains then, that seeing constitutions ordained as necessary, or with
opinion of meriting remission of sins by them, are flat repugnant to the
Gospel, because that it is not lawful for any Bishops to appoint or urge any
such worship. For it is very requisite, that the doctrine of Christian liberty
should be maintained in the Church, because that the bondage of the law is not
necessary unto justification, as it is written to the Gal. Come not ye under
the yoke of bondage again. It is necessary that the chiefest point of all the
Gospel should be holden fast, that we do freely obtain remission of sins and
justification by faith in Christ, and not by any observations, nor by any
worship devised by man. For though they seek to qualify traditions, yet the
equity of them can never be seen nor perceived, so long as the opinion of
necessity remains, which must needs remain, where the righteousness of
faith and Christian liberty are not known. The Apostles commanded them to
abstain from blood: who observes that now a days? and yet they do not sin
that observe it not: for the Apostles themselves would not burden men's
consciences with such a servitude. but they forbad it for a time, for offense
sake. For in that decree the perpetual intent and mind of the Gospel is to be
considered: scarcely any canons are precisely kept, and many grow out of use
daily, yea even among them that do most busily defend traditions: Neither can
there be sufficient care had of men's consciences, except this equity be kept,
that men should know, that such rites are not to be observed, with any opinion
of necessity, and that men's consciences are not hurt though traditions grow
out of use.

The Bishops might Look the 1. observation upon this confession.
easily retain lawful obedience, if they would not have men to observe such
traditions, as cannot be kept with a good conscience. But now they command
single life, and they admit none, except they will swear not to teach the pure
doctrine of the Gospel. The Churches do not desire of the Bishops, that they
would repair peace and concord with the loss of their honor, which yet good
Pastors ought to do: only they desire that they would remit unjust burdens,
which are both new, and received contrary to the custom of the Catholic
Church. It may well be, that some constitutions had some probable causes, when
they began, which yet will not agree to latter times. It is evident, that some
were received through error. Wherefore it were for the Look the 2. Observat.
chief Bishops gentleness, to mitigate them now, for such a change would not
overthrow the unity of the Church. For many humane traditions have been
changed in time, as the Canons themselves declare. But if it cannot be
obtained, that those observations may not be released, which cannot be kept
without sin, then must we follow the Apostles rule, which wills to obey God
rather then men. Peter forbids Bishops to be Lords, and to be imperious over
the Churches. Our meaning is not to have Look the 3. observation.
rule taken from the Bishops. But this one thing is requested at their hands,
that they would suffer the Gospel to be purely taught, and that they would
release a few observations, which cannot be observed without sin. But if they
will remit none, let them look how they will give account to God for this that
by their wilfulness they give occasion of schism.

Also in the same 7. Article touching abuses, this exposition is found thus in
another Edition.
NOw come I to the question in hand, touching the laws of Bishops: concerning
which first this most certain rule is to be holden, That it is not lawful for
any to make laws repugnant to the commandment of God. That sentence of Saint
Paul is well known: If an Angel from heaven teach any other Gospel, let him be
accursed. Upon this foundation, which is sure and immovable, the rest may
easily be reared. Now there be three orders of the decrees of Bishops Some do
constrain a man to sin, as the law of single life, the laws of private
Masses, wherein is made an oblation and application for the quick and the dead.
And the opinion of Transubstantiation breeds a wicked adoration. Also the
commandment of praying to the dead. It is an easy matter to give sentence of
these laws. For seeing they do manifestly oppugn the commandment of God,
the Apostles rule is, We ought rather to obey God then men.

The second order is of those rites, which concern things in their own nature
indifferent, such as are the laws touching the difference of meats, and days,
and such like things. But when false opinions are joined unto these things,
they are no more indifferent. Now our adversaries do, some more, some less,
tie unto them absurd and false opinions, for the which both those laws and
rites are to be cast off, lest any corrupt worship should be established. The
most part do feign, that the works of man's traditions, as satisfactions, and
such like, do merit remission of sins. This opinion is apparently false: for
it removes the benefit of Christ unto man's traditions. And there needs here
no long confutation: we will content our selves with one thundering saying of
Saint Paul, Ye are made void of Christ, whosoever are justified by the law: Ye
are fallen from Christ. This saying teaches, that men do not merit remission
of sins by the proper works, either of Gods law, or of man's traditions.
Others being put in mind, what gross absurdity there is in this first
error, they begin to talk more modestly of traditions. But yet they hold
still an error, that is not to be borne withal. They say, That these works,
though they do not deserve remission of sins, yet are they services of God,
that is, works, the immediate end whereof is, that God by them might be
honored. This error also must be stiffely withstood. For Christ says
plainly, They worship me in vain with the precepts of men. And Paul does
expressly condemn will worship to the Coloss. And seeing that the worship of
God must be done in faith, it is necessary that we should have the word of God,
that may testify that the work pleases God. For how can the conscience offer
a work unto God, unless there be a voice of God, which may declare, that God
will be so worshipped or served with this honor? But ungodly men understanding
this Doctrine of faith, have in all ages with damnable boldness devised
worships, without commandment or word of God, which thing if it be lawful to
do, you can show no cause why the heathenish sacrifices, slaying of dogs,
sacrifices offered at Lampsacum to Priapus, and such like monstrous worship
should not please God. Whether has man's foolehardinesse rushed, not only
amongst the Ethnicks, in feigning worships, but also among the Popish rout in
devising eft-soons new and foolish ceremonies, in prayer to the dead, in the
worshipping of Saints, and in the babbling of Monks. Here therefore let us be
watchful, and not suffer laws to be thrust upon the Churches, which prescribe
works without the commadement of God, as Gods worship and man's righteousness.
And whereas all our adversaries, even they that speak most modestly, do tie
this opinion of worship unto those works, let us know, that it is a good work
to withstand them, and by violating such traditions to show a pattern, by
which the godly may know what to judge of them. As Euscbius writes of Attalus,
That he was commanded by God to speak unto a certain man which eat nothing
but bread, salt, and water, that he would use common meat, lest he should
bring others into error. Moreover this second error which makes these works
to be the worship of God, brake farther. For many in the Church were deceived
through a perverse emulation of the Leviticall ceremonies, and did think that
there should be some such rites in the New Testament, and that they are the
worship of God, or things whereby God will be honored, yea and that they are
righteousness. And for that cause they gave authority to the Bishops to
ordain such rites and such services. This Pharisaicall error Christ and his
Apostles noted, who taught, that the worship of the New Testament is
repentance, the fear of God, faith, and the works of the Ten Commandments,
as Paul says, The kingdom of God is not meat, and drink, but righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. For he that in these serves Christ,
pleases God, and is approved of men. The Monks fained themselves to be
Nazarites. The Mass Priests that sacrifice for the dead, would have men think
that they imitate Aaron offering sacrifices. But these examples do not agree:
the rites of Monks, and the Priests mercenarie Masses, have no word of God for
them, yea there are many fond opinions mingled with them, which of necessity
must be reproved in our Churches.

The third error is the opinion of necessity, wherein they imagine that the
Church is like unto other humane governments. For they surmise that it is a
kingdom, wherein the Bishops, as if they were Kings, have power to make new
laws, that are besides the Gospel, and that they must of necessity be obeyed
(even as the Princes laws must necessarily be obeyed) especially seeing this
life of man cannot be without traditions. And this opinion of the necessity of
these things, has stirred up contentions, whilst every one defends his own
rites invented by man, as simply necessary. But Christ and his Apostles teach
that such rites set forth without Gods Commandments, are not to be taken for
things necessary. Against this liberty enacted and established by Gods
authority, the opinion which maintains that the violating of traditions
about things indifferent though it be not in a case where offense may be given,
is not to be received. Hitherto belongs the saying of Paul, Let no man judge
you in meat and drink, and intercourse of holy days, etc. For to judge
signifies to bind the consciences, and to condemn them that do not obey.
Again, Gal. 5. Stand in the liberty wherein Christ has made you free.

Hitherto it has bin showed in what respect it is not lawful to appoint
traditions, or to approve them. Now some man may ask whether we would have
this life of man to be without order and rites? No surely. But we teach that
the true Pastors of the churches may ordain public rites in their Churches,
but so, as it be only for an end belonging to the body, that is, for good
orders sake, to wit, such rites, as avail for the instruction of the people:
As for example, set days, set lessons, and such like, and that without any
superstition, and opinion of necessity, as has been said before, so that it
may not be counted any sin to violate any of these ordinances, so it be not
with giving offense. But if so be that they be broken with offense there, where
the Churches are well ordered, and there is no error in doctrine, let him that
in such place breaks them know, that he does offend, because he disturbeth
the peace of the Church well ordered, or does withdraw others from the true
ministry. This reason does sufficiently warrant the authority of profitable
traditions, and lays no snare on men's consciences. So the Church in the
beginning of it, ordained set days, as the Lords day, the day of Christ's
nativitie, Easter, Pentecost, etc. Neither did the Church dispense with the
moral precepts, but Gods own authority abrogated the ceremonies of Moses law.
And yet it was meet that the people should know when to come together to the
hearing of the Gospel, and unto the ceremonies which Christ did ordain. And for
that cause certain days were appointed to that use, without any such opinions
as were above mentioned. And the general equity abides still in the moral
law, that at certain times we should come together to these godly exercises:
but the special day, which was but a ceremony, is free. Whereupon the Apostles
retained not the seventh day, but did rather take the first day of the week for
that use, that by it they might admonish the godly both of their liberty, and
of Christ's resurrection. Look the 4. Observat.
The things objected against this may easily be taken away. The Apostles decree
touching things offered to Idols, and fornication, was moral, and perpetual:
but in that which they added, touching blood, and that which was strangled,
they had regard of offense giving at that time. For it was an use even before
the Apostles time, that such as then were conquered by the Jews should abstain
from blood and things strangled. The Apostles therefore have laid no new thing
upon those, that were joined unto their fellowship, but as yet they kept the
old usual rite, which was pleasing both to the godly Jews, and such as joined
with them in the society of Christ. As for that which Christ says, I have yet
many things to say unto you: doubtless he meant not those foolish ceremonies
that the Popes have brought in, nor that any new articles of faith, but a
farther illumination of that Gospel, which he had already delivered. And
therefore afterward he adds touching the office of the holy Ghost, that he
should not bring any other kind of doctrine, but should enlighten the minds of
the Apostles, that they should understand the Gospel touching the will of God,
which before had been taught. Therefore he says, Ioh. 14. He shall teach you
all things, and shall bring all things to your remembrance, which I have showed
you. Again, He shall not speak of himself, but what he has heard, that
shall he speak.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY. Of traditions, that is, of Ceremonies
instituted in the Church, by man's authority.
ALthough for orders sake there must needs be some decent and seemly
Ceremonies; yet notwithstanding men that Artic. 20.
are given to superstition do soon pervert those Ceremonies, falsely imagining
that such observations do merit forgiveness of sins, and are accepted for
righteous in the sight of God: and do turn the signs into Gods, like as many
have ascribed a Godhead unto Images: and many, either of superstition, or by
tyranny, do heap up Ceremonies: and superstition has increased in the
Church the Ceremonies of satisfaction, as they call them. Nebuchadnezar and
Antiochus, because they are of opinion, that consent in Religion is availeable
to the peaceable government of their kingdoms, do ordain such service of
God, as they will have indifferently observed of all their subjects. There new
laws, and new gods were erected, not of superstition, but by tyranny. Thus we
observe that amongst men true and false religion are confounded, and each
changed into other, and we marvel at the cause, why men do not steadfastly
continue in the truth revealed by God. But the word of God pronounces, that
men are set on by Devils to fall away from God: and the nature of man being
blind, curious, and inconstant, loves to play with diverse opinions. Against
these great mischieves God armeth and confirms his Church, and delivers a
sure and certain doctrine, which is contained in the books of the Prophets
and Apostles, and in the Creed. Wherefore it is necessary to consider, what
those laws, or rites be, and whence they had their beginning.

The first rule therefore is this: It is lawful for no creature, neither for
Angels, nor for men, neither for Kings nor for Look the 1. observation upon
this confession.
Bishops to make laws, or ordain ceremonies, disagreeing from the word of God.
Horribly sinned the King of Babylon, although he excelled in wisdom and
valor, when he commanded his Image to be worshipped; and all men do sin
that obey such Proclamations or laws: even as Eve sinned, when she departed
from the commandment of God, for the lying persuasion of the Devil. But
generally the rule is to be observed, which is set down, Act. 5. We ought
rather to obey God then men. Such are the Edicts which command to call upon
dead men, or to embrace false doctrine, or to use ungodly worship. Touching all
these, that Rule of the first Commandment is to be holden, 1 Cor. 10. Fly
from Idols. Such is also the law of the single life of Priests, which many can
not observe without sin. And albeit we know what opinion politic and expert
men do hold of the change of laws, yet God has so commanded obedience, that
still he would have us fast tied unto himself, and to agree with his wisdom
and righteousness. From whence do arise those unchangeable and perpetual
rules, Exodus 20. Thou shall have no strange gods. Also, Act. 5. We ought rather
to obey God then men, Also, Gal 1. If any man teach you any other Gospel, let
him be accursed.

The second rule. For as much as it is usual to add superstition to those
works, which otherwise in their own nature were indifferent, as to eat, or
not to eat flesh, it is necessary to reprove such superstitions and errors,
as are in this sort added, and in the practice of our liberty, examples of
this doctrine may modestly be showed. And that error is not among the least,
which the folly of many teachers, and for the most part of the people brings
in, in that they teach and think that fasting and such like works deserve
forgiveness of sins, both of the guiltiness, and of the pain: as both
Thomas does write of satisfactions, and many also do say the same. This
Pharisaicall imagination easily intangleth the minds of men, and darkeneth the
light of the doctrine of the benefits proper to Christ, and of free
forgiveness of sins, and of faith. For when as men think that they merit
remission of sins by these their Ceremonies, they take away the honor due
unto Christ, and give it unto these ceremonies, and are somewhat puffed up with
vain confidence. Yet afterward when they be in true sorrow, they fall headlong
into many doubts, which turn to their destruction. And of it self it is a
great sin, not to know the benefits of God. For this cause Paul so earnestly
contendeth for the abolishing of circumcision, and other ceremonies of the law
of Moses, for fear lest the true acknowledgement of the Mediator might be
clean put out, if men should think that they deserved remission of sins,
and were made righteous by this observation of the law and ceremonies of Moses,
as the Pharisees did avouch. And oftentimes Paul admonishes to beware that the
light of the Gospel be not darkened by new ceremonies of man's invention. This
second error is not so evident, but yet very dangerous. After that some men
see that this Pharisaicall error cannot be defended, they come to this:
Although, say they, these ceremonies deserve not remission of sins, yet are
these traditions defended, because they are good works and services of God: as
in the law of Moses the abstinence of the Nazarites, although it deserved not
the remission of sins, yet it pleased God, and was a service acceptable unto
God. With this color certain of late have learned to paint traditions, which
yet strive not about these indifferent matters, but go about to establish other
foul errors, and the opinion of the power of Bishops. But it is necessary for
the godly here to beware of deceitful doctrine. There is a great error even in
this colorable reason: neither is that example well alleged out of Moses. The
works ordained and commanded by God do far differ from works not commanded
nor ordained by God, but only devised by man's invention. The works ordained
in the law of God, were services of God, although they deserved forgiveness of
sins. But will worship devised by men, neither have been, nor are any service
of God: God does not allow this boldness of men, which notwithstanding has
always been usual, to devise new worship, that is, such as is immediately
intended to honor God withal. Therefore the Word of God cries out, Matthew.
15. In vain do they worship me after the ordinances of men. And every where
in the Apostles, and in Paul, this boldness is reproved. But the true service
of God are those works, that he has commanded, which are done in the
acknowledgement and confidence of the Mediator, to the end, that God may be
obeyed, and that we may profess him to be the true God, whom we so worship. So
also Ezec. 20 he calls us back to the commandment of God, saying: Walk not
after the ordinances of your fathers, but walk in my commandments. And often
are such warnings repeated. And Psalm. 1 18. Thy word is a lantern to my feet.
And Numb. 15. Let them not follow their own imaginations.

The third error is this. Hypocrites do imagine that such works are a kind of
perfection: as Monks do prefer their vows full of vanity before the civil
and householders life: whereas God by his wonderful providence has so joined
mankind together in fellowship, and in these travels and dangers would have
our faith, prayer, and confession, or liberality one toward another, or
patience, and other virtues, to be tried.

The fourth error is, the opinion of necessity, as some do write, That the
fasting of Lent is necessary, and other things are arbitrary. Neither is it
only a torment of conscience, to judge that he is no Christian nor member of
the Church of God, that eats flesh on the Saturday, or observes not the fast
of Lent; but it is also an error that darkeneth great matters, as the doctrine
of the righteousness of the Gospel, and of the Church, what manner of Church it
is, and how the members of the Church are to be discerned, not by meat and
drink, but by faith, prayer, and other virtues. And against the opinion of
necessity it is expressly said, Col. 2. Let no man judge you in meat or drink.
And Gal. 5. Stand in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and be
not again entangled with the yoke of bondage. And that opinion of necessity
has always bread great discord: as in time past there was great contention
about Easter day, and about leven, and now also many such like contentions have
risen.

The fifth error. To the former opinions this error also is added, that the
Bishops take to themselves authority to ordain new kinds of worship, and to
bind consciences, as Gregory has ordained, That married men translated to the
order of priesthood should forsake the company of their wives, and the
constitution of confession commands to reckon up sins, and decrees have been
made of differences of meats, and fasting, and such like. Of such traditions
there are also late books set forth, full of labyrinths, wherein it is
written, that the transgressions of such ceremonies are mortal sins, yea
though they be committed without giving offense to others. Gerson sought for
some mittigations, but the true comfort is the voice of the Gospel, which would
have the understanding of this liberty to be made known and maintained in the
Church, namely by removing those errors whereof has been spoken. But
ceremonies invented by man, such as are seemly, devised for order, may be
observed without any opinion of merit, worship, or necessity, as has been
aforesaid out of the Col. 2. Let no man judge you in meat or drink. And Peter
says, Act. 15. Why do ye tempt God laying upon the necks of the disciples a
yoke, which neither your fathers, nor we were able to bear.

The third rule. Those errors being removed, whereof the Church must needs be
admonished, afterward we both observe certain ceremonies, which are comely, and
made for good order, and also teach that they ought to be observed, even as men
cannot live without order. And Paul says, 1 Cor. 14. Let all things be done
decently and in order. And there is a saying of Athanasius, Ceremonies are
profitable, but with knowledge of the truth, and in measure. It is plain, that
this last word is opposed to superstition, which then also daily increased
ceremonies, and darkened the truth, and burdened consciences, and the Churches.
But we thank God the everlasting Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who for his
Son, and by him gathers an eternal Church, for that even from the first
beginning of mankind he has preserved the public ministry of the Gospel, and
honest assemblies, who himself also has set apart certain times for the same:
and we pray him that henceforth he will save and govern his Church And we
diligently teach, that all men ought to help to maintain the public
ministry, and avoid offenses, and dislentions that scatter the Church, as in
it proper place more at large is declared.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE. Of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies.
WE acknowledge, that by Christ the Son of God two Artic. 35.
Ceremonies were ordained in the Church, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which
are also to be observed, according to the institution of Christ. We confess
also, that the Apostles did appoint certain ordinances in the Church, That all
things be done decently, and in order, as Paul speaks, such as they be, that
are set down, 1 Cor. 14. and 1. Tim. 2. The Apostles also, in ordaining
Ministers of the Church, used laying on of hands, which being retained out of
the custom of the old Law, and not being commanded to the Church, may be
freely observed. They ordained also in the Acts of the Apostles, That the
Gentiles should beware of eating of that which was strangled, and of blood: not
that this observation should be for ever among the Gentiles, but for a time,
and so long to continue, till this eating were no more offensive. We confess
this also that it is lawfu^l for the Bishops, with with the consent of their
Church, to appoint holy days, lessons, and Sermons, for edifying, and for
instruction in the true faith in Christ. But it is not lawful for them to
thrust upon the Church the ceremonies of the old law for the holy service
wherewithal God alone is worshipped. Neither is it lawful either to restore
the old ceremonies of the law, or devise new, to shadow forth the truth already
laid open, and brought to light by the Gospel: as in the day light to set up
candles, to signify the light of the Gospel, or to carry banners and crosses,
to signify the victory of Christ through the Cross. Of which sort is all that
whole furniture of massing attire, which they say does shadow out the whole
passion of Christ, and many other things of that kind. Much less is it
lawful to ordain ceremonies, and holy rites, by the merit whereof sin may be
purged and the kingdom of heaven purchased. For of that former kind of
ceremonies and holy rites, Christ out of Esaias preaches, saying, In vain, do
they worship me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of men. And Paul says,
Let no man judge you in meat, or drink or part of an holy day, or of the new
Moon, etc. Hitherto may be added the testimonies of Augustine and others,
touching the observation of such ceremonies. But touching the latter kind of
ceremonies, it is manifest, that they are wicked rites, and reprochful to the
death and resurrection of Christ, by whose only merit, we have deliverance
from sin, and inheritance of eternal life by faith.

Out of the Confession of SUEVELAND. Of humane Traditions. CHAP. 14.
FVrthermore, touching the traditions of the Fathers or such as the Bishops and
Churches do at this day ordain, this is the opinion of our men. They reckon
no traditions for men's traditions, but such as are condemned in Scripture, but
such as are contrary to the law of God, such as bind the Conscience about
meat, drink, and times, and other outward things, such as forbid marriage to
them who have need thereof, to live honestly, and the rest of that stamp. For
such as agree with the Scripture, and were ordained for good manners and the
profit of men, although they be not word for word expressed in the Scriptures,
nevertheless in that they proceed from the commandment of love, which
orders all things most decently, they are worthily to be accounted rather of
God, then of man. Of this sort were those set down by Paul, that women should
not pray in the Church bareheaded, 1 Cor 14. 1 Cor. 14.
nor men with their heads covered, that they who are to communicate together
should tarry one for another: that no man should speak with tongues in the
congregation without an Interpreter: that the Prophets without confusion should
deliver their Prophecies to be judged by them that sit by. Many such the Church
at this day for good cause observes, and upon occasion also makes new, which
who so refuses, he despises the authority, not of men, but of God, whose
tradition, it is, whatsoever is profitable. For, whatsoever truth is said or
written, by his gift it is spoken and written, who is truth, as Saint Augustine
has godly written. But oftentimes there is disputing about that, what
tradition is profitable, what not: that is, what set forward godliness, what
does hinder it. But he that shall seek nothing of his own, but shall wholly
dedicate himself to the public profit, he shall easily see, what things are
agreeable to the law of God, what are not. Furthermore, seeing the estate of
Christians is such, that they are also helped by injuries, the Christian will
not refuse to obey, no not unjust laws, so they have no wicked thing in them,
according to the saying of Christ, If any man compel thee to go with him one
mile, go with him two. Even so servile the Christian ought to become all unto
all, that he may study to do and suffer all things, so that they be not
contrary to the commandments of God, to pleasure and profit men withal. Hence
it comes to pass, that every man, so much the more willingly obeys the
civil laws which are not repugnant to religion, the more fully he is endued
with the faith of Christ.

THE EIGHTEENTH SECTION. OF WEDLOCK, SINGLE LIFE, AND MONASTICAL VOWS.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA. Of Single life, Wedlock, and Household
government. CHAP. 29.
SVch as have the gift of chastity given unto them from above, so as they can
with the heart, or whole mind be pure and continent, and not be grievously
burned with lust, let them serve the Lord in that calling, as long as they
shall feel themselves endued with that heavenly gift: and let them not lift up
themselves above others, but let them serve the Lord daily in simplicity and
humility. For such are more apt for doing of heavenly things, then they which
are distracted with private affairs of their family: but if again the gift be
taken away, and they feel a continual burning, let them call to mind the
words of the Apostle, It is better to marry, then to burn. 1 Cor. 7.


For wedlock, which is the medicine of incontinencie, and continency it self,
was ordained by the Lord God himself, who blessed it most bountifully, and
wills man and woman to cleave Mat. 13.
one to the other inseparably, and to live together in great love and concord.
Whereupon we know the Apostle said, Marriage Heb. 13. 1 Cor. 7.
is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled. And again, If a Virgin marry,
she sins not. We therefore condemn Poligamie, and those which condemn
second marriages. We teach that marriages ought to be made lawfully, in the
fear of the Lord, and not against the laws, which forbid certain degrees to
join in matrimony, lest the marriages should be incestuous. Let marriages be
made with consent of the parents, or such as be instead of parents, and for
that end especially, for the which the Lord ordained marriages: and let them be
confirmed publicly in the Church, with prayer, and blessing of them. Moreover,
let them be kept holy, with peace, faithfulness, dutifulnes, love, and also
purity of the persons coupled together. Therefore let them take heed of
brawlings, debates, lusts, and adulteries. Let lawful judgments and holy
Judges be established in the Church, which may maintain marriages, and may
repress all dishonestie, and shamefulnesse, and before whom the controversies
in matrimony may be decided, and ended.

Let children also be brought up of the Parents in the fear of the Lord, and
let Parents provide for their children, remembering the saying of the Apostle,
He that provideth not for his own, has 1 Timothy 5.
denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel. But specially let them teach
their children honest sciences, whereby they may maintain themselves: let them
withdraw them from idleness, and plant in them a true confidence in God in all
these things: lest they through distrust, or overmuch careless security, or
filthy covetousness wax loose, and in the end come to no good. Now it is most
certain, that those works which parents do in a true faith by the duties of
marriage, and government of their families, are before God holy and good works
indeed, and do please God no less, then prayers, fastings, and alms deeds.
For so the Apostle has taught in his Epistles, especially in those to Timothy
and Titus. And with the same Apostle we account the doctrine of such as forbid
marriage or do openly dispraise, or secretly discredit it as not holy, or
clean, amongst the doctrines of Devils. And we do detest unclean single life,
licentious lusts, and fornications, both open, and close, and the continency
of dissembling hypocrites, when as they are of all men most incontinent. All
that be such, God will judge. We do not disallow riches, and rich men, if they
be godly, and use their riches well, but we reprove the sect of the
Apostoliques, etc.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA. Of holy Wedlock.
WE think that wedlock being appointed of God for all Artic. 37.
men, that be fit for it, and are not called to some other thing, is nothing
repugnant to the holiness of any degree. The which as the Church does
consecrate and establish, with a solemn exhortation and prayer, so it is the
duty of the Magistrate, to see that it be worthily kept, and maintained, Look
the 1. Observation upon this confession.
and that it be not dissolved, but upon just cause. Therefore we do far
reject this Monastical single life, and this whole slothful kind of life of
superstitious men, which is nothing else but an abominable devise, as being as
much repugnant to the Church, as to the common wealth.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA.
Hitherto pertains first, that which is set down in the 19. Chap. of this
Confession in these words.
FOr this cause it is thought to be good, and well standing with wisdom (so
far undoubtedly as may be done by conscience) that Priests, to the end that
they may so much the more diligently exercise themselves in the study of the
holy Scriptures, and may the more readily and profitably serve the Church of
God, be free, and exempted from all affairs and burdens of civil
conversation, seeing that it behooves them to fight valiantly for the faith of
the Gospel of God, and if it may be, to be also free from wedlock, to this
end, that they may be the more ready and free to do that which is for the
increase and furtherance of the salvation of the people, and that many
harmefull impediments may be turned from them, which do concur with that
kind of life, and do oftentimes withhold, and hinder the due works of the
ministry. For which causes our ministers think, that they are more ready
pressed, and more fit for the Ecclesiastical Ministry, which are unmarried:
yet they mean such unmarried persons, as have this peculiar gift given to them
of God, that they may remain such, and so give themselves wholly to the
Ministry. This things is so observed among us, as is meet: yet it is neither
taken for a sin, neither does any man disdain at it, if Priests, upon just
and lawful causes, be married. For holy Paul teaches, how such ought to be
chosen to this function, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.
yea the holy Ghost himself does permit that Bishops and Elders should have
their lawful and honest wives, and he does in no case give them liberty,
contrary to order and the discipline of God, to entertain concubines, or
otherwise so to live, as that they may thereby give offense to others. And
concerning marriage, it is thus written, It is better to marry, then to sin
so many ways, and to burn with so great dishonestie: for which sins, not
only the Priest, but also every Christian, without respect of persons, both
ought, and shall worthily, by excommunication be cast out of the Church.

Also, CHAP. 19. Of single life and of Wedlock.
COncerning the condition of single life, virginity, and widowhead, our
Preachers do teach, that every man has free liberty, either to choose it to
himself, or to refuse it: for by way of a law nothing is commanded of God to
men touching these things: neither is this thing appointed of God, neither is
it on the other side forbidden: for which cause no man ought to be enforced
thereunto against his will, nor be driven from it. And as concerning the
Church, and certain men, and chiefly the Ministers of the Church, our men have
taught from the beginning, and do now teach, first, that the gift of chastity,
by the peculiar goodness of God, and of the holy Ghost, both in times past was
given, and at this day also is given to some, for the singular use and profit
of the Church, as Christ his speech does evidently witness. Every Matthew. 19.
man, says he, does not receive these words, that is, that a man should keep
himself single without a wife, but they to whom it is 1 Cor. 7.
given. And holy Paul also does both place and celebrate this amongst peculiar
gifts, and whereunto some are peculiarly called. And moreover, the examples of
certain in the Prophetical and Apostolical writings, and of John Baptist,
and of many Ministers, and Look the 2. Observat.
women ministers of the Church, do witness this thing.

In the second place they teach that this gift is not of flesh and blood (for
the Lord by distinguishing does remove and separate from hence that unablenesse
which is in this kind) but of the spirit which is jealous, who from his heart
has a care and pleasure in the glory of God, and in his own and his neighbors
salvation, and also in the Ministry of the Church, and for this cause he does
of his own accord abstain from wedlock: Therefore the Lord says, Those
which have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom Matthew. 19.
of heaven: that is, who be such, as might be married, yet they do omit and
abstain from it, because of the affection of the inward heart and their love
toward God, and his word, and for the pleasure and joy which they receive
thereof: and through this gift of the spirit, whose virtue and power does
overcome the motions of nature, they do preserve the pureness as well Look
the 3. Observation.
of the spirit, as of the body: howbeit this thing is not in them without
labor and difficulty, even as it is a thing of no small labor and
difficulty for all Christian men to forsake, and to want the use of other
pleasant things, and also such as are profitable for this life, as friends,
riches, and money.

Thirdly, that single life is to be chosen, and taken with a true intent and a
godly meaning, that is, not to this end, or with this purpose, that a man would
by this means merit or get unto himself, or to another, remission of sins, and
eternal life, and so consequently salvation it self. For there is no
continency or chastity, nor any humane action, or other virtue, which can
merit: the only innocence and death of the only begotten Son of God our Lord
Jesus Christ does perform and perfect this thing. Neither must the thing be
received with this meaning, as to think that some dignity is added to the
holy ministry of the Church by reason of this gift: or that the works of
those that be unmarried in this ministry, are to be preferred in merit and
dignity before the works of married men: but as the Lord says, that it may be
received for the kingdom of heaven: that is, in such sort, as he which for the
gift spoken of before, is fit to lead a single life.

As therefore by these things he may with less hinderance and more easily, and
readily with great leisure, and more commodiously employ his labor to the
salvation of the Church and holy assemblies, even so he may be a more
convenient Minister then others, of the same salvation, which Christ has
purchased for him: (and whereof that he may be partaker by faith, it is given
him freely of grace, and wherein he does keep and uphold himself) seeing that
it is certian, that by the state of marriage many lets, many cares, and many
things whereby necessary quietness is disturbed, are cast in our way. And
this is it which Paul says, I 1 Cor. 7.
would that you should be without such cares. He that is unmarried, is careful
for those things which pertain to the Lord, how he may please the Lord. Also, I
think that this is good for the present necessity. Also, to that which is
seemly to perform diligence, by serving the Lord without distraction. And
before we rehearsed the voice of the Lord who says, that there be some, who
for the kingdom of heaven, do abstain from marriage. And holy Paul says, He
that gives not his virgin to be married, does the better. For which cause it
is taught, that all they, who of their own accord do take and choose unto
themselves this kind of life, ought carefully to have regard hereunto, that in
such a life they may with a singular and earnest endeavor exercise godliness,
and be holy, as Paul commands, as well in body, as in spirit, and give more
light then others, by the honesty of their actions, by the labors of such
trades as beseem a Christian profession, by doing all that they can for the
benefit of the Church, and by yielding their service to the sick, and to other
needy members.

This gift and purpose of such which do thus in this matter consecrate
themselves to God, and such an exercise of their godliness, is commended of
our men, and they do faithfully persuade men hereunto: but they do persuade,
as we said, and not compel: the which thing Paul also does, who writes thus:
Concerning Virgins I have no commandment of the Lord, but I deliver 1 Cor 7.
my judgment, which have received this mercy of the Lord, that I may be
faithful. I think it good for a man to be such a one: and he concludes after
this sort, He is more happy, in my judgment, if he remain such a one, that
is, unmarried, then if he marry: and I think that I have the spirit of God. In
like sort, in comparison of others, there be bountiful and peculiar promises,
and singular rewards offered unto those, that keep themselves single, to wit,
that their worthy works shall be recompensed with a great reward, and Mat^h. 17
that no man shall in vain for sake any thing, as house, father, brother, so
also his wife, etc. as the Apostles did, for the Lords cause. Furthermore, it
is taught, that they which have received this gift of God, and being thoroughly
proved and tried in this behalf, do of their own accord serve the Lord and
the Church, they are taught I say, together with other gifts to make great
account of this gift, and to keep it diligently, lest that by any evil lusts,
or by any allurements of occasions, they do loose it. Yet notwithstanding if
any good, faithful, and diligent man chance to be assaulted with such a
tentation, as to fear in himself the heat and wicked fact of lust, then there
is no snare laid for such a one, neither is there any danger of entrapping his
conscience, but he that is in this case, let him be put over Look the 4.
Observat.
to take counsel of the Elders, and governors of the Church, who have the
spirit of God, that all may be done in the Church in order, decently, with
honesty of the example, and with the using of all due consideration. Then
verily, if upon these things thus done, he does lawfully change his kind of
life, he does not sin, seeing that he obeys the counsel of the holy Ghost:
and the holy Church ought not for this cause to contemn him, nor to make any
thing the less account of his ministry. Notwithstanding, if for this cause
he should be contemned, which the Church cannot do without sin, it were
certainly better for him, by this means to preserve his soul, (although he
should be one of the common sort of Christians only) then by persisting in his
ministry with sin, to loose and condemn it.

But although it seems to come nearer to the example of the Primitive Church,
that worthy and honest married men may be chosen to take the charge of souls in
the Church, then to give them leave to change their kind of life, who before
being unmarried, did labor diligently in the ministry of the Lord, yet
notwithstanding our men do not ground the worthiness, holiness, and virtue
of the Ecclesiastical ministry, no more then they do of Christian salvation,
upon either of these kinds, to wit, neither upon the state of single life, nor
of wedlock: neither is there any other thing sought or looked for (as it is
before declared) more then that only profit, and opportunity, which falls
into a single life, and is commended of the holy Ghost. After these things they
do thus consequently teach touching wedlock, that such a condition of life,
though it have many difficulties, punishments, and curses joined with it, where
with after the fall of man, both mankind, and this order is oppressed, yet
that it is in this wise holy, and acceptable unto God, because that God
himself did in the beginning ordain it, and afterward Christ our Lord did
consecrate it, and does daily consecrate it in those that are his, and that in
such sort, that their children also be holy, and that moreover God has offered
unto it peculiarly singular promises, and blessings, which are contained in the
Scriptures. Thence therefore must all true Christians know, that whosoever do
choose this kind of life so as it becomes them, and with an upright purpose
do both give themselves thereunto, and be conversant therein, they do not
only not sin, but they do, and accomplish that, which God would have them
to do: and that they lead such a kind of life, as God does peculiarly call
some unto, and that they do serve the self same Lord, whom the unmarried men
do serve.

The FRENCH Confession does condemn Monastical vows, and the forbidding of
Marriage, Artic. 24. which we have inserted in the 16. Section.


Out of the ENGLISH Confession.
WE say, that Matrimony is holy, and honorable in all sorts and states of
persons: as in the Patriarchs, in the Prophets, in the Apostles, in the holy
Martyrs, in the Ministers of the Church, and in Bishops: and that it is an
honest, and lawful thing (as Chrysostom says) for a man living in
Matrimony, to take upon In Tit. 1. Hom. 11. Theo. ad Tit. 10. Eusebius. lib. 10.
cap. 5.
him therewith the dignity of a Bishop. And, as Sozomenus says of Spiridon,
and as Nazianzene says of his own Father, we say, that a good, and d^ligent
Bishop does serve in the Ministry never the worse, for that ^e is married, but
rather the better, and with more ableness to do good. Further we say, that the
same law, which is by constraint, takes away this liberty from men, and
compels them against their wills, to live single, is the doctrine of devils,
as Paul says: and, that ever since the time of this law, a wonderful
uncleanness of life, and manners in Gods Ministers, and sundry horrible
enormities have followed, as the Bishop of Augusta, as Faber, as Abbas
Panormitanus, as Latomus, as the Tripartite Work, which is annexed to the
second Tome of the Councels, and some other Champions of the Popes band, yea
and as the matter it self, and all Histories do confess. For it was rightly
said by Pius the second Bishop of Rome, that he saw many causes, why wives
should be taken away from Priests: but that he saw many Plat. in vita ^ii. 2.
more, and more weighty causes, why they ought to be restored to them again.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
Art. 5. Of Abuses. Of the marriage of Priests.
Whereas the Doctrine of Christ makes honorable mention of marriage, and
wills men to use the same, not only for procreation sake, but also to bridle
and avoid lusts: now a days the marriages of Priests are not only by the
Popes law, but also by a new and unwonted cruelty forbidden, and such as be
made and contracted, are dissolved and broken. Which is so much the more
unseemely, for that these things are done in the Church, which, as she ought
most of all to abhor and detest filthiness, so should she with great care
defend wedlock, for the avoiding of many grievous enormities. Besides, seeing
that in all heathenish Commonwealths that were but meanly well ordered,
marriage was in great account, for very weighty causes; what is there less
seemly in the Church, then either to break in sunder the most holy knot of
wedlock, or to punish marriage with punishments of death, as though it were a
most heinous offense? Whence is it, that this cruelty has spread it self
into the Church, in which mutual love should flourish most of all? Moreover
the matter it self does testify how much beastliness, and how many villainies
this popish law of single life does bring forth: no voice of man is able to
show, how many vices have issued forth of this fountain into the Church. For
(to say nothing of Epicures, who blush at nothing) how many good and godly men
have had ill success in striving with their natural weakness, and at the
last have fallen into horrible despair? Now whereto tends this new cruelty,
but that those innumerable villainies might be confirmed in the Churches, and
that wicked men might sin more freely? This matter needs no disputation at
all. For this new law defended by our Adversaries, which forbids Priests to
marry, and dissolveth those that are contracted, is flat contrary to the law of
nature, to the law of God, to the Gospel, to the constitutions of ancient
Synods, and to the examples of the ancient Church. Only in this calling we
need the godliness and equity of the most excellent Emperor, whom we beseech
for his godliness and duties sake that he would seek some remedy for the
Church by abolishing this tyrannical law. For as all unjust cruelty does
displease God, so that most of all, which is exercised against godly and
learned Priests, which deserve well of the Church.

And in this case we have not only the word of God threatening most grievous
plagues against them, which exercise cruelty on the Priests, but also there
are examples to be seen in all ages which do plainly testify, that such
threatenings are not in vain. For to let pass infinite other examples, the
Tribe of Benjamin was almost quite destroyed, for abusing the Priests wife that
came thither as a stranger. For when as the dead body of the woman, which died
after she had been so abused, was cut in pieces, and sent to all the Princes of
Israel, all the people judged that such outrage ought most severely to be
revenged. And when they could not get the authors of this shameful fact to be
delivered unto them, for to be punished, the whole Tribe of Benjamin receiving
a great overthrow, was punished for it. Now in these days the Priests are
vexed with sundry injuries: they are (when no other crime is objected unto them
but marriage) racked with most horrible torments, and so put to death, their
miserable wives and little children, being thrown out of house and home,
wander up and down, as banished persons, without any certain place of abode,
or house to dwell in. Paul calls The forbidding of marriage the doctrine of
Devils: which to be true, not only these filthy vices, which the single life
has brought into the Church, but also the cruelty, which by reason of this
law is exercised upon Priests, and their wives and children, do testify
plainly. For the Devil is a murderer, and he is chiefly delighted with the
miseries of the godly. But the devisers of such counsel shall one day have
their just reward from God. We judge that such cruelty is not worthy for
Christians to use, nor profitable to the Church of God.

Whereas they object the authority of the Popes law, why do they not allege
the authority of the Canons against those shameful examples of unclean
single life, and those villainies, that were worthy of most severe punishment?
The authority of the Popes decree, which is contrary to the law of nature, and
the commandment of God, should be of no weight. Men are so made by nature,
that they should be fruitful. Whereupon the Lawyers say, That the conjunction
of man and woman is by the law of nature. And the same the first book of Moses
teaches in the first and second Chapters. Again, when Saint Paul says, To
avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, it is certain, that he
bids all which are not apt for a single life, to join in marriage. And
Christ does admonish, that all are not fit for a single life, when he says,
All men do not receive this thing. Moreover, neither men's laws, nor any vows,
are of force, which are against the commandment of God. And the event it self
does testify, that nature cannot be changed by man's law. For we see what vile
filthiness this single life does bring forth, and if there be any honest men
which endeavor to keep themselves chaste, they perceive right well how great
a burden, how great danger there is in this thing, and they do especially be
wail this slavery of their order.

Certain men went about in the Nicene Synod to make a law to forbid Priests
the use of their wives. This law was resused by the holy Synod: and the Latin
Churches in the old time was not so severe in this point: for they did put from
the ministry only such, as when they had taken upon them any Ecclesiastical
function, did afterward marry wives, yet they did not forbid marriage. But
this is a new law of the Pope, unknown to the ancient Churches and Synods,
which does wholly forbid marriages, and breaks of such as are contracted. But
it is evident, that either part of this decree is flat contrary to the Gospel.
They allege against us the authority of the Church, and of Synodes, which the
Popes themselves that were Authors of this decree, did impudently contemn, and
godly Priests did evidently withstand this new law. For the Ecclesiastical
Histories do testify, that it was never laid upon the Churches, without
great contentions and resistance. The Bishop of Tarracon writes to Syricius
the Pope, That the Priests of Spain could not be brought to admit that law
which forbad them the use of their wives. What a stir does Syricius keep
there? How sharply does he write? For these are the words of Syricius, which
are unmeet for a Pope: Let him tell me, whosoever he be, a hunter after lusts,
and a Master of vices. And thereupon he wresteth the words of Saint Paul to his
cause, which are most far from it: They which live in the flesh cannot please
God. A man may doubt surely, whether it may better be attributed to his
ignorance, or his impudency, that he speaks so disdainfully of marriage. For
he goes about nothing else but to forbid Priests the use of their wives, which
then they had married.

But the Popes that succeeded after were yet more hard and cruel. When the
Archbishop of Mentz did in a Synod rehearse the Popes decree touching the
putting away of wives in Germany, the Priests were so kindled in their anger
that they threatened to set upon the Archbishop himself. And it was in deed
both an unworthy, and cruel thing, to put away their wives, which they then
had. But at last either force, or superstition got the upper hand. Cyprian was
far more equal and gentle to such women as had not kept their vowed
chastity. For he writes in the first book, the 11. Epist. If they will not,
or cannot endure it, it is better they should marry, then that they should fall
into the fire through their importune lusts. In any wise let them give no
offense to the brethren or sisters. Besides this, unjust laws are not wont to
be perpetual. We do therefore entreat the most excellent Emperor, that among
many other enormities of the Church, he will also consider the faults of this
law: in which case that also is to be weighed. The nature of man does as it
were wax old, and is become weaker. Wherefore there must be care had that
vices do not increase: Neither must the laws themselves be seeds of vices.
Plato says very wisely, that Laws must be made for virtues sake. Now whether
this tradition of single life be maintained for pieties sake, or for some other
purpose, it is no hard matter to determine. Last of all, seeing that Christ
has especially commended the care of the Ministers of the Gospel to the
godly, we desire therefore that the most excellent Emperor would restrain
this cruelty, which has a long time been exercised upon godly Priests, and
would rather consult with the Church, then with our Adversaries, in that
behalf. Surely love and merciful dealing should flourish in the Church.
Wherefore the true Church does greatly abhor unnecessary cruelty, and would
not have the Priests put to death for a tyrannical tradition. She would also
have the poor Wives and Children of Priests favorably dealt with. All whose
lives and safety the Church does commend unto thee, O most merciful Emperor.
All the godly wheresoever, are touched with their miseries and do in heart
desire Christian lenity in this behalf, and do also with tears jointly
commend learned and honest men that are profitable to the Church together with
their wives and children, unto thee, whom they see both to be endued with an
excellent and heroical goodness and kindness, and also to have used in this
cause very notable moderation, which does let us understand that thou art
careful of bringing some remedy unto the Commonwealth. The Church would not
have thee to be a Minister of another man's cruelty. The greatest honor of
Kings is that which Esaias gives to them when he says, that they should be
nurse fathers to the Church: that is, that kingdoms and the maintenance of
peace and of humane society should not only serve for the profit of the body,
but also should further the Gospel, namely, when as they both rule the
Priests, and also grant peace and quietness in cities, that the youth might be
trained up in religion, and men might be instructed. The Church therefore does
beseech thee to remember that the care of defending the godly Priests, as of
certain nourslings, lies upon thee. It belongs unto this calling to be a
succor for innocence, to save from injuries, especially such as are weak,
which are not able to defend themselves, as namely, godly women, children, and
orphans or the fatherless. Among which you may well think that the wives and
children of Priests, which are right orphans in deed, are left unto your
charge by the Lord. The Church, as most full of natural affection and love,
does not only approve of the mutual love of married folks one to another, and
of the love of parents to their children, but is also touched with the miseries
of those that are forlorn and fatherless. And surely she judges in so great
goodness of your nature that there is no inhumanitie or want of natural
affection. Wherefore she is in good hope that the murders, and executions of
Priests, and the banishment of their wives and children do grieve thee not a
little. The Church also does give thee warning to look to it, lest many points
of Christian doctrine, the unfolding and laying open whereof is very necessary,
be smothered up, whiles godly and learned Ministers are put to death, and
whiles men are driven from the study of Christian doctrine. What else do our
Adversaries seek, but that all good learning and true doctrine may be rooted out
or oppressed, and men may only depend upon the authority of such as do bear
rule, and that they might esteem the dreams of unlearned men, though never so
impious, never so absurd, for oracles. Our Adversaries imagine that this
barbarous bondage is the best, and surest for their Lordly rule. And in deed it
is very evident, how the Church in many places is oppressed with this bondage.
Now though liberty may not be granted to disanull such determinations, as be
received by good authority, and though men ought not to depart either from the
Scriptures, or from the decrees of the ancient Synods, wherein they have
determined of Christian doctrine, yet is it not meet that the authority of the
Church should be pretended for all such abuses and faults, as the latter and
worser age has brought into the Church. And surely men do flatter and deceive
themselves too much, if they think that there be no faults conveyed into the
Church by the desires of covetous men, and by those Labyrinthes and
obscurities, of the doctrine and traditions of the Schoolmen. For now adays
good men are not so much in danger for their marriage sake, as for their care
and desire they have to purge and bring to trial the doctrine of Christ. Which
care the Bishops ought wisely to direct and further. For to them especially is
the care of setting forth the maintenance of true doctrine commended: they
should be the Ringleaders and furtherers of this most holy and fruitful care
and study. But it belongs not to the Bishop alone but also to godly Princes,
and especially to the Emperor, to understand the Gospel purely, to judge of
opinions, to be wary and watchful that no wicked opinions be received or
rooted: and to abolish Idolatry with all his might and main.

By these and such like duties did many valiant and notable men deserve well at
the hands of godly men, as Gedeon, Ezechias, Josias, and Constantine, and
sundry others. Wherefore you must think it your duty also to take heed, lest
such things, as be godly and profitably brought to light and reformed by God
and learned men, be smoothered again, and lest that wicked abuses be
established by your authority. The Psalm says, for thy temples sake in
Jerusalem, the King shall offer gifts unto thee. The proper gifts that Kings
are to bestow upon the Church are, to search out true doctrine, and to see that
good teachers be set over the Churches, to give diligence that the
controversies of the Church may be rightly decided: Not to take away true and
holy doctrine, but to raise it up, and to set it forward, and to defend it, and
rightly to set it in order, and to maintain the quiet concord of the Church.
By these true gifts, most noble Emperor, you may adorn the Church of Christ,
which especially both Christ himself requires, and the Churches, that are rent
and torn in most horrible manner, do crave at your hands.

Last of all, seeing that humane traditions ought to give place to times and
opportunities, especially in the Church, wherein there should be more regard
had of the salvation of the godly, and of love, and public peace, then of any
humane traditions, it were a great deal better to make show of abrogating this
silly tradition of single life, then to strengthen lusts, to dissolve
marriages, to exercise cruelty against the Priests and their wives and
chidren, to oppress true and holy doctrine, and to make havocke of the Church.
We do therefore commend this matter of their marriage unto your piety and
bounty, O noble Emperor, as that which has no difficulty or doubtfulnesse
in it. For they that be governors both may and ought to abolish an unjust law.
And the laws of single life, whether they be new, or old, belong only to humane
equity, in mitigating whereof the authority of the Church should be of great
force. We could bring very many examples out of the Histories of all times and
countries, in which there might be seen horrible examples of judgments, which
followed upon unclean lusts. Among many other causes of the general flood,
there is mention made of fleshly lusts. Afterward five cities were swallowed up
in an opening of the earth, so as the lake called Asphalites was left as a
perpetual monument of that punishment: when the Israelites were departed out
of Egypt, and diverse had defiled themselves by going in unto Moabitish women,
the twelve Princes of the tribes were hanged up, and twenty four thousand men
were slain. The Cananites after this were clean rooted out, and among the
causes thereof, incestuous copulations are namely reckoned up: shortly after
followed the overthrow of the tribe of Benjamin, for abusing the Levites wife.
After this David was driven out of his kingdom for adultery. And Jeremy in
diverse places cries out, that these three, idolatry, oppressions, and
adulteries, are the causes of those great calamities, which overwhelmed the
whole nation of the Jews then, when they were carried captives to Babylon.
These things are written for this purpose, that we might know certainly that
God is displeased with wandering lusts of uncleanness: and that unclean and
incestuous persons do not fall into punishments by chance, but are punished of
God. Therefore the destructions of heathenish Cities also do put us in mind
of the wrath of God against these villainies. Sibaris was overthrown: Athens,
Sparta, and Thebes, being tossed with civil wars, received due punishment of
their filthiness. And Rome when it brought forth many Neroes and Heliogabales,
at length it came to ruin, the Empire being rent into sundry parts by the
wars of sundry barbarous nations. There is also a long Catalogue in Aristotle
of cities, wherein there happened changes of government and seditions, for
unclean lusts. Besides all which punishments Paul warns the Church that
there is another judgment that follows upon these lusts, and that is
madness, or fury, as it is written. Romans 1. and Ephesians 4. And it may well
be, that this judgment has seized upon our Ecclesiastical governors, who
for the most part are open Epicures, open defenders of Idols, that they may get
wealth and authority, and scoff at those heavenly sayings, which threaten
vengeance upon Idolaters, unclean persons, and Parricides. They vaunt that
they do all things well, which they do for their kingdoms sake, and that such
are good subjects, and love quietness and peace, that allow of errors and
open naughtiness, that they may uphold the Majesty of the Popes kingdom. The
whole world can bear witness that there is a God that does revenge all
filthiness, uncleanness, and oppression. Wherefore though they now deride and
scoff at these speeches, yet let them know, that they shall one day stick fast
in those punishments, whereunto the world it self does call them.

Seeing then it is a clear case, that the law of single life is directly
against the commandment of God, we think that the Priests and others do very
well, which join in honest marriage, as Paul says, that a Bishop must be
chosen that is the husband of one wife. We judge also that the Rulers both may,
and ought to abolish this law of the Pope. For they are foulely deceived, that
think either that marriage is forbidden to Priests by Gods law, or else that
the Kings or Bishops may make a law to forbid them marriage. And if that Rulers
will not help the Church in this behalf, yet the godly do well which follow
the Apostles rule, which says, That we must rather obey God, then men. To
conclude seeing the defense of the Popes law has many faults joined with it,
as namely, the strengthening of wandering lusts, superstitions, and murdering of
godly Priests, every one may see that our Churches deal well in abolishing and
condemning that law of the Pope. And we beseech the most renowned Emperor,
that he will not defile himself, with defending that unclean single life, and
with the blood of the Priests: for it is written, Blessed is he that has pity
on the poor and needy, the Lord shall deliver him in the evil day.

This Article we found elsewhere placed in the second place, amongst those
wherein the abuses that are changed be mentioned. Of the marriage of Priests.
Art. 2.
THere was a common complaint of the examples of such Priests, as were not
continent. For which cause also Pope Pius is reported to have said, that there
were certain causes for which marriage was forbidden to Priests, but there
were many weightier causes why it should be permitted again. For so Platina
writes. When as therefore the Priests among us fought to avoid these public
offenses, they married wives, and taught that it was lawful for themselves to
join in marriage. First, because that Paul says, To avoid fornication, let
every man have his wife. Again, It is better to marry then to burn. Secondly
Christ says, All men do not receive this word: where he shows that all men
are not fit for a single life, because that God created man for procreations
sake. Genesis 1. It is not in man's power, without a special gift and work of
God, to alter his creation. Therefore such as are not meet for a single life,
ought to join in Matrimony. For no law of man, no vow can take away the
commandment of God and his ordinance. By these reasons our Priests do prove
that they may lawfully marry wives. And it is well known, that in the ancient
Churches Priests were married. For Paul says, that a Bishop must be chosen
which is a husband. And in Germany about 400. years ago, the Priests were by
violence compelled to live a single life, who then were so wholly bent against
the matter, that the Archbishop of Mentz, being to publish the Pope of Rome his
decree in that behalf, was almost murdered in a tumult by the Priests in their
anger. And the matter was handled so contrary to law, that they did not only
forbid marriages for the time to come, but also such as were then contracted,
contrary to all laws divine and humane, contrary to the Canons themselves, that
were before made not only by Popes, but also by most famous Councels. And
seeing that the world decaying, man's nature by little and little waxes weaker,
it is behoovefull to look well to it, that no more vices do overspread
Germany.

Furthermore, God ordained marriage to be a remedy for man's infirmity. The
Canons themselves do say, that the old rigor is now and then in latter times
to be released for the weakness of men. Which it were to be wished might be
done in this matter also. It is very like that if marriage be forbidden any
longer, we shall at length want Pastors in the Church. Seeing then that there
is a plain commandment of God, seeing the use of the Church is well known,
seeing that the impure single life brings forth very many offenses,
adulteries, and other enormities worthy to be punished by the godly Magistrate,
yet it is a marvel, that greater cruelty should be showed in no other thing,
then against the marriage of Priests. God has commanded to honor marriage:
the laws in all well ordered Commonwealths, even among the heathen also have
adorned marriages with very great privileges. But now men are cruelly put to
death, yea and Priests also, contrary to the mind of the Canons, for no other
cause, but only for marriage. Paul calls that a doctrine of devils which
forbids marriage. 1 Timothy 4. which may now very well be seen, when as the
forbidding of marriage is maintained by such punishments. But as no law of man
can take away the law of God, no more can any vow whatsoever. Therefore Cyprian
gives counsel, that those women should marry, which do not keep their vowed
chastity. His words are these in the first book, the 11. Epist. If they will
not, or are not able to endure, it is far better they should marry, then that
they should fall into the fire by their importune desire. In any wise let them
give no offense to their brethren or sisters. Yea and the Canons use a kind of
equity toward such, as before their ripe years did vow chastity, as hitherto
the use has been.

To this place also belongs the 6. Article. Of the vows of Monks.
What is taught amongst us, touching the vows of Monks shall be better
understood, if you call to mind what was the state of Monasteries, and how
many things were every day committed in the Monasteries, contrary to the
Canons. In Augustines time Colleges were free, but afterward, when discipline
was corrupted, every where vows were laid upon them, that as it were by a new
devised prison, the discipline might be restored again. Over and besides vows
by little and little many other observations were added. And these bands and
snares were cast upon many, before they came to ripe years, contrary to the
Canons. Many through error fell into this kind of life unawares, who though
they wanted no years, yet they wanted discretion to judge of their strength and
ability. They which were once got within these snares, were constrained to
abide in them, though by the benefit of the Canon, some might be set at
liberty. And that fell out rather in the Nunneries, then in the Colleges of
Monks, because the weaker sex was more to be spared. This rigor and severitie
misliked many good men heretofore, when they saw young maids and young men
thrust up into Monasteries, there to get their living, and saw what an unhappie
success this counsel had, what offenses it bred, and what snares it laid upon
men's consciences. They were grieved that the authority of the Canons was
wholly neglected and contemned in a thing most dangerous. To all these evils
there was added, such a persuasion of vows, which as it is well known, did in
former times mislike the Monks themselves, if any of them were some what
stouter then the rest. They taught forsooth that vows were equal to Baptism:
touching single life, they taught that it merited remission of sins, and
justification before God: yea farther, that the Monks life did not only merit
righteousness before God, but more then that, because it observed, not only
the commandments, but also the Counsels in the Gospel. And thus they taught,
that the Monks profession was better then Baptism, that the Monks life did
merit more, then the life of Magistrates, of Pastors, and such like, which in
the obedience of Gods commandment followed their calling, without any such
religion of man's making. None of these things can be denied, they are to be
seen in their writings. What fell out afterward in the Monasteries? In old
time there were Schools for the study of Divinity, and other Arts, which were
profitable to the Church, and thence were Pastors and Bishops taken. But now
the case is altered. It is needless to rehearse their vows. In old time they
came together into such places to learn, but now they feign, that it is a
kind of life taken up to merit remission of sins and justification: yea they
say, it is a state of perfection, and prefer it to all other kind of life's
that God ordained. We have therefore mentioned these things, amplifying nothing
odiously, to the end that the doctrine of our men touching this matter might be
understood.

First, touching such as join in marriage, thus they teach with us, that it is
lawful for any to marry, that is not fit for a single life: for as much as
vows cannot take away Gods ordinance and commandment. The commandment of God
is, To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife. And not only the
commandment, but also the creation and ordinance of God, compels such unto
marriage, as without the special work of God are not exempted, according to
that saying, It is not good for man to be alone. They therefore that are
obedient to this commandment and ordinance of God do not offend. What can be
said against these things? Let a man amplify the bond of a vow, as much as he
will, yet can he never bring to pass that the vow shall take away Gods
Commandment. The Canons teach, That in every vow the right of the superior is
excepted: much less therefore can these vows, which are contrary to Gods
Commandment, be of force. If so be that the bond of vows had no cause why it
might be changed, then should not the Roman Bishops have dispensed there with.
For indeed it is not lawful for man to disanull that bond, which does simply
belong to the law of God. But the Roman Bishops have judged very wisely, that
in this bond there must an equity be used: therefore they are often read to
have dispensed with vows. The history of the King of Arragon, being called
back out of a Monastery, is well known, and there be many examples of our time.

Secondly, why do our adversaries exaggerate the bond, or the effect of the
vow, when as in the mean time they speak not a word of the very nature of a
vow, which ought to be in a thing possible, which ought to be voluntary, and
taken up of a man's own accord, and with advice or deliberation. But it is not
unknown, how perpetual chastity is in the power of a man. And how many
amongst them is there, that does vow of his own accord, and with advice?
Wenches and young maids, before they know how to judge, are persuaded, yea
sometimes also compelled to vow; wherefore it is not meet to dispute so
rigorously of the bond, seeing that all men confess, that it is against the
nature of a vow, which is not done of a man's own accord, or unadvisedly. The
Canons for the most part do disanull vows, which are made before one be
fifteen years of age, because that before one come to that age, he seems
not to have so much judgment, as to determine of a perpetual life. Another
Canon permitting more to the weakness of men, does add some years more, for
it forbids a vow to be made, before one be 18. years of age. But whether of
these shall we follow? the greatest part has this excuse, why they forsake
Monasteries, because that for the most part they wowed before they came to this
age.

Last of all, although the breaking of a vow may be reprehended, yet it
follows not, that the marriages of such persons are to be dissolved. For
Augustine in his 27. quest. 1. cap, of Marriages, does deny that they ought to
be dissolved: and his authority is not lightly to be esteemed, although others
afterward have thought otherwise. And although the commandment of God,
touching wedlock, does free most men from vows, yet our men do also bring
another reason concerning vows, that they be frustrate, because that all the
worship of God, instituted of men without the commandment of God, and chosen
to merit remission of sins and justification, is wicked, as Christ says:
They do in vain worship me with the commandments of men. And Paul does every
where teach, that righteousness is not to be sought, out of our observations,
and those worships, which are devised by men, but that it comes by faith to
those that believe that they have God pacified and reconciled to them for
Christ, not for any of their merits. But it is evident that the Monks did
teach, that these made or counterfeited religions do deserve remission of sins
and justification, and that they do satisfy for sins. What else is this, then
to detract from the glory of Christ, and to obscure, and deny the
righteousness of faith? wherefore it follows, that these vows thus used
were wicked worships, and therefore they be of no value. For a wicked vow, and
that which is made against the commandment of God is of no force, neither
ought a vow to be a bond of iniquity, as the Canon says, Paul says, Ye are
made void of Christ, which seek to be justified by the law, ye are fallen from
grace: that is, they which do think, that by their own works they do merit
remission of sins, and that they do please God for their own fulfilling of
the law, and do not perceive, that for Christ his sake they do freely receive
by faith the remission of their sins, through the mercy of God, and that they
do please God through Christ, they do loose Christ, because they do transfer
the confidence which is due to Christ, and to the promise of God unto works.
Also they oppose to the wrath of God, not Christ the propitiatour, but their
own works, therefore they do transfer the honor, which is due unto Christ,
unto our works. Now it is manifest that the Monks do teach this, that by their
observations they do deserve remission of sins, because they find God
merciful unto them for these observations. Wherefore they teach men to trust
to their own works, not to the propitiation of Christ. This is a wicked
confidence, and is contrary to the Gospel, and in the judgment of God it shall
be found to be vain. For our works cannot be opposed to the wrath and
judgment of God: the wrath of God is then only appeased, when as we do by
faith lay hold upon the free mercy, promised for Christ's sake. Therefore they
lose Christ, which place their confidence, not in Christ, but in their own
works.

Moreover the Monks have taught, that their kind of life is a state of
perfection, because they did observe not only the commandments, but also the
counsels. This error is chiefly contrary to the Gospel, because they have
feigned that they do so satisfy the commandments, as that they can also do
somewhat more: and hereupon arose that horrible error which they have feigned,
that they had merits of supererogation. These they have applied for others,
that they might be satisfections for other men's sins. If any man will odiously
exaggerate these things how many things might he rehearse, whereof the Monks
themselves are now ashamed? It is no light offense, in the Church to propound
unto the people a certain worship devised by men, without the commandment of
God, and to teach, that such a worship does justify men: because that the
righteousness of faith in Christ, which ought especially to be taught in the
Church, is obscured, when as those mavelous religions of Angels, feigning of
poverty, and humility, and of single life, are cast before men's eyes. Moreover
the commandments of God and the true worship of God are obscured, when men
hear, that Monks alone are in that state of perfection: because that Christian
perfection is this, to fear God sincerely, and again to conceive great faith,
and to trust assuredly, that God is pacified toward us for Christ his sake, to
ask, and certainly to look for help from God in all our affairs, according to
our calling: and outwardly to do good works diligently, and to tend upon our
vocation. In these things does true perfection and the true worship of God
consist: it does not consist in singleness of life, in beggarie, or in vile
apparel.

The people also does conceive many pernicious opinions of those false
commendations of the Monastical life. They hear that single life is praised
above measure, therefore they live in marriage with offense of conscience. They
hear that beggars only are perfect, therefore they keep their possessions,
and buy and sell with offense of conscience. They hear that the Gospel gives
counsel, not to revenge: therefore some that lead a private life are not
afraid to revenge themselves: For they hear that it is a counsel, not a
commandment. Others do think that all Magistracy and civil offices are
unworthy a Christian man. We read examples of men, who forsaking wedlock, and
leaving the government of the common wealth, have hid themselves in
Monasteries. That they called, to fly out of the world, and to seek a kind of
life, which is more acceptable to God: neither did they see, that God is to be
served in those commandments, which he himself has delivered, not in the
commandments, which are devised by men. That is a good and perfect kind of
life, which has the commandment of God for it warrant. It is necessary to
admonish men of these things. And before these times Gerson did reprehend this
error of the perfections of Monks, and he witnesses, that in his time this
was a new or strange voice, that the Monastical life is a state of perfection.
Thus many wicked opinions do cleave fast unto vows, as that they merit
remission of sins and justification, that they are Christian perfection, that
they do keep the counsels and commandments, that they have works of
supererogation. All these things, seeing they be false and vain, do make vows
to be of none effect.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY.
Of Wedlock.
THe truth concerning Wedlock did at all times remain sincere Artic. 18.
in the Church only. For the Church does know, that God does most severely
forbid wandering lusts amongst mankind, and that he would have chastity so to
be understood, and performed, as he himself has ordained it, that we also may
know, that he is a pure and a chaste mind, and may discern him from devils,
who through the hatred they bear to God, are delighted with the confusions of
lusts, and do drive forward this weak nature of man, that it may be horribly
defiled. Wherefore both the Heathen did every where admit certain foul
examples, and Heretics at all times have spread abroad monstrous opinions
touching wedlock, as Clemens Alexandrinus, and Epiphanius do declare. And the
Turkish manner, and the laws of the Pope, concerning single life, have caused
a great deformity in this last old age of the world. But Paul does affirm,
that it is a sign of evil Spirits, to forbid marriage.

Wherefore we do very carefully keep the sincere doctrine of God touching
marriage, and by the mercy of God our civil Magistrates have appointed, and
do defend judgments for Marriage matters in their government, and they do
severely punish those wicked deeds which are contrary to the law of God, and
know that by the commandment of God they are enjoined to have a care to defend
chastity, and wedlock. And we detain this true definition, agreeing with the
commandments of God, and the custom of the Apostolic Church. Marriage is a
lawful and indissoluble conjunction, only of one man and of one woman, to be
kept because of the commandment of God, who by this mean will have mankind
associated, chastity to be understood, and lusts not to wander. God in the
beginning did consecrate this order, saying thus, They shall be two in one
flesh, to wit, one man, and one only woman inseparably joined together. And
again, this first law was established of Christ, Matthew. 19. Now that this
coupling together may be lawful, we do immutably observe the differences of
persons, that we may not make a mixture of those persons, who by the law of God
are not permitted to couple together. Look the 1. Observation upon this
confession.
Also we keep the rules of the Canon law, touching other nearer degrees, as
there be ordinances to be seen delivered with grave and wise deliberation in
our Consistories.

Moreover, we know it is the will of God, that marriage should not be forbidden
to any persons, that be fit thereunto, and which, without marriage, could not
live without danger of their conscience, as it is written, Genesis 2. Matthew. 19. 1
Cor. 7. Therefore we give leave to Priests and other persons, to marry, which
had rather live godly in marriage, then in a single life to have wounded
consciences, so that they may not invocate God, and live holily. In affiances,
even according to the ancient laws, we will have the consent of Parents also,
seeing that Parents are moved with a probable reason. Touching divorcements,
this rule is most firmly held, that they do sin, who either by adultery,
or by forsaking, be the first cause of distraction: and adulterers and
adulteresses, and he and she that does forsake the other, are condemned by the
voice of them that preach in our Churches, and of the Judges in our
Consistories, and they be severely punished of our Magistrates. But the
innocent person (when as the matter being well known, he is set free) is not
forbid to marry, that he may invocate God, and live holily. For seeing that
the Lord does expressly set at liberty the innocent person, Mat. 19. when as
the other party is polluted with adultery, we must understand a setting at
liberty, not in name only, but in deed. And Paul speaks after the same
manner, in the case of forsaking. This our custom does also agree with the
most ancient Church. The other laws which we have in our Consistories, Look
the 2. Observat.
do agree with the Canon law: and we do truly propound unto the people the
whole doctrine touching marriage and chastity.

We affirm, that all commixtions, and spilling of the seed without marriage,
are sins condemned of God, Look the 3. observation.
as mortal sins, and such as drive out of men the holy Ghost, and that many
grievous punishments are spread throughout mankind, by reason of lusts, as it
is written, Fornicatours and adulterers God will judge. And there is a
threatening of these punishments set down, Levit. 18. Now we count that to be
chastity, both to keep purity in a single life, and also to have the laws of
wedlock observed: and we affirm wedlock, as we did before describe it, to be a
society instituted, and consecrated of God, and that this very society, and
the duties of a life in wedlock, do please God. And we condemn all those
fanaticall spirits, Basilides, Tatianus, Carpocrates, and such like, whereof
some by one means, and some by another, did either condemn wedlock, or did
approve filthy confusions. Also we condemn that Popish law, which forbids
Priests to marry, and gives occasion of destruction to a great multitude of
men, and for the same cause we do utterly dislike the Monastical vows of
single life. Touching other causes we shall speak hereafter: for those Popish
laws and vows are flat contrary to the law of God. The Lord said, It is not
good for man to be alone: He said, that is, by his unspeakable wisdom he
decreed in this sort to make mankind, that by the society of man and woman it
might be propagated. And He made them two, that there might be a Church, and
he established these bounds, that lusts might not stray abroad: for he would
have an understanding of chastity to be in mankind.

Although God has said and decreed these things, yet Tatianus, the Pope, and
the Monks do say the contrary: who when as they forbid marriage, do give
occasion to many men, being otherwise fit unto virtue, to heap up many
horrible sins, by reason whereof very many do fall headlong into eternal
destruction, and the wrath of God is more kindled against whole mankind. A law
of man, being contrary to the decree of God, and to the very work of God
instituted and established in the creation, and also to the commandments of
God, and that law, which is the fountain of great wickedness and heinous
deeds, for the which both many do perish, and the wrath of God is the more
kindled, yea which law the holy Ghost does affirm to have it beginning from
the Devil, is in no case to be laid upon the Church, but by the consent of all
godly men to be abolished. Now it has fallen out very often within these 30.
years, that Priests, whose manners were blameless, and honest, have chiefly
been put to death because they were married. Thus the Devil goes about to
establish his law by most cruel murders, and he has for his instruments, most
impudent writers, Ecchius, Faber, Pighius, who has expressly written, That a
Priest does less offend, if he be an adulterer, then if he marry a wife. It is
an unworthy thing that these, who will be counted Christians, should write and
speak such things. Wise men do see that in this declining age of the world,
both the nature of men is more weak, and by little and little there is greater
releasing and confusion of discipline. And at all times a license in this kind
did immediately go before the destroying of Cities, and the ruins of
Kingdoms. Therefore such as are governors ought to be more vigilant and
severe in maintaining discipline, in strengthening the laws of wedlock, in
punishing and prohibiting wandering lusts: touching which matter we rejoice that
our admonitions be extant for all posterity, and we also desire the Son of
God, our Lord Jesus Christ, the keeper of his Church, and a true lover of
charity, that he would bow the minds of Governors to listen to wholesome
counsels, and repress the Devil, which kindled the flames of lusts, and hinder
evil examples that they may not be far spread. The minds and hearts of all
godly men do tremble, when they read, and hear of such foul and horrible
heathenish examples: the which truly afterward were accompanied both with
blindness in the minds, and with other outrages, which were pernicious to
whole Nations, as in the histories of the heathen examples do every where
offer themselves to all men. The Scedasians had cast into a well two daughters
of Spartanus being deflowred: afterward, as it were in the very same footstop,
the army of the Lacedaemonians wasslain, and the Empire changed. But there be
many examples of all ages. We our selves do remember, that certain Bishops,
who were famous for their nobility, and their wits, were slain in adultery.
But we beseech the Son of God, that for this cause he would preserve many,
and bow them unto chastity, that he may sincerely be invocated of many. As for
those things which are alleged of our odversaries for the defense of single
life, they are as well applied to the matter, as that saying of Christ to
Solomon, which Tacianus did allege out of the Gospel according to the
Egyptians. I came to destroy the works of the woman: Tacianus did thus
interpret it, I came to destroy, that is, to abolish wodlocke: Look the 4.
observation.
whereas the words of Christ did speak of the fall of Eve, and of the miseries
that followed that fall, as also John does write, The Son of God came to
destroy the works of the Devil.

Hitherto also pertains the 21. Article of the same Confession.

Of the Monasticll life.
WE omit a larger rehearsal out of ancient Writers, of those, who either
departed into the wilderness, as did Antonius, or erected like Colleges or
Schools, as did Basilius: for diverse men had diverse causes of separating
themselves. We speak now of the present Monks, which are not in the
wilderness, but are Colleges of men either learned, or unlearned, which do
live more commodiously in the open light, and in places of greatest resort,
then other men do. They have those pleasures which they desire, some one, some
another: and they have much more leisure, then other men have, that live either
in civil, or in domestical affairs. Neither do they now transfer unto
themselves those ridiculous praises of perfection, and of a contemplative life,
as in times past some did. And seeing that there is great difference in diverse
societies of men, we will not preach to the evil, who for the kitchins, and
all licentiousness, do love those dark places: but those, of whom there is
hope of amendment, we do earnestly request, for the glory of God and their own
salvation, that they would think upon these sayings: Thou shall have no strange
Gods. Fly from Idols. What manner of thing is the Monastical life now adays?
It has very much wicked worship, and vanity: their Masses for the quick and
the dead they set out to sale, and this is the greatest gain that Monasteries
for the most part have: there is used invocation of the dead, heaped up with
very foul superstitions: as with the adoring of Images, with indulgences, and
other juggling tricks. The study of doctrine is either none at a^l, or very
corrupt. These only causes are great enough, why men, which are not profane,
ought to depart out of such societies: because that the vows, which wrap them
in a kind of life, wherein is the worship of Idols, are without doubt
frustrate, according to the first commandment which is immovable, eternal,
and the rule of all other commandments. Thou shall have no strange Gods, Exodus
20. They do bring a testimony out of Paul, 1 Timothy 5. Concerning widows, They
have lost their first faith: But the answer is sure and clear, although Paul
should speak of vows, yet would he in no case allow of such vows, as are joined
with the worship of Idols, and with many errors. But there be also many other
lies in vows. They promise chastity and poverty: but how many of them be fit
to lead a single life, they themselves do know. And touching poverty, they
know that the far greater part does there rather seek kitchins well
furnished, then for poverty and hunger.

Now we must also consider of this: let eloquent men excuse and praise the
Monastical life as they list, yet always this opinion is confirmed in men,
that are not profane, by this example, that such works, chosen by man's devise,
are the worship of God: that is, such works whereby God does count himself to
be honored. This opinion is to be reproved and to be pulled out of the minds
of men, and men are to be drawn back to the commandments of God, according to
this saying, Mat. 15. In vain do they worship me with the commandments of men.
Also, Walk not after the commandments of your fathers, but walk ye in my
commandments. This is a true and notable reprehension of the Monastical life.
Now if they do feign hereunto merits and perfections, the Gospel of Christ
touching the righteousness of faith and true worship, is the more obscured:
because it is a foul and horrible lie, that monastical observations should
merit remission of sins, or be of so great value, as is Baptism, as Thomas
does expressly say: Neither was antiquity ignorant of this reprehension.
There is a narration extant, whether it be true, or written only for doctrines
sake, yet does it show forth the judgments of godly men: They write, that when
Antonie, desired to know, how much he had profited before God in those
external exercises, there was showed unto him a Cobblers house at Alexandria,
being next door to him. He therefore going in speaks to the good man of the
house, questioneth with him concerning doctrine, and exercises of godliness.
The Cobbler answers sincerely touching doctrine. Afterward he says, that in
the morning in a short prayer he gives thanks to God, both for other benefits,
and that he sent his Son: then that he does ask remission of his sins for
the Sons sake, and pray that God would preserve the Church, and his family:
also that he prays to the Son, to make intercession for us: and that he
does rest in this faith, and does his domestical affairs joyfully, and
provide that his children may be well taught. And usest thou no other
streighter exercise, says Antonie? why, says he, does he labor alittle, trow
you, that provideth how his family shall be maintained? and many things do
oftentimes happen, which do su^ely vex him that governs a house, beside
other burdens which he has common with the Citizens. Do thou not see, how
many private and public miseries there be in this life? and to bear these
well, and in them to exercise faith and patience, do thou not think it a
warfare hard enough? Antonie went his way, and understood that he was
admonished, not to prefer his own exercises, before the duties of this
common life. These, and other like narrations are read, which although they be
so written for doctrines sake, yet they do declare the judgments of learned
men. Neither is it now needful to add a longer discourse, especially seeing
that no man is ignorant, how that in those places, where Monks be, there is
much wicked superstition in Monasteries, and that the studies of doctrine are
either none at all, or very corrupt. To deliberate of the means how to amend
these things we leave it to them, that are in authority.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE.
Of Wedlock. CHAP. 21.
WE confess that Wedlock is a kind of life, instituted and approved of God,
and that it is Look the 1. observation.
a mystery, that is, as commonly it uses to be expounded, a great Sacrament,
in Christ and his Church, as Paul says. And because Christ does evidently
affirm, that wedlock does pertain to this present life and the administration
of the things of this life do consist of public laws being made upon right
and probable reason, therefore we teach that it is lawful to marry in these
degrees of consanguinitie and affinity which Look the 2. observation.
the politic laws, which are the ordinances of God, do permit. Also we
teach, that those which be young ought not to marry without the authority of
their parents, and that the marriage which is contracted by a rash and
unlawful consent of young parties without the authority of them, in whose
power they are, is not to be counted as ratified: For although there be certain
cases, wherein it is lawful to marry without the consent of parents, yet it
seems not good to make a general rule thereof, as though every consent of
young parties, should ratify the contract of marriage, and as though privy
marriages were to be approved. For not only the commandment of God does
require, that children should honor their Parents, but also natural reason
does command, that the consent of parents should be requested in making a
marriage: hitherto also are children called by the politic laws. And there
is a decree of Pope Euarastus extant, the words whereof be these: Marriage as
we have heard of our fathers and have found it delivered unto us of the
Apostles, and their successors, is not otherwise made lawful, but when a wise
is sought for at their hands, and affianced by the nearest Parents, who seem
to have authority over the maid or woman, and in whose custody she is.

Moreover we do not doubt, but that they which are in deed lovers of honesty,
do think that it is not free for the lay men only, as they call them, but also
for the Ministers of the Church, to marry. For the Epistle to the Heb. says,
Marriage is honorable in all men, and the bed that is undefiled. And Paul
allows of marriage in a Bishop, and affirms that the forbidding of marriage
is a spirit of errors, and a doctrine of devils. For though this saying of
Paul is commonly expounded of the Tatians and Eucratians, who thought that
marriage does nothing at all differ from whordome, yet notwithstanding seeing
that marriage is forbidden in the popish decrees, it is forbidden by the same
reasons, by the which marriage is wholly condemned, and not in one kind of men
only. For that saying is alleged out of Leviticus, Be ye holy, because I am
holy: and that of Paul, Not in chambering and wantonness: And again, They
which are in the flesh, cannot please God. But seeing that these sayings of the
Scripture do pertain to all men, certainly they might drive all godly men from
marriage, if they were fitly applied to forbid marriage unto Priests. But we
hope that all good men do think more honestly of marriage, and that they do not
dislike of that in the Ministers thereof, which they did approve in the Church
it self, especially seeing that there be manifest examples of the Church, when
as yet it was but fresh and more pure, wherein it was lawful, both for the
Apostles which was the highest degree in the Church, and also for Bishops, to
have their wives. And we think that this thing is so to be understood, that it
was not only lawful for the ministers of the Church to be married, before they
were ordained ministers, but also to marry after their ordination. For which
opinion there be very evident arguments.

Neither ought the vow of chastity to be any hinderance herein, because that
such a vow being taken upon a man by humane superstition, without the
authority of the word of God, and against faith, is not acknowledged of God,
and wedlock also has it chastity, that he which before had vowed chastity,
and marries a wife in the Lord, does indeed fulfill the vow of chastity.
Seeing therefore that the word of God is evident, touching the honesty of
wedlock, the examples of the Apostles and Bishops of the Primitive Church be
evident, the weakness of man's nature is evident, dangers of single life be
evident, and seeing that the offenses, which unchaste Priests do give, are
evident, we do verily hope that it will come to pass, that they which have the
government of the Church, will not go forward severely to maintain and defend
this constitution touching the marriage of Priests, but favorably to interpret
it. For so it shall come to pass, that there may be both fewer and less
offenses in the Church, and that many good men's consciences may be relieved.
Also we hope that it will come to pass, that all good Bishops and Princes will
permit them, who, by a lawful divorce, are separated from their adulterous
wives or husbands, to use that liberty of marrying again in the Lord, which
the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ has granted to them, Matthew. 5. and 16.

Hitherto also pertains the 26. Article.

Of Monastical vows.
THere is no doubt but that godly, just, and lawful vows are to be kept and
paid, and that wicked vows are to be disanulled. But it is not without cause
made a matter of controversy, in what kind of vows Monastical vows
touching virginity or single life, poverty and obedience, are to be placed.
For it is evident, that single life, is not commanded by the Word of God: also
it is evident, that although the estate of single persons be in public dangers
quiet, and more fit and commodious to execute the public Ministeries of the
Church, then is theirs, which use it not, yet we must not think, that this kind
of life is of it self before the tribunal seat of God more excellent, and more
holy, then is marriage. For as in Christ there is neither Jew, nor Grecian,
neither servant nor freeman, as Paul says, so in Christ, there is neither
married, nor unmarried. And as, In Christ Jesus circumcision avails nothing,
but the keeping of the commandments of God, and a new creature: so also does
single life avail nothing, and wedlock avails nothing, but to be renewed in
Christ Jesus, and to obey the calling of Christ. In the Council held at Gangrum
there was this Canon: If any of those, who for the Lords sake do keep
virginity, is lifted up against those that be married, let him be accursed.
And an other Canon says, If any man, for continency, as it is thought, does
wear a cloak, as believing that hereby he has righteousness, and does
despise others, who with reverence do wear other common and usual kinds of
garments, let him be accursed. And Augustine, De bono coniugali, cap, 21.
dares not prefer the virginity of the Baptist, before the wedlock of
Abraham.

Therefore he that does vow virginity or single life, does either vow it, as a
singular worship of God (And then because the state of single life is not
commanded by the word of God, this vow pertains to the commandments of men,
whereof Christ says, In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
precepts of men.) Or else he works it, as a merit of remission of sins, and
of life eternal, and then it is evidently a wicked vow, whereunto no man is
bound. It is to no better purpose to vow poverty. For either thou are poor by
condition or estate, and possessest no earthly substance: (And then this
cross, which God has laid upon thee, thou must bear it patiently, which
moreover if thou do vow, thou do nothing else, then if in thy sickness
thou should vow, that thou would always be sick, or that in thy
infamy, thou should always vow to be infamous: which kind of vow is rather
a madness, then godliness.) Or else thou do possess substance, and vowest
that, forsaking thy substance, thou will always lead a poor life, and get
thy living by beging, and obtain, by the merit of this vow, eternal life: and
then this vow is first of al repugnant to the love of thy neighbor, which
requires, that by thy begging thou be not troublesome to any, further then
necessity compels: secondly it is contrary to faith in Christ, because that
he alone is the merit of eternal life. Therefore it is evident, that this kind
of vow is unlawful and wicked. But so to forsake thy substance, as to give it
to a common use, is not to follow after poverty, but to provide a more certain
and bountiful living for thy self: the which what manner of worship it is
before God, it cannot be unknown. And as for obedience, it is either referred
to God, and then it is not an arbitrary vow, but of due necessity, of which
obedience it is said, Obedience is better then sacrifice: Or else it is
referred to man, and then of their own accord they are to perform those
duties, which the subject owes to the Magistrate, children to the Parents,
servants to their Lords, and scholars to their Schoolemasters. These things
does God look for at men's hands whether they be vowed, or not vowed: but yet
with this condition, that we do always rather obey God, then men. But to vow
obedience unto man, without a special calling of God, that by the works of
such obedience, a man may not only perform a singular worship unto God, but
also purge his sins before God, it is altogether superfluous (because that
Christ says, They worship me in vain with the traditions of men) and also
wicked, because the obedience of Christ alone, which he performed to God his
Father, has puged our sins, and reconciled us with God. By all these things
it is manifest, that the kind of vowing single life, poverty, and obedience,
does not agree with that doctrine which is indeed Catholic, especially seeing
that certain men are not afraid, to make this kind of vowing equal with
Baptism.

Out of the Confession of SUEVELAND. Of Monkerie. CHAP. 12.
ANd for the same cause, that all our Justification does consist The former
part of this 12. Chap. might more commodiously have been referred to the 17.
Sect. where we entreated of true Christian liberty if those things which
follow had not hindered it.
in faith in Jesus Christ, whereupon we have liberty given to us in all
external things, we have permitted the bonds of Monkerie to be released among
us. For we saw that this liberty of Christians was vehemently challenged in
every place by Saint Paul, whereby every Christian man does assure himself,
that all righteousness and salvation is to be sought for only in Christ Jesus
our Lord, and is also assured, that he must at all times use all the things of
this life, as to the profit of our neighbors, so to the glory of God: and that
all which he has is to be arbitrated, and moderated by the holy Ghost, who is
the giver of true adoption and true liberty, and that he ought freely to
permit them to be appointed, and bestowed both to the relief of his
neighbors, and also to the advancement of the glory of God. Seeing that we
retain this liberty, we show our selves to be the servants of Christ: when we
betray it to men, addicting our selves to their inventions, we do like
runnagates, forsake Christ, and fly to men. The which thing we do so much the
more wickedly, because that Christ has freed us by his blood not by a vile or
common price, and has redeemed us to himself from the deadly slavery of
Satan. And this is the cause, why Saint Paul writing to the Galathians, did so
much detest it, that they had addicted themselves to the ceremonies of the law,
though they were commanded of God, whereas notwithstanding, as we declared
before, that might be far better excused, then to submit themselves to the
yoke of those ceremonies, which men have feigned of their own brain. For he did
write, and that truly, that they which admit the yoke, of those ceremonies,
despise the grace of God, and count the death of Christ as a thing of nothing:
and thereupon he says, That he is afraid, lest that he had bestowed his labor
among them in vain: and he exhorts them, That they would stand steadfast in
that liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, and not to be entangled
again, with the yoke of bondage.

Now it is evident, that Monkerie is nothing else then bondage of traditions
devised by men, and indeed of such as Paul has by name condemned in the places
which we alleged. For undoubtedly they which profess Monkerie do addict
themselves to those inventions of men for hope of merits. And hereupon it is,
that they make it so heinous an offense, to forsake those inventions, and to
embrace the liberty of Christ. Therefore, seeing 1 Cor. 6.
that as well our body, as our spirit, belong unto God, and that in a double
respect, to wit, of our condition, and Redemption, it can not be lawful for
Christians, to make themselves slaves to this Monastical servitude, much less
then for profane servants, to change their masters. Moreover it cannot be
denied, but that by such like bondage and vows, to live after the commandment
of men, a certain necessity (as it always uses to be) of transgressing the
law of God is brought in. For the law of God does require, that a Christian man
should, as much as lies in him, Matthew. 15.
employ his service to the benefit of the Magistrate, his parents, kindred, and
others; and of all those, whom the Lord has made his neighbors, and brought
to him to be delivered, in what place, time, or manner soever their necessity
shall require it. Then let him embrace that kind of living, whereby he may
chiefly provide for the affairs of his neighbors, neither let him choose a
single life, but let him know that to renounce marriage, and to make himself
an Eunuch for the kingdom of heaven, that is, to further godliness, and the
glory of God, it is a peculiar and a special gift of God. For that Edict which
Paul did publish, stands firm and steadfast, neither can any vows of men
make it frustrate; For the avoiding of whoredom let every man (he excepteth
none) have his own wife, and every woman her own husband. For all men do not
receive that word, of taking upon them a single life for the kingdom of
heaven, as Christ himself does witness, then whom no man did more certainly
know, and more faithfully teach, either of what force man's nature is, or what
is acceptable to his Father. Now it is certain, that by these Monastical
vows, they which do make them are bound to a certain kind of men, so that
they think it not lawful to show themselves obedient and dutiful any longer,
either to the Magistrate, or to their parents, or to any men (only the chief
governor of the Monastery excepted) nor to releeve them with their substance,
and least of all to marry a wife, though they be greatly burned, and therefore
they do necessarily fall into all kinds of dishonesties of life.

Seeing therefore that it is evident, that these Monastical vows do make a
man, which is freed from the service of Christ, to be in danger, not so much of
the bondage of men, as of Satan, and that they do bring in a certain
necessity of transgressing the law of God, (according to the nature of all
such traditions as are devised by men) and that therefore they be manifestly
contrary to the commandments of God, we do, not without cause, believe, that
they are to be made frustrate, seeing that not only the written law, but also
the law of nature does command to disanull a promise, if being kept, it be a
hinderance to good manners, not only to religion. Therefore we could not
withstand any which would change a Monastical life, which is undoubtedly a
bondage to Satan, for a Christian life, as also we could not withstand others
of the Ecclesiastical order, who marrying wives, have embraced a kind of
life, whereof their neighbors might look for more profit, and greater
honesty of life, then of that kind wherein they lived before. To conclude,
neither did we take upon us to drive them from the right of wedlock, who among
us have persevered in the ministry of the word of God, whatsoever chastity
they had vowed, for the causes before specified, seeing that Saint Paul the
chief maintainer of true chastity, does admit even a Bishop to be a married
man. For we have lawfully preferred this one law of God before all laws of men,
For the avoiding of whoredom, let every man have his own wife. Which law
truly, for that it has been rejected so long time, all kinds of lust, even
those which are not to be named (be it spoken with reverence to your sacred
Majesty O noble Caesar) have more then horribly overthrown this
Ecclesiastical order, so that at this day amongst men there be none more
abominable then they, which bear the name of Priests.

THE NINETEENTH SECTION. OF THE CIVIL MAGISTRATE.
The latter Confession of HELVETIA.
Of Magistracy. CHAP. 30.
THE Magistracy, of what sort soever it be, is ordained of God himself, for
the peace and quietness of mankind: and so, that he ought to have the
chiefest place in the world: If he be an adversary to the Church, he may
hinder and disturb it very much: but if he be a friend and a member of the
Church, he is a most profitable and excellent member thereof, which may profit
it very much, and finally may help and further it very excellently. His
chiefest duty is, to procure and maintain peace and public tranquillity.
Which doubtless he shall never do more happily, then when he shall be truly
seasoned with the fear of God and true religion, namely, when he shall after
the example of most holy Kings and Princes of the people of the Lord, advance
the preaching of the truth, and the pure and sincere faith, and shall root out
lies, and all superstition, with all impiety and Idolatry, and shall defend
the Church of God. For indeed we teach that the care of religion does chiefly
appertain to the holy Magistrate: let him therefore hold the word of God in
his hands, and look that nothing be taught contrary thereunto. In like manner
let him govern the people committed to him of God Look the 1. observation.
upon this confession.
with good laws, made according to the word of God. Let him hold them in
discipline, and in their duty, and in obedience, let him excrcise judgment by
judging uprightly, let him not accept any man's person, or receive bribes: let
him deliver widows, fatherless children, and those that be afflicted from
wrong: let him repress, yea and cut off such as are unjust either by deceit,
or by violence. For he has not received the sword of God in vain. Therefore
let him draw forth this sword of God against all malefactors, Romans 13.
seditious persons, thieves, or murderers, oppressors; blasphemers, perjured
persons, and all those whom God has commanded him to punish or execute. Let
him suppress stubborn heretics (which are heretics in deed) who cease not
to blaspheme the majesty of God, and to trouble the Church, yea and finally to
destroy it: but if so be it be necessary to preserve the safety of the people
by war, let him do it in the name of God, so that he first seek peace by
all means possible, and use it not save only then, when he can save his
subjects no way but by war. And while as the Magistrate does these things in
faith, he serves God by those works, as with such as be good works, and shall
receive a blessing from the Lord.

We condemn the Anabaptists, who as they deny that a Christian man should
bear the office of a Magistrate, so also they deny that any man can justly be
put to death by the Magistrate, or that the Magistrate may make war, or that
oaths should be performed to the Magistrates, and such like things. For as God
will work the safety of his people by the Magistrate, whom he has given to
be as it were a father of the world, so all the subjects are commanded to
acknowledge this benefit of God in the Magistrate: therefore let them honor
and reverence the Magistrate, as the minister of God, let them love him, favor
him, and pray for him, as their father, and let them obey all his just and
equal commandments: Finally, let them pay all customs and tributes and all
other duties of the like sort, faithfully and willingly. * Look the 2.
Observat.
And if the common safety of the country and justice require it, and the
Magistrate do of necessity make war, let them lay down their life, and
spend their blood for the common safety and defense of the Magistrate, and
that in the name of God willingly, valiantly, and cheerfully. For he that
opposes himself against the Magistrate, does procure the wrath of God against
him. We condemn therefore all contemners of Magistrates, as rebels, enemies of
the Commonwealth, seditious villains, and in a word, all such as do either
openly or closely refuse to perform those duties which they ought to do, etc.

The Conclusion.
WE beseech God our most merciful Father in heaven, that he will bless the
Princes of the people, and us, and his whole people through Jesus Christ our
only Lord and Savior, to whom be praise, and thankesgiving, both now and for
ever.

Out of the former Confession of HELVETIA. Of Magistracy.
SEeing that every Magistrate is of God, his chief duty (except it please him
to exercise a tyranny) consists in this, to defend religion from all
blasphemy, and to procure it, and, as the Prophet teaches out of the word of
the Lord, to put it in practice, so much as in him lies. In which part truly
the first place is given to the pure and free preaching of the word of God, the
instruction of the youth of Citizens, and a right and diligent teaching in
Schools, lawful discipline, a liberal provision for the Ministers of the
Church, and a diligent care for the poor. Secondly, to judge the people
according Look the 1. observation. upon this confession.
to just and divine laws, to keep judgment and justice, to maintain this
public peace, to cherish the Commonwealth, and to punish the offenders,
according to the quantity of the fault, in their riches, body, or life: which
things when he does, he performs a due worship or service to God. We know,
that though we be free, we ought wholly in a true faith holily to submit our
selves to the Magistrate, both with our body, and with all our goods, and
endeavor of mind, also to perform faithfulness, and Look the 2. Observat.
the oath which we made to him, so far forth as his government is not
evidently repugnant to him, for whose sake we do reverence the Magistrate.

Out of the Confession of BASIL.
Of Magistracy.
MOreover, God has assigned to the Magistrate, who is his minister, the sword
and chief external power for the defense of the good, and to take revenge and
punishment of the Romans 13.
evil. Therefore every Christian Magistrate ( Look the 1. Observation upon
this confession.
in the number whereof we also desire to be) does direct all his strength to
this, that among those which are committed to his credit, the name of God may
be sanctified, his kingdom may be enlarged, and men may live according to his
will, with an earnest rooting out of all naughtiness. And in the margent, This
duty also was enjoined to the heathenish Magistrate, how much more to the
Christian Magistrate ought it to be commended, as to the true substitute of God?

Also, Art. 11. Sect. 1. 3. and 4.
We do clearly protest, that together with all other doctrins, which are
directly contrary to the sound and pure doctrine of Jesus Christ, we do not
only not receive, but, as abominations and blasphemies, reject and condemn
those strange and erroneous doctrines, which the spirits of hurleburly, among
other damnable opinions do bring forth, saying, etc. that Magistrates cannot
be Christians. And in the margent, The Magistrate does then show himself to be
a good Magistrate, when he is a true Christian.

The Conclusion.
LAst of all, we submit this our Confession to the judgment of the holy
Scripture of the Bible, and therefore we promise, that if out of the foresaid
Scriptures we may be better instructed, we will at all times obey God and his
holy word, most thankfully.

Out of the Confession of BOHEMIA.
Of the civil power, or civil Magistrate. CHAP. 16.
FVrthermore, it is taught out of the holy Scripture, that the civil
Magistrate is the ordinance of God, and appointed by God: who both takes his
original from God, and by the effectual power of his presence, and continual
aid is maintained to govern the people in those things which appertain to
the life of this body here upon earth: whereby also he is distinguished from
that spiritual state: whereof is that worthy sentence of Paul, There is no
power but of God, and the power that is, is ordained Romans 13.
of God. Then according to these points, all they that being endued with this
authority do bear public offices, of what kind soever they be, being in
the degree of Magistrates, necessarily must know, acknowledge, and remember
this, that they are Gods deputies, and in his stead, and that God is the
Sovereign Lord and King, even of them all, as well as of other men, to whom at
length in the last day they must give an account, of the degree wherein they
were placed, of their dominions, and of the whole administration of their
government, whereof it is expressly written in the book of Wisdom, and
elsewhere.

And seeing they do govern in stead of God upon earth, and Sap. 6.
are his Lieutenants, it is meet that they frame themselves to the example of
the superior Lord, by following, and resembling him, and by learning of him
mercy and justice. As touching these therefore such an instruction has been
delivered, that they who are in authority ought to do good unto others,
according to that which Christ says, They that are mighty are called
gracious, or Luke 22.
bounteous Lords, and that in regard of their duty they are especially bound
thereunto, and that this is their special charge, that they cherish among the
people without respect of persons, justice, peace, and all good things that are
appertaining unto the time: that they protect and defend their peaceable
subjects, their rights, their goods, their life and their bodies, against those
that wrong, and oppress them, or do any ways indammage, or hurt them: also
against the unjust violence of the Turks, together with others that do the
like, to succor and defend them: and so to serve the Lord God herein, that
they bear not the sword in vain, but valiantly, courageously, and faithfully
use the same to execute the will and works of God therewith. Hereof in the holy
Scripture such are called Gods, and of Saint Paul, the Ministers of God. The
Magistrate, says he, is the Minister of God for thy good; who Psalm. 8 2. Ioh.
10. Romans 13. 1 Pet 2.
is sent, as Peter says, to take vengeance on those that do evil, and to
give honor unto those that do good.

But for as much as the Magistrate is not only the power of God, in that sort,
as the Scripture does ascribe that title even to an heathen Magistrate, as
Christ said unto Pilate, Thou could Ioh 19.
have no power over me, unless it were given thee from above: but the
Christian Magistrate ought also to be a partaker, and as it were, Apoc. 1. and
19. 1 Timothy 6. Isa. 49.
a Minister of the power of the Lamb Jesus Christ, whom God has in our nature
made Lord and King of Kings, that Kings of the earth, who in times past had
been heathen, might come under the power of the Lamb, and give their glory
unto the Church, Ma^th. 15. Luke 13.
and become nources thereof: which then began to be fulfilled, when they
received Christian religion, and made them nests under the tree of
Mustard Seed, which is faith. Then for this cause the Christian Magistrate is
peculiarly taught to be such a one, that he should well use this glory and
portion of his authority, which he has common with the Lamb, and that he
betray it not to Satan and to Antichrist, unless he will be transformed into
that beast, and hideous Monster, which carries the beast, and that he be not
ashamed of the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, and that by this authority of
his he set forth the truth of the holy Gospel, make way for the truth
wheresoever, be a defender of the Ministers and people of Christ, suffer not so
far as in him lies Idolatry, or the tyranny of Antichrist, much less
follow the same, although he be driven to sustain some harm therefore, and so
lay down his Crown before the Lamb, and serve him together with the spiritual
Kings and Priests of the holy Church, that is, with all the faithful, and
Christians that are called to eternal life. Whereunto also the second Psalm
does exhort Magistrates, which it is profitable often to remember, where it is
thus read, And now ye Psalm. 2.
Kings understand, and be ye learned that judge the earth serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice unto him with trembling, Hereupon it follows and is
concluded by force of argument: namely, that whosoever does use in such sort as
has been said, this ordinary power of God and of the Lamb, with patience in
their adversities, as well on the right, as on the left hand, they shall
receive for this thing, and for their labor a large and infinite reward and
blessing of God upon earth, and also in the life to come, through faith in
Christ: and contrariwise upon the wicked, cruel, and bloodthirstie, that
repent not, shall come the pains of fearful vengeance Psalm. 82. Sap 6.
in this life, and after this life everlasting torment.

Moreover the people also are taught of their duty, and by the word of God are
effectually thereto enforced, that all and every of them, in all things, so
that they be not contrary unto God, perform their obedience to the superior
power, first to the Kings Majesty, then to all Magistrates, and such as are in
authority, in what charge soever they be placed, whether they be of themselves
good men, or evil; so also to all their Ministers, and such as are sent with
commission from them, to reverence and honor them, and yield unto them all
things, whatsoever by right are due unto them: and perform and pay unto them,
honor, tribute custom, and such like whereunto they are bound. But in things
pertaining to men's souls, to faith and eternal salvation, of those the people
is taught, Look the a. observation.
that they ought to obey no man more then God, but God only and his holy word
above all things and especially, according to that which the Lord commands,
Give unto Caesar the things which are Cesars, and unto God the things which
Matthew. 22.
are Gods. But if some should attempt to remove any from this Christian and
true opinion, they ought to follow the example of the Apostles, who with a bold
courage nothing at all daunted, answered the Magistrate and counsel of
Jerusalem in this manner, We ought rather to obey God, then men. Whereof also
is to be Causa 11. ^^^est 3. Cap. St Domi^^^.
seen the judgment of the old fathers, and of the Canon law: where they thus
write, and these are the words of St. Jerome: If the Lord (or Magistrate)
command those things that are not contrary to the holy Scriptures, let the
servant be subject to the Lord: but if he command any thing contrary, let him
rather obey the Lord of his spirit then of his body. And a little after. If it
be good which the Emperor commands, do the will of him that commands: if
it be evil, answer, we ought rather to obey God then men.

The Conclusion.
ANd hitherto have been informed and showed unto your Majesty in this writing
the reasons and causes of our faith and doctrine and Christian religion: such
doctrine as the Ministers of our Churches, all and singular, every one
according to the gift of God granted unto him, do with one consent of
judgment hold, talk of, and preach, and do constantly maintain and fight
for the same, not with the power of this world, but by holy Scriptures, against
those that impugn it, or by teaching do spread abroad contrary errors
thereunto. Neither yet without that modesty that becomes the profession of
Christians, do they stubbornly rather then rigorously persist in this
doctrine, or have at any time heretofore persisted: but if any thing be found
herein not well taken by them, and that by certain grounds out of the word of
God (which ought to be the rule of judgment unto all men) peaceably, and with
a meek spirit (as it ought to be done) be showed unto them, they are ready and
forward, and thereunto, as always heretofore, so now they offer themselves,
that after due consideration and true knowledge of the truth had, they will
most gladly, and thankfully receive that doctrine which shall have better
foundations, and willingly reform whatsoever shall have need to be amended.
Wherefore most excellent King, and gracious Lord, may it please your Majesty
to examine this our confession, and after diligent and due consideration had,
to way and consider whether any man worthily and for just cause, may reject,
and condemn this doctrine, as not agreeable to the holy Scripture, nor
Christian. Verily, we are of opinion, that if any man presume to despise, or
condemn this doctrine, he must of necessity also condemn the holy Scripture,
from whence it was taken, and the ancient, and true Christian Doctors, with
whom it agrees, and also the holy Church it self, which from the beginning,
and that constantly, so has, and does teach. And hereby your Majesty may
graciously perceive and determine, whether the complaints and accusations of
our Adversaries, and such as favor not us and our Teachers, be just or no.
Wherefore most humbly we pray, that your sacred Majesty will give no place or
credit to our Adversaries, in those matters which diverse ways without any
ground they charge us withal, when as without all humanity they accuse us,
our Ministers and Preachers, as if we had another religion, and taught another
doctrine, then that which at this present we offer unto your Majesty; or that
we presume stubbornly to take in hand, or do attempt any other thing against
God, and your Majesty, and contrary to the institutions of this Commonwealth,
and to the public law of the kingdom of Bohemia. And your Majesty may well
call to your remembrance that we have every way, and at all times, behaved our
selves obediently and peaceably, and in all things which may turn or belong to
the preservation of your Majesty's person, and to the public good, and
commodity of the whole Realm: in all such things, I say, we have indeauoured
not to be behind others: and hereafter also we offer our selves most ready to
perform the same, according to our allegiance and duty. Neither do we think
it only a point of virtue, and to appertain unto honesty alone and the good
estate of the Commonwealth, to yield our selves subject and faithful to your
Majesty, for peace, concord and the rewards of this life, but much rather we
acknowledge that it pleases God, and that so is his will, that every one for
conscience sake should be obedient to the Magistrate, and should reverence,
love, honor, and highly esteem him: even as our Teachers also do deal both
with us, and with the people to perform this, and oftentimes by teaching out
of the word do enforce it upon us both.

Here we commend our selves unto your Majesty, as to the fatherly and liberal
tuition, care and protection of our most gracious Lord, and do most humbly
beseech of your Majesty, that unto these things, which on the behalf of
Christian religion we have tendered unto your Majesty, we may receive a
courteous answer, and such as God may be pleased withal. The Almighty and
everlasting God graciously preserve your Majesty in continual health, to the
profit, benefit, and increase of his holy Christian Church. Amen.

Proverb. 20. Mercy and truth preserve the King, for his throne is established
with mercy.

Out of the FRENCH Confession.
WE believe that God would have the world to be governed Artic. 39.
by laws, and by civil government, that there may be certain bridles, whereby
the immoderate desires of the world may be restrained, and that therefore he
appointed kingdoms, Commonwealths, and other kinds of principality, whether
they come by inheritance, or otherwise. And not that alone, but also whatsoever
pertains to the state of righteousness, as they call it, whereof he desires
to be acknowledged the author. Therefore he has also delivered the sword into
the hands of the Magistrates, to wit, that offenses may be repressed, not only
those which are committed against the second table, but also against the first.
Therefore, because of the Author of this order, we must not only suffer them
to rule, whom he has set over us, but also give unto them all honor and
reverence, as unto his Ambassadors, and Ministers assigned of him to execute a
lawful and holy function.

Also, Art. 40.
THerefore we affirm that we must obey the Laws and Statutes, that tribute
must be paid, and that we must patiently endure the other burdens, to conclude,
that we must willingly suffer the yoke of subjection, although the Magistrates
be infidels, so that the sovereign government of God do remain whole or
entire, and nothing diminished. Therefore we detest all those, which do reject
all kind of dominion, and bring in a community and confusion of goods, and
who, to conclude, do go about to overthrow all order of law.

Out of the Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe that the most gracious and mighty God did Artic. 36.
appoint Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, because of the corruption and
depravation of mankind, and that it is his will that this world should be
governed by laws, and by a certain civil government, to punish the faults of
men, and that all things may be done in good order among men. Therefore he has
armed the Magistrates with the sword, that they may punish the wicked, and
defend the good. Moreover it is their duty, not only to be careful to
preserve the civil government, but also to endeavor that the ministry may
be preserved, that all Idolatry and counterfeit worship of God may be clean
abolished, that the kingdom of Antichrist may be overthrown, and that the
kingdom of Christ may be enlarged. To conclude, it is their duty to bring to
pass, that the holy word of the Gospel may be preached every where, that all
men may serve and worship God purely and freely, according to the prescript
rule of his word.

Moreover all men of what dignity, condition, or state soever they be, ought
to be subject to their lawful Magistrates, and pay unto them subsidies and
tributes, and obey them in all things, which are not repugnant to the word of
God. Also they must pour out their prayers for them, that God would vouchsafe
to direct them in all their actions, and that we may lead a peaceable and
quiet life under them with all godliness and honesty. Wherefore we condemn
the Anabaptists, and all those troublesone spirits, which do reject higher
powers, and Magistrates, overthrow all laws and judgments, make all goods
common, and to conclude, do abolish and confound all those orders and degrees,
which God has appointed among men for honesties sake.

Out of the Confession of AUSPURGE.
COncerning civil affairs they teach, that such civil ordinances, Artic. 16.
as be lawful, are the good works and ordinances of God, As Paul witnesses,
The powers which are, be ordained of God. They teach therefore that it is
lawful for Christians to bear offices, to sit in judgment, and to determine
of matters by the Princes laws, or by the laws of the Commonwealth, to appoint
punishments according to law, to make lawful wars, to go to war, to deal
in bargains and contracts, by laws to hold his own, to take an oath at the
request of the Magistrates, to contract lawful marriage, and to follow such
crafts and sciences as are approved by law.

They condemn the Anabaptists, which forbid Christians these civil offices.
They likewise condemn them which have placed perfection under the Gospel, in
the renouncing of civil offices, whereas it is spiritual, that is, it
consists in the motions of the heart, in the fear, faith, love, and
obedience of God. For the Gospel speaks of a certain eternal righteousness
of the heart, yet does it not take away civil, or domestical government, but
requires most of all to have them preserved in this bodily life, as the
ordinances of God, and that we should exercise love and charity in such
ordinances. Wherefore Christians must of necessity obey the Magistrates laws
that now are, save only where they command and set forth any sin. For in
such case they must obey God, rather then men. Act. 4.

These things are thus found in another Edition.
COncerning civil things, they teach that such civil ordinances Artic. 16.
as are lawful are the good works of God, that Christians may lawfully bear
office, sit in judgments, determine matters by the Princes or country laws,
lawfully appoint punishments, lawfully make war, be soldiers, make bargains
and contracts, by law hold their own, take an oath when the Magistrates
require it, marry a wife, or be given in marriage. They condemn the
Anabaptists, which forbid Christians to meddle with civil offices: as also
those that place the perfection of the Gospel, not in the fear of God and
faith, but in forsaking civil offices. For the Gospel teaches an everlasting
righteousness of the heart. In the mean time it does not disallow order and
government of Commonwealths, or families, but requires especially the
preservation and maintenance thereof, as of Gods own ordinance, and that in
such ordinances we should exercise love and charity. Christians therefore must
in any wise obey their Magistrates, and laws, save only then, when they
command any sin. For then they must rather obey God then men.

We condemn the Anabaptists which do spread Jewish opinions afresh. They
imagine that the godly before the resurrection, shall possess the kingdoms of
the world, and the wicked and ungodly in all places be destroyed and brought
under. For we are sure that seeing the godly must obey the Magistrates that be
over them, they must not wring their rule and authority out of their hands,
nor overthrow governments by sedition, forasmuch as Paul wills every soul to
be subject to the Magistrates. We know also that the Church in this life is
subject to the cross, and that it shall not be glorified till after this life,
as Saint Paul says, We must be made like to the image of the Son of God, And
therefore we do condemn and detest the folly and devilish madness of the
Anabaptists.

The Conclusion.
THese are the principal articles that seem to have any doubt or controversy
in them. For though we might have spoken of many more abuses, yet to avoid
tediousness, we have only set down the chiefest, by which it is easy to
judge of the rest. There have been great complaints of Indulgences and
Pilgrimages, and of the abuse of excommunication, Parishes have been diverse
ways molested by Catchpoles: there have been many brawles and bickerings
between Parish Priests and Monks about this, who had greater right to the
Parish, and about commissions, burials, and extraordinary Sermons, and other
such innumerable things, such like matters we have permitted, that such as are
the principal in this cause, being shortly set down, might the better be
understood. Neither have we here spoken or written any thing to any man's
reproach. Only we have rehearsed such things, as seemed necessary to be
spoken, to the end that it might be seen, that nothing is received among us in
doctrine or ceremonies, contrary to the Scripture, or the Catholic Church. For
it is evident, that we have most diligently taken heed that no new or wicked
opinions should creep into the Church. These articles above written, we
thought good to exhibit according to the Emperors his highness Edict wherein
our confession might be extant, and the sum of that doctrine, which our
Teachers do deliver among us, might be seen and known. If any thing be
wanting in this confession, we are ready, if God permit, to yield a more full
information thereof according to the Scriptures.

Another Edition has it thus.
WE have set down the sum of the doctrine of the Gospel that is needful
for the Churches. And we are out of doubt that this our judgment in these
points is in deed the doctrine set forth in the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, and whereunto the universal Church of Christ does agree and consent,
and whereto the best learned Writers of the Church do give testimony in many
places. And we offer our selves to make a more large and ample explication of
these things when need shall require. Now we beseech God, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that he will vouchsafe to rule, preserve, purge, and
increase his Church, which he has purchased and redeemed by the blood of his
Son. Amen.

The faithful, and subjects to the Emperors Majesty. John Duke of Saxony
Elector. George Marquis of Brandembrough. Ernest Duke of Luneborough. Philip
the Lantgrave of the Hesses. John Frederick Duke of Saxony. Francis Duke of
Luneborough. Wolfgang Prince of Anhalt. The Senate and Magistrates of
Nurnborough. The Senate of Reutling.

Out of the Confession of SAXONY.
Artic. 23. Of the civil Magistrate.
BY the benefit of God this part also of doctrine of the authority of the
Magistrate, that bears the sword, and of the authority of Laws and
Judgments, and of the whole civil state is godlily set forth: and by great
travel, and many writings the manifold and great furies of the Anabaptists and
other fantastical men are refuted. We teach therefore that in the whole
doctrine of God delivered by the Apostles and Prophets, and degrees of the
civil state are avouched, and that Magistrates, Laws, order in judgments and
the lawful society of mankind, are not by chance sprung up among men. And
although there be many horrible confusions, which grow from the Devil, and the
madness of men, yet the lawful government and society of men is ordained of
God, and whatsoever order is yet left by the exceeding goodness of God, it is
preserved for the Church sake, as it is said, Romans 13. and Psalm. 126. Except
the Lord keep the City, in vain he watches, that keeps it, etc. Therefore
in themselves they are things good, to bear the authority of a Magistrate, to
be a Judge, to be a Minister, to execute judgments, to make lawful wars,
and to be a soldier in lawful wars, etc. And a Christian man may use these
things, as he uses meat, drink, medicines, buying and selling. Neither does
he sin that is a Magistrate, and discharges his vocation, that exercises
judgment, that goes to war, that punishes lawfully those that are
condemned, etc. And subjects owe unto the civil Magistrate obedience, as Paul
says, Romans 13. Not only because of wrath, that is, for fear of corporal
punishment, wherewith the rebellious are rewarded by the Magistrate, but also
for conscience sake, that is, rebellion is a sin that offends God, and
withdraws the conscience from God.

This heavenly doctrine we propound unto the Churches which establishes lawful
authority, and the whole civil state, and we show the difference of the
Gospel, and the civil government. God would have all men to be ruled and kept
in order by civil government, even those that are not regenerate, and in this
government, the wisdom, justice, and goodness of God toward mankind, is most
clearly to be seen. His wisdom is declared by order, which is in the
discerning of virtues and vices, and in the society of mankind under lawful
government, and in contracts guided and disposed by mavelous wisdom. Then
the justice of God appears in civil government, in that he will have open
sins to be punished by the Magistrates, and when they that are in authority
do not take punishment on offenders, God himself miraculously draws them
unto punishment, and proportionably does lay upon grievous sins, grievous
punishment in this life: as it is said, Matthew. 26. Whosoever takes the sword,
shall perish with the sword, and Heb. 3. Whoremongers and adulterers, God will
judge. In these punishments God will have to be seen the differences of
virtues and vices, and will have us learn that God is wise, just, true, and
chaste. The goodness of God also toward mankind is seen, in that he
preserves the society of men after this order. And for that cause does he
maintain it, that from thence his Church may be gathered, and he will have
Commonwealthes to be places for the entertainment of his Church. And the civil
government is one thing, which keeps in order all men, even those that are
not regenerate: and forgiveness of sins, and righteousness in the heart,
which is the beginning of life and of eternal salvation, which by the voice of
the Gospel is effected in the hearts of them that believe, is another thing.
Both these benefits God has bestowed upon mankind, and will have us to
understand the difference of civil justice, and light in our hearts. Neither
does the Gospel condemn or overthrow Commonwealths or families. And although
it belong not to those that teach in the Church, to give particular laws of
politic government, yet the word of God does generally teach this of the
power of the Magistrate.

First, God would that the Magistrate without all doubt should sound forth the
voice of the moral law among men, touching discipline, according to the ten
commandments or the law natural; that is, he would have by the voice of the
Magistrate, first sovereign and immutable laws to be propounded, forbidding
the worship of Idols, blasphemies, perjuries, unjust murders, wandering lusts,
breach of of wedlock, theft, and fraud in bargains, contracts, and judgments.

The second duty. Let the Magistrate be an observer of these divine and
immutable laws, which are witnesses of God, and chief rules of manners, by
punishing all those that transgress the same, For the voice of the law without
punishment and execution is little availeable to bridle and restrain men.
Therefore it is said by Saint Paul, Romans 13. The Magistrate is a terror to him
that does evil, and gives honor to them that do well. And well has it
been said of old, The Magistrate is a keeper of the Law, that is, of the first
and second Table, as concerning discipline and good order.

The third duty of the civil Magistrate is to add unto the law natural,
some other laws, defining the circumstances of the natural law, and to keep
and maintain the same by punishing the transgressors: but at no hand to
suffer or defend laws contrary to the law of God or nature, as it is written,
Isa. 10. Woe be to them that make wicked laws. For kingdoms are the ordinance
of God, wherein the wisdom and justice of God, that is, just laws ought to
rule, even as the wise King, and one that feared God, Jehosaphat said, 2 Chronicles.
19. Ye exercise not the judgment of men, but of God, who is with you in
judgment. Let the fear of God be with you, and do all things diligently. For
although many in kingdoms do despise the glory of God, yet notwithstanding
this ought to be their especial care, to hear and embrace the true doctrine
of the Son of God, and to cherish the Churches, as the second Psalm
speaks, And now ye Kings understand, and be learned ye that judge the earth.
And Psalm. 23. Ye Princes open your gates, that is, open your kingdoms to the
Gospel, and give entertainment to the Son of God. And Isa. 49. and Kings and
Queens shall be thy nurces, that is, let common wealths be nurces of the
Church, let them give entertainment to the Church, and to godly studies. Let
Kings and Princes themselves be members of the Church, and rightly understand
the doctrine thereof, and give no help unto those that establish false
doctrine, and exercise unjust cruelty, and remember this saying. I will honor
them that honor me. And Daniel in the fourth Chapter, exhorts the King of
Babylon, to acknowledge the wrath of God, and to show mercy to the banished
Church, when he says, Redeem thy sins with righteousness and with mercy
toward the poor, and there shall be a healing of thy transgressions. And
since they are among the principal members of the Church, let them provide
that judgment be rightly exercised in the Church, as Constantine, Theodosius,
Arcadius, Martian, Charles the great, and many godly Kings have provided, that
judgment in the Church should be sincerely executed. But of the difference of
both states, namely of the Ministry of the Gospel, and the civil
Magistracy, there are many writings in our Church, which declare, that we
teach no fantastical nor seditious opinions, but do show the necessary
doctrine delivered in the Gospel touching both degrees, profitable to
godliness, and common peace.

Thanks be to God.
THis is the sum of that doctrine, which by the blessing of God with one
consent we teach in our Churches, which to be the sincere meaning of the
doctrine delivered from God in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and
in the Creeds, we nothing doubt, and it may be understood out of the ancient
and purer writers, to be agreeable to the ancient and purer Churches. Now the
matter it self declares, that we have not sought to dispute about new
fangled, curious and subtle questions, neither do strive about authority or
riches, but only to unfold and bring to light from the great darkness of
traditions and opinions, that doctrine which is necessary to the true
invocation of God, to true worship, to the right knowledge of the Son of God,
and to the salvation of souls, and do in most simple and plain manner
propound the same unto the Churches. For all wise men must needs confess that
there was much obscurity and many errors in the doctrine of the Monks, and
many snares of conscience in the Popes traditions: and whether doctrine is
true, plain, evident, profitable for consciences, and for manners, comparison
does declare. For we avoid not the judgments of the godly, yea rather we
desire that the whole true Church of God, that is, all the faithful and
learned, wheresoever they are, may understand what we say, who we doubt not
will be witnesses that this doctrine is the consent of the true Catholic
Church of God. Also we offer our selves at any time, to a more full declaration
in every point; and think that this rehearsal of our doctrine now made is
agreeable to the confession exhibited at Auspurge, Anno, 1530.

For as much therefore as the doctrine, which we here recite, is true, and
necessary for the Church, we entreat that our Churches may not be condemned, as
if they either embraced errors, or foolishly or seditiously stirred up strife
without any weighty cause. The truth, and weight of the matters may deliver us
from this unjust accusation. Next after a godly manner, we admonish the Council
it self. They see that old abuses and many great errors are as yet sticking
in the Church, because in all ages even from the beginning of mankind the
devil continues scattering his seed of error, and since that time through
the ignorance of men, by superstition they are either confirmed, or do shoot
forth again. And now for that the vanity of many superstitions is known, the
times require a reformation, and unless the Governors provide that the truth
may be brought to light, great division in opinions is like to follow:
especially because in this last age of the world great confusion is to be
feared. Therefore let the Council see to it, that they condemn not a manifest
truth. And if a godly sort they will deliberate how they may provide for the
Churches, and if a more ample declaration shall be demanded of us, men learned,
of understanding, loving the truth and fearing God must be chosen, to consult
together of these so weighty matters. Neither let them only strive with us in
number of vices, seeing it is manifest by many prejudices, of what opinion the
Bishop of Rome, and others that are, are addicted unto him, who now by the
space of many years have not only set forth against us Edicts written with
blood, but also have slain many of our side: and there be many that neither
understand, nor look after any truth of doctrine, but being already corrupted
with profane persuasions, do think this to be an especial part of politic
men, to defend the present state and to maintain their own authority. And
for this purpose they seek fit Ministers, by sophistical juggling to jest out
the truth Wherefore now we testify that we will not reject the truth, although
it be condemned by the judgments of such men. And we openly profess, that we
consent not to the Council of Trent, which heretofore has sent abroad Decrees
partly false, partly captious and sophistical: but do earnestly request that
both we may be heard in the same matter, and that the errors before confirmed
by the Decrees of the Tridentine Council may be reformed. And we reverently
beseech the most worthy Emperor Carolus ^ugustus that he give not leave to the
Adversaries to oppress the truth by their presumption, and to strengthen their
cruelty which they exercise against innocents, and to stir up greater
dissension by their unjust Decrees. And now we commend the Church and our
selves to the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, who we know, by the voice of
the Gospel gathers together to himself an everlasting Church: and we pray
him that he would govern us, and not suffer the light of his Gospel to be
extinguished, nor the assemblies of them that rightly call upon him to be
dispersed.

An Addition.
ANd we request all that teach in the Churches near adjoining or elsewhere,
that receive the Confession exhibited at Auspurge, 1530. that when they read
these things, if in any point they find any want, they would lovingly admonish
us thereof: for that it was not our purpose to bring up any other kind of
doctrine, but plainly to receite the sum of the Confession of Anspurge, and
the common consent of these Churches: and we desire that we may be favorably,
and not quarrelously judged of. We purpose not to stir up new contentions:
but especially we pray to the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, that was
crucified for us, and rose again, that prayed in his agony, that we might be
one in God, that he would make us also in the most Churches one in himself. We
whose names are subscribed hereunto, who do now teach in the Churches and
Universities under mentioned, do protest that in this writing, which we desire
to have rightly and not quarrelously understood, we have recited the common
doctrine published in the Churches and Universities, wherein we teach the
Gospel, and we are persuaded that this is the true, sincere, and incorrupt
doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, agreeing with the Apostles and Prophets and
with the Creeds, and that it is necessary for the Churches, and we pray our
Lord Jesus Christ, who was crucified for us, and rose again, that he would
mercifully govern and defend these Churches.

Also we offer our selves to further declaration in every Article. This was
written Anno 1551. July ^0. in the Town of Wirtemberg, where the Pastors of
the Churches near adjoining were met together, etc.

Out of the Confession of WIRTEMBERGE. The Conclusion, which is placed in the
latter end of the 35. Chapter.
WE have rehearsed those things, which seem good both to be approved, and
also to be refuted, or amended in the Ecclesiastical doctrine, and in the
whole administration of the Church. And if any thing be spoken either more
briefly, or more obscurely, then so great a matter would require, our Preachers
do promise that they will expound them more largely, and more clearly. That
which remains, we beseech all the godly through Jesus Christ the Son of
God, our only Savior, that (which thing we hope they will do of their own
accord) every one according to his office and calling, would take unto himself
a true and earnest endeavor to reform the Church. It cannot be denied, but
that hitherto for these many years not only the discipline of the Church has
decayed, and the manners thereof have been corrupted with great and horrible
vices, and they have very much degenerated from the honesty of our Elders, but
that also the doctrine of the Church has been depraved in suffering and
bearing with corruptions: which if hereafter they be either dissembled, or
confirmed, every man that is but meanly wise may consider, how great evils are
like to follow in the Church of God. Those execrations and cursings are well
known, whereunto the law of God does addict the transgressors of his word. And
Josias the King of Judah, was endued with an heroical mind, when he repaired
the Church, and although the wrath of God was by his godly repentance and
obedience mittigated (after that the book of the law was found out, and well
known) that those punishments, which the Church of God at that time had
des^rved, through the neglect of his word and their impietr, might be deferred
till another time, yet notwithstanding such was the severitie of God against
the contemnets of his word, and the impenitent, that the King although he were
very godly, could not altogether take it away from them, and appease it. Now we
think that in these times the wrath of God is no less, yea much more
grievously kindled, and set on fire against the assembly of his Church, (by
reason of so many heinous wicked deeds and offenses, which even in that people
which glories in the Name of God, are more evident, then that they can be
denied, and more clear, then that they may be excused) then in times past,
when as yet the Son of God was not made known to the world by his Gospel:
And the judgment of God shall be so much the more severe, by how much his
benefits are the greater, which he seems to have bestowed, both in the
former, and also at these present times upon unthankful men.

But many other things have need of amendment in the Church and ministry
thereof, and especially the doctrine of Repentance, Justification, and the use
of the Sacraments, and single life of the Ministers of the Church, do require
a godly amendment. If these things by the mercy of God, and by the diligence
and care of all good men shall be restored, according to the writings of the
Prophets and the Apostles, and according to the true Catholic consent of the
ancient and purer Church, we shall not only give unto God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ a most acceptable worship, but also the whole Christian world
shall be stirred up to declare their thankfulness and obedience in all
dutiful manner that they may. We truly do not know of any error in our
Preachers, either in doctrine, or in the other administration of the Church:
yet we do not doubt, but that they are endued with so great modesty and
godliness, that if they be admonished by the testimony of the heavenly
doctrine and by the true consent of the Catholic Church, they will in no case
be wanting to the edifying of the Church. And as much as lies in us, and in
our government, we will do our endeavor, that the mercy of God helping us,
none of those duties may be pretermitted of us, whereby we hope that the true
quietness of the Church, and salvation in Jesus Christ the Son of God, may
be preserved.

Out of the Confession of SUEVELAND.
Of Secular Magistrates. CHAP. 23.
IN the former points we have declared, that our Preachers do place that
obedience which is given unto Magistrates, among good works of the first
degree, and that they teach, that every man ought so much the more diligently
to apply himself to the public laws, by how much he is a more sincere
Christian, and richer in faith. In the next place they teach, that to execute
the office of a Magistrate, it is the most sacred function, which can happen
unto man from God, whereupon also it is come to pass, that they which are
endued with public authority, are in the Scriptures called Gods. For when as
they do justly and orderly behave themselves in their function, it goes well
with the people both in doctrine, and in life: because that God does use so to
moderate our affairs, that for the greater part, the safety and destruction
of the subjects does depend upon them which are the Governors. Wherefore none
do more worthily execute Magistracy, then they which of all others are the
most Christian, and Bishops and other Ecclesiastical men were promoted by most
godly Emperors and Kings to an external government in civil affairs.
Wherein though they were religious and wise, yet in this one point they
offended, because they were not able to discharge both those functions
sufficiently, and it was necessary, that either they should be wanting to the
Churches in ruling them by the word, or to the commonwealth, in governing it by
authority.

The Conclusion.
THese be the chief points, most mighty and religious Emperor, wherein our
Preachers have somewhat swerved from the common doctrine of Preachers, being
forced thereunto by the only authority of the Scriptures, which is worthily to
be preferred before all other traditions. These things, being so declared, as
the shortness of time would give us leave, we thought it good to offer them to
your sacred majesty, and that to this end, that we might both give account of
our faith to thee, whom next unto God we do chiefly honor and reverence, and
might also show how necessary it is, speedily and earnestly to consult of a way
and mean, whereby a thing of so great importance, may be known, diligently
weighed, and discussed, as the honor which we do chiefly owe to God (in
whose chief matter it behoovethus to be conversant with fear and trembling)
does require. Secondly, it is a thing worthy of your sacred Majesty, (which is
so much commended for the name of religion and clemency). To conclude, the
very mean to attain to that certain and sound peace, which your sacred
Majesty goes about, does require it: which peace, seeing that we do vary
about Faith and Religion, can no other ways be obtained, then when as before
all other things the minds be plainly instructed concerning the truth.

But peradventure it might seem needless, that we in these matters should use
so many words, seeing that the most famous Prince Elector of Saxony and others
have very largely and soundly declared unto your sacred Majesty those things,
which at this day are in controversy in our holy Religion. But because that
your sacred Majesty has desired that all they, who have any interest in this
business, should declare unto you their judgment concerning Religion, we also
thought it our duty, to confess those things unto your sacred Majesty, which
are taught among us. Howbeit this matter is so large, and comprehends so many
things, that even those things which we have declared on both sides, are as yet
fewer, and more briefly declared, then that we may hope, presently to have some
certainty determined in the controversies, and that such, as may be approved,
not of all, but at the least of a good part of Christian people: So few is the
number of those that do subscribe to the truth. Therefore seeing that this
matter is so weighty, so diverse, and manifold, and cannot fruitfully be
decided, except it be well known and sifted of many, we beseech your sacred
Majesty, and most humbly request you by God and our Savior, whose glory
without doubt you do chiefly seek, that you would procure, as speedily as may
be, that a general, free, and a Christian Council in deed may be summoned,
which hitherto has seemed so necessary a thing both to your sacred Majesty,
and also to other Princes of the sacred Empire, for the setting of
Ecclesiastical affairs at a stay, that almost in all assemblies throughout
the Empire, which have been gathered together since the beginning of this
variance about Religion, both your sacred Majesty's commissioners and other
Princes of the Empire, have openly witnessed, that there was no other way in
these matters, to bring that to pass which might be wholesome. Whereupon in
the last assembly held at Spire, your sacred Majesty gave occasion to hope,
that the Bishop of Rome would not withstand it, but that such a Council might
with speed be summoned.

But if so be that in time we may not have opportunity for a a general
Council, yet at the least your sacred Majesty may appoint a Provincial
assembly, as they call it, of the learned men of every degree and state,
whereunto all, for whom it is expedient to be present, may freely and safely
resort, every man may be heard, and all things may be weighed, and judged, by
such men, whom it is certain, as being endued with the fear of God, to make
the chiefest account of the glory of God. For it is not unknown, how gravely,
and diligently in times past both Emperors and Bishops behaved themselves in
the deciding the controversies of Faith, which notwithstanding were oftentimes
of much less moment, then those which do presently trouble Germany, so that
they thought it not an unworthy thing for them to examine the self same things
the second, and the third time Now he that shall consider, how things stand at
this present, he can not doubt, but that at this day there is greater need,
then ever was heretofore, of greater faithfulness, gravitie, meekness, and
dexterity, to this end, that the Religion of Christ may be restored into her
place. For if so be that we have the truth, as we do undoubtedly believe, how
much time and labor, I pray you, is requsite that they may know the truth,
without whose consent or patience at the least, sound peace cannot be obtained?
But if we do err (from the which we do not doubt but we be far) again the
matter will not require slothful diligence nor a short time, that so many
thousand men may be called into the way again. This diligence and time it
shall not be so unseemely for your Majesty to bestow, as it is meet that you
should express his mind toward us, in whose stead you do govern over us, to
wit, the mind of Jesus Christ the Savior of us all, who, seeing that he came
with this mind, to seek, and to save that which was perished, so that he
vouchsafed also to die, that he might redeem them which were lost, there is no
cause, why your sacred Majesty should think much, although you should
undoubtedly believe, that we are fallen from the truth, to leave the nintie
nine sheep in the wilderness, and to seek for the hundredth, and to bring it
back into the sheepfold of Christ, that is, to prefer this business before
all other things, that the meaning of Christ in every of these things, which at
this present are in controversy, may out of the Scriptures be plainly and
certainly laid open unto us, though we be but a few in number and of the
meaner sort, and we for our parts will show our selves willing to be taught,
(only let all obstinacy be removed) so that it may be lawful to hear the
voice of our Shepherd Jesus Christ: and let all things stay and rest upon the
Scriptures (which teach whatsoever is good) whereunto we shall be called. For
if it should so fall out, that the care of teaching us being rejected, there
should compendious forms of Edicts be sought (which we do nothing fear
whilst the matter is in the hand of your sacred Majesty) it cannot be said,
into what straights innumerable thousands of men should be brought, to wit, of
those, whom, as being persuaded that God is chiefly to be heard, and then that
those things which follow as opinions must stay upon the undoubted oracles of
God, these sayings of our Savior do always appale: Fear not them which kill
the body. He that shall loose his soul, shall find it. He that shall not
hate father and mother, etc. yea even his own soul, he cannot be my Disciple.
He that shall be ashamed of me, before this froward and adulterous nation, of
him will I be ashamed before my Father and his Angels. And such like.

Many men being moved with these thundering speeches, have resolved with
themselves to suffer all extremity: and many for fear of death do rather seek
delays, but yet waiting for a fit opportunity, if they should be dealt
withal in this matter by authority, before they be dealt withal by doctrine,
and by force, before their error should be made known unto them. For of what
force a sound persuasion of Religion is, and how it makes men to make no
account not only of their goods, but also of their lives, it has been seen
more then sufficiently in very many, even within this 10. years (that we may
say nothing of the former ages) who have willingly suffered not only
banishments and proscriptions, but also torments, and death it self, rather
then they would suffer themselves to be withdrawn from that judgment which
they had conceived, and which they believed to be true. If now a days when as
there is contention of those lighter matters, there be but a few to be found,
whom a man may bring to unfeigned concord, except they may be persuaded of the
law, or the equity of conditions, how, when as the controversy is of
Religion, shall we look for true peace and, an undoubted tranquillity in these
matters, to wit, such a one as your sacred Majesty goes about to establish,
except that on both sides it be agreed upon, what things they be that God does
approve, and what things be agreeable to the Scriptures? For as Religion by
right, and by the custom of all nations, is preferred before all other things,
so there never was any more vehement or sharp fight among men, then that which
is undertaken for Religion. But we, seeing that your sacred Majesty has used
such an unspeakable clemency toward your enemies, and those such, as have
pretermitted no kind of hostility, that we may let pass other things, have
not without cause received great hope, that you will so moderate all things
even in this matter also, that you will much more seek for the praise of
goodness and courtesy in us, who are most desirous of your safety and
honor, as we have in deed testified, and do from the bottom of our hearts
desire yet farther to testify. For we have dealt so moderately in all points,
that we have made it evident enough to all good men, that it was never in our
mind to hurt any man, or deceitful to increase our commodities by the
discommodities of other men. Indeed we have sustained dangers for this cause,
and spent exceeding much, but we have not gained no not so much as a little
thereby, this one thing excepted, that we being better instructed, touching the
goodness of God showed unto us through Christ, we have begun (by the grace of
God) to hope better of those things which are to come: and of that we do by
right make so great account, that we do not think that we either have done, or
suffered any thing as yet worthy thereof, seeing that it is an inestimable
thing, and to be preferred above all things, which are in heaven or in earth.
We have been so far from emparing the riches of Ecclesiastical men, that when
the husbandmen were in an uproar, we, to our great costs and dangers, defended
them to their uses. The Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, as surely as we would
that he should love us, is the only thing that enforces us, and has caused
us to do all these things, which we seem to have altered.

Therefore let it please your sacred Majesty rather to follow the examples of
these most mighty and indeed happy Emperors, Constantine, Jovinian, Theodosius,
and such like, who both by doctrine daily taught in all meekness by most holy
and vigilant Bishops, and also by Councels lawfully assembled, and by a wise
discussing of all things, did deal with them that erred, and assayed all means
to bring them again into the way, before that they would determine any thing
more sharply against them; then to follow those, who it is certain had such
counselors, as were most unlike to those ancient and holy Fathers indeed, and
received an event nothing answerable to the godliness of those Fathers. In
consideration hereof let not your sacred majesty be withdrawn with this, that
the chiefest matters, which are now in controversy, were decided long since,
and chiefly in the Council held at Constance, especially seeing you may see,
that of those innumerable, no less holy then necessary decrees of the former
Councels, there is not so much as the least point observed of our
Ecclesiastical men, and that they have so degenerated in all things, that no
man which is but endued with common sense, does not cry out, that there is need
of a Council, to restore Religion, and the holiness of the Ecclesiastical
order. But if that does like them so well which was decreed at Constance, how
comes it to pass, that by no means at all that decree eversince took place,
that Christian Councels should be assembled every tenth year? the which thing
was at that time decreed. For by this mean much godliness and faith might
either be recovered, or preserved.

But what is he that will not confess, that so often as the discase waxes
fresh, so often the remedy is to be used, and they which have the truth indeed
do never think it much, both that good men should teach it, and also defend it
against the evil sort, where any fruit thereof may be hoped for? Now when as so
many thousand are so miserably entangled in the opinions of our Religion, who
can deny that there is hope of most plentiful fruit, and such as has justly
enforced all those that are governed by the spirit of Christ, that omitting all
other things what soever, contemning all kind of labor and cost, they may give
themselves wholly to this one thing, that the doctrine of Christ, which is the
mother of all righteousness and salvation, may be worthily weighed or
considered, purged from all errors, and offered in it natural color to all
those that love godliness and the true worship of God, to the end that a peace,
and such as may be firm for ever, and a true setting of all holy things at a
stay, may be restored and confirmed to the sheep of Christ, for whom he has
shed his blood, which are now too much troubled and wavering. The which peace
can by no other mean, as we have said, be restored and confirmed unto them, as
being certain that in other things they are in some sort to yield or to give
place, but in the matter of godliness, they are so to stick, and bend themselves
to the word of God, that if they had a thousand lives, they should offer them
to be tormented, rather then to yield one jot, or in the least point, which
they are persuaded to be the word of God. Now if one only soul be of more
value then the whole world, what ought we to do for the salvation of many
thousands? Certainly seeing we are allured by so great a hope, both by this,
that they which are accused to your sacred Majesty of error, do desire
nothing else but that they may be taught, and have wholly addicted themselves
to the holy Scriptures, which are fully sufficient to confute every error: and
also thereby, that Christ our Savior has made so large a promise, that where
even two or three be gathered together in his name, there he will be in the
midst of them, and grant unto them any thing whereupon they shall agree.

These things, most godly Emperor, we do here rehearse for no other cause,
then to show our selves obedient to your sacred Majesty, which would have us
also to declare what is our judgment, concerning the reforming of Religion.
For otherwise we have good hope that your sacred Majesty has of late very
well considered, and does sufficiently perceive, what necessity does enforce
us thereunto, what fruit does allure us, and to conclude, how worthy a thing
this is for your sacred Majesty, which is so much praised for Religion and
clemency, that all the best learned and most godly men being called together,
they may find out of the divine Scriptures, what is to be thought of every
point of doctrine, which are at this time in controversy, and then that it be
expounded by the fit Ministers of Christ, with all meekness and faithfulness,
to them which are thought to be detained in errors. Notwithstanding
herewithall it is to be feared, that there will not be men wanting, who will
do their endeavor to withdraw your sacred Majesty from this: unto these men
it seemed good to us in this sort to make answer as it were before your
Majesty. Let it please your sacred Majesty, according to your most excellent
clemency, for which you are renowned, to take and interpret in good part, both
this same, and all other things, (which we have here expounded and confessed,
for no other respect, then to defend the glory of Christ Jesus our God, as our
duty requires, and, as it is meet we should, to obey your sacred Majesty)
and to account us among those, who truly do from our hearts desire to show
our selves no less obedient and addicted to your Majesty in all humble
subjection, then were our blders, being ready in this point, so far as is
lawful, to spend both our goods and our lives. The King of glory Jesus Christ
grant unto your sacred Majesty, both in this and in all other matters, to do
all things to his glory, and preserve it long, and advance it happily both in
health, and in flourishing estate, to the safety of all Christendom. Amen.

VERY BRIEF OBSERVATIONS UPON ALL THE FORMER HARMONY.
Wherein the doubtful sayings of every Confession are made plain, the dark
speeches opened, and besides such as in outward show seem to be contrary one
to the other, are with modesty reconciled: And to be brief, such things
wherein there is yet any controversy (which indeed are very few) are
favorably marked and noted, that they also may at length through Gods
assistance come to be agreed upon, by a common consent of all the Churches.

1 Cor. 14. 32. The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

Phil. 3. 15. Let us therefore so many as be perfect be thus minded: and if ye
be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even the same unto you. Nevertheless,
in that whereunto we are come, let us proceed by one rule, that we may mind
one thing.

VERY BRIEF OBSERVATIONS UPON THE FORMER HARMONY ACCORDING TO THE ORDER of
the Sections.
IN THE FIRST SECTION.
Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
ACcording to the ancient custom. This ancient custom Obser. 1. page 8.
we do thus far allow, that liberty be be left to every Church to use, or
not to use those Postils, as they call them: yet so as we advise them to
beware, lest this culling out of some parts of the Scripture, bring in a
neglect of the other parts.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
Joining our Prayers with all Saints in heaven. We learn in Obser. 1. page 13.
many places of the holy Scripture, that the Angels, according to the nature of
their ministry which they are sent to perform, do further the salvation of
the godly: and it is evident by that saying, Love does not fall away, and by
the 6. Chap. verse. 10. of the Apoc. that the spirits of the Saints taken up
unto Christ, do with their holy desires, in some sort help forward the grace
and goodness of God, touching the full deliverance of the Church. And thus we
acknowledge, that as well this, and other places of the same Confession, as
also that place in the 23. Chap. of the Confession of Wirtemberge, which
follows after the 2. Section, page 45. are to be interpreted. And we
acknowledge no other intercession or entreating either of the blessed Angels,
or of the spirits of holy men, that are now departed from us.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
OF whose autho itie there was never doubt made. What books Obser. 1. page 13.
these be, may be seen out the French and Belgian Confessions, where they are a
Ireckoned up one by one. And though that in the Catalogue of the books of the
New Testament there are some to be found of which there has been some doubt
made sometimes by the ancient Doctors of the Church, yet at length by the
common consent of the whole Catholic Church even they also were received and
acknowledged for Canonical. And therefore there is no cause, why they should
now be refused, for the scruples that some make about them.

IN THE SECOND SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Helvetia.
FOr as touching their nature and essence they are so joined together. Obser.
1. page 19.
Lest any man should slander us, as though we did make the Persons all existing
together, but not all of the same essence, or else did make a God of diverse
natures joined together in one, you must understand this joining together, so
as that all the persons (though distinct one from the other in properties) be
yet but one and the same whole Godhead: or so, that all and every of the
Persons have the whole and absolute Godhead.

Upon the same.
WE reject not the gods only of the Gentiles, but also the Images Obser. 2.
page 20.
of Christians. By Christians understand such as call themselves Christians in
deed, but yet do retain the use of images for the service of religion, against
the express commandment of God.

Upon the former Confession of Helvetia.
Rejecting herein all means of life and salvation save Christ alone. Obser. 1.
page 24.
Understand it thus, that here are excluded and condemned all those means that
use to be matched with, or made inferior unto Christ, by such as be
superstitious: and not isntrumental means, ordained by the word of God, whose
help God does so use, that the whole force of the outward ministry is to be
ascribed to God alone, as is plainly set down afterward in the 12. Sect. in the
declaration of this self same Confession, where it entreats of the
ministry and sacrifices.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
IS above all to be honored with high worship. To wit, with religious Obser.
1. page 26.
worship, and such as properly respects the conscience, which is all whole
due to God alone, as it is in plain terms afterward set down, lest any man
should think, that that false and impious distinction of Latria, dulia, and
hyperdulia (if so be that it be referred to religious worship) should here be
confirmed. For otherwise as for civil honor, which is due to the higher
powers, and to some other for honesty and orders sake, we are so far from
rejecting it, that we teach, that seeing it is commanded of God, it cannot be
neglected of us, without some wound of conscience.

Upon the same.
SHe was made a dear companion of Christ by the holy Ghost Obser. 1. page ^8.
through faith. Understand this of that peculiar grace and mercy which was
bestowed upon Mary alone, whereby she was made the Mother of God that bare him,
and was also endued with an excellent faith: and not as though any duties of
the only Mediator Christ, either of redemption or intercession, were to be
attributed to her, as afterward in plain words is expressly declared.

Upon the same.
MVch less their images. The meaning of this is, that we are Obser. 3. page 2^.
bound to honor in the Lord both the Saints that are alive, and also the
memory of them that are dead. But to their Images we are not to give any show
of worship whether religious or civil, for as much as that cannot be attempted
without abominable superstition.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
OFfer up their prayers by the Son of God, as in the end of the Obser. 1 page
^7.
prayers it is accustomed to be said, Through Jesus Christ our Lord, etc. These
words do not excuse the Popish prayers unto Saints, which they conclude with
this term of words, for that he speaks here, of godly prayers unto God, and
not of idolatrous and superstitious prayers to Saints.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
THere is no doubt but such as are in bliss pray for the Church, Obser. 1.
page 43.
etc. Look the first observation upon this Confession above in the 1. Section.

Upon the same.
VVAsting Gods gifts in vain. Concerning wasting and losing Obser. 2. page 44.
of the Spirit and of the gifts of the same, look the first Observation upon
this Confession in the 4. Sect. following.

IN THE FOVRTH SECTION.
Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
THey teach also that we must acknowledge our weakness. The Obser. 1 page 66.
terms of imbecillitie and difficulty, which this Confession uses in many
places, must be referred either to the regenerate (in whom the spirit
struggling with the flesh, can not without a wonderful conflict get the upper
hand) or else unto that strife between reason and the affections, whereof the
Philosophers speak, in which not the spirit with the flesh (for the spirit is
through grace in the regenerate only) but the relics of judgment and
conscience, (that is, of the Image of God) which for the most part are faulty,
do strive with the will wholly corrupted: according to the saying of the Poet,
I see the better, and like it well, but follow the worse, etc. Which thing is
largely and plainly set forth in the latter Confession of Helvetia.

Upon the same.
IT could not rise again or recover that fall. This is thus to be taken,
Obser. 2. page 67.
not as though the first grace does find us only weak and feeble before
regeneration, whereas we are rather stark dead in our sins, and therefore we
must be quickened by the first grace, and after we be once quickened by the
first, be helped by the second following, and confirmed and strengthened by the
same continuing with us to the end of our race.

Upon the Confession of Belgia.
THerefore whatsoever things are taught as touching man's free Obser. 1. page 70.
will, etc. This general word Whatsoever we take to appertain to those things
only, which either the Pelagians, or Papists, or any other have taught,
touching this point, contrary to the authority of the Scripture.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
THat which in this Confession is said touching the liberty of Obser. 1. page
71.
man's nature to perform a civil justice, and cited out of the 3. book
hypognosticon (which is fathered upon Augustine) we are taught it out of
another place of the same Father, namely in his Book de gratia ad Valentinum.
Cap. 20. (whose words are these.) The holy Scripture if it be well looked into
does show, that not only the good wills of men (which God makes good of evil,
and having made them good, does guide them unto good actions and to eternal
life) but also those which are for the preservation of the creature in this
life, are so in Gods power, that he makes them bend, when he will, and whether
he will, either to bestow benefits upon some, or to inflict punishments upon
others, according as he does appoint in his most secret, and yet without doubt
most just judgment.

Upon the same.
THis spiritual justice is wrought in us, when we are helped by Obser. 2. page
72. and 73.
the holy Ghost. And a little after, In these sure we had need to be guided and
helped of the holy Spirit, according to that saying of Paul, The Spirit helps
our infirmities, etc. Understand this not of any natural faculty, which unto
any good thing indeed, is none at all, but of the will regenerated, which is
very weak, except it be aided by another grace, even unto the end. And so also
must it be understood which is said a little after, that The law of God can not
be fulfilled by man's nature, to wit, though it be changed and renewed, according
as we have declared in the former Observations upon the Confession of Bohemia,
which we advise you to look over.

Upon the same.
Man's nature can by it self perform, etc. By it self, that is, Obser. 3.
page 73.
by it own proper and inward motion, yet so, as the working and goodness of
God, who upholdeth the society of men, is not excluded, which does not indeed
renew a man, but preserves that reason which is left in him (though it be
corrupt) against the unbridled affections, and disperseth the darkness of the
mind, lest it overspread the light that remains, and represseth the disorder
of the affections, lest they burst forth into act.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
THat which is both here and else where in this Confession, Obser. 1. page 7^.
and now and then in the Confession of Auspurge, repeated, touching the shaking
off and losing the holy Spirit, we take it thus, that it is chiefly meant of
the gifts which are bestowed, even upon those also which pertain nothing to the
Church (as in Socrates, Aristides, Cicero, and some others there shined certain
sparks of excellent virtues.) Secondly of those gifts also, which are bestowed
upon those that are so in the Church, that yet they are not of the Church, nor
truly regenerated by the spirit of adoption, as may be seen in the examples of
Saul Judas, and such others. For as concerning the spirit of sanctification,
which is only in those that are truly regenerated, it is never taken wholly
from them; but only the force and working thereof for a time interrupted,
whilst lusts do bear sway in the heart, even as drunkenness does not take
away the mind it self, but only the use of the mind for a time.

Upon the same.
NOr are sins against the Conscience. We take the meaning to Obser. 2. page
78.
be this. That the elect are said to sin not against their whole conscience,
or so as sin reigns in them, but that albeit they often yield and fall
down, yet they rush not into sins with a full purpose and deliberation, and
that as yet the spirit (though for a time it yields to the flesh) does
wrestle and strive in them, till at length by power from above it gets the
upper hand again.

IN THE SIXTH SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Helvetia.
THis Jesus Christ our Lord is the only and eternal Savior of Obser 1. page
88.
mankind, yea of the whole world. This which is said distinctly of saving the
whole world, we take to be meant of the restoring of the world at the last:
wherein notwithstanding men must not hearken to vain speculations, which are
besides the word of God.

Upon the former Confession of Helvetia.
SImply rejecting all mean. Look the 1. Observation upon this Obser. 1. page
91.
Confession in the 2. Section, where these very same words are set down.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
COncerning Christ his presence, etc. Concerning the presence Obser. 1. page 94.
of Christ in his Church ever since his ascension, and so to continue until
his second coming, we teach this in plain and evident words: (And we do not
think that the brethren are of any other mind in this point) Namely that the
Person of Christ may not be divided, but that both the substance of the natures
and their essential proprieties, ought evermore of necessity to be kept and
retained. And therefore that Christ according to his deity is truly and
essentially with us in the earth, as he is also in heaven, not only as filling
a place, (in which manner he is every where) but also by his peculiar saving
virtue; in respect whereof he is said not only to be, but also to dwell in the
Saints alone, and in none else. But according to the humane nature being above
the heavens, he is neither visibly nor invisibly now in the earth, but only by
his effectual working and most mighty power, when as the Godhead by means of
the Communication of his humanity with us spiritually by faith, works that
in the believers, which he works to their salvation.

Upon the Confession of Belgia.
But two natures joined together in one person: that is, united Observe. 1. page
99.
hypostatically, or personally.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
We do not see as yet, etc. To wit, plainly and perfectly. Observe. 1. page 103.


Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
TO procure the eternal salvation of mankind, that is, to bring Observe. 1.
page 104.
to pass.

IN THE SEVENTH SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Helvetia.
THe whole will of God, etc. Understand, as concerning those Observe. 1. page
106. Observe. 2. page 106. Observe. 3. page 106. Observe. 4. page 106. Observe. 5.
page 106.
things which men are bound to perform to God, and also to their neighbors.

Any flesh, that is, any man, although he be regenerate.

The law of God, to wit, the moral law, comprehended in the ten Commandments.

In the law, to wit in the moral law.

The Scripture of the law, to wit, the ceremonial law.

IN THE EIGHTH SECTION.
Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
MOreover the penitent are taught: Understand those penitent, Observe. 1. page
122.
whose sins are examined in the Ecclesiastical judgment: who are enjoined
to give a testimony of their repentance, till the sentence of absolution be
pronounced: yet so, that every Church may keep her liberty, both in this kind
of examination, and also in the testimony of repentance, and in the
administration of private absolution.

Upon the same.
An external testimony of their repentance. Look the observation Obser. 2
page 123.
that does immediately go before this.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
THey may find: yea and it may in deed be given to those, which Obser. 1. page
127.
do truly repent.

Upon the same.
And that the Church: That is, the Presbytery, of the College Obser. 2. page
127.
which does represent the Church, as Matthew. 18. 17. Therefore this cannot fitly
be understood, either of all kind of sinners, or else of private absolution,
but only of those, which were first bound by the Presbytery. For certainly
the whole assembly of the Church cannot be said to absolve the penitent, which
is a part of the holy Ministry, (as shall hereafter be made evident in the 11.
Section) but to gather together those who do satisfy it, so much as in it
lies, to wit, by the consent and approbation of it.

Upon the same.
That the calamities of this life may be assuaged by good works: Obser. 3. page
127.
yet not so, as though any good works did deserve this mitigation, but it is of
the mere mercy and grace of God.

Upon the same.
They condemn the Anabaptists, who deny that they who be once Obser. 4. page
721
justified, can again lose the Spirit of God, etc. We also do condemn the
Anabaptists, although we do deny, that they which are once justified do
altogether lose the holy Ghost, but yet not so, as they do deny it. For they
confound the holy Ghost, not only with the spirit of the flesh, but also with
those Satanicall furies, wherewith they be tossed. Again, neither do they
know, neither will they know, what faith is, and who are indeed justified. But
we do teach, that the holy Ghost is to be discerned by the word of God, that
is, by the Prophetical and Apostolical writings, from the Spirit of
darkness, although he do transform himself into an Angel of light: And we
distinguish the gifts of the holy Ghost which are without repentance (to wit,
the Spirit of adoption, and an assured persuasion, which is proper to the Elect
and to those that are truly justified) from the temporal gifts, of which sort
is that counterfeit or resemblance of faith, to wit, a temporal faith. Neither
do we deny, that the motions, even of those gifts which are without
repentance, are discontinued, and sometimes almost extinguished, yet so, that
the very true root being once planted in those, that be truly justified, does
persevere in them without repentance even to the end.

Upon the same.
That private absolution is to be retained in the Church, etc. but Obser. 5.
page 1^0.
also to every one in particular, etc. How far and upon what condition,
private absolution is to be retained in the Church, we have declared a little
before in the first observation upon the Confession of Bohemia. But here it is
in deed a miracle, to have that applied to the use of the keys, which Christ
spoke of private admonition between private persons, to wit, Thou have gained
thy brother.

Upon the same.
Those ancient customs were in time worn out of use. Be it that Obser. 6.
page 132.
those painful punishments and satisfactions, which cannot, especially at
these times, be brought into use again, but that they will do more hurt then
good, be worn out of use, yet notwithstanding this does nothing hinder but
that every Church, as it knows what is expedient, may appoint a certain
kind of Censure or Ecclesiastical discipline, which it may use, where need so
requires, that the Church may be satisfied, as we have noted before in the
first observation upon the Confession of Bohemia, and hereafter in the 10.
Section, and in the third observation upon the Confession of Bohemia.

Upon the same.
We give men warning of this also, etc. How temporal punishments Obser. 7.
page 132.
may be said, sometime to be deferred, and sometime to be mitigated by good
works we have declared a little before, to wit, in the third observation upon
this confession. Moreover, the word merit, both in the words which follow (
Repentance deserved that God should alter his purpose, touching the destruction
of Ninive:) and also in other places, wheresoever either this or other
Confessions do use it, it is without doubt thus to be taken, for that which we
say, to obtain, and to get, as it is often times used among the ancient Latin
divines. And whereas God here is said to have changed his mind, we do not
doubt, but that our brethren do understand it, as spoken after the manner of
men, as when he is said to repent him of some thing: or else it is to be
referred to the outward preaching of Jonas. For as concerning God himself, it
was only a threatening, and not a sentence decreed.

Upon the confession of Saxony.
WE affirm that the Ceremony of private absolution is to be, Observe. ^. page
134.
retained in the Church. How far we think that this private confession and
absolution is to be retained in the Church, we have declared a little before,
to wit, in the first observation upon the Confession of Bohemia.

Upon the same.
In true Confession there must be these changes, a mortification Observe. 2.
page 134.
and a quickening, Romans 6. etc. This is most truly said, but in a diverse sense.
For neither is contrition, or a sense of sin, which is a fruit of sin
common to all, signified by the name of mortification (insomuch as it is a gift
of the holy Ghost, proper to the Elect) but an abolishing of the old man or of
the flesh, or of that natural corruption, which taking it beginning of that
contrition or sorrow, which is according to God, (whereof that place Psalm. 5.
19. and Esa. 66. 2. is understood) is by little and little perfited in the
elect, and is the beginning of true conversion, whereunto on the other side
quickening is answerable, that is, a certain restoring, as it were from death
unto life, of the mind, which was before in a manner dead in that corruption:
and being persuaded of the free remission of sins in Christ, by faith, it
begins to hate sin, wherewith it was delighted: to love God, whom it
hated, and to conclude, to will well, and to do uprightly.

Upon the same.
To shake of God, and again to loose, etc. Look those things Observe. 3. page
136.
which are noted in the first observation, of the 4. Section upon this
Confession.

Upon the same.
This whole custom was appointed for examples sake, and is political, Observe.
4. page 137.
etc. We do think that this custom of public satisfaction before the
Church, is in such sort political, that notwithstanding it may be referred to
the Ecclesiastical order, and may altogether be distinguished from those
punishments which are merely civil, and from those which are to be inflicted
by the civil Magistrate. For although such a public kind of acknowledging
and detesting of sins, being made in the Church, is in no case to be thought,
to be of any value before God for the ransom of our sins (much less that it
should be a Sacrament) yet we do not doubt, but that this abasing is both
acceptable to God, and commodious for the edifying of the Church, and that in
such places, wherein it may be fruitfully used.

Upon the same.
Has no commandment to inioyne such punishments, etc. But it Obser. 5 page
137.
has a commandment lawfully to bind and to loose, and to try by diligent
search, which is true repentance. Concerning which thing look what we have
spoken a little before in the 2. observation upon the confession of Auspurge,
and is hereafter taught more at large in the 11. Section, where we do
expressly entreat of the power of the Keys.

Upon the same.
Are chiefly mitigated for the Son of God, etc. Where the Obser 6. page 138.
question is of the Church of God, we say, that all blessings, without any
exception, are bestowed upon it, and the members thereof, not chiefly, but
only for the Son of God his sake. And these words, Even for the very
conversions sake our punishments are mitigated, because that in the Saints the
legal promises being added to their works are not without their effect, but
have their rewards, etc. ought, as they seem, to be thus taken, by adding to
them this interpretation, They are not without their effect, but that must be
of mere grace, and in respect of Christ alone, in whom God does vouchsafe even
to reward both the Saints themselves, and also good works, having no regard to
the blemishes of their works: as we have said before in the 3. and 7.
observations upon the confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
It does only pronounce this sentence, etc. To wit, according to Obser. 7.
page 138.
the Ecclesiastical judgments and censures, whereof we made mention before,
and not by any civil authority, as Officials, as they be termed in Papacy,
use to do.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
ALthough we think, that it is not necessary to salvation, to r^ckon Obser. 1.
page 141.
up sins, etc. yet we endeavor, that a general confession of sins may be
retained in our Churches, etc. Seeing that these things pertain not to the
Doctrine of faith, but unto the use of Ecclesiastical discipline (of the
liberty whereof in particular Churches we have oftentimes spoken, elsewhere)
we do not think it good, that this law should be brought into our Churches,
being made, and received in other places, beside the word of God, and the
custom of the ancient pure Church, which did never require private confession
of every one of those which did profess the Christian Religion, but only of
them, of whose sins knowledge was taken in the assembly.

IN THE NINTH SECTION,
Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
But such works as are taught of men, what show soever they have Obser. 1. page
155.
even of goodness, are in no case to be so highly esteemed, as those which are
commanded of God. Understand this of those works which yet are not
will worship, and devises of man's brain. For such are wholly to be rejected, as
is also said of such, a little after, that are not of faith, but contrary to
faith.

Upon the same.
By taking heed that they fall not into mortal sin. Look the 2. Obser. 2
page 157.
observation upon the Saxony Confession in the 4. Section.

Upon the same.
First for this cause, that is, for diverse causes, whereof this is one. Obser
3. page 157.
Lest that the grace of faith which we have already, etc.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
THe Gospel bewrays our sin. These words seem thus to be Obser. 1. page
163.
understood, that the Gospel should bewray all kind of sin, yet not
properly and by it self. For the proper difference between the law and the
Gospel, is to be held fast, to wit, that the Gospel does properly, reprove
the sin of infidelity, and by an accident all other sins also: but the law
does properly reprove all sins whatsoever are committed against it.

Upon the same.
And deserves reward. Touching the word of meriting or deserving, Obser. 2
page 169.
which this Confession uses often in this Section. Look before in the 8. Sect.
the 7. observation upon this same Confession, and look the 1. observation upon
the Confession of Wirtemberge in this Section. And again after in the 16.
Section, the 1. observation on this Confession.

Upon the same.
Living in mortal sin. Look before in the 4. Sect. the 2. observation,
Obser. 3. page 167.
upon the Confession of Saxony.

Nor the righteousness of works. Look before in the 4. Section, Obser. 4.
page 167.
the 1. observation upon the Confession of Saxony.

Upon the same.
And like as the preaching of repentance in general, so the promise Obser. 5.
page 169.
of grace. General that is offered to all sorts of men indefinitely, as well
to one as to another, without difference of country, sex, place, time, or
age. But we cannot conceive how repentance and the promise of grace can be said
to be preached universally to every nation, much less, to all men
particularly, for as much as experience does plainly prove that to be untrue.

Upon the same.
Here needs no disputation of predestination. Even as we do Obser. 6. page
169.
abhor curious disputations, that is, such as pass the bounds of Gods word,
touching predestination (of which sort we take these words to be meant) as most
dangerous matters for grievous falls: so we affirm, that whatsoever the holy
Ghost does teach touching this point in the holy Scriptures, is warily and
wisely to be propounded and believed in the Church, as well as other parts of
Christian Religion: which thing the Doctors of the Church, both old and new
did, and among the rest Master Luther himself in his book, de servo arbitrio,
and elsewhere.

Upon the same.
That they be necessary. We take them to be necessary, because Observe. 7. page
173.
they do necessarily follow the true faith, whereby we are justified, not that
they concur unto the working of our justification in Christ, as either
principal or secundarie causes, for that faith it self, as it is an inherent
quality does not justify, but only in as much as it does apprehend and lay
hold on Christ our righteousness.

Upon the same.
Albeit that men by their own strength, be able to do outward Observe 8. page
175.
honest deeds, etc. Look in the 4. Sect. the 3. observation upon this
Confession.

Upon the same.
Moreover nature by it self is weak. Without Christ and without Observe. 9.
page 175.
regeneration, the nature of man can do nothing but sin. For God by his grace
does create the ability of thinking, willing, and doing well, not helping the
old man in that he wants, but by little and little abolishing it. According
to that saying, When we were dead in sins, etc. Ephesians. 2. But touching the
weakness of our nature, look that which was said, in the 1. observation upon
the Confession of Bohemia. Section 4.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
BEcause that God left this liberty in man after this fall. Here also Obser.
1. page 181.
look in the 4. Sect. the 1. observe. upon the Confession of Bohemia, and the
3. upon the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Therefore although men by the natural strength. Look here Obser. 2. page 190.
again the 1. observation upon the Confession of Bohemia in the 4. Section,
and also the 9. observation upon the Confession of Auspurge in this same
Section.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
WE teach that good works are necessarily to be done, and do Obser. 1. page
198.
deserve, etc. That is, obtain, and that (as it is well added by and by after)
by the free mercy and goodness of God. Touching which point look the 7.
observe. upon the Confession of Auspurge in the 8. Sect. the 2. observe. upon the
same Confession in this Sect. Also touching the necessity of good works, look
the 7. observe. upon the same Confession in this self same Section.

IN THE TENTH SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Helvetia.
ANd no marvel if it err. How and in what respect the visible Obser. 1. page
206.
Church considered universally is said to err, it is afterward declared more
fully in this same Confession.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
THe Heathenish life. This saying the brethren in Bohemia did Obser. 1. page
213.
themselves expound thus unto us in their letters, to wit, that they speak
here of the notes of the visible Church, which are all jointly to be
considered, that look where both the errors of Idolaters and heretics and
impiety of life do openly overflow, there it cannot safely be affirmed, that
the visible Church of Christ is to be seen, or is at all. And yet
notwithstanding there is no doubt to be made but some secret true members of
Christ, and such as it may be are only known to God, be there hid, and
therefore that there is a Church even in Popery, as it were overwhelmed and
drowned, whence God will fetch out his elect and gather them to the visible
Churches that are restored and reformed, whereas Popery never was, nor is the
true Church.

Upon the same.
But he that loses: In what sense we think that a true faith Observe. 2. page
214.
may be lost, we have declared before in the fourth Section, in the first
observation of the Confession of Saxony, and elsewhere.

Upon the same.
By Ecclesiastical punishment, which is commonly called, etc. We Observe. 3.
page 215.
take this to be so meant, as that notwithstanding every Church has her
liberty left unto her what way to exercise such discipline, as is before said
in the first observation upon this same confession, in the 8. Section. As for
this particular cursing, to wit, of this or that man, if the word be taken for
a perpetual and an unrepealable casting out from the Church of God, we leave
it to God alone; and therefore we would not lightly admit it in our Churches.
For the Church uses only such a cursing as determines nothing finally,
following Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 16. 22.

Upon the same.
Go and chastise him, that is, reprove him, and admonish him of Observe. 4.
page 215.
his duty.

Upon the confession of Saxony.
THe sentence of excommunication, etc. Look before in the Observe. 1. page 226.
3. Observation upon the Confession of Bohemia in this same Section.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
Has authority to bear witness of the holy Scripture. This Observe. 1. page
228.
authority and right you must understand in this respect, that the true Church
of God discerning the Canonical books of the Scripture from all others
teaches and defends that nothing is to be added to or taken from the Canon
of the old Hebrew, or to the new Scripture of the Christians.

Upon the same.
Authority to judge of all doctrines and to interpret Scripture. Observe. 2.
page 228.
To this we yield, with these cautions. First, that in the judging of
controversies, not any judges whatsoever do take unto themselves the name of
the Church: but that as the matter and importance of the cause does require,
judges lawfully chosen, whether more or fewer, whether in an ordinary assembly
of a particular Church, or in a more general meeting, ordinary or
extraordinary, provincial or general, be appointed to judge of the matter.
Secondly, that there be free obedience, and free giving of voices. Thirdly,
that all controversies be determined out of the word of God alone, yet so as
the fathers judgments be not condemned, but laid to the only rule of Gods
word (according as they themselves would have us to do.) Now the Church is
said to judge of doctrine, not that it is above the truth of the doctrine, or
that the doctrine is therefore true, because the Church has so judged, but in
as much as the Church being taught and confirmed out of the word by the holy
Ghost, does acknowledge and hold fast the true doctrine and teach men to hold
it fast, and condemns, and rejects, and teaches to reject all other
strange doctrines.

IN THE ELEVENTH SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Helvetia.
ANd such are found among us, etc. To wit, interpreters of the Observe. 1. page
235.
Scriptures, that were endued with a special gift of the spirit thereunto. For
as touching the visions of Prophets, and those extraordinary motions, and
inspirations of the holy spirit, this gift, as also the gift of tongues and of
healings, being fitted for the confirmation of the Church, when it was
beginning, is now long since ceased, after that the whole Counsel of God
touching our salvation, was plainly revealed, howbeit God yet can, when he
will, raise it up again.

Upon the same.
And were also Preachers of the Gospel. Such as the Apostles Observe. 2. page
235.
did join unto themselves as helpers, and sent them now to this place, now to
that: and these also are no more in use, since the Churches were settled in good
order: Of which sort, diverse are mentioned in the Acts, and in the Epistles of
the Apostles.

Upon the same.
Bishops were the overseers and watchmen of the Church which Observe. 3. page
235.
did distribute, etc. Taking this name for those, which in a more strict
signification are called Deacons, and are distinguished from them, which attend
upon the preaching of the word.

Upon the same.
Provide things necessary for it. To wit, spiritual things, by Observe. 4. page
235.
teaching, reproving, correcting, instructing both all in general, and man by
man particularly, yet tied to their special flocks and charges.

Upon the same.
Now the power given to all the Ministers. To wit, of the word, Observe. 5. page
235.
that is, the Pastors, and Doctors, whose diverse functions are afterward more
fully set forth.

Upon the former Confession of Helvetia.
BY the voice of God. As namely, if at any time, the lawful ordinary Observe.
1. page 242.
vocation being quite abolished (as it has fallen out under the Papacy) God
by his spirit has extraordinarily raised up certain men. Which thing when it
appears by their fruits, then the liking and approbation of the Church
reformed being added thereunto, they are confirmed in their calling. For
otherwise while the lawful order of calling stands in the Church, no man may
enter into the ministry, but by that door.

Upon the same.
By the laying on of hands of the Priest. By Priest, take that they Observe. 2.
page 242.
mean him that is appointed out of the College and company of the Pastors,
for to set him, that is lawfully chosen, as it were into the possession of his
ministry in the sight and presence of the whole Church. Now as touching the
very rite of this ordination, every Church has it own liberty, so that both
alike, superstition and occasion of superstition, be avoided.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
BY laying on of hands. Look before the 2. observation upon Observe. 1. page
246.
the former Confession of Helvetia, and look after in the 14. Chapter of this
same Confession, and the 1. observation upon this Confession in the 13. Section.

Upon the same.
Hereof speaks the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Yet Obs^rv. 2. page
246.
not properly, for he disputes of the Leviticall Priesthood, which was abrogated
by Christ, and not of the ministry under Christ.

Upon the same.
Are a long time, etc. Let the reader thus take these words, not Observe. 3.
page 247.
as though this same order were prescribed unto all and singular Churches, or
were observed of all: seeing we neither have any commandment touching that
matter, neither can it every where be performed: But that this is very
carefully to be looked unto, that none but he that is furnished with learning,
and an approved integrity and uprightness be advanced to any Ecclesiastical
functions.

Upon the same.
And Sodomiticall life. That is, of an unclean life given to riot, Observe. 4.
page 249.
and excess, as Ezech. chap. 16. verse. 49. charge the inhabitants of Sodom.

Upon the same.
Especially those, etc. Once again this is to be taken, as that Observe. 5.
page 249.
we must know that this law of working with their own hands, is is not
prescribed to the Churches.

Upon the same.
Such as are to lay on hands. Touching this rite, look before in Observe. 6.
page 251.
the 2. Obser. upon the former Confession of Helvetia.

Upon the same.
To each several Ecclesiastical societies. That is, to Presbyteries Observe.
7. page 252.
or Consistories, which stand of Pastors and Elders: and unto whom properly
the dispensing and ordering of the keys, and Ecclesiastical Censures do
belong. As afterward is taught in the fifth Observation upon the Confession of
Auspurge.

Upon the same.
That every Christian so often as he needs these keys, etc. ought Observe. 8.
page 252.
to require them. This is to be interpreted by those things, which we spoke of
private absolution in the eighth Section, in the 1. Observation upon this
Confession, and the first upon the Confession of Saxony.

Upon the same.
That the Priests ought not. Whom they mean by the name Observe 9. page 252.
of Priests it has been already showed before in the 2. Observation upon the
former Confession of Helvetia, and shall straight after be repeated in the 3.
Observation upon the English Confession, in which signification it is
henceforward to be taken in all the Confessions.

Upon the English Confession.
ANd is Lucifer. It is grown to a custom to call Satan Lucifer, Observe. 1.
page 255.
the prince of Devils, upon a place of Esaias misunderstood of some of the
ancient Fathers.

Upon the same.
By open excommunication. There is also a certain kind of excommunication
Observe. 2. page 256.
which is not public or open, and is used only for a trial of repentance.
Again, this is so to be taken, that (as we have often before admonished) all and
singular Churches may keep their holy liberty both in ordaining and putting in
practice this manner of discipline. So that there be good heed taken that the
flock be not infected with a contagion of obstinacy, and that the sacred
mysteries be not cast to dogs and swine.

Upon the same.
Unto the unbeleeving a savor of death. This must be understood, Obser 3. page
256.
to be the accidental, and not the proper end of the Ministry of the Gospel,
arising not of the Gospel it self, but of the contempt of the Gospel. But this
application of the similitude of the keys (for the opening of all men's
consciences) which this Confession does often use, seems to be somewhat far
from the meaning of Christ.

Upon the same.
That the Priest in deed. Touching the name of Priests, look Obser. 4. page
256.
the 2. Observation upon the former confession of Helvetia. Again it must be
understood that (when the question is of Ecclesiastical Censures) the lawful
intelligence of the Seigniorie must go before the Priests judging. That which
is said, touching power or authority, must be understood of civil power,
which Ecclesiastical functions have not at all: or else, of the authority of
making laws to men's consciences, which rests wholly in Christ the only
lawgiver, according to whose prescript and appointment, his Ministers ought to
judge and determine in the Churches.

Upon the same.
Yea and the Bishop of Rome: and a little after, except he go to Obser. 5.
page 257.
work. By Bishop understand not him, that now sitting Pope at Rome is called
of other and terms himself universal Bishop, but such a Paster, as being
lawfully called in the Church of Rome (if there were any true Church to be
found) did with his fellow laborers discharge a Christian ministry.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
NO more then does the skill of music, namely because it has Obser. ^ page
259.
a diverse scope, not that there is no more affinity or agreement between the
Ecclesiastical ministry and the civil government, then between a Musician
and a Magistrate, when as they do both tend directly unto the self same only,
though by means distinct and diverse one from the other: and also both the
Ministers in matters civil be subject to the magistrate, and the magistrate in
matters belonging to conscience is subject to the Ecclesiastical ministry,
and one does lean and stay it self upon the other, and one aid and succor
the other.

Upon the same.
The Magistrate is to defend, not the mind, but the bodies. This Obser. 1.
page 259.
also is to be understood, as that notwithstanding this, the Magistrate is the
keeper and defender of both tables of this law.

Upon the same.
If so be the Bishops have, etc. This do we also acknowledge Obser 3. page 260.
to be most true: but we say, that it was neither lawful for the Princes to
derive this power unto Bishops, nor for the Bishops to take it when it was
offered, because the Lord has so distinguished these two, as he has also
severed them the one from the other. And the Apostle does expressly forbid
Ministers to entangle themselves in the things of this life: yea and the
Apostles themselves did cast off even the care of the alms from themselves
unto the Deacons, that they might attend upon the word and prayers.

Upon the same.
To debar the wicked, etc. To wit, by the judgment and Obser 4. page 260.
verdict of the Presbytery lawfully gathered together, and not by the will and
determination of any one man, as was noted before in the third Observation upon
the English Confession.

Upon the same.
The Churches must perform unto them, To wit, to the Ministers Obser. 5. page
260.
of the word, and to the Elders, and not to such alone as now by the law of man
carry the name of Bishops, as proper and peculiar to themselves alone, which is
common to all Pastors equally, as Hierome can testify.

Upon the same.
If so be they have any other power, etc. they have it by man's law. Observat.
6. page 260.
It seems the band of marriage should be excepted, the knowledge whereof, by
Gods law, belongs to the Pastors, and namely in this respect, that it cannot
be judged firm and sure, or void and frustrate, but by the word of God,
according to that: That which God has coupled, let no man put asunder:
touching which point look the 1. Observation upon the former Confession of
Helvetia, and the 2. upon the Confession of Wirtemberge, in the 18. Section.

Upon the same.
Christ. Though Christ would also be the Minister of the circumcision,
Observat. 7. page 262.
yet we would not have him ranged in the same order with others, whether they
be Prophets or Apostles.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
IF we speak of the Mediator of praying. Look the 2. Observation Obser 1.
page 265.
upon the Confession of Saxony, in the 1. Section.

Upon the same.
That except a Priest be ordained. To wit, when question is of Obser. 2. page
266.
such Elders or Priests, as did attend upon the preaching of the word. For
there was also another sort of Elders whom the Apostle calls governors, 1
Cor. 12.

IN THE TWELFTH SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Helvetia.
THe thing signified is regeneration. That is, the blood of Christ, Observat.
1. page 273.
by virtue whereof we are regenerated and washed from our sins. For to speak
properly, the thing signified by water, is the blood, and by sprinkling the
washing from sins and regeneration is signified.

Upon the former Confession of Helvetia.
THe thing it self is regeneration. Look the Observation that Obser. 1. page
275. Obser. 2. page 275.
went next before upon the latter Confession of Helvetia.

But the thing is the communication of the body, etc. that is, the body and
blood of Christ, communicated to us spiritually by faith, to the remission of
sins, and to eternal life.

Upon the declaration of the said former Confession of Helvetia.

Visible show, that is, show by setting forth visible signs. Observat. 1. page
276 Observat 2. page 277.


Upon the same.
The Minister does convert. To wit, as the isntrumental outward cause, which
the holy Spirit uses, to work those things inwardly, which are preached to us
outwardly.

Upon the Confession of Basil.
TO testify our faith. Hereunto add also the other ends and Observat. 1. page
278
effect, which are more fully set forth in other Confessions.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
EIther entirely. Entire, that is, lawful liberty such as does agree
Observat. 1. page 279
with Christ his institution.

Upon the same.
They do always exercise their virtue. This must warily be understood.
Observa. 2. page 281.
For properly the Sacraments do witness, seal, or confirm no other thing,
but grace and salvation. The condemnation of such as use them unworthily does
not flow from any virtue or power of the Sacraments, which does avail only to
salvation, but only from the fault of the unworthy themselves, (whereby it
comes to pass, and that by an accident) that whilst they receive the signs
alone, and that unworthily, they deprive themselves of the Sacraments: and yet
for all that they cease not on Gods behalf to be perfect Sacraments, whether
they be given to the worthy, or to the unworthy: touching which point, look
after in the 14. Section, the 1. and 2. Observations upon the Confession of
Auspurge.

IN THE THIRTEENTH SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Helvetia.
THat is the most perfect form of Baptism, etc. Understand by Obser. 1 page
287.
form, the external ceremony, whether it be of dipping, or of sprinkling.

Upon the same.
We think them nothing necessary, etc. Yea we have utterly Obser 2. page 288.
rejected some of them, as mere superstitious, some as being manifestly
brought by the negligence of Bishops, from the Baptism of those which be of
age, unto the baptism of infants, and some, to be short, as altogether
unprofitable, as it is clearly expounded in the Confession of Wirtemberge.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
BY the laying on of hands, etc. This whole ceremony is profitably Obser. 1.
page 293.
kept in the Churches of Bohemia, not as a point of doctrine, but as a part of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, without any prejudice to the liberty of other
Churches, seeing that it is no where commanded in the writings of the Apostles,
neither does this Confession therefore approve Papistical confirmation, which
they do falsely call a Sacrament. But that which is added, that they which are
thus baptized are received into the covenant of Baptism, it is well expounded
a little after, to wit, so far forth as that grace which they received in
Baptism, is by this mean made manifest to the Church, and to them that are
baptized.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
THat it is necessary to salvation, etc. Understand this by those Obser 1. page
294.
things, which afterward were declared in the agreement made at Wirtemberge
1536. the 29. of May, where these words be read: Master Luther and his fellows
do agree upon this, that by the power of Christ, even those which are not
Baptized, may be saved: But it is necessary that these should not contemn
Baptism. And hence it is that they will have infants to be batized of
necessity, etc.

Upon the same.
And hold that infants are saved, etc. Look the former Observation. Obser. 2.
page 94.
We also condemn the Catabaptists, who do either forbid the baptism of
Infants, or else teach, that it is by no means necessary.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
ANd that the holy Ghost is given in Baptism, etc. That is, that Obser. 1.
page 296.
it is in deed offered indifferently to all, but is received only by faith,
and not given, to wit, through faith for the works sake: And that it is so
received, as that neither faith, nor the efficacy of faith are necessarily to
be referred to that very moment, wherein any one is baptized. Moreover in the
very form of the administration of baptism, we use in our Churches to
declare, that baptism is not only a pledge of our Renewing, but also, and that
chiefly of the remission of sins.

Upon the same.
That Baptism is necessary, etc. Look the 1. Observation upon Obser. 2 page
296.
the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
And to those only, etc. And a little after, Because that then Obser. 3. page
^96.
they be grafted into the Church. How we understand this grafting Look before
in the former Confession of Helvetia, Art. 21.

IN THE FOVRTEENTH SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Helvetia.
NOt as they be corporally eaten. The Adverb ( so far as) understand Obser.
1. page 304.
to be used casually, for because, as if he had said, not that they be eaten
corporally, etc. But in this place and other places elsewhere afterward so
understand these Adverbs corporally, and spiritually, that by them not the
thing signified, which is received, but the manner of receiving it is declared,
namely, to be not corporal, but spiritual, that is, not of the external
mouth, but of the faithful mind.

Upon the former Confession of Helvetia.
THese things be holy, and to be reverenced, etc. By holy understand Obser. 1
page 307.
those things, which are appointed to a most holy use, not those wherein
consists any inherent holiness. In like manner by reverent, understand those
things which are to be received with outward comeliness, and in that order,
which might testify an internal reverence: namely, when our minds are lifted
up unto God, not that any worship ought to be yielded to the signs themselves,
or that those rites, which are either in their own nature superstitious, or
else may easily be turned into superstition, ought to be used in the holy
service of the Lord.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
THat which of themselves they do signify, etc. That is, to say, of the true
bread and wine, and also of the very body, that Obser. 1. page 3^3.
was given for us, and of the very blood, that was shed for us. As for that
attribution wherein the bread is said to be the body, and wine to be the
blood, even in this Confession it is evidently set down, that it ought to be
interpreted by a sacramental metonymie.

Upon the same.
And the truth thereof. By the word truth in this place understand, Obser. ^.
page 313.
not the fruit of the Sacraments, which is received of the faithful only,
neither yet the very body and blood of Christ (seeing that they also can not be
received but by faith, to salvation) but the bread and the wine, the which
(whether worthy, or unworthy communicants do approach) are never, in respect of
God, offered to be received, without the thing signified, because the truth of
God depends not upon the worthiness, or unworthines of the communicants. Yet
hereby it cannot be concluded, that both of them are received of every one,
because both of them are always offered by God to all indifferently.
Concerning which matter, look before in the 12. Section and 2. Observation upon
the Confession of the Waldenses, or Bohemians, and also very fully hereafter in
the 1. Observation upon the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Moreover absolution from sins, is lawfully administered, etc. Obser. 3. page
315.
Look the 8. Section upon the Confession of Bohemia, Auspurge, and Saxony.

Upon the same.
Most commonly falling down on their knees, etc. In this ritc Obser. 4 page
31^.
also suppose that every Church ought to have her liberty not that we do
utterly in it self condemn this manner (so that the caution be added, whereof
we spoke of late in the 4. Observation) but because that for the rooting of the
superstitious worshipping of the bread out of men's minds, it were more
expedient that that ceremony in most places were abolished in the receiving of
the signs themselves: whereof look before in the 1. Observe. upon the former
Confession of Helvetia.

Upon the French Confession.
THe substance of his body and blood, etc. The French Churches Obser. 1. page
316.
have witnessed in general Synods, that they after the example of the ancient
Fathers do use the word substance: not as if the very substance of Christ were
conveyed into the bread, or derived into us any manner of way, either
corporal, or unspeakable, or that it were applied to our corporal substance
(seeing that it verily is now in heaven, and no where else, unto the last day,
and we in earth and no where else) but to meet, with the slander of those men,
which think that we instead of the very body and blood of Christ do place only
his merits, or his spiritual force and operation, whereas notwithstanding we
do teach, that we (though spiritually and mystically, yet notwithstanding
truly) do participate Christ himself, not that either we should cleave
essentially unto him, or he unto us, but that his life is derived into us. Look
also concerning this matter in the 1. Observation upon the Confession of
Auspurge, in this Section.

Upon the Confession of Belgia.
ALl the operations of the holy Ghost are hidden, etc. That is to Obser. 1.
page ^21.
say, both when the proper force of the holy spirit, which is incomprehensible,
is regarded, and seeing that his effects do exceed our senses. Both which do
come to pass in these mysteries.

Upon the same.
That which is eaten, etc. Namely by faith, as it is often iterated Obser. 2.
page 321.
in this Confession, that is to say, that which is received spiritually, by the
mind, by believing, as the sign is eaten and drunken corporally. I or the
words eating and drinking can no otherwise be spoken of the mind and of faith
(which are the only instruments of receiving the very body and blood of
Christ) then metaphorically or metonymically.

Upon the same.
By the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, etc. That is Obser. 3
page 321.
(as has been said in the former Observation) by a spiritual participation,
the which sometimes by reason of the sacramental receiving, and (sometimes by
reason of that spiritual life, which Christ ingendereth in us is
metaphorically signified, by the names of eating or drinking.

Upon the same.
Although the sacraments be joined to the thing, etc. Of the sacramental
Obser. 4. page 32^.
union we have spoken before, in the second Observation upon the Confession of
Bohemia.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
THat the body and blood of Christ are there in deed, and are distributed,
Obser. 1. page 32^.
etc. We also do allow of this, namely that the word of God is not deceitful,
and therefore as often as the holy signs are rightly given, that is, according
to Christ his institution, that then also the thing signified by the sign
(which is the very body of Christ crucified for us, and the very blood of
Christ shed for us) is also given to be received. But we affirm that the thing
signified is no otherwise coupled with the sign, then sacramentally. The truth
of which sacramental conjunction, does not consist in this, that wheresoever
the sign is, there the thing represented by the sign, should also be present,
but in this, that that which God promises by the sign, he also does offer to
be received. Therefore we hold that the body of Christ is not really present
in, with, or under the bread, otherwise then after this sacramental manner,
both because it is a true body, being circumscribed in his local situation,
and also has truly ascended from the earth, above the heavens, that be subject
to our sight, and shall there remain (from whence he exercises a government
over all these beneath, even as he is man) until he come truly from thence to
judge both quick and dead. Moreover we do also avouch that as the signs are
offered to the body, so the things signified are offered to the mind: and
therefore that the signs are received of every one with the hand and mouth,
that come unto the supper: the which unto some, namely, to the worthy
receivers, do turn unto salvation, but unto others, that is, the unworthy
communicants by reason of the profanation of the signs, and contempt of the
thing signified, they do turn to condemnation. As for the things signified
those we affirm to be truly, and effectually apprehended, only of those that
be endued with a right mind and a true faith, and that always unto salvation,
whereunto the distance of place is no hinderance by reason of the unspeakable
operation of the holy Ghost. And yet not so as that the substances should be
mingled betwixt themselves, or cleave together in any place (for Christ's flesh
abides in heaven, and ours upon the earth) but that (these things being
mystically united, which in true distance of situation are separated) we might
draw from the flesh of Christ all gifts necessary for our salvation, and
especially that lively juice whereby we are nourished to eternal life.
Therefore whatsoever they pretend which are of the contrary judgment, the
controversy is not either of the sign, or of the things signified, or of the
truth of the Sacraments, or of the receiving of them, or of the effects; but of
the only definition of the sacramental conjunction, and also of the manner of
receiving the things signified. Both which we contend to be so interpreted by
some out of the word of God, that if their opinion be once granted, both the
truth of Christ's body, his assention into heaven, and his second coming is
consequently overthrown. Look the exposition of this Article expressed in the
diverse editions of the Auspurge Confession, though not after the same manner,
and in the same words, and for the full declaration thereof look in the
Admonition lately set forth by our brethren the Neustadians in the 5. Chapter,
out of the which our agreement in this point of doctrine rightly declared does
appear.

Upon the same. Art. 1. Of the abuses.
For the Mass is retained still amongst us, etc. The Princes, and Obser. 2
page 322.
Divines in the assembly at Newburdge testified in the year 1561. as is
manifest by the decrees of that assembly, that they by the word Mass, do
understand the administration of the Supper, and do from the bottom of their
hearts detest the Romish Mass. And although we do abhor all contentions
about words, and do acknowledge that the word Mass is not newly sprung up in
the Latin Church: yet seeing that the Original of this term (namely because
alms were sent from the faithful in their usual meetings at their love
feasts) is long since abolished, and seeing that this word has these many
years broken out into great abomination, and so great, that none so gross or
execrable was ever heard of, we do not without cause together with the thing
abolish the name it self out of our Churches. As for the holy liturgy there,
we think that it is most rightly celebrated, where it is most simply and most
nearly unto the first institution observed. And seeing it is manifest that the
ceremonies in the Roman Liturgy are partly in themselves unprofitable, partly
tending rather to an ambitious show and pomp, then to edification, partly
ridiculous, and partly either in themselves superstitious, or else ready to be
turned into superstition. Therefore the most of them, or in a manner all, we
have in every place utterly swept away. Yet so as that the Church has her
liberty left in things indifferent, as it is meet, and shall be declared in the
17. Sect. As for the speaking or singing of any thing in the public Liturgy,
in such a tongue, as is unknown to the common people, unless there be an
interpreter, the Apostle does plainly forbid it, 1 Cor. 14.

Upon the same.
A Ceremony in the new covenant, without faith does merit nothing, Obser. 3.
page 326.
etc. No, nor yet in the Old testament: yea neither any ceremony, nor faith it
self does merit any thing, but whereas the external work being performed with
faith, according to Gods commandment, is acceptable unto him, all that we
teach out of Gods word to be of grace and not of debt. Whereof look the 8.
Section, and the 7. Observation, the 9. Sect. and the 2. Obser. unto the same
Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
The Pastors of the Churches do consecrate, etc. By the name of Obser. 4. page
327.
consecration we understand no other thing, then the use of Christ's ordination
by whose blessing and power the elements are sanctified unto us, whereof
depends the whole force and dignity of the Sacraments.

Upon the same.
Every holy day, and other days also, if any be desirous to use the Obser. 5.
page 327.
Sacrament, etc. Of holy days is spoken afterward in the 16. Section. But in
our Churches certain days by public warning are appointed, wherein if any
refuse to receive the Supper, they answer for it in the Consistory.

Upon the same, about the end of the second Article of abuses.
And because that the parting, etc. This verily is one cause why Obser. 6. page
334.
the carrying about of the Sacrament is condemned: yet neither the only cause,
nor the chiefest.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
ANd that he is in thee, etc. This we admit, touching the spiritual Observe. 1.
page 336.
efficacy, not concerning the very essence of the flesh: the which is now in
heaven and no where else, as has been before showed in the 1. Obser. upon the
Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Neither are any admitted to the communion, etc. This we allow, Obser. 2 page
336.
as being understood of Catechizing or instruction. As for private absolution,
how far we think it to be required, it has been showed of us heretofore,
namely in the 8. Sect. and 1. Observat. both upon this, and also upon the
Confession of Bohemia.

Upon the same.
Obser 3. page page 336.
That Christ is truly and substantially present, etc. Look the 1. and 2.
Observat. upon the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
That Christ witnesses, that he is in them, and does make them Obser 4 page
337.
his members, etc. Both these also we do embrace, as is contained in the word
of God, namely so, that this whole dwelling be by his power and efficacy, and
that the flesh of Christ be communicated unto us, yet after a spiritual and
mystical manner, as has been declared of us before, both in the Confession of
Bohemia, and of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
And lessons appointed, etc. How far we do allow this distribution, Obser.
5. page 337.
of the holy Scripture, look the 1. Observat upon the Confession of Bohemia,
the 1. Section.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
That the true body of Christ, etc. Look before in the 1. Observation Obser. 1.
page 342.
upon the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Of the body of Christ being only absent, etc. We do believe Obser. 2 page
342.
out of the word of God, and by the perpetual and evident agreement of the
whole ancient and true Church, that the body of Christ has always been, is
and shall be circumscribed and local: Wherefore, as when he lived upon the
earth, he was no where else, so now also being above in heaven, he is there,
and no where else in his substance, as Vigilius plainly affirms against
Eutiches. Yet for all that we do not affirm, that the very body of Christ is
only or simply absent, or that the bread and wine are only simple and naked
signs, or bare Pictures, or nothing else, but certain tokens of Christian
profession. For in this sense is there one only action of the holy Supper,
that yet not withstanding it should be partly corporal, and celebrated upon
the earth (in which respect we doubt not to say that Christ's body is as far
distant from us, as heaven is from the earth) partly heavenly, the mind and
faith lifting up the heart unto God: in the which respect we acknowledge, that
the body of the Lord is present in the Supper to our mind and faith. But that
they be bare and naked signs, how can we possibly affirm which so often and
so evidently have beaten upon this, that the things signified are no less
certainly given unto the mind, then the signs themselves unto the body.

Upon the same.
Or else change them into the body and blood, etc. We see not Obser. 3. page
342.
how God may be said to be able to do that which is manifestly repugnant to
his own will, concerning the everlasting truth of Christ's body, as it has been
opened unto us in the word of God.

Upon the same.
But for the truth of the sacraments, etc. The truth of the Sacrament Obser. 4.
page 342.
we affirm wholly to consist in this, that there be not any vain
signification of the signs: but that that which is signified unto them by the
body, is indeed given unto the mind to be received by faith. As has more fully
been spoken heretofore in the first Observation upon the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
But that whole Christ, etc. But we say by the institution of Obser. 5. page
342.
God, that the body, by the delivering of the bread, is given unto us as true
meat: and that his blood by the pouring of the wine is given unto us as
distinctly as true drink, yet both of them to be received with the mind and
with faith, and not with the mouth. Not withstanding that by this dispensation
(which in respect of the thing signified is distinctly made, and in regard of
the signs themselves severally distributed) that nothing is divided in the
humanity of Christ.

Upon the same.
Therefore to the right action of the Eucharist, etc. This we do Obser. 6.
page 344.
so grant to be true, that notwithstanding we do also know that the Supper of
the Lord is not private unto two, but that it appertains to the whole Church,
or at the least to some one part of the same.

IN THE FIFTEENTH SECTION.
Upon the former Confession of Helvetia.
TO the people every day, etc. To wit, where may be done commodiously: Observe.
1. page 356.
but in other places as often as may be.

IN THE SIXTEENTH SECTION.
Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
OF this sort be certain days appointed for fasts and holy days, Observe. 1.
page 37^.
etc. And a little after, to the remembrance of holy men, as of the Virgin
Mary, etc. Also a little after, in the 1. Chap. Holy days consecrated to the
Virgin, etc. Also, That the Saints are truly worshipped, etc. As certain
Churches do so far submit themselves to the infirmity of them, with whom they
be conversant, as to observe these things, though they do disagree very much,
yea though they be altogether contrary in the manner thereof: so most Churches
not being compelled by any such necessity, have without the offense of other
Churches, utterly abolished even these things also, not only as unprofitable,
but as hurtful.

Upon the same.
Do make godly and Christian songs of her, etc. Also a little after, Observe. 1.
page 372.
and sing profitable songs, and such as are free from superstition, etc. Herein
also let the Churches use their liberty, to edifying: and let that be very
carefully avoided in this song, which has happened in extolling the praises
chiefly of the Virgin Mary: lest that whilst God seems to be praised in his
Saints, the Saints being transformed into Idols, the worship which is due to
God alone, be again transferred unto them. Howbeit they truly seem to be the
wiser, who do not suffer any thing to be either taught or sung in the Church of
God, beside the word of God, interpreted in a tongue peculiar to the people,
and in singing do keep this mean, that the greatest part of the time may be
spent, Father in hearing, then in singing, of the word of God: and that which
is sung may so be sung, that the minds may rather be instructed, then the
ears delighted with any broken music.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
ANd meritorious works. Although we are persuaded, that Observe. 1. page 381.
such meritorious works be not meant in this place, as by their own worthiness
do deserve any thing, but that they be acceptable to God, and are crowned, not
according to debt, but according to grace, yet we cannot approve this improper
speech, by what interpretation soever it be qualified, as we have already in
certain places noted before, Section 8. Obsevration 7. upon this Confession.
Also Sect. 9. Obser. 2. upon the same; and Observation 1. upon the Confession
of Wirtemberge.

Upon the same.
The order of lessons in the Mass, etc. Also we have declared Obser. 2. page
384.
before Sect. 14. Obser. 2. upon the same Confession of Auspurge, why we do
worthily detest even the very name of the Mass, and as touching holidayes, or
fasts, we spoke thereof in the Confess. of the Waldenses, or Bohemia, going
next before this.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
ANd to comfort them as well by the preaching of the Gospel, as Observe. 1. page
391.
by the dispensing of the Lords Supper, etc. We do also understand this
without any prejudice to the liberty of other Churches, wherein the Supper
uses not to be administered but in the public assembly, lest that salvation
might seem to be tied to the Sacraments, or the fruit of the Supper of the
Lord be bound to that time only wherein it is received.

Upon the same.
We think it is a most profitable thing, etc. In this point also the Obser. 2.
page 392.
Churches do use their liberty to edifying, howbeit we think it the safer
way, once to lay aside funeral orations, and with honest simplicity to bury
those that are departed godlily, seeing that it is a very hard thing to keep a
mean therein: and we ought very carefully to take heed, that not so much as the
least entrance be opened to the revoking of the opinion of prayers to be made
for the dead, then the which nothing can happen more pernicious in the Church
of God, as the lamentable experience of so many ages has taught.

IN THE SEVENTEENTH SECTION.
Upon the French Confession.
WE think it to be necessary. In all the French and Belgian Observe. 1. page
406.
Synodes, it was decreed, that it is necessary for this people, plainly to
reprove those that be unruly or impenitent, and not to leave them to the
discretion of their own conscience, but whereas the lawful intelligence of the
Presbytery goes before, so long to exclude them from the Supper of the Lord,
till they do testify their amendment. By which custom notwithstanding they
mean not to prejudicate those brethren, who think that they can avoid the
profanation of the Supper of the Lord, although they do not so far extend
the authority of the Ecclesiastical Censure.

Upon the former Confession of Belgia.
ANd hereunto excommunication is chiefly necessary, etc. Look Obser. 1. page
407.
the Observation which goes next before this, upon the French Confession.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
THe Bishops might easily, etc. Three kinds of Bishops may Obser. 1. page 410.
be reckoned up. One which is in deed the Apostles Bishop, and is a Bishop in
order, not in degree, and is common to all Pastors, that is, to the Ministers
of the word. An other is not only in order, but also in degree, whereby the
whole Clergy of some Dioces is subject to some one man, and is even by the
testimony of Jerome himself, an old invention of man's appointment, and not of
Gods ordinance, limited and hedged in by very many ancient Canons. But as for
the third kind, which roveth far and wide, not only beyond the word of God,
but also beyond the most just Canons, and is indeed Satannicall and
Tyrannical, and as yet flourishing in the Roman false named Church, we do
detest it, as a most certain pestilence of the Christian Church.

Upon the same.
It were for the chief Bishops gentleness. We suppose that this Observat. 2.
page 411.
is not meant of the Popes gentleness, whom all the purer Churches do at once
detest as that Antichrist, but of that kind of Bishops, which in the
Observation next before this we called the second sort. Which though it be so,
yet it seems to be against the old Canons, that that should here be hanged
upon the Bishops gentleness which after lawful intelligence, they are rather
bound to do both by Gods laws, and by man's, or else they are to be removed
from their Bishopprick.

Upon the same.
To have rule taken from Bishops. It is without all controversy, Observe. 3.
page 411.
that Christ did not only distinguish, but also both by word and his own
example sever the civil rule and jurisdiction from the Ecclesiastical.
Besides, that is also a plain case, that the goods purposed and appointed to
the uses of the Churches were in old time given not to the Bishops own persons,
but to the Church it self. Now how far it is expedient that the Bishops should
carry the show and appearance of any civil rule and jurisdiction, it is the
duty of godly Magistrates to consider.

Upon the same.
The Apostles decree touching things offered to Idols, etc. To wit, Observe. 4.
page 414.
touching that sort of things offered to Idols, which is eaten at the table of
devils, or by the eating whereof men sin against their weak brethren. Like
as the decree of the Apostles is expounded of Paul, 1 Cor. 9. and 10.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
NOt lawful for Kings nor Bishops to make laws or rites, that Observe. 1. page
416.
can not stand with the word, etc. And therefore no mystical rites (that is,
which carry some mystery or hid signification in them) though not otherwise
impious, as namely such as should be parts of Gods doctrine or kinds of
Sacraments: but only such laws as pertain^ to order and decency (as is said
in the end of this Articl^) and that not upon their private will and advise,
but by the judgment of a lawful assembly.

IN THE EIGHTEENTH SECTION.
Upon the former Confession of Helvetia.
But upon just cause, etc. To wit, taken from the word of God. Observe. 1. page
424.
For we do not think that it is lawful for men, at their pleasure to made
laws concerning divorcements in marriages permitted, and already contracted,
according to the word of God, as they may do in contracts, which are merely
civil: for the Lord has said, That which God has joined together, let no man
separate. But the matter being diligently weighed by them, of whom it is
profitable for the Church that counsel should be asked, concerning such
matters as be not merely civil, the civil Magistrate may prescribe in his
jurisdiction what affinities, and upon what conditions, it may stand with the
profit of the common peace, to have permitted, or forbidden.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
EIther to choose it to himself, or to refuse it, to wit, if he be Obser. 1.
page 425.
thoroughly privy to himself of his own strength, and so that he do not bind
himself by a vow, as it is expounded a little after.

Upon the same.
And women Ministers, that is, of those, who have willingly submitted Obser. 2.
page 426.
themselves to take care for the hospitals, and for the poor, and those that be
sick: whom notwithstanding the Apostle does forbid to be received before they
be threescore years old, 1 Timothy 5. 9. And generally he forbids women all
other Ecclesiastical ministry, in the second Chapter of the same Epistle.

Upon the same.
They do preserve the pureness as well of the spirit, as of the body,
Observat. 3. page 426.
etc. to wit, resisting the burning. For otherwise the pureness both of the
body and of the spirit is preserved in wedlock of married parties that use it
holily.

Upon the same.
To take counsel of the elders, and governors of the Church Obser. 4. page
428.
etc. understand this of him who should be taken into the Ecclesiastical
Ministry being a single man, as for the most part it is used in the Churches
of Bohemia, yet without any vow or constraint, and with no prejudice to other
Churches, which do not observe this difference. For this necessity of going
to, and asking counsel of the Presbytery, it is not laid upon others.
Concerning which thing we will not think it much to set down in this place
what the brethren themselves of Bohemia did heretofore answer to a certain
godly and learned man admonishing them of these things, that no man may be
offended with those things which be read both in this place, and elsewhere in
their Confession, touching the single life of Ministers. The meaning, say they,
of single life is evidently declared in the beginning of that article, that it
is not ordained of God by any commandment. Neither do we place any dignity
of the ministry in single life. We do without doubt believe, according to the
words of Christ, that that gift is given to some, and to whom it is not given,
for them it is free to marry. We have by the mercy of God both married and
unmarried Ministers, and we endeavor to keep a mean in this matter. The
Monkish custom, and other absurd things we have by the grace of God removed
far out of our Churches. Thus did they write that they might the better
expound themselves.

Upon the confession of Saxony.
ALso we keep the rules of the Canon law, touching other nearer O^serv. 1.
page 445.
degrees, etc. Our Churches also do herein attribute some thing to the degree
of Cousin Germans, to avoid the offense of those that be weak: seeing that
even certain profane Lawmakers have forbidden this degree: and Christian
charity does command us to depart even from cur right in those things which of
themselves be lawful, for their sakes that be weak. But we admonish the
people diligently that they do not think, that this degree is forbidden in it
self, that is, by the law of God, either expressed, or understood, which is
the law of nature. As for other inferior degrees of affinity, and whatsoever
that law, being not Canonical, but Tyrannical, has decreed, as though it
were spiritual, concerning corporal affinity, without the word of God, which
is agreeable to the civil laws, we do abolish and detest it, as proceeding
from the only inspiration of the lying spirit.

Upon the same.
Do agree with the Canon law, etc. We would have it declared Obser. 2. page 446.
unto us what manner of law this Canon law is: seeing that there be many
things, both in certain ancient, and especially in the Canons of the Popes,
flat repugnant to the word of God, and to equity.

Upon the same.
As mortal sins and such as expel the holy Ghost, etc. why we Observe. 3. 446.
do think that this also has need to be more diligently expounded, we have
showed not once before. Look the 4. Sect. observe. 1. and 2. upon this same
Confess. Also Sect. 8. observe. 4. upon the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Where as the words of Christ did speak, etc. If so be that we Obser 4. page
448.
should admit that Gospel according to the Egyptians, wherein those words be
attributed to Christ.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
ANnd that it is a mystery, etc. to wit, a spiritual marriage Observe. 1. 451.
between Christ and his Church, and not this carnal or corporal, and humane
marriage: which is not appointed to represent that other, which is spiritual.

Upon the same.
The politic laws which are the ordinances of God, etc. we Obser. 2 page 451.
also do approve the politic laws touching these things, so that the
consciences be not snared, and that which in this contract is merely divine,
be administered according to the true word of God, being distinguished from
civil controversies, which fall out in marriage. Look before observation 1.
upon the former Confession of Helvetia.

IN THE NINETEENTH SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Helvetia.
With good laws made according to the word of God, that is, Obser 1. page 458.
with such as do not forbid that, which God does command in the moral law,
and by the voice of nature it self, nor command that which he forbids. For
otherwise by the name of the word of God, the Judicial civil law might also
be understood, to the which not withstanding we are not bound in so much as it
is civil, but only so far forth as it is grounded upon a general and
perpetual rule of justice.

Upon the former Confession of Helvetia.
ACcording to just and divine Laws, etc. That is agreeable to Observe. 1. page
400.
equity and righteousness, and to conclude, to the law of nature, whereof God
himself is the Author.

Upon the same.
And the oath which we made to him, etc. That is an oath, whereby Obser. 2.
page 460.
subjects are bound to their Magistrates.

Upon the Confession of Basil.
IN the number whereof we also desire to be, etc. These things are Obser. 1.
page 461.
spoken in the person of the Magistrates themselves and not of the Pastors of
the Church at Basil, in so much as this Confession was published in the name of
the Magistrates themselves.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
THe people is taught, that they ought to obey no man more then Obser. 1. page
464.
God. This is so far to be extended, as that we must understand, that we
ought not to obey any in these things which pertain to the conscience and to
salvation, but God alone, seeing that the Apostle does not except so much as
the Angels themselves, Gal. 1.

The end of the Harmony, and of the Observations.
A GENERAL CONFESSION OF THE TRVE CHRISTIAN FAITH and Religion, according to
Gods Word and Acts of our Parliaments, subscribed by the Kings Majesty and his
Household, with sundry others.
To the glory of God, and good example of all men. At Edinborough the 28. day
of January. The year of our Lord 1581. And in the 14. year of His Majesty's
Reign.
WE all, and every one of us under written protest, that after long and due
examination of our own consciences, in matters of true and false Religion, are
now thoroughly resolved in the truth by the Word and spirit of God. And
therefore we believe with our hearts, confess with our mouths, subscribe with
our hands, and constantly affirm before God and the whole world, that this
only is the true Christian faith and religion, pleasing God, and bringing
salvation to man, which is now by the mercy of God revealed to the world by
the preaching of the blessed Evangell, and is received, believed, and defended
by many and sundry notable Churches and Realms, but chiefly by the Church of
Scotland, the Kings Majesty, and three Estates of this Realm, as Gods eternal
truth, and only ground of our salvation, as more particularly is expressed in
the Confession of our Faith, established and publicly confirmed by sundry Acts
of Parliaments, and now of a long time has been openly professed by the Kings
Majesty, and whole body of this Realm, both in burgh and land. To the which
confession and form of Religion, we willingly agree in our consciences in all
points, as unto Gods undoubted truth and verity, grounded only upon his
written word. And therefore we abhor and detest all contrary religion and
doctrine, but chiefly all kind of Papistry in general, and particular heads,
even as they are now damned and confuted by the word of God and Church of
Scotland, but especially we detest and refuse the usurped authority of that
Roman Antichrist upon the Scriptures of God, upon the Church, the civil
Magistrate and conscience of men: all his tyrannous Laws, made upon indifferent
things, against our Christian liberty: his erroneous doctrine against the
sufficiency of the written word, the perfection of the law, the office of
Christ, and his blessed Evangell: his corrupted doctrine concerning original
sin, our natural inabilitie and rebellion to Gods law: our justification by
faith only: our imperfect sanctification and obedience to the law: the nature,
number, and use of the holy Sacraments, his five bastard sacraments, with all
his rites, ceremonies, and false doctrine added to the administration of the
true Sacraments, without the word of God: his cruel judgment against infants
departing without the Sacrament, his absolute necessity of Baptism, his
blasphemous opinion of transubstantiation or real presence of Christ's body in
the elements, and receiving of the same by the wicked, or bodies of men: his
dispensations with solemn oaths, perjuries, and degrees of marriage forbidden
in the word, his cruelty against the innocent divorced, his devilish Mass,
his blasphemous Priesthood, his profane sacrifice for the sins of the dead and
the quick: his Canonization of men, calling upon Angels, or Saints departed,
worshipping of Images, relics, and crosses, dedicating of Churches, Altars,
Days, Vows to creatures: his Purgatory, prayers for the dead, praying or
speaking in a strange language, with his processions and blasphemous Letany,
and multitude of Advocates, or Mediators: his manifold orders, Auricular
confession, his dispersed and uncertain repentance, his general and doubt some
faith, his satisfactions of men for their sins, his justification by works,
Opus Operatum, works of supererogation, merits, pardons, peregrinations and
stations, his holy water, baptizing of Bells, Conjuring of spirits, Crossing,
Saving, Anointing, Conjuring, Hallowing of Gods good creatures, with the
superstitious opinion joined therewith, his worldly Monarchy, and wicked
Hierarchy, his three solemned vows, with all his shavelings of sundry sorts:
his erroneous bloody decrees made at Trent, with all the subscribers and
approvers of that cruel and bloody band conjured against the Church of God.
And finally, we detest all his vain allegories, rites, signs, and traditions
brought in the Church without, or against the word of God and doctrine of this
true reformed Church: to the which we join our selves willingly, in doctrine,
faith, religion, discipline, and use of the holy Sacraments, as lively members
of the same in Christ our head, promising and swearing by the great name of the
Lord our God, that we shall continue in the obedience of the doctrine and
discipline of this Church, and shall defend the same according to our vocation
and power, all the days of our lives, under the pains contained in the law,
and danger both of body and soul, in the day of Gods fearful judgment. And
seeing that many are stirred up by Satan, and that Roman Antichrist, to
promise, swear, subscribe, and for a time use the holy Sacraments in the
Church deceitfully against their own conscience, minding hereby, first under
the external cloak of Religion, to corrupt and subvert secretly Gods true
Religion within the Church, and afterward when time may serve, to become open
enemies and persecuters of the same, under vain hope of the Popes dispensation
devised against the word of God, to his greater confusion, and their double
condemnation in the day of the Lord Jesus; We therefore willing to take away
all suspicion of hypocrisy, and of such double dealing with God and his
Church, protest and call the searcher of all hearts for witness, that our
minds and hearts do fully agree with this our confession, promise, oath, and
subscription. So that we are not moved for any worldly respect, but are
persuaded only in our conscience, through the knowledge and love of Gods true
Religion, printed in our hearts by the holy Spirit, as we shall answer to him
in the day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. And because we
perceive, that the quietness and stabilitie of our Religion and Church does
depend upon the safety and good behavior of the Kings Majesty, as upon a
comfortable Instrument of Gods mercy, granted to this Country, for the
maintaining of his Church, and ministration of Justice amongst us, we protest
and promise with our hearts, under the same oath, hand writ, and pains, that we
shall defend his person and authority with our goods, bodies, and lives, in
the defense of Christ's Evangell, Liberty of our country, ministration of
justice, and punishment of iniquity, against all enemies within this Realm or
without, as we desire our God to be a strong and merciful defender to us in
the day of our death, and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the
Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory eternally, Amen.

THE ESTATES OF SCOTLAND WITH THE INHABITANTS OF the same, professing Christ
Jesus and his holy Gospel.
To their natural contrymen, and to all other Realms and Nations,
professing the same Christ Jesus with them, wish grace, mercy, and peace, from
God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the spirit of righteous
judgment of salvation.
LOng have we thirsted (dear brethren) to have notified unto the world the
sum of that doctrine which we profess, and for the which we have sustained
infamy and danger. But such has been the rage of Satan against us, and
against Christ Jesus his eternal verity lately borne amongst us: that to this
day no time has been granted unto us to clear our consciences, as most gladly
we would have done. For how we have been tossed at times heretofore, the most
part of Europe, as we suppose, does understand. But seeing that of the infinite
goodness of our God (who never suffers his afflicted utterly to be
confounded) above expectation we have obtained some rest and liberty, we would
not but set forth this brief and plain confession of such doctrine as is
proponed unto us, and as we believe and profess: partly for satisfaction of
our brethren, whose hearts we doubt not have been (and yet are) wounded by the
despitefull railing of such as yet have not learned to speak well: and partly
for stopping of the mouths of the impudent blasphemers, who boldly damn that
which they have neither heard nor yet understood. Not that we judge that the
cankred malice of such is able to be cured by this our simple confession. No,
we know the sweet savor of the Gospel, is, and shall be death to the sons
of perdition, but we have chief respect to our weak and infirm brethren, to
whom we would communicate the bottom of our hearts, lest that they be troubled
or carried away by diversity of rumors, which Satan spreads abroad against
us, to the defacing of this our most godly enterprise: protesting that if any
man shall note in this our confession, any article or sentence repugning to
Gods holy word, and do admonish us of the same in writing, we by Gods grace
do promise unto him satisfaction from the mouth of God, that is, from his holy
Scriptures, or else reformation of that, which he shall prove to be amiss.

For God we take to record in our consciences, that from our hearts we abhor
all sects of heresy, and all teachers of erroneous doctrine, and that with all
humility we embrace the purity of Christ's Gospel, which is the only food of
our souls, and therefore so precious unto us, that we are determined to suffer
the extremity of worldly danger, rather then that we will suffer our selves to
be defrauded of the same: for hereof we are most certainly persuaded, that
whosoever denies Christ Jesus, or is ashamed of him in the presence of men,
shall be denied before the Father, and before his holy angels. And therefore by
the assistance of the Almighty, the same our Lord Jesus, we firmly purpose to
abide to the end, in the confession of this our faith, as by articles follows.

Of God.
WE confess and acknowledge one only God, to whom Deuteronomy. 6. Isa. 44. Deuteronomy. 4.
only we must cleave, whom only we must serve, whom only we must worship,
and in whom only we must put our trust: who is eternal, infinite,
unmeasurable, incomprehensible, omnipotent, invisible, one in substance, and
yet distinct in three Matthew. 28. Genesis 1.
persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. By whom we confess and
believe all things in heaven and earth, as well visible, as invisible, to have
been created, to be retained in their being, and to be ruled and guided by his
inscrutable providence, to such end, as his eternal wisdom, goodness, and
justice, has appointed Prove. 16.
them, to the manifestation of his glory.

Of the creation of Man.
WE confess and knowledge this our God to have created Genesis 1. 2.
man, to wit, our first father Adam, to his own image and similitude, to whom
he gave wisdom, Lordship, justice, freewill, and clear knowledge of himself,
so that in the whole nature of man there could be noted no imperfection. From
which honor and perfection, man and woman did both fall: the woman Genesis 2.
being deceived by the serpent, and man obeying the voice of the woman, both
conspiring against the Sovereign Majesty of God, who in express words had
before threatened death, if they presumed to eat of the forbidden tree.

Of Original sin.
BY which transgression, commonly called Original sin, was the Image of God
utterly defaced in man, and he and his posterity Ephesians. 3. Romans 5. John 3. Rom
5. 8.
of nature became enemies to God, slaves to Satan, and servants to sin.
Insomuch that death everlasting has had, and shall have power and dominion
over all that have not been, are not, or shall not be regenerate from above,
which regeneration is wrought by the power of the holy Ghost, working in the
hearts of the Elect of God, an assured faith in the promise of God, revealed to
us in his word, by which faith, we apprehend Christ Jesus, with the graces and
benefits promised in him.

Of the revelation of the promise.
FOr this we constantly believe, that God after the fearful and and horrible
defection of man from his obedience, did seek Adam again, call upon him,
rebuke his sin, convict him of the Genesis 3. Genesis 12. 15. Isa. 7. 8.
same, and in the end, made unto him a most joyful promise, to wit, that the
seed of the woman should break down the serpents head, that is, he should
destroy the works of the Devil: which promise as it was repeated, and made
more clear from time to time: so was it embraced with joy, and most constantly
received of all those faithful from Adam to Noe, from Noe to Abraham, from
Abraham to David, and so forth to the incarnation of Christ Jesus, all (we
mean the faithful Fathers under the law) did see the joyful days of Christ
Jesus, and did rejoice.

The continuance, increase, and preservation of the Church.
WE most constantly believe that God preserved, instructed, Ez^c. 16. G^n. 12.
13. Exodus 1. 2. Exodus 20.
multiplied, honored, decored, and from death called to life his Church in all
ages, from Adam till the coming of Christ in the flesh. For Abraham he called
from his Fathers country, him he instructed, his seed he multiplied, the same
he marvellously preserved, and more marvellously delivered from the bondage and
tyranny of Pharaoh, to them he gave his laws, constitutions, and ceremonies,
them he possessed in the land of Canaan, to them after Judges and after Saul,
he gave David to be Josu. 1. 25. 2 Reg. 17.
King, to whom he made promise, that of the fruit of his loins should one sit
for ever upon his regal seat. To this same people from time to time he sent
Prophets to reduce them to the right way of their God: from the which
oftentimes they declined by Idolatry. And albeit that for the stubborn contempt
of justice, he 2 Reg. 24. 25. Deuteronomy. 28. Ier. 39. Esdr. 1. Agge. 1. 2. Zach. 3.
was compelled to give them into the hands of their enemies, as before was
threatened by the mouth of Moses, in so much that the holy City was destroyed,
the temple burnt with fire, and the whole land left desolate the space of 70.
years, yet of mercy did he reduce them again to Jerusalem, where the City
and Temple were reedified, and they against all temptations and assaults of
Satan, did abide till the Messiah came according to the promise.

Of the incarnation of Christ Jesus.
When the fullness of time came, God sent his son his Galat. 4. Luke 1. 2.
eternal wisdom, the substance of his own glory, into this world, who took
the nature of manhood of the substance of a woman, to wit, of a Virgin, and
that by operation of the holy Ghost.

And so was borne the just seed of David, the angel of the great counsel of
God, the very Messiah promised, whom we acknowledge and confess Emmanuel, very
God, and very man, two perfect natures united and joined in one person.

By which our confession, we condemn that damnable and pestilent heresies of
Arrius, Marcion, Eutiches, Nestorius, and such others, as either did deny the
eternity of his Godhead, either the verity of his humane nature, either
confound them, either yet divide them.

Why it behooves the Mediator to be very God and very man.
WE acknowledge and confess, that this most wondrous conjunction betwixt the
Godhead and the manhood in Christ Jesus, did proceed from the eternal and
immutable decree of God, whence also, our salvation springs, and depends.

Election.
FOr that same eternal God and Father, who of mere grace elected us in Christ
Jesus his Son, before the foundation of the world was laid, appointed him to
be our head, our brother, Ephesians. 1. Heb. 2.
our Pastor and great Bishop of our souls. But because that the enmity
betwixt the justice of God and our sins was such, that no flesh by it self
could, or might have attained unto God: it John 20.
behoved that the Son of God should descend unto us, and take himself a body
of our body, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones, and so become the
perfect Mediator betwixt God and man, giving power to so many as believe in
him, to be the sons of God, as himself does witness, I pass up to my
Father, and John 1. John 20.
unto your God. By which most holy fraternity, whatsoever we have lost in
Adam, is restored to us again. And for this cause are we not afraid to call
God our Father, not so much because he has created us (which we have common
with the reprobate) as for that that he has given to us his only Son to be
our brother, and given unto us grace to acknowledge and embrace him for our
Mediator, as before is said. It behoved farther, the Messiah Isa 53.
and Redeemer to be very God, and very man, because he was to bear the
punishment due for our transgressions, and to present himself in the presence
of his Fathers judgment, as in our person, to suffer for our transgression,
and inobedience, by death to overcome him that was author of death. But
because the only Godhead could not suffer death, neither yet could the only
manhood overcome the same, he joined both together in one person, that the
imbecillitie of the one should suffer, and be subject to death (which we had
deserved) and the infinite and invincible power of the other, to wit, of the
Godhead, should triumph and purchase to us life, liberty, and perpetual
victory, and so we confess and most undoubtedly believe.

Christ's Death, Passion, and Burial.
THat our Lord Jesus offered himself a voluntary sacrifice unto Heb. 10. Esa.
53.
his Father for us, that he suffered contradiction of sinners, that he was
wounded and plagued for our transgressions, that he being the clean innocent
Lamb of God, was damned in the Deuteronomy. 21. Gal. 3.
presence of an earthly Judge, that we should be absolved before the tribunal
seat of our God, that he suffered, not only the cruel death of the Cross
(which was accursed by the sentence of God) but also that he suffered for a
season the wrath of his Father, which sinners had deserved. But yet we avow
that he remained the only welbeloved and blessed Son of the Father, even in
Heb. 10. 1.
the midst of his anguish and torment, which he suffered in body and soul, to
make the full satisfaction for the sins of the people. After the which we
confess and avow, that there remains no other sacrifice for sin, which if
any affirm, we nothing doubt to avow, that they are blasphemous against
Christ's death, and the everlasting purgation and satisfaction purchased to us
by the same.

Resurrection.
WE undoubtedly believe, that insomuch as it was impossible that the dolours
of death should retain in bondage Acts 2. 3. Romans 6.
the Author of life, that our Lord Jesus crucified, dead and buried, who
descended into hell, did rise again for our justification, and destroying of
him, who was the author of death, brought life again to us that were subject
to death and to the bondage of Matthew. 28. Matthew. 27. Ioh. 20. ^1.
same: we know that his resurrection was confirmed by the testimony of his
very enemies, by the resurrection of the dead, whose sepulchers did open and
they did arise, and appeared to many, within the City of Jerusalem. It was
also confirmed by the testimony of his Angels, and by the senses and
judgments of his Apostles and others, who had conversation and did eat and
drink with him after his resurrection.

Ascension.
WE nothing doubt, but the self same body, which was born Acts 1. Matthew. 1^.
of the virgin, was crucified, dead, and buried, that it did rise again, and
ascend into the heavens, for the accomplishment of all things, where in our
names, and for our comfort, he has received all power in heaven and earth,
where he sits at the right hand of the Father, crowned in his kingdom,
Advocate, 1 John 2. 1 Timothy 2. Psalm. 110.
and only Mediator for us. Which glory, honor, and prerogative, he alone
amongst the brethren shall possess, till that all his enemies be made his
footstool.

As that we undoubtedly believe there shall be a final judgment: to the
execution whereof, we certainly believe that the same our Lord Jesus shall
visibly return, even as he was seen to ascend. And then we firmly believe,
that the time of refreshing and restitution of all things shall come, in so
much that those, that from the beginning have suffered violence, injury, and
wrong, for righteousness sake, shall inherit that blessed immortality,
promised Apoc. 20. Esa. 66.
from the beginning: but contrariwise, the stubborn, inobedient, cruel
oppressors, filthy persons, Idolaters, and all sorts of unfaithful, shall be
cast into the dungeon of utter darkness, where their worm shall not die,
neither yet the fire shall be extinguished. The remembrance of which day, and
of the judgment to be executed in the same, is not only to us a bridle,
whereby our carnal lusts are refrained, but also such inestimable comfort, that
neither may the threatening of worldly Princes, neither yet the fear of
temporal death and present danger, move us to renounce and forsake the blessed
society, which we the members have, with our head and only Mediator Christ
Jesus. Whom Esa. 1. Col. 1. Heb. 9. 10.
we confess and avow to be the Messiah promised, the only head of his Church,
our just Lawgiver, our only high Priest, Advocate, and Mediator. In which
honors and office, if man or Angel presume to intrude themselves, we utterly
detest and abhor them, as blasphemous to our Sovereign and supreme governor
Christ Jesus.

Faith in the holy Ghost.
THis faith and the assurance of the same, proceeds not Matthew. 16. John 14.
15. 19.
from flesh and blood, that is to say, from no natural powers within us, but
in the inspiration of the holy Ghost: whom we confess, God, equal with the
Father and with the Son, who sanctifies us, and brings us into all verity
by his own operation, without whom we should remain for ever enemies to God,
and ignorant of his Son Christ Jesus. For of nature we are so dead, so
blind, and so perverse, that neither can we feel when we are pricked, see the
light when it shines, nor assent to the will of God when it is revealed,
unless the spirit of the Lord quicken that which is dead, remove the darkness
from our minds, and bow our stubborn hearts, to the obedience of his blessed
will. And so as we confess that God the Father created us, when we were not: as
his Son our Lord Jesus redeemed us, when we were enemies to him: so also do
we confess, that the holy Ghost does sanctify and regenerate us, without all
respect of any merit proceeding from us: be it before, or be it after our
regeneration. To speak this one thing yet in more plain words, as we willingly
Romans 5.
spoil our selves of all honor, and glory of our own creation, and
redemption, so do we also of our regeneration, and sanctification: for of our
selves we are not sufficient to think one good thought, but he who has
begun the work in us, is only he that continues in us the same, to the
praise and glory of his undeserved grace. 2. Cor. 3.


The cause of good works.
SO that the cause of good works we confess to be not our John 13. Ephesians. 2.
free will, but the spirit of our Lord Jesus, who dwelling in our hearts by
true faith, brings forth such good works, as God has prepared for us to
walk in. For this we most boldly affirm, that it is blasphemy, to say, that
Christ abides in the hearts of such, as in whom there is no spirit of
sanctification. And therefore we fear not to affirm, that murderers,
oppressors, cruel persecutors, adulterers, whoremongers, filthy persons,
Idolaters, drunkards, thieves, and all workers of iniquity, have neither true
faith, neither any portion of the spirit of the Lord Jesus, so long as
obstinately they continue in their wickedness. For how soon that ever the
spirit of the Lord Jesus (which Gods elect children receive by true faith)
takes possession in the heart of every man, so soon does he regenerate and
renew the same man, so that he begins to hate that which before he loved,
and begins to love that, which before he hated. And from thence comes that
continual battle which is betwixt the flesh and the spirit in Gods children:
so that the flesh and natural man, according to Gal. 5.
the own corruption, lusts for things pleasing, and delectable unto it
self, grudgeth in adversity, is lifted up in prosperity, and at every moment
is prone and ready to offend the Majesty of God. But the Spirit of God which
gives witnessing to our spirit, Rom 3.
that we are the sons of God, makes us to resist filthy pleasures, and to
groan in Gods presence for deliverance from this bondage of corruption. And
finally, so triumphs over sin, that it reigns not in our mortal bodies.
This battle have not the carnal men, being destitute of Gods Spirit, but do
follow and obey sin with greediness, and without repentance, even as the
Devil and their corrupt lusts do prick them. But the sons of God, as
before is said, do fight against sin, do sob and mourn, when they perceive
themselves tempted in iniquity: and if they fall they rise again with
unfeigned repentance, and these things they do, not by their own power, but by
the power of the Lord Jesus, without whom they were able to do nothing. John
15.


What works are reputed good before God.
WE confess and acknowledge, that God has given to man his holy law, in
which not only are forbidden all Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
such works as displease and offend his godly Majesty, but also are
commanded, all such as please him, and as he has promised to reward. And these
works be of two sorts. The one are done to the honor of God, the other to the
profit of our neighbors. and both have the revealed will of God, for their
assurance. To have one God, to worship and honor him, to call upon him in all
our troubles, to reverence his holy name, to hear his word, to believe the
same, to communicate with his holy Sacraments, are the works of the first
Table. To honor father, mother, Princes, Rulers, and superior powers, to love
them, to support them, yea to obey their charges, (not repugning the
commandment of Ephesians 6.
God) to save the lives of innocents, to repress tyranny, to defend the
oppressed, to keep our bodies clean and holy, to live in soberness and
temperance, to deal justly with all men, both in word and deed: and finally to
repress all appetite of our neighbors Ez^ch. 22. Ier. 22. Esa. 50. 1 Thessalonians.
4. Luke 2.
hurt, are the good works of the second Table, which are most pleasing and
acceptable to God, as those works that are commanded by himself. The
contrary whereof, is sin most odious, which always displeases him and
provokes him to anger. As not to call upon him alone, when we have need, not
to hear his word with reverence, to contemn and despise it, to have, or to
worship Idols, to maintain and defend idolatry, lightly to esteem the
reverent name of God, to profane, abuse, or contemn the Sacraments of Christ
Jesus, to disobey or resist Romans 11. Ez chapter 22.
any that God has placed in authority, (whilst they pass not over the
bounds of their Office) to murder, or to consent thereto, to bear hatred, or
to iuffer innocent blood to be shed, if we may withstand it: and finally, the
transgression of any other commandment in the first or second Table, we
confess or affirm to be sin, by the which Gods hate and displeasure is
kindled against the proud and unthankful world. So that good works we affirm
to be those only, that are done in faith, and at Gods commandment, who in his
law has expressed what the things be that please him. And evil works we
affirm not only those, that expressly are done against Gods commandment, but
those also that in matters of religion, and in worshipping of God have no other
assurance, but the invention and opinion of man: which God Esa. 26. Mat. 15.
from the beginning has ever rejected, as by the Prophet Esaias, and by our
Master Christ Jesus, we are taught in these words: In vain do they worship
me, teaching the doctrines and precepts of men.

The perfection of the Law, and imperfection of man.
THe Law of God we confess, and acknowledge most just, most equal, most holy,
and most perfect, commanding those things, which being wrought in perfection,
were able to give Romans 7. Psalm. 19. Deuteronomy. 5. Romans 10. 1 John 1. Romans 10. Gal 3.
Deuteronomy. 26. Ephesians. 1. Rom 4.
light, and able to bring man to eternal felicity. But our nature is so
corrupt, so weak, and so unperfit, that we are never able to fulfill the works
of the Law in perfection. Yea, if we say we have no sin, even after we are
regenerated, we deceive our selves, and the verity of God is not in us. And
therefore it behooves us to apprehend Christ Jesus with his justice and
satisfaction, who is the end and accomplishment of the law, by whom we are set
at this liberty, that the curse and malediction of God fall not upon us,
albeit we fulfill not the same in all points. For God the Father beholding us,
in the body of his Son Christ Jesus, accepts our imperfect obedience, as it
were perfect, and covers our works, which are defiled with many spots, with
the justice of his Son: we do not mean, that we are so set at liberty, that
we owe no obedience to the law (for that before we have plainly confessed) but
this we affirm, that no man in earth (Christ Jesus only excepted) has given,
gives, or shall give in work that obedience to the law, which the law
requires. But when we have done all things, we must fall down and unfeinedly
confess, that we are Luke 10.
unprofitable servants. And therefore whosoever boast themselves of the merits
of their own works, or put their trust in the works of supererogation, boast
themselves of that which is naught, and put their trust in damnable Idolatry.

Of the Church.
AS we believe in one God, Father, Son, and the holy Ghost, so do we most
constantly believe that from the beginning there has been, and now is, and to
the end of the world shall be, Matthew 3. 8.
one Church, that is to say, a company and multitude of men chosen of God, who
rightly worship and embrace him by true faith in Christ Jesus, who is the only
head of the same Eph^s 1. Col. 1. Eph^^ 5.
Church, which also is the body and spouse of Christ Jesus, which Church is
Catholic, that is universal, because it contains the Elect of all ages, of
all realms, nations, and tongues, be they of the Jews, or be they of the
Gentiles, who have communion and society Apoc. 7.
with God the Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus, through the sanctification
of his holy spirit, and therefore it is called the communion, not of profane
persons, but of Saints: who as Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, have the
fruition of the most inestimable benefits, to wit, of one God, one Lord Jesus,
one faith, and of one Eph^s 2.
Baptism, out of the which Church, there is neither life nor eternal
felicity. And therefore we utterly abhor the blasphemy of those that affirm,
that men which live according to equity and Io^. 5. 6.
justice, shall be saved, what religion soever they have professed. For as
without Christ Jesus there is neither life nor salvation, so shall there none
be participant thereof, but such as the Father has given unto his Son Christ
Jesus, and those in time, to come unto him, avow his doctrine, and believe in
him (we apprehend the children with the faithful parents.) This Church is
invisible, known only to God, who alone knows whom he has chosen, and
comprehends as well (as is said) the Elect that be departed, commonly called
the Church triumphant, as those that ye live and sight against sin and Satan,
and shall live hereafter.

The immortality of the souls.
THe Elect departed are in peace and rest from their labors: Ap^c. 14. Apoc. 7.
not that they sleep and come to a certain oblivion, as some phantastikes do
affirm: but that they are delivered from all fear and torment, and all
temptation, to which we, and all Gods Elect are subject in this life, and
therefore do bear the name of the Church militant, as contrariwise, the
reprobate and unfaithful departed, have anguish, torment, and pain, that
cannot be expressed. So that neither are the one, nor the other in such sleep,
that they feel not their torment, as the parable of Christ Jesus in the 16. of
Luke, his words to the thief, and these words of the Luke 16.
souls crying under the Altar ( O Lord thou art righteous and Apoc. 6.
just, how long shall thou not avenge our blood upon these that dwell in the
earth) do testify.

Of the notes by which the true Church is discerned from the false, and who
shall be judge of the doctrine.
BEcause that Satan from the beginning has labored to deck his pestilent
Synagogue with the title of the Church of God, and has inflamed the hearts of
cruel murderers, to persecute, Genesis 4. 21. 17.
trouble and molest the true Church and members thereof, as Caine did Abel,
Ishmael Isaac, Esau Jacob, and the whole priesthood of the Jews, Christ Jesus
himself and his Apostles after Mat. 23. John 11. Acts 3.
hiw: It is a thing most requisite, that the true Church be discerned from the
filthy Synagogues, by clear and perfect notes, lest we being deceived, receive
and embrace to our condemnation, the one for the other. The notes, signs, and
assured tokens, whereby the immaculate spouse of Christ Jesus, is known from
the horrible harlot, the Church malignant, we affirm are neither antiquity,
title usurped, lineall descent, place appointed, nor multitude of men,
approving an error: for Cain in age and title was preferred to Abel and Seth,
Jerusalem had prerogative above all places of the earth, where also were the
Priests lineally descended from Aaron, and greater number followed the Scribes,
Pharisees and Priests, then unfainedly believed and approved Christ Jesus and
his doctrine: and yet, as we suppose, no man of sound judgment will grant,
that any of the forenamed were the Church of God. The notes therefore of the
true Church of God, we believe, confess, and avow to be, first, the true
preaching of the word of God, in the which God has revealed himself unto us,
as the writings of the Prophets and Apostles do declare. Ioh 1. 20.
Secondly, the right administration of the Sacraments of Christ Jesus, which
must be annexed unto the word and promise of Rom 4.
God, to seal and confirm the same in our hearts. Lastly, Ecclesiastical
discipline uprightly ministered, as Gods word prescribes, 1 Cor. 5.
whereby vice is repressed, and virtue nourished. Wheresoever then these former
notes are seen, and of any time continue (be the number never so few, above
two or three) there without all doubt is the true Church of Christ, who,
according to his promise, is in the midst of them. Not in the universal, of
which we have before spoken, but particular, such as was in Corinthus, Acts 16.
18. 1 Cor. 2. Acts 20.
Gallacia, Ephesus, and other places, in which the Ministry was planted by
Paul, and were of himself named the Churches of God: and such Churches we the
inhabitants of the Realm of Scotland, professors of Christ Jesus, profess
our selves, to have in our Cities, towns, and places reformed. For the
doctrine taught in our Churches is contained in the written word of God, to
wit, in the Books of the Old and New Testaments, in those Books we mean, which
of the ancient have been reputed Canonical. In the which we affirm that all
things necessary to be believed for the salvation of mankind are sufficiently
expressed. The interpretation whereof, we confess, neither appertains to
private nor public person, neither yet to any Church, for any pre-eminence,
or prerogative personal or local, which one has above another, but
appertains to the Spirit of God, by the which also the Scripture was written.
When controversy then happens for the right understanding of any place or
sentence of scripture, or for the reformation of any abuse within the Church of
God, we ought not so much to look what men before us have said or done, as
unto that, which the holy Ghost uniformely speaks within the body of the
Scriptures, and unto that which Christ Jesus himself did, and commanded to be
done. For this is one thing universally granted, that the Spirit of God, which is
the spirit of unity, is in nothing contrary to himself. 1 Cor. 1^^.
If then the interpretation, determination, or sentence of any Doctor, Church,
or Council, repugne to the plain word of God, written in any other place of
the Scripture, it is a thing most certain that there is not the true
understanding and meaning of the holy Ghost: although that Councels, Realms,
and Nations have approved and received the same. For we dare not receive or
admit any interpretation, which repugneth to any principal point of our faith,
or to any other plain text of Scripture, or yet unto the rule of charity.

The authority of the Scriptures.
AS we believe and confess the Scriptures of God sufficiently to instruct, and
make the man of God perfect: so do we 1 Timothy 3.
affirm and avow the authority of the same, to be of God, and neither do
depend on men nor Angels. We affirm therefore, that such as allege the
Scripture to have no other authority, but that which he has received from the
Church, are blasphemous against God, and injurious to the true Church, which
always hears and obeys the voice of her own spouse and Pastor, John 10.
but takes not upon her to be maistresse over the same.

Of the general Councels, of their power, authority, and causes of their
convention.
AS we do not rashly damn that, which godly men assembled together in general
Council lawfully gathered have proponed unto us: so without just examination we
do not receive whatsoever is obtruded unto men under the name of a general
Council: for plain it is, as they were men, so have some of them manifestly
erred, and that in matters of great weight and importance. So far then as the
Council proves the determination and commandment that it gives, by the plain
word of God, so soon do we reverence and embrace the same. But if men under
the name of a Council pretend to forge unto us new Articles of our faith, or to
make constitutions repugning to the word of God, then utterly we must refuse
the same, as the doctrine of Devils, which draws our souls from the voice of
our only God, to follow the doctrine and constitutions of men. The 1 Timothy 4.
cause then why that general Councels came together, was neither to make any
perpetual law, which God before had not made, neither yet to forge new Articles
of our belief, neither to give the word of God authority: much less, to make
that to be his word, or yet the true interpretation of the same, which was not
before his holy will expressed in his word. But the cause of Councels (we mean
of such as merit the name of Councels) was partly for confutation of heresies,
for giving public confession of their faith to the posterity following, which
both they did, by the authority of Gods written word, and not by any opinion
of prerogative, that they could not err, by reason of their general assembly.
And this we judge to have been the chief cause of general Councels. The other
was for good policy and order to be constitute, observed in the Church,
wherein (as in the house of God) it becomes all things to be done decently,
and in order. Not that we think that one policy and one order in ceremonies
can be appointed for all ages, times, and places: for as ceremonies, such as
men have devised, are but temporal, so may and ought they to be changed, when
they rather suffer superstition, then that they edify the Church using the
same.

Of the Sacraments.
AS the fathers under the law besides the verity of the sacrifices, had two
chief Sacraments, to wit, Circumcision, and the Passover, the despisers and
contemners whereof, were not reputed for Gods people: so we acknowledge and
confess, that we now in the time of the Gospel have two chief Sacraments
only, instituted by the Lord Jesus, and commanded to be used of all those, that
will be reputed members of his body, to wit, Baptism, and the Supper or Table
of the Lord Jesus, called the communion of his body and his blood. And these
Sacraments as well of the Old, as of the New Testament, now instituted of God,
not only to make a visible difference betwixt his people and those that were
without his league, but also to exercise the faith of his children, and by
participation of the same Sacraments to seal in their hearts the assurance of
his promise, and of that most blessed conjunction, union, and society, which
the Elect have with their head Christ Jesus. And thus we utterly damn the
vanity of those, that affirm Sacraments to be nothing else but the naked and
bare signs. No, we assuredly believe, that by baptism we are ingrafted into
Christ Jesus, to be made partakers of his justice, by which our sins are
covered, and remitted. And also that in the Supper rightly used, Christ Jesus
is so joined with us, that he becomes the very nourishment and food of our
souls. Not that we imagine any transubstantiation of the bread in Christ's
natural body, and of wine in his natural blood, as the Papists have
perniciously taught, and damnably believed: but this union and conjunction,
which we have with the body and blood of Christ Jesus in the right use of the
Sacrament, is wrought by the operation of the holy Ghost, who by true faith
carries us above all things that are visible, carnal, and earthly and makes
us to feed upon the body and blood of Christ Jesus, which was once broken and
shed for us, which now is in heaven, and appears in the presence of his
Father for us: and notwithstanding the far distance of place, which is
betwixt his body now glorified in heaven, and us now mortal in this earth, yet
we must assuredly believe, that the bread which we break is the communion of
Christ's body, and the cup which we bless, is the communion of his blood, so
that we confess and undoubtedly believe, that the faithful in the right use
of the Lords Table, do so eat the body and drink the blood of the Lord Jesus,
that he remains in them, and they in him. Yea they are so made flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bones, that as the eternal Godhead gives to the flesh
of Christ Jesus (which of the own condition and nature was mortal and
corruptible) life and immortality, so does Christ Jesus his flesh and blood
eaten and drunken by us, give unto us the same prerogatives. Which albeit we
confess are neither given unto us at this time only, neither yet by the
proper power and virtue of the Sacrament only, yet we affirm, that the
faithful, in the right use of the Lords Table, have such conjunction with
Christ Jesus, as the natural man cannot apprehend: yea, and further we
affirm, that albeit the faithful oppressed by negligence, and manly
infirmity, do not profit so much as they would, in the very instant action of
the Supper, yet shall it after bring fruit forth, as lively seed sown in good
ground. For the holy spirit, which can never be divided from the right
institution of the Lord Jesus, will not frustrate the faithful of the fruit of
that mystical action: but all this we say comes of true faith which
apprehends Christ Jesus, who only makes his Sacraments effectual unto us.
And therefore whosoever slandereth us, as that we affirm or believe Sacraments
to be only naked and bare signs, does injury unto us, and speaks against
the manifest truth. But this liberally and frankly we confess, that we make
distinction betwixt Christ Jesus, in his eternal substance, and betwixt the
elements, in the sacramental signs. So that we will neither worship the
signs, in place of that which is signified by them, neither yet do we
despise, and interpret them as unprofitable, and vain, but do use them with
all reveverence, examining our selves diligently before that so we do. Because
we are assured by the mouth of the Apostle, that such as eat of that bread,
and drink of that cup unworthily, are guilty of the body and of the blood of
Christ Jesus.

Of the right administration of the Sacraments.
THat Sacraments be rightly ministered, we judge two things requisite: the one,
that they be ministered by lawful ministers, whom we affirm to be only they,
that are appointed to the preaching of the word, into whose mouths, God has
put some Sermon of exhortation, they being men lawfully chosen thereto by some
Church. The other that they be ministered in such elements, and in such sort, as
God has appointed: else we affirm that they cease to be right Sacraments of
Christ Jesus. And therefore it is that we fly the society with the
papisticall Church, in participation of their Sacraments, first, because their
Ministers are no Ministers of Christ Jesus (yea, this is more horrible, they
suffer women, whom the holy Ghost will not suffer to teach in the Congregation,
to baptize:) and secondly, because they have so adulterated both the one
Sacrament and the other, with their own inventions, that no part of Christ's
action abides in the original purity. For oil, sait, spattle, and such like
in baptism, are but men's inventions: adoration, veneration, bearing through
streets and towns, and keeping of bread in boxes or boists, are profanation
of Christ's Sacraments, and no use of the same. For Christ sesus said, Take eat,
etc. Do you this in remembrance of me. By which words and charge, he sanctified
bread and wine to be the Sacrment of his holy body and blood, to the end that
the one should be eaten, and that all should drink of the other, and not that
they should be kept, to be worshipped and honored as God, as the Papists have
done heretofore: who also have committed sacrilege, stealing from the people
the one part of the Sacrament, to wit, the blessed cup. Moreover that the
Sacraments be rightly used, it is required, that the end and cause for which
Sacraments were instituted, be understanded, and observed, as well of the
Minister, as by the receivers. For if the opinion be changed in the receiver,
the right use cease, which is most evident, by the rejection of the
sacrifices: as also if the teacher plainly teach false doctrine, which were
odious and abominable before God (albeit they were his own ordinance) because
the wicked men use them to another end, then God has ordained. The same we
affirm of the Sacraments in the Papisticall Church, in which we affirm the
whole action of the Lord Jesus to be adultered, as well in the external form,
as in the end and opinion. What Christ Jesus did, and commanded to be done, is
evident, by the Evangelists and by Saint Paul: what the Priest does at his
Altar, we need not to rehearse. The end and cause of Christ's institution, and
why the self same should be used, is expressed in these words: Do ye this in
remembrance of me. As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup,
you shall show forth, that is, extol, preach, magnify, and praise the Lords
death till he come. But to what end and in what opinion the Priests say their
Mass, let the words of the their own Doctors and writings witness: to wit,
that they, as Mediators betwixt Christ and his Church, do offer unto God the
Father, a sacrifice propitiatory for the sins of the quick and the dead:
which doctrine is blasphemous to Christ Jesus, and making derogation to the
sufficiency of his only sacrifice, once offered for purgation of all those
that shall be sanctified, we utterly abhorte, detest, and renounce.

To whom Sacraments appertain.
WE confess and acknowledge, that Paptisme appertains as well to the
insants of the faithful, as unto them that be of age and discretion. And so we
damn the error of the Anabaptists, who deny Baptism to appertain to
children, before they have faith and understanding. But the Supper of the Lord,
we confess to appertain to such only, as be of the household of faith, and can
try and examine themselves, as well in their faith, as in their duty toward
their neighbors. Such as eat and drink at that holy Table without faith, or
being at dissension with their brethren, do eat unworthily: and therefore it
is, that in our Church, our Ministers take public and particular examination
of the knowledge and conversation of such, as are be admitted to the Table of
the Lord Jesus.

Of the civil Magistrates.
WE confess and acknowledge Empires, kingdoms, domininions, and cities, to
be distincted or ordained by God: the powers and authority in the same, be it
of Emperors in their Empires, of Kings in their Realms, Dukes and Princes in
their dominions, and of other Magistrates in their cities, to be Gods holy
ordinance, ordained for manifestation of his own glory, and for the singular
profit and commodity of mankind: so that whosoever goes about to take away,
or to confound the whole state of civil policies, now long established, we
affirm the same men, not only to be enemies to mankind, but also wickedly to
fight against Gods expressed will. We farther confess and acknowledge, that
such persons as are placed in authority, are to be beloved, honored, feared,
and holden in most reverent estimation: because they are the Lievetenants of
God, in whose seats God himself does sit and Judge, yea, even the Judges and
Princes themselves, to whom by God is given the sword, to the praise and
defense of good men, and to revenge and punish all malefactors. Moreover, to
Kings, Princes, Rulers, and Magistrates, we affirm that chiefly and most
principally, the conservation and purgation of the Religion appertains, so
that not only they are appointed for civil policy, but also for maintenance
of the true Religion, and for suppressing of idolatry and superstition
whatsoever. As in David, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, and others highly
commended for their zeal in that case, may be espied. And therefore we
confess and avow, that such as resist the supreme power, doing that thing
which appertains to his charge, do resist Gods ordinance, and therefore
cannot be guiltless. And farther we affirm, that whosoever deny unto them
their aid, counsel, and comfort, whilst the Princes and Rulers vigilantly
travel in execution of their office, that the same men deny their help,
support, and counsel, to God, who by the presence of his Lieutenant does crave
it of them.

The gifts freely given to the Church.
ALbeit that the word of God truly preached, and the Sacraments rightly
ministered, and discipline executed according to the word of God, be the
certain and infallible signs of the true Church, yet we mean not that every
particular person joined with such company, is an elect member of Christ Jesus.
For we acknowledge and confess that darnell, cockell, and chafe may be sown,
grow: and in great abundance lie in the midst of the wheat, that is, the
reprobate may be joined in the society of the elect, and may externally use
with them the benefits of the Word and Sacraments. But such being but temporal
professors in mouth, and not in heart, do fall back and continue not to the
end. And therefore they have no fruit of Christ's death, resurrection, nor
ascension: but such as with heart unfainedly believe, and with mouth boldly
confess the Lord Jesus, as before we have said, shall most assuredly receive
these gifts: First, in this life, the remission of sins, and that by only
faith in Christ's blood. In so much that albeit sin remain and continually
abide in these our mortal bodies, yet it is not imputed unto us, but is
remitted and covered with Christ's justice. Secondly, in the general judgment,
there shall be given to every man and woman, resurrection of the flesh. For the
sea shall give her dead: the earth those that therein be enclosed, yea the
eternal God shall stretch out his hand on the dust, and the dead shall arise
uncorruptible, and that in the substance of the same flesh that every man now
bears, to receive according to their works, glory, or punishment. For such as
now delight in vanity, cruelty, filthiness, superstition, or idolatry, shall
be adjudged to the fire unquenchable: in which they shall be tormented for
ever, as well in their own bodies, as in their souls, which now they give to
serve the devil in all abomination. But such as continue in well doing to the
end, boldly professing the Lord Jesus, we constantly believe that they shall
receive glory, honor, and immortality to reign for ever in life everlasting,
with Christ Jesus, to whose glorified body all his elect shall be made like,
when he shall appear again in judgment, and shall render up the kingdom to
God his Father, who then shall be and ever shall remain all in all things, God
blessed for ever: to whom with the Son, and with the holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory, now and ever. So be it.

The Kings Majesty's charge to all Commissioners and Ministers within his Realm.
SEeing that We and Our household have subscribed and given this public
Confession of our Faith, to the good example of Our Subjects: We command and
charge all Commissioners and Ministers, to crave the same confession of their
Parishioners, and proceed against the refusers, according to Our laws and order
of the Church, delivering their names and lawful process to the Ministers of
Our house, with all haste and diligence, under the pain of 40. pound, to be
taken from their stipend, that We with the advice of Our Counsel may take
order with such proud contemners of God and Our laws. Subscribed with Our hand
(At Holyrudhous 1581.) the 2. day of March, the 14. year of Our Reign.

Now unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be
honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

