THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the Five PRISONERS That suffered on the New
Gallows at TYBURN On Friday the 6th of September, 1678. At which time were
Executed Daniel Massey, John Johnson. Sarah Brampfield. Hannah Smith, otherwise
called Hebshebeth Cobb. Anne Davis, alias Smalman.
WITH Brief Notes of Two SERMONS Preached before them after Condemnation, their
Carriage in Prison, and last Speeches at the place of Execution.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for L.C. 1678.

The Confession and Execution of the several Prisoners that suffered on the New
Gallows at Tyburn, on Friday the 6th of September, 1678.
AT the last Sessions there were in all Ten persons Condemned to die; Four men
for Robberies on the Highway, and Six women for Felonies here in Town, either
Lifting (as they call it) of Goods out of Shops, or else Robbing those whom
they pretended to serve: both which wicked Practices are become so common, and
more than once followed by these incorrigible Prisoners, that it was highly
necessary to make them Exemplary. Two of the beforementioned men, viz. those
concerned in that barbarous Assault and Robbery, whereof a particular Narrative
has been made public by the unexpected Mediation of some generous Friends;
and the women whose Crimes had not been so great and obstinately continued in
as the others, obtained his Majesty's gracious Reprieve: and another woman,
immediately after she stood attainted, was reprieved by the Court, in reguard
she was found by a Female Jury to be quick with Child.

The Rest came this day to suffer, being charitably indulged in pity to their
Souls, so long time to fit and prepare themselves for their great and terrible
Change. In order to which, on the Lord's Day before, there were two Sermons on
most suitable Texts preached before them in the Chapel of Newgate. That in the
Forenoon on the fifth verse of the 38 Psalm -- My wounds stink and are corrupt,
because of my foolishness: Wherein the Minister very pathetically laid open the
deplorable Condition such sinners are in by Nature, wallowing not only in
their original Depravity and Corruption, but in continued actual Transgressions
against the holy Laws of God; whereby they become abominable, and as a
loathsome stench in the Nostrils of that pure Majesty and all good men; and all
this occasioned by their own foolishness, that is, their wilful rebellion and
obstinacy against all the dictates of Reason, offers of Grace, and impulses of
the Holy Spirit upon their Consciences. Which having, like a true Bonaerges,
hereby endeavored to awaken, and put them into a serious sense and
apprehension of their lost, undone, and perishing Estate, without speedy and
sincere Repentance.

In the Afternoon, as a Son of Consolation, from the 147 Psalm, verse. 3. He
heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds, he came to show them
the infinite Mercies of God, and Love of Jesus Christ, if they would come in
and accept of Pardon and Salvation upon Gospel-terms. That although they had
made their wounds to fester and rankle by their foolishness, and had Souls all
over bespread with a filthy Leprosy, yet there was Balm in Gilead, an Almighty
Physician, both able and willing to heal them, if they would submit to his
Prescriptions. In order to which, he gave them diverse most necessary and
excellent Directions; Not to deceive themselves with a false and palliated
Cure, but to close with Christ on his own Terms, and in all his Offices, as
their King to Rule them, and their Prophet to Guide them, as well as their
Priest to Intercede and make Atonement for them. To hate Sin more, because it
was displeasing to God, than because it brought upon them temporal or eternal
Punishments. To be as desirous to be Holy as to be Happy; because none can be
justified until they are sanctified, etc.

During the whole time of Religious Worship, and the Sermons, they behaved
themselves very Reverently and Attentively; nor was the Minister wanting
afterward, daily to visit them, with pressing Exhortations, and necessary
directions to fit them for their last end; especially charging them to
disburthen their Consciences, and give glory to God by a free and hearty
Confession of their Sins; which had so good an effect, as to bring them to an
Acknowledgment; not only in general terms, but particularly bewailing the Ill
Courses of their past Lives; in neglect of the public Divine Worship,
Violation of the Lords day, Drunkenness, Swearing, and continual practices of
Lascivious Debauchery; Two of them above the rest abounding in expressions of
Penitence, and endeavoring to improve those few moments of their Lives, to
work out their Salvation, and make their peace with God; begging heartily
forgiveness from his most holy Majesty, for their Rebellion against his
Precepts, and of all those whom they had wronged, by violent taking away their
Temporal Goods.

Some of the Women had been Condemned before, and would often bewail the
wickedness of their Hearts, that would take no warning thereby: the Men
alleged, they were ignorantly drawn in to that ill Fact, for which they
suffered, being their first of that kind, and rather by the unhappy operation
of too much Drink, than any premeditated design; yet confessed, they had more
than once deserved to Dye, and freely acknowledged the justice of the
punishment they were to suffer.

At the place of Execution they said little, besides those common, but too much
neglected Exhortations, desiring all present to take Warning by them, and
remember their Creator in the days of their youth; Not to suffer themselves to
be seduced by Ill Company, or sensual pleasures, which had been the means of
their destruction, and would be so of all, that did not continually keep a
reverent fear of God, and his Worship and Laws in their Hearts.

Thus heartily praying to God for Forgiveness, and to receive their Souls for
the alone Merits of his blessed Son, and desiring all good people to join with
them and for them in those Supplications, they submitted to the Sentence, and
taking their leave of all things in this world, were wafted into the
unfathomable Regions of Eternity.

FINIS.

