The Second CHARLES Heir to ye Reyall Martyr
Who for Religion and his Subjects Charter
Spent ye best blood, that unjust sword ere die d^^
Since yt rude Soldier peired our Saviors s^^
Who such a Father had; art such a Son,
Redeem thy People and assum thy Own.


A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL CHURCH IN GLOUCESTER, UPON ST. Georges Day,
On which day His most sacred Majesty CHARLES the SECOND, was most solemnly
crowned.

By Thomas Carles Mr. of Arts, late Fellow of Baliol Coledge in Oxford, now
Rector of Barnesly in Glovcester.

PSALM 132.18. (...).

I will make the horn, ( vid. Hamond in locum.
or Regal power) of David to bud, (or rise again gloriously as the Orient Sun):
I have ordained (or prepared a lamp (or glory) for mine anointed.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Peter Dring at the Sun in the Poultrey, next door
to the Rose Tavern, Anno 1661.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of GLOVCESTER.
Right Reverend Father,
THE place where this Sermon was delivered, directs me to this dedication; and
your early influence among us, emboldens me to hope your Patronage and
Protection.

I have always, studiously, to my power, avoided the torture of public
censure, but now I am forced to submit to the severity of desire; and herein I
am willing to grant the request of many worthy friends, that by this new way of
selfdenial, I may serve my Generation.

My turn in the City-Lecture falling upon that happy day, 1 Cor. 12.26.
my natural Allegiance bound me to speak a word in season; but I little thought
there would have been so solemn an Assembly; but I then saw the Apostle
verified, If one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it. Every
Conduit, Cross, and Marketplace in that ancient City, by their Garlands,
Crowns and Laurels proclaimed what day it was to England; and indeed the
morning preparations for the solemnity of that glorious day, did much satisfy
and encourage me, to lift up my voice like a trumpet, and to tell them both
their duty and happiness, in their strict Allegiance and fidelity to their
unparalled King; And I hope that those that left no possible expression of
joy out of their Festival, will carry on the same cheerful spirit of Obedience
and gratitude, at the return of the exercise of your Lordships Holy Office, and
Paternal care for their souls.

My necessary retirement of late years to my Country charge, has too much
estranged me from men and books, and all the modern advantages for so solemn a
performance; but since my slender pains were so courteously accepted in that
great congregation, I hope my boldness in entituling your Lordship to them will
be pardoned; for while I hear you have so zealously and happily defended our
public devotions, I will not despair of your favor to the meanest son of the
Church; while I remain

Your Lordships most humbly devoted Thomas Carles.

A SERMON ON THE CORONATION-DAY. April 23. 1661.
PSALM XXI. 3. For thou preventest Him with the Or liberal blessings
blessings of goodness: thou set a Crown of pure gold on His head.


THE liberal blessings of this gladsom day, which we by a loyal sympathy
partake of, challenge an hearty Selah, a ravishing Hallelujah, from every true
lover of his God, his King, and his Country.

That oil of gladness, wherewith our Royal head is this day solemnly anointed,
cannot but run down to the skirts of the Nation: We being therefore so
miraculously prevented with the blessings of goodness, let us loudly echo
their Hosanna to our David, Psalm 51.1.
when our God is setting a Crown of pure gold upon his head.

While therefore Ispeak of the things of God, that concern the King; if your
Christian attentions crown my meditations, I hope you will receive (and I wish
you might with all its due accents) verbum diei, in die suo.

It was a pious exhortation, and a strange prophecy of a worthy person, Dr.
George Wild Bishop of London declared in a Sermon preached at Oxon before the
members of the house of Commons there assembled. 1643. ^on Psalm 12.8, 9.
now a reverend Father of the Church, about fourteen years ago -- when we were
fallen into an Iron age, and never dreamt Domitians dream, or thought of this
golden and peaceful time we now behold. -- Be we but content (says he) to
wait Gods leisure, without murmuring and distrust, here in his own house, and
we shall behold the Buckler of the North, and the sword of the West meet, and
concenter triumphantly in the East, and there make up a wreath of bays, and a
chaplet of roses for that head, that has been so long crowned with thorns.
This day I may say is this Prophecy, and my Text fulfilled in your ears.

Verse 1. The King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord, exceeding glad shall
He be of thy salvation.

Verse 3. For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness: Thou settst a
Crown of pure gold on His head.

If I am unmethodical in my discourse, impute it to the Hyperbaton of joy: the
natural disorder of that heightened passion, may not misbecome this day.

This day it is just a twelvemonth, since we were singing another tune in this
City; But blessed be God, while I was performing my duty, the joyful news was
brought that the Phanatique cloud was dispersed, which threatened the preventing
of all these blessings of goodness: and therefore since the Ruler of the stars
has been so favorable, as to crown this year thus with thy goodness; that we
have an unparalled Prince, for sufferings and virtues, after a twelve years
divorce from his people, so unanimously owned, so I appily returned, so
gloriously received, so firmly established, so universally beloved, and so
solemnly crowned, as it is this day, we cannot but take up this holy (...), or
song of triumph: and bear our part in the burden of this Psalm of prayer and
say, as the King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord, so will we sing and
praise thy power.

The whole Psalm seems to be penned on purpose for the coronation of a King,
and is primarily to be understood of David, the proverb of Kingly blessings:
with reference to Christ, the antytipe of David, and author of those blessings:
and is very applycable to every godly Prince, that writes after David's copy,
and Christ's example, and through many tribulations, enters into the glory of
his kingdom.

If I should draw the Parallel throughout the Psalm, between King David and our
pious Sovereign; I might possibly seem tedious, but be neither guilty of
falsehood, nor flattery, both which are abominable in this sacred place.

In the former part the first seven verses of the Psalm, there is a notable
(...), or Enumeration of those signal blessings, wherewith God blessed them
both, and for which therefore they both bless God. Salvation in the first
verse. Satisfaction in the second. Coronation of his head in the third verse.
Prolongation of his life in the forth verse. Glory, honor, and Majesty in the
fifth. Superlative benediction, Excessive joy in the sixth, Abstract of
blessings, and that for ever. And all this heap and load of bounty, flowing
from the favorable countenance, and the never failing mercies of the most
high, verse 7. Gods gracious acceptance of the Kings prayers, v. 2. and his
preventing grace in the Kings extremities, verse 3. not flowing from any merit
of his own, but because of his constant faith, and trust and confidence in God,
verse 7. which is the best foundation of an unmovable and settled continuance of
all there. And in the latter part, (that we may know at the same time in which
the King is so happy) what shall become of his enemies; and that his enemies
may know what will become of all their treacheries and conspiracies: both their
prosperous rebellions, and their yet undiscovered stratagems and machinations:)
there is an (...); a confession, or acknowledgement of Gods power, or a
prophecy of their destruction, that hate the Lord's Christ. His hand, his right
hand shall find out them that hate him, season of his angry countenance, they
shall be suddenly and dreadfully consumed, fiery Oven against the opportunity
of his vengeance, (...)) as the Septuagint reads it.

Nay their seed and offspring utterly extirpated from among the children of
men, verse 10. And because they blotted such a mischievous device, which they
were not able to perform, verse 11. And yet, though their power was weakened,
their will was not wanting, and they fought, as it were, the last man against
God: therefore now will God laugh at their calamity, and make them the sport of
his fury, the But of his vengeance, emptying his quiver upon the very faces of
them, and cut them off with a methodical destruction, as the words enforce it,
verse 12. viz. the preservation of this anointed, Psalm 144.10.
and rescueth David his servant from the hurtful and cruel sword.

Now because this third verse contains so full a reason, and ground of the
Kings unexpressible joy, O how greatly shall he rejoice! because it immediately
follows the only Selah of of the Psalm, and appears by the first particle, for,
to be the cause of the lifting up, both of the heart and voice, both of David
and Israel, of King and people: I have confined my thoughts to that alone,
leaving the rest of the Psalm to your occasional meditations: and herein we
have enough to carry on the parallel, to teach us our duty and happiness in the
Kings honor and deliverance. Here is

1. The division.
His unexpected restoration. Thou preventest him with the blessings of
goodness.

2. His splendid inauguration. Thou set a Crown of pure gold on his head.

In both we have to consider these three things.

1. The Author. Thou, O Lord.

2. The Object, or subject of these great things. Him, the King.

1 David in the letter and original. 2 Charles the second, in the transcript
and copy.
3 The Act of special grace and favor: that is twofold. 1 Preventing him with
all his doings, with his most gracious favor. 2 Furthring him in his great
happiness with his continual help. 1 Delivering him from wrong. 2 Restoring him
to his Right. 3 Settling him in his throne.



1 Bestowing blessings upon him: and those

2 The blessings of goodness, liberal blessings: (...).

3 And that by way of Preventirn: (...), unthought of, unaskt of him.

Again. 1 a Crown; nay, two Crowns for David, as many, or more for our dear
Sovereign.

2. Of Gold, not of thorns, nor of lead, though weighty and full of cares.

3 Pure gold, (...), an honorable Imperial Crown.

4 Upon his head, not over it as Edward the fifth, not only in his eye; not to
aim at, but to enjoy and wear.

5 And lastly; Set it; settled, placed, confirmed, established.

In such a large field, I shall only gather some flowers to weave a Civique
garland for our Caesar, that at least we may also crown him with our loyal
thoughts, our hearty wishes, and and our Religious prayers: and first let us
look on the Original awhile, and see David's enlargement: that we may make room
for his Majesty's honor to be seen.

If we consider him in the sacred story from his first anointing by Samuel, to
the end of his reign, 1 Samuel 16.
we shall find much of this free and preventing grace of God bestowed upon him:
and indeed God is not satisfied to give when we ask, but before we think of
mercy to bestow it, that is, his Prerogative, that is, his delight. It Is the
blessing of Gods goodness to prevent with tender mercies. To prevent, and with
a blessing, and that of goodness too, that is the fat of the sacrifice, the
Crown of benediction: thus it was with David, thus with us too.

When he was following the Ewes great with young, Psalm 78.71. 1 Samuel 16.6.
a Kingdom entered not into His thoughts: praevenit Deus. sent for by Samuel:
Eliab his elder brother was not taken, nor any of his brethren, but He, a
youth, a stripling, anointed then, and by divine appointment entititled to the
Crown.

For this Crown he stays some years, 1 Samuel 26.10
till Saul the Tyrant and cruel enemy of David was dead, and His day was come;
and all the while that the evil spirit of Saul stirred him up, to plot and
contrive David's destruction; what a heap and catalogue of preventing mercies
and memorable deliverances are registered in the latter half of that first book
of Samuel.

How often was Saul hindered from actual murder of David? 1 Samuel 19. ibid. 1 Samuel 19.20.
sometime by the unmatchable love of Jonathan, Saul's own son: sometime by the
kindness and policy of Michael, Saul's own daughter. One while by transforming
Saul's Pursuivants into Prophets. Nay, if that will not change his furious
resolution, but he will himself pursue David, you will find him tamed to a
proverb, Ibid. v. 23.
and like Saul in the Gospel, not now a persecutor of David, but a Prophet also
in Samuels College.

But yet the fear that David will enjoy the kingdom, makes Saul continue his
impotent fury: and then though good David is forced to fly, and banish himself,
yet he is not starved: The Priests rather shall relieve him with Hallowed
bread, (though that cursed Doeg makes them pay for it with their lives;) 1 Samuel
22.18.
yet though the plot be against the Priests, as well as the King; (and truly
for no other cause but their faithfulness to the King) Blessed be God for all
their malice, Abiathar is escaped, an honest high Priest, to maintain the
succession. 1 Samuel 22.20.


Nay when the ungrateful men of Keilah will betray their Deliverer, 1 Samuel
23.12.
giving up David into the cruel hands of Saul, though He had saved them from
the Mosse-troopers of the Philistines: God will reveal the conspiracy, and give
him opportunity to escape. 1 Samuel 23.19.
And when the Ziphites turn Intelligencers, and help Saul to inviron David, so
that his escape is thought impossible: God will divert the fatal stratagem by
the Philistines Invasion.

Yet Saul seeks to slay him day by day, 1 Samuel 24.4.
and at Engedi it happens that David had opportunity to slay Saul, but he only
cuts off the lap of his garment, and God sends Saul home from the slaughter,
with that merciful conviction.

This and much more is registered for our instruction, that we might consider
how often (as he says) there was but a step between him and death: yet he
lives still, 1 Samuel 20.3.
and after his patient waiting upon God, He is at last Possessor of the regal
Crown: and that is brought him too by an Amalekite, not by an Israelite, lest
the people should brag that they gave him the Crown, 2 Samuel 1.10.
still to show the prevention of divine bounty.

Well, Crowned he is, and He raigns in Hebron seven years, and is still
followed with preventing grace; a golden chain of multiplied preservations,
till about thirty years after, 2 Samuel 5.5.
the King of Ammons crown is set on too: 2 Samuel 12.30.
a Massy crown of finer gold, and precious stones in it; which Crown (say all
the Interpreters) this our Text is meant of; and this was a mere prevention of
Mercy, for you will find, that David (though He was David was under a sad cloud
at that time, and his sin upon sin, one to cover the other, the murder of
Uriah, to cover his Adultery with Bathsheba, had rather rendered him liable to a
severe judgment, then fit for so rich a crown; but as before in his distresses
by Saul, vitam petiit, He asked life, and God gave it Him; so now, veniam
petiit, He begged pardon, and God forgave Him.

The story of David, if I should track it step by step, would yield a Volum,
rather then a Sermon. Not an honest English man among us, but might take his
Bible, and with a grateful acknowledgement, turn most of it into an Allegory
for this Day. Three things more I cannot but point at in David; two of which
concern Kings in general, but all three are most eminently applicable to our
most gracious Sovereign, and so I shall be led by the hand into my intended
Application.

1. God the setter on of Crowns.
The first is in the Text expressed: Tu posuisti; God is the setter on of
Crowns. This to rectify our judgments, which if they were in this point
erroneous, it is hoped they are by this time somewhat convinced by providence,
which has been the great argument all along.

For if this be true, that Per me Reges regnant, that God is the Sovereign
Imposer and Disposer of Crowns, then let the ambitious Absaloms and Jeroboams
of the world, that 1. Usurp Crowns take notice of this act of God; 1 Against
Usurpers of Crowns.
not ipse sibi, sed Deus ipsi. David did not snatch at it, and set it on his
own head, but God did set it on David's head. The Crown is in Gods hand, says
Esaias 62.3. And I have set thee this day over the Nations, says Jeremy 1.10.
Where it is rightly placed, there is Gods right hand in it.

Well might therefore the Emperors style themselves (...), and so significantly
stamp their coins with a hand coming out of the clouds, and setting a Crown
upon their heads.

2 Again. 2. Against Deposers of Kings.
Let such as pretend to a power of desposing Kings, consider, that there is a
noli me tangere engraven upon every imperial Crown: such as David's was over
Judah, and (as it was excellently cleared by that Sir Orland Pridgman.
incomparable person, in his late charge at the solemn trial of the Regicides)
such is the Crown of England, an Imperial Crown. In this sense only can that
phrase be rightly understood, -- Against thee, thee only have I sinned, Psalm
51.4. Though Murder and Adultery, even in King David were great sins, yet he
was accounted to none but God. And thus it is held forth in those excellent
Canons set forth in 1640. Can. 1. concerning Regal power.
Canons, That, There is no superior coercive power on earth, neither in the
Pope, nor in the people, over the Kings of England, and therefore for Subjects
to bear arms against their Kings, offensive or defensive, upon any pretense
whatsoever, (they are the very words of the Canon) is at least to resist the
powers ordained by God; and St. Paul says, They receive unto themselves
damnation.

It Is a concerning case (Beloved) and therefore give me leave to say the more.
Hear the sad complaint of a Reverend Dr. H. King Bishop of Chchester, n a
Sermon preached at Paul; Cross, March 27. 1640 Text Jer. 1.10. page 36. Vide
etiam p. 27 28.
father of our Church, above twenty years ago on the anniversary of such a day
as this, -- Arise, O sword, and smite my shepherd, Zac. 13.7. was the
barbarous inhumanity used toward Christ, and I confess (says he) ofttimes
since practiced upon his Vicegerent. I do not only mean the sword of
excommunication more frequently used by the reverend Bishop of Rome then his
Crosyer, (at which weapon Knox and Buchanan have showed themselves as cunning
Fencers as he) but the material and criminal sword, and this defended as stiffly
by those you scarcely would suspect. Men, who like the mutinous Israelites upon
all occasins of pretended discontent, cry down Moses, and set up an Idol, made
out of popular votes and contributions. Men who have found an arm to wield the
sword of Justice, which God never appointed, in the manage of which irregular
authority they have presumed to set the people on the bench, and place the King
at the bar.

Good God! Who would think this should be verified within eight years! I should
not trouble your loyal ears with such discourse as this, but that it is too
manifest, that the Conclave and the Consistory do in this point jump together,
and a great many (that cry out against Popery, and fain would buz it in the
heads of the vulgar, that the Priests and the Gentrey will club to bring it in)
they d; I say, by these Antimonarchical principles work jorney-work to the
Jesuits, to the ruin of a reflourishing Church and State, and the carrying on
of the great project of their Catholic Dominion.

Let us (beloved) be more wise hereafter; Tu posuisti will be Scripture still.
God is the setter on of Crowns. This day is the marriage of the King to his
people; and matches you know are made in heaven; The Contract is long since
past, this is the solemnity of the Royal Espousals: The Crown is the gold ring,
and let the Motto be still, (since it is of Gods devising, Mat. 19 6.
Quae Deus conjunxit, nemo separet; What God has joined, let no man put
asunder. He is to set it on, Kings are not to catch at Crowns. He alone
disposes them, Subjects are not to snatch off Crowns.

2. The second thing more remarkable, is this, that as He receives his power
from God, so one of his first cares is to provide for Gods honor, A Kings
first care is for Religion.
in the Reinstitution of true Religion. God miraculously restores the King; and
He, as the tribute of thankfulness endeavors to restore the worship of God in
its purity; and by this indeed He is chiefly set as blessings for ever, by
forwarding his peoples eternal blessedness.

You shall find this in the fixth of the second of Samuel, as soon as the
Kingdom was confirmed to him, the house of Saul growing weaker, and the house
of David stronger, (for Saul the father was dead; 2 Samuel 4.5.
and Ishbosheth Saul's son, that was set up by Abner his Uncle, was cut off by
Baanah and Rechab, two of the chief Commanders in the Army.) His first care, I
say, after the settling of his Kingdom, was with solemn joy and triumph to
bring back the ark of God. to his own City, and its proper resting place. 2 Samuel 6.17.


This remarkable passage in the story applies it self, and therefore since our
Sovereign is confessedly on all hands, so religious and zealous for the
restoration and advancement of the reformed Religion, established by Law; I
heartily wish and believe you will join with me in the prayer, 2 Samuel 6.12.
that all the honest Obed-Edoms, that give the Ark house-room in their hearts
and families, may feel the manifest blessings of pure Religion: and that those
rash and inconsiderate Uzzah's that will needs be meddling with the Ark, under
pretense of upholding it, (supposing every stumble of the Oxen, may prove an
overthrow of the Ark it self, which God has more care of then they consider) I
wish they may remember how he was there in the place, 2 Samuel 6.7.
immediately smitten for his error, that they may not by their rashness cause
a breach among Gods people.

3 The third remarkable passage in King David's story, is most applicable to our
dear Sovereign, that now is; and it is the glorious Return of David to his
Jerusalem in peace after the mishaief and confusion of a strong conspiracy
managed by one that was both Absalom and Achitophel too, The Kings return.
and like Herod (styled by Caussinus the unfortunate Politic) was a man sprung
out of nothing, O. C.
and yet built his fortunes as high as a Throne.

Our sins were great, and alas, are so still, and the sad thoughts, that we
were not ripe, for Mercy prevented me, else in the Tropique of our condition,
at the turning of our captivity, I had burst forth to this purpose last year,
and on Which was my turn in the Lecture at Gloucester the day that Lambert was
brought to London Prisoner. Verse 43.
Easter day, preached unto you the Resurrection of a dying Nation, represented
out of David's Chronicle; in the Exemplary contention between Judah and Israel,
about bringing back the King; as you have it at large in 2 Samuel 19. where the
Holy Ghost takes notice in the last verse, That the words of the men of Judah,
the royal Tribe, were fiercer then the words of the men of Israel. But blessed
be God, the King and His Household were safely brought over the water; 1 Samuel
19.41.
and the moderate men of Israel, that followed many of them after Absalom, did
heartily join with the Talkative men of Judah that were all along true to the
King, and like loyal Subjects, hand in hand, brought the good King with great
pomp and triumph into Jerusalem.

When success (which had blinded) had opened their eyes, and Absalom the Rebel
and Usurper was taken away; then the divided Nation is united in their desire
of David's return with honor; quarrelling for pre-eminence in duty; nay, 2 Samuel
19.20.
cursing Shimei comes out the first of all the house of Joseph to meet him.

Indeed the patient bearing of Gods frowns, (as David did, when he fled from
his royal Chamber of Jerusalem) is the best preparative to his smiles. And the
restoring of a pious Prince to his just rights and happy Government, is worthy
of the strife of Gods people: and doubtless God has a blessing in store for
them that were so zealous in that good work. For besides their share in the
blessing they receive from the father of their country, their memory will be
blessed in future generations. And give me leave to annex a good wish too, to
this third notable particular, so eminently made good in the return of our
gracious King. That,

Since (as that blessed Saint his (...). c. 27. To the P. of Wales. p. 2.
Father foresaw and prophesied) the mountains of congealed factions are by the
Sunshine of Gods mercy, and the splendour of his virtues thawed and dissipated,
and the forked arrow of factious emulations is drawn out, and he makes it his
constant business, with all Princely arts and clemency to heal the wounds, That
now we would believe, that our Religion and our Loyalty cannot be parted
without our sin and our infelicity; and from henceforth strive who shall be the
best Christian, 1 Pet. 2.17.
and the best Subject: for Fear God, Honor the King (in St. Peter's style, have
not so much as a conjunction copulative to part them.

And if any discontented Sheba, 2 Samuel 20.1.
upon a pretended interest in the King, shall blow the trumpet of sedition, and
bring the people from bragging of their ten parts in David, to cry out they
have no part at all in the son of Jesse: If ever again ye go to your Tents, O
Israel, surely the Lord of Hosts will make ready his arrows upon the string
against the very faces of you, and make a wise woman able to throw the son of
Bichri's head over the wall. 2 Samuel 20.22.


Thus I have pressed upon your thoughts and thanks, these three special and
choice observations in a practical way:

1. That God is the right desposer of Kingdoms.

2. That a good Kings chief care is for Religion.

3. That such a King trusting in God, shall be restored with greater honor to
his throne.

Thus much of the Original, David, by way of Parable. Now as duty binds me, of
David's Copy, in plain English.

And now I am at a loss where to begin, and must contract my meditations, that
I may not hinder the enlargement of your joy.

We are scarce yet awak't out of our National amazement at the wonderful acts
of divine providence in this year of Jubilee, wherein the Riddle of Joseph's
preferment has been resolved, Psalm 130.7.
and the plentiful redemption of Israel from their Egyptian bondage, G. Monk.
reacted and outdone: To him that raised up a Moses to conduct us, and made
him a second Joshua too, to give possession of our Canaan to the redeemed ones,
let us, Now, first and always give the praise; Holy and reverend is his Name.
Psalm 111.9.


Well might the Pope tell an English Gentleman, in the midst of our greatest
confusions, that our Nation was the land of wonders, because we changed our
Religion once a month, and our Government once a week: He little thought of
the great wonder, which, since, our eyes have seen: that all those changes did
work together; through the overruling providence of him that changes not, to
bring about the Royal Exchange, the happy restoring of that Government, which
we hope will never change.

Time was when we could scarce hope for this day, nay some would not hope for
it, though they did desire it: it could not be, they thought, without blood;
therefore they rather begun to lie down under the burden, as Issachar, rather
hugging their wounds, then looking out for a cure for fear of torture. -- and
truly our case was so desparate, that had not God, like the good Samaritan,
poured oil into our wounds, by saving and restoring his anointed, with the
wholesome help of his right hand, we had been as Sodom, and like unto
Gomorrah. Romans 9.29. Ezekiel. 18.29.
But his ways were equal, though ours were unequal.

To look back on our many miseries, Judge. 21.25. Virgil.
when there was no King in our Israel, were but -- Infandum renovare dolorem,
and that would be improper on a day of triumph.

No, Beloved, since we are, even to miracle, prevented with the blessings of
goodness; and God is this day setting a Crown of pure gold on our Sovereigns
head: let the perpetual Amnesty be confirmed, and all the dire effects of war
and violence be buried in Oblivion. Ephesians. 4.20.
-- I Am sure we have so learned Christ.

But that we may not loose our selves in this Labyrinth of joy, I shall follow
the clew of my Text, and briefly show you our happiness in the Kings honor,
which will excite us to pay our duty and homage to his Crown: let us therefore
cheerfully put in our claims at the Court of Heaven, and having our Petitions
granted, perform the best office at his Coronation (i.) Proclaim his virtues,
and pray for his felicities.

What the Prophet says of the Lord Christ: that God will shake the heavens and
the earth, Hag. 2.7.
-- and the desire of all Nations shall come; we may apply in a qualified sense
to our dear King, the Lord Christ. After a terrible conclusion of the European
world, the temple of Janus was suddenly shut, an unexpected peace ensued among
all the dissenting kingdoms round about, and the desire of these three Nations
did come home, and indeed so highly has it pleased God to honor our Augustus
(for so we are told Charles signifies) that the Miracle of a general peace
attends the beginning of his actual reign, who is not only the desire of his
own people, but the admiration of foreign Nations.

And we trust and pray that the glory of this latter house raised by Gods
special instrument, the valiant Zerubbabel, shall be greater then that of the
former. In honor of whose prudent and matchless archievements. Hag. 2.9.
His Majesty sure is crowned upon St. Georges day.

It Is wonderful to consider how God prevented us with his liberal blessings,
which the Fathers call benedictionem dulcedinis, the blessing of sweetness it
self; the very cream and quintessence of blessing lay in the prevention of the
mercy. Our hearts (God knows) panted for the Kings return, and we thought it
seven years first; seven years, shall I say? An age; an age, shall Isay? nay,
every day as much; and yet he returned before we could in any reason or
conjecture expect him. God had wonderfully preserved him, Psalm 91.3.
Delivering him from the snares of the hunter, and mighty Nimrods of the Earth;
and (to show still the prevention of goodness) when we would willingly have
been at the expense of blood, to purchase his presence and protection, He
brought Him to us crowned with the Olive of peace, and the Laurel of victory,
wreathed into one garland, bringing him back into the Loyal City, between a
matchless pair of Royal brothers, with thousands of drawn swords, and yet no
blood spilt. -- Did not the Duke of Gloucester dead since the Kings return.
Fatal Title of the place wherein we meet, compress my thoughts, 'twere easy
to expatiate here. -- but,

Surely the divine Providence so ordered it on purpose; that we should eye the
Person as extraordinary, for whom he has done such great things.

That his entrance into the World, May 29. 1930 1660.
and his entrance into His Palace (both on the same day of the month) should
be attended with Wonders. Charles the second born May 29. 1630. being Saturday.
On Sunday, his father, King Charles the first, came to St. Paul's. to render
thanks, where these verses were presented to hims An Ecclypse on Monday
following.
His Birth with a miracle in nature, a bright star at midday; His bringing back
with a Miracle of Providence, a Constellation of once divided affections.

Rex ubi Paulinas accessit gratus ad Aras,
Immicuit medio Lucida stella polo.
Dic, Divina mihi tranctans aenigmata coeli,
Haec Oriens nobis, quid sibi stella velit?
Magnus in Occiduo Princeps modo nascitur orb,
Moxque sub Ecclypsi Regna Orientis erunt.
After Caesar's death we are told that such a star appeared, which was commonly
talked of, as if it were Caesar's soul. What was the Roman Caesar's Epilogue, was
our English Caesar's Prologue. I will not launch out into the unridling of dark
Prophesies, I need not construe Grebner's praedictions, but certainly some
great thing was presaged by such an unusual Herald. But that observable Motto
on the coin, stamped on purpose in honor of his Royal birth, as it was true in
the sense then meant, so I hope and believe it will be verified with advantage
in his future glorious Reign; Hactenus Anglorum nulli.

Never yet was any English man born Prince of great Britain, France and Ireland
before him. My meaning is, that since He may truly say, that the Moto's of his
three glorious Predecessors in their coins, are still ^^^rant with him; Posui
(...) ^torem meum. Qu. Eliz. K. James. Charles 1.

(...), dissipentur inimici, and
(...) Regno.
I say, that as there was none like before him, so he may prove thrice blessed
in his Government, and the Nonesuch of the Princes of the Earth.

I believe you come prepared to excuse me, if my piety to my renowned
Sovereign, break forth more solemnly this day, I never had such an opportunity
before to cast in my Mite into this Treasury. Whiles therefore his real virtues
transcend my Panegyric, and my conscience bears witness that I speak the truth
in Christ, Romans 9.1.
I lie not. If I should be silent? I should prevaricate against the truth; and
for you not to desire to hear it, were to declare your selves most unthankful
to God, who has blessed you with so religious, so just, and yet so merciful a
King.

I have observed it usual for our divine Orators, in the most eminent pulpits,
to affect their hearers with the most eminent virtues of their present Prince,
and in speaking of those three, his Predecessors lately mentioned, I never
observed much flattery, but usually they fall short, as I must needs this day.

The truth is, I am not personally so much acquainted with his merit (having
never had the happiness to see the face of this glorious Sun since he shone
among us) I am, I say, neither Courtier, nor Orator enough to speak his just
character. That his daily endearing actions, imprint on the hearts of all, even
his very enemies, if any such be left, and their conversion be not perfectly
wrought by his unparalled conversation. Me thinks I have said enough already,
to heighten our due esteem of so superlative a blessing, and for this days
felicities, to cause an April shower of tears of joy.

Let us therefore (briefly, yet seriously) consider whose Head is crowned this
day.

A person of most High birth: most Religious education like David; a man, I
verily believe, after Gods own heart, trained up in the advantageous school of
afflictions: patient in Adversity; for, like David, though the Crown was his by
succession, yet he waits twelve years till Gods time is come to set it on, and
surely miraculously preserved for this purpose.

A person naturally of a most majestique countenance, yet mixed with so much
sweetness and humility, that his presence awes and invites at the same time.

Of an unmovable constancy in religion; of a fixed confidence and trust in God,
demonstrating his innocence by his freedom of converse, without distrust of any.

A strennous defender of the true faith; a Pious Promoter of primitive
discipline; a zealous Reformer of corrupt manners; and that by his own example,
as well as Precept; being (...), a living Law, a walking statute; Regis ad
exemplum.
knowing that to be the more taking rule of the twain.

And surely (dear Christians) when we have commented in our thoughts upon
these, and the rest of his several perfections, (which I am not able
sufficiently to express) we cannot sure but believe, that God has set him as
blessings for ever: blessings in the abstract, and in the plural, and for ever;
not only his ever, but the ever of our posterity. How then can we choose but cry
out, in the style of the Councels to their Emperors. Carolo secundo a Deo
custodito, coronato, vitam longam,
Regnum prosperum, prolem foelicem, vitam aeteraam.
A long life, a glorious reign, a happy offspring, and everlasting felicities.
And therefore to conclude, let us never hereafter hearken to the ra^ling
Rabshak^hs of Rome, nor the popular insinuations of Geneva; nor the Phanatique
enter prizes for a fifth Monarchy; but gladly acquiecse in this days manifest
decision of the long controversy, and shout with heart and voice. Vive le Roy;
Vivat Rex: God save the King.

Now to God the Father, who has mercifully restored the father of our
Country: To God the Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. who has so wonderfully saved
His anointed: and to God the Holy Ghost, the ever blessed Spirit, who has to
this day preserved the breath of our Nostrils, be given and ascribed by us and
all the faithful servants of the King of Heaven, and all the loyal Subjects of
his Deputy on earth. The largest kindome, the greatest power, the highest
glory, this thrice happy day, and for evermore, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

