A Congratulatory POEM ON The meeting together OF THE PARLIAMENT, According to
his MAJESTY'S Gracious CONCESSION The 21th of this instant October.
THe Commonwealth may Represented be,
By a brave Frigot, sailing on the Sea;
The King the Captain is, Who all Commands,
Who sometimes dains to Steer with his own Hands.
Else picks some noted Person in his Realm,
Whom he as Pilot, bids stand at the Helm.
The Stern that turns the Vast Ship to and fro,
Does the Kings Wisdom and his Council Show
And that alone the Vast Bulk in its Pride,
Through dandgerous Seas and breaking Wave; does guide.
The Sails, State Policies, without whose Aid.
(Sometimes ^url'd up, and sometimes wide displayed
To catch each Wind of State) the mighty Ship
Could not so nimbly over the Billows leap.
The Waistcloaths, Streamers, Flags and Pendants be
The Cerimonious Pride of Majesty,
Without which Grace and Glory she would look,
Like an huge Leaveless Oak that is Thunder-strook.
The Guns the Frigots Force, and main Defense,
Are the Arms, or the Militia of the Prince;
But the Sheet-Anchor best does represent,
(...) Safety in Distress, the Parliament.
Whose Privileges the great Gable-Rope,
In Danger is its Holdfast and its Hope.
Which Anchor is heaved forth or weighed up still,
At the great Captains pleasure and his Will;
In choosing Times and Seasons when and where,
His Wisdom and his Skill does best appear,
When the Seas Rage, the Waves go Mountains high
The Winds blow rfom each Quarter of the Sky,
The Face of Heaven obscured with black Clouds,
And the horrid storm bellowing among the Shrouds;
When through the Ship a fearful Cry does sound,
Out with the Anchor else we all are drowned;
Then is the time the Captains Skill is found.
The Danger's nigh, each Saylor should submit
To the brave Captains Wisdom, Skill and Wit,
He to cast Anchor best knows when it is fit.
Each dangerous Shift he is supposed to know,
Each Place where hidden Rocks or Quicksands grow.
He does the Depths of all Seas wifely sound,
Considers well the Nature of the Ground,
Whether 't be Rocky, Sand, or Claye mold,
And fit for the Sheet-Anchor to take hold;
Perhaps it is Deep, no Bottom to be found,
Or it is too many Fathoms to the Ground:
Perhaps it is paved all with Rocks below,
Into whose Sides the Anchor cannot go.
Perhaps the Bottom is loose shifting Sand,
And then the Ship by the Anchor is trepan'd.
Whilst it against the furious Tides does strive,
The Anchor drags, and then the Ship does drive.
Thus by that means, by which they trusted most,
For Safety, all is in Danger to be lost,
The Captain wise, not shook with every Fear,
The Ship does through the Raging Billows stear;
Till he does some convenient Harbor find,
Safe with fit Bottom, sheltered from the Wind.
Where on the Waves she may securely Ride,
And bravely with her Prow stem the strong Tide;
Then he Commands the Anchor to be cast,
Where Sails furled up, she safely Rides at last.
Our Royal Captain after many a storm,
Having preserved the Floating Ship from harm;
Now knowing that it may Convenient be,
Bids the Anchor to be heaved into the Sea,
To the great Joy of all the Company.
This is the Day, which like a New Creation,
Has been so greatly longed for by the Nation.
And now I hope as in a Glorious Day,
Our Discontents will fly like Mists away;
For which all Loyal Hearts should daily pray.
A brisk Gay Joy, in every Face appears,
And vanished is their Troubles and their Fears;
The Cloudy Sky, in every Quarter Clears.
The Seas which against the Rocks, did foam and beat
And to the ship did no small danger threat;
Are now grown Calm, and quietly do flow,
And with a soft embrace salutes the prow.
The winds are still, which erst while were so loud,
That tore the Sails and ratl'd in the Shroud.
The Sun shines brighr and makes a Glorious day,
And wanton Dolphins round the Frigot play.
Ruff Boreas who had stirred up many a Wave,
King Aeolus has thrust into his Cave.
And now the Frigot's Riding in the Road,
Sweet Zephoras permits to go abroad.
Great Neptune with his Trident struck the Main,
And on him strait waited his numerous Train,
Whom he Commanded by the Ship to stand,
While our Great Captain did the same Command;
The C^ck-boats Lanch'd, and all things ready be,
To let the Anchor drop into the Sea
May't at the Bottom find a proper Mold,
And whilst the Captain please fast may it hold.
For good success, let all to Heaven Cry,
And let each Saylor now his Business ply
Let the brave Frigot be Carined now,
New Dressed, and paid even from the Stem to Prow;
That she may in the Port long, long endure,
And Ages Ride Triumphant and secure.
London, Printed for Langley Curtiss 1680.


