A MISSIVE TO His Majesty of Great Britain, KING JAMES.

Written diverse years since, By Doctor CARIER.

Containing the Motives of his Conversion to Catholic Religion. With a
notable foresight of the present distempers both in the Church and State of
His Majesty's Dominions: And his Advice for the prevention thereof.

Eructavit cor meum verbum bonum; dico ego opera mea Regi.

Psalm. 44. First printed at LIEGE, and now reprinted at PARIS: With some
Marginall Notes; And a previous Discourse to the like purpose. M. DC. XLIX.

To the Reader of what Reformation soever in matters of Religion.
LIghting casually of late on the ensuing Letter, written above thirty years
ago by one of the most learned of his time among English Divines, Doctor
Carier, Chaplain to King James, and sent to His Majesty, by him, as a
justification of his then deserting the Protestant Cause, and conversion to the
Catholic Church, as a submissive testimony of his loyalty to his Sovereign;
and as a faithful Servants advice to his royal Master, for his future safety
both in this and the world to come; I could not but sigh with a groaning
Utinam, that the King had entertained his suggestion with a more yielding
regard. Had he been so happy, I dare boldly pronounce the temporal State of
his left Kingdom, (to say nothing of the other world) and posterity, had not
been so deplorable, as now with mournful countenances we are forced to behold
it.

Dr. Carier (being a man born and bred from his infancy in the Protestant
Profession, orderly promoted to his academicall degree, and above others
indeared to his Prince for his greater proficiency in the literature and
principles of the English Church,.i. in the grounds of Luther or Calvin, or
both, with others of the late Reformers of the old Christian world) foresaw to
what tragical conclusions their premises did dispose, and what Cockatrices
would be conuaturally hatched out of their eggs, when time served to sit long
upon them: he foresaw they would certainly prove destructive to Church and
State, where ever they found good acceptance. Nor can I say the Doctor was a
Prophet by that foresight, more then he, who seeing the heavens over-cast with
clouds, prognosticates a tempest; or he who seeing Gunpowder enough laid under
the corner stones of a building, and the match fired, fore-tells a quick
subversion of that Fabric. A man becomes not a Prophet by such a prediction,
but contrarily he is to be esteemed short-sighted, and of little consideration,
that sees not those necessary effects, if he sees the cause.

Take first for example sake, those Doctrines of your first General in the
late Reformation, Luther in his Comments upon S. Paul to the Galat. in his
books de liberate Christiana, and de seculari potestate, That Christians are
not tied to the observance of the Decalogue, but freed by faith from all Laws.
That among Christians there must be no Superiority. That there is no hope of
salvation or safety, as long as the Commonwealth is governed by humane or
civil Laws. That God is to be prayed unto, that Magistrates be not obeyed by
their Subjects. These Doctrines are impugned and execrated by all Catholics,
as their Books do every where testify: but take them, I say, and digest them
once for truths, and then tell me what sequeles will naturally follow, or
rather what will not follow? tell me, if you can, to what end Ecclesiastical
or Civil Laws are enacted? what obedience can Princes or Magistrates of
either sort expect from those they count their Subjects? who scour in his own
possessions? what curb for vice? To those points of reforming Doctrine, add his
scornful saucy censure of temporal Princes in the cited book de Seculari
Potest. Scire debetis quod ab initio Mundi rara admodum avis est princeps
prudens; ad huc multo rarior Princeps probus: sunt communiter maxim fatui; ac
pessimi nebulones super terram, sunt Lictores and Carnifices Dei. It is a thing
that all ought to take notice of, that from the beginning of the world a
prudent Prince has been a very rare bird, and much rarer a Prince morally
honest: they are most commonly the veriest fools and greatest knaves on earth,
they are the Catchpoles and Hangmen of God. Whether this proceeding as Doctrine
from the mouth and pen of one reputed a reforming Saint, be not apt to breed
disrespect of Princes in their Subjects, and to stir these to disobedience,
contempt, and rebellion against them, I appeal to others judgment?

Add again his spirited encouragements against Bishops in his Bulla contra
ordinem Ecclesiasticum. Quicunque opem ferunt (says he) corpus, bona and famam
in hoc impendunt, ut Episcopatus Devastentur, etc. And again, Evangelium
quocunque venit, oportet ut tumultuetur; nisi id faciat, non est verum.
Whosoever afford their assistance, and employ their strength; goods, and credit
to wast and destroy Bishoprics, and to root out Episcopal Government, they
are the beloved children of God, and true Christians, obedient to God, and
resisting the Ordinances of the Devil: and on the contrary side, whosoever
maintain E-Episcopall Government, and obey it, they are the Ministers of
Satan: wheresoever the Gospel comes it must breed tumults, unless it do so,
it is a sign it is not the right or true. More might be added out of his book
Contra Regem Angliae, of his insulting foul language against Princes, Church,
and Bishops; but what I have already produced is sufficient to demonstrate,
that one conversant in his School must quickly discover him altogether
destructive of all order in Church and State. But before I go any further, I
cannot but wonder, that the pretended Bishops in England did not see themselves
Mar-Prelates, I mean destroyers of their own Government, (put Deane and
Chapter to boot) and consequently of their Church, whilst they sided so
strongly with Luther, and magnified his reformation; which to do, was co ipso,
as you may read in his words, utterly to abolish Episcopacy, and to cut their
own throats. O insensari^ O senseless and unwise men! what bewitched you into
so blind a stupidity, as not to see so palpable an error and contradiction in
your practice?

Secondly, take this Dogmaticall point of your other grand Reformer Calvin (all
Catholics declaime against it, as most execrable blasphemy) touched by D.
Carier in his Letter, That God predestinates to evil; That he is the Author,
willer, and promoter of what men call evil, as well as of those they call good
actions, and then tell me what rational check you can find against any crime,
how enormous soever? be it treason or rebellion, against Church or Prince, with
the slaughter of both; be it blasphemy against God, or Deicide it self, as far
as humane malice can reach toward it; has not the perpetrator a ready
protection to justify his fact? God predestined him unto it, God would have
it so, who must not obey God? or who may lawfully resist his decrees? tell me
again, what Church, or Prince, or private person can promise himself security,
whilst every villain has that principle to justify his attempt against them?

These and the like Doctrines, dispersed up and down in the written works of
the late Reformers, obvious to be met withal both in the Authors themselves,
and in others that write of them, did D. Carier ponder, and in them saw clearly
the effects, that by an unavoidable connection (as long as the causes were kept
in their vigor) were to flow out of them* and these were the overthrow of
Church and State. Nor did he see these effects only in their cause, but really
extant in themselves, he saw the Germans, till then commended for loyal to
their Princes, and obedient to their spiritual Pastors, presently upon Luthers
firing and blowing the coals with a pretense of Reformation, divided among
themselves in open Rebellion against their Liege Emperor Charles 5. without
regard to Ecclesiastical Superiors. He saw their Churches wasted and
profaned, and men's manners in a moment altered into worse, he saw the Genevean
tumults against their true Prince and Bishop, their Reformer Calvin (that so he
might be more absolutely independent of all, and chief over all) being the
Incendiary. Nor can I think him ignorant of the Council held at Geneva, in
the year 1560. for the murdering of the King and Queen of France, the Queen
Mother with the royal issue, the Catholic Peers and Magistrates of the
Kingdom, the two great Reformers Calvin and Beza being Authors and principalls
in the Conspiracy, as Bolsecus in the life of Calvin makes appear out of a
Letter of the said Calvin to his trusty friend Viretus; he saw the ruinous
devastations that fell upon the flourishing Kingdom of France from the same
fiery spirit of Reformation, which Herod-like was most malicious against the
venerable Antiquities of the nation. He saw again (to omit others) the
rebellion of the Scots against their Sovereign Queen Mary, our present Kings
Grandmother, who afterward by the arm and axe of the old cause, was beheaded
at Fodringham Castle in England, the common Hangman of London by public
authority (O eternal shame to the English and Scottish Nation!) imbruing his
hands in her royal blood. And observing how hand in hand real destruction,
rebellion with their issue outrages, and their sister pre^ence of Reformation
traversed other Countries; he saw that one could not stand long parted from
the other throughout King James his Dominions, so gave him a seasonable warning
of it; and as a provident Noe showed his Majesty a safe Arc to prevent the
Deluge, if he pleased. But to the present woe of his posterity, and their
loyal Subjects, through ill private choice, or counsel from others, he
neglected the wholesome advice of his knowing and faithful servant the Doctor.

Now though the publishing of this Epistolar Treatise comes too late for the
effect first intended to King James, yet seeing the old principles still
standing, and the authority of their founders still maintained by the Reformed
Church of England: And again, seeing our Kingdom in blood from Sea to Sea,
with wounds inflicted, doubled, and redoubled by them, (though few reflecting
whence the blows do originally proceed) I thought it no ill office of a
Patriot (though now in a kind of exile) to endeavor a stop to my Countries
evils; as far forth as the reading of a sheet or two of printed paper might
contribute thereunto, by presenting all whom it may concern (and whom does it
not concern,) with a fresh view of D. Cariers advice. The old proverb (out of
the Prophet Isay, cap. 28. v. 19.) is, Vexatio dat intellectum, vexation gives
understanding; it sometimes cures mad men, and brings them to themselves
again. Perhaps the smart of so many blows may make men reflect whence they
have good and bad derived unto them, and render them more capable to regard the
Doctors remedy, then whilst they were blinded with fullness, ease and
prosperity; His remedy in a word is an obedient return of all unto that
Church, whence those Reformers rebelliously apostated; the charge of which
Church is to execrate to the pit of hell the blasphemies and seditious
principles of Luther and Calvin, to reduce all to a sound saveing belief, with
a good conscience, to order all into their due postures of obedience to
temporal and spiritual Superiors; and in a word, not to live profanely, as
men destitute of the knowledge of the true God; nor thirsting one another
blood, nor invading one another rights, as Wolves and Tigers: but as the
Apostle says, (Tit. cap. 2. v. 12.) sobrie, and just, and pie, soberly for
our selves, justly toward our neighbor, and piously to God, or as the true
pattern of all Justice Christ Jesus has taught us, reddentes quae sunt
Caesaris, Caesari, and quae sunt Dei, Deo: By this you have one reason why D.
Cariers Letter is republished.

Another reason is to show the world that the late conversion of D. Tho. Vane,
late Chaplain to the Kings Majesty that now is, and of Dean Cressey (so much
talked of in England; and the more by reason of their learned books printed to
satisfy all why they became Roman Catholics) and of many other prime wits of
our Universities (some whereof are hereafter particularly mentioned) who have
lately trodden the same paths, utterly forsaking their former Tenets in
Religion, not for temporal gain, (as all men know) unless it be of poverty
and persecution, is not a thing new, strange, or to be wondered at.

When D. Carier listed himself into the Militia of the Roman Church, (choosing
rather as Moses did in Exodus to be afflicted with the true Israelites, then
prosper among the Egyptians; and to be, according to the Psalmists Dialect, an
abject in the House of God, rather then inhabit the Tabernacles of sinners)
there were many circumstances that might make some inconsiderate people to
wonder at it.

The Church then called Protestant, whereof it seems he counted himself a
member, was at that time most flourishing in England; they had a visible
supreme head of above forty years standing without interruption, (after the
title was first taken by Henry the eight, to legitimate his Marriage with Anno
Bolen, whilst his first wife lived, it ceased during the reign of his
daughter Q. Mary, and so was interrupted) in whom by Oath they acknowledged the
supremest power in all things under heaven. They gloried in their Prelates and
Bishops, not found in any reformed Churches out of their Kings Dominions, they
had some colorable pretense to a succession of Ministerial Ordinations, and
Missions from the Apostles and Christ. They thought they had their Church well
and properly marked by thirty*nine Articles. They boasted of a Liturgy
consecrated with the blood of Martyrs, more complete for all uses, and
satisfactory to the people, thou any of the neighboring Reformations enjoyed.
They had differences of days, some kept holy, others fasted. They used some
solemnities in the administration of their two Sacraments. They had decencies
in their Burialls. They had several practices outwardly religious: and in
brief, they had so many Relics of the old Christianity of their Country, as
did manifestly distinguish them from Jews, Turks, and other more profane
people. All which as they were plausible stays to withold men in the
Protestant Religion, and not to think on any other, especially if they were
born and bred in Protestancy: so made they any man's conversion to Catholic
Religion in those days, more remarkable, more wondered at, and more subject to
the question, what moved him to forsake the Protestant? Withal D. Cariers
favor with his Prince, together with his great learning, and good parts,
making him capable of the chiefest spiritual dignities and promotions in the
Kingdom, might well move many to take notice of his conversion, and wonder he
should change both his present possessions, and pregnant hopes of more, for the
poor contemptible being of an exiled Papist, perhaps scanted in necessaries to
live and breath.

But now to use the Prophet Jeremies words, in his Threnes (c. 4. v. 1. cap. 2.
v. 2. though in a different sense) Obscuratum est aurum; mutatus est color
optimus; dispersi sunt lapides Sanctuarii in capite omnium platearum: what
seemed gold among the Protestants, is now altogether darkened, and cast off as
dross, the most specious of their fair colors is faded, (an argument it was
of no long lasting complexion) the seeming corner stones of their seeming
Sanctuary are dispersed in the head of all the streets. The sworn supreme head
of their Church, though gray, aged, and well deserved of them, is made his
vassalls subject, their ward, their captive, scarce allowed to keep his own
head on his shoulders; and whilst it is on, is little less then basely
foot-balled by the miscreants of his own Subjects.

Their Bishops once the corner-stones of the English Sanctuary, or Reformation,
are even levelled to the flock by their own Disciplinated sheep: yea, I may
say, facti sunt opprobrium vicinis, subsannatio and illusio his qui in circuitu
sunt: they are truly become a reproach to their neighbors, a scorn and mock
to all about them. The Reformation, now thought best for England, can subsist
(they say) as well without Bishops, as their neighbor Churches. Their old
Ordination of Ministers (and as old as it is, only invented in King Edward the
sixths days) is already laid to the wall, this present Parliament has found a
newer way to supply the Bishops Office; there is no pretense to Mission,
derived by any order from the Apostles, all claim an equal right to the
Pulpit, Tinkers, Weavers, Tailors, Fiddlers, Soldiers; nor do any fail of
novell-hunting auditors, some of the old Protestant Preachers silenced by the
Parliament, others fallen to silence of themselves, as not knowing what to
preach to day, for fear they be driven to contradict it in the next Sermon, or
to fight for their Pulpit; others preach according to the times* though against
their own consciences, to save their livings. And good God! what nonsense,
ignorances, seditious and rebellious Doctrines, yea Blasphemies, do the Tubs
and Pulpits ring with, whilst they are knocks and belabored by those new
Mountebank Predicants or Praters, who decry and contemn the Lords Prayer, the
Apostles Creed, and ten Commandments, as rags and relics of Popery and
Superstition.

Their Liturgy (which began in the nonageraign of Edw. the 6. and after some
years interruption, got stronger footing by an Act of Parliament in Q.
Elizabeth's days, and so was become almost of fourscore years prescription,
half as old as one of our Grandfathers) is decryed, antiquated by the present
Parliament, contemned by the people, and succeeded by a new thing called a
Directory, of 4. or 5. years unquiet standing, which begins already to lose
credit with its first accepters, though as yet the stronger Faction (not
without frequent scuffles and bloodshed) keeps it perforce in many Churches;
and what is kept in perforce it neither likely to breed devotion, unless it be
of the new garb, nor to be of long durance, if the old Proverb fail not, Nihil
violentum diuturnum.

Their former mark of thirty nine Articles is little regarded, if not quite
out of date: yea, which is worse, the Apostles Creed, the perpetual mark or
symbol of a Christian, is questioned and has stood these six or seven years
subjected to the disquisition of the Parliaments subpedancan Divines, without
determination as yet, whether it be to be embraced all and entirely for truth,
or only part.

Concerning the solemnities of their Sacraments* I need not tell you into what
omission and confusion they are fallen about their Lords Supper, some Churches
having had no Communion at all these six or seven years: some using it after
the old fashion, others after the new: some receive it kneeling, some standing,
some sitting, none of the newmodell'd Ministers (some of the old did, others
derided it) claiming more power to consecrate, then the Layicks of the
Parliament can give them, which they know to be no more then the Bakers that
sell them bread can sell with it.

As for their Sacrament of Baptism, besides their novelty in the manner and
circumstances, it is certain they are defective in some places, even in the
essentialls, I mean in the words of Institution, and application of water,
some saying (instead of I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, etc.) We take
thee into the Congregation of the faithful. Whether all apply the water either
at all, or rightly, is more then my distance out of the Country permits me to
learn, but not more then I have reason to doubt of: And where any of the
essentialls are wanting, there certainly the child is not baptized, but left
as he was borne, a child of perdition by the state of original sin.

The Burialls now among the Reformed in England, are in a manner profane, in
many places the dead being thrown into the ground like dogs, and not a word
said; nor have they willingly more differences of days, by holy or fast, in
memory of Christian mysteries, then Turks and Infidells: nor finally is there
any thing almost out of the Catholics hands left in the Country that can
persuade a traveling stranger to think England to be rather Christian then
Turkish, excepting the outward shape of Churches, which of the charges to alter
them be not a Remora, may be also reformed ere long.

To these metamorphosies or changes of late inventions into the present of a
little fresher coin, add the confounded Chaos we see now in matters of
Religion throughout the Kingdom, God Almighty permitting the monster of
Reformation to reveal its own turpitude, and to betray its self by its
cloven feet of Sects and Divisions, to be what indeed it is, that men might
more easily discern it, to beat it down and detest it.

Luther himself at the first, and afterward his followers of whatsoever
Reformation, were mightily tormented with those questions of the Catholics,
Where the Church afterward called the Lutheran, or Reformed, was in the year
of Christ, 1512.? (when Luther was an Augustine Friar in his Monastery, a
Catholic in communion with the Pope of Rome) Who was then a Protestant? In
what Country did he live? What was his name? the question is not, Who was then
a Protestant in name? without asking them, we know by Histories, that the
Lutherans had the name of Protestants some years after the Reformation begun,
from their Covenants and Protestations first made at Spire, and afterward at
Smalcald in Germany, when finding their party growing strong, they began to
take head against their Catholic Sovereign Charles the fifth. Nor was the
question, who was then (before Luthers forsaking his cloistre and former
Religion) opposite to the Church of Rome, or of a different belief from hers?
This question had been easily answered by naming the Hussits, Wicklesians,
Berengarians, Arrians, and others, which for particular points of Doctrine,
were as different from Luther, as he from the Catholic; but the meaning of the
question was, and still is, Who did then believe all those points of Faith, and
only those, which Luther, or any other after-Reformer did afterward believe,
and wherein they differed from the belief of Catholics, which they pretended
to reform? this has been from the beginning, and still is a tormenting
question to all of the Reformed Churches, and though daily asked by Catholics,
Writers, and Discoursers, yet to this day could never be answered, with any
satisfaction or probability worthy a Scholars pen.

If now in this November, 1648. I should ask who is a Protestant in
England?.i. one holding all those points of faith, and only those (what other
definition of a Protestant to give I know not, but desire the learned
Protestants to agree in it, and to set it down, that he, who desires to be one
of their number, may know what he desires,) which Luther the supposed
Grandfather of Protestancy, and Enemy to Catholics, professed to believe?
perhaps it would prove as troublesome, or unsatisfiable a Quaere as the former:
yea, if I should ask what three or four Scholars (speaking of those that are
come to some eminency in learning, and to have some conceit of themselves for
it) are to be found in the Kingdom justly agreeing in all matters of faith?
yea, to come closer to the purpose, if the question were, what one man (setting
the Catholics aside). is there to be found of the same opinion now in matters
of says, that he was of, on the second of November, 1640? (the day before the
present Parliament began) perhaps it would put you to a long search, before you
met a sure satisfactory answer.

Lest you should think I speak too much at random, consider I beseech you, how
frequently you meet with men, seriously and deliberately saying, Pox on it,
rather then hazard my life, liberty, or fortunes, I Will be of any profession.
I Will keep my conscience to my self, but I Will never lose my land for want of
outward compliance, or conformity with the prevailing Multitude. And really
their practice both in Religion and Loyalty is squared by that Dictamen; Of
what Religion I pray you do you count these? Are they Protestants? Weighing
them in the true scale of the Sanctuary, I take them to be Nullisidians,
indifferent, for Christianity, or the Turkish Turbant, in evident state of
damnation for their souls; and that Tire and Sidon may escape with a more
remiss damnation in the day of Judgment then they, Mat. chapter 11. v. 22.
Consider secondly, the multitude of Sects lately sprung up in the Kingdom: what
divisions, and subdivisions are there known to be of the old Anabaptists;
besides the two main Factions of Presbyterians and Independents, new things and
names, that have almost quite abolished their Protestant Progenitor; their
zeal and number ebbing and flowing by success of the Sword. Some, you know,
are servent Zelots of the Scottish Reformation; others detest it as pestiferous
and heretical: Some retain the old denomination of Protestants, yet have much
of the new Model: Some hold Episcopacy essential to the true Protestant
Church; others deny it* holding Bishops altogether unnecessary to the reformed
Churches; and demonstrating it by the not being and non-use of them, in any
Reformation, even from the beginning, out of the King of Englands Dominions.
Some again, as you know, either of curiosity, or to prevent Penalties,
frequent the Parish Churches on Sundays; and on other days frequent
Conventicles of another Communion, utterly detesting that of the Parish Church,
as superstitious or heretical; and so on the Week days outwardly disavow the
profession, they avowed on the Sunday. Consider thirdly, the little regard that
is now given to the 39. Articles, heretofore the distinctive difference of the
old English Protestant. And fourthly the questioning of the Apostles Creed,
which implies a doubt of its truth, at least in some points. Before this
Parliament it was every where used throughout the Kingdom, as an outward
profession of every ones belief: Now it is questioned, and consequently
doubted of, by the Representative Body of the whole Kingdom, and their
Synodicall Divines; Add to this, the old true saying, Dubious in fide, infidelis
est, he that doubts in matters of faith, is no right believer, and then draw
you the consequence; Put all together and you will see, that the questions I
made you, are not so easily answerable, as perhaps you thought at the first.

S. Augustine (lib. de. haeres.) numbereth ninety several Heresies (so many
Reformations were they) sprung up betwixt Christ's time and his. i. in about
four Centuries. So many more rose betwixt S. Augustines days, and Luthers. i.
180. Heresies in 1500. years, according to the observation of others. Betwixt
Luthers apostacy from S. Austins Rule, and defection from the Catholic Church
in the year 1517. and the year 1595. (which is but the intervall of 78) modern
Authors, Staphilus, Hosius, P^ateolus, and others do reckon 270 new Sects, all
Reformations of what was some days, or hours before. But if any man would
number all the Reformations, or Sects that these last 8. years have hatched in
England, perhaps the probablest rule of his Arithmetic would be quot capita,
tot sententiae, as many opinions in matters of Religion, as heads of men; no
common name being to be found, sit to comprehend our Sectaries, but that of a
Suist, one that follows his own dreams or fancy in choice of Scripture, in the
interpretation of it, and in every particular concerning Religion, without
profession of agreement or communion, which any follow, unless it be the
communion of non-agreement. The Scrofa Alba of Reformation has been so fertile
these later days, that to use Stanislaus Roscius his words (Lib. de Atheismis)
Errans nescit quid velit, neec quid nolit. The erring Reformer does neither
know what he would, nor what he would not: let it be but new, it suffices.

S. Hilarie (lib. ad Constantium and Constantem Imperat.) objected as a great
absurdity against the Arrians, that they had annuas, and menstruas fides, that
they changed their faith once a year, yea once a month; an evident argument
of their falsehood. If you will take the testimony of twice two or three, and
compare the weekly Sermons together, you may perhaps find some of your English
reforming Doctrines, brought to old age, and funerals, in less then a month.
An evident demonstration, that Reformation of Faith is not a city built on a
mountain, (Matthew. 5. 14.) nor a wise man's house seated on a rock, (Matthew. 7.
24.) but a wall raised and dawbed without tempering, (Ezech. 13. 11.) or a
fools cottage erected upon sands.

Quae pendulum solutae
Pondus far recusant.
In Heresies unstable ground
No settled footing can be found.
And how real that of S. Athanasius against the Arrian Heretics (Epist. de
Nicaena Synodo) agrees unto all the Reformers of the later days, I submit even
to their censures: Nunquam unam, etc. They never stand to one and the same
opinion, but run from one to another; now praising, now dispraising the same;
now condemning what they approved a little before: a true character of
heretics, and mark of falsehood.

Things then being fallen to this unconcealable confusion in England, without
likelihood of stop, as long as the principles of the prime Reformers stand
still in vogue; can any man wonder at the conversion to Catholic Religion,
either of the men hereafter specified, or any others? for my own part, I cannot
but wonder, that any man acknowledging the soul immortal, and that either
Hell or Heaven must be her eternal Domicil after this life; and with all
acknowledging that a false Religion cannot be the way toward beatitude; should
expect a second call, for his deserting that, of whose falsehood in it self,
damnablenesse to man's soul; and inconsistency with an ordered Church, or
State, be has so many, and so pregnant Demonstrations, as it were to the eye.

The old Proverb of the Hebrews is, Veritatem, stabiles; mendacium, debiles
habere pedes* that truth has strong steadfast, sure footing; but a lie, only
weak, unstedfast, tottering foundations: Whence, the first is of a permanent
perpetual durance; the other, easily supplanted and overthrown. Were any of
the Reformations that are so yearly, monthly, if not oftener forged, true; it
would stand the same in it self, firm, and constant, scorning chop and change:
but seeing there is none that does not lose ground upon the first approach of a
new spirit, none that suffers not in her reputation, by the credit of every
gifted Preacher of the new Model, (you know how frequently new spirits and new
gifts are pretended) certainly by the Hebreans Adage, all Reformations are to
be esteemed, as weak grounded lies.

Nihil quod non manet in se ipso, verum est: omne quipp^ quod alteratur,
falsitas est, non manens in scipso. Nothing can be true, (says that rare
Prodigy of Nature Trismegistus) that does not abide the same constant in it
self: every thing subject to alteration, is false: That your Reformations in
England are subject to alterations, I need not tell you, unless you be blind;
that therefore they must of necessity be false, you may take as a sure truth,
from the pen of Trismegistus.

If according to the Wiseman in his Proverbs, the later ends of some ways,
which seem to a man, just and upright, so outwardly masked with morality of
life, and good neighborhood, as hardly discernable, (especially by the unwary
vulgar) from ways really sure and good; do yet lead to death: how sure of
eternal death and damnation must he be, who runs the ways of the present
Reformation; which are so far from seeming just by any obducted disguise, that
every man (even the greatest sticklers stick not to confess it now and then
among their friends) sees them plainly full of injustice, impiety,
oppressions, rebellions against all sorts of humane superiors, and blasphemies
against God himself? certainly it is more then high time for all men to abhor
the Sodom and Gomorrhe of Reformation in Faith, with the inundation of vice,
and corrupted manners it has brought with it into the world.

That you may yet farther penetrate the malignity of the confusion you are
fallen into, (another argument that Reformation in Faith is of the serpent
Hydras nature,) take this Corollary or addition to what is said already: That
it must be endless in Church and State, and altogether remediless, as long as
the old laid principles of Reformation, derived from Luther and Calvin, stand
uncontrolled: there being now no way left to withstand the reforming decrees of
the present Parliament, (from which is issued the main of your late
alterations,) or condemn, what most men now judge to be amiss; without
condemnation of what you have been approving and abetting ever since your first
revolt from the Pope and Roman Church. For a clearer explication of my mind,
give me leave I pray, with your patience, to propose you some questions.

Sic volo; sic jubeo; sit pro ratione voluntas,

I so will have it; so command;
My will must for a reason stand.
When others failed, this was one of Luthers Laws, to set forward his
fanaticall Reformation against the Pope, and Catholic Church. Why may not the
Parliament, the Representative Body of a Kingdom, use it with more authority
then Luther, one single private man? If you allow the Parliament the use of
such a legislative Power; you must not condemn the seque^l^ that do naturally
flow out of it: you must (...) to all their Orders and Ordinances, how
irrational (...) they seem to private persons. If you condemn it in the
Parliament, (look well to it) through their sides, you condemn it a fortiori
in Luther, and so you crack the pate and credit of your grand Reformer, who so
insultingly used it, and whom you have been so long upholding for a Saint.

But to insist no longer on that extravagant principle. The specious pretense
of Reformation will so justify the present Parliaments actions (seem they
never so new or paradoxicall) that you shall hardly question them, without
subversion of the whole Fabric of your late Reformation. For example, tell me
why may not this present Parliament cashiere the Ordination of Ministers,
invented only in Edward the sixths days; as well as those of his time,
cashiered the manner of Ordination, they then found in being and vigor,
without any known beginning of it since the Apostles? Why may not this
Parliament degrade the now pretended Bishops, made only according to that new
Model, and only authorized by Parliament; why not divest them of their
Peerage, cast them out of their government, and level them to the rank of
ordinary men; as well as other Parliaments cast out the old Bishops,
consecrated after the manner of the whole Christian World, and who were never
pretended to have their spiritual authority from Parliament, nor to be
invested in their dignity by usurpation of any other man's right; cast them out
(I say) of their Seas of Government, their Seats in Parliament, out of their
means, and liberty, into poverty and prison? Why not trench on all men's
proprieties, and violently despoile them of their fortunes; as well as former
times for Reformation sake, impropriated to themselves the Church and
Abby-lands from their first true owners, casting the Monks Friars and vowed
Nuns a begging into the world? D. Carier observed (nor did he alone) that
Church and Abbey lands did seldom thrive with their new holders. If (I tell
you now) that the present ruin of a flourishing Kingdom is but the natural
offspring of the old injurious depopulations of the Churches and Abbeys, you
will hardly know how to refute me.

Why may not this present Parliament damn the Common Prayer Book first
invented in Edward the sixths days, and afterward confirmed by Act of
Parliament in Q. Elizabeth's Reign, since the birth of many now alive, (no long
prescription) as well as those of their times, damned the Mass, which was as
ancient in England, and generally throughout the world, as Christianity it
self? Why may not King Charles that now is, (whom I honor and love from my
heart, as it is the duty of all Subjects to do in whatsoever Country they
live) overthrow the Reformation, he swore at his Coronation to maintain, as
well as King Henry the eighth and Queen Elizabeth introduced their several
Reformations, contrary to the old Religion which they found in the Kingdom,
and swore at their Coronations, to preserve, with all her Rights, Liberties,
and Privileges? would King Charles be more perjured then they, or his perjury
worse then theirs? why may not this Parliament, yea particular Subjects, rebel
against their Sovereign for a better Reformation; as well as the Lutherans in
Germany rebelled against their Sovereign Charles the fifth, to bring in their
Reformation, and to abolish Popery; or (to omit others, all applauded justified
and abetted by those of the reformed Churches) as the Scots rebelled for the
same end, against Queen Mary, our Kings Grandmother, afterward beheaded in
pursuance of the same cause? you tell me I do C^me^in^m movere. I desist with
the proposal of one only question more; when the present Agitators of
Reformation have purged themselves of all the pretended Religion they had eight
or nine years ago, and raised their work to a higher pitch then they have
(...) thought on; will it not still be subject to a Babilonian confusion? Why
may not the children of the present Reformers cut the throats of their fathers,
and condemn them for ignorants or superstitious, and rescind all the Acts of
their predecessors, for a better Reformation, according to their new spirits,
as well as these present cut the throats of their forefathers, undoing at a
breath what bad been so long a doing in the Kingdom.

Damnosa quid non imminuit dies?
Aetas parentum pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores: mox datura
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
Joel chapter 1. Where Grandsires Erukes are; their issue may
Wild Locusts prove; next comes, in Joels list;
The Bruke; a plague of worse, and greater sway:
And what comes then? a blast, or burning mist.
Thus men, in tract of time, from bad do fall,
To what is worse; from worse, to worst of all.
To pretend that, what the present or past Reformers did, was all done for the
truth, for the glory of the Lord, for the light and liberty of the Gospel, to
abolish Idolatry and Superstition: to ^nthrone Antichrist, the whore of
Babylon, the Beast of the Apocalypse, and the like; is more then childish
simplicity; there is no Reformer so forgetful or stupid, but by his spirit
pretends Scripture, the glory of the Lord, the light and liberty of the
Gospel, the planting of saving truth, etc. and whosoever is opposite to his
spirit, is Antichrist, the Whore of Babylon, the Beast of the Apocalypse, and
therefore must be pulled down whosoever he be. Nor can it avail at any time,
to say, that hitherto the work of Reformation has been in fieri, or in doing;
(as some say, Qu. Elizabeth's broom did not sweep clean) but now is in facto
esse: Now it is come to a Non plus ultra, perfected beyond all addition or
alteration: this, I say, can never avail, nor stop the confusions; as long as
the reforming private spirits, for the pretenses already specified, (which will
never be at an end) or the Calvinian Doctrine of Predestination says, No.

Perhaps the present pretended Bishops, and the Party suffering with them, may
say, The old Reformations against the Catholics were good and necessary, but
the means used to begin and promote them, naught, and not to be imitated: And
that if there be any farther Reformation to be made, it must not be by
prosecution of the old unlawful means. Their suffering by the means used for
the present further Reformation, makes them condemn the old. This comes now
too late: they should have condemned them long ago, before their testimony
became invalidated by their private interest. Certainly Luther and the first
late Reformers never acknowledged the means they used, to be naught or
unlawful. And why should we think the present or future Reformer will ever
hold the means necessary for his ends, unlawful? Endless then is the
confusion of Church and State in England to be; no end of sticklings and
rebellions; no end of our wounds and bloodshed; no inheritance more intailed
upon our posterity, then violation of humane and divine Laws; nothing more
certain then eternal damnation of men's souls, as long as the first Reformers
principles stand in force, and their Reformations applauded.

Behold more then sufficient cause, not only, not to wonder at the late
conversion of diverse learned Scholars to the Roman Faith; but to admire that
more do not follow their examples. Behold more then sufficient cause, for those
that pretend to any fear of God, or care of their own souls, by regard to
Religion, or manners, to the spiritual or politic weal, utterly to
anathematize all Reformation in Faith, with the damnable principles of the late
Reformers, the sources of all the evils our Kingdom now groans under.
Consequently behold more then sufficient cause, for all to rank themselves into
the number of Catholics, who have now the same unchanged Religion they had
before this present Parliament; and then had the same they had in the reign of
K. James, ^u. Elizabeth, Qu. Mary, K. Edward 6. and Henry the 8. in whose days
the Reformation was commenced in Germany, and through too general a looseness
in manners, and, desire of sensual liberty, began to creep into England, as
all Histories can evidence unto you. Nor can any desire a more pregnant
testimony of our being now, and in former days of the same Faith, without
variation of one tittle; then our reformed Adversaries are ready to afford us,
who have for the times past, and still do persecute us, not as new Sactaries
with old Laws, but with new Statutes for nonconformity to their new
Reformation, and for our constancy to the profession of our forefathers: from
which had we stincht but the breadth of a nail, and taken upon us some new
denomination, we had been as hard to be found out as other Sectaries, and as
free from penalties as they: which forefathers of ours, living (before Luthers
days) in communion with the Catholics of France, Spain, Italic, and all the
Christian world, as we do now, did deliver faithfully (it stood upon their
salvation so to do) unto their children (those of the rest of the Christian
World did the like unto their children) that Depositum of Christianity, which
they had received from their predecessors, and they from theirs, by a continued
successive line of Tradition from the Apostles, and Christ; no reforming enemy
being able to show, when the Catholic Faith now professed by us, and
persecuted in us, began in the world, nor when the successive Tradition we and
all Catholics pretend unto, was intercepted; an infallible argument of our
persecuted Religions being from the Apostles and Christ. More then sufficient
cause, I say, for all to return to the Catholic Church, settled by Christ the
divine Architect, upon a rock never to be prevailed against by humane or
Devils powers, never subject to fall from her self in points of faith, nor
consequently to be reformed in them, from which Church your first Reformers
fell, Ex nobis exeuntes (one of the marks by which we are to discern Heretics,
as the Apostles teach us in their Acts, chap. 15. ver. 24.) going out from
among us, to gain sensual liberty to themselves, to be revenged on their
superiors, or for private by-ends: troubling the world with words, subverting
men's souls, without commission or mandate from any superior for their facts,
or pretended Reformations.

And finally, cause enough, for the world to reflect how ill advised they were
in times past, and what an ill president they showed posterity, in their former
greedy acceptance of new reforming spirits, so prejudicial to saving truth, to
orderly government in Church and State, and to particular men's properties. And
withal, to take warning for the future, not to remit the work of Reformation,
even in things subject thereunto; as Ceremonies, humane practices, manners, and
the like, to every giddy pretending spirit, (if you do so, you shall certainly
have more holes made then mended) but to such as are lawfully ordered and
commissioned for it by the visible Church, the pillar and ground of truth, that
all things be done according to her prescript, honest and secundum ordinem, 1
Cor. 14. 40.

But fearing, lest I should make this Prefatory Discourse like the gates of the
City Myndus, or like a great portall to a little house, I Will first present you
with the names of some late Converts, and then deteine you no longer from my
promised re-impression of Doctor Cariers learned Letter to King James, which is
here rendered verbatim according to the Original, excepting only the addition
of some few marginall Notes; I desire you to read it with attention, reflecting
from those, to these times, and not permit your mind to be so prejudicate, as
to give censure, before you have well pondered the matter, the scope of which
(mutato tempore) is the same with this, which comes from one, who unfeignedly
would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of, and embrace the truth.

N. STRANGE.
From Paris 1. November. 1648. stylo novo.
PSALM. 2. Et nunc Reges intelligite: erudimini qui judicatis terram. Attendite
disciplinam, ne -- pereatis.


The names of some who have lately been Ministers, or University men in England
and Scotland, and are now converted to the Catholic Faith.
Tho. Vane, Doctor of Divinity of Christ's College Cambridge, lately Chaplain
Extraordinary to His Majesty, and Parson of Crayford in Kent.

Hugh Paulin de Cressy, of Cambridge, lately Prebend of Windsore in England,
and Deane of Laghlin in Ireland, now entered into the Religious Order of S.
Benedict at Doway.

Hen. Ireson of All-Soules Oxford, Doctor of the Civil Law.

N. Read of New College Oxford, Doctor of the Civil Law.

Mr. Rich. Nicholls Bachelor of Divinity, of Peter-house Cambridge.

Mr. Rich. Crashaw, Master of Arts of Peter-house Cambridge, now Secretary to a
Cardinal in Rome, well known in England for his excellent and ingenious Poems.

Mr. William Rowlands Minister of S. Margarets Westminster, Master of Arts of
Exeter College Oxford.

Mr. Tho. Normington, Master of Arts of Pembroke Hall Cambridge, now in Italy,
a very able man in diverse Sciences.

Mr. Joyner Bachelor of Arts, and Fellow of S. Mary Magdelens College Oxford.

Mr. Blakiston Bachelor of Arts of Cambridge, who died last year in the
English College at Rome.

Mr. Edward Barker of Caius College Cambridge, Bachelor of Arts.

Mr. Eaton of Cambridge, now Priest in the English College at Rome.

Mr. Peter Glu, Minister, of Ballioll College in Oxford, now Priest.

Mr. Jackson Minister.

Mr. Cooper. Minister.

Mr. Daniel Minister, now entered into a Religious Order.

Of Scots.
Mr. John Chrighton, a famous man in his Country, late Preacher of Parson in
Scotland, afterward eminent in Languedos, and lastly Chaplain to the Marquess
of Ormond.

Mr. Andrew Youngston late Regent of Aberdein, now in a College in Spain.

Mr. William Simple late Regent in Glascow now also in Spain.

Mr. Hugh Rosse late Regent in Aberdein, now also in Spain.

Mr. Tho. Johnston, etc.

Besides these, there are diverse both learned and unlearned, lately entered into
Communion with the Church of Rome, whose names you may more easily learn, then
I discreetly publish. Nor do I doubt but one more commerced with England
Scotland and Ireland, with other parts of France, and with the promises of the
low Countries might easily furnish you with a larger Catalogue of Convertites,
of as good fame for their learning, and good parts in your Universities, and in
their respective countries, as these I have been bold to name: their
understanding being now better disposed to discern and reflect upon their
former errors, by the palpable confusion and unconsciable effects they saw
e-every where sprouted and sprouting out of the late Reformation begun by
Luther.

Errata in the Preface.
PAge 6. line 13. read pretense of. p. 12. l. 6. r. the bread. and l. ult. r.
of a little.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 28. read title. p. 7. l. 13. dele one at. p. 11. l. 15. dele in.
p. 21. l. 24. r. swinge over. p. 23. l. 13. r. in these. p. 39. l. ult. r.
reasonable.

Other less material faults, with some false pointings, the discerning Reader
will easily discover and correct.

Most Excellent, and renowned Sovereign,
IT is not unknown to all that know me in England, that for these many years I
have had my health very ill: And therefore having from time to time used all the
means and medicines that England could afford; last of all by the advice of my
Physicians, I have made it my humble suit unto your Majesty, that I might
travel unto the Spa for the use of those waters; purposing with my self, that
if I could be well, I would go from thence to Heydelberg, and spend this winter
there. But when I was gone from the Spa to Aquisgrane, and so to Colein, I
found my self rather worse, then better then I was before: And therefore I
resolved with my self, that it was high time for me to settle my thoughts upon
another world. And seeing I was out of hope to enjoy the health of my body, at
the last to look to the health of my soul, from whence both Art and experience
teach me, that all my bodily infirmities have their beginning: For if I could
by any study have proved Catholic Religion to be false, or by any means have
professed it to be true in England, I doubt not but the contentment of my soul
would have much helped the health of my body. But the more I studied the
Scriptures and most ancient Fathers to confute it, the more I was compelled to
see the truth thereof. And the more I labored to reconcile the Religion of
England thereunto, the more I was disliked, suspected and condemned as a common
enemy. And if I would have been either ignorant or silent, I might perhaps with
the pleasures and commodities of my preferments, have in time cast off the care
of Religion. But seeing my study forced me to know, and my place compelled me
to preach, I had no way to avoid my grief, nor any means to endure it. I have
therefore apprehended the opportunity of my License to travel, that I may
withdraw my self for a while from the sight and offense of those in England,
who hate Catholic Religion, and freely and fully enjoy the presence of our B.
Savior, in the Unity of his Catholic Church; wherein I will never forget at
the daily Oblation of his most B. Body and Blood, to lift up my heart unto him,
and to pray for the admission of your Majesty thereunto. And in the mean time,
I have thought it my duty to write this short Treatise with my own hand;
wherein, before I publish my self to the world, I desire to show to your
Majesty these two things. 1. The means of my conversion unto Catholic
Religion. 2. The hopes I have to do your Majesty no ill service therein. I
humbly crave your Majesty's pardon, and will rest ever,

Your Majesty's faithful, and truly devoted Servant, B. Carier.
Liege December. 12. 1613.
CHAP. I. The means of my Conversion to the Catholic Religion.
I Must confess, to Gods honor, and my own shame, that if it had been in my
power to choose, I would never have been a Catholic. I was born and brought up
in Schism, and was taught to abhor a Papist as much as any Puritan in England
does. I had ever a great desire to justify the Religion of the State, and had
great hope to advance my self thereby. Neither was my hope ever so great, as by
your Majesty's favor it was at the very instant of my resolution for Catholic
Religion, and the preferment I had, together with the honor of your Majesty's
service, was greater by much; then without your Majesty's favor, I look for in
this world. But though I was as ambitious of your Majesty's favor, and as
desirous of the honors and pleasures of my Country, as any man that is
therein, yet seeing that I was not like any long while to enjoy them, and if I
should for my private commodity speak, or write, or do any thing against the
honor of Christ his Church, and against the evidence of my own conscience, I
must shortly appear before the same Christ, in the presence of the same his
Church, to give an account thereof. Therefore I neither durst any further pursue
my own desire of honor, nor hazard my soul any farther in the justification
of that Religion, which I saw was impossible to be justified by any such
reason, as at the day of Judgment would go for payment; and that it may
appear that I have not respected any thing so much in this world, as my duty
to your Majesty, and my love to my friends and Country, I humbly beseech your
Majesty to give me leave, as briefly as I can, to recount unto you the whole
course of my studies, and endeavors in this kind, even from the beginning of
my life until this present.

2. I was born in the Year, 1566. being the son of Ant. Carier, a learned and
devout man, who although he were a Protestant, and a Preacher, yet he did so
season me with the Principles of Piety and Devotion, as I could not choose but
ever since be very zealous in matters of Religion. Of him I learned that all
false Religions in the world, were but Policies invented of men, for the
temporal service of Princes and States; and therefore that they were diverse,
and always changeable, according to the diverse reasons and occasions of State.
But true Christian Religion was a truth revealed of God, for the eternal
salvation of souls, and therefore was like to God, always one and the same:
So that all the Princes and States in the world never have been, nor shall be
able to overthrow that Religion. This to me seemed an excellent ground, for the
finding out of that Religion, wherein a man might find rest for his soul,
which cannot be satisfied with any thing but eternal truth.

3. My next care then was, after I came to years of discretion, by all the best
means I could, to inform my self, whether the Religion of England were
indeed the very same, which being prefigured and prophesied in the Old
Testament, was perfected by our B. Savior, and delivered to his Apostles and
Disciples to continue, by perpetual succession in his visible Church, until
his coming again: or whether it were a new one, for private purposes of
Statesmen invented, and by humane Laws established. Of this I could not choose
but make some doubt, because I heard men talk much in those days of the change
of Religion which was then lately made in the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign.

4. I was sorry to hear of change, and of a new Religion, seeing me thought in
reason, if true Religion were eternal, then new Religion could not be true.
But yet I hoped that the Religion of England was not a change, or new Religion,
but a restitution of the old; and that the change was in the Church of Rome,
which in process of time might perhaps grow to be superstitious, and
idolatrous; and therefore that England had done well to leave the Church of
Rome, and to reform it self; and for this purpose I did at my leisure and best
opportunity, as I came to more judgment, read over the Chronicles of England,
and observed all the alterations of Religion that I could find therein: But
when I found there, that the present Religion of England was a plain What then
is it now!
change, and change upon change, and that there was no cause at all of the
first, but only that K. Henry 8. was desirous to change his old Bedfellow,
that he might leave some heirs male behind him (for belike he feared that
Females would not be able to withstand the tile of Scotland,) and that the
change was continued and increased by the posterity of his later wives, I could
not choose but suspect something; but yet the love of the world, and hope of
preferment would not suffer me to believe, but that all was well, and as it
ought to be.

5. Thus I satisfied my self at School, and studied the Arts and Philosophy,
and other humane learning, until being Master of Arts, and Fellow of Corpus
Christi College in Cambridge, I was at the last, by the Statutes of that
House, called to the study of Divinity, and bound to take upon me the order of
Priesthood: then I thought it my duty, for the better satisfaction of my own
soul, and the saving of other men's, to look as far into the matter as
possible I could, that I might find out the truth. And having the opportunity of
a very good Library in that College, I resolved with my self to study hard,
and setting aside all respect of men then alive, or of Writers that had moved
or maintained controversies (farther then to understand the question which was
betwixt them) I fell to my prayers, and be took my self wholly to the reading
of the Church History, and of the Ancient Fathers, which had no interest in
either side; and especially I made choice of S. Augustine, because I hoped to
find most comfort in him for the confirming of our Religion, and the confuting
of the Church of Rome.

6. In this sort I spent my time continually for many years, and noted down
whatsoever I could gather, or rather snatch either from the Scriptures or the
Fathers to serve my turn. But when, after all my pains and desire to serve my
self, of Antiquity, I found the Doctrine of the Church of Rome to be every
where confirmed, and by most profound demonstrations out of holy Scripture,
made most agreeable to the truth of Christ's Gospel, and most conformable to all
Christians souls, and saw the current opinions of our great Preachers to be
every where confuted, either in plain terms, or by most unanswerable
consequence, although my understanding was thereby greatly edified, (for which
I had great cause to render immortal thanks to our Blessed Savior, who by
these means had vouchsafed to show himself unto me) yet my heart was much
grieved, that I must be feign either not preach at all, or else to cross and
vary from the Doctrine, which I saw was commonly received.

7. Being thus perplexed with my self what course I were best to take, I
reflected back again upon the Church of England, and because most of those
Preachers, who drew the people after them in those days were Puritans, and had
grounded their Divinity upon Calvin's Institutions, I thought peradventure that
they, having gotten the multitude on their side, might wrong the Church of
England in her Doctrine, as well as they desired to do in her Discipline,
which indeed upon due search I found to be most true; For I found the
Common Prayer Book and the Catechismes therein contained, to hold no point of
Doctrine expressly contrary to Antiquity, but only that it was very defective,
and contained not enough. And that for the Doctrine of Predestination,
Sacraments, Grace, Free Will, Sin, etc. the new Catechismes and Sermons of
those Preachers, did run wholly against the Common Prayer Book and Catechismes
therein, and did make as little account of the Doctrine established by Law, as
they did of the Discipline; but in the one they found opposition by those that
had private Interest, in the other they laid what they list, because no man
thought himself hurt.

8. This truly was a great increase of my grief, for knowing diverse of those
Preachers to be very honest men, and such as I did love with all my heart, I
was exceeding loath to descent from them in private, much more loath to oppose
them in public. And yet seeing I must needs preach, I was loathest of all to
oppugn my own conscience together with the faith wherein I was baptized, and
the souls of those to whom I preached. Nevertheless having gotten this ground
to work upon, I began to comfort my self with hope to prove, that the
Religion established by Law in England, was the same, at the least in part,
which now was and ever had been held in the Catholic Church, the defects
whereof might be supplied whenever it should please God to move your Majesty
thereunto, without abrogating of that, which was already by Law established,
which I still pray for, and am not altogether out of hope to see; and therefore
I thought it my duty, as far as I durst, rather by charitable constructions to
reconcile things that seemed different, that so our souls might for ever be
saved in unity, then by malicious calumniations to maintain quarrels, that so
men's turns might for a time be served in dissension.

9. In this course although I did never proceed any further then Law would give
me leave, yet I always found the Puritanes and Calvinists, and all the
Creatures of Schism, to be my utter enemies, who were also like the Sons of
Zerviah, too strong for David himself, but I well perceived that all temperate
and understanding men, who had no Interest in the Schism, were glad to hear
the truth honestly and plainly preached unto them. And my hope was, that by
patience and continuance, I should in the end unmaske Hypocrisy, and gain
credit to the comfortable Doctrine of Antiquity, even amongst those also, who
out of misinformation and prejudice did as yet most dislike it. And considering
with my self, that your Right to the Crown came only from Catholics, and was
ancienter then the Schism, which would very feign have utterly extinguished
it; and that both your disposition by nature, your amity with Catholic
Princes, your Speeches, and your Proclamations did at the beginning all tend to
peace and unity, I hoped that this endeavor of mine, to enforce Catholic
Religion, at the least as far as the Common*Prayer Book and Catechism would
give me leave, should be well accepted of your Majesty, and be as an
Introduction unto farther peace and unity with the Church of Rome.

10. But when after my long hope, I at at the last did plainly perceive, that
God for our sins had suffered the Devil, the Author of dissension, so far to
prevail, as partly by the furious practice of some desperate Catholics, and
partly by the fiery suggestions of all violent Puritans, he had quite diverted
that peaceable and temperate course, which was hoped for, and that I must now
either alter my judgment, which was impossible, or preach against my
conscience, which was untolerable: Lord, what anxiety and distraction of soul
did I suffer day and night, what strife betwixt my judgment, which was wholly
for the peace and unity of the Church, and my affection, which was wholly to
enjoy the favor of your Majesty, and the love of my Friends and Country. This
grief of soul growing now desperate, did still more and more increase the
infirmities of my body, and yet I was so loath to become a professed Catholic
with the displeasure of your Majesty, and of all my honorable and loving
friends, as I rather desired to silence my judgment, with the profits and
pleasures of the world, which was before me, then to satisfy it with
reconciling my self unto the Catholic Church; But it was Gods will, that ever
(as I was about to forget the care of Religion, and to settle my self to the
world among my neighbors) I met with such humors, as I saw by their violence
against Catholics and Catholic Religion, were like to waken my soul by
torture, rather then bring it asleep by temper. And therefore I was driven to
recoile to God, and to his Church, that I might find rest unto my soul.

11. And yet because I had heard often, that the practice of the Church of
Rome, was contrary to her Doctrine, I thought good to make one trial more
before I resolved; and therefore having the advice of diverse learned
Physicians to go to the Spa for the health of my body, I thought good to make
a virtue of necessity, and to get leave to go the rather for the satisfaction
of my soul, hoping to find some greater offense in the Service of the Church
of Rome, then I had done in her Books, that so I might return better
contented to persecute and abhor the Catholics at home, after I should find
them so wicked and Idolatrous abroad, as they were in every Pulpit in England
affirmed to be. For this purpose before I would frequent their Churches, I
talked with such learned men as I could meet withal, and did of purpose
dispute against them, and with all the wit and learning I had, I did both
justify the Doctrine of England, established by Law, and object the
Superstition and Idolatry which I thought they might commit, either with the
Images in the Church, or with the Sacrament of the Altar.

12. Their common answer was, that which by experience I now find to be true,
viz. that they do abhor all Idolatry and Superstition, and do diligently
admonish the people to take heed thereof. And that they use Images for no other
purpose, but only for a devout memory and representation of the Church
Triumphant, which is most sit to be made in the time and place of prayer, where
after a more special manner, we should with all reverence have our
conversation amongst the Saints in Heaven.

And for the B. Sacrament, they do not worship the Accidents, which they see,
but the substance which they believe; and surely if Christ be there truly and
really present (as your Majesty seems to grant he is) he is as much to be
worshipped, as if we saw him with our bodily eyes; Neither is there any more
Idolatry in the one, then in the other. If our B. Savior himself should
visibly appear in person, as he was upon the earth, Jews and Infidells would
hold it for Idolatry to worship him, and would crucify him again; and so would
all Heretics also, who refuse to worship him in the Sacrament, where he is
really present.

13. After diverse other objections which I made, not so much because I was not,
as because I desired not to be satisfied, I came to the Popes supposed pride
and tyranny over Kings and Princes, and told them of the most horrible Treason
intended and practiced by Catholics against your Majesty, which has not yet
been judicially condemned by the Church of Rome. They all seemed to abhor the
fact, as much as the best Subjects in the world, and much more to favor, and
defend the authority of their Kings and Witness their loyalty to the King in
these late wars.
Princes, then Heretics do. And they said, that although your Majesty were out
of the Church, yet they doubted not, but if complaint were made in a Judicial
proceeding, that fact should be judicially condemned. In the mean time it was
sufficient that all Catholic Writers did condemn it, and that the Pope by his
Breve had condemned it, exhorting the Cathelikes of England to all Christian
patience and obedience. As for any other authority or superiority of the Pope,
then such as is spiritual and necessary, for the unity of the Church, I have
met with none that do stand upon it.

14. So that, whereas my hope was, that by finding out the corruptions of the
Church of Rome, I should grow farther in love with the Church of England, and
joyfully return home: and by inveighing against the Papists, both enjoy my
present preferments, and obtain more and more; I saw the matter was like to
fall out clean contrary. It is true indeed that there are many corruptions in
all States; God has no wheat-field in this world, wherein the Devil has not
tares growing; and there are no tares more rank then those that grow among the
wheat; For, optimi corruption pessima; and where grace abounds, if it be
contemned, there sin abounds much more. But seeing both my reading and
experience has now taught me, that the truth of Christian Religion now taught
and practiced at this day in the Church of Rome, and all the obedient Members
thereof, is the very same in substance, which was prefigured and prophesied
from the beginning of the world, perfected by Christ himself, delivered to his
Apostles, and by them and their Successors perpetually and universally in one
uniformity practiced until this day, without any substantial alteration. And
that the new Religion of England, wherein it does differ, has no ground, but
either the pleasure of the Prince, and Parliament, or the common cry and voice
of the People, nor no constancy or agreement with it self, what should I now
do? It is not in my power not to know that which I do know, nor to doubt of
that which I have spent so much time, and taken so much pains, and bestowed so
much cost, and made so many trialls to find. And yet I know, if I should yield
to be reconciled to the Church, I should be for this world in all likelihood,
utterly undone; and that which grieved me more, I should be rejected of your
Majesty, my most redoubted Lord and Master, and despised by all my dear
friends and lovers in England.

15. These were in my thoughts at the Spa, which did so vex and afflict my
soul, as that the waters could do my body no good at all, but rather much
hurt. Nevertheless I avoided the company of Catholics, abstained from the
Church, and did both dispute and write against the Church of Rome, as occasion
was offered. I still hoped that time would give me better counsel, and
therefore resolved to go from the Spa to Heidelberg to do my duty there. In the
mean time I thought with my self, it may be God has moved His Majesty's heart
to think of peace and reconciliation. I know his disposition was so in the
beginning; and I remember M. Causabon told me when I brought him out of France,
that his Errand was nothing else, but to mediate peace betwixt the Church of
Rome, and the Church of England. Therefore I thought, before I would submit my
self to the Church of Rome, I would write to M. Causabon such a Letter as he
might show unto your Mdjesty, containing such conditions as (I thought) might
satisfy your Majesty if they were performed by the Church of Rome. The copy
of which Letter is too long here to set down. But when Mr. Causabon answered
me that he knew your Majesty was resolved to have no society with the Church of
Rome upon any condition whatsoever, and that it would be my undoing, if those
my Letters should come to your Majesty's hands, or of those that bare the sway,
I began to despair of my return into England, unless I would overthrow both
the health of my body and the quiet of my mind, and either utterly damn my own
soul, or greatly endanger not only my living and credit, but my life it self
also, by reason of your Majesty's displeasure, and the severity of the Statutes
made, and in force against Catholics, and Catholic Religion.

16. There is a Statute in England, made by King Henry, the 8. to make him
supreme head of the Church in spiritual and Ecclesiastical Causes, which
Statute injoynes all the Subjects of England, on pain of death, to believe and
to swear they do believe that it is true. And yet all the world knows, if
King Henry the 8. could have gotten the Pope to divorce Q. Katherine, that he
might marry Anne Boleigne, that Statute had never been made by him, and if that
Title had not enabled the King to pull down Abbeyes and Religious Houses, and
give them to Laymen, the Lords and Commons of that time would never have
suffered such a Statute to be made. This Statute was continued by Q. Elizabeth,
to serve her own turn, and it is confirmed by your Majesty to satisfy other
men. And yet your Majesty yields the Church of Rome to be the Mother Church,
and the Bishop of Rome to be the chief Bishop or Primate of all the Western
Churches, which I do also verily believe, and therefore I do verily think he
has, or ought to have some spiritual Jurisdiction in England. And although in
my younger days, the fashion of the world made me swear, as other men did (for
which I pray God forgive me) yet I ever doubted, and am now resolved that no
Christian man can take that.i. Of Supremacy.
Oath with a safe conscience, neither will I ever take it, to gain the
greatest preferment in the world.

17. There is another Statute in England, made by Q. Elizabeth, and confirmed
by your Majesty, which makes it death for any Englishman to be in England,
being made a Priest by authority derived, or pretended to be derived from the
Bishop of Rome; I cannot believe that I am a Priest at all, unless I be made
by authority derived from Gregory the great, from whence all the Bishops in
England have their being, if they have any being at all.

18. There is another Statute in like manner made and confirmed, that it is
death to be reconciled by a Catholic Priest to the Church of Rome; I am
persuaded that the Church of Rome is our Mother Church, and that no man in
England can be saved, that continues wilfully out of the visible unity of that
Church, and therefore I cannot choose, but persuade the people to be reconciled
thereunto, if possibly they can.

19. There is another Statute in like manner, made and confirmed, that it is
death to exhort the people of England to Catholic Roman Religion, I am
persuaded that the Religion prescribed, and practiced by the Church of Rome is
the true Catholic Religion, which I will particularly justify; and make
plain from point to point, if God give time and opportunity, and therefore I
cannot choose but persuade the people thereunto.

It may be these are not all several Statutes, some of them may be members of
the same, (for I have not my books about me to search) but I am sure all of
them do make such felonies and treasons, as were the greatest virtues of the
Primitive Church, and such as I must needs confess my self, I cannot choose if
I live in England, but endeavor to be guilty of, and then it were easy to
find Puritanes enough to make a Jury against me, and there would not want a
Justice of Peace to give a sentence, and when they had done, that which is
worse then the persecution it self, they would all swear solemnly that Doctor
Carier was not put to death for Catholic Religion, but for Felony and Treason.
I have no hope of protection against the cruelty of those Laws, if your
Majesty be resolved upon no conditions whatsoever, to have any society at all,
or communion with the Church of Rome. And therefore whilst the case so stands,
I dare not return home again. But I cannot be altogether out of hope of
better news before I die, as long as I do believe that the Saints in heaven do
rejoice at the conversion of a sinner to Christ, and do know that your Majesty
by your birth, has so great an interest in the Saints of heaven, as you shall
never cease to have, until you cease to be the son of such a mother, as would
rejoice more then all the rest for your conversion. Wherefore I assure my self
that she with all the rest do pray that your Majesty before you die, may be
Militant in the Communion of that Church, wherein they are Triumphant.

And in this hope I am gone before to join my prayers with theirs in the unity
of the Catholic Church. And do humbly pray your Majesty to pardon me for doing
that which was not in my power to avoid; and to give me leave to live, where I
hope shortly to die, unless I may hope to do your Majesty service, and without
the prejudice of any honest man in England, to see some unity betwixt the
Church of England, and her mother the Church of Rome. And now having declared
the means of my conversion to Catholic Religion, I will briefly also show
unto you the hopes I have to do your Majesty no ill service therein.

CHAP. II. The hopes I have to do your Majesty no ill service in being
Catholic.
MY first hope that your Majesty will accept of that for the best service I can
do you, which does most further the glory of our Blessed Savior, and my own
salvation. Indeed there are Kingdoms in the world, where the chief care of
the Governor is, Non quam bonis, sed quam subditis regnent: such were the
heathen Kingdoms which S. Augustine describes (in his 2. de Civit. Dei, cap.
20.) In such Commonwealths the way to be good Subjects is not to be good men,
but to serve the times and the turns of them that bear the sway whatsoever
they are. But if it be true, (as some holy and learned Fathers teach) that in a
well-ordered Government there is, cadem faelicitas unius hominis, ac totius
civitaiis, then I am sure that it must follow, that in a Commonwealth truly
Christian there is, eadem virtus boni viri, ac boni Civis. And therefore being
a Minister and Preacher of England, if I will rather serve your Majesty then my
self, and rather procure the good of your Kingdom then my own preferment, I am
bound in duty to respect and seek for those things above all other, that may
advance the honor of God, and the salvation of my own soul, and the souls of
those who do any way belong to my charge; and being sufficiently resolved, that
nothing can more advance the honor of our Savior and the common salvation,
then to be in the unity of his Church, I have done you the best service I could
at home, by preaching peace and reconciliation, and being not able for the
malice of the times, to stand any longer in the breach at home, I think it
safest in this last cast to look to mine own game, and by my daily Prayers and
dying, to do your Majesty the same service in the unity of the Church, which
by my daily preaching and living, I did endeavor to do in the midst of the
Schism.

2. And though it be sufficient for a man of my profession, to respect only
matters of heaven, and of another world, yet because this world was made for
that other, I have not regarded my own estate, that I might respect your
Majesty's therein, and after long and serious meditation, which Religion might
most honor your Majesty even in this world, I have conceived undoubted hope
that there is no other Religion that can procure true honor and security to
your Majesty, and your Posterity in this world, but the true Catholic Roman
Religion, which is the very same, whereby all your glorious Predecessors have
been advanced and protected on earth, and are everlastingly blessed in heaven.

3. The first reason of my hope is, the promise of God himself to bless and
honor those, that bless his Church and honor him, and to No question but
this will come home in the end to the Church-Prophaners of our times.
curse and confound those that curse his Church, and dishonor him, which he
has made good in all ages. There was never any Man, or City, or State, or
Empire so preserved and advanced, as they that have preserved the unity and
advanced the prosperity of the Church of Christ; nor ever any been made more
miserable and inglorious, then they that have dishonored Christ, and made
havoc of his Church by Schism and Heresy.

4. If I had leisure and books, it were easy for me to enlarge this point
with a long inumeration of particulars. But I think it needless, because I
cannot call to mind any example to the contrary, except it be the State of Q.
Elizabeth, or some one or two other, lately fallen from the unity of the
Catholic Church, or the State of the great Turk, that does still persecute the
Church of Christ, and yet continues in great glory in this world. But when I
consider of Q. Elizabeth, I find in her many singularities; she was a woman,
and a Maiden Queen, which gave her many advantages of admiration, she was the
last of her race, and needed not care what became of the world after her own
days were ended. She came upon the Remainders of Devotion and Catholic
Religion, which like a Bowl in his course, or an Arrow in his flight, would go
on for a while by the force of the first mover, and she had a practice of
maintaining wars among her neighbors (which became a woman well) that she
might be quiet at home. And whatsoever prosperity or honor there was in her
days, or is yet remaining in England, I cannot but ascribe to the Church of
Rome, and to Catholic Religion, which was for many hundred years together,
the first mover of that Government, and is still in every settled Kingdom, and
has yet left the steps, and shadow thereof behind it, which in all likelihood
cannot continue many years without a new supply from the fountain.

5. As for the honor and greatness of the Turk, and other Infidells, as it
reaches no farther then this life, so it has no beginning from above this
world; and if we In Luc. 4. and alibi.
may believe S. Ambrose, those honors are conferred rather by Gods permission,
then by his donation, being indeed ordained, and ordered by his providence, but
for the sins of the people, conferred by the Prince that rules in the air. It
is true, the Turkish Empire has now continued a long time, but they have other
principles of State to stand upon. The continual Guard of 100000. Soldiers,
whereof most of them know no parents, but the Emperor. The Tenure of all his
Subjects, who hold all in capite ad voluntatem Domini, by the service of the
sword, their enjoined silence, and reverence in matters of Religion, and their
facility in admitting other Religions, as well as their own to the hope of
salvation, and to tolerate them, so that they be good Subjects.

These and such like are principles of great importance to increase an Empire,
and to maintain a Temporal State. But there is no State in Christendom that
may endure these principles, unless they mean to turn Turks also, which
although some be willing to do, yet they will neither hold in Capite, nor hold
their peace in Religion, nor suffer their King to have such a guard about him,
nor admit of Catholic Religion so much as the Turk does.

6. It is most true, which I gladly write, and am ready, with all the honor I
can of your Majesty, to speak, that I think there was never any Catholic King
in England, that did in his time more embrace and favor the true body of the
Church of England, then your Majesty does that shadow thereof, which is yet
left, and my firm hope is, that this your desire to honor our Blessed Savior
in the shadow of the Church of England, will move him to honor your Majesty so
much as not to suffer you to die out of the body of his true Catholic Church,
and in the mean time to let you understand that all honor that is intended to
him by Schism and Heresy does redound to his great dishonor, both in respect
of his Real, and of his Mystical Body.

7. For his Real Body it is not as the Ubiquitaries would have it every
where, as well without the Church as within, but only where himself would have
it, and has ordained that it should be, and that is only amongst his Apostles
and Disciples, and their Successors in the Catholic Church, to whom he
delivered his Sacraments, and promised to continue with them until the worlds
end; So that though Christ be present in that Schism, by the power of his
Deity, (for so he is present in hell also) yet by the grace of his humanity,
(by participation of which grace only there is hope of salvation) he is not
present there at all, except it be in corners and prisons, and places of
persecution. And therefore whatsoever honor is pretended to be done to Christ
in Schism and Heresy, is not done to him, but to his utter enemies.

8. And for his mystical Body, which is his Church and Kingdom, there can be
no greater di^honor done to Christ, then to maintain schism and dissension
therein. What would your Majesty think of any Subjects of yours, that should go
about to raise civil dissension or wars in your Kingdom, and of those that
should f^ster, and adhere unto such men? It is the fashion of all Rebels when
they are in Arms, to You know who have done so of late.
pretend the safety of the King, and the good of the Country; but pretend what
they will, you cannot account such men any better then Traitors. And shall we
believe that our B. Savior, the King of Kings, does sit in heaven, and either
not see the practices of those, that under color of serving him with
Reformation, do nothing else, but serve their own turns, and distract his
Church, that is his Kingdom on earth, with sedition? Or shall we think that he
will not in time revenge his wrong? Verily he sees it, and does regard it, and
will in time revenge it.

9. But I hope and pray, that he may not revenge it upon you, nor yours, but
rather that he will show, that your desire to honor him, is accepted of him,
and therefore will move you to honor your self, and your posterity, with
bestowing the same your favor upon his Church in the unity thereof, which you
do now bestow in the Schism, and that he will reward both you and yours for
the same, according to his promise, not only with everlasting glory in heaven,
but also with long continued temporal honor and security in this world. And
this is the first reason of my hope, grounded upon the promise of God.

The second Reason of my hope, that Catholic Religion may be a great means of
honor and security, to your Majesty's posterity, is taken from the
consideration of your neighbors, the Kings and Princes of Christendom; among
whom there is no State ancient, and truly honorable, but only those that are
Catholic. The reason whereof I take to be, because the Rules of Catholic
Religion are eternal, universal, and constant unto themselves, and withal so
consonant unto Majesty and greatness, as they have made and preserved the
Catholic Church most reverent and venerable throughout the world for these
1600. years, and those Temporal States that have been conformable thereunto,
have been always most honorable, and so are like to continue, until they
hearken unto Schism. And as for those that have rejected and opposed the Rules
of Catholic Religion, they have been driven in short time to degenerate, and
become either tyrannical or popular; your Majesty, I know does abhor Tyranny,
but if Schism and Heresy might have their full swing cover the Seas, the very
shadow and Relics of Majesty in England, should be utterly God grant this
prove not too true.
defaced and turned into Helvetian, or Belgian popularity: For, they that make
no conscience to profane the Majesty of God and his Saints, in the Church,
will, after they feel their strength, make no bones to violate the Majesty of
the King, and his Children in the Commonwealth.

10. I know well that the Puritanes of England, the Huguenots of France, and
the Gueses of Germany, together with the rest of the Calvinists of all sorts
are a great faction of Christendom, and they are glad to have the pretense of
so great a Majesty to be their chief, and of your posterity to be their hope:
but I cannot be persuaded that they ever will or can join together to advance
your Majesty, or your Children farther then they may make a present gain by
you. They are One may swear it.
not agreed of their own Religion, nor of the principles of Universal and
Eternal Truth, and how can they be constant in the rules of particular, and
transitory honor? where there is Nullum Principium ordinis, there can be Nullum
Principium honoris; such is their case, there is a voice of Confusion among
them, as well in matters of State as of Religion. Their power is great, but not
to edification, but destruction. They join together only against good order,
which they call the Common Enemy, and if they can destroy that, they will in
all likelihood turn their fury against themselves, and like Devils torment,
like Serpents devour one another. In the mean time if they can make their
Burgers, Princes, and turn old Kingdoms into new States, it is like enough
they will do it, but that they will ever agree together to make any one Prince,
King, or Emperor over them all, and yield due obedience unto him, further then
either their gain shall allure them, or his Sword shall compel them, that I
cannot persuade my self to believe. And therefore I cannot hope that your
Majesty or your posterity can expect the like honor or security from them,
which you might do from Catholic Princes, if you were joined firmly to them in
the unity of Religion.

12. The third reason of my hope, that Catholic Religion should be most
available for the honor and security of your Majesty, and your children, is
taken from the consideration of your Subjects, which can be kept in obedience
to God, and to their King by no other Religion, and least of all by the
Calvinists; for if their principles be received once, and well drunk in, and
digested by your Subjects, they will openly maintain, that God has as well
predestined men to be Is not this now openly professed, by those who would
have the King called to an account? etc.
Traitors, as to be Kings, and he has as well predestined men to be Thieves,
as to be Judges, and he has as well predestined that men should sin, as that
Christ should die for sin; which kind of disputations, I know by my experience
in the Country, are ordinary, among your Country Calvinists, that take
themselves to be learned in the Scriptures, especially when they are met in the
Alehouse, and have found a weaker brother, whom they think sit to be instructed
in the profound mysteries. And howsoever they be not yet all so impudent, as to
hold these conclusions in plain terms, yet it is certain they all hold these
principles of Doctrine, from whence working heads of greater liberty, do at
their pleasures draw these consequences, in their lives, and practices. And is
It now appears it is not.
this a Religion sit to keep Subjects in obedience to their Sovereigns?

13. Here I know the great Masters of Schism, will never leave objecting the
horrible treason of certain Catholics against your Majesty, which if the
Devil had not wrought to their hands, they had had little to say against
Catholic Religion before this day. But I humbly entreat that the fact of of
some few men, may not be for ever objected against the truth of a general
Rule. It is not the question which Religion will make all your Subjects true,
but which Religion is most like to make all true. It is certain there be
Traitors against God and man, of all Religions, and Catholics as they are the
best Subjects, so when they fall to it, they are the worst Traitors. But if we
will look upon examples, or consider of reasons, the Catholic is the only
Religion, which as it does duly subordinate Kings unto God, so does it
effectually bind Subjects to perform all lawful obedience to their Kings, I
will not repeat examples, because the ancient are tedious, and the present are
odious. But if there can be but one King named in all the world, that did ever
receive honor from Calvinists, farther then to be their Champion or Protector,
until their turn were served, then I may be content to believe that your
Majesty, and your Family shall receive perpetuity from them. But if your
Calvinists do profess to honor you, and all other Calvinists do overthrow
their Kings and Princes wheresoever they can prevail, I can hardly believe
that yours do It appears so now.
mean any more good earnest then the rest. There is certainly some other matter
that they are content for a time to honor your Majesty, it cannot be their
Religion that ties them to it, for it does not tie them to it self. There is
no principle of any Religion, nor any Article of any Faith, which a Calvinist
will not call in question and either altogether deny, or expound after his own
fancy, and if he be restrained, he cries out by and by, that he cannot have the
liberty of his Conscience. And what bond of obedience can there be in such
Religion?

14. It is commonly objected by Statesmen, that it is no matter what opinions
men hold in matters of Religion, so that they be kept in awe by Justice, and by
the Sword: Indeed for this world it were no matter at all for Religion, if it
were possible without it to do Justice, and to keep men in awe by the Sword. In
Military estates whilst the Sword is in the hand, there is the less need of
Religion, and yet the greatest and most Martial States that ever were, have
been willing to use the conscience and reverence of some Religion or other, to
prepare the Subjects to obedience. But in a peaceable Government, such as all
Christian Kingdoms do profess to be, if the reins of Religion be let loose,
the Sword commonly is too weak, and comes too late, and will be like enough to
give the day to the Rebel: and seeing the last and strongest bond of Justice
is an Oath which is a principal act of Religion, and were but a mockery, if it
were not for the punishment of hell, and the reward of heaven, it is unpossible
to execute Justice without the help of Religion. And therefore the neglect and
contempt of Religion has ever been, and ever shall be the forerunner of
destruction in all settled States whatsoever.

15. The Devil that intends the destruction as well of bodies, as of souls,
and of whole States, as of particular men, does not commonly begin with men's
bodies, and with matters of State, but being himself a spirit, and the Father
of lies, he does first insinuate himself into men's understandings by false
principles of Religion, whereunto he has the more easy entrance, because he
has persuaded their Governors to believe that it is no great matter what
opinions men hold in matters of Religion, so that they look well into their
actions, and keep them in obedience, which persuasion is all one, as if the
Enemy that besieges a City, should persuade the Garrison, that they might
surrender the Castle unto him well enough, and keep the base Town, and all the
people of the Town to themselves. But when the devil has prevailed so far,
as by false opinions in matters of the first truth, that is of Religion, to get
the understanding in possession, which is the Castle as it were, and
watchtower both of the soul, and body, and state, and all, he will
peradventure dissemble his purpose for a while, and by slandering of the truth
and pleasing them with the trifles of the world, (which by Gods permission are
in his power) make men believe, that the world is amended; for, Nemo repent
sit pessimus, but shortly after when he sees his time, he will out of his
Arsenal of false apprehensions in understanding, send forth such distorted
Engines of life and action, as will easily subdue both body, and goods, and
states, and all, to his devotion,

16. The Calvinisticall Preacher, when he has gotten his honest, abused, and
misguided flock about him, will cry out against me for this Popish collection,
and call God and them to witness, that he does daily in his Sermons exhort men
to good works, and to obedience unto the Kings Majesty; and am not I and my
brethren (says he) and our flock, as honest, and as civil men, as any Papist
of them all? For my own part I will not accuse any Calvinist though I could,
neither can I excuse all Papists, though I would.

Iliacos intra muros peccator and extra.

But I must never forget that most true and wise observation which the noble
and learned Sir Francis Bacon makes in one of his first Essaies, viz. That all
Schismatics utterly failing in the Precepts of the first Table concerning the
Religion and worship of God, have necessity in policy to make a good show of
the second Table, by their civil and demure conversation toward men. For
otherwise they should at the first appear, as afterward they show themselves,
to be altogether out of their ten Commandments; and so men would be as much
ashamed to follow them at the first, as they are at the last. It is a sure rule
of Policy, that in every mutation of State, the Authors of the Change, will
for a while show themselves, or pretend to be honest, rather of spite, then of
conscience, that they may disgrace those, whom they have suppressed: but it
does never hold in the next generation. You shall scarce hear of a Puritan
father, but his son proves either a Catholic or an Atheist: Mutinous Soldiers
whilst the Enemy is in the field, will be orderly, nor for love of their
General, but for fear of the Enemy: but if they be not held in the ancient
Discipline of Wars, they will upon the least truce or ceslation, quickly show
themselves.

17. And as for their exhortations to obedience to your Majesty, when they have
first infected the understanding of your Subjects, with such principles of
Rebellion, as have disturbed and overthrown all other States, where they had
their will, it is a ridiculous thing to think upon such exhortations, and all
one, as if a fantastical fellow, finding a herd of young Cattle in a close,
should first break down the hedges, and then cry loud to the Cattle, not to
venture to go out, nor to seek any fatter pasture, for fear they be put into
the pound, and if they chance to feed where they are, because they have no
experience of other, and to tarry in the Close for an hour or two, then the
unhappy fellow should run to the owner of the Cattle, and tell him what great
service he had done him, and how he had kept his Cattle in the Close by his
goodly charms and exhortations. Let them say what they list of their own
honesty, and of their exhortations to obedience, as long as they do freely
infect the peoples souls with such false opinions in Religion, they do
certainly sow the seeds of disobedience, and Rebellion in men's understandings,
which if they be not prevented by your Majesty's giving way to Catholic
Religion, will in all likelihood spring up in the K. Charles feels the sad
effects of this predictio^.
next generation, to the great prejudice, and molestation of your Majesty, and
your posterity. So that whether I do respect heaven, or earth, my own soul,
or the service of your Majesty, God, or your Neighbors, or your Subjects, my
assured hope is, that by joining my self to the Catholic Church, I neither
have done, nor ever shall do any ill duty or service unto your Majesty.

18. But perhaps there is such opposition both in matter of Doctrine, and in
matter of State, as it is unpossible that ever there should be any
reconcilation at all betwixt the Church of England, and the Church of Rome, of
which I humbly pray your Majesty to give me leave to show you what I have
observed.

19. It is true, the breach has continued now these many years, and it is
much increased by so long continuance, so that it was never greater, then it
seems to be at this day, nor ever more dangerous to deal withal; For if a man
do but go about to stop it, there arises presently a great and fearful noise,
and roaring of the waters against him: but yet nevertheless the greatness of
the noise ought not to discourage us, but rather to give us hope, that although
it be wide, yet it is but shallow, and not far from the bottom, as proceeding
from affection, which is sudden and violent, and not from judgment, which is
quiet, constant, and always like it self; for if a man ask in cold blood,
whether a Roman Catholic may be saved, the most learned Churchman will not
deny it. And if a man ask, whether a Roman Catholic may be a good Subject,
the most wise Statesman will easily grant it; May we be both saved? then we
are not divided in God. May we be both good Subjects? then we are not divided
in the King. What reason is there then that we should be thus hotly and
unplacably divided?

20. Truly there is no reason at all, but only the violence of affection, which
being in a course, cannot without some force be stayed. The multitude does
seldom or never judge according to truth, but according to customs; and
therefore having of purpose been bred, and brought up in the hatred of
Spaniards and Papists, cannot choose but think they are bound to hate them
still; and that whosoever speaks a word in favor of the Church of Rome, or of
Catholic Religion, is their utter enemy. And the Puritannicall Preacher, who
can have no being in charity, does never cease by falsifications, and slanders,
to blow the coals, that he may burn them, and warm himself.

But if your Majesty shall ever be pleased to command those make bates to hold
their peace a while, and to say nothing, but what they are able to prove by
sufficient authority, before those who are able to judge, and in the mean time
to admit a conference of learned and moderate men on either side, the people
who are now abused, and with the light of the Gospel held in extreme
ignorance, are not yet so incapable, but they will be glad to hear of the
truth, when it shall be simply and evidently delivered by honest men; and then
they will plainly see, that their Light of the Gospel, which they so much talk
of, is but a counterfeit light in a Thieves lantern, whereby honest men's eyes
are dazzled, and their Purses robbed. And it will also appear that there is not
indeed any such irreconcilable opposition betwixt the Church of England, and
the Church of Rome, as they that live by the Schism, do make the world believe
there is, neither in matter of Doctrine, nor matter of State.

21. For matter of Doctrine there is no reason that your Majesty or the
Kingdom should be molested, or burdened for the maintenance of Calvinisme,
which is as much Indeed a true Protestant and a Papist are now almost equally
odious.
against the Religion of England, as it is against the Religion of Rome, and
will by necessary consequence overthrow not only the Catholic Church, the
Communion of Saints, and the forgiveness of sins, but also all the Articles
of the Creed, saving only so much as the Turk himself will be content to
believe, which will be easy to prove upon better leisure.

The Doctrine of England is that which is contained in the Common Prayer Book
and Church Catechism confirmed by Act of Parliament, and by your Majesty's
Edict, wherein all English men are Baptized, and ought to be confirmed, and
therefore there is some reason that this should be stood upon.

But this Doctrine, in most of the main points thereof (as has been touched
before, and requires a just treatise to set down in particular,) does much
differ from the current opinions and Catechismes of Calvinisme, or does very
near agree with, or at least not contradict the Church of Rome, if we list with
patience to hear one another. And those points of Doctrine wherein we are made
to be at wars with the Church of Rome, whether we will or not, do rather argue
the Corruptions of that state, from whence they come, then are argued by the
grounds of that Religion whereupon they stand; and the contradiction of
Doctrine has followed the altera^ion of State, and not the alteration of State
been grounded upon any truth of Doctrine.

22. For when the breach was resolved upon for the personal and particular
ease of King Henry the eight, and the Children of his later Wives, it was
necessary to give every part of the Commonwealth contentment, for which they
might hold out in the heat of affection, and study to maintain the breach,
otherwise it was likely that in the clearness of Judgment it would quickly
have grown together again, and then the Authors thereof must have been
excluded, and given account of their practice.

23. Therefore to the Lords and In like manner the Members of Parliament, and
their Adherents have now purchased the Bishops Lands at easy rates, etc.
Favorites of the Court were given the Lands and Inheritance of the Abbeys,
and religious Houses, that having once as it were, washed their hands in the
bowels and blood of the Church, both they and their posterity might be at
utter defiance therewith. And so having overthrown and profaned the good
works of the Saints, it was necessary for them to get them Chaplains that might
both dispute, preach and write against the merits of good works, the Invocation
of Saints, the sacrifice of the Altar, Prayer for the dead, and all such points
of Catholic Doctrine, as were the grounds of those Churches and Religious
Houses, which they had overthrown and profaned. And it was not hard for those
Chaplains by some show of Scripture to prove that which their Lords and their
followers were so willing to believe.

24. To the Commons was given great hope of relief for their poverty, case of
Subsidies, and of the burden of so great a Clergy, and many other goodly gay
nothings. And for the present they should have liberty, and the benefit of the
Common Law, that is, leave to live by such Laws as themselves list to make,
and to contemn the Authority of the Church, which although it were for their
benefit every way, yet because it crossed their affections, like wayward
Children, they could never abide it. And was not this reason enough for them to
hold out the breach, and to study Scripture themselves, that they might be able
to confute Confession, Satisfaction, Penance, and to declaime against all that
Tyranny of the Church of Rome, whereby themselves, and their forefathers had
been kept in awe and obedience unto God, and their Kings?

25. To the Clergy men that would turn with the times, besides the possibility
of present preferment by the alteration, was given shortly after leave to
marry, and to purchase, and enjoy the profit and pleasure of the world, as well
as the Laity. And what carnal minded Monk, or Priest, would not with might and
maine keep open the breach, after he was once plunged in it, rather then be in
danger to forgo so pleasing a commodity? Hence did arise a necessity of
speaking, and writing against Vows, Virginity, Poverty, Fasting, Praying,
Watching, Obedience, and all that austerity of life, which is by the Laws of
the Church required in a Monastical, and Priestly Conversation.

26. Upon these conditions, the Lords, the Commons, and the Clergy, were
content to believe that the King was supreme Head of the Church of England, not
that they did think so indeed, or that they desired to augment his authority,
but that they might be protected by him, and freely enjoy those commodities, So
our Purchasers love not to hear of peace or unity, lest they should come to
lose their so easy bought Bishops lands, and other profits.
which they thought Schism had brought unto them, and feared the unity of the
Church might again take from them. Hence did arise a necessity of inveighing
against the Pope, and the Church of Rome, as against Antichrist and Babylon,
and the greatest enemies of the State of England.

Insomuch that that Clergie-man was most acceptable to them, and in their
opinion most worthy of preferments, that could most confidently preach, and
write the most foul, and monstrous assertions of the Pope, and the Church of
Rome, though they were never so false. These and such like are those temporal
respects, which would feign seem the daughters of those Doctrines, which
themselves have brought forth, and to be divided from the Catholic Church by
Doctrine, when they themselves have caused the Doctrine of Division.

27. In all these, and all other Doctrines of Division, men have received great
countenance, and encouragement from Geneva; For although ^. John Calvin were
never any good Subject, or friend to Bishop, Duke, or King, yet he did so fit
the common people with new Doctrine, that no Gospel can be so pleasing to
them, nor so lightsome as his. For finding Geneva to be fallen out both with
their Bishop, (who was their ancient Prince) and their Duke, to whom they
pretended against their Bishop, and to be all in a combustion among themselves
for want of government, although he were then a stranger, and a very young man
of some 26. or 27. years old at the most, yet he thought good upon the
opportunity to give the venture, and to step in himself to be the founder of a
new Church, and State amongst them, and for that purpose, he found them out
such a Catechism, as they might easily contemn all ancient Learning and
authority, and save themselves by a strong fancy, which he called Faith. And
this pleased the Burgers of Geneva so well, that they called a meering, and
caused all the Citizens to swear, that that Catechism was true, and that all
Popery was false, as may appear in Calvin's life, written by Beza himself, and
prefixed to his Epistles. And although the Ministerial Presbytery of Geneva,
has lost much of M. Calvin's greatness, yet the City has had the fortune ever
since by the help of their neighbors to hold out against their Bishop, and
their Duke, and all their ancient Governors.

28. Now it is the nature of all common people, especially of Islanders, not
only still to These late times witness this truth sufficiently.
affect more and more novelty and liberty, and to be weary of their old
Clergy, but also to admire any thing that comes from beyond the Seas, and to
cherish, and comfort one another with reporting the good success which
Schismatics and Rebels happen to have against their lawful Prelates and
ancient Governors, and to impute all their good fortune to their new Religion.
Hence it comes to pass, that that Doctrine, which is indeed the lawful
Doctrine of the Church of England, is neglected, and contemned as a Relic, or
a Rag of Popery, and Calvin's Institutions being come from Geneva, and fairly
bound up with the Preface of the Gospel, is dispersed throughout all Schools,
Cities, and Villages of England, and has so infected both Priest and People,
as although it be against Law, yet it is cried up by voices to be the only
current Divinity in Court, and Country. In hope (belike) that it may one day
serve the turn in England, as well as it has done in Geneva, and in other
places where it has prevailed.

28. These reasons, or rather Corruptions of State, have so confounded the
Doctrine of the Church of England, and so slandered the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, as it has turned men's brains, and made the multitude on both sides
like two fools, who being set back to back, do think they are as far asunder as
the Horizons are, which they look upon. But if it might please your Majesty to
command them to turn but each of them a quarter about, and look both one way
to the Service of God, and your Majesty, and to the salvation of souls, they
should presently see themselves to be a great deal more near together in
matters of Doctrine, then the Puritannicall Preachers on both sides do make
them believe they are. I cannot in the brevity of this discourse descend into
particulars, but if it please your Majesty, to command me, or any other honest
man, that has taken pains to understand, and observe all sides freely, and
plainly to set down the difference betwixt Calvinisme, and the Doctrine of
England established by Law, and and then to show Locos concessos, and Locos
controversos, betwixt the Church of England, and the Church of Rome, I doubt
not but the distance that will be left betwixt, for matter of Doctrine, may by
your Majesty, be easily compounded.

30. But perhaps there is so great opposition in matter of State, that although
the Doctrine might be compounded, yet it is unpossible to hear of agreement.
And if there be the same reason of State which there was in the beginning, and
continued all Q. Elizabeth's days, there is as little hope now that your
Majesty should hearken to reconciliation, as there was that King Henry 8. or
Q. Elizabeth would. But when I do, with the greatest respect I can, consider
the State of your Majesty, your Lords, your Commons, and your Clergy, I do
find as little cause of holding out, in reason of State, as I do in truth of
Doctrine.

31. King Henry the 8. (although he had written that book against the Schism
of Luther, in the defense of the Sea Apostolic, for which he deserved the
Title of Defensor Fidei, yet) when he gave way to the lust of Anne Bolen, and
the flattery of his Favorites, and saw he could not otherwise have his will,
he excluded the Pope, and made himself supreme Head of the Church, that so he
might not only dispense with himself for his lust, but also supply his excess
with the spoil of the Church, which was then very rich. But when he saw God
blessed him not, neither in his wiving, nor in his thriving, he was weary of
his Supremacy before he died, and wished himself in the Church again, but he
died in the Curse of his Father, whose foundatitions he overthrew, and has
neither child to honor him, nor so much as a Tomb upon his grave to remember
him, which some men take to be a token of the Curse of God.

32. Q. Elizabeth, although she were the daughter of Schism, yet at her first
coming to the Crown, she would have the Common Prayer Book, and Catechism, so
set down, that she might both by English service, satisfy the Commons, who
were greedy of alteration, and by Catholic opinions give hope to her Neighbor
Princes, that she would her self continue Catholic. And all her life long she
carried her self so betwixt the Catholics, and the Calvinists, as she kept
them both still in hope. Yet being the daughter of the breach-maker, and having
both her Crown, and her life from the Schism, it was both dishonorable, and
dangerous for her to hearken to reconcilement. And therefore after she was
provoked by the excommunication of Pius Quintus, she did suffer such Laws to be
made by her Parliaments, as might cry quittance with the Pope, and the Church
of Rome. And this course seemed in policy necessary for her, who was the
daughter of King Henry the 8. by Anne Bolen, born with the contempt of Rome,
the disgrace of Spain, and the prejudice of Scotland.

33. But now that your Majesty is by the consent of all sides come to the
Crown, and your undoubted Title settled with long possession, the case is very
much altered, for your Majesty has no need of dispensations, nor no will to
pull down Churches, nor no dependence at all on Henry the 8. and if this
Schism could have prevented your Title with the divorce of one wife, and the
marrying of five more, neither your Mother nor your self, should ever have made
Q. Elizabeth afraid with your right to the Crown of England. And therefore
although it were necessary in reason of State to continue the Doctrine of
division, as long as the fruit of that Doctrine did continue, yet now the fruit
of Schism is all spent, and that Parenthefis of State is at an end, there is no
reason, but that the old sentence may return again, and be continued in that
sense, as if the Parenthesis had been clean left out; and that God had of
purpose crossed the fleshly pretense of Schism, and raised your Majesty to
restore it, as your most wise, and Catholic Progenitor King Henry the 7. did
leave it.

34. But perhaps the Schism though it serve you to no use at all for your
Title, yet it does much increase your authority and your wealth, and therefore
it cannot stand with your honor to farther the unity of the Church of Christ.

Truly those your most famous and renowned Ancestors, that did part with their
authority, and their wealth to bestow them upon the Church of Christ, and did
curse and execrate those that should diminish them, and take them away again,
did not think so, nor find it so: and I would to God your Majesty were so
powerful, and so rich, as some of those Kings were, that were most bountiful
that way. You are our Sovereign Lord, all our bodies, and our goods are at
your command, but our souls, as they belong not to your charge, but by way of
protection in Catholic Religion, so they cannot increase your honor or
authority, but in a due subordination unto Christ, and to those that supply his
place in iis quae sunt Juris divini. It was essential to heathen Emperors to
be Pontifices, as well as Reges, because they were themselves Authors of their
own Religion. But among Christians, where Religion comes from Christ, who was
no worldly Emperor (though above them all,) the Spiritual and Temporal
Authority, have two beginnings, and therefore two supremes, who if they be
subordinate, do uphold and increase one another; but if the temporal
authority do oppose the spiritual, it destroys it self, and dishonours him
from whom the spiritual authority is derived. Heresy does naturally spread it
self, like a Canker, and needs little help to put it forward; So that it is an
easy matter for a mean Prince to be a great man amongst Heretics, but it is
an hard matter for a great King to K. Cha. knows this to be true by woeful
experience.
govern them. When I have sometimes observed, how hardly your Majesty could
effect your most unreasonable desires amongst those that stand most upon your
Supremacy, I have been bold to be angry, but durst say nothing, only I did
with my self resolve for certain, that the Keys were wont to do the Crown
more service, when they were in the Arms of the M^^er, then they can do, now
they are tied together with the Scepter, and that your Title in spiritual
affairs does but serve other men's turns, and not your own.

35. As for your wealth, it is true, that the Crown has more pence paid unto
it now, then in Catholic times it had, but it has never the more wealth. It
is but the gain of the Tellers to have more money, true wealth is (...), he is
the richest Prince, that has means to main^^ine the greatest Army, and to do
most magnificent works both in war and peace, wherein the facts of your
Catholic Ancestors do appear upon good Record, your Majesty's are but yet
hoped for, and if ever you have the help of Catholic Religion to assist you, I
hope you shall excel them all; otherwise I assure my self, the Schism will do
what it can to make you poor, and then complain, that you are not rich. It
was indeed one of the main pretenses in the Statutes of Henry the 8. that the
Schism might enrich the King, and maintain his wars, but God did not bless
it; for notwithstanding No more will Church Lands enrich this Parliament, or
the Purchasers.
all the Church Lands, and Goods, and Tenths, and Fruits, and Praemunires, King
Henry the 8. was feign to abase his coin more then once, and yet he died not
so rich as his Catholic Father left him. And since his time what is become of
the Court of Augmentation? what benefit you receive of all the Church Lands,
more then your Progenitors did when they were in the hands of the Clergy, what
case your Subjects have of Subsidies thereby, or in brief, how much your
Coffers are in iched, you may be pleased to be informed by th^se that have to
do with those offices, and can readily give you an account: for mine own part I
have diligently read over all the Statutes made by Henry the 8. and do find
that the Events are so clean contrary to the Prefaces and pretenses of them, as
if God of purpose would laugh them to scorn.

36. There is yet another objection or two in reason of State concerning your
Majesty, which seem to be harder to answer, then all the rest, whereof the one
is, that your Majesty has undertaken the cause in writing, and set out a
book in Print, and it must needs be great dishonor to you to recall it. This
indeed is that which I have heard the Calvinists of England often wi^h for,
before it was done, and much boast of, after it was by means effected, that
your Majesty should be no longer able to show your self indifferent, as you
did at the first, but were now engaged upon your honor, to maintain their
party, and to oppugn the Catholics, and altogether to suppress them. But
there is nothing in that book, why your Majesty may not when you please admit
the Popes Supremacy in spiritualls. And you are partly engaged thereby to admit
the trial of the first General Counsels, and most Ancient Fathers. And as
for the question of Antichrist, it is but an Hypotheticall proposition, and so
reserved, as you may recall your self when you will; and howsoever that book
came forth either of your own disposition, or by the daily instigation of some
others, that did abuse your Clemency, and seek to send you of their own
Errand, it cannot serve their turns, nor hinder your Majesty from harkening to
an end of contention. For if King Henry the 8. in the Judgment of Protestants,
might save his Honor, and contradict his Book from very good, to stark naught,
they must not deny, but that your Majesty may increase your Honor by altering
your Book from less good, to much better.

37. The other and the greatest objection, that howsoever your Majesty before
your coming to the Crown, and in the beginning of your Reign, were
indifferent, yet after the Gunpowder Treason, you were so angered, and averted,
as now you are resolved never to be friends. And therefore he is no good
Subject, that will either himself be reconciled to the Church of Rome, or
persuade any of your Subjects thereunto. It is true, I confess, your Majesty,
had great cause to be thoroughly angry, and so had all good men, whether
Catholics or Protestants: but if your Majesty will harken to those, that work
their own purposes out of your anger, you shall be driven to live and die out
of Charity; which although it be not so horrible to the body, yet is it more
harmfull to the soul, then violent or sudden death. It is hard I confess for
a private man to assuage his anger on the sudden, and there is as much
difference betwixt the anger of a private man, and the indignation of a Prince,
as betwixt a blast upon the River, which is soon down, and a storm upon the
Sea, which having raised the billows to the height, is nourished by the motion
thereof, and cannot settle again, in a long time. But there is a time for all
things; And seven years is a long time. When a man is in the midst of his
anger, it pleases him not to be entreated by his neighbors, much less by his
servants; but when a man has chidden, and punished until he is weary, he will
be content to hear his servant speak reason. And though he be not the wisest,
yet he is the lovingest servant that will venture to speak to his Master in
such a case. God himself is exorable, and it pleases him to be entreated by
his Servants for his Enemies. I am persuaded there is no good Catholic in the
world, that can be your Majesty's Enemy. And therefore I do assure my self,
that God will be pleased with you to hear them speak, and not angry with me
for moving you^ thereunto. And if your Majesty do but vouchsafe so much
patience as to give equal hearing, I doubt not but you shall receive such
satisfaction, as will give you great quiet, and contentment, and disquiet none
of your Subjects, but those only, that do for their advantage misinforme your
Majesty, and mislead your people.

And if your Majesty have no such use of the Schism, as King Henry the 8. and
Q. Elizabeth had, and that it does neither increase your authority, nor your
wealth, nor your honor, but rather hinder them all, and deprive you of that
blessing which otherwise you might expect from Christ and his Church, from your
Catholic neighbor Princes, and Subjects, and from the Saints (...) heaven, in
whose communion is the greatest comfort of every Christian, both in life and
death, then whatsoever some great Statesman may say to the contrary, I do
verily believe they do but speak for themselves, and that there is no true
Reason, that may concern your Majesty, to hinder you from admitting a
toleration of Catholics, and Catholic Religion, that those who cannot command
their understanding to think otherwise, may find the comfort, they do with so
great zeal pursue, in the unity of the Catholic Church, amongst whom I
confess my self to be one, that would think my self the happiest man in the
world, if I might understand that your Majesty were content that I should be so.

38. But although your Majesty sit at the stern, and command all, yet you are
carried in the same ship; and it is not possible to weild so great a vessel
against wind and tide. And therefore although it do not concern your Majesty in
your own estate, yet if your Lords, and your Commons, and your Clergy do reap
any great benefit by the Schism, it will be very hard for your Majesty to
effect unity. But if upon due examination there be no such matter, then it is
but the cry of the passengers, who, for want of experience, are afraid where
there is no danger, and that can be no hinderance to any course your Majesty
shall think to be best, for the attaining of the haven.

39. For my own part, for the discharge of my duty, and conscience, I have
considered of all their states, and can resolve my self, that I have not
prejudiced the state of any good Subject of yours, but mine own, in coming to
the Catholic Church. And first for your Lords and Nobles. It is true that many
of their Ancestors were allowed a very good share in the division of the
Church, when the Schism began, and therefore it concerned them in reason of
their state to maintain the doctrine of division. But I think there are very
few in England, either Lords, or other now possessed of Abbey lands, which have
not paid well for them, and might not as well possess them in the unity of the
Church; as in the Schism. And there was a Declaration made by the Pope to that
purpose in Queen Mary's days; so that there is now no need at all to preach
against the merits of good works, nor the virtue of the Sacraments, nor the
Invocation of Saints, nor the rest of that Popery, that built Churches, unless
it be to help the Huguenots of France to pull them down.

40. But perhaps the Commons of England do gain so much by the Schism, as they
cannot abide to hear of unity. Indeed when the Puritan Preacher has called
his flock about him, and described the Church of Rome, to be so ignorant, so
idolatrous, and so wicked as he has made himself believe she is; then is he
wont to congratulate his poor deceived Audience, that they, by the means of
such good men as himself is, are delivered from the darkness, idolatry, and
wickedness of Popery, and there is no man dare say a word, or once mutter to
the contrary. But the People have heard these lies so long, as most of them
begin to be weary, and the wisest of them cannot but wonder, how these Puritan
Preachers should become more learned, and more honest, then all the rest that
lived in ancient times, or that live still in Catholic Countries, or then
those in England, whom these men are wont to condemn for Papists.
Nevertheless I confess there be many honest men and women amongst them, that
being carried away with prejudice and pretext of Scriptures, do follow these
Preachers out of zeal and devotion to the truth, as my self did, until I
knew it was but counterfeit. And these good People, if they might be so happy
as to hear Catholics answer for themselves, and tell them the truth, would be
the most devout Catholics of all other. But most of the People were never led
by Sermons; if they were, the Catholic Church is both able, and willing to
supply them far better then the Schism. But it was an opinion of wealth and
liberty, which made them break at the first, and if they do duly consider of
it, they are never the better for either of both, but much the worse.

41. For wealth the Puritan unthrift, (that looks for the overthrow of Bishops,
and Churches Cathedral) hopes to have his share in them, if they would fall
once; and therefore he cannot choose, but desire to increase the Schism, that
he may gain by it: but the honest Protestant that can endure the State of the
Church of England as it is, could be content it were, as it was, for he should
receive more benefit by it every way.

The poor Gentleman and Yeoman, that are burdened with many Children, may
remember that in Catholic times, the Church would have received and provided
for many of their sons and daughters, so as themselves might have lived and
died in the service of God without posterity, and have helped to maintain the
rest of their Families, which was so great a benefit to the Commonwealth, both
for the exoneration and provision thereof, as no humane policy can procure the
like. The Farmer and Husbandman, who labors hard, to discharge his payments,
and has little or nothing left at the years end to lay up for his Children,
that increase and grow upon him, may remember that in Catholic times there
were better penny-worths to be had, when as the Clergy had a great part of the
land in their hands, who had no need to raise their Rents themselves, and did
what they might to make other Lords let at a reasonable rate, which was also an
inestimable benefit to the Commons. So that whereas ignorant men carried with
envy against the Clergy, are wont to object the multitude of them, and the
greatness of their provisions, they speak therein, as much against themselves
as is possible. For the greater the number is of such men as are Mundo mortui,
the more is the exoneration of the Commons, and the more the lands are of such,
as can have no propriety in them, the better is the provision of the Commons.
For themselves can have no more but their food, and regular apparel, all the
rest either remains in the hands of the Tenants, or returns in Hospitality,
and relief to their Neighbors, or is kept as in a living Exchequer, for the
service of Prince and Country in time of necessity. So that the Commons do gain
no wealth at all, but rather lose much by the Schism.

42. And as for liberty, they are indeed freed from the possibility of going to
shrift, that is of confessing their sins to God, in the ear of a Catholic
Priest, and receiving comfort and counsel against their sins from God, by
the mouth of the same Priest, which duty is required of Catholic People, but
only once in the year, but performed by them with great comfort and
edification, very often; so that a man may see and wonder to see many hundreds
at one Altar to communicate every Sunday with great devotion, and likely no day
pass, but diverse do confess, are absolved, and receive the blessed Sacrament.

The poor Commons of England are freed from this comfort; neither is it
possible, (unless their Ministers had the seat of Secrecy) for them to use
it. And what is the liberty that they have instead thereof? Surely the servants
have great liberty against their Masters by this means, the Children, against
their Parents, the People against their Prelates, the Subjects against their
King, and all against the Church of Christ, that is against their own good, and
the Common salvation; for without the use of this Sacrament, neither can
Inferiors be kept in awe, but by the Gallows, which will not save them from
hell; nor Superiors be ever told of their Errors, but by Rebellion, which will
not bring them to heaven. These and such like be the liberties, that both
Prince and People do enjoy by the want of Confession, and of Catholic Religion.

43. As for the liberty of making Laws in Church Matters, the Common Lawyer
may perhaps make an advantage of it, and therefore greatly stand upon it, but
to the common people it is no pleasure at all, but rather a great burden. For
the great Multitude of Statutes, which have been made since the Schism, (which
are five times more then ever they were before, since the name of Parliament
was in England) has caused also an infinite number of Lawyers, all which must
live by the Commons, and raise new Families, which cannot be done without the
decay of the old. And if the Canons of the Church and the Courts of Confession
were in request, the Lawyers market would soon be marred.

And therefore most of your Lawyers in this point are Puritans, and do still
furnish the Parliament, with grievances against the Clergy, as knowing very
well, that their own glory came at the first from the Court Infidel, and
therefore cannot stand with the Authority of the Church, which came at the
first from the Court Christian. I speak not against the Ancient Laws of
England, which since King Ethelberts time were all Catholic, nor against the
honest Lawyers of England. I know many, and honor all good men among them, and
do hope for better times by the learning wisdom, and moderation of the
chiefest. But I am verily persuaded that the pretended liberties of the
Commons, to make Laws in matter of Religion, does burden the Common wealth,
and both prejudice your Majesty, and pleasure none at all, but the Puritan, and
petty-fogging Lawyer, that would feign fetch the antiquity of his Common Law
from the Saxons, that were before King Ethelbert. So that whether we respect
the spiritual instruction and comfort, or the temporal wealth and liberty of
the Commons of England, if the Puritan Preacher, and Puritan Lawyer, who both
do seek the overthrow of the Church, and deceive, and consume the people, would
let them alone, there would quickly appear no reason of their Sta^e at all,
why they should hate the Catholic Church, that is so comfortable, and
beneficial unto them, or maintain the Schism* that with sugared speeches, and
counterfeit faces does so much abuse them.

44. I am therefore in very assured hope, that by my coming to the Catholic
Church, besides the satisfying, and saving of my own soul, I shall do no ill
service to your Majesty, neither in respect of your self, nor your Children,
nor in respect of your Lords, and Commons, and that there is no reason
concerning the State in any of these, that is sufficient to dissuade unity.
There is only the The Protestant Clergy are now like to find this a true
prediction.
Clergy left which (if Calvinisme may go on, and prevail as it does) shall not
in the next age be left to be satisfied.

And there is little reason, that any man that loves the Clergy, should desire
to satisfy such Clergy men, as do under hand favor Calvinists, and maintain
such points of Doctrine, as if your Majesty's favor were not, would out of
hand overthrow the Clergy, and instead of them set up a few stipendary
Preachers,

45. There never was, is, or shall be any well settled State in the world,
either Christian, or Heathen, but the Clergy or Priesthood was, is, and must
be a principal part of the Government depending upon none, but him only, whom
they suppose to be their God. But where Calvinisme prevails, three or four
stipendary Ministers, that must preach, as it shall please Mr. Mayor, and his
Brethren, may serve for a whole City. And indeed if their opinions be true, it
is but a folly for any State ^o maintain any more. For if God has
predistinated a certain Number to be saved, without any condition at all of
their being in the visible Church by Faith, or their persevering therein by
good works; If God has reprobated the greatest part of the world, without any
respect at all of their infidelity, heresy, or wicked life; If the Faith of
Christ be nothing else, but the assured persuasion of a Man's own Predestination
to glory, by him; If the Sacraments of the Church be nothing but signs, and
badges of that grace, which a man has before by the carnal Covenant of his
Parents faith; If Priesthood can do nothing but preach the Word (as they call
it) which Laymen must judge of and may preach too, if they will, where
occasion serves; If the study an I knowledge of Antiquity, Universality, and
Consent be not necessary, but every man may expound Scripture, as his own
spirit shall move him; If I say, these and such like opinions be as true, as
they are among Calvinists in the world common, and in England too much
favored, and maintained, there will certainly appear no reason at all to your
Parliament, whenever your Majesty or your Successor shall please to ask them,
why they should be at so great a charge as they are, to maintain so needless a
party, as these opinions do make the Clergy to be. They can have a great many
more How right this points upon the Doctrine of these times.
Sermons, a great deal better cheap, and in the opinion of Calvinisme, the
Clergy do no other service. They that do in England favor, and maintain those
opinions, and suppress, and disgrace those that do confute them; they,
although themselves can be content to be Lords, and go in Rochets, are indeed
the greatest Enemies of the Clergy. And it were no great matter for the Clergy
they might easily turn Lay, and live as well as they do for the most part. But
it is a thing full of compassion, and commiseration to see, that by these false
and wicked opinions, the Devil, the the Father of these and all other lies,
does daily take possession of the souls of your Subjects, both of Clergy and
Laity.

These kind of Clergy men I confess, I do not desire to satisfy any other
way, then as I have always done, that is by the most friendly and plain
confutation of their errors, to show them the truth. As for other Clergy men
that are conformable to the Religion established by Law, as well for their
Doctrine, as for their Discipline, if they be good Scholars, and temperate
men, (as I know many of them are) they cannot but in their judgments approve
the truth of Catholic Religion; and if it were not for fear of loss, or
disgrace to their wives, and Children, they would be as glad as my self, that
a more temperate course might be held, and more liberty afforded unto
Catholics, and Catholic Religion in England.

These Clergymen, I am, and ever shall be desirous to satisfy, not only in
respect of themselves, but also in respect of their wives and children, whom I
am so far from condemning and disliking, as that I do account my self one of
them, and I desire nothing more in this world, then in the toleration of
Catholic Religion, to live and die among them. And therefore I have had so
great care in this point, as before I did submit my self to the Catholic
Church, I received assurance from some of the greatest, that if your Majesty
would admit the Ancient subordination of the Church of Canterbury unto that
Mother Church by whose authority all other Churches in England at the first
were, and still are subordinate unto Canterbury, and the free use of that
Sacrament, for which especially all the Churches in Christendom were first
founded; the Pope for his part would confirm the Interest of all those, that
have present possession in any Ecclesiastical living in England; And would
also permit the free use of the Common Prayer Book in English for Morning and
Evening Prayer, with very little or no alteration, And for the contentment and
security of your Majesty, he would give you not only any satisfaction but all
the honor, that with the unity of the Church, and the safety of Catholic
Religion, may be required; which seemed to me so reasonable, as being before
satisfied of the truth of Catholic Religion, I could ask no more. So that I am
verily persuaded, that by yiedling to that truth, which I could not deny, I
have neither neglected my duty, and service to your Majesty, and your Children,
nor my respect and honor to your Lords and Commons, nor my love and kindness
to my honest friends, and brethren of the Clergy; but rather that my Example
and my Prayers shall do good unto all.

47. But that which I must trust to, when all the rest will fail me, is the
service of God, and saving of my soul in the unity of that Church, which was
founded by Christ himself, and shall continue until his coming again,
wherein all the Saints of God have served him on earth, and do enjoy him in
heaven, without which Holy Catholic Church, there is no Communion of Saints,
no forgiveness of sins, no hope of Resurection unto life everlasting. I
beseech your Majesty let not Calvin's Ecclesia Praedestinatorum deceive you, it
may serve a Turk, as well as a Christian, it has no faith but opinion, no
hope, but presumption, no Charity, but lust, no faith, but a fancy, no God,
but an Idol. For Deus est omnibus Religionibus commune Nomen, All Religions in
the world, begin their Creed, with I believe in God. But homini extra
Ecclesiant, Religio sua est cultus phantasmatum suorum; and error suus est Deus
suus, as S. Augustine affirms, Epist. 64.

48. I have more things to write, but the have of answering your Majesty's
Commandment, signified to me by Sir Thomas Lake his Letters, has made me
commit many faults in writing this very suddenly, for which I crave pardon, and
cut off the rest.

But for my returning into England, I can answer no otherwise but thus, I have
sent you my soul in this Treatise, and if it may find entertainment, and
passage, my body shall most gladly follow after. And if not, I pray God I send
my soul to heaven, and my body to the grave, as soon as may be. In the mean
time, I will rejoice in nothing, but only in the Cross of Christ, which is the
glory of your Crown. And therefore I will triumph therein, not as being gone
from you to your adversary, but as being gone before you to your Mother, where
I desire, and hope for ever to continue

Your Majesty's true Servant, and Beadsman, B. CARIER.
Liege December. 12. Anno, 1613.
Multum incola fuit anima mea
Cum his qui oderunt pacem; eram pacificus,
Cum loqucbar illis, impuguabant me gratis.

FINIS.

