CONDITIONS Upon which the Most Christian King Consents, That the DIFFERENCES
Between him and The Catholic King Be ENDED.
THe Equivalent which can most speedily put an end to the Differences which the
Most Christian King has with Spain, is the Delivery up of the City of
Luxemburg in its present condition, or even demolished; with the few Villages
and Hamlets depending upon it, which are not above Fourteen or Fifteen.

But if the Spaniards persist still in refusing this Proposal, the second
Equivalent whereunto his Most Christian Majesty can consent, will be Dixmude
and Courtray, with their Dependencies; of which however the Town of Deinse and
its Dependence (although one of the Districts which compose the Chastellenie of
Courtray) shall remain to Spain: The Fortifications of Dixmude and Courtray to
be demolished, as also the Citadel of Courtray, in such manner as only to
leave a Wall to enclose them, for the security of the Manufactures and Commerce
of those two Cities.

Further, The Villages belonging to the Chastellenie of Aeth, which having been
annexed to the Government of Tournay, have been with the Most Christian King's
consent dismembered by the Treaty of Nimeguen, that there might be no delay to
the re-establishing of a Peace. Beaumont and Bouvines, with the Villages and
Places which depend on them, of which there remain not above Four or Five,
whereof the Most Christian King has not already taken possession. Lastly,
Chimay, with its Dependence.

And as by means of this Accommodation, there will remain for the future no
cause of a Rupture, because all the Pretensions on both sides will be reduced
solely to what each Party has been in possession of for above a Year, without
any other change than what this Equivalent is to contain, there will be no
difficulty to maintain that Tranquillity in the Low Countries, which the
Neighboring Princes and States do desire.

But if the Catholic King desire rather to give an Equivalent in Catalonia,
or in Navarre, his Most Christian Majesty will be content, as to the first,
with that part of the County of Cerdagne which the Crown of Spain now has,
whereof Puycerda, now entirely demolished, is a part, with the Seu d'Vrgell, of
Camprede, and with Castelfaillite, and their Dependencies. Or else with Rose,
Gironne, and Cap de Quiers.

And as to the Frontiers of Navarre, with Pampelune and Fontarabie, and their
Dependencies.

These are the Conditions upon which a good and sure Peace may be again
established before the end of the Year: and that no cause may remain to disturb
it in the Empire, his Most Christian Majesty declares, That provided the
Emperor and the Diet at Ratisbonne accept, within the same Term, the Truce
that has been offered, either for Thirty, Twenty five, or even Twenty years,
his Most Christian Majesty will again empower the Sieur Verjus to Conclude it;
and will consent, That all the Princes and States of Europe be Guarantees of
both Treaties.

But if some of these Proposals, the Choice whereof is left to the Catholic
King, be not accepted before the end of this Year, and the Possession delivered
up to the Most Christian King of those Places which he offers to take for an
Equivalent, His Most Christian Majesty not only pretends to be no longer
obliged to stand to these Conditions, but even thinks, he shall have great
reason to procure himself Satisfaction for those extraordinary Expenses he
shall be forced to be at in taking possession of what belongs to him; and that
all the Mischiefs of a War begun by Spain, after they had refused all means of
an Accommodation, can be imputed to none but them, and the Support given them
by their Allies.

London: Printed by J. C. and F. Collins. 1683.


