A CONGRATVLATORY EPITHALAMIVM, OR SPEECH ON THE ARRIVAL OF HER Royal Highness,
AND HAPPY MARRIAGE TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE JAMES DUKE OF YORK:

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. MDCLXXIII.

On the Arrival of Her Royal Highness, and Happy Marriage to the most
Illustrious Prince JAMES, Duke of YORK, etc.
WHilst now the Sun retiring, Mews his Beams,
And gilds the Days with none but Sickly Gleams:
What New-sprung Light breaks from our East, to bring
In Depth of Winter this unlooked for Spring?
What Second Venus do our wondering Eyes
Behold, from Neptunes Azure Bosom Rise?
Thus I inquired, when the loud Breath of Fame
Straight Blessed my Ears, with Fair MODENA's Name
A Princess! That adds Luster to Her Race,
And's made by Heaven the Storehouse of each Grace;
Attracted by Chaste Love's Magnetic Charms,
Thus Northward to her Mighty JAMES's Arms:
We did to Italy a Conquest owe,
Since Casar wrought the Britains overthrow.
Love makes Reprisals now, and brings from thence,
A Trophy of a greater Excellence.
As Sheba once, led by the Noise of Fame
To Solomon, from distant Regions came:
So YORK's Renown, which through the World is spread,
Invites this Virgin Princess to his Bed:
Who through a Tedious Journey does Advance,
Traversing all the Continent of France;
Whose proudest Beauties, Envying at her Fate,
Must yet pay Homage to her greater State;
And with Regret Conduct her to the Sea,
Each Blushing Princess wishing 'thad been She.
News of YORK's Bride to Neptunes Court does run;
YORK! that so many Wonders There had done;
And straight the busy Sea-Nymphs call each other,
To show their Duty to their Sov'raigns Brother;
Mounted on swiftest Dolphins Backs, they come
And Dance about the Ship should bring her Home.
When first she Launched, the Ambitious Waves no more
Would Kiss the Lips of the forsaken Shore;
But Proud of such Rich Freight, began to Aspire,
As if they would Quench the Elemental Fire;
So that Philosophers since scarce agee,
Whether the Earth, or Ocean highest be.
The trembling Compass had forgot to stir,
Instead of the North Pole, pointing still at Her;
At which the Pilot wonders, till he spies
Two North-Poles Culminant at once, Her Eyes.
The Jolly Seamen, when she Breathed, thought
The Precious Amber 'bout their Ship did Float.
And if at all sweet Zephyrus did stir,
'Twas not to Blow, But suck fresh Breath from Her:
But see! Fair Albions Rocks do yonder stand,
And Neptune must Resign Her to the Land;
Who vexed to part so with the Prize he bore,
With sullen Murmurs, chides the happier Shore;
'Till that with Roaring Cannons loes affright
Him back, and makes him quit the Glorious Sight:
Mean time our Nobles Crowd to Admire her Charms,
Whilst the Brave Duke Receives Her in His Arms;
And Heavens Ambassador prepared stands
In Sacred Ties, to Link their Amorous hands.
Henceforth no more, They Night or glaring Noon
Shall know, not Measure Hours by Sun or Moon.
But Kisses as they often repeated flow,
Shall score Minutes; and their Embraces show
Our duller Age, how all the Flowers pass,
Without the Help of Times VVorm-eaten Glass.
Astrologers shall by their Motion-make
The Year, and from their kind Conjunctions take
Rules to Compose Love a New-Almanack.
But to describe their Pleasures, is as far
Above our Reach, as their Just Praises are.
To Fadome either Ocean, we Despair,
And only dare Address to Heaven a Prayer,
With Zealous Wishes for this Glorious Pair.
May Blessings Rich and Fragrant Crown their Heads,
As the mild Heaven on blushing Roses sheds;
Fresh as the Hours, may all their Pleasures be,
Healthful and Lasting as Eternity.
Soft as Themselves, run their whole Lives, and Clear
As their unflat'ring Glass, or what Shines there;
Smooth as Heavens Face in Spring, and Bright as She
When dazzling, without Mask or Tiffany.
With no one Jarr, may their Calm thoughts e're meet,
But Peace as Silent as Tyme's Wooly Feet.
Like the days Warmth, may all their Comforts be
Vntoil'd for, and ever Serene as He;
Yet Free and Full, as is that Golden Sheaf
Of Sunbeams, Gilding every drooping Leaf;
When Tyrant Heat of the Midday Expires,
And his descending Steeds Breath milder Fires.
And as those Parcell'd-Glories, Sol does shed,
Are the fair Issue of his flaming Head;
Which never so Scattered, or Remote, are known
By the Heat and Native Luster for his own:
So may each happy Branch of theirs we see,
Their Lively Copies, and our Wonders be.
And when no more on Earth they shall remain,
But are Invited Home, to Heaven again;
Then may the Glories of their Virtuous Flames,
Live in those Heirs of their Illustrious Names;
And teach the obliged Worlds, this Mystery,
To enjoy Themselves in Their Posterity.
So They to both Worlds, shall Rich Presents bring,
And gathered up to Heaven, leave here a Spring.
FINIS.

