CONSIDERATIONS Touching the Late TREATY FOR A PEACE held at VXBRIDGE. With
some Reflections upon the Principal Occasions and Causes of the FRVSTRATION
THEREOF. Extracted out of the late Printed full Relation of the Passages
concerning it.

PRINTED AT OXFORD, BY Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University. 1645.

CONSIDERATIONS TOUCHING THE FRVSTRATION Of the Late TREATY.
CONON describing the practices and plots used by Gelon, how to make himself
sole Tyrant over Sicily, sets this down for a ruled observation upon his Case;
(...), that, as there is a kind of Pleasure, in the practice and exercise of
any Power which is given; so, that pleasure, is improoved to a kind of Lust or
Venery, no way so much, as, when that Power is exercised and administered,
either against the Fortune, or against the Person, of that man, which gives it:
The beams of Soveraignety, by like, being as the beams of the Sun, not so
hot, in direct and strait lines, as in reflections. And therefore, as Pliny
speaks of Callimachus (an excellent Painter, but one that was so curious, that
the grace of his work was much abated by the diligence; for, he could never
tell, when he had done well) that, he was maximus sus calumniator, his own
worst detractor: So does Aristides observe of an excellent Prince, administering
that Empire with Remissness and Favor, which is best swayed by Justice, and
by Power; that he is (...), his own greatest Rebel; For, letting down the
string of Monarchy never so little, and sinking his own natural Right and
Interest in all High Actions, to an inferior communication, and adoption of
other Counsels, It often happens to him, as it does, to many other kind
Masters in the World, That, whatsoever he shall, heretofore, have granted,
shall be no longer thought on, as a piece of Grace and Mercy; but, whatsoever
He shall, henceforth, deny, shall be now looked on, as an Act of great Injustice
and Tyranny. The sad testimony, which the Miseries of our present War
afford unto this Truth, will save the labor of examining other witnesses; and
the sadder testimony, which the Mistakes of our late pretended Peace, afford,
will save the examination of them. Never did condescension, (I had almost said,
submission) in any Prince, meet with so much scorn and contempt, from any
People; whilst all His former Acts of Grace and Favor, that should have
Instructed their obedience, do but Arm their Pride: By receiving, they only
learn to Ask; and, having gotten a Power into their hands, they are now so
far enamoured of Majesty, that, if they cannot get her Scepter, (as they
hope, they shall) They are resolved, not to let go her Sword; not unlike, to
some young passionate lovers of Beauty, who, when they cannot obtain the
Eldest daughter to Wife, whom they most desire, will match her Sister. They
think it not enough to cosen us of our Moneys; now, they cosen us of our very
Senses; and whilst they call upon the World, to behold and see a Treaty, They
cheat them, with a very Trick. They have dealt with this whole Kingdom, now, as
they dealt with the Lord Mack-Quire, not long since; They have, in a manner,
executed a Commonwealth, these three or four years, by Rapines, by
Rebellions, and by all the sad appertenances of War; and now, They cut it
down, as it were in a pretended Treaty, for a well settled Peace; but, to what
end? not, as purposing or intending any such blessing, as Peace, unto the
Kingdom, that should animate it, as it were, with a new life, and make it
happy; but, only, to recover a little, so much of her exanimated Spirits, as
shall make her sensible, and more apprehensive of fresh and new Miseries. For,
that in the late Treaty, they never did intend a Peace, I think, will be easily
made appear to any common judgment and understanding, that shall observe and
weigh no more, then these four particulars. First their Indisposition and
Aversion from Treating: Secondly, their Impotent and Imperfect Qualification of
their Commissioners to Treat: Thirdly, their Insolent Expostulations and
Demands in the Treaty: and Lastly, Their Inexorable Obduration and Deafness,
against all Enlargement, Prorogation, or Reviving of the Treaty.

I. Concerning the first of these, their natural indisposition and aversion
from Treating. It is worth observing, That from the 4th of July last, when His
Majesty recommended this Treaty first unto them, unto the 23d of November last,
when their Propositions were brought down to Oxford, upon which the Treaty was
founded, there passed almost five whole Months between. A Small Time, for the
grave Advices of a Parliament to work in, in such a point full of
perplexities, as this, Whether it be better for the Kingdom, to have Peace, or
War? If the question had been only put, whither Presbytery were not better
then Episcopacy, whereon depends but the Ruin of the Church? or whether
Democracy, were not better then Monarchy, whereon depends, but the Ruin of
the State? or lastly, whither the Militia of the Kingdom, were not safer in
their hands, then in the Kings; whereon depends, but the Ruin of them both?
For the ventilation and agitation of such easy points, as these, a matter of
Three Days a piece, is time enough; (for no more would be allowed us, at
Vxbridge) as if the Church, amongst the other new marks of Primitive
Institution, were in this also, to be reckoned the more like* to Christ; for
dying and rising again; for laying down her old Ceremonious and Carnal Body,
and taking up a new, glorious and Spiritual Body, and all in Three Days? But
when a point of so great concernement, as this, comes in debate, whither it be
better to have Peace, or War? A point, which, if it miscarry never so little
in the stating, may chance endanger That Lords Pension, and this Lords Place;
may chance endanger the Trial of some of the Members, and the Trade of more;
may chance return them, to their Original three-penny Seats, that have sat,
all this while in great State, upon the Stage? It will ask time, to traverse
and discuss it; and four or five months Allowance, is truly, with the
shortest. All this while, indeed, had they a very hard game to play. They held
the Wolf by the Ear, as they say; They durst not hold a Treaty, when the King
offered it, for then, They knew they should loose Themselves; and They durst
not let it go, when it was offered; for, then they knew they should loose the
People. Was it not high time, for to bestirre them now, and like true
State-Iugglers, express a little skill? First therefore, to make the People a
little sport in the street, the better to persuade them faster in; They do
give it out, that if the King would acknowledge them His Parliament, and the
Great Council of the Kingdom, then They would Treat; as if this were a World
for men, (...), to admire Names for Things: as if Theodora in Procopius, having
been a common Whore, and now coming to the Court to be Justinians wife, were
ever a whit the honester Woman, for Euphemia's name; as if they knew not* how
to imitate their dear Brethren of Scotland, as Aesops Ass did the Dog, who,
seeing the Dog leap upon his Master, and his Master stroke him, and call him
by his Name, thought that He might do so too, and be as welcome. When this did
not take, as was expected, (for I dare say, They stood upon this Denomination,
They desired the grant of this Liberty, but as Saint Augustine in his youth is
reported to have desired the gift of Chastity, which He had rather God would
have denied him) when there was no Remedy, but that Treat they must; By mere
slight of hand, they draw some Propositions, which they will have called,
Propositions for a safe and a well grounded Peace, like so many Ribbands out of
their mouth, the various Colors whereof do so please the Peoples Eyes, that
they cannot see the Cords; Propositions, which the very Anabaptists have
already Christened in their Childhood, and called them Propositions of Peace;
which I am confident, They dare not hope to see, at their full years of Action
and Accomplishment, even by a successful War. And thus, having made the
Quarrel become the Decision; having by cleanly conveyance, jugled the true
ground of the War on the Kings part, into the Foundation of the Peace on
their part: They hope, they have satisfied the World, now, that They are for
Peace, but that the King is not; And they doubt not, I warrant you, to raise
good Sums out of the People, for the continuance of War, upon the credit of
these pretended Intentions, which they had of Peace: as your ordinary Iuglers
of Small* Wares use to do; who will put a padlock into the poor
Country-fellowes mouth, that shall thereby suffer some of his Tricks, and then
make him pay his penny, besides, for seeing them.

II. In the second place, observe their Impotent and Imperfect. Qualification
of their Commissioners to Treat: For first, whereas, the King invested his
Commissioners, or any ten of them, with a full and whole Power, not only to
Meet and Treat, but also, to Compose and Conclude a Peace, obliging Himself
under his own Royal Hand to ratify whatsoever they should do: The Men of
Westminster endow their Commissioners, but with half a Power; A Power to
Treat; but reserve to themselves the better half, a power to Conclude; tying
up their Commissioners only to such Instructions, as, either were already
given them, or else, from time to time, should be. Now, let all the World
Judge, whether these men had any Love to Peace, (nay, whether they, rather, did
not Fear it) who, durst not trust their own Members, creatures of their own
election and free choice, with the managery and regulating of it. The Kings
Majesty trusted his Commissioners with a power, which, if they had abused, they
had, indeed, abused the King, by giving and betraying up his Rights; but, They
had not abused themselves; nay, they might have done it, no doubt, to their
own great advantage: But, if They had trusted their Commissioners with such a
power, those Commissioners could not have abused the Parliament, by giving up,
and betraying of their Rights, but withal, They must abuse Themselves, and do
it, to their own special disadvantage: And yet, so zealous is the King for
Peace, that it might be settled, that, Those men, who might abuse his Power to
his prejudice, are trusted; and so jealous are the Rebels of Peace, least it
should be settled, that Those men, who could not abuse the Parliament-power, but
to their own prejudice, are not. Now: what could the World expect, in order to
a Peace, from such Eunuch-Commissioners? from such persons, who were rather
Parliament- Conduits, to conveigh such Answers, and the Reflection of such
Thoughts, as were hourly put into them; then, Parliament. Commissioners, to
speak upon occasion, and to utter, what They themselves Thought? What could the
World look for, from men, who were not so much, Full Narration. Page 50. No. LX.
as their Humble Orators, to use (if not, any Reason, as being against the
usage of Parliament, yet) a little Rhetorique to color, and set off the
business; but, were only their dumbo Oracles, which opened not their mouth,
or ever spoke word, but, as the Devil of Westminster (who, was brought every
day from London to Vxbridge in a Cloak-bagg, as the Holy Ghost, they say, was
once brought from Rome to Trent) did usually possess them, and inspire them. I
believe, they durst confide in their Committee; but, they durst not confide in
their Commissioners. The Grand Committee, they knew, was, as the first-running
of this Rebellion; all the Strength and Spirit of Sedition was in it; which
would keep life in their Designs and Purposes, though at the very last gasp;
But these Commissioners, are but like the second-tapp, which runs smaller and
smaller; there might possibly they thought, be some relish and tincture of
Allegiance in some of them; and therefore, they durst not adventure any rich
Commodities, in a bottom, that had, or might have, more pieces, then they
could imagine. In the mean time, God help the poor common people of this
Land, that have trusted these men with their Fortunes, Freedoms and Lives, in
managing of a War, for the space of three years, and over; who, now dare not
Trust one another, with either, in settling of a Peace, for the space of three
whole Days together.

III. Thirdly, consider their Insolent Expostulations and Demands in the
Treaty. Whereas War is ever full of Tumors, Risings and Swellings; all
Treaties have in them, still, a kind of lankenesse, leanenesse, or as it were,
a falling away of Desires; (for, if there be not a mutual condescension on
both Sides; if one part only take, and the other only give: The Commonwealth
may have a clove put in her Mouth, but she has not cured her Lunges, and as
one disadvantage does beget a Treaty, so another advantage will break it) And
then, to what one abatement, in what one part, of what one Proposition, did
their Commissioners ever condescend? In what one thing, did they go less at
Vxbridge, then before they did at Oxford: unless perchance you will account it
a greater insolence, to defy the King at fifty miles distance from their own
dunghill, then to do it at fifteen? Men, that will pretend to Treat, and yet
will proceed in no complying, but all in a commanding and Imperious way, as
these men did, can no more properly be said to Treat, then the Slave and his
Master in Terence, could be said to Fight; when the one with beating, and the
other with being beat, at last, They were both sore and weary. Induciae sunt
Belli Feriae, says Varro: Truces and Treaties, are Warre's Holy Days: and as
Religion uses to have her free practice and exercise in the one, so should
Reason in the other; and for men to urge only Demands in a Treaty, which lies
open on purpose, for admitting of Debates, is all one, as for a man to think to
make a Syllogism, of nothing but Conclusions, because he would have no
Proposition denied. Besides, if nothing less then the granting of all these
Demands can obtain a Peace, (as it should seem it cannot) I would feign know,
what these men propose unto themselves if they should obtain by War? What
can They have more to Ask, or the King to Give, unless it were his Life? (and
if any thing secure that, it must be their Scorn, as preferring that of any
Constables before it.) Suppose (I doubt not, but the King of Kings will ever
keep them at the distance of a Supposition, and therefore I suppose) that all
Success, which ever yet crowned impious Attempt, should wait on thi^
Rebellion, and make them Lucky Villains: (for I find, (...) even the Rebel
Jews, a Nation condemned to Slavery (...) the sacking of Jerusalem, were
prosperous and for tunate once, for seven years together, in an Insurrection
under the Persian, which is more then ever they could boast off, either before
or since) Yet I dare say, that in these Propositions, They have endeavored to
lay some particular Obligations upon the King, in the way to Peace (as for
example, that Imperious Obstruction of the Two Princes Right in their
Electorall Dignity, which is the provision of the 22th Proposition) which They
themselves will never be able to make good unto their Malice, if they should
succeed and prosper in this unnatural War: And are these fit Ingredients for
a Peace? If they can gain that, in order to a Peace (that is, a Curb and
Bridle on the Imperial Law) which they cannot loose by War, (because they
never had it) I should commend the playing of their Cards; and think they do
just, as some cunning Merchants of their own Miseries use to do; that will
ordinarily get more by the Brief, then they could loose, by the Fire.

But you will say, They demanded of the King, in order to our Peace, in a
manner, but two things; An abolition of Episcopal Government, for the settling
of the Church; and a disposal of the Militia to Commissioners of their own
Nomination, for the securing of the State. And to say truth, They did not: but
then, if you mark it, These two particulars do stand out, and show themselves
as the most prominent pieces of all their Propositions, as those Two teeth did
in the Worm, which C^esias writes of in his Indian Stories: which indeed, were
all the teeth that Worm had: and yet with those two Teeth, was that Worm able
to pull down any Camel or Ox, that happened to come near him. The bare
concession of these, involves a total Alteration in the Government, both of
the Spiritual and Civil State; and all other things contained in their
Propositions, non sunt plura, sed minora, as Quintilian speaks, They are not
more parts of Insolence, but lesser pieces.

Concerning the abolishing of Episcopacy, there passed Arguments with the
Divines: one side pressing for it, and the (...) against it. Those Arguments on
our part, that concluded against the abolishing thereof, were drawn, as I have
learnt, from these three several Heads: First, from the point of Perjury, the
King having taken a Solemn Oath to maintain the Rights and Liberties of Holy
Church: Secondly, from the point of Sacrilege; The alienation of Things
offered unto God, being accompanied still with visible, and more then ordinary
Judgments from God, either upon the Persons or Fortunes, or Families, of those
men that are the chief Instruments and Actors therein: and Thirdly, from the
point of Divine Right; Episcopacy having been accounted and accepted, as an
Ordinance and Institution of Christ himself, by the most Learned men that have
lived in all Ages of the Church.

Against those Arguments deduced from the two first heads, there was scarce any
thing offered in the shape of a Reply, which indeed was not Ridiculous, even in
the Judgment of their own Commissioners: for it appeared, in those Two
questions of Sacrilege and Perjury, Their understanding of the State thereof,
was like their Conscience of the Sin, little or just none at all. Indeed
little could be said, by greater Clerks then they: for as the Orator observes
of some Creatures, that are pretty nimble at shifting for themselves, so long
as they are in Cranies and in Holes* who notwithstanding are soon overtaken
and caught when they are brought out into an open Field, where every man may
see them; So there are some pieces of Truth, which will admit of disquisition,
whither they be so, or no, so long, as they do but peep now and then, out of
the Pit; which, when they are once laid open to the understanding, will bear
no Argument; because they carry their own light with them, that does betray
them. But as touching the third Head, those Arguments that were instituted in
defense of the Divine Right thereof, out of the Scriptures, to those, They made
a shift to say something; and although that something were no more like an
Answer, then an Ape is like a Man: yet their own Commissioners, who saw them
beaten from their two other Works, and yet were resolved never to give up the
Fort; abett those Answers, and seem to wonder, that we were not satisfied
therewith. Alas! I cannot blame young Gamesters at disputing, if they catch up
their last Stake. It was all they had to live on. The two former Heads, that of
Sacrilege, and the other of Perjury, they frighted them so, that they durst
not look them in the Faces: They were indeed so open, and so demonstrable: But
this Third Head of Divine Right; because they thought it a Head in a Bag:
because They knew it was more Problematicall, and would admit colors on either
side: therefore they stick close to that, and think they can avoid all
Arguments from Scripture, that may be brought to prove it; nay, They think
they can raise as good Arguments out of the Scripture, that shall conclude
against it. And truly, I would not have any man think it strange, for men of
contrary Persuasions to have contrary Conceptions upon some Texts of Scripture,
which Scripture they did neither make nor write, and, which Scripture, is
brought to prove and evidence a Truth, perchance, which, either it did not
intend at all, or but upon occasion, and by the by; (as it may well happen in
the case of Episcopacy, and in most other points of Christian Practice.) Why
should any man, I say, wonder at this, that shall observe the very same Men,
according to their different, and divided interests, to have as divided and
different understandings, upon some Texts of Law, which Law, notwithstanding,
they themselves framed and made, and which Law was brought to prove and
evidence a Truth, which was one of the very Reasons, why that Law was made: (as
it happened afterward in the Case of the Kings Power in making a Cessation
with Ireland, Full Narration. No. CXLIV. CXLV.
whither it were limited, or whither it were not limited by the Statute made
this Parliament; and as it will happen in most other points of Civill-Right.)
Not that I can think these Arguments brought on either side, to be of equal
worth and strength (for as it appears by all their Commissioners Answers which
I have read, so does it appear by some of their Commissioners Arguments, which
I have heard, that They had no Power to Conclude) but that I think Ignorant
Men, in pursuing of any Truth, to be like ignorant Hunters in pursuance of
their Game; who whatsoever they can light on, by the by, lay hold on strait;
and if they come to sell it, will be sure to ask much more then it is worth,
or then any other man who knows what the Thing is will give, Imbecillitate sua
pretium rei metientes, as he says; having no better measure of the things
worth, then their own weakness; Or, that I think, with Saint Hilary, quot
voluntates, tot fides; there are as many several Faiths, as there are, Wills;
and, when men of several engagements, fall into heats and disputes, in points,
which are not mathematically demonstrable; their several affections ordinarily
will improve into several opinions, and they will judge of things, not
according to other men's proofs, but their own praepossessions: And therefore,
for my part, I have ever thought most of our Divinity Disputation, but a kind
of Church-Duell; which does oftener declare, which is the Stronger side, then,
which the Truer; and so much the more often, by how much, it may fall out
easily, that the truth may be on neither. But if men will proceed to Disputes
and Arguments, (which, seldom, or, never, is, to any purpose; for, either,
those persons, at whose request, or for whose satisfaction that Disputation is
instituted, are able to judge of the solidity and strength thereof, or they are
not: If they are not able to judge of it, they receive no good by it; and, If
they are able to judge, they do not need it) it is a requisite expedient for
hopeful proceedings in that kind, That, men proportion their Proofs according
to the nature and condition of those Propositions, which they are to prove: If
the matter, be a Matter of Belief, the Scripture is the best proof thereof;
because the Scripture exactly conteynes all matters of Faith; but if it be, a
Matter of Practice, the Scripture is not the best Proof thereof; because, as
it contains not exactly, all Matters of Form, so, neither is there any
reason, why it should contain them; it being the principal, if not the sole
end of Scripture, to transmit those Laws of Faith unto the world, by which, it
should be governed: and not, to transcribe the Forms, Institutions, and
Difference in degrees, of those Officers, who, then did, and ever were, to
govern it. Nor does it a whit impeach the Divine right and Institu^ion of
Episcopacy in the Church, founded in the first Apostles, if there should chance
to be found, no particular Text in Scripture, which, in express terms, does
settle and establish that Foundation: no more, then it does impeach the Right
of Monarchy, in a State, founded in the Roman Empire, or, in any other Kingdom
of the World, a thousand years ago, because in the Code, or Digest of those
Fundamental Laws, by which those Kingdoms have been so long governed, there
is no particular Act or Law, made, in direct words, which does establish and
ordain, that Imperial and Monarchical Form of Government. And therefore,
there is no more reason in the world, when a man sees, or may see, that the
whole Church of Christ in all ages, has ever acknowledged, and observed a
difference of Order between a Bishop and a Priest, why, he should infer, that
at first, a Bishop and a Priest were all one, no doubt, because the word
Presbyter, in Scripture, is sometime given to both: Then there is, when he
reads, or may read, that the Church of the Jews in all ages, never had but One
High Priest; Why, he should infer, that at last, there were Two High Priests
in that Church, no doubt, because Annas and Caiphas, are both called High
Priests together, in Scripture.

I speak none of this, as if I thought the Divine Right of Episcopacy could
not be proved by Scripture (for I rest most assured, it is as clearly proved
from thence as the Observation of the Lords Day: which particular, I rather do
insist upon, because, in these Propositions for a well settled Peace, There is
One Act desired to be passed, for the Abolishing of the One, and Another Act
desired to be passed, for the Observation of the other; when all knowing men
must confess, their Interest and Tenure in the Scripture, to be equal, and
the same.) But because I think, that Scripture is not the right Topic, out of
which men ought to deduce and draw those proofs; If it find but any footing
in the Scripture, the Churches universal Practice of such a Proof, is the
best Proof that can be made, of such a Practice; In regard, that Matters of
Faith and Good Life, as they are Essential to the Church, so, they are
Vnivocall; and, the Scripture, as it delivers them, once, so it delivers them,
ever: but, Matters of Form, and Government, if they should be confessed
Essential to the Church, in their Institutions; yet, are they not always
Vnivocall, in their operations; but of necessity must rise and fall, and,
either admit of grouth, or seem to do so, according to the conditions and
changes of time, that will suite best unto them. Besides, the condition of the
Mystical Body, the body of the Church, as considered in her Infancy, to my
thinking is not much unlike to the condition of the Natural body, the body of
Man, as considered in His; and the several operation of orders in the one, is
not much unlike to the several operation of souls in the other; now we know
that the reasonable soul, albeit a soul of another order, then the sensitive
(being derived from a nobler extraction, and origin) and infused from the
beginning into the Body, no less then it, yet, it exercises little or no
distinct operations in that body from it; till such time as that body come to
years of understanding, where Reason may have room and scope to work in, at
her pleasure: In like manner that Order of Episcopacy might be planted from the
beginning in the Church, and be superinduc't upon this order of Preisthood, as
a distinct and nobler Order from it; and yet, in the nonage of the Church,
there may be little or no distinction found in the Scripture, of Administration
of those Orders; which then began most eminently to appear, when that Body of
the Church was a little more grown, and come to years, and had Instruments
fitted, and Organs well prepared for the execution thereof. Furthermore it
would be considered, that there is something almost in every practical Text of
Scripture, like to that which the Painters call the Air in every Face; if all
the parts of a Face, be taken in their right feature and proportions, and that
Air be not taken (which Air is a kind of center, wherein all consents of
similitude and likeness meet) one man will confidently pronounce the Face is
like, and another will as confidently pronounce as he, that it is not; and both
believe themselves to be very right in judgment; If the sense of the words of
any Text be taken and understood, according to the partial and particular
acceptance of those words in other places; and then the General Air, the
Scope and Harmony of the whole Text, with that which went before, and that
which follows; The Relation and Interest which it has to persons and places,
or that cast of the lo^ke, as it were, which it has upon some Times, Vsages,
and Customs; if all this be not taken, and understood, as well: One man, may
deduce one conclusion from that text, and another man, another cross to that,
and both think themselves to have inferred justly. No mervaile then, if these
men, should produce some Texts of Scripture, that color for Presbytery to
those men's Apprehensions, that are resolved before, to set it up: and no
mervaile, if they produce other Texts, that look a squint upon Episcopacy, to
those men's understanding, that are resolved before, to pull it down; For, when
the Air of the Face, is mist, it is no longer, a Picture, but a Fancy; and,
whom, every man is pleased to think it like, like to them, it is, and, when the
Air of a T^xt is mist (as they, generally, either, never go about to take it,
or, ever miss it) That text, is like the Children of Israells Manna, which
will taste, to every man, according to the particular affection and inclination
of his own palate; or, like Pauso's Horse, which was, ever ready made, whither
you would have the Head or Heels stand uppermost, all was one. And, therefore
our Commissioners chalkt them out the readiest way, to detect the unlawfulness
of Episcopal Government, Full Narration p. 56. no LXIX.
if there were any; when, They desired to be informed by them, when, and where
any National Church since the Apostles time, was ever governed without it.
For, if they pretend that Government to be unlawful, and yet, can show no
other; it is a shrewd argument, that they do but pretend it; For, it can
hardly be imagined, that Christ should ordain but one only lawful form of
Government in his Church, that was to abide, even unto the end of the World:
and, that, that Form should so soon decay and perish, as that there should not
remain the least foot-step or impression of it in his Church, for the whole
space of Fifteen hundred years together. But their Commissioners will not hear
of this; They tell us, that, what our Lords did mention concerning a National
Church, Their Reply 21. Feb. p. 57. no LXX.
is a new Question, which has not, as yet, been any part of the subject of
their Debate. Good Lord I how well acquainted are these men with
Congregationall, and Classical, and Synodicall, and National Assemblies,
which are for them: and, what a strange matter they make, of a National
Church, because, it is against them? This is but just, as I have known some
beggars, who will make you believe they do not understand scarce a word of good
English, because they find, they can get more with Canting. Well: They are
willing for all this, to believe Episcopal Government unlawful: and I make no
question (at least no new Question, for I believe, it is already stated) but
that, They look to be well paid for their opinion. But this I must tell them; I
would not have them found that unlawfulness on Scripture; or I would have them
find it; For, as concerning all their arguments out of Scripture, which have
hitherto been brought against it, I will say no more but this; That they have
concluded no more against Episcopacy, even to those very persons that have such
unequal thoughts, and so prejudicate affections to that sacred Order; Then
they may conclude, when they please against the keeping of the Lords Day,
against the Baptizing of Infants, against Original sin, or in a word,
against any one Article, either of Christian Practice or Belief, established
in the Church; when the disbeliefe of any one of these Articles is like to
prove as advantageous and beneficial to them, as the disbelieving of this
Episcopacy has done.

Concerning the Militia, their demands were Two; First, They demand the sole
Nomination of all the Persons to be entrusted therewith wholly to themselves,
not allowing the King, not only the Power of nomination of one man in Twenty,
but not so much as the Power of exception against one man in Twenty: Secondly,
they demand the Continuance of this Power during pleasure, and without any
limitation or restriction of Time. And truly, when I met with this, I began to
think, that in short time, the Rebels would invest the King with such a
Prerogative, as Agatharcides reports of the Sabaeans, that they allowed their
King* So long as he kept close, and within his Court, it was lawful for him to
do any thing, what he would; but if once he stirred a foot, but out of his
Palace, it was then lawful for them to stone him. His Majesty's most Loyal
and most Humble Subjects, will be content to spare him a little Honor; but
they will be sure to clip, and pare him to the quick, of all His Power. So that
upon the whole matter; the Case is this. John a Nokes and John a Styles fell
out, and fought; and having drawn some blood one from another, at last, they
were contented to put up their Swords, and be made Friends; Provided, that both
their Swords might be put into such hands, as might prevent all further
quarrelling between them. John a Styles, he proposes that both their Swords
may be put into Two friends hands; that the ones Friend may keep the one, and
the others Friend the other. But John a Nokes, (though causelessely he drew
first on John a Styles, which meant him no harm yet now) afraid least John a
Styles should do him mischief, will have both the Swords put into his own
hands, or He will not be Friends. Now certainly, though upon severe examination
of this offered Composition, there be no real security, founded upon that
motion, even of John a Styles (for if the Two Swords should be put into two
Friends hands as he desires; The Danger might be more, because They might fall
out also, as the other did before them: But the Security is not, because two
Persons are no more secure against two, then one against one) yet there is more
Imaginable security, that is, Men will be more apt to conceive and imagine,
that John a Styles intended and meant honestly, as equally, and as
indifferently to provide for both their securities, as possibly upon the
sudden he could, in this His way; then They can imagine or conceive, that
John a Nokes, could intend or mean in that way of His. And yet this is the way
the Parliament will take, or none; Unless they may have the whole Power of the
Militia put into the hands of such Persons amongst themselves, whom they shall
nominate, They will not hear of Peace. Now if the Nomination of Commissioners
for the Militia be deviced, as the fittest Instrument in order to security of
Sides, as no doubt it is; reason will, that, as the Fears are equal and
reciprocal on both sides, so should the securities be also; And then what
reason is there in the world, that the King should not as well desire the sole
Nomination of all the Commissioners of the Militia, in order to His better
Security from Them; as that They should desire the sole Nomination of those
Commissioners, in order to their better security from Him? Oh! there is great
Reason, they will tell us; and such a Reason that we little thought on; Full
Narration, Page 92. No. CXXXVI.
For This Power of the Commissioners, whom they desire to Nominate, without the
King, is not to be exercised by them until a Peace be concluded upon the
Treaty, and then His Majesty will be fully secured by the Laws of the
Kingdom, and by the duties and affections of His People. If I understand
ought, the Result of that which is here said, is this: There are two ways of
securing both the King and the Kingdom, when the Peace is once settled, from
those mutual Fears and Iealoufies, which the one has of the other; and they
are these: First the sole and whole Nomination of such a number of
Commissioners, that shall have power over all the Forces of this Kingdom both
by Sea and Land: that is one way; and Secondly, The benefit and use of the
Laws of the Land, together with the Duties and Affections of the People to
guard ones Person; that is another way. Now the justest and most equal way, to
divide this double Security between both Parties, against their double Fears,
is this: For Them to take the Sole Nomination of all Commissioners that shall
have Power over all the Forces of the Kingdom, both by Sea and Land; and so
secure the Kingdom this way: and for Him to betake himself to the Laws of
the Land, and the Duties and Affections of His People; and so secure Himself
that way. But what if this way be neither just nor equal? I have a just
suspicion upon it, which I wish they would remove; For I demand: This Security,
which the Laws of the Land, and the Duties and Affections of the People can
give, either it is greater then that other Security, which consists in the Sole
Nomination of Commissioners, or it is less, or it is even, and as commensurate
in all parts and proportions, as any two things can be. That both these
Securities are equal on all parts, I believe, they will not say; because I
know, they never measured them; for albeit, they may reckon and number the
strength of their Horses, and their Arms, yet they may not reckon and number
the Affections and Hearts of the People: or if they have numbered them, and find
them equal on all parts; I hope I may say it (...) not Incivility, and I know
They must (...) It is not Injustice, (...) two Equal Securities, for the King
to Choose, and then the matter is ended. But if they say, it is either greater
or less, then are the King and the Kingdom, still in the very same
Insecurities, Fears, and Iealousies which they were before; and so these ways
which they have found out for mutual securities, do not reach their Ends; and
by consequence are not in reason to be insisted on. For if the Laws of the
Land, and the Duties and Affections of the People be a lesser security to the
King, then the sole nomination of Commissioners is to the Parliament; then is
not He so secure from Fears and Iealousies from Them, as They are from Him;
And if they be a greater security, then are not they so secure from Fears and
Iealousies from Him, as He is from Them So that, take these ways how you
please, and they must needs prove either impossible or useless; useless, if
one of the securities be greater or less then the other, for then they do not
equally proportion the Securities unto the Fears: Impossible, if once they go
about to number the Hearts and Affections of the People, and reckon upon them:
which commonly the greater sort of People themselves do not truly know.

And as it is against Reason, this Demand of Theirs, so is it against Law; The
Power of War and Peace, and the Managery of the Civil Sword, being so
rivetted and incorporated into the Crown, by the Fundamental Laws of this
Land, that without manifest Alteration in the very Foundation of this
Government, it cannot be distinguished and divided from it. When They are told
of this, They tell us again; that this Demand of Theirs, conteines no such
Alteration, as we speak off, Full Narration, p. 62. no. LXXV.
but Desires that, which by the Wisdom of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms
is judged necessary at this time, for the security of His Majesty's Kingdoms,
and preservation of the Peace now to be settled. But if these words admit of
any, they must admit of one of these four senses; and let us see, whither any
one of them make a true Answer to that which has been said. For first, either
they must mean, that to have had a Power, and now to have it not, is no
Alteration, (and surely that is false; for if a ^otion from being such, to a
not being such; be a proper Alte^ation, as the Philosopher tells us, it is;
Certainly, to have the Sole Power of the Sword in ones hands, is a being such;
and to have no Sword in ones Power, is a not being such; and so by consequence
an Alteration.) Or Secondly, they must mean, that such an Alteration in the
Government of the State, which both the Parliaments of the Kingdom desire, is
not to be termed an Alteration; (and truly that is true; so long, as both the
Parliaments only desire it: but when They obtain that desire, then it is as
perfect an Alteration, as if it were made by Force and Violence: as a man does
as truly loose his money when he is cheated, as he does when he is robbed: and
then it is false again.) Or in the third place, Their meaning must be, that,
that Alteration which is for the better, namely, the preserving of the Peace,
and securing of the Kingdoms, and is judged necessary to that end, by the
wisdom of both the Parliaments, that, is not to be called an Alteration; (and
if the other sense be false, this cannot be true: for it is all one, in respect
of the Truth and Nature of an Alteration in the Civil Body, whither it be done
in Passion, and for the worse, or in Judgment, and for the better: as it is
all one, in regard of the Truth and Nature of an Alteration in the Natural
Body, when he that was well the last minute, and is ill the next, whither he be
made so sick, either by his Surset or his Physic.) Or last of all, They must
mean, that They do not know what an Alteration is: (and that may be True; but
supposing the Wisdom of the Parliament, it were better for their credit to be
False:) And then, take these words of theirs, in any one of these four senses,
which you please, and they signify just nothing in the way of a true Answer to
that objection concerning Alteration, which our Commissioners urged them with
before; For the words taken in either of the three first senses, do indeed
contain an Answer, but that Answer is not Truth: and taken in the last sense,
They may indeed contain a Truth, but that Truth is no Answer.

This Demand notwithstanding so senseless and unreasonable in the very
substance of the thing, receives a new accession of Insolence, from the
circumstance of time: For (as if their Sovereignty could have no soul, unless
that soul were Immortal.) First, they desire this nomination of the
Commissioners, without any limitation or restriction of Time; and Secondly they
desire it for seven years at least, Full Narration, p. 88. no, CXXXI. 21. Feb.
and after the expiration of that term, to be settled and exercised in such
manner, as shall be agreed on by His Majesty, and the Two Houses of Parliament
in England, and by His Majesty, and the Estates of the Parliament in Scotland,
and not otherwise. So that for these seven years it seems they will proceed
with the King, as God did with Nebuchad-nezzar for his seven times; He shall
converse with Beasts, (that is, He shall be no better then any one of the
Beasts of the People, as the Prophet speaks,) His Royalty, and His Imperial
Rights all this while being taken from Him; which after those seven years,
like Nebuchad-nezzars understanding, shall revert and return safe again unto
Him. And is not this a gracious condescension? Is not this a kind relaxation of
the former Rigor? are not these men willing to comply, and to do any thing for
Peace? I will not say that either this is a condescension, and a complying on
their parts, or that nothing is; but I will say that either this was a
condescension and complying on their parts, or that nothing was; for in all
those Twenty days of the Treaty, which should have bin intended by both sides,
for reciprocal abatements of the rigor of their first Desires, They never
receded from any one part of any one of their Propositions, but only in the
particular of this Limitation; and eighteen of the twenty days were full
elapsed and expired, before ever they expressed that. But what if these
Oraculous words of theirs should have a double sense? what if that which we are
willing to take, as a little Grant* should prove a greater Grievance? I think
if these words [And after the expiration of the said term, the Militia of the
Kingdom to be seiled, and exercised in such manner, as shall be agreed on by
His Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament, etc.] be well weighed and
examined, although they may seem to return the King, after His seven years
Apprenticeship, unto his Liberty again, and as it were make Him Free, yet they
will signify no more in order, to any such true Freedom, then in that old
expression of [ For ever and a day] that Day, there signifies in order unto any
true time; For if the King shall not exercise His own Legal Power of the
Militia, when those seven years are expired, Otherwise, then by both Houses
of Parliament shall be agreed on (as their words expressly say, he shall not)
what is the difference between His condition, during these seven years, and
His condition when those seven years shall be expired, but only in this, that
for seven years He shall have no Power with them; and after those seven
years He shall have no Power without them; so that either way He is bereaved
of His Right; and for ought I can see yet, more this last way, which is
proposed in the way of Concession, and Favor; then he is, the first way, which
is imposed by way of Oppression and Rigor. For the King, having no Power with
them, but being excluded for seven years, from the nomination of
Commissioners, has thus much of Liberty left him, that he is not obliged,
either to God, or Man, to answer for those miscarriages of State, that shall
happen in the mean while, by Persons that may abuse their Trust; and although
he suffer something, yet all this while, he is sure, that He shall Do nothing,
against his own will; But the King having no power without them, that is,
having his Power ordered, as it is like to be, when his Seven years are out,
by both His Houses of Parliament, and [OTHERWISE] not to be exercised; may be
reduced to this strait and necessity, that if both His Houses of Parliament
shall agree upon some Person notoriously disaffected to His Majesty's Rights or
Government, who thereby, perchance, shall have merited some mark of His
Displeasure; The King notwithstanding, shall be compelled and enforced, to Do
something against his own will; and to set upon such a man a special stamp
of Confidence and Favor; Which indeed, rather is a piece of infelicity then a
part of any Power; as we call it Power in God, whereby he is able to do any
Thing; and yet, do not call it Power but Weakness, even in God himself, if
he should be able to sin.

And having thus extracted all the Pure Metal of the Crown, by their demands;
having thus extenuated and annihilated all the Kings Power of making War;
they begin to bethink themselves, of disposing the Allay too, for their best
advantage; They will not leave Him, so much, as a Power neither, of Making
Peace. For they demand, That the Cessation of Ireland, Full Narration, p. 95.
no. CXXXVI. 7. Feb.
and all Treaties with the Rebels, without consent of both Houses of
Parliament be pronounced void; And that the Prosecution of the War in
Ireland, be settled in both Houses of Parliament, to be managed by the joint
advice of both the Kingdoms: Good God! That these ill men should not be
content to rob their King of all His Power and Royalty; that they should not be
content to render Him no True King; But their petulant insolence must attempt
His very Faith and Honesty; But they must attempt to render Him no True Man? As
if they had a purpose to constrain Him, to a needless breach of Promise now;
that with more color, and better credit, hereafter, they might distrust Him;
as they report of the daughter of Sejanus, who was first purposely ravished,
that after wards, she might be put to death; because being a Virgin, by the Law
she could not suffer? For this particular demand of making the Cessation void,
was made in the month of February last; and that very Cessation voyded of it
self, expired in the Month of March; Now if the Kings Commissioners had
agreed to the latter part of this Demand, the settling of the prosecution of the
War in both Houses of Parliament, for the time to come; what could the
voyding of this Cessation contribute to the current of their design (but only
by way of scandalous Reflection upon His Majesty's breach of Faith and Promise)
when that Cessation would void it self, would exhale and expire of it self,
before ever those Designs of theirs could be ripe for any prosecution?

I confess, when I look well upon it, me thinks the true state of this
question, concerning the Irish Cessation, is the same with the state of that
question in Plutarke, concerning Demonides his shoes. Demonides was a lame
impotent man, and therefore had his shoes made very wide and easy for his
feet; Those shoes, when a cunning youth had stolen one day from him, and some
of his neighbors coming in, and willing to extenuate and alleviate his Loss,
that he might be the less affected with it, had told him, that they were but a
scurvy pair of clouterly shoes, and very naughtily made; Demonides replied,
that the shoes indeed, were no very good shoes; but they were very good
shoes for Demonides, because a better pair would not have fitted his sore
feet half so well. In like manner, it may be said of this Cessation; That
indeed, it was no very good Cessation; because peradventure other Cessations
heretofore, have been made, according to the more punctual Rules of Honor and
Advantage: But it was a very good Cessation for Ireland; because the condition
of her infirmity was such, that she could admit no better. For when the Chief
Justices and Officers of State, when the chief Commanders and Officers of the
Camp, when both of them shall complain unto the King, of the miserable
condition and posture of Ireland, for very want of Food; and advertise Him, by
their Letters, of her present inabilities to maintain the prosecution of a
War; what could the King do more, in discharge of His duty both to God and
Man, then to admit of a Cessation, in order to a present Peace? The Houses of
Parliament it seems would not help them at all; (for after Six months
expectation, they send them provision of Victuals, for some Seven days, as
if they purposed a scorn to the Miseries of their poor Brethren, rather then
a succor.) And the King could not help them better, then by giving his
Approbation to a Cessation, which the Public Ministers of the State of
Ireland, had ordered and assented to, there, as fittest for the present
condition of that Kingdom; and so show Himself, at least willing to Respite
that Cause as well as He could, which He well knew himself unable, to Revenge.

Now in Inducijs Bellum manet, quamvis Pugna cesset, say our Books; So long as
the Parties engaged in a War, proceed no further then Cessations, and Truces
for a time, There is only a suspension of the Fight, there is no suffocation of
the Quarrel; which may better be resumed again, when they that manage it,
shall have out-grown those necessities and encombrances, which compelled them
first unto it: so that if this Cessation were Destructive to either of the
Parties, it is most like to be so to the Rebels; who were not in that visible
Distress, and want of all sort of Provision, as the Protestant party was; and
if the condition of the protestants were the worse condition when the Cessation
began, because the actual necessities of both sides were unequal, and We
wanted more then They; certainly the condition of the Rebels cannot be the
better condition, when the Cessation shall end; because the possible supplies
of both sides must be confessed equal, and They can be no more releiv'd, then
We. Notwithstanding all this, this Cessation of Ireland is exploded, and
exclaimed against by both Houses of Parliament, as destructive to His Majesty's
good Subjects, Full Narration, p. 99. no. CXLV.
and to the Protestant Religion, and only for the advantage of the Popish
Rebels. Indeed I do read, that there may be Destruction in a Cessation; for the
Prophet David calling all men to behold the works of the Lord, and what
destruction he has wrought upon the earth; in the 46 Psalm; makes his first
instance in the point of a Cessation, in the next words that follow, He makes
Wars to cease. verse. 9. But the Prophet had a Mystical meaning in his words;
and so no doubt have They; For surely they mean that a Cessation is destructive
to the good Subjects of Ireland, just in the very same sense, that the want of
Victuals is a Preservative for them; and, if that be not a mystical sense, I
know not what is. But if these men would speak plain, they would say, That
this Cessation in Ireland is Destructive to His Majesty's ill Subjects here in
England, who cannot have that convenient color now, to raise Forces and levy
Moneys, for the suppression of a Rebellion there; which Moneys and Forces, they
may convert, (as heretofore too often they have done) to the feeding and
fomenting of their own Rebellion here. And this is evidently the Reason, why
they so desire a prosecution of the War in Ireland, and demand the settlement
of that Prosecution in their own hands; that having once a Power, of
impropriating all the Succors of Ireland, to their own Rebellious ends and
purposes, they may with better advantage, manage the War here in England,
against the King; when they shall have Two swords for His One; and may fight
against Him, not only with His Enemies, but with His Friends.

For if both Houses of Parliament, intended only the prosecution of Justice
upon those accursed Rebels, and not some vicious ends of their own, no less
accursed then they, (for the grounds of all Rebellions are alike; and if there
be any just ground for one, no ground is unjust, that is laid for any other)
Certainly the King would be thought on, as a fitter instrument of execution,
(whither He be considered as King, or as one single Person, who can have but
one will, and so cannot differ from himself) then a collected body, made out
of many Persons of two Kingdoms, (those of each Kingdom having a negative
voice) who thereby may have Two wills, and so differ amongst themselves;
whereby the main business must needs receive obstruction. Neither does that
avoid this inconvenience, which these men say; namely, Full Narration, p. 120.
no. CLXXIV.
That in case of any disagreement in the Committee, the two Houses of
Parliament are to prosecute that War; unless they can imagine any man so
simple, as not to think it as possible for the two Houses of Parliament to
disagree, as for one Committee; Besides, when the Parliament had a mind to
settle the Militia of England for the preservation of the Peace, in the hands
of some Commissioners of their own naming, and would exclude the King, from so
much as the nomination of any one amongst them; They give this, as a reason of
their desire; Full Narration, p. 92 no. CXXXVI. 22* Feb.
That is the Commissioners should be severally named, as the King would have
had them; probably they would have acted according to their several interests,
and the war thereby would be more easily revived; And is it not as probable
now, if the prosecution of the War in Ireland should be settled in a Committee
of two several Kingdoms, England and Scotland, that the Persons of that
Committee, should have several interests, and ends in the carrying on of that
War, according to their several Necessities or Ambitions, and so what one
aims at, as a Conversion, the other may intend, as Conquest? by which means,
the War either will be retarded, or, which is worse, exchanged? I do not
asperse either of the two Nations with the unworthiness of these Designs; But
I must needs say this: When a great man's House is on Fire, which he is able to
quench, with the servants help of his own Family, and yet strangers will be
pressing in whether he will or no; It is an even wager, if Two men come in
together to Help; but One of them comes to Steal.

If this Committee of both Kingdoms should have but one and the same end, and
that end, a good one. The quenching of the Fire of that Rebellion in Ireland,
and the reducing of that unhappy Kingdom to His Majesty's Obedience: yet
certainly, reason would not, that the prosecution of such a good end, should be
put into the hands of such State-Empericks, who will go about to cure a burnt
Finger, by putting it into another Fire: who think to quench the flames of
that Rebellion there, by blowing up a greater Rebellion here. And let no man
wonder, that I call this Rebellion a greater: For as the Casuists use to say,
That, when a man Swears, the greater the subject matter of his Oath is, the
less is the sin: So do I say, That, when a man Rebels, the better his
Ground is, whither it be Religion or Gods Glory, the worse is his Rebellion:
because he goes about to lay that for a Foundation, which will never
incorporate with any part of the Superstructure or Building. Nay, further then
all this: If it should please God to give these men the grace of true
Repentance, so that they should detest this unnatural Rebellion here; and with
unfeigned hearts should set themselves to the extirpation and rooting out of
that Rebellion there; yet, in reason, were not the prosecution of that War,
to be put into their hands, even then; because, in the Traverses of an
uncertain War, In those ordinary reciprocations and returns of Fortune; In
those ebbings and flowings of Success, which are not the less natural to
great Enterprises, because, less certain: There will fall out many particular
emergent occasions, both for Action and Council, quae, non dum fiunt
laudentur, sed cum facta sunt, as the Orator speaks: The Success whereof,
will much depend upon the Secrecy: and the greatest commendation that can be
given the doing of them, is, that they are already done. Which Counsels can
never run so clear through a Sive, as through a Pipe: where, many Heads have
the conveighing thereof, as where, but one. And therefore it was not a piece of
Pride but Policy, in that great Statesman, who would usually debate all his
Designs of War amongst his Council; but then, would be sure never to follow
that Advice, which generally was accounted for the best: because by long
experience he had observed, that a less Expedient, accompanied with secrecy
and silence, operated more in the ways of Advantage; then a greater Expedient,
exposed to common observation and knowledge. And then let all the World Judge,
whither it stand with ordinary Prudence and Reason, to commit the prosecution
of a War to their Hands, who do now manage an Actual War against their
own Prince, and are in open Rebellion against Him; which ordinary Wisdom and
Discretion would not entrust them with (as being a Multitude) if They should
return to their Subjection and Obedience.

IV. In the last place, observe their inexorable obduration and deafness
against all enlargement, prorogation, or reviging of the Treaty. For being
importuned by the King Commissioners for an Addition of Time (that so, as they
might give Fuller Answers to those Propositions of the Parliament if there were
occasion; so they might hope to receive some kind of Answer to those
Propositions of the King: of which some, received no direct Answer, and some,
no Answer at all.) They kept them still in suspense, till the very Twentieth
Day, that Day, when the Treaty was to break up, before ever They would give
them Answer: And then they tell them, Full Narration, p. 148. no. CXCV.
That their Lordships having not given full and satisfactory answers concerning
Religion, the Militia, and Ireland, They cannot for those reasons expect an
Addition of Time: (A man would think, they should rather have given more time
in hope of Fuller Answers: specially having nothing else to do, but to receive
the Homage of our Commissioners, as if they had come rather to keep a Court,
then to speed a Commission.) Neither have they received any Instructions to
continue this Treaty any longer then the Twenty Days, of which this is the
last. Oh! the torment of having an ill Conscience, and hearing Reason! I dare
say, never was any Cheater in the Pillory, gladder to see the Judges come from
Westminster, then these ill men were to s^e the Twentieth Day, that was to
redeem them from the cruelties of a convinced understanding! And yet, as your
ordinary Players, when they cannot play that Comedy which was intended, because
some of their principal men of parts are drunk: will lay the fault on the
Spectators, and say, the House or Galleries are not full: So these Actors of a
Peace; when they durst not continue the Treaty any longer, because of those
Overtures that were made by our Commissioners concerning a Cessation,
concerning the Kings Return to Westminster, and concerning a present
disbanding of both Armies, the very steame and air whereof, was able to turn
the brains of this Rebellion, and to make it stagger; They tell our
Commissioners, that it seems We had resolved that the Treaty should end with
the Twenty Days; Full Narration, p. 154. no. CXCVII. 22. Feb.
the means to continue it, being so well known to be, a good Progress in the
Propositions for Religion, the Militia, and Ireland; wherein they cannot find
any satisfaction that was intended by Us to be agreed unto. But when (as any
man would imagine) did they tell them this? Truly just, when the last instant
of the Twenty Days was now expired; After Twelve a clock at night; when They
were sure no Answer could be given, as part of the Treaty, without their
Consent; As if the Rules of Treating were like those of Scolding, and the
simple World must needs imagine, that because They had the last Word, They had
the best Cause. I must profess ingenuously, when I met with this particular,
and compared it with the drolleryes of many of their other Papers, where mere
Fumes are maintained like Fortifications, and so much Reason, as will hardly
make a cracker, is mounted like some whole piece of Canon, that must sweep and
carry all before it; I could not, on the sudden, satisfy my self, whither I
were reading Solids or Phancies; whither I had met with a Relation or a
Romance. I could never hear any thing of the Presbytery, but me thoughts, it
sounded like the report of some Enchanted Castle, which every Knight is bound
by his Adventure to seek, but knows not where to find: For their
Commissioners urge and press Our Commissioners, ever and anon unto it: and yet
never so much as offer them any particular Idea, visible Form, or
Representation thereof, whereby they might be enabled to pass their Judgment
and Opinion of it. I never could read their Papers concerning Episcopacy, but
me thoughts, it looked, like to some strange Blacke-Knight, that was much
afflicted and oppressed, but no body could know the Cause: for I saw plainly,
They were resolved to ruin it, though they had no Reason. And then, let the
ground be never so disadvantagious, the Weapons never so unequal, the Quarrel
never so unjust, or the Design never so impossible: I found that the Knight
did ever kill the Giant, as in all Romances, He is wont to do: For let the
Proposition be against Law, let it be against Reason, nay, let it be against
Religion, all is one for that: and the Parliament is sure to have the better of
the King.

But did Our Commissioners make no good Progress in their three Propositions
as these men pretend? First, it is evident, We proceeded farther in Their
Propositions, then They did in Ours; for, apprehending the business of that
Meeting in its true and proper notion, as being intended rather for a trial of
Judgments, then a tickling of Humors, Our Commissioners never returned Answer
to their Papers, but such as was elemented and made up of Reason and
Conscience, Justice and Prudence, which of necessity must satisfy, either wife
men or good; whereas They rather gave Excuses then Answers, when They did give
any; and sometimes They would not give so much as that: which I think was so
far from being Satisfactory, that it was not Civil. And do these men accuse
us of breaking up the Treaty by our ill Progress in their Propositions; when
We had Propositions, (which They were to Treat on as well according to the
Tenor of their own Commission,) wherein notwithstanding They made not so much
as any kind of progress at all? Secondly, We conceive, (and so We doubt not
but the wiser world will,) that the Commissioners on both sides, were to be
reckoned on as Parties, who were mutually to make up this good progress
between them, by their complying and cooperating Hands; and not as Judges for
the one side to determine, whether that were good or no, which the other side
had made; and therefore we think, there is no more reason on the one side, why
our Progress on Their Propositions should be reckoned and accounted no good
Progress, because They say it is not; Then there is on the other side, why it
should not be reckoned and accounted a good Progress, because We say it is.

They find themselves a little pinch't with this; and therefore They produce a
Reason against our good Progress, which they doubt not, but will satisfy the
World, (Then, truly must they serve the World, as they served Us at Vxbridge:
suffer it only to receive a Paper, and then* not suffer it to Return an
Answer; for otherwise, there is room enough for a Reply.) And that reason, is
this: that, For Religion We granted them very little or nothing but what already
They were in possession of by the Laws of this Kingdom. Should this which
they allege be true, certainly this were a strange Argument against us, to
prove, that we made no good Progress in their Propositions, because we granted
little or nothing, but what they were already in possession of by Law; For, if
the defense of their Laws, was one of the chief ingredients that made the
War, (as out of doubt it was; and four years ago, what other language did
they speak? wherefore did they take up Arms, but for the maintenance of
Religion, their Liberties, and their Laws?) Assuredly, the bare Concession of
the free use and benefit of those Laws, is a sign of fair progression in the
way to Peace. He that should have told the Soldier when he first took up
Arms, that he was to fight for the making of New Laws, and not for the
maintaining of the Old, would, I believe, have found but very cold Musters; But
in few years, see, to what a Contradiction of sin these Men are grown; At
first, They took up their Arms to compel and force the King to keep the
Laws; and now, They are resolved by like, never to lay them down again, if
He will not Break them. It is one of the Kings Propositions offered to them,
Full Narration, p. 18. no. VIII.
That whatsoever has been done contrary to the known Laws of the Kingdom,
should be renounced and recalled: and I dare presume, His Majesty would allow
that for a good Progress upon His Propositions, if the Parliament would but
grant Him that; nay, He would ask no more; He would repose Himself in that,
as the sole Complement of His Desires; and yet, that very thing which the King
would be contented to rely and rest on, as upon His End; namely, That nothing
should be done contrary to the known established Law of this Land; That, will
not the Parliament accept of in the condition of a good Progress, only
bending and leading thereunto. Truly, this Allegation of theirs, is so full of
advantage, that I could almost wish it True: that is, I could wish our
Commissioners had not granted them, so much as very little, but had granted
them entirely nothing at all, but what they are in possession of already by
Law; because I cannot well see, how they could grant it. But, what if all this
which they allege be false? What if our Commissioners were so far from
granting them very little, but what they were in possession of already by Law,
that they granted them very much? What if those particular Concessions, which
were never yet established by Law, were more then those which were? Nay, what
if it evidently be made appear, that they never were by Law of the Land in
possession of any the least of those Concessions, which our Commissioners
offered unto them? I am so charitable in conceiving these men may have some
Flesh in their Foreheads, that I hope the Scotsh Commissioners (who must be a
little excused for not being Acquainted with our Laws, unless they had rather
be accused for their Acquaintance) had the penning of this Paper, that was the
Stopple of the Treaty; because, although the words be English, yet the sense,
is Scotsh; But out of all doubt, there is not greater evidence of Light, then
of this Truth; That of all those nine or ten Concessions which our
Commissioners offered, upon the point of Religion, in the way of
Reconciliation, and Advancement of a blessed Peace; There were none of them,
but were the Spawnes of so many New Laws: There was not one of them, to which
the Church, and Churchmen were heretofore obliged, by any known established
Law of the Kingdom, whatsoever. And now let all men Judge of their Faith in
other Testimonies, which cannot easily be reduced to a convenient Test: who
dare thus abuse the World with Falshhood in This, which lies so open and
obnoxious to a plain and ordinary Trial.

Secondly, For the Militia, they say, Full Narration, p. 155. no. CXCVII.
We made no good Progress therein, and therefore were resolved, it seems, the
Treaty should break up; Because We thought it not fit to consent to any one of
their Demandes, but made some new Propositions of our own, which were not in
any degree sufficient for the settling and securing of the Peace of both the
Kingdoms. I did ever think, till now, that it was one thing to make a
Progress, and another thing, to make an End: Do they say, We made no good
Progress in the Militia, because We consented not unto their whole Demands?
They might altogether as properly say, that a Countryman travailing toward
London, has made no good Progress in his Journey; because, He is not come as
yet, to Charing-Crosse. Questionless a Progress is made on their Demandes,
when We Consent, but unto any part thereof; and the better that part is, that
is consented to, the better is the Progress. Now, if half of any Thing be a
good part, then is our Progress upon their Demands, a good Progress; for We
consented to the one half of every thing that was required. They demanded the
Nomination of all the Commissioners: and We granted them the Nomination of
half; They demanded the Militia for Seven years: and We would have given
them it, for Three. But I perceive, He grants them nothing, that does not grant
them all; and it fares with the Parliaments Demands, as some report it does, in
the fortunate Islands of Arabia, with the People Days; They know not what
belongs to dawning: They never see Day, till the whole Sun appears unto them.

Besides, if Our Commissioners had made no better Progress, then They pretend:
if We had exhausted all those Twenty Days assigned for the Treating upon Their
Propositions, in mere Tergiversation and Cavil: if We had denied Our Assent
to all their Demands, and then had been never able to make good any colorable
Reason for that Our Denial; yet certainly, Their Original Commission having a
kind of Counter part, and they being authorized to Treat upon those Three
Propositions offered by Us to Them: as well, as upon these other Three, offered
by Them to Us: Reason and equity would, that an equal number of Propositions,
should have been allowed an equal number of Days: and then, if the Successes
and Issues of both, had happily fallen out equally unprofitable, yet, no one
side could have had just cause for to complain, of the partial and uneven
proceedings of the other. And although We do not urge it, as an Argument of
Insolence and Pride, that Their Propositions must be Treated on, in the first
place, before the Kings; yet, when the pretense of Our ill Progress upon
Theirs, is made a Reason of their no Progress at all on Ours: We cannot but
look upon this Order and Disposal of the parts, as an Argument of great
Inconvenience, against a Peace: and which has somewhat of the visage of an
Affected and Studied Obstruction, cast in the ways thereof. For those Three
Propositions of Theirs, if They had been denied at Vxbridge; yet, they might
have been granted at Westminster, in a Full and Free Convention of Parliament;
out of which I know not well, indeed, how They could be granted. But these
Three Propositions of Ours, They, cannot be granted at Westminster, if They be
denied at Vxbridge: unless you think it fit to persuade one man to lay down
the Bucklers, whilst another beats him. The Kings Proposition for a present
Cessation in England, could not be settled, but in a Treaty; The Parliaments
Proposition against the Cessation which was already past, in Ireland, might be
settled, out of it; and yet, so enraged and incensed are these men against that
Cessation there; that they will not endure the mention of any thing that sounds
like it, here; as that impetuous Emperor, who, by witchcraft having learnt
three letters of His name, that was afterward to Succeed him; put every man to
death whom he could lay hands on, that had those three letters, for the
beginning of his Name. His Majesty's Return to Westminster (which Our
Commissioners desired in the second place) could not be Safe, but as both Sides
agree, before He commes: But Episcopacy (which their Commissioners desired to
have abolisht) could not be, but unsafe, even after his coming: for if there
be just Reason to take it away, now; there will be reason, then. And yet, so
transported are they, with a passionate and eager pursuit of a thing, in the
persuasion whereof both Parties profess they differ: that they will not admit
Discourse, or Treat of another thing, wherein both Sides profess before hand,
that They do agree. Both Armies cannot be Disbanded (according to that Demand
of Ours) but before the King and Parliament do meet: but the Power of the
Militia, may be settled (according to that Demand of Theirs) after that Meeting;
and indeed, there is but little reason, that this Power of the Militia should
now come in projection in these Times of War: which must lie Dormant, as
Themselves confess, and not be put in Execution, till the Time of Peace. And
yet, so violent are these Men in settling of a Power, which must not be
exercised, but in the Time of Peace; That they will hear of no course, that
may be taken in the mean time, for dissolving of the War: like ordinary
People in a Croude; that will make such have, every man to get first out of
doors, that no man stirs. So that, upon viewing of the whole matter, We can
cast all these obstacles and Impediments in the ways of Peace, that arose out
of this perverse Method of handling the Propositions, into no other Mould, but
this; That They, never intending to conclude a Peace, resolved in the first
place to Treat of Their Propositions, which they knew, no man with Honesty or
Conscience could Grant; That, in the second place, they might with better
color avoid the Treating upon Our Propositions, which they knew, no man with
Conscience or Honesty, could offer to Deny.

And, if all this which has bin said, be not enough to persuade with men of
common understanding, that these Rebels never did intend a Peace, but that they
purpose to make this War, which at first was their Necessity, now, become
their Trade (for too many of them know not how to live without it) yet this One
Consideration is sufficient to enforce them to belief, if they will but weigh
it well, and that is this: That, They never would allow the Tender and Offer of
all those things, for Overtures of Peace; the Stop and Obstruction whereof,
they themselves, ever professed, till now, was the greatest Incentive and
Occasion of the War.

They took up Arms, for the Liberty of the Subject; to vindicate and to
recover that; and yet, in all this Treaty, they never let fall so much as any
one word or syllable, tending or bending thereunto. They did well to set those
words, [ The Liberty of the Subject] in their Banners, so as they did; For all
the World cannot but see, that they meant it for a Flourish; For, when the
Kings Commissioners urged and pressed this point, of the Liberty of the Subject
in many several particulars, and desired, Full Narration, p. 18. no. VIII.
Prop. 3.
that all illegal Power used over the Subject, as imprisoning, or putting him
to death without Law; stopping of his Habeas Corpus, and imposing upon his
Estate, without Act of Parliament (the very grievance, which these men
heretofore possessed the World they labored under; and therefore urged them to
take up Arms, that so they might redress them) should from henceforth be
utterly disclaimed; They would never so much as admit of any Treaty thereof, or
return any colorable Answer concerning it.

They took up Arms for Defense of their Religion; And yet, in all the Twenty
days of this whole Treaty, were never able to produce any one Article of
Doctrine, avowed and established in the Church of England, wherein that Church
had receded either from the Truth, or from Her self: And for points of
Discipline; when the King offered in His Propositions, all ease to tender
Consciences, in such particulars as should be agreed on by a National Synod
legal called; They would never hear thereof; but, put off the Treating of
that Proposition, as they did the rest, with this uncivil Answer; Full
Narration, p. 141. no. CLXXXIV.
That, when the Houses of Parliament shall be satisfied in the good progress
of the Treaty upon their Propositions, concerning Religion, the Militia, and
Ireland, they will give time for the Treaty upon these Propositions sent by His
Majesty; In the point of which Satisfaction, they were resolved before hand,
both to be Parties and Judges, as already has appeared.

They have raised several Armies, upon this very reason and ground, To bring
the King (whom they pretended to be seduced by Evil Council) up unto the
Parliament (His great, and His good Council, as the World must needs imagine)
By means whereof, too much of Christian Blood has been already shed, and, as
yet, shed in vain; (for by Force, They never yet were able to obtain it) And
They do now Refuse His Majesty's willing Offer of Return; or to Treat of any
Fair means of Accommodation, in pursuit thereof, the only visible way left
under Heaven, by which They may effect it. And if They shall go about, after
all this, to Farce and fill the World with Noise and Clamor, that They would
have had a Peace, but the King would not. (as it is like they will) For my
part, I shall leave off further Persuasion, and fall to Prayer; humbly
beseeching God, who is the Searcher of Hearts, and knows the Spirits of all
Men; To prosper on both Sides, those Issues and Successes, which They hope now
to have, by War; according unto those upright Intentions, and unfeigned
Purposes, which They then had, of Peace.

FINIS.

