A CONTINVATION OF THE HISTORIES OF Foreign MARTYRS: From the happy reign of
the most renowned Queen Elizabeth, to these Times. With sundry Relations of
those bloody Massacres executed upon the Protestants in the Cities of France,
in the year 1572. WHEREUNTO ARE ANNEXED the two famous Deliverances of our
English Nation: the one from the Spanish Invasion in 88. The other from the
Gunpouder Treason, in the year 1605. Together with the Barbarous cruelties
exercised upon the Professors of the Gospel in the Valtoline, 1621.

LONDON, Printed by RIC. HEARN, for the Company of Stationers, Anno Dom. 1641.

decorative title page border, featuring an arch or compartment of two
solomonic or spiralling columns supporting grape-vines, with a vase or urn in
front (though not in McKerrow, this title page was previously used for a number
of books, including the 1587 edition of Holinshed's Chronicles) POSSIDETE
ANIMAS VESTRAS
NH

1574



A TREATISE OF AFFLICTIONS AND PERSECVTIONS OF THE FAITHFVLL, PREPARING THEM
WITH PATIENCE TO SVFFER MARTYRDOM.
CHAP. I. Showing, That such as will live godly in Christ Jesus must needs
suffer afflictions.
WE are all prone by nature to decline afflictions, each one supposing to find
out some back way to escape them. First, Some are of opinion, that they can
quit themselves by playing the Temporizers; Secondly, Others, by hiding and
concealing themselves; Thirdly, Another sort, by flying from those places where
Tyrants vex and domineere; Fourthly, a fourth, thinking to bear off blows by
their greatness and credit they have gotten in the world; Fifthly and lastly, a
fifth sort imagining to find some evasion, either by reason of their allies, or
good services which they have done; dreaming forsooth, that either these or the
like projects should yield them good respect, and preserve them from being
called into question by those that hate them. In a word, which of us has not
some fetch or other to break loose, if he should be either examined or pursued?

This is the true cause that so few are prepared, and careful timely to
foresee what belongs to suffering shame and disgrace for the truth, as the
discommodities of long imprisonment, or what appertains to the constant and
patient bearing of hideous torments and death for the cause of the Gospel. But
alas, all these are but as fig leaves, and vain hopes, which being somewhat
pleasing to the flesh do only dull and deceive us; causing us to grow secure
and careless, and so unprovided to suffer, till we be surprised, and in safe
custody in our enemies hands. So that, when we should be able to give a reason
1 Pet. 3. 15.
of the hope that is in us, we have not a word to say.

To prevent these so great inconveniences, let us hold this for a sure
principle, That it is impossible to live godly, and not suffer persecution. For
God has so decreed, that 2 Timothy 3. 12. Romans 8. 20.
if we will partake of the glory of his Son, we must first be conformed to
him in his sufferings. Yea, this is that strait gate and narrow way which
leads unto life. Through Mat. 7. 14.
much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14. 22. and
whosoever bears not the Cross of Christ, following him, cannot be his
Disciple. The Apostle in Luke 14. 27. Heb. 12. 7.
the Epistle to the Hebrews plainly tells us, That if we be children, we must
taste of that discipline which God nurtures his withal in his Family. It is
and must be the portion of Gods beloved ones, to live in this world as sheep
amongst wolves. Mat. 10. 16.


Indeed, if we could live without sin, we might then conceive some hope of
freedom from the Cross. But whilst corrupt nature lives in us, and brings
forth such bitter fruits, God has, and will in all ages raise up some Tyrant
or other, as means to mortify and tame the pride and rebellion thereof. Devils
may as soon cease to be, as that enmity should cease between the seed of the
woman and the seed of the serpent. As long as the Genesis 3. 15. Mat. 8. 24.
Church continues to be Christ's poor Barque in the salt sea of this world, she
must make her account to be tossed with storms and tempests of persecutions.

What should I say, no Crown is to be expected in Heaven, if we will not fight
the 2 Timothy 47. Psalm. 126. 5. 2 Cor. 4 10.
good fight of faith here on earth; nor to reap in joy, if in this world we
refuse to sow in tears: The life of our Lord Jesus Christ cannot be manifest
in us, except we bear about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus.

Let every Christian then hold this for certain, That when the world cease
to hate the Children of God, and the Devil to envy them, then may they look,
and not before, to live in the world without persecutions.

Has not the Way, the Life, and the Truth said it? In the world you shall have
tribulation. John 16. 33.
And therefore let not the great ones of the World think to be exempted out of
this rank, more than the small: For to the Saints and members of the true
Church afflictions are even as ordinary, as is Baptism, Faith, and the Spirit
of Adoption.

Was not Moses the adopted son of Pharaobs daughter, saine to sly out of
Egypt to Exodus 2. 15. Act. 7. 29. Heb. 11. 27. 1 Samuel 26. 20: Saint Iereme in
his Commentary upon Isaiah. Dan 6. 16.
save his life? Was not David, though anointed King, hunted by Saul his pursuer
as a Partridge into the mountains? Isaiah and Daniel were of the blood Royal,
yet they escaped not; the one, from being cruelly rent in sunder with a Saw,
after he had preached to his Nation sixty years; nor the other (although next
unto the King he swayed the affairs of the Babylonish Empire) to be cast into
the lions den.

In the times of the great persecutions under Dioclesian the Emperor of Rome,
who were the first that were sacrificed, but Nicomede, and the principal
Favorites of the Court? Who is ignorant that two of the most noble Princes of
our times that ever Germany had, notwithstanding their munition and means,
were taken prisoners by the Emperor, or held captive five or six years in
great distress? What should I here mention Lady Jane Gray proclaimed Queen of
England, and yet cruelly put to death? Or Thomas Cranmer, Primate of England,
burned to ashes at Oxford? Or the Lord Cobham that religious and valiant
Knight, hanged, and burned hanging in Saint Giles in the fields? All these,
with many more, were apprehended, and not long after put to death, even then
when they might seem most to have flourished in the World.

Seeing then that neither age, sex, power nor place can secure us from
suffering, which are every where foretold in the holy Scriptures to abide us,
whether we be high or low, Act. 20. 23.
let us in the name and fear of God prepare to take up the Cross of Christ
betimes; learn we of the silly Ant in Summer to store up food against the cold
and stormy Winter Prove. 6. 6.
of Affliction: Imitating those who dwelling in defenced cities are careful to
provide themselves of munition before they be besieged.

CHAP. II. Showing, How the Faithful ought to be are persecutions patiently.
FOrasmuch as afflictions are thus necessary and inevitable to believers, that
whether they will or no, they must pass this strait way: they ought to
bethink them how to make hard things easy. And herein to follow the dealing
of the Physician with his patient, who, intending to give him some bitter
Potion or Pill, is wont to sweeten the one with Syrrup, and to wrap up the
other in gold, lest he should abhor to take in, or swallow down, either the
one or the other. Even so are we, by committing to memory some elect and choice
sentences of holy Scriptures concerning the Cross, to cover over the same
therewith, that it may not appear so dreadful unto us, as we apprehend it to
be. For that which causes us to fly and fear persecution, is a prejudicate
opinion we have conceived in our minds, that some deadly poison lurks under
it. And therefore we shun so much as to taste a little sup thereof, in regard
we imagine it to be the only bitter drug in the world.

Now, that which makes us fall into, and breeds in us this error, is because
(as therein so almost in all things else) we are led rather by sense, than by
the word, by which we ought to balance and regulate all our persuasions and
resolutions. For could we believe what the Prophets and Apostles (inspired of
God) have preached and written for the use of posterity, as touching
persecutions, we would not only have them in a more honorable esteem, but
thankfully and patiently bear them.

To which end, let us endeavor firmly to imprint in our minds these and the
like sentences. Saint Paul tells us, that if we be reproached for the name of
Christ, we may think our selves happy; for the spirit of glory and of God
(says he) rests upon you. And 1 Pet. 4. 14. Romans 5. 3.
Saint Paul speaking of himself and his associates, says thus, And not only
so, but we glory in tribulation also, knowing that tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, etc. And in another place, God forbid that I
should glory save in the cross of our Gal. 6. 14.
Lord Jesus Christ. These places, with sundry others to the same purpose, do
sufficiently manifest how much the true Christian ought to think himself
honored of God, when it pleases him to call such an one forth to suffer for
his name in the defense of his Truth.

What other thing else, I pray you, was the cause of Saint Paul's glorying, and
that 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Hos. 13. 14.
glory in an higher degree, which Christ has ordained for us by his death;
with which glory he is now environed in the kingdom of his father? What else
is it which is promised to the Elect, as a recompense of their faith in Gods
promises and all their loyal Isa. 24. 16.
services, but glory to the righteous? What is the principal glory which we
attribute to the Martyrs? Is it not in regard of their invincible patience and
constancy of faith, by which they overcame the world and their own flesh,
which is not to be esteemed a small or mean victory?

If Alexander obtained so great renown by conquering Darius; and Scipio for
discomfiting Hannibal, etc. who slew but a few mortal men like themselves; how
much are we, in comparison of them, to admire their valor, who have not only
warred against men, but against their threats, gibbets, fires, yea against
death it self, and in the end triumphed over it? We worthily magnify the
prowess of Sampson and Sha^gar; the one for Judge. 15. 15. Chap. 3. 31.
killing a thousand men with the jaw bone of an ass; the other for killing six
hundred men with an Ox goad. Yet did the force of the Martyrs far excel
theirs, who with the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, were mabled
to overcome the devil with Ephesians. 6. 17.
all his retinue.

Tertullian tells us, That there is no better Order of Knighthood, nor chains
of greater In his Epistle to the martyrs of his time.
price, than those to which the Martyrs of Jesus Christ are fastened, nor
richer bracelets than the manacles wherewith their hands are bound. In the
Ecclesiastical history it is It was Babilas Bishop of Autioch in the year
250. Ex Chrysoft. li. contra Gentiles
reported of a good Bishop, who by the Emperor Decius being cast into a filthy
stinking prison or hole for the name of Christ, with as many yrons as he could
bear, entreated his friends (who sometime came to visit him) that after his
death they would bury with him the signs and tokens of his valor, meaning his
bolts and fetters which were put upon his legs and hands, teaching us, That
when we see it is the will of God to impose them upon us, and thereby to dub us
Knights of his Order, we should esteem our selves no less honored, than if a
King, by way of gratifying a valiant champion for some great services done for
him, should reward the same with some of his own precious jewels, and then no
less to brave it out in these our Ornaments, than a woman when she sees her
self decked with all costly array from top to toe.

If that which Cicero writes be true, That no virtue gives to man greater
Iustre than In his book of Offices.
Magnanimity, we may thence safely conclude, That none ought in this kind to
be preferred before a Christian Martyr; who neither loves, desires, or admires
ought, save that which is honest and praiseworthy, nor gathers any riches to
himself but what he knows to be lasting, and hopes to possess for ever in the
Kingdom of Heaven: and therefore sleighting either men's favors or
displeasures, as those that are high borne contemn the one, when they seem to
smile, and are not much daunted with the frowns of the other, knowing right
well that all things under the Sun are but vanity, and subject to change with
their ages and seasons.

We read in the Ecclesiastical story of one Phanutius Bishop of Thebaides, who
under the tyranny of Maximinus, having one of his eyes put out, never presented
himself before Constantine the Great, but that good Emperor embracing of him
would kiss that eye, which being lost, we know how unseemly it causes that
part to be. But thus the Emperor would show, That nothing ought to be in
higher esteem with us, than the cross of Christ, and the marks thereof when
we bear or wear them on any part of our bodies.

If the good and holy life o^a Christian be so much set by of us, then must the
death of such a one be much more glorious, when for the name of Christ, he
takes the same joyfully. Who could be more dear in the eye of God the Father,
than his Son Jesus Christ? Mat. 3. 17.
Yet gave he him to suffer death for our sins, and by suffering the same,
according to the will and appointment of his heavenly Father, has he not
obtained a name which is above every name, That at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, etc.

If Gods glory ought to be preferred before all things, yea, our own
salvation; and that Christ by dying to save us has obtained the greatest glory
that ever was; what may we judge of that death we endure for his honor, his
word, and for the maintenance of his pureworship and service?

Abraham never performed a more honorable act, than in offering up his son
Isaac at Gods command, nor for which he is more praised. I demand then, that
seeing our own life is more dear and precious to us than the life of another,
whether the Martyrs, who according to the will of God, and for his honor, have
been so prodigal of their blood, have not deserved greater, or at least an
equal praise and commendation with Abraham?

The Bishops of old had such an honorable esteem of martyrdom, that they
preferred it before their Episcopal dignities; so as both themselves, and
their Disciples and followers whom they had taught, were so ambitious thereof,
that when they wanted opportunity to suffer, being excluded therefrom by the
interceding of friends, or were not the first that suffered, they took it so to
heart, that some of them carried the grief thereof to their graves.

Think I pray you what a shame it were for a Gentleman, who, being called by
his Prince to fight in his wars, should busy himself only about combing,
curling, and perfuming his hair, tooting all day in a Looking-glass, to deck
and attire himself: and then judge by that, what valiant soldiers we are, and
what a goodly reputation we shall reap either at the hands of God, or of good
men, if in our spiritual warfare, wherein we are to be employed during our
whole life, whilst the alarm is stricken up, and every one mounted to give
the onset in the face of the enemy, we in the mean time will play least in
sight, hiding our selves behind every bush, as Scholars that are loath to go to
School for fear of the rod.

Good God? That men of noble spirits should so much affect the renown of being
valiant, fearing nothing more than to be reputed for base fellows and cowards;
yea some are so jealous thereof, that they cannot endure to hear so much as a
suspicion of flying, and yet all this their valor tends only to covet a fame
which consists in skill how to kill and destroy men's lives.

Now we being kings then and the adopted children of God, if either greatness
of our courage, or nobleness of our house or birth whence we are descended,
may prevail any thing with us: then who I pray you ought to show forth more
valor than the faithful, or more dread the staining of their honor by
playing the dastards; This being yet one argument more to put spirits in them;
namely, that their prowess tends not to kill and slay men's bodies, as that of
worldlings does, but to save, heal, support and s^ccour, as the arm and power
of God, which is far more honorable than the other.

CHAP. III. Manifesting the great profit and benefit which the faithful reap
by Persecution.
HAving showed in the former Chapter that a more honorable condition cannot
befall a Christian than to suffer affliction for the name of Christ; we are
here to show how nothing is more beneficial and profitable, which will the
better appear if we reckon up some few particulars thereof. To begin with the
first then. In affliction God manifests his readiness to comfort us, and his
power in sustaining and upholding us, that we sink not under the weigh^ ^f
them. Examples whereof we have in Joseph and David, and sundry others; who, by
the afflictions they suffered for righteousness sake, were prepared (in that
which God had appointed) the one to be Governor over the land of Egypt, the
other over the kingdom of Israel. For as in the time of war, a Captain or a
General Three similies
of an army, takes occasion there to let his soldiers see his fidelity,
vigilance, fortitude and skill he has in leading them out and in; and as a
Physician among the sick and diseased, is occasioned to exercise the
profundity of his art and experience he has achieved; Or as friends, when we
are in distress, do give us to understand what love they bear toward us,
and how mindful they are of us; Even so, or much more, does God declare how
greatly he loves us, and how faithful he is in performing his promises, in
the time of our distresses, which is no mean benefit.

For the experience which we get from his bounty, love, power, and care of our
welfare, causes us with greater confidence to stay and rest our selves wholly
upon him; and the trial also of his fidelity does more and more confirm us in
waiting for the performance of his promises, which consequently occasionshim to
accomplish the same in us.

Again, had we no other good for which we ought to rejoice in afflictions,
and accustom our selves to bear them both patiently and thankfully, but this,
that they serve to set forth Gods glory, which after a sort shines in us, while
during our troubles he upholds us in them, and in due time delivers us out of
them; what can we desire more? For his glory ought to be so dear unto us, that
if our damnation it self might be a means to advance it, we should not refuse
to undergo it, but freely and willingly offer our selves to be cast into hell.
Subjects and servants joy in nothing more than in seeing their lords and
masters highly honored, as on the contrary nothing vexes them more, than when
they see them disesteemed, or ought to be broached tending to the impeaching or
obscuring their estimation or honor. Shall we then who are not only subjects
and servants, but have obtained the prerogative to be accounted sons and
friends in our fathers house and family, shall not we I say rejoice? The second
fruit which we reap from affliction, is, that hereby God multiplies his gifts
and graces upon us, as it is written, Mygrace is sufficient 2 Cor. 12. 9.
for thee: for my power is made perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9. Humility,
Faith, Patience, Prudence, and Repentance, are augmented and increased in us by
suffering persecutions. For look as bodily exercise is an help to increase
health, strength, and heat in the outward man; and catechizing or posing of
children (to which we often call them) is the way whereby they grow in
knowledge; even so the several trials and troubles, through which God
exercises, and makes proof of our faith, cause it to grow from a less
measure and degree thereof unto a greater.

A Captain, who has once or twice besieged a city or castle, becomes much
more expert, hardy, and wary than a fresh water soldier; so also is the
prudence, counsel, courage, fortitude, and zeal much greater, and resolution
stronger, in such as have often passed through the pikes of tribulations, than
theirs who never knew what such trials meant. Yet I affirm not that
persecutions have always this effect in all, who have but once burnt their
fingers in this fire of afflictions; as if they should not cause them sometimes
to grow cold, and forsake their standing: for as concerning such, their faith
was never truly grounded in them, they have only had the outside and shadow of
Faith. Even as the seed sowed upon the stones easily dries away, for lack of
good moisture, and rooting, by the excessive heating of the Sun; so this
formal professor, with his painted shows of Religion, and outward appearance
of faith, when the heat of persecution approaches, vanishes away and comes to
nothing.

But where faith is livily rooted in the heart of the Believer, and always
watered by the holy Ghost, although through storms and tempests it may come to
be shaken, yet do the roots thereof grow more strong and settled; as the root
of a tree planted in a high place, which has the winds still beating upon it,
is fortified, and grows daily by the sap, which the other wants that is seated
in a low and shady place. In a word, persecution may be compared to fire, which
hardens the clay, and melts the wax, and consumes the stubble: so it works
diverse effects, according as it meets with sundry subjects; for either it adds
courage to one strong in faith, or else softens such as are yet weak, or in
the end ruins such as are Backsliders and Apostata's. So did the red Sea save
the people of God, Exo. 14. 22. 28.
who believed in him and his promises, and drowned Pharaoh and his host (being
Infidels) in the bottom thereof as a stone.

Now whereas I said, That persecutions do cause unto us the multiplying of
Gods spiritual gifts and graces, my meaning is not only concerning the
spiritual, but even of temporal good things also: for howsoever the latter of
these happens not so usual to the faithful as the first, because the Lord
according to his wise dispensation (knowing man's nature to be altogether
corrupted) would not occasion such, by enriching them, to forget him, and
fixing their minds on things earthly, to make them their treasure; yet has it
often come to pass, that the Faithful have been greatly enriched even by
persecutions.

Among others, Abraham prospered more in power and worldly substance amongst
Genesis 13 2. 6.
Heathens and strangers, than ever he had like to have done in his own
country. Also Joseph, in his Fathers house but a silly Shepherd, being
banished thence by the hatred Genesis 27. 21. and 41. 45.
and persecutions of his Brethren, became the Governor of a whole kingdom,
Genesis 42. 6. Did not Daniel also obtain such honors and dignities in Babylon
among Idolaters, as Dan. 2. 48. and 5. 29.
he could never have expected to be raised to be raised to the like in the land
of Iudaea? But to say no more of ancient examples, I could allege many the
like, and that of late years. But these formerly mentioned may suffice; but
only this I think, that of all such as have been persecuted for the Truths
sake, there is not one (if he would speak uprightly) but must acknowledge,
that he was never unprovided for in his afflictions, nor left altogether
without necessaries; God thereby teaching him by experience, what care he had
over him.

Let not persecution therefore too much daunt us, lest we or our posterity
should by means thereof fall into poverty. For as we read in the history of
Job, after the Sabeans and Chaldeans had stripped him of all that ever he had,
yet God in the end restored to him more than he had lost. Say then that our
goods be confiscated by Tyrants, let us not fear we shall be utterly
impoverished thereby; for it is the course which God takes in providing us of
food and raiment, by way of rendering us us a reward when we have lost our
livelihood in his service.

Kings are usually wont to recompense such as have ventured the loss of their
Simile.
and Livings in their quarrel. And do we not see many Italians banished out of
Naples and other parts, who have obtained great pensions in France? Shall we
think then, that God has less love or respect of his, who show themselves
forward to defend his Kingdom and honor? We may therefore assure our selves,
that if we walk with a right foot in the way of Gods commandments, it is in a
manner impossible for us to escape persecution; but yet on the other side, we
ought much more to believe, that his blessings shall never cease to accompany
us, and to restore unto us an hundred fold back again that which Tyrants
either can or would snatch away from us, be it food or raiment.

The third fruit which we may reap out of our afflictions is, That God uses
them as Afflictions s^ive in the church, as rods hanged up here and there in
schools.
his fatherly rods to correct the offenses which we his children have and daily
do commit against him: So as they are no less needful for a Church than rods
in a school, or household discipline in a well governed Family. For we cannot
long persist in the right way without them, our nature being so corrupt as it
is; we should grow to be disordered, if we were not held in by persecutions and
afflictions. What should become of a Commonwealth, if every one were left to do
as him listed? So if God should forbear to correct his children, the city of
God would in time come to be a Sodom, and the sheepfold of Christ an Hog-stie
or a College of a Devils.

A loving father, that puts forth his son to be a scholar, entreats his
Master now and Simile.
then to correct him: And if through indulgency he neglects to do it, the
father will complain of him that he marres his child. Would we be Schoolers in
Christ's School, and not suffer him to do that to us, which we would a
Schoolmaster should do to our children? So indeed, if we shall refuse to bear
the yoke in our youth, we may worthily be condemned with the world when we are
old. It is good for a man, says the holy Prophet, That he bear the yoke in
his youth; for such is the untamednesse of our simple nature, Lam. 3. 27.
that if it be not betimes curbed, and continually kept short, it will hardly
be reclaimed or brought within compass. But if God once take the rod into his
hands, we begin then to have some fear of offending him; and if we do, we are
ready to confess it. The rod wakens the dead and drowsy conscience: It makes
us mourn and weep, as also to accuse and condemn our selves for our
ingratitude toward so good and gracious a Father; we begin to toss and roll
our selves this way and that way to find ease, waiting from whence it will
spring forth unto us.

In this perturbation and anxiety of conscience the holy spirit of God, seeing
us cast down and humbled, sets before our eyes Gods mercy in Christ: Whose
blood applied by faith purges and heales the wound which is made therein. This
done, he will carry such an hand over us as shall withhold us from vice, and
draw us on to the love of virtue. And thus we see how the Lord does by little
and little correct our sinful disposition, by exercising us with manifold
afflictions; whereby the whilst he provides for his own glory. Let us
therewith consider his admirable bounty, seeing thus he covers our shame: for
whereas he might justly cause us to suffer for our sins which we have
committed against his Majesty, he in stead thereof turns it to suffering for
his truth and holy names sake; putting this honorable Title as a veil over
us, to shadow our nakedness.

For first he alters the nature of the punishment, which is due unto us for our
misdeeds, into an assured hope of recompensing all our labor and travel we
undergo for righteous causes. And in the second place, he turns the dishonor
which we ought to receive, as a token of the vengeance which he might to our
ignominy execute upon us, into an immortal Trophee of Honor, wherewith we
are crowned in the presence of God and of his Angels. Thirdly, hereby he
graciously provides for the peace of our consciences, which, in stead of sorrow
and grief wherewith they might be wounded for guilt of sin, on the contrary
do sensibly rejoice and glory in these sufferings for the name of Christ. And
fourthly in the midst of all these joys, and most singular consolations, yet
the conscience (for all that) cease not to retain a scruple or dram of
Rubarb mingled herewith, to purge out now and then some corrupt humors, and by
persecutions to put us in mind of our sins committed against the Lord in
times past.

But yet he so tempers and moderates these his drugges, and that in so
exquisite and artificial a manner, that while he humbles us with his left
hand, he supporteth us with his right hand; if he causes grief, by and by he
comforts us; in smiting he heals us; in which mixture and tempering of things,
so much diffring in nature and quality, consists the salvation of our souls.
Even as the skillful and expert Physician, by measuring out an equal and just
proportion of contrary drugs meeting with our corrupt humors, provides for the
safety of our bodies.

We see that an hot or dry Summer, or a fair Spring time, brings many diseases
therewith; S^mile.
and how fast weeds sprout forth among the good herbs; besides filling our
houses with flies, fleas, and like annoyances; the air and streets with
unsavory and infectious smells: all which in Winter, in cold and frosty weather,
do take their leave and are gone: So whilst outward joy and prosperity with
other contentments last, the body of the Church is pestered with sundry and
diverse spiritual bad humors and dangerous diseases; which on the contrary it
is preserved and freed from by the variety of Gods fatherly rods and
chastisements.

Now to proceed to the fourth benefit of afflictions, which is to kill the
pride of our (4)
rebellious nature: The Hebrews use these two words, to afflict and humble,
for one and the same thing; as if the latter were the fruit of the former. Nor
do we want examples which may sufficiently admonish us, that as worldly
prosperity usually causes our hearts to swell, and to be puffed up; so on the
contrary, adversities and afflictions deject and humble us. Whilst
Nebuchadnezzar abounded in all his delights, his heart was Dan. 4. 30. Dan 315.
swollen so far with pride, that he began not only to oppress his subjects,
but to justle even against God himself by his blasphemies. But when God had
once cast him into the furnace of affliction, he then became as meek and
humble a person as was in all his kingdom. Dan. 4. 37: 2 Chr. 33. from verse
1. to verse 24.


Manasses reigning in peace and liberty over the people of Judah, grew so inso
lent, that there was no impiety or injustice wherein he overflowed not; but
being surprised by his enemies, and laid in iron bands and fetters, he was
changed in an instant, and became as low in his own esteem as ever he thought
himself high: which appears in his prayer made to God in his affliction,
wherein he prostrates himself before him, confessing his offenses with great
compunction of heart and humility.

Saint Paul bare himself like a fierce and cruel Lion all the while he
enjoyed favor Acts 9. from verse 1. to verse 24.
from the high Priests, raging hither and thither, breaking forcibly into
houses, and apprehending such as he found to be professors of the Gospel; but
the same man, being touched by Gods hand in the way as he was journying toward
Damascus (intending there to exercise his Commission upon the Saints and
servants of Christ) suddenly became also as meek as a Lamb, and was ready to
proffer his service in whatsoever the Lord would enjoyne him to do.

Eusebius, in his Prologue to the eighth book of his Ecclesiastical history,
relates, how God seeing the pride which began to bud and spring forth in the
Church, and principally among the Pastors thereof (who out of their ambition
strove about dignities and preferments therein) was moved for that very thing
to raise up that great persecution which befell the Church under the reign of
Dioclesian and Maximinian, to crack their pride, and to provoke them to prayer,
yea rather to watch over their flocks, than to contend who should be the
greatest.

Wherein we may see, that by the blessing of God there is a kind of virtue in
afflictions, to humble and bring those home who through prosperity have
forgotten themselves, and strayed out of the right way. Nay, so forcible are
they to abate and take down the pride of such who otherwise are hardened and
grown obstinate, that even Pharaoh, as Exo. 8. 8. and 9. 27. and 10. 16.
rebellious and stiff necked as he was, seemed sometimes to bend and bow under
the mighty hand of God. Whilst God gave him some respite, it is true, he still
hardened his heart; but when the next judgment fell upon him and his people,
he by and by became as pliable as a glove for ones hand.

Seeing then all of us naturally are thus inclined, to wax proud by
prosperity, a vice which God sets and opposes himself against above other, as
most abominable in his sight, we ought not me thinks so much to be terrified
at the approach of persecutions, forasmuch as they withhold from, and correct
in us the same our pride, sooner than all the instructions which are taught us
by word of mouth.

The next benefit afflictions bring us, is to quicken us up to the prayer of
faith, which is never better discerned than when afflictions lie heaviest upon
us. In my distress (says David) Feried unto the Lord. For as our desires to
obtain mercy grow stronger, so are Psalm. 120. 1.
our requests more or less servent; our desire always being according to our
necessity. Let a man be sick, poor, or lie under any other greater trial,
the prayers of such do beyond comparison exceed in earnestness and servour
theirs, who are well and at their hearts ease. David in many of his Psalms
pressed the Lord in such wise by prayer, Psalm. 17. 1, 2. and 28. 1, 2.
when troubles lay heavy upon him, as if he meant to take no denial.

With what vehemence prayed the Apostles to God for strength, being persecuted
Act. 4. 5, 6. 24. 29.
by the Rulers, Elders, and Scribes of Jerusalem, insomuch as the place was
shaken where they were assembled? He that shall duly weigh with what prayers
and tears our Lord Heb. 5. 7. Luke 22. 44.
Jesus Christ solicited his father in his passion, being nigh unto his death,
will confess that fire is not more apt to be kindled by the winds which blow
upon it, than the prayer of Faith is fired and augmented by affliction. Would
any man have imagined that ever such voices of prayers and praises should have
been made in the belly of a Whale, Jonah 2. read the whole chapter.
as Jonas made being there as it were in the bottom of hell?

CHAP. IV. Wherein is showed that afflictions are not only profitable, but
pleasant also.
IGrant that afflictions considered in themselves are no way joyous but
grievous, as the Apostle declares, Heb. 12. 11. because they are rather
messengers of Gods displeasure; the root also from whence they spring being
indeed our sins. But as we see how our Apothecaries in their shops have the
skill to mix poisons with good and healthful medicines: So our God, being
infinitely more wise, knows so to temper our afflictions for our good, that our
of things, bitter and distastefull to us in the own nature, he can compose
not only a profitable, but a most pleasant potion.

Yea, even as Bees out of the bitterest herbs draw the most sweet honey, so the
Lord out of the tartest troubles extracts such sweets, that at length we shall
with Sampson be Judge. 14. 14.
forced to say, Out of the ^ater came forth meat, and out of the strong came
forth sweetness. Hunger in it self is sharp, and hard to be endured; yet our
taste is greatly delighted, when we can eat with an appetite. Could any man
judge how beneficial a fire were, if he were not some times pinched with cold?
Or with what delight could we accept of drink in the hear of Summer, if we were
not almost dried up with thirst? Or how acceptable rest is, if we were not
tired out with travel and labor? As we see then, that these accidents (how
grievous or incommodious soever, now incident unto our nature corrupted by
finne) do notwithstanding dispose us to receive exceeding contentments
therefrom: So persecutions, albeit in and of themselves naturally abhorred,
proceeding partly (as we have said) from Gods displeasure, and partly from
Satan and his instruments; yet do they fit and prepare us for the enjoying of
those great consolations which God has promised to his Elect. Afflictions
cause us to feel, first, That God is the Father of mercies, and of all
comfort: Secondly, That the Office of Christ his Son is, To revive the 2 Cor.
1. 1.
desolate and broken in heart; Thirdly, That the holy Ghost is the comforter of
his Mat. 11. 28. John 14. 16: Romans 15. 4.
Church: Fourthly, That the word of God is it that ministers comfort to us in
all our tribulations and adversities which for the most part befall us for
adhering thereto.

For as he who would taste meat favoury to his palate, uses falt therewith; so
if we would (to purpose) find the Word of God tastefull to us, commonly it is
when we are in affliction. When did the Apostles rejoice more, than after they
had tasted of the whip Acts 5. 4.
for the name of Christ? When did Saint Stephens face appear as if it had been
the face of an Angel, but when he stood before the Council at Jerusalem to
answer for his life? Acts 6. 15.
He that looked upon the three young men in the hot fiery furnace, saw them
walking up Dan. 3. 25.
and down there, as in some pleasant and delightful meadow or garden. Behold
that ancient father Ignatius, who (as himself records) being led from Syria to
Rome, there to be devoured, accompanied by sea and land with a band of
soldiers (which he terms ten Leopards) wished by the way as he went, that he
were in the midst of those beasts which were ready to rent him in pieces, and
that their appetites might be whetted to dispatch him quickly; fearing lest it
should happen to him as to some other Martyrs, that the beasts out of a kind of
reverence and humanity would not dare to approach unto him; being ready, he
said, rather to provoke them to the fight, than that they should suffer him so
to escape. Pardon me, I pray you, says he, for I know what is profitable for
me: I now begin to be a Disciple of Christ, I affect nothing this world
affords? What is so dear to me as Christ? If it be not sufficient for me to be
torn with beasts, let fires and all the tortures of men and Devils be prepared
for me; let all my body be dismembered, my bones bruised to pieces, so that I
may enjoy communion with my God, and come into the presence of my Savior. And
when he heard the Lions roaring, he said, I am the Lords wheat, I must be
ground with the teeth of wild beasts, that I may be found pure bread.

May we not now conjecture by the wishes of this holy Bishop, what sweet
delight he Simile.
found in himself in approaching nigh unto his Martyrdom? As a Queen then, or
great Lady takes no greater content than when she perceives in her husband some
apparent signs of his favor, especially then when she has conceived some
suspicion of alienating his affection from her, or it seems to be any way
cooled or abated: So the faithful soul, who loves the Lord entirely, desires
nothing more, nor takes at any time more delight, than when she feels from
her husband Christ love for love, but chiefly in the hour of temptation and
tribulation, which often times causes our heads and hearts to be possessed with
jealousies and suspicions that we are out of his favor. Let us conclude then,
that seeing (in regard of the reasons heretofore alleged) persecutions are so
honorable, every way profitable and delectable to the true Christian; What
cause has he either to be grieved or terrified when they befall him? Nay, he
ought with the Apostles and Martyrs to triumph and rejoice.

To which purpose may fitly be applied that saying of Themistocles to his
children, when he saw the great honors that the King of Persia had conferred
upon him by their exile, finding kinder entertainment among strangers than in
their own country; We had perished, said he, if we had not perished. So may
we say, That did not our natural life perish here by persecutions, we had
never been saved in the kingdom of heaven.

Run we then (my brethren) with patience the race that is set before us; let us
not be ashamed with Simon the Cyrenian to carry the reproachful Cross of
Christ; and seeing we must die once, let us desire rather to die gloriously for
righteousness sake, than ignominiously by shunning it. If Princes had rather
die in a breach than in their bed; and to lose their life in the field, than an
eye at tilt or tourney; let us imitate them in this our spiritual
conflict-earnestly entreating the Lord, if it be his blessed will, that we may
fight and die valiantly in the defense of his Truth, and for the honor of his
son. If worldly minded men can and will suffer many hard adventures, some for
their honor, others for their profits and pleasures, though but vain and
temporary; with what longing should we aspire to that certain and eternal
happiness, rest, and glory, wherewith all those shall be crowned who fight
manfully and constantly for the cause of Christ?

But the world and worldings smile at this wisdom, counting it foolishness;
the flesh also joining therewith thinks all we have said to be either idle
fantasies, or mere paradoxes; and no marvel, for both of them being from the
earth can savor nothing but what is earthly, as Christ says. Between the
judgment of the Church and that of the World there is a broad difference, when
the question is of determining what is true honor, profit, or pleasure; whence
it is that in a manner the one scorns that which the other admires and adores.
So as they never consent in approving or condemning with one voice that which
is questioned; for the belly has no ears. If therefore we mean to be ruled
aright either in the matter of faith or outward manners, let us not be guided
therein either by the worlds judgment, or yet that of the flesh; for the world
is poreblinde, and the belly, as we have said, has no ears.

Ponder we then these things, that so we may be prepared to obey the will of
God: let us not wilfully r^sh into dangers; only if God shall call us forth to
suffer, purposing thereby to conform us to our Head, and so to accompany that
great cloud of witnesses through the narrow way that leads to his kingdom,
yield we our necks to bear the sweet and easy yoke of Christ. Be it that
Satan and his confederates do persecute the Church of Christ, yet has she an
assured hiding place. The faithful may be imprisoned, but in the mean while
they leave the world in a worse prison, viz. shut up under the wrath of God.
They may be in bonds, yet is not that so bad as to lie bound in the bonds of
iniquity; they are often shut up in dark and unsavory places, but how can
darkness be grievous to them who are the children of light, especially when
God shines upon them with the light of his countenance? Stinking holes and
odious smells cannot so offend and annoy them, but that the sweet savor of a
good conscience, purified by faith, surmounts all. They may be put into
dungeons in the world, yet being chosen of God out of the world, they have
their conversation in heaven. Be it that they lose a few commodities here, it
is but as if they forsook counters to receive gold, things terrestrial for
celestial. A Christian may suffer, but he cannot die; he may lose his life,
but he cannot lose Christ; when he leaves the world he goes to God.

Wherefore let us then put on the whole armor of God, and as good soldiers of
Ephesians. 6. 11. 2 Timothy 23. Rev. 2. 10,
Jesus Christ enure our selves to endure hardness. So shall it come to pass,
that continuing faithful in this spiritual Warfare unto the death, we shall
at length receive the crown of eternal life.

THE HISTORY OF FOUR MARTYRS BVRNT AT LILE IN FLANDERS, IN THE YEAR, 1556.
WHOSE NAMES ARE ROBERT OGVIER, AND HIS WIFE, BAVDICON, AND MARTIN, their two
Sons.
THe example which is set before us in this so godly a Family may well serve
for an entrance to the Continuation of the History of foreign Martyrs, in that
we^ may thence learn, what those true ornaments are wherewith both parents and
their children ought to be decked and adorned namely with such a light shining
forth from the sound knowledge of the Gospel, as whereby the Church of God may
be edified and confirmed in seeing them to hold the profession of their faith
coustantly even unto the death.

THe City of LILE may Anno 1556.
well be placed in the first rank of those Cities of Merchandise in the
Low Country of Flanders, Artols and Haynault, upon which the Lord has
multipl^ed his blessings, not so much of worldly good things, as of his
spiritual

For, for three years together the Gospel was secretly taught among them,
sometime in houses, then, in woods, in fields, and in caves of the earth, not
without the ha^arding of their dearest life, if

What was among them preached, was accordingly practiced: works of mercy and
charity were there exercised, not only toward those of the household of Faith,
but even toward them which were without; so as many by means hereof

And thus each one according to his place endeavored

In a very short space of time, the Lord by the Ministry of his Word (though
preached in secret) erected here a flourishing Church, so as the Congregation
consisted of a competent number of men, women, and children, not only of the
city, but out of four or five Willages besides bordering nigh unto it, who
came also with an eager appetite to be instructed.

In the mean while, you may conceive that satan and his adherents ceased not
to storm and rage hereat, not being able long to endure these their holy
meetings; but when the time was now come, that God had given them power to
prove and try his Church, they foreflowed not to exercise their cruelty upon
if, which long before they had plotted and contrived.

Upon Saturday then the sixth of March, Ann. 1556. between nine and ten of the
Clock in the night, the Provost of the City with his Sergeants armed
themselves to make search, if they could find any met together ^t houses; but
as then there was no assembly. Therefore they came to the house of one whose
name was Robert Oguier, which was a little Church: for all both great and
small, menservants and ma^ds were familiarly instruded there is in the knowledge
of God, as the issue well manifested.

Being violently entered into the said house, and seeking here and there for
their prey, they found certain books which they carried away. But he whom
they principally aimed at was not then in the house; viz. Baudicon the son of
the said Robert O^^uler, who at that time was gone abroad to commune and talk
of the word of God with some of the brethren, as he often used to do. Returning
home, he knocked at the door: Martin his younger brother, watching his
conunting, bad him be gone, willing him not to come in. But Ba^dicon, thinking
his brother mistook him for some other, said, it is I, open the door: with
that, the sergeants approaching nigh unto it, opened the same, and causing him
to enter in, said, Ah Sir, you are well met, to whom he answered, I thank you
my friends, you also are welcome hither.

Then said the Provost, I arrest you all in the Emperors name, and with that
commanded each of them to be bound, to wit, the husband and his wife with their
two sons, leaving their two daughters to look to the house. Now as they
conveied them along through the streets, Baudicon with a voice somewhat
extended (which might easily be heard The prayer which Baudicon made as he was
led to prison.
at that time of the night) said, O Lord, assist us by

Thus were they brought into several prisons, where they were severally
handled; yet ceased they not to praise and bless the Lord with one consent;
within a few days after, the prisoners were presented before the Magistrates
of the City, and examined as touching their course of life, who directed

Robert Oguier answered, whereas first of all you lay to my charge that I go
not to Mass; I For Christ by one sacrifice has perfected for ever them that
are sanctified. The Apostle says, by Heb. 10. 14.
one offering. For do we read in all the scriptures, that either the Prophets,
Christ, or any of his Apostles ever said mass? for they knew not what it
meant. Christ indeed instituted the holy Supper, in which all Christian people
do communicate In vain do they worship me, Mat. 15. 9.
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men If either my self, or any of
mine had been at Mass, which is ordained by the commandment of men, Christ
would have told us, we had worshipped him in vain.

As for the second accusation, I cannot nor will deny, but there have met
together in my house honest people fearing God; I assure you not with intention
to wrong or harm any, but rather for the advancement of Gods glory, and the
good of many. I knew indeed that the Emperor had forbidden it, but what then? I
knew also that Christ in his Gospel had commanded it. Where two or Mat. 18. 20.
three, says he, are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. Thus you see I could not well obey the Emperor, but I must disobey
Christ. In this case then, I choose rather to obey my God, then man.

One of the Magistrates demanded what they did when they met together.

To which Baudicon the eldest son of Robert Oguier answered; if it please you
my Masters to give me leave, I will open the business at large unto you.

The Sheriffs seeing his promptnes, looking

One of the Magistrates gave him a sign by which he might understand that
they desired to hear it. Baudicon then kneeling down before them, prayed with
such fervency of affection, that the like ardency of zeal never appeared in
him in so admirable a manner as at that time; Insomuch that the Magistrates were
forced to burst forth into tears; beholding what a gracious Spirit the young man
was endued withal. Then standing up, he said, now your Masterships may take a
scantling by this, how we are employed in our meetings.

Whilst they were thus examined, each of them made an open confession of the
faith which they held. After this being returned again into prison, they not
long after were put to the torture, to make them confess who they were that
frequente^d their house, but they would discover none, unless such as were
well known to the Judges, or else were at that time absent. About four or
five days after, they were convented again before their Judges, namely, the
father and his two sons: and after many words passed, they asked them whether
they would submit themselves to the will of the Magistrates. Robert Oguier and
Baudicon his son, with some deliberation, said, yes, we will.

Then demanding the same of Mart. the younger brother, he answered, that he
would not submit himself thereto, but would accompany his Mother: so he was
sent back again to prison, whilst the father and the son were aduidged to be
burned alive to ashes. Now as they went to receive the sentence, one of the
Judges sitting in his place, after sentence pronounced, said, to day you shall
go to devil with all the Devils in hell fi^e (which he spoke as one
transported with fury in beholding the great patience of these two servants of
Christ) for they took all things quietly, vanquishing their enemies cruelty by
patient bearing the Cross, and in praising God for the same. Having received
the sentence of death, they were returned to the prison whence they came, being
joyful that the Lord did them that honor to be enrolled in the number of his
Martyrs. No sooner entered they the prison, but a band of friars came in
thither: one amongst the rest told them, the hour was come in which they must
finish their days. Robert Oguier and his son answered, we know it well. But
blessed be the Lord our God, who now delivering our bodies out of this vile
prison, will receive our souls into his glorious and heavenly kingdom.

One of the Friars whose name was Lazard, a notable limme of Antichrist,
endeavored to turn^ them from their faith, saying, Father Robert, thou art an
old man, let me entreat thee in this thy last hour to think of saving thine
own soul. And if thou will give ear to me, I warrant thee thou shall do
well.

The old man answered, poor man, how dare thou attribute that to thy self
which belongs to the eternal God, and so rob him of his honor; for it seems
by thy speech, that if I will hearken to thee, thou will become my Savior. No,
no, I have one only Savior Jesus Christ, who by and by will deliver me from
this miserable world. I have one Doctor, whom the heavenly Father Mat. 17 5.
has commanded me to hear, and I purpose to hearken to none other.

A Friar, called the Father of Saint Clare, exhorting him to take pity of his
soul which Christ had redeemed: Thou willest me, said Robert,

The Friar hearing this, said, Out Dog, thou

As they were about to sever Baudicon from his father, he said, Let my father
alone, and trouble him not thus, he is an old man, and has an infirm body,
hinder him not I pray you, from receiving the Crown of Martyrdom.

Another of the Friars said, Away varlet, thou

Baudicon was then conveyed into a chamber apart, and there being stripped of
his clothes was fitted to be sacrificed; now as one brought him Gunpowder to
put to his breast, an odd fellow Saint Laurence was roasted on a gridiron by
Pagans. In this age the godly find in a manner the like from fai^e and fained
Christians. A gentle persuasion.
have them fried on Gridirons, as S. Laurence

Whilst they spoke thus to Baudicon, some of the Friars closed in with the old
man, persuading him at least to take a Crucifixe into his hands, lest the
people (said they) should murmr against you; adding further, that he might
for all that lift up his heart to God, because you know, said they, it is but a
piece of wood.

Thus they fastened it between his hands, but as soon as Baudicon was come
down, and espied

As they were led to execution, a band of soldiers

Then turning his eye toward his father, who was about to be chained to the
stake, he said, Be of good courage father, the worst will be past by and by. As
the executioner was fastening him to the post, he chanced to hit him with his
hammer on the foot, to make him stand nearer to the same. The old man being
sensible of the blow, said, Friend, thou hurtest my foot, why do thou abuse
me thus? The Friar hearing this, said, Ah these heretics! They would be
counted Martyrs forsooth; but if they be but touched a little, they cry out as
they were killed. To which Baudicon thus replied: Think you then that we fear
the tormentors? No such matter; for had we feared the same, we had never
exposed our bodies to this so shameful and painful a kind of death.

Then he often reiterated these short breathings, O God, Father everlasting,
accept the sacrifice of our bodies, for thy well beloved Son Jesus Christ's
sake. One of the Friars cried, Heretic, thou lie, he is none of thy father,
the Devil is thy father. And thus, during these conflicts, he bent his eyes to
heaven, and speaking to his father, said; Behold, for I see the heavens open,
and millions of Angels ready pressed to receive us, rejoicing to see us thus
witnessing the truth in the view of the World. Father, let us be glad and
rejoice, for the joys of heaven are set open unto us.

Then said one of the Friars, I see hell open, and millions of Devils present
to carry you thither. But the Lord, who never forsakes any that put their
trustin him, stirred up the heart and opened the mouth of a poor man who stood
among the multitude, beholding this spectacle, who being moved with compassion,
cried aloud, Be of good comfort Baudicon, stand thou to it, thou (...) in a
good quarrel, I am on thy side; after which words he departed thence, and a
way being made for him, saved himself from danger.

Fire was forthwith put to the straw and wood which burnt beneath, whilst they
(not shrinking for the pains) spoke one to another; Baudicon often repeating
this in his fathers ears, Faint not father, nor be afraid, Yet a very little
while and we shall enter into the heavenly mansions.

In the end the fire growing hot upon them, the last words they were heard to
pronounce, were Jesus Christ thou Son of God, into thy hands we commend our
spirits. And thus these two slept sweetly in the Lord.

Within eight days after, Jane the mother, and Martin her son were executed
in the same City of Lile; but of this more hereafter.

Jane the wife of Robert Oguier, and Martin her son, Martyrs.
THe wife here follows her husband, and accompanies her son: her conversion
is admirable; for being severed from him, the Friars having seduced her
labored with her to turn her some also out of the right way; but he
understanding thereof recovers his mother again, and so they both gave their
lives for the truth, to the great confusion of their enemies.

But before we come to describe their happy ends, we will, as briefly as may
be, note by the way the great conflicts of spirit which both of them sustained.

There were sent unto them many of the popish rabble, to turn them from their
faith. Now that this their devilish enterprise might the rather be effected,
they sundred one of them from the other,

For on a day one of the Monks resorted to her in the prison, counselling her
to win her son Martin, and to draw him from his errors: which she promised to
do. But when he was come to

O Mother, says he, what have you done? Have you denied him who has redeemed
you? Alas, what evil has he done you, that you should requite him with this
so great an injury and dishonor. Now I am plunged into that woe, which I have
most feared. Ah good God, that I should live

His Mother hearing these his pitiful complaints, and seeing the tears which
her son shed for her, began again to renew her strength in the Lord, and
with tears cried out, O Father of mercies, be merciful unto me miserable
sinner, and cover my transgression under the righteousness of thy blessed
Son; Lord enable me with strength from above, to stand to my first
confession, and make me to abide steadfast therein even unto

It was not long after this her change, but the same instruments of Satan, who
had seduced her, came in, supposing to find her in the same mind wherein they
left her: whom she no sooner espied, but with detestation said, Avoid Satan.
get thee behind me: for henceforth thou have neither part nor portion in me. I
will by the help of God stand to my first confession; And if I may not sign it
with Ink, I will seal it with my blood.

The Judges seeing their constancy, delayed not to dispatch them out of the
way, condemning them to be burned alive, and their bodies being reduced to
ashes, the same to be scattered and dispersed in the air. The mother and the
son having heard their sentence read, in the way as they were going back
again to prison, said, now blessed be our God, who causes us thus to triumph
over This is the wished hour, our gladsome day is come. Let us not then, said
Martin, forget to be thankful for the honor he does us, in thus conforming
us unto the Image of his Son. Let us remember those who have traced this path
before us: for this is the high way to the Kingdom of heaven. Let us then good
Mother go on boldly out of the Camp with the Son Heb. 13. 13.
of God, bearing his reproach, with all his holy Martyrs; for so we shall find
passage into the

Some of the company hearing, but not being able to brook these words, said,
we see now thou heretic that thou art wholly possessed body and soul with a
devil, as was thy father and brother who are both in Hell. Martin said, Sirs,
as for your railings and cursings, our God will this day turn them into
blessings in the sight of himself and of all his holy Angels.

A certain temporizer said to Martin, thou silly See here the sundry ^ights of
Satan.
youth thou say thou know not what; thou art too well conceited of thy
self and of thy cause. See thou not all this people here about thee? what
think thou of them? they believe not as thou do, and yet I doubt not but
they shall be saved. But you imagine to do that which will never come to
pass, though you pretend never so much that you are in the faith, and have the
Scriptures for you.

The good woman hearing this, answered, Sir, Christ Jesus our Lord says, that
it is the wide gate and broad way which leads to destruction, Mat. 7. 12.
and therefore many gooe in thereat: but the gate, says he, is narrow that
leads to life, and few How we may know we are in the right way.
there be that find it. Do ye then doubt whether we are in the straight way
or no, when ye behold our sufferings? would you have a better sign then this,
to know whether we are in the right way or no? Compare our Doctrine with that
of your Priests and Monks: we for our parts are determined to have but one
Christ and him crucified; we only embrace the Scriptures of the old and new
Testament. Are we deceived in believing that which the holy Prophets and
Apostles have taught?

One of the Friars turning toward Martin, said, youngman, be well advised; for
thy father and thy brother have acknowledged the seven Sacraments of the Church
together with us: and thou poor silly youth have heard some wicked Heretic
who has deluded thee: think thou thy self wiser then so many learned
Doctors as have lived in so many ages? Martin answered, I pray you Sir, does
not Christ our Lord tell us, that his Father has hid the secrets of his
Kingdom from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to Mat. 11. 25. Job 5. 13.
babes? And does not the Lord oftentimes catch the wise in their own
craftiness?

And whereas you say my Father and Brother have confessed seven Sacraments, I
well perceive by this that I ought not to give credit to ought you say; knowye
not that the Devil is the father of lies, and all liers? Is it not sufficient
that I acknowledge so many Sacraments as God himself has instituted and
ordained, to wit, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord?

Then came there into the prison two men of great authority in the City of
Lisle, the one called Mounsieur Barras, the other Beaufremes, who promised
Martin great matters, if he would recant and return to the Roman Church.
Beaufremes among other speeches said thus unto him, Young man, I have
compassion on thy tender years, if thou will be ruled by us, I will 100 (...)
amount to two hundred crowns: but this faithful Martyr of Christ was not like
Judas, who for love of money sold his Master.
promise thee thou shall not die this shameful death: moreover, I will give
thee one hundred pounds sterling.

Martin gave him this answer. Sir, you present before me many temporal
commodities: but alas, do you think me so simple, as to forsake an eternal
Kingdom for enjoying of a short transitory life? No sir, it is too late to
speak to me now of worldly commodities, but of those spiritual, which God
has prepared for me today in his Kingdom: nor do I purpose to hearken after
any other: only, I pray you let me crave one hours respite to give my self
to prayer, and calling upon the Name of my God: for you know now it is eight
days since my father departed this world, and hitherto I have scarce enjoyed
an hours rest; That which I have had, has rather been to slumber in, then have
any quiet sleep, having continually had eight or nine persons invironing me
about, and talking unto me.

After these great men were forced to go even as they came, Martin declared
the effect of this his combat to certain Brethren who were there detained with
him in prison; saying moreover, Let us lift up our heads Brethren, the brunt is
over, this I hope is their last assault; forget not, I pray you, the holy
doctrine of the Gospel, nor those good lessons which you have learned from our
Brother Guy. It is very likely he means Guy de Brez a godly Minister, of whom
you shall read more, God willing, hereafter.
Manifest it now to all, that you have received them not only into your ears,
but also into your hearts; follow me, we lead

Soon after Martin and his mother were bound and brought to the place of their
Martyrdom: His mother having ascended the scaffold, cried to Martin, Come up,
Come up my son. And as he was speaking to the people, she said, Speak out
Martin, says she, that it may appear to all, that we die not Heretics.
Martin

The fire being kindled, the vehemence thereof did nothing cool or abate the
fervency of their Lord Jesus into thy hands we The happy death of the mother
and her son.
commend our spirits. And thus they blessedly slept in the Lord. These were the
fruits which these holy assemblies in the City of Lisle brought forth. None
need to enquire whether the rest were suffered to live in peace; for what other
spectacles were to be espied in the high ways and fields, but poor fugitives
flying hither and thither, for safeguard

John Rebec, Martyr, burned at Aniers in France, the 24 of April, 1556.
THis Robert had his tongue cut out because he A Martyrs tongue cut out for
refusing to call upon the virgin Mary.
would not pronounce Jesus Maria, to join them both in one prayer; for being
urged thereunto with great threats, he boldly answered, that if his tongue
should but offer to utter those words at their bidding, himself would bite it
asunder with his teeth.

Bartholomew Hector, Martyr, was burned
BEing called before Authority to be examined' The Martyr would not answer the
Adversary till he had first craved assistance from God.
he would answer them to nothing before he had made his prayer to God.
Whereupon falling down there on his knees, he besought him to open his mouth,
and to direct his speech only to utter Lord, how sweet and welcome is this to
me?

Charles Covincke, or le Roy de Gand, once Anno 1557.
a Friar Carmelite at Gand in Flanders, was apprehended and executed at Bruges
in the same Country, Anno 1557. April 27.
BEing persuaded by his brother to return Charles would none of his popish
habit which he had once rejected.
again to his Order, and take upon him his friars habit; he made him this
direct answer, what needs that, says he? now I have cast off that popish weed
I will never resume it again. Christ has now set me free, I will be no longer
of the Order of the slaves of Satan.

One of the Magistrates of Bruges conferring with him, promised to procure his
deliverance if he would yield but a little; and if his friars coat displeased
him, he would get him a dispensatton from the Pope to forbear the wearing of
it, and provide him a Canonship. Sir, said Charles, I give you many thanks for
your good will and these your kind offers: would to God I could accept of them
without offending his Majesty; you offer me a Canonship, that I might live
quietly and in security; but know you sir, That rest is That is not worthy the
name of rest which is procured with offense of conscience. A judgment of God
upon a persecutor.
no true rest and quietnsse which is obtained against the peace of a good
conscience?

A few days after his execution, one of them, who had his hand deepest in
procuring his cruel death, died himself in such terror and horror of
conscience, that it gave sufficient testimony to those of Brugoes, that they
had put to death an Innocent, and that God was highly offended with those that
had persecuted him.

Philibert Hamelin of Tournay, Minister and Martyr, was there executed in the
year 1557.
Whilst he remained prisoner some of his friends dealt with him to break
prison, and offered him means tending thereto. But he on the contrary, having
resolved to give his life for so just a quarrel as he maintained, refused,
saying, I esteem it altogether unbeseeming for a Preachers must be no breakers
of prisons.
man that is called to preach Gods Word to others, to run away and break
prison for fear of danger, but rather to maintain the Truth taught even in the
midst of the flaming fire.

After sentence of death was passed upon him by the court, whereby he knew he
had not long to live, yet did he eat his dinner with the rest of the prisoners
as joyfully as though he had been in no A good conscience is a continual feast.
danger, speaking unto them of the happiness of eternal life, comforting all
that sat at table with him in the Consciergery.

That none might hear what he said at the place of execution, the trumpets were
caused to be sounded continually; yet might it be seen, both by his gestures
and cheerfulness of his countenance, that they could not let him from
speaking to God.

Archambant Seraphon, Martyr, in the year 1557.
BEing demanded what he thought of the Pope and his authority, he answered, I
think verily A practice of the Papists.
that same is he of whom Saint Paul speaks in his second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, Chapter the second. Which words he being willed to sign with
his hand; Yea, yea sir, said he, I am now ready to sign it with my blood
rather than with Ink.

He reports in a Letter written to his wife The Martyrs ready to scale the
truth with their blood. A Iaylor of a Lion became a Lamb.
and friends, that whereas this Iaylor was wont to carry himself as sternly
toward him as a Lion, roaring always in such wise upon him that all the
prisoners were amassed at it, the Lord had now so mollified his heart, that he
became as meek as a Lamb, declaring how he would come and visit him himself
in his prison, and as well If life, life; if death, death be it.

One thing I had like to have omitted concerning

This Archambant, in a letter to his wife, puts An exhortation to get the
Psalms without book.
his brethren in mind to learn David's Psalms; My brethren, says he, I exhort
you in the Name of God, that you would learn, yea, learn the Psalms without
book whilst you have time and leisure; for when you shall be cast into dark
prisons (I say when God shall call you to suffer for his sake) you shall then
have no book with

When he looked on his hands, he was wont to say, o flesh, thou must suffer and
be turned into ashes, until the last day.

Ieffery Vergale Martyr in the year 1557. He was burned at Turin the last of
December.
STanding upon a stool at the stake, the executioner according to the custom
prayed him to forgive him his death.

Ieffery answered him, I not only forgive thee, but those also who first
imprisoned me at Burges, yea, those that brought me to this City, and have
condemned me to this death. Be not afraid, do thine office, my death shall not
be unprofitable. The death of the Martys is not without fruit.


Nicolas Ieuville Martyr in the year 1557. who with two others mentioned
hereafter were burned in the place called Mawbert without Paris in France.
THis godly Martyr being condenmed to be burned alive, and his tongue to be cut
out, the Tormentor being there present offered to put the Praised be God, for I
am now counted worthy to be one of the heavenly Order.

Two innocents condemned to suffer death, the one of them being called Henry
the Tailor.
THis Henry rejoiced at the hearing of the These two were burnt at Antwerpe.
The Martyrs willingly give their necks to the block, but left the punishment
to their persecutors.
sentence read, saying, This is the day we have long expected, and therefore
give our selves willingly to die, but as for the punishment, my masters, that
we leave to you: yet we pray that God would pardon you this injustice.

At which speeches the Magistrates turned away their faces not willing to hear
it; but Adrian, who was the other Martyr, told them boldly, That God would
require the blood of the just at their hands whom they daily put to death.

The next day being appointed for their execution, a great multitude were
assembled into the Market place, to be hold the behavior of these goodly men,
who, as they were led to death, protested. That the cause why they dyed, was
only for bearing witness to the truth of the Gospel, which words they uttered
with such courage, that the officers, who environed them round about, strove to
damp the same by a great noise; which they made, lest their voice should be
understood. Whilst the executioner fastened them to the stake, there was on an
instant such an hurlyburly amongst the people, that with one voice they cried,
Kill, kill, rushing There were they in great fear, where no fear was, for as
says the Psalmist, God is in the generation of the righteous. Psalm. 14. 5.
one in upon another. By and by the shops and doors of houses were shut up.
The hangman let fall all his preparations, leaving the two patients standing at
the stake. The Margrave being on horseback could by no means get away, being
compassed in on each side. The Officers trembling for fear threw down their
halberds. The spy who attended there to hearken, not knowing where to bestow
himself, forsook his horse, and ran into a Church for fear.

And though one told him that a cutpurse had caused all this ado, he would not
be drawn to believe him, but said, I know we are but dead men; it is not the
Thief, but the seditious people who now begin to work their revenge. Thus God
confounded these bloodthirsty, showing how he could have brought all their
preparations to nothing if it had pleased him.

As soon as this hubbub was quieted, the servant of the executioner ran and
strangled the two Martyrs, who had now a good space been fastened to the stake,
still calling upon the name of the Lord. The fire being afterward kindled, the
bodies were consumed to ashes the 19. of January, 1559.

A Recantation fathered upon a Martyr called Cornelius Hallewin, which he never
consented to, and how he took the same, in the year 1559.
THe father of this Cornelius, soliciting the Margraue and his wife (who as it
was thought was Godmother to Cornelius) to get his son out of prison; It was
so agreed among them, that a libell should be framed under the name of
Cornelius, wherein he should now acknowledge his error, be confessed to a
Priest, would also receive his Maker, and come again into the state of grace,
as a good child of his holy mother the Church. And further should say, That
Sermons were of no worth, because they were not made upon holy ground. Also
requiring that if he had failed in ought else, the same should be attributed
Anno 1559.
to his young years, and therefore craved pardon. Howbeit the said Cornelius
wrote letters daily in the mean while to the brethren, showing forth an
admirable constancy in defending the faith; gladding the hearts of many, who
gave God thanks for the graces of his good Spirit wherewith he had endued him.

The Minister of the Flemish Church hearing of this Libell, by the means of
some friends, got

The said Cornelius being condemned to die, the Margraue offered him so much
more favor as to die a more easy kind of death, if he would They would not
give the least sign that might be of betraying the truth, and that it was all
one to them what death they put them to, so they dyed in and for the Lord. The
punishment, they said, could last but for a while,

Then were they led toward the Market place, and Herman rejoicing in the Lord
sung the hundred and thirtieth Psalm. Cornelius followed him, and gave the
people godly exhortations. Being come to the place of execution, the sword was
laid there ready to behead them, if they would take the Cross into their
hands, and admit the Friars into their company: But because they would not
yield one whit unto them, wood was

Notes upon the occasion of a sedition at Paris, the fifth of March 1559.
THe fifth day of March, there was a great uproar raised in the church of Saint
Innocents in Paris. The preachers all the Lent never ceased to move the people
to kill all the Lutherans they could meet withal, and not leave the execution
thereof to the Magistrates. Amongst the rest a Minorite, who preached in the
said Church, spent all his Sermons upon that subject. The same day taking his
text out of the eight of Saint John's Gospel concerning the woman taken in
adultery being brought to Jesus Ch: he uttered execrable things against the
Magistrate: showing that it was no wonder if the Judges did not cast the first
stone at the Lutherans, because they themselves were also Lutherans; and
therefore the people were not to attend them any longer, but to rise and make
open war against them, yea, upon the chiefest of them, which were but suspected
to hold that doctrine. In this garboile a poor Priest (with a brother of his,
a Captain, passing by, and thinking by fair language to pacify the disordered
tumult) had his foot no sooner out of the Church door, but he was set upon by
this blood-thirsty crew, who although he asked forgiveness in the name of the
Saints, desiring to be confessed, and And thus thinking to martyr the
Christians, by the providence of God, it fell on those of their own side.
showed all outward signs of being one of their own side, yet could he of
this headless beast the multitude obtain no favor, but was stabbed into the
belly with a dagger, and fell down dead. And yet they were not satisfied so,
but the very meanest among them had a blow at him, raking with their hands in
his wounds, and then in Triumph lifting him up, bragged that they had bathed
their hands in the blood of a Lutheran.

The Captain with much ado getting into the Vicars house, they beset the house
lest he should escape their fingers. And hearing that the magistrate was
coming to deliver him, they feared not with one voice to say, that they would
spare none, no not the King himself though he came in his own person. If any
more pitiful than the rest uttered but so much as the least word tending to
compassion, they were cruelly handled on all sides, so as many met with hard
usage even for that.

Not fully a year before this, there fell out the like, if not a worse
spectacle of cruelty in the Church of Saint Eustate.

For a Doctor of the Sorbonists, commonly called the soul of Picardy, who in
his sermons preached out nothing but fire and fagots, encouraged the Parisians
to slaughter the Lutheranes, making many goodly promises to all such as would
undertake such a bloody design: which was not so soon propounded, as accepted
of by the people. For a poor scholar, who out of devotion was present at the
sermon, happening (upon some accident) to laugh at his fellow Pupil; an old
turnecoate sitting by and observing it cried out forthwith, that a Lutherane
mocked the Preacher. The people at the sound of this voice began to stir, not
knowing upon what ground: and haling him out of the Church miserably massacred
him, till they had forced both his eyes out of his head, buffeting him with
their fists; and one among the rest caused his horse to trample upon him thrice.

John Barbeville of Normandy being questioned by three of the Counsel about
the sacrament, See here what mock^ gods these be who condemn the poor
christians.
not return thence, till he come to judge the quick and the dead. Upon which
article one of the Counsel added this scoff, which ascended into heaven, and
drew the ladder up after him.

Upon some occasion they said unto him that he A resorting speech well applied.
to reprove him, for loading him with stripes when he was going to utter his
lies against the Children of God? If God opened the Asses mouth, do ye now
wonder if he opens mine, to cause me to speak against the falsehood and lies
which you spread abroad against the people of God?

Another inquisitor a Monk called Benedict told him that he was come to
comfort and instruct him in the truth. How can you, said Barbeville, say, you
come to instruct me in the truth, when your self does wear the habit of a
liar? I cannot

God so wrought here, and the truth so prevailed, that though it was plainly
confessed, yet the Prisoners were delivered, Anno 1559.
THe court of the parliament of Paris, willing to moderate the cruelties used
against those of the reformed religion, solicited them what they could, to
dissemble and to yield in some points; wherein the well minded of that side
were not yet rightly informed: but to this their advice they would by no means
consent. Then they took another course, and that was simply to examine

This was propounded to four young men who were in the flower of their age, and
lying prisoners in the Consciergerie of the palace, if it might be, to satisfy
them. Now when this confession was presented to the Court, all that were well
affected were glad of it, in regard it was drawn so favorably; some being of
opinion that it would work their deliverance. Others there were which opposed
this project, and requested they might be examined what they thought of the
Mass, it being so necessary an article; provided, that there might be some
moderation in the ordinary course of such interrogations. Notwithstanding it
was thought, that this would rather hinder than further their deliverance; yet
did the better part persist in their purpose of freeing them.

Being therefore asked again what they thought of the Mass, they answered,
that they would stand to their first confession. It was replied, That the Court
would rest satisfied with that answer, if so be they would now only go to
Mass. But with one voice they affirmed, that they would never yield to come
there where God was so dishonored. The Court, to make it appear that no
advantage should be taken against them for this their answer, gave them leave
severally to show their reasons. This pleased the prisoners well, and therefore
they spared not to paint forth the Mass in its lively colors; that all might
perceive there was cause sufficient why they should detest it.

First, one of them by way of opposition showed The Mass deciphered in its
colors.
how contrary the Mass was to the Lords supper. The second declared, it was
blasphemy to affirm, that there was any other propitiatory sacrifice for
sins then the blood of Christ. The third avouched, that if the article of
Transubstantiation (whereon the Mass depends) were allowed, Christ his deity
and his humanity should be abolished, and therefore it must be flat idolatry to
worship Almighty God in a corruptible piece of paste. The fourth told them,
that the fruits of the Sacramant could not be received where the Word was not
joined with the sign, where one of the signs were withheld, or where there
was no Communion.

Thus was the Mass anatomised, with the abominations thereof, with all
boldness; so as some of the Judges were constrained to aver openly, that
there was a great abuse in it indeed, being a manifest wrong done to the
institution of Christ; as also that the Laity were there deprived of the Cup,
and the Bread only given, the whole being performed in a language which the
poor people understood not.

It was beyond the expectation of all men, that so free a confession would have
passed for current in that place, in which whosoever came before them formerly,
and made the like, was condemned to die. But now the Truth so prevailed, that
against all hope and ordinary proceedings in times past, yea, contrary to the
minds of those which were Gods chiefest enemies, the order was this, That
howsoever sentence of death had been pronounced against three others of this
company, by the inferior judges, yet these four should have their lives
saved; provided, that they departed the country Four witnesses of the truth
gently entreated by their Judges.
within fifteen days. Which exception, though it favored of some injustice,
yet was it nothing in comparison of the former cruelties; and this banishment
turned rather for a benefit to them than an hurt, for by this means they had
liberty to go to such places where God was purely served.

The story of Peter Chevet, Martyr.
BEing asked whether he durst affirm that he He was in outward appearance a
silly poor man, a vinedresser, of the age of 60. years and upwards.
had the spirit of God? Yea, said he, for I am one of Gods children, and
therefore have the spirit of God given unto me, as the earnest of my adoption.

It is to be feared, said some, that you will bring your self in danger of the
law, and so be burned. Truly, said he, I do not think to escape better
cheap; and though you scortch and roast me alive, yet will I never renounce
Jesus Christ. Is it not written, He that shall confess me before men, him will
I confess before my Father which is in Mat. 10. 32.
heaven, etc? Being asked whether he desired not to be absolved, confessed, and
to receive pardon, having stood excommunicate now three years; he answered, I
confess my faults every day to my God, but where is that goodly absolver that
will

Being come to the place where he was to suffer, He could say the new
Testament by heart, and was so prompt therein in all his answers, that the
people who heard him, said if he were suffered to speak, he would convert
all the City of Paris.
help him from off the cart, but tumbled him down with his head forward.
Notwithstanding all this and other cruelties, he manfully overcame the same
with invincible constancy. And when they pulled off his clothes, he was heard
to say intelligibly, How happy, how happy, o how happy am I? with his eyes
still lifted up to heaven.

He was burned in the place called Maubert, nigh to the city of Paris, the 11.
of March, 1559.

A notable speech uttered by Anne du Burg Counselor for the King in
Parliament, in the month of June, An. 1559.
AMong the rest there was a Counselor called Anne du Burg^ a man of singular
understanding and knowledge, bred and nursed up in the bosom of the Church of
Christ. This man having

Only one thing more touching the said Anne du Burg I could not here omit, and
it is this. A certain woman being prisoner (for the same cause) right over
against him, had a little window in her chamber which opened toward that where
In the History of the martyrs mention is made of one Peter Arundeau, whose
co^stancy was so admirable in suffering the extremity of death, that it was the
means to imbolden this worthy counselor Anne Du Burg with others to suffer
for the cause of the Gospel.
Master du Burg lay; from whence either by

Whose godly zeal was such, as that her story

Christian women, says the Historian, behold here the courage and zeal of
this Margaret your sister, who is set before you for a pattern to unitate: she
encouraged both great and small, who at that same time were prisoners with her.

Margaret Rich was born in Paris, the Wife of Anthony Ricant Bookseller,
dwelling in Paris in the place called the Mount of Saint Hillary, at the sign
of the great Quail. This woman was as virtuously disposed as could be; she
had gotten some small insight into the mystery of iniquity, by means of her
husband, who yet suffered her to observe the superstitions of Popery, without
urging her any further; for he was a man indifferent in the matter of Gods
service: but yet her conscience gave her, that knowing her course to be evil,
it was not sufficient to forsake that, unless she did cleave to the contrary
good which leads to life and salvation, namely to serve God according to his
Word. Understanding then, that there were godly meetings of good Christians,
which assembled together in the City, she found the means to come in amongst
them, and profited so well thereby, that she resolved in her self never to go
again to the Mass, but to die rather.

At length being hardly used by her husband because of this her sudden change,
he threatened her so far as to carry her himself to the Mass, (the next day
which was Easter-Sunday) rather than that she should not go. After she had
endured much from this man who would have her to play the dissembler, she to
preserve her self therefrom, being also afraid of her husbands fury, upon
Easter day withdrew her self to a friends house of hers: thinking it safer to
displease her husband, than God, to whom she had dedicated her self.

This day being past, because she would not overlong absent her self from
her own home, she determined to return back again to him, whom God had
bound and conjoined her with, though she could not but foresee the great
evils and inconveniences which would follow thereupon, in regard of her said
husbands crooked disposition. She came no sooner home, but she was discovered
by the Curate of Saint Hillary, committed prisoner, and brought into the
Consciergery. They asked her where she had kept her Easter: she without faining
told them, she absented herself from home, that she might abide a while with
some of her loving friends, lest she should be urged to profane the supper of
the Lord, as others usually did; and therefore had kept the same according to
Gods ordinance, in the assembly of faithful and devout christians. Being asked
whether indeed she had been present at those secret meetings: she answered
yea, and esteemed her self happy that ever she came among them. And thus
being questioned by the Counsel, with other prisoners, about the Mass,
purgatory, auricular confession, and such other points, she freely told them
what she had learned concerning the same out of Gods word; so as the fifth of
May she was ordered to be sent to the Bishop, or his official, to see if by
any means she might be reclaimed. But the official prevailing nothing with
her, because she persisted constant in the profession of the truth, he
pronounced sentence against her, declaring her to be a pertinacious and
obstinate heretic; yea such a one as was to be redelivered over to the
secular power, and thence to be sent back to the Consciergery.

Being brought back into the Court, certain Doctors and others were sent to
reason with her: yet her faith for all that staggered not, but remained
victorious, notwithstanding all their batteries laid against it,

Then by the sentence of the Court she was condemned to be carried in a dung
cart to the place called Maubert, a gagge to be put into her mouth, and there
to be burned and consumed to ashes. But before she should suffer death, she was
sentenced to be put to the extraordinary torture, to make her confess, whom
she knew, and was conversant withal, and to name the house where she received
the Communion: yet did this woman undergo all these her afflictions, with
incredible joy, singing Psalms, and praising God continually: she was never
seen to shrink at her

But to return to the manner of her death; after sentence she was led to the
Chapel, as the

Coming to the place of her martyrdom, they told her if she would relent,
she should be strangled. She answered, That her resolution was so rightly
founded upon the word of God, that she never meant to change. And to let them
see that death terrified her not, she began to disrobe her self without
troubling the hangman at all. Being hoised up in the air, they asked her
again, if she would not accept of the grace which the court

How one that was naturally deaf helped himself.
IT is recorded of John Beffroy a Lock-smith He was exceedingly maligned of his
neighbors for his piety, but especially because he had a little infant of his
baptized secretly, and then for working upon a light holyday, which was the
cause of his apprehension and death.
himself very religiously, never denying his house for Christian meetings,
what danger soever might ensue thereupon. He had an incredible desire to profit
by the preaching of the Gospel. And therefore being hindered by a natural
infirmity of deafness to understand what was spoken, he used this help,
commanding a Lad which he kept to hearken to the sermon attentively, and at his
Anno 1549.

Another relation of Anne du Burg.
DV Burg, being asked if he had conferred with any about certain articles
formerly mentioned, answered, That he had conferred with his books, but
especially the holy Scriptures.

Having framed a Confession of his faith which he intended to have presented to
the court of parliament, certain counselors which were advocats in the said
Court pretending friendship toward him, being yet but time-servers, showing
themselves also discontented therewith, labored with him to make another
Confession, not directly contrary to the truth, but somewhat ambiguous and
doubtful, so as it might give satisfaction to his Judges. Du Burg, having of a
long time resisted, was in a manner overcome (by their entreaties) to consent
to their Counsel; telling him, it sufficed that himself understood his own
true meaning, though ambiguously expressed; as also that his Judges would not
stand strictly to examine such a confession as had only an outward appearance
of consenting to their doctrine. Now this disguised confession was no sooner
come into the hands of his Judges, but great hopes were conceived of his
enlargement. But when the assembly had got a true copy thereof, they were
greatly greeved, being more careful of the saving his soul, of Gods glory,
and the edification of his Church, then of such a deliverance, which could not
be obtained without great dishonor to God.

And therefore they gave order to M. Augustine Of the manner of whose death you
shall read hereafter
Marlorate to write a large discourse concerning the duty of such as were
called of God to bear witness to his eternal truth before the Magistrate;
wherein were also set down Gods threatenings and judgments against such as
either directly or indirectly in what kind soever did disavow the same.
Exhorting him more highly to 1 2 3 4 5 6
prize the glory of God, than his own liberty; the truth of the Gospel, than
a short and transitory life. That it beseemed him not now to give over, having
already made so happy a beginning, and so good a progress in his Christian
course. That the report of his constancy was spread not only through the
kingdom of France, but throughout all Christendom. That he had been a means
to confirm many weak ones, and caused others to enquire after the means of
Salvation. That the eyes of all were fixed on him, to expect the manner of his
coming out of prison. So as if now through fear, or faintheartednesse he
should enterprise ought that might contradict his first confession, he would
thus become an occasion of much scandal and offense. And therefore exhorted
him to give glory to God, to edify his Church, assuring him that God would
never leave nor forsake him. These Letters wrought in the conscience of Du Burg
a sense of his sin: for which asking pardon of God, without any further
delay, he sent a petition to his Judges, in which retracting this his last
confession he protested to stand unto his first.

Slanders raised by the Sorbonists against the Protestants of Roan in France,
and what was the issue thereof.
THree Doctors of the Sorbonists, whose names were Secard, Columbell, and
Fancillon, in their collations to their parishioners accused those of the
Religion with their wonted slanders, as, that they committed whordome one with
another after the candles were put out, and were taught to rebel against their
King and governors; which governors also these Sorbonists accused to connive
and hold with them, inciting the people to run upon those of the religion,
since the Magistrates forbear to do their duty. But here God catched the wise
in their own craftiness; for by means hereof many began to look into these
matters whereof the godly were accused; Namely, to enquire both what they did
and spoke in their assemblies.

But these accusers, not content herewith, went in the night into Churches, not
sparing to deface the images that stood therein, and then charged the
Protestants to be the only actors thereof.

The story of a Locksmith, Martyr, who being dry had holy water given him to
drink.
ABout this time was a Locksmith burnt in the city of Again, upon the clamours
and seditious

The miserable death of a Consul who was both an accuser and a Judge.
IOstas Simler, a learned Divine of our time, in

As they led him to execution he went toward it with undaunted courage, and
died very constantly; protesting in the presence of all the Spectators, that he
most gladly laid down this life present, for the maintenance of that religion
whereof he had made profession, believing undoubtedly that it was the Truth;
but added, that the consul who was the author of his death should himself die
within three days, and appear before Gods judgment seat to render an account
of his sentence. Which came to pass according as this pious man foretold: for
the Consul being then in the prime of his youth, and of an healthful
disposition of body, from that day began to be assailed first with an exceeding
heat, and then with an extraordinary cold; and thus was he smitten with a new
kind of sickness, so as within three days he followed him, of whom he had
bin both the most unjust accuser and judge.

The speech of a poor Porter called Chevillon, whipped for the Truth, and
after confined to the Galleys.
BEing whipped through the streets of Romans, he said to him that lashed him,
Lay on my friend, lay it on and spare not, chastise this flesh which has so
often rebelled against his God: thinking himself happy that he suffered in so
good a quarrel.

The miserable end of one called Aubespine, a Counselor of Grenolle, and a
persecutor.
AFter these bloody persecutions, this Aubespine fell in love with a
gentlewoman, and therein gave such way to his passion, that he forsook his
calling, casting off all care of his own welfare, to follow her whithersoever
she went. But she disregarding him, he took it so to heart, that he neglected
his own person: by reason whereof swarming full of lice, he could by no means
be rid of them; for they increased upon him, and came out at all the parts of
his body, as they are seen to issue out of a dead carcass. It was not long
before his death, but feeling himself smitten with Gods hand, he began to
despair of his mercy, and to shorten his days he concluded to famish
himself: in the mean while the lice gathered so thick about his throat, as if
they would strangle him. Some beholding this so lamentable a spectacle, being
much moved therewith in commiserating his estate, agreed to make him eat
whether he would or no, forcing him to take some broth, or a Cullis, which he
resisting with all his might, they bound his arms, gagging his mouth with a
stick to keep it open, whilst they put somewhat thereinto. Being thus gagged
he died like an enraged beast, with the abundance of lice which crept toward
Gag them said he, for it we suffer them to speak, they will do more harm at
their death than in their life: which practice was not only liked but executed.
by some of the Romish Religion, that look what torment he had devised for the
ministers of Valence, sending them gagged to their execution, he was by the
just judgment of God punished after a sort in the same kind.

John Ponce of Leon a Gentleman of Seuill in in Spain.
AMong those that with a firm faith sealed the truth of the Gospel with their
blood in the Spanish inquisition at Sevill the four and twentieth of September
1559. Don John Ponce of Leon, the son of Roderic Ponce of Leon Count of
Baylen, may of good right deserve to be placed in the first rank. For besides
the noble race from whench he sprang, the Lord had endued him with singular
virtues well beseeming so worthy and Christian a Gentleman. Those who

The Inquisitors of Sevill envying the sweet savor of such a life and
conversation as he led before them, flowing from an inward taste of true
Religion, spared him no more than those of meaner condition. For having gotten
him into their hands, they left no means unassayed, but used the

For in the said sentence were read his articles for which he was principally
condemned to the fire; namely, That he abhorred the Idolatry which is
committed in adoring the Sacrament, calling it a breaden god. Also, that when
he met it as it was carried through the streets, either in solemnity or to some
sick body, he passed into another street going apace before it, that he might
give no reverence unto it. That coming often into the Cathedral Church where
mass was

These were in effect the Articles which were inserted in his sentence, a part
whereof also was drawn out of the confession of his faith, the sum being this:
First. That a man is justified and accepted of God only for the merit of
Jesus Christ apprehended by faith. That the popes pardons and indulgences sent
from Rome are mere delusions, and that the Pope is Antichrist, etc. That it
was the desire of his heart to be burned, or to suffer some other extremity for
the maintenance of the Faith which he professed. That he endeavored to employ
the goods and riches wherewith God had blessed him, only for the defense and
further enlarging of the doctrine of the Gospel; Yea, to forsake life, wife,
children, and all, for the same: to which end he had daily sent up many hearty
prayers to God.

In all this business, the holy tribunal labored by cunning devices to obscure
this confession, causing it to be bruited that he held not out to the end, with
many other like inventions to make the people believe they had turned him to
their Law: but herein they showed themselves not well advised, in that they
belied both him and themselves. For in publishing his crimes and offenses with
the manner of his death, what did they else but declare and manifest the truth
of the fact, which plainly appears in these words of the sentence; John Ponce
of Leon, burned for an heretic and an obstinate Lutheran, etc. Which words
made their fraudulent dealing apparent to such as doubted any way of the
constancy and perseverance of this pious Christian knight.

John Gonzalve a Preacher in Sevill, Martyr: with whom were executed two of his
sisters, their mother remaining in prison, reserved to act her part in another
tragedy.
GOnzalve a renowned Preacher throughout the Country of Andalousie, was also
led in this inquisitoriall triumph: who forsaking his School Divinity, in
which learning he excelled all his fellows, gave himself wholly to the study
of the holy Scriptures, according to the purity whereof his whole conversation
was ordered, both inwarly and outwardly. He was often observed in all his
Sermons to aim at this mark, namely to deliver men's minds from that blind
conceit of meriting by works; that so way might be made for justification only
by Faith in Christ Jesus, and deeply to in graft into them the knowledge of the
sole merit of his plenary satisfaction. For which his labor he expected to
receive from man the same reward which all the true servants of God have had in
their times.

Being then seized upon by those of this Spanish inquisition, he yielded a
reason of his faith in that purity and sincerity, as did the aforesaid John
Ponce; who as they had been friends and of familliar acquaintance, so were
they joined together in the same confession, and led to the same execution
together. The night before he suffered he had a sore conflict with an old sect
of Priests, who were of the Inquisition, but in the end he caused them to
return vanquished and ashamed. He was led from the castle and prison of Trion
with his two sisters unto the place appointed for his end, that they with him
might drink of the same cup, leaving his mother and one of his brethren behind
him in prison, reserved to be executed when their turn came about. He never
showed the least sign of being dismayed; but contrariwise with great constancy
and courage of heart standing above all the people, to whom he had formerly
preached and delivered the pattern of sound Doctrine; He began with a loud
voice to recite the Psalm which begins thus, O Lord my Rock Psalm. 28. 1.
be not thou silent to me, etc. not changing his conntenance at all upon the
Scaffold, though they had gagged him there, because he comforted and freely
exhorted one of his sisters to be constant: whose spirit he feared might
otherwise faint.

When the time was come that those which should be burned were brought to the
place of execution, they were every one commanded to recite the articles of
their belief, which they willingly did: but when they came to the Article, I
believe the holy Catholic Church, they were bidden to add this word Roman,
whereupon they were silent: then did the Roman; who answered they would, if
they might hear John Gonzalva pronounce it (not that they intended so to do,
but being confident of his renouncing the same) hoping by this means to free
him of his gagge, and so to obtain the liberty of speech, by which he might
render a reason of his faith, and so of this article among the rest. Being

Isabell of Vaenia, Mary of Viroes, Cornella
AMong all the most ancient professors of true religion that had their abode in
the Church of God at Sevill (who in a manner were all wasted by the Tyranny of
the Inquisition) the power of faith appeared in these four women above
specified. Now howsoever they were all endued

As touching the first of these, Vaenia; her Would to God many maids in these
dates might deserve to be so commended.


During her Captivity there came many Monks to dispute and reason with her;
above all, those of the order of Saint Dominicke, who were enforced to admire
the spirit of wisdom, wherewith this Damsel was inspired, as also at the
pregnant answers which she gave to their demands. She suffered so many kinds
of torments, that by the violence thereof they forced her to nominate her
sister Jane Bohorques, and to confess that she had often been present at the
Preaching of the Gospel. This Jane was the wife of one called Francis Varquis,
Lord of Higueras, a man of excellent note. She was six Months gone with
child when she was committed to prison, and therefore was not so straightly used,
nor hardly dealt with all as other of the prisoners were. But within eight
days after her delivery, her child was taken from her, and then giving her no
longer time of breathing, they began to deal with her after the guise of the
Spanish Inquisition, forming her indictment agreeable to the rigor and
severity thereof. In which her extremity she had comfort of none, but of a
virtuous young maiden, who afterward was burned for the profession of the
truth: which maid being one day brought by the Inquisitors to the torture, was
in a manner dismembered, and then laid upon a bed of straw, whereon both were
laid in the prison, serving rather to vex then any way to ease them, yet did
the other yield her all the relief which her self or the place could possibly
afford. Scarce had this poor Damsel recovered some ease after these
intolerable bruises, but this aforesaid Jane Bohorques tasted of the same
bitter Cup, where she was so cruelly tormented on the Burro, as they call it,
which is a bench or form whereon they give the Towell or Napkin, that the
cords pierced through the flesh into the bones, both of her arms and legs:
and in this pitiful plight the blood gushing out, she was returned to her
prison, where within eight days after it pleased God to free her out of the
clutches of these bloudthirsty, into his eternal happiness and glory. Now
they were very loath it should be bruited abroad that this gentlewoman, so well
borne and delicately bred, should dye under so cruel torments: but they who
were the beholders of such inhumanity could not be silent. Yet these good
fathers, being under no control, take their liberty thus to imbrue their hands
in the blood of Gods saints.

Her sister Mary being led with the rest of her fellows to the place where
they were to suffer, she went thereto with such joy and gladness, as one
triumphing over her enemies: which the whole tribunal observing, and fearing
lest others would be imboldened by her constant defense of the truth and
singing of Psalms as she went, gagged her. And when she came to the place of
execution, that they might obscure the glory of this heavenly constancy they
presently strangled her.

Julian Hernandes burned in Sevill in Spain, Anno 1559.
THis Julian, who for his small stature was called, le petit, was servant to
John Piers and Spaniard, and minister of the Gospel in Geneva,

These books to the poor Chrstians there were welcomed with no less
joyfulnesse, then the rain when it showers down upon the parched ground. For
the Gospel by means hereof grew, and was Psalm. (...).
enlarged; so as the Lord thereby reaped a very great Harvest. But the news
hereof coming to the ears of the holy Fathers, first, by the indiscretion and
foole-hardinesse of one more zealous then wise, and then by the treachery of
wily spies of the Inquisition, who counterfeited a profession of the Gospel,
merely to ensnare and betray the sincere professors thereof, by their
disloyal practices: no sooner had these venerable Fathers, or hunters rather
gotten a sent of this game Deuteronomy. 21. 6.
great surprisall the whole flock was scattered; but so many was the number of
them even at their first apprehension, that it amassed the huntsmen themselves.

For the prisons were so replenished, that they See what great increase God can
bring out of weak beiginnings.
were feign to borrow private houses to shut up the prisoners in. At once they
burned twenty and upwards of them together, whilst in Sevill they detayned in
bonds 800. Amongst whom this Such honor have all Gods Saints.
These hypocrites are gone away confounded, no less then Wolves which have
been long

After many fierce encounters and sharp disputes with the Monks and others of
the popish crew, being brought out of the prison into the Castle, there to
receive the mark and livery of Christ the son of God, with the rest of the
prisoners, it was reported, that he with a bold courage and settled countenance
thus spoke unto them; Courage my valiant and constant Brethren, now is the
hour come in which, as the true Champions of Jesus Christ, we must witness
his truth before men, and for a short trial for his sake we shall triumph
with him for ever and ever. But the officers of the Inquision interrupted him
instantly, by putting a gagge in his mouth, with which he continued until a
little before he dyed. Mounting then upon the scaffold where he was to suffer,
by manifold signs he showed the constancy and steadfastness of his faith,
which by words he could not. For in ascending up the steps of the scaffold,
When the Martyrs were hindered to manifest their faith by speech, yet they would
by outward gestures do it as well as they could.
kneeling down he kissed them; and being fastened to the stake, environed and
compassed round abut with fagots, he sundry times bowed his head within the
pile of wood, as if he desired to die by fire, and so rendered up his soul into
the hands of God, to the great admiration of the Spectators, and the animating
of his fellow Martyrs who were to suffer with him. When he was to die, a
certain Doctor called Ferdinando Rodrigo, contrary to his intention, made the
faith of this our little Julian much more glorious: for he thinking by
terrifying him with the apprehension of the present torment he was to endure,
obtained so much favor of the Sheriff, as to permit him to speak; thinking
thereby to give the people some intimation of his recantation; which is the
utmost triumph that these holy Fathers of the Inquisition thirst after: but it
proved clean contrary: for Julian recovering liberty of speech, did yield a
more clear evidence and demonstration of his faith than formerly he had done,
and so confuted this Doctor Rodrigo, (calling him a seducer, and one that spoke
against his conscience) that by and by in an outrage, to cover his shame, he
cried out like a Bedlam; Must Spain, which commands silence to so many, be
thus troubled now with this so contemptible a wretch? Kill him, dispatch him,
etc, At which words, the tormentors being there at a beck, forthwith kindled
the fire upon him.

Now having thus formerly mentioned what tortures are exercised upon the bodies
of Gods Saints by the merciless Inquisitors of Spain, and that also upon
those of their own Nation: it shall not be much from the purpose if from
thence we take occasion more particularly here to relate unto thee (Christian
Reader) with what inhumanity such are used who for the cause of religion fa^l
into the hands of these carnal tyrants, according as I find the same set
forth at large by my Author, whose footsteps in the whole Work I endeavor to
follow.

WHen they purpose to torture any one, the Iaylor is commanded to bring forth
his prisoner into the accustomed place where it is to be given; which place is
under the earth, and very obscure. Then going through many turnings, and through
sundry doors, so as the horrible cries of those who are there tortured can in
no wise be heard, there is a seat prepared for the Iuquisitors on high, with a
Register also to behold that tragical act. The torches being lighted, those
who are to act their parts in this woeful Tragedy are brought in: the tormentor
who attends their coming, is covered all over with a black garment, close to
his body, and on his head a black Hood, which hides his face from being seen;
having only two or three holes made therein for himself to see and breathe at;
and all this is the way to terrify the poor Patient, who beholds as it were
a grimme devil ready to torment him. These Fathers being set upon their seat
begin again to charge the Prisoner voluntarily to confess the truth: which if
be refuse to do, and if it then happen that an arm or any other member of his
body be broken, or that they die on the torture (for that is all the favor he
has showed him) they make it his own fault and none of theirs. After they have
used all the terrible threats that can be, they cause him to be stripped
stark naked, whether man, woman, or maid, though they be never so modest and
bashful. Many having fallen into their bloody fingers, thus to have their
shame discovered to the sight of others, was more grievous

The man or woman standing naked then, and their nakedness covered only with
little breeches, as was said, they becken to the tormentor, signifying thereby
what kind of torture he is to put them to. For herein, as also in many things
of a like nature, they have some secret watchword or sign among themselves;
and the Officers being well acquainted therewith can readily discern what
torments the holy Fathers would have

But yet this suffices not. For then if through their importunity he will
confess nothing, they augment the weight the third time, and thus in a manner
being as good as dead, cause him to be pulled up: to which cruelty they add
railing and reviling speeches, calling him dog and heretic, who being
obstinate conceals the truth from them, and therefore deserves to be left dying
there. If the poor creature in regard of his intolerable agony cries unto
Jesus Christ to help him, and to have mercy upon him (as all such do as
suffer for the truth) then they scoff and mock him, saying, Jesus Christ,
Jesus Christ, let this Jesus Christ Impious blasphemiest.
alone a while, and tell us what that Jesus Christ is thou call upon?
Confess to us that which we demand of thee; the which testifies to their faces
how odious and hateful a thing it is unto them to hear such as suffer in the
quarrel of Christ to call upon his name. If the sorrowful wretch desire to be
let down, promising to confess and to tell them somewhat, they will for all
that torment him again. For having paused a little, then they tell him that is
not all, and so continue threatening him with the Strappado as before.

This hellish torture begins at nine of the clock, and lasts till noone, or
one of the clock; and when they please to make an end, then they ask of the
Tormentor if he have his other Engines ready, which they do to strike the
greater terror into the bruised and martyred Patient, whom they now have in
their hands. He answers be has them not there, then they command him to fit
and prepare them against the next day, and not to fail: we will see, say they,
whether we can fetch the whole truth out of this fellow or no. And at their
going out, they comfort the desolate soul thus; This shall suffice for this
time, but look between this and to morrow thou advisest thy self well, what
thou ought to confess, otherwise thou art like to die on the torture; nor
think to escape by what thou have endured, for that is but as a bed of Roses in
regard of the torment which is to come. Being gone, the (...) indevours to set
together the joints of the Patients legs and arms, as well as he can. Then
his clothes being put on, he is brought again into his prison, and if he be
not able to go, then he is carried thither; and sometimes this help proves a
vexation unto him, in that they churlishly hale him by his arms and legs.
The Iaylour also in scorn asks of him, if he need a Surgeon: now if they
mean to torture him no more, then he is called for two or three days after,
and as he passes from the prison, they make him come nigh the door where he
was tortured, where the Tormentor presents himself before him in all points as
has formerly been related, that at this very sight the prisoner in his passage
might be put in mind of what he had but a while since suffered. When he is
come before them, there he finds the Inquisitor, the Register with others set
in their seats attending for him, where according to the guise, they adjure
him to speak the truth. If at that time they can draw nothing out of him, they
send him to prison again. But if he happen to disclose ought serving their
turn, then they ply him hard to utter all: and thereupon make him turn thence
to the torture, hoping thereby to get something more out of him.

If they purpose to exercise this their cruelty with all extremity upon the
same Patient, they send for him the third day, whilst his sinews and joints
are in the prime of their pain, and so renew their horrible threats unto him,
to reveal Anno 1560.
his heresies, and those which had formerly mentioned, and who they be that are
of his opinion; otherwise he must prepare himself for the torture, wherein if
he any way miscarry in his body, or if death it self do follow, the fault
shall be his, and not theirs. If he continue unmovable in his mind, they cause
the Iaylor to bring him to the place of torture, and there they sitting in
their Tribunal, command him to be stripped naked, and then tormented

They have yet another kind of torment, which Burno, which is a planke of
timber made hollow in form of a gutter or trough, wherein a man may lie on his
back; now just where the back bone should repose it self, there is a round
piece of wood lying overthwart, keeping up the back from resting in the
bottom of the hollow place, so as it gives no rest

If they please to proceed further in adding more torments, within a month or
two after the said cruelties are renewed, either in more terrible or moderate
manner, to some once, to others to the sixth time.

There is yet another torment which is peculiar

Thus much be said as touching these torments used by those cruel tormentors
of the bloody Inquisition of Spain upon the bodies of poor Christians.

A note of Francis Oliver Chancellor of France.
THis Chancellor, who in the former persecutions not behaving himself
according to a good conscience, (being in times past so far enlightened as to
make profession of the truth) was Gods judgment upon an Apostate.
visited with a mortal disease; in which sickness he was observed to cast
forth hideous sighs without ceasing. In which perplexity the Cardinal of
Lorraine came to visit him, standing aloof off from him. To whom the
Chancellor uttered these words; Ah Cardinal, thou will damn us all. It is
also reported, that he much and often bewailed the death of Anne du Burg, of
whom mention was made heretofore. And thus living a while in this miserable
condition he ended his days.

A Papist defined by Jacques de Lo.
HAving called the vows of papists papisticall vows, he was asked what a
papist was. He is a Papist, said De Lo, who squares his actions and
conversation according to the Popes laws. Anno 1560.

Being pressed by the papists to confess whom he knew of the reformed
religion, he would name none but such as had suffered; and withal further
added, I entreat you my Brethren in the name Note his admirable constancy.
of God, that you conceive no sinister opinion as touching me in this behalf:
for I am resolved, by the help of my God (without whose assistance I can do
nothing, and with which I can do all things) to suffer my flesh rather to be
rent in pieces, then to reveal any whose persons might thereby be endangered.

The notable conversion of a notorious evil liver, by name John Herwin, of
Houtkerk in Flanders, Martyr; who by degrees was so far brrught into Christ's
Fold, that he was called forth to bear witness of the Truth, from which he
was once as far remote as the heavens are from the earth, in the year 1560.
THis John Herwin, born in Geestercoorne, etc. in the West side of Flanders,
was of a dissolute life, such as soldiers for the most part are of; but God
having a purpose to show forth in him the admirable work of conversion, to
draw him to Christ, put it into his heart to leave his own country, and come
to the City of London. Being arrived there about Easter, the Lord going on
with his work brought him by his providence into a Brewhouse, being a Brewer
by his calling, where he met with a master and fellow servants fearing God; a
thing seldom seen in men of that Profession, seeing ordinarily they are
excessive drinkers. His master caused him often to resort to the Dutch Church in
the said city of London, where by ordinary hearing of the Word preached he
began first to taste, and after to increase more and more in the saving
knowledge of Christ. News coming over, that wars were likely to be in
Flanders, caused him to leave England, and to return again into his own
country. He came thither at the same time that three other martyrs were there
apprehended, but he was not taken with them.

The Bailiffe of Furne when he saw he could not meet with him, understanding
that he was at Honscot, advertised the Bailiffe of the said place, that he
might take him at his sisters house. As soon as he heard thereof he delayed no
time, but in the night time came with his Sergeants and apprehended him. Now
leading him to prison, the bailiffe Anno 1559.
meeting certain drunkards in the streets, said; they say, We have many
Gospellers in Houscot, but it little appears by these disorders.

John Herwin hearing him say so, and not willing to balke it, replied, Is
drunkenness a sin, Master Bayliffe? Then said the Bayliffe, What of that?
Herwin made this conclusion; Why then commit you not these fellows to prison,
seeing it is your office to punish vice, and to protect such as

At length he was brought before the sheriffs of the town, who commanded a
Priest to dispute with him. At the first Encounter he asked Herwin how long it
was since he was confessed? Isai. 66. 1. 2.
what house will ye then make unto me, and where is the place of my rest?
Has not my Act. 4. 19. and 5. 29. A godly admonition to Judges and Magistrates.
what I say, and that seriously also, for at the last When the church of Rome
was a true Church.
after that she fell from the pure word of God, and

Having then given sufficient testimony of his Faith, before those of Houscot,
he craved for Justice either one way or another. But they on the contrary urged
him to desist from his opinion. To which he answered, that his faith was not
built of Psalm. 14.
an opinion, but said he, the Lord has taught me to eschew evil and do good.
Yea, said they, but see thou not how these opinions have troubled the World?
And also how many of the learneder sort do contradict them? Answer. So far is
it off that the doctrine of the Gospel should be the cause of troubles, that
it only is the means of quieting the troubles, debates, and strifes which
reign in the world. These troubles arise indeed from the malice of men. And as
touching your learned men you speak of, it is impossible for humane wisdom to
comprehend the doctrine of God: for which cause Christ says. Father I thank
thee, that Mat. 11. 25. Luke 10. 21.
thou have hid these secrets from the wise men of the World, and have revealed
them to babes. Now as the Sergeants conveyed him to prison, they counseled him
to speak more mildly, and then he might do well enough.

Before his death he was sorely set upon by certain Sophisters, who alleged
to him the sayings of many of the ancient Fathers upon the point of the Lords
Supper; but he overcame them, by holding close the true sense of Christ's words.
In prison he comforted himself in singing of Psalms and spiritual Songs,
some of which he indicted himself. The Canons and priests seeing the people
flock together to the prison door to hear him, especially upon the Sundays
and holy days, strove by all means to put him by his singing. They coupled
him with two malefactors, to be a grief unto him: who obtaining certain
instruments by the help of their consorts, brake prison and fled. Herwin might
thus have escaped if he would; but fearing his flight might be imputed to the
godly Christians in the City, he resolved rather to remain there, than to
fly. His sentence in the mean while coming from the Court, he was no sooner
advertised of it, but he thanked God for advancing him to so high an honor as
to be counted worthy to suffer for his name: Testifying the joy he inwardly
had, by a Letter which he sent to the brethren; praying and exhorting them to
be constant and to persevere in that Doctrine which they had received from God.

The fourth day of November between four and five of the clock in the
morning Herwin was sent for by the Magistrates from prison into the place of
Judgment, where by intreatings and goodly promises they urged him to recant
and receive their breaden God, which was then to be offered up; or at least to
confess that Jesus Christ was there corporally present, upon which he should
by and by be delivered out of all dangers. Now Herwin refusing their offer was
bound and brought by force into the Chapel: but he in sign of his
detestation, turned his back always upon it, shutting his eyes, and stopping
his ears. At the elevation of their Host, one who was kneeling to it, asked
him if Jesus Christ was not now between the Priests hands. No, no, said
Herwin, he is in Heaven at the right hand of his Father.

Soon after the sentence of death was read against him, and so was he
delivered into the hands of the Tormentor. As he passed out of the townhouse,
standing upon the first step, and viewing the people who waited to see him, See
here (says he) how this wicked World rewards the poor servants of Jesus
Christ. Whilst I gave my self to drunkenness, to playiug at Cards and Dice,
living in all dissolution and ungodly behavior, I was never in danger of these
bands (lifting up his hands which were bound) I was then counted a good fellow,
and at that time who but I? But Anno 1561.
no sooner began I by conversion to ask after a godly life, but the world made
war upon me, and became my enemy, persecuting and imprisoning me, and now last
of all sending me to the place where I must pay my last debt. But the servant
is no better than his Lord: For seeing they persecuted Mat. 10. 24. John 15. 20.
him, no question they will persecute us.

Being come to the place where he was to suffer, one of the assembly reaching
him forth his

There were more than four hundred which encouraged him to continue to the
end, as he had well begun. Then he said unto them, Brethren, I fight under the
Standard and in the quarrel of my great Lord and Captain Christ.

Having ended the psalm he made his prayer to God upon his knees. Then rising
up, and being about to enter into his lodge made with an heap of fagots, he
said to the people, I am now When he was gone in, the Friar put him in mind
again, that yet there was time to repent: but he, as one little minding what
this deceiver said, commended his spirit into the hands of God. He that
reached him forth his hand stood in the midst of the Sergeants, and not far off
from the Tormentor, still encouraging the Patient, and yet none laid hold on
him; they were stricken with Anno 1560. His body was consumed to ashes, which
were buried in the Market place of Honscot.

Here it shall not be amiss to insert a godly prayer which a like notorious
wretch (before his conversion) made at his death after he was converted, and
suffered for the same cause. His name was Lieuin Blekere, by his Trade a
Painter, who dwelt in a little village in the
O Heavenly Father, I give thee thanks that thou have pulled me out of
darkness, and have revealed the light of thy Gospel unto me, for else I had
perished everlastingly. O father, thou did ordain me to be one of thy
Witnesses, even from my mothers womb, yea, before the foundation of the world
was laid. Now therefore Lord let this sacrifice be acceptable unto thee,
receive me thy poor servant into thy grace and favor, and pardon the sin of
my persecutors.

To one that stood by he said, Brother, fight the good fight of faith with me,
and pray for me so long as you see life to be in me. And while he was yet
speaking the tormentor strangled him. The dead body, being a little scortched
with the fire was taken thence and hanged on a gibbet by Pamelle, whence he was
taken down in the night and buried.

John de Boschane drowned in a tub in prison, the twenty eighth day of
February, in the City of Antwerpe, Anno 1561.
THe evening before he suffered many of the faithful expected what should be
done unto him. But the Magistrates of the town fearing an uprore, knowing that
he was a man free of speech, and beloved of the people, took counsel to
drown him secretly in the prison, which could not be executed without murder
and cruel torment. For the tub (in which he should be drowned) being neither
large nor deep enough, the Martyr himself being tall of stature, and the
executioner having provided so little water that he could not possibly be
drowned therein; therefore he was constrained, for the shortning of this so
cruel a torment, to wound him in the body with diverse A sure way to make an
end of him.
stabs of a dagger, which were to be seen thereon after he was dead. Thus
finished this Boschane Martyr his life, being twenty six years of age, in the
City of Antwerpe, in the year of our Lord 1560.

The story of one John de Buisons, who was beheaded in the prison, as John the
Baptist was, in the night.
THis holy servant of Christ having valiantly stood to the profession of the
Gospel, was soon after condemned to die. Now fearing lest any tumult or
sedition should be raised in the City of Antwerp, he was beheaded in the prison
about one or two of the clock in the night, to the glory of God, and the
confusion of his adversaries, Anno 1561.

Simon Harm Martyr, who had sentence of death pronounced two several times
upon him in the City of Lisle in Flanders.
THis Simon was accused to have uttered some speeches long since against the
Church of Rome. Witnesses being produced against him in the towne-house, the
Magistrate condemned him to be beheaded. Now according to their custom in that
place, his hat being taken from him after sentence pronounced, he was returned
back again to prison, expecting the hour of his execution. Then were sent
unto him certain friars to confess, or rather to vex and torment him. But
this godly man being thoroughly fenced with the sword of the Spirit, which is
the Word of God, made them know to their shame that they were greatly mistaken:
for the Friars returning back to those who had employed them in this
business, reported that this Simon was a most notorious heretic; which the
Magistrates of the City hearing, caused him by and by to be called The Martyr
had his hat sent him which was taken from him.
to judgment, sending him his hat again which they took from him, in token
that they had revoked the sentence first pronounced, to enter a

A note of one John Martin, who bragged he would cut off a Ministers nose.
THe Church of God increasing so far in the Valleys of Angrongne in France,
that they were feign to build a Church wherein to preach the Word publicly, in
regard of concourse of people resorting thither, it happened that the forenamed
John Martin, boasting every where that he would cut off the ministers nose of
Angrongne, was soon after set upon by a mad wolf, who did indeed eat his nose
from his face, A remarkable judgment of God.
dying mad thereof himself, and yet it was never An. 1561.

A mischief mercifully prevented by the means of prayer and calling upon the
A Certain President being come into the city of Pigneroll, sent for one of
Saint John's (very near unto Angrongne) who at that time dwelt there, asking
him if he had not caused a child of his to be baptized at Angrongne, and why
he had done so? The poor silly man answered, he had

Papists committed their children to Protestants, to be preserved from being
deflowred.
AMong other things (says my Author) this is to be observed, that during these
troubles in the Valleys of Angrongne from the year 1555 unto the year 1561.
The Papists which dwelt in the Country conveyed their daughters away into the
Mountains, and committed the custody of them to these poor persecuted
Christians of Vandois, for fear lest their chastities should be violated by
the common soldiers, according as they had been threatened by them, who were
given over to all villainy and cruelty.

An assemble of the faithful, descried nigh to Antwerpe, was by the enemies of
the Gospel put to flight, of which three being apprehended, two escaped, and
one named Barthelemi de Hoy was executed Anno 1561.
THe third day of the month of August in the year 1561, when great triumphs
were usually made in the city of Antwerpe about the plays and prizes of
Rhetorike (as they call them) to the sight and hearing whereof there commonly
came great multitudes from many places: those of the Religion being willing to
take all opportunities to meet together in the fear of God, whilst others
were busted in seeing and beholding those vanities: a great number withdrew
themselves out of the City, and entered into a wood, nigh unto Marksem, that
there they might hear the word of God preached with lively voice by the
preachers thereof.

The Dorsart of Marklem being advertised thereof, resorted thither with his
Officers, being conducted to the place by certain poor youths, being
Nete-heards, whom he promised to apparel, if they could bring him to any place
of the wood where the assembly was; Whilst himself staying without, with two
or three other on horseback, sent the rest of his Officers with the boys into
the wood. At the appearing of these wolves the poor sheep of Christ began to
be affrighted, and to fly. The Ministers and others seeing this disorder
admonished the assembly not to stir, showing how great inconveniences would
follow upon such an inconsiderate flight. The persecutors were not above five
or six, but the persecuted were about four or five hundred persons; so as
without any great difficulty they might have had the better hand of them. The
principal aim which the Officers had, was to apprehend the Minister. For
having caught one of the assembly, thinking he had been the man, they cried
one to another. Hold the Priest fast, striking him with their Pistols and
staves, and so brought him out of the wood. The Dorsart, perceiving that this
was not the Minister, kept him notwithstanding as his prey, and left not
pursuing this scattered flock until night. After this he took two others in
the Lordship of Akeram.

Thus having apprehended these three prisoners, and withal having taken up
many cloakes, hats, vailes, foreparts, and other accout^ents, which the poor
dispersed had lost and let fall, these they took away as a spoil, and
returned to Markesem. This Dorsart laid hold on two others by the way, whom he
supposed to be of that number, one of which was Barthelemi de Hoye, a Joyner,
of the age of twenty four years. These five were committed to prison one from
another, some at Marksem, and others at Damme. Soon after the first three
which had been taken in the Jurisdiction of Akerem had the means to escape
without any danger or detriment, by the assistance of their friends. Barthelemi
only remained in Carnal reasons used by carnal people.
content himself with their religion and glorious Church, adorned with silver,
gold, and precious stones, in which there was such melodious music, both of
voices and instruments, but must needs join himself to that Church which was
hated, Luke 16. 45.
in the sight of God. Having then often justified the cause of God, and
reproved the Roman Church of false doctrine, known by the fruits thereof, viz.
the hateful lives of the priests, etc. he was after a few days brought out of
Prison, Ann. 1561.

A relation touching the Massacre at Vassy in the country of Champaigne in
France.
THe Duke of Guise being arrived at Ioinville,

The next day being Sunday, which was the first of March, after he had heard
Mass very early in the morning, being attended with about two hundred men
armed with harquebuses, Pistols, and Coutelaxes, he left Dammartin passing
along to Vassy. As he went by the Village

Now there were certain soldiers and archers accompanying the, Duke, who
compassed about Vassy; for, having been mustered at Monthicxender, in stead of
returning home, as they were wont to do after the muster was ended, they took
their way thence to Vassy, most of them being lodged in the houses of Papists.
The Saturday before the slaughter they were seen to make ready their weapons,
harquebuses, and Pistols: but the Faithful not dreaming of such a conspiracy,
thought the duke would offer them no hard measure, being the Kings subjects,
also, that not above two months before the Duke and his brethren passing by
nigh unto the said Vassy, gave no sign of their displeasure.

The Duke of Guise being arrived at Vassy with all his troops, a young man a
shoemaker stepping out of his house not far from the door where the assembly
was, Montague pointing to him with his finger said he was one of the Ministers.
Whereupon the Duke called this shoemaker to him, and asked of him whether he
were a Minister, and of what University he was. He answered, that he was not
of that Calling, neither was he a scholar. Notwithstanding he hardly escaped
from this troop, which had environed him round about: only one of the company
told him, That if he had been a Minister he had taken So it is deemed in the
eye of the word.
upon him a very base Calling.

From thence the Duke, La Brosse, and La Montague passed on in the said City
with their soldiers, as if they minded to take their way toward the village
of Esclairon, where it was given out he meant to dine. But passing by the
market house of Vassy, which is right over against and nigh unto the monastery
in the way leading to Esclairon, he turned and went directly toward the Common
Hall or market house, and then entered into the Monastery, where having called
to him one named Dessalles, the Prior of Vassy, and another whose name was
Claude le Sain, being the Provost of the said Vassy, he talked a while with
them, and issuing hastily out of the Monastery was attended by many of his
Followers. Then commandment was given to such as were. Papists, to retire into
the Monastery, and not to be seen in the streets, unless they would venture
the loss of their lives. The Duke perceiving others of his retinue to be
walking to and fro under the town Hall and about the Churchyard commanded them
to march on toward the place where the sermon was, being in a Barn distant
from the Monastery about some hundred paces, quite opposite to that way which
the Duke should take to Esclairon. This command was by and by put in execution
by such of the company as went on foot, going directly thither. He that
marched foremost of this rabble was La Brosse, and on the side of these marched
the horsemen, after whom followed the Duke with another company, as of his own
followers, so likewise of those of the Cardinal of Guise his brother.

By this time Master Leonard Morrel the Minister, after the first prayer ended,
and having begun his sermon before his auditors, which might amount to about
1200 persons, consisting of men, women, and children: The horsemen first
approaching to the Barn within a matter of twenty five paces, shot off five
harquebuses right upon those who were placed in the galleries joining to the
windows. The people within perceiving that, they who were nigh to the door used
means to shut it, but were disappointed, because this disordered company
pressed in upon them: who forthwith unsheathing their swords, cried furiously
out, Death of God, kill, kill these Huguenots.

The first they seized on was a poor Crier of Anno 1559.
Wine, who stood next the door, asking him, if he were not a Huguenot, and in
whom he believed? Having answered that he believed in Jesus Christ, they smote
him twice with a sword upon his body, which felled him to the ground. Being got
up again thinking to recover himself, they struck him the third time,
whereby being overcharged with wounds he fell down and dyed instantly. Two
other men at the same time were

Then did the Guise with his company violently enter in among them, striking
down maine blows upon the poor people with swords, daggers, and Coutelaxes,
not sparing any age or sex. Besides, they within were so astonished that they
knew not which way to turn them, but running hither and thither fell one upon
another, flying as poor sheep before a company of ravening

Some of the murderers shot off their pieces against them that were in the
Galleries; others cut in pieces such as they lighted upon; others had their
heads cleft in twain, their arms and hands cut off, and did what they could to
hew them all to pieces; so as many of them gave up the ghost even in the place.
The walls and Galleries of the said Barn were Dyed with the blood of those who
were every where murdered: yea, so great

Being got thither, and then fearing to fall again into the hands of these
cruel tigers, some of them leaped over the walls of the City, which were very
high, flying into the woods and amongst the vines, which with most expedition
they could soonest attain unto; some hurt in their arms, Come down ye
dogs, come down, using many cruel threatening speeches unto them.

The cause why women with child escaped, The duchess entreats for a
pacification; that those of her sex being with child might not be affrighted.
the pieces and pistols continually discharged, sent in all haste to the Duke
her husband with much entreaties to cease this persecution, for frighting women
with child.

During this slaughter the Cardinal of Guise remained before the Church of the
said City of A lamentable spectacle.
of Dessalles Prior of Vassi, shooting at the roof people, caused them to fall
down from the roof like pigeons: one of that wretched company was not ashamed
to boast after the massacre was ended, That he for his part had caused six at
the least to tumble down in that pitiful plight, saying, that if others had
done the like, not many of them could possibly have escaped.

The Minister in the beginning of the massacre ceased not to preach still, till
one discharged his piece against the pulpit where he stood, after which falling
down upon his knees, he entreated the Lord not only to have mercy upon
himself, but also upon his poor persecuted floke. Having ended his prayer, he
left his gown behind him, thinking thereby to keep himself, as unknown: b^t
whilst he approached toward the door, in his fear he stumbled upon a dead
body, where he received a blow with a sword upon his right shoulder. Getting up
again, and then thinking to get forth, he was immediately laid hold on and
grievously hurt on the head with a sword, whereupon being felled to the ground,
and feeling himself mortally wounded, he cried, Lord into thy hand I Psalm. 31.
5.
commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, thou God of truth.

Whilst he thus prayed, one of this bloody crew ran upon him to have houghed
him, but it pleased God his sword brake in the hilts. Now to let you understand
by what means he was delivered from so imminent a death, two gentlemen taking
knowledge of him, as the rest were about to kill him, said, it is the Minister,
let him be conveyed to my Lord Duke. These leading him away by both the arms,
brought him before the gate of the Monastery, from whence the Duke and the
Cardinal his brother coming forth said, come hither, and asked him, saying,
Art thou the Minister of this place? who made thee so bold to seduce this
people thus? Sir, said the Minister, I am no seducer, for I have preached to
them the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The Duke perceiving that this short and pithy
answer condemned his cruel fact, began to curse and swear, saying, Death of
God, does the Gospel preach sedition? Provost, go and let a Gibbet be set up,
and hang this bougrer.

At which words the Minister was delivered into the hands of two Pages, who
misused him vilely. The women of the City being ignorant Papists caught up dirt
to throw in his face, and with extended outcries said, Kill him, kill this
varlet, who has been the cause of the slaughter of so many. Much ado there
was to hold off the women from being revenged upon the poor Minister.

Whilst the Pages had him thus in their handling, the Duke went into the barn,
to whom they presented a great Bible, which they used for the service of God.
The Duke taking it into his hands, calling his brother the Cardinal said, Lo
here the Title of the Huguenot books. The Cardinal viewing it, said, There is
nothing but good in this book, for it is the Bible, to wit, the holy
Scriptures. The Duke being offended for that his answer suited not to his
humor, grew into a greater rage than before, saying, Blood of God, how now?
what? the holy Scripture. It is a thousand and five hundred yeerey ago since
Jesus Christ suffered his death and passion, and it is but a year since these
books were imprinted, how then say you that this is the Gospel? by the death
of God you say you know not what. This imbridled fury of the Duke displeased
the Cardinal, so as he was heard secretly to mutter, An unworthy Brother. This
Massacre continued a full hour, the Dukes trumpeters sounding the whilst two
several times. When any of these desired to have mercy showed them for the
love of Jesus Christ, the murderers in scorn would say unto them, you use the
name of Christ, but where is your Christ now become? And when they said Lord
God, they blasphemingly would A grievous scorn.
say, Lord devil.

There dyed in this Massacre within a few days fifty or threescore persons;
besides these, there were about two hundred and fifty others as well men as
women who were wounded and spoiled, Anno 1563.
whereof some died, some were maimed, losing some a leg, some an arm; some
their fingers cut off from their hands, and carried away. The poores The poores
money violently taken away and never after restored.
box which was fastened to the door of the Church with two Iron hooks, was
wrested thence, with twelve pounds therein, and never restored again. Nothing
was to be seen in the streets but Women with their hair hanging about their
ears, faces besmeared with blood, being wounded in

The Minister was kept close prisoner, so as for four and twenty hours none
were permitted to supply him with any necessaries at all, nor any suffered to
see him or speak with him, and was often threatened by his keepers to be sowed up
in a

Whilst the Duke was at Esclairon, the Lackeys and others of their sort put to
sale, unto such as would give most, cloaks, hats, girdles, Coifes,

A memorable deliverance.
ONe called John of the Gardens, having lived

The strange deliverance of a godly Minister of the Church of Chaalons in
Champaign He at the first was doctor of the Sorbonists; a man well learned and
of an unblameable life.
Fournier, after he had endured many hardusages.
FIrst being apprehended and spoiled of all that he had, they stripped him of
his good apparel, and then put an old threadbare Cloak upon him, and carried
him away in a Cart, in regard of a hurt which he had formerly gotten in one of
his feet; by reason whereof he was disabled to go, and

The thirteenth of September, a Captain called Fraisne came to the prison
where he was detained, accompanied with many soldiers, who with mocks and
threats mingled together swear that within three hours he should be hewed and
hacked in pieces, and so should be made a Maygame to all the City, with which
words he left him. Godet the kings Lieutenant with other of the Justices came
in after him, demanding wherefore he was brought to S. Manehon, and forthwith
commanded the Iaylour to load him with yrons, telling him in scorn, you are no
better than saint Peter I am sure, whom they laid in iron. But if you have as
much faith as he, God will then deliver you, as he did him, by sending an
Angel unto you. I will not, said the prisoner, compare my self with saint
Peter: yet it is not twelve years ago since (for preaching the same doctrine
that Saint Peter did (I was imprisoned at Toulouse, and yet admirably
delivered: and though Saint Peter was delivered out of prison, yet in the end
he glorified God by his death. And if I shall be counted worthy to suffer with
him for the truth, may it not be said that I have the like precious says as
Saint Peter had? but for that time he esaped those bolts, having hurt his leg
and foot very sore at his apprehension: His Shackles at that time were turned
into a far more straight prison.

The Duke of Nevers was a good friend unto this Fournier, by whose mediation he
was the rather spared. But the said Duke receiving an hurt at Dreux whereof he
dyed, and the Duke of Guise succeeding him in the government of Champaigne, his
enemies began to renew their former grudge against him, who brought him to be
examined by torture.

Where first they strayned both his thumbs so hard with asmall Cord, that the
blood came forth. Then turning his arms behind his back, they hoysed him
with a rope put between his thumbs so tied; twitching him up five or six
times thereby, sometimes letting him down, and then letting him hang again,
till his spirits and speech failed him. But not content therewith they tied a
great stone to both the great toes of his feet, and then examined him; first if
he had not a purpose to preach at Verdun, if the company who conducted him
thither came together; his answer was, That he could not determine to do that
which he had no hope to perform, nor came it into his thought.

Then they asked him where he had those clothes he wore, seeing he was but
barely clothed when he came into prison? He answered, That the Marquess D'Ile
when she went from Chaalons, sent them unto him by her Iaylor. Being further
asked who taught him to refuse his judge, his answer was, That his own reason
counseled him so to do, and none else. This was the effect of that for which
he was so miserably tortured, and so in conclusion they let him fall with such
violence on his face, that he was grievously hurt thereon.

Being from thence removed to another prison according to their custom for two
or three hours, and then returned to that he was in before, h^ could not be
permitted to have so much as a Surgeon to cure him of the gashes the Cords
had made in his Flesh, even to the bare bones: by reason whereof he continued
in exceeding torment and anguish, not being able to bring his hands to his
mouth, which were also so wrung that he thought if God should grant him life,
yet he should yet be deprived of the use of his limbs.

His indictment being framed, and his condemnation subscribed by sundry Judges
thereunto appointed, some other being of another opinion Anno 1559.
disappointed that determination. The news also of the Duke of Guises death
coming in the neck of it, changed these Foxes into another shape. The names of
the principal whereof were This Bussi was a governor of Champaigne, a covetous
wretch and an enemy to religion.
Cocot and Bussi. Some that had been his Judges, coming into the prison,
demanded of him if he bare them not ill will: he answered, that men of his
profession and religion ought not to malice any, no not their enemies, being
rather enjoined

The next day, being the twelfth of April, Bussi,

In the mean while the Prince of Portien bringing

It is here to be noted, that upon the eighth day

Godet bestirring him, and being now far more willing to save the said
Fourniers life, than

Savage cruelties committed upon the persons of the godly at Bar upon Seine.
SUch was the cruelty of the Executioners after they had slain those of the
religion, that cleaving their bodies in twain, they stuck not to pluck their
hearts thence, as they lay upon the ground, gnawing them between their teeth,
and so reaching them from one to another, saying, now they knew they had eaten
the heart of a Huguenot before they dyed.

The violent rage of the soldiers at Issondun, who proceeded so far as to
re-baptise the young Children of Protestants after the Popish manner.
THe soldiers in this City of Issondon took little children who had been
baptized by the Ministers of the Church there, and caused them to be
re-baptised by their Priests, imposing upon them other names; yea, they
re-baptised a girl of thirteen years old, whom they presented stark naked to
the Font. Yet the young Infants which began only to speak declared both by
evident signs, and words that they would not be re-baptised, so as a girl of
two years old, being brought naked to the Font, with much struggling cried
with a loud voice, that their doings were too shameful; saying that she would
not be baptized again, and therewithal struck the Priest with all the power
she had. Also the son of Iean (...), of the same age, took the Priest by the
beard, and defended it self as well as it could. But for all this the Priests
would not give over.

Another barbarous cruelty committed by Anno 1563.
the Pesants of Fresnay in the County of Main.
IN the village of Fresnay, distant about some ten miles from the City of Man's,
a little after that those of the religion had forsaken the City, a

Execrable blasphemies and outrages
A Company of rake-hels breaking into a merchants house, found there many
Bibles, which they burned in the City; but choosing out a great Bible amongst
the rest, gilt and fair ruled, they fastened it upon the point of an halberd,
and going thence, went in procession therewith through the high streets of the
City, with a great cry, saying, Voila la verity pendue, la verity des
Huguenots, la verity de tout les Diables: voila la Dieu le fort, l'eternel
parlara, etc.
Lo, here the truth hangs, the verity of the Huguenots, the truth of all the
devils; lo, here the God, the mighty God has spoken. And in this manner they
passed along until they came to the bridge, where they threw it into the
river, saying, Behold the truth of all the devils drowned.

A strange course to make victuals cheap.
IN the City of Bloys, whilst those of the religion were cruelly handled, it
so fell out, that in such a disorder even the Roman Catholics themselves
drank with them of the same cup; in regard whreof complaint was made on both
parts, to the Duke of Guise, in hope of some redress. His answer was, that the
Kingdom was but too much replenished with people, and therefore

An outrage done to poor women, who met together to comfort one another.
THere was an honest woman of the City of Blois, whose name was Nichole, the
wife of one John le Manchet, a maker of Sun-Dials, in whose house certain
neighbors meeting together to comfort and edify one another, and to pray one
with and for another, to the number of nine or thereabouts, with their
daughters, these Murderers hearing of it ran violently in among them,
thinking to have found a Minister preaching to them; but when they saw how they
were

A pitiful and tragical spectacle.
A Certain poor woman of Tours, whose husband they had not long before
drowned, having an Infant about six or seven weeks old sucking at her
breasts, and holding by the hand a daughter of hers, very beautiful to look
upon, of the age of 15. or 16. years, was by many insolences haled to the
river side, where having made her prayer upon her knees, the child sucking at
her breast, she shifted it there in the sun, and after laid it upon the grass,
then kneeling down again, commended it to God. Mean while this hellish-rable
used many words to turn the young maiden from her religion, some using sore
threats, others making her many fair promises. One of the soldiers, being a
braver gallant than the rest, promised her marriage, so as the poor wench
stood in a mammering, not knowing what to do. Her Mother seeing her wavering,
earnestly exhorted her to persist in the truth, her self being at that instant
ready to be plunged into the water. The daughter beholding such an outrage,
crying out used these words (all which was afterward testified by those who
were consenting to this murder, being also converted themselves by such a rare
example of constancy) I will said she live and die with my mother, whom I know
to be a virtuous woman: as for your threats and promises, I regard them not,
do with me as you please. The Mother was not yet dead when these merciless
wretches threw in the daughter after her, who making toward her Mother and
they both embracing each other, yielded up their souls into the hands of God.
The poor Infant was taken up by a soldier, who, having kept it a day and a
night from the breast, laid it the next day in a Church porch, whence being
taken up, and given to a nurse to keep, it would never take the breast after,
but within two days it dyed.

An history containing the singular constancy of a Christian Woman, together
with her gracious Answers to her adversaries.
IN the same City of Tours, the death of an honest Matron called Glee is very
remarkable. This woman having much profited in the knowledge of Gods word, was
presented before Chavigny, before whom she gave a reason of her faith,
confirmed by testimonies of scripture, with such constancy in the presence of
certain Friars and Priests, that in the end they gave her no other answer but
this, that she was in a damnable estate. It seems so indeed, said she, being
now in your hands; but I have a God that will neither leave nor forsake me for
all that. Thou have, said they, renounced the Faith. It is true, said she, I
have renounced your faith; which I am able to show is rejected and accursed of
God, and therefore deserves not so much as to be called Faith. Upon this they
committed her to prison, where she was again solicited to recant; to which
purpose they sent certain women unto her into the prison; but all in vain:
for on the contrary she spoke her mind freely, and comforted the prisoners
which were in the same prison with her for religion. Anno 1562.


Now it happened one morning, as she was about to take some bodily refreshing,
news was brought her that she was condemned to be hanged with three men also.
Which news she received with such joy and rejoicing, that the officer had no
sooner ended his message, but forthwith she kneeling on her knees began to
praise and magnify the name of God, in that he had showed her

Being conducted thus with the rest of the prisoners about two of the clock in
the afternoon, and passing by Saint Martins Church, she was commanded to
receive a torch into her hand, and to acknowledge she had offended God and the
King, Away, away, said she, with it; I have neither offended

Then one of her kinsfolks met her in the way, and presented unto her view her
little children, praying her to have compassion on them, seeing that I must
needs tell you, said she, that I love my children dearly: but yet neither for
love I bear to them or any thing else in this world, will I renounce the truth,
or my God, who is and will be a Father unto them, to provide better for them
than I could have done; and therefore to his providence and so passed on
cheerfully without being any further daunted.

Drawing nigh to the place of execution, she called upon God without ceasing,
lifting her hands up to Heaven. Now the men which came with her being ready to
suffer, when she saw them about to die silent, and not to call on God, she
exhorted them thereto, and began aloud to rehearse the confession of sins,
which begins thus, Lord God and so continuing forth the ordinary prayers,
reciting also the Lords prayer, and the Articles of the Creed, she with much
peace and joy in the holy Ghost finished her life.

A Note touching the King of Navarre that then was.
DUring the siege of Rovan, Anthony of Bourbon King of Navarre, being forsaken
of his faithful friends and servants for conniving with the camp of
Trium-Zirat, was shot into the right shoulder with an Harquebuse, the fifteenth
day of October, whereof he dyed the seventeenth following. Not many hours
before his death, with tears in his eyes, he asked pardon of God, making a
confession of his faith, according to the form then used amongst those of the
Religion; And yet but eight days before, through ill counsel and the
solicitation of the Bishop of Mande (one of them that betrayed him) he was
confessed in the ear of the official of Rovan, and communicated after the
popish manner.
protesting that if he might be cured of his wound he would cause the gospel
to be prenched throughout all the Kingdom of France. He was a Prince endowed
with many good gifts of God, naturally of a gentle disposition, and yet a
valarous and courageous warrior, but so addicted to follow his pleasures and
delights, that to enjoy them, he easily abandoned the care of his more weighty
affairs, and so was subject to no small inconvenience, namely to be ill served
and obeyed; in the mean while neglecting the services of such as had been his
loyal and affectionate subjects: An imperfection which has cost France a
million of men's lives, with immunerable ruins besides; an end whereof is not
suddenly to be expected.

The death and Martyrdom of Augustine Marlorat, one of the Ministers of the
reformed Church in Rovan, as also of three other personages, who suffered with
him at the same time, Anno, 1562.
AMongst the garboyles which by the seditious were moved at Rovan, Captain
Saint Estevo seized upon the bodies of Augustine Marlorat, of Du-Bosck, Sieur
de Mandreville, Cruchet, Sieur de Soquence, and Noel Cotton. Mandreville
perceiving this Captain to be no well willer of theirs, yet promised him a
thousand Crowns, if he would save his life and the life of Marlorat, one of
their Ministers: which he having promised to do, by and by he showed him the
place whereinto Marlorat was retired, namely ^ower into which himself, his
wife and children were put, with some others. Thus being has brought together,
the door was presently fast shut upon them.

The seven and twentieth of October the Constable (accompanied with the Duke of
Guise) coming to view the place, desired to see Marlorat, to whom he said, you
are he who have seduced the people. To which he replied, That if he had seduced
them, it was God that had been the doer of it rather than he; for, said he, I
have preached nothing unto them but his Divine truth. The Constable told him,
that he was a seditious person, and the cause of the ruin of that City. To
which he answered, As for that imputation, I refer my self to all that have
heard me preach, be they Papists or Protestants, whether I ever meddled with
matters of politic State or no: but contrariwise have according to my ability,
labored to instruct them out of the holy Scriptures. The Constable with an oath
replied, That he and his abettors plotted together to make the Prince of Conde,
King, the (...) Duke of Normandy, and Antelot Duke of Britain. To which
Marlorat answering and testifying the innocence of those noble personages, gat
only this for his labor, the Constable told him (confirming it with a solemn
oath, that within a few days he should see whether his God could deliver him
out of his hands or no; and to departed in great (...).

Not long (...) these (...), to wit, Marlorat, Mandreville S^quence and Co^on,
and other chief men of the Church were brought into the palace. But the names
of the four above specified were only taken, and forthwith their indictment
drawn; whence presently succeeded the sentence at the instance of Bigot
Advocate for the King which sentence here follows.

The Court having been informed by the Interrogatories and confessions of the
seditious in the city of Rovan, and other parts of the country, namely by M.
Io. du Bosc of Mandreville, President of the court of Requests in Rovan,
Vincent The name of a spacious prison.
of the said Court; conclusions against them being taken by the Kings Attorney
general, all and every thing and circumstance considered, the court has and

And as touching Gruchet and Cotton it is decreed, that they shall also be
drawn in like manner upon a sled before the town house of the City, there to
be hanged upon a gibbet, and afterward their heads, being separated from their
bodies, to be affixed and set up upon the bridge of the said City, and
afterward to be carried to the gibbet.

And as touching the said Morlorat, the Court

And underneath it was written;

This present sentence was pronounced and executed in the presence of the Lords
and Commissaries, Alexander Moyss, Morterule, and Sirend
MAndraville at his death showed a wonderful The death of Mandravill.
constancy, expecting the stroke without being bound, calling earnestly upon
God, speaking in the just defense of the reformed Churches, in the faith of
which doctrine he protested he was now pressed to yield up his soul into the
hands of

AS touching Augustine Marlorat, a man excellently learned, and of an
unblameable life, who had the testimony even of the Papists themselves, that in
his sermons he never uttered ought that tended to sedition or rebellion; they
were not content to see him drawn upon a hurdle with shame and contempt, but
also the Constable Marlorate^ used disgracefully as he went to be executed.
loaded him with a thousand disgraces and outrages; as also a son of his called
Nombron slain soon after in the battle of Dreur. Besides, Villebon gave him a
switch with a wand, not without reproachful speeches also. But he
notwithstanding bare all indignities very meekly and patiently.

When he was come to the place where he His behavior at his death.
should suffer, he made an excellent speech, according as the time there
permitted him; exhorting Gruchet and Cotton, who were to suffer with him, to
stand fast in the faith unto the end: which they also did. And yet the rage of
the people not being herewith satisfied, a soldier with his sword struck at
Marlorats leg, being already dead. Upon which insolences God within a while
after executed his just vengeance; for the Captain Strange judgments of God
befalling such as had an hand in persecuting of him.
who surprised Marlorat was slain within the space of three weeks by one of
the basest soldiers in all the band. And as concerning his Judges, two of them
dyed soon after strangely; namely one of them, to wit the President, by a
flux of blood, which they could by no means stanch: the other (which was a
Counselor) making water at his fundament, with such stinch, that none could
endure to come nigh him.

As for Villebon, he escaped at no better rate; for the sixteenth day of
February the Marshall of Vieille Ville, coming to Rovan to take order about
the affairs of Diepe, having invited him to dinner, among other talk between
them, sitting together after they had dined, the Marshall lamenting the
miserable estate of that City, exhorted Villebon to use some means for the
redress of such disorders, being the Kings Lieutenant there. Which words
Villebon took very harshly, saying, That if any would dare to tax him for not
carrying himself as he ought in his place, he would again tell him to his
face he lied. Which words (with often repetitions) he used after such a manner,
as the Marshall being therewith very much urged, was forced for saving of his
honor to draw his sword, wherewith he let drive with such violence at
Villebon, that if he had not received the blow with his hand, he had cleft his
head down to his teeth. So Villebon escaped at that time with the loss of his
hand, wherewith he had dishonorably smitten Marlorat at the place of execution.
Which hand he caused to be buried with greater solemnity than himself could
attain unto afterward.

A relation of such troubles and persecutions as happened to those of the
Religion in the City of Caen and other Cities of France, as hereafter follow in
the year 1562.
Caen.
SUch and so long continued the troubles in the City of Rovan, that many were
driven to escape for their lives into this City of Caen; for albeit the King
had commanded, that the pillaging and sacking of Rovan should not last above
twenty four hours, the seditious there continued it above twenty four
weeks; and albeit they were forbidden to carry any goods out of that City, yet
the Merchants of Paris, of Amiens, Beauvais, and others besides, ceased not to
load carts by land, and vessels by water: which some of them notwithstanding
enjoyed not long; for such as were the receivers of these spoils were spoiled
thereof by thieves which met them upon the way.

Valougnes.
THe body of Coqueville being stripped naked was dragged by the murderers (of
this town being in low Normandy) up and down his house with all derision into a
chamber of his, where the exhortations were wont to be made; and there spurning
the dead body with their feet, they bad yea the Priests who were then present
stuck not with the points of their halbards to stuff the mouths and wounds of
the dead with the leaves of bibles, saying to the poor dead corpses, Preach
the truth of your God, and call upon him now to help you.

Thalouse.
A Trumpeier and the common Crier in the City called Nicholas Bosche, being
commanded by the seditious to say, Ave Maria, answered with a steadfast
countenance, Ah, the blessed Virgin! where is she that I might salute her? Then
looking about him this way and that way, he said, I see she is not here, she is
in heaven, and thither will and so being brought to the place of execution, he
dyed constantly.

Gaillac.
THe murders which were committed in this place were cruel and horrible;
insomuch as

Among the rest Peter Domo, the servant of

Souraize.
A Poor woman called Castille Roques being (...)
drew her again by the neck with the cord, and then applied roasted eggs even
as they came hot out of the fire, under her arme-holes, so as they were much
blistered therewith, and afterward in derision bad her cry to her father which
is in heaven. She answered, I will not cry aloud for thee, and yet he can
hear me well enough, and when his will is, he will also deliver me out of thy
hands; being more afflicted with the blasphemies which this varlet uttered,
then with all the torments which she endured on her body. He having bemauled
her shinnes with the pattents she wore upon her feet, she told him his
cruelty far exceeded that of the Turks and Infidels.

Whereupon he calling her a Huguenot whore, told her, That these were but the
beginnings of her sorrows, so as if she did not disclose unto him her seven
hundred pieces of gold, he would draw her cheeks and breasts with Lard, and
then fasten her to a form, and burn her quick, and after mount her up to the
highest steeple in the City, and cast her thence down headlong. Well, said
she, though my body fall never so low, that shall not let my soul from being
carried up into heaven. This Captain being herewith more inflamed with ire
than before, seeing that none of these cruelties could shake the faith and
constancy of this poor woman, he said unto her, eat this Sugar, taking loame
or mortar from off the wall, causing her to open her mouth with his dagger, and
to swallow it down. But not contenting himself herewith, the villain forced
her to drink a glass of Urine, which himself had made in her presence, and
then threw the glass, with what remained therein, in her face. Lastly, he
caused her to pass along through the troops of soldiers, with intention to
have had her slain among them: yet compassion moving them to spare her, he
brought her into his lodging, where this enraged Wolf by strange cruelties
would have caused her to lose her life, had not some of the inhabitants by
giving him ten crowns redeemed her, and so conveyed her to her own house,
where within a short time after she finished her days.

One buried alive.
PEter Roch, servant to the Lieutenant of Dignes, being met withal in the
country, was buried alive; they constrained him to dig his own grave
himself, and so try whether it were large enough or no; unto which he was
compelled by Bartholomew Chause-grosse, and his accomplices.

Provence.
Two women crowned with thorns.
THe wife of Andrew Renaud being brought through Saint Martins of Castillon was
stripped stark naked; and resisting such as would have violated her chastity,
she was whipped outragiously, Anno 1566.
then wounded with swords, crowned with thorns, then cast into the river, and
lastly shot to death with harquebuses.

Iannenta Calvin, of the place of Cella, being of the age of eighty years,
brought into the city of Brignole with a crown of thorns platted upon her
head, being whipped till the blood came exceedingly, was first stoned, and then
burned alive.

Mascon.
THe Murderers in this city having seized upon the body of Bonnet Bor in
Mascon, one of the most noble houses of the same, a man of great learning, and
of an unblameable life, who in other places had served in the Ministry twenty

He only requested before he died, that they would permit him to make his
prayers to God. Now pray as long as thou will, and then we will send thee to
all the Devils. Then he kneeled down, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven prayed
with such fervency of spirit, that he caused some of his murderers to sigh
within themselves.

Then directing his speech to him who had cut off his nose, he said, Friend, I
am here ready to suffer what thou have yet further to inflict upon me. At these
words the blood issued so fast out at his nose, that it hindered him from
proceeding on in that he was about to have said.

A Captain passing by cried to the soldiers, Send this wretched man to the
Devil. Which

See here in part (says the Historiographer) the lamentable estate of the
poor churches of France, during the first troubles, which ended with the end
of the Duke of Guise, the principal actor therein; who was slain at the siege
of Orleance, not without the immediate hand of God, in the year 156^. by a
poor gentleman whose name was John Poltrot, a man very desperate, but of small
stature, and therefore commonly called the

A very comfortable Letter written by Wouter Oom Prisoner and Martyr in the
City of Antwerpe, and full of consolation against the fear of persecution:
directed to a Brother and Sister of his.
Grace and peace from God the Father, and from his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
WElbeloved brother and sister, whom I love dearly for the truths sake and for
your faith in Christ Jesus. These are to certify you that I am in bodily
health, and enjoy the comfort or a good conscience, I praise my Lord God
therefore, who is able to increase the same more and more, by the powerful
operation of his holy spirit. Whosoever they be that will forsake this present
evil world, and become followers of their Captain Christ, must make account to
meet with many persecutions and afflictions: for Christ has told us aforehand,
that we should be hated, persecuted, Mat. 10. 12.
and banished out of the world, for his names sake. And this they will do,
says he, because they have neither known the father, nor John 16. 3.
me. But be not afraid, says he, for I have overcome the world. Saint Paul
also witnesses the 2 Timothy 3. 12.
same thing, saying, all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
persecution. And again, to you it is given for Jesus Christ, not only to
believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake. And Phil. 1. 24. Mat. 5. 11,
12.
does not our Lord Jesus Christ say, blessed are you when men persecute you,
and speak all manner of evil falsely against you for my name sake? Rejoice
therefore and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Now whereto serves
all this, my beloved, but to bring us into a conformity with our Lord and
Master Jesus Christ? For Christ has suffered for us, says the Apostle saint
Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 21.
leaving us an example, that we should walk in his steps: who also endured the
cross, and despised Heb. 12 2.
the shame, for the obtaining of that joy which was set before him, and became
poor to make us rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9.

By him also are we brought by faith into that Romans 5 2.
state of grace, wherein we stand, rejoicing in the hope of the glory of God,
knowing that tribulation works patience, etc. Wherefore dear brother and
sister, be not afraid of the fiery trial which is now sent amongst us to prove
us. For what Father loving his child does not correct it? Heb. 12.
Even so does the Lord chastise those whom he loves: for if we should be
without correction, whereof all true Christians are partakers, then were we
bastards and not sons. And therefore Solomon says, my son, despise not the
chastening of the Prove. 3. 11, 12.
Lord, neither faint when thou are corrected of him, for whom the Lord loves,
the same he corrects, even as a Father the son in whom he delights. Fear
not then to follow the footsteps of Christ; for he is the head and we are his
members. Even as Christ then has obtained full joy and glory by suffering of
anguishes and sorrows; so we also according to his example must through Acts
14 21.
many tribulations enter into the heavenly places, even into the new Jerusalem.
Let us then say Phil. 1. 21.
with saint Paul, Christ unto me is in life and in death advantage. Let us cry
out with him, O Romans 7 24.
wretched creatures that we are, who shall deliver us from this body of death?
See here how the faithful have desired to be with Christ: for with Abraham
they had an eye to that holy City, Anno 1562.
which has foundations, whose builder and maker Heb. 11. 10.
is God. Let us then, my beloved, cheerfully and willingly follow the Lord,
possessing our souls by patience. For it is a good thing, as says the Prophet
Jeremiah, both to hope and quietly to Lam. 3. 26.
wait for the salvation of the Lord; and good also it is for a man to bear
the yoke in his youth, for such the Lord will comfort in the end, and restore
unto them the joy of his salvation.

Lo here dear brother and sister, what consolations our God has treasured up
for us in his holy word; for us I say, whose desire it is to fear the Lord,
and to trust in his grace and mercy. For Psalm. 37. 39.
the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord: he is their strength in the
time of trouble. Wherefore (q) giving all diligence, let us add to faith
virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8.
and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance
patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly

Out of my hole, December the eleventh, 1562. Wouter Oom prisoner for the
truth.
Now because ye may see that this Letter was not without its happy effect,
hearken to the relation of the History following.



THere was one John Wolf of the City of Audenard, who because he could no
longer inhabit

But in the midst of these assaults he was heard, with prayers and sighs,
to cry mightily to God to be delivered from this temptation. Which prayers of
his were heard in due season, even then Whither we ought to fly in time of
temptation.
when in the judgment of man he was supposed to be overcome thereof, means
was made of bringing to his hands consolatory letters: as also

A relation of the troubles and martyrdom of Christian Quekere, Jacques
Dionssart, and Iean de Salomez of Steenwerk in Flanders.
To whom God gave such ability to answer their enemies demands, as if they had
come from persons much more learned. Which shows, that God measures out to all
the gifts and graces of his holy Spirit, according to his good will and
pleasure.

Whilst the persecution continued at this time in sundry places of Flanders,
under Philip King of Spain, and that many fled into England under the
protection of Queen Elizabeth; these three above mentioned were of the same
number, who joined themselves to the Dutch Church in London, having given
public testimony of their faith before all the Congregation. In which place
they continuod not long, but they were constrained upon some special occasions
to return into their own country again, taking boat about the end of June,
Anno 1560.

They were no sooner arrived at Nieuport, but two of them, to wit, James and
Ieane, endeavored to pass on to Honscot, leaving Christian to come at his
leisure, because he was not well at ease, having also a fardel of small books
of religion.

The Bailife with some others meting him upon the way, asked him whence he came
and whither he was going, as also what he was. Christian framed them such an
answer that they could take no advantage against him (traveling as he did
upon the way) only they spied about him that fardell of books, by occasion
whereof they brought him back into the City: and having learned that he came
over wish two others, the Bailiffe forthwith sent his lieutenant toward
Honscot; who so wilily handled the matter, that in the end he caught them, and
brought them bound to the City of Furn. Where for a few days they were
prisoners together with the foresaid Christian; in which condition they
mutually comforted and encouraged one another: but their adversaries soon
separated them, thinking thereby to weaken their strength, constancy, and
fortitude.

Upon the first of their interrogatories (which was about the third and fourth
of July) they asked James why he separated from the church of Rome

Ans. Because it is not the church of Christ.

Quest. How know you that?

Answer. Because it has neither the Word of God soundly preached, the
Sacraments duly administered, nor the Ecclesiastical Discipline after a right
manner executed. James gave good and solid reasons hereof; showing that in
their Church was taught, that souls must be saved by saying of Masses, long
prayers, invocation of saints, pilgrimages, with other such vain and
deceivable hopes; yea, said the Priest, do you thus judge of those who give to
Jesus Christ bread when he is hungry, and drink when he is thirsty, and cloth
Anno 1563.
him being naked, etc. And so went on with multiplying many words, not
suffering the said James to finish what he was about to have said. Others asked
him if he could prove that they had not the true administration of Baptism.

Answer. You have so obscured it with your own additions, that a man can
scarce discern it to be Baptism.

Quest. What think you then of your own

Answ. Were I now to be baptized, I would not receive it from your Church, so
well it likes me that I have received it from you. Being demanded what he said
to the Sacrament of the Altar, he proved evidently how far off it was from
the first institution of the Lords supper. And as concerning the
Ecclesiastical discipline, he uttered more of their corrupting of it, then
they were willing to hear.

After this, they were examined by two friars, who were chosen out for the
purpose; one of them was John Campo, superintendent of the Gray Friars of
Dixmude, the other was called Peter Pennet Prior of the Carmelites in Ypre.
These two examined the three prisoners first upon the articles of the faith;
and then, if they believed that Christ was made of the seed of the woman? James
answered, we are all persuaded that Jesus Christ was made of the seed of the
woman, according Genesis 3. 15. Moreover, of the seed of Abraham, add of David;
and Gal. 4. 4. Romans 1. 3. Heb. 4. 15.
that he was in all things made like unto his brethren, sin only excepted.

After many other questions upon diverse points, they were asked, whether in the
consecration of the Mass the body of Christ was present there or no? No, said
James, It is nothing like the Lords Supper which Christ gave to them that sat
at table with him: According to Acts 2. 42. brake bread, etc. Nor shall ye find
in the Scriptures, that one alone receives, or that the rest stood and looked
on. And if Saint Paul justly challenged the Corinthians, because every oue was
forward to eat his own supper apart, 1 Cor. 11. 20.
much more are you worthy of their reprehension. I do therefore rank you
amongst those false prophets which our Lord Jesus Christ has warned Mat. 24 23.
us of, who will say thus unto us, Lo, here is Christ,

Hereunto the adversaries replied, Does not Christ in express words say, This
is my body; This is my blood?

Answer. The words must not be taken as they sound in a literal sense, for so
they shall have no agreement with other like places of Scripture. You know the
words belonging to the ancient Sacraments were expounded by the holy Ghost
himself; Circumcision is called the Covenant,

They asked if God were not omnipotent.

Yes, said James, but yet he will do nothing against his Word.

Quest. If the bread be not changed, why does 1 Cor. 11. 29.
Saint Paul affirm, That whosoever eats of this bread unworthily, eats
judgment to himself, not discerning the Lords body.

We acknowledge all this, said they, because a man ought to examine himself,
before he presume 1 Cor. 10. 16. Matrimony.


In the fourth place, they were asked if marriage were not a Sacrament? No, said
James, for sacraments are not things indifferent to Christians, as marriage is;
for Saint Paul says, he that gives 1 Cor. 7. 8. 29. 38.
his Virgin in marriage does well, but he that gives her not in marriage does
better. We h^ wedlock to be an holy ordinance of God, instituted in Paradise
from the beginning of the world, Genesis 2. John (...). Heb. ^3 4.
honored by Jesus Christ with his first miracle, yea we add further, that as
marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled, so whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge.

Quest. But saint Paul says, it is a great Sacrament.

Answer. Why do you forbid it then? But that place of Paul by you alleged is
not to be understood Ephesians. 5. 32.
of marriage, but is meant of that special mystical union and Communion which
is between Christ and his Church.

Quest. They asked him if confession were a Confession.
Sacrament.

Answer. I find but two Sacraments mentioned in the New Testament. If you can
find out any more, you shall do well to show them. But as touching
confession, it is to God, to whom we must confess our sins, according to
David's Psalm 32. 5. Luke 15. 18. 21.
example, and of the Prodigal son, and sundry others, who with true
repentance acknowledged their offenses to God, who is faithful and just to 1
John 1. 9.
pardon and forgive them. But to confess them to a priest, it is so far off
from being necessary, that I hold it altogether unlawful. These Fathers had
their refuge to their wonted place of saint James, Confess your faults one to
another. James 5. 16.


Answer. The Apostle would have us to confess our faults to such as we have
wronged by word or deed. Also God enjoynes us to reconcile ourselves one with
another by such a confession, Mat. 6. 12. Mat. 16. 19.
if we would obtain pardon of him.

Then they alleged that place of saint Matthew, That whatsoever they bound on
earth was bound in heaven.

Answer. Christ speaks there of Ecclesiastical discipline, which ought to be
observed amongst Christians, by admonitions, and then by applying the censures,
according to the doctrine of the Gospel, that so obstinate sinners may be cast
out of the Church. But all the world may see that you know not what this true
discipline of Christ means, nor what a right Ministry is in your Churches.

Quest. At least you acknowledge Extreme unction Extreme unction.
to be a Sacrament, seeing Saint James speaks so clearly of it.

Answer. The anointing that Saint James James 5. 14. Mark (...). 13.
speaks of is nothing like to your anointings. For that was a miraculous
anointing for healing of the body, and that, whilst the gift of healing was
usual in the Church. But you anoint such as lie drawing on, and do it for the
salvation of their souls. It is needful, I grant, to send for the Minister,
to comfort the sick, and to pray with them and for them, but not to besmeare
and grease them.

Quest. Well, what say you to Confirmation? Confirmation.
is not that a Sacrament?

Answer. In all the Scripture (said James) do I not find such a thing as your
confirmation, as you now use it, and therefore I know not what it is. Here they
caused the Register to write, Non credit.

Then came they to the order of priesthood, and asked if that were not a
Sacrament.

Answer. No, no more than the rest. I am not 1 Pet. 2. 9.
ignorant that S. Peter calls the faithful a chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people: nor yet where Saint John says,
that Christ has made us Kings and Priests; but what is all this to your
Bishops and Priests? Rev. 1. 6.


Quest. What think thou of the Pope.

Answer. I think him to be the same that Daniel and Saint Paul foretold he
should be. For he Anno 1560.
shows himself such a one as they have described him to be, coming with
false signs, and lying 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9 10.
wonders, sitting in the Temple of God, and exalting himself above all that is
called God forbidding marriage, which God has ordained, and 1 Timothy 4 3.
meat which God has commanded to be received with giving of thanks.

Question. What say you then unto Purgatory? Purgatory. 1 John 17.


Answer. We acknowledge none other Purgatory,

Quest. Do not the Saints pray for us, and ought we not to pray to them?

Answer. God alone is to be worshipped, and Prayer to Saints.
prayed unto. Whilst the Saints were on earth they would not endure to be
adored. Acts 10. 25, 26. Which they then would rather have permitted (being
clothed with corruption, and with natural Revelat. 19. 10. and 22. 9. They had
many other disputes, which James could not write for want of paper, as he
intimated to them of the Church.

The fourteenth of August they were examined the third time by Peter Titleman
Dean of Renay, Inquisitor general of Flanders, whose cruelties and extortions
were exercised upon all the

To James Diensart he propounded no questions, but came about him with these
flattering speeches; My son, you are young and in the prime of your youth:
Therefore the Magistrate of this City is very desirous you should be withdrawn
from holding this new doctrine, that so you might be brought again into the
right way; but as I

To whom the Inquisitor replied, That Martin Luther was the first that broached
it.

Answer. And what say you then to so many learned men which lived before him,
as Io. Wickliffe, John Hus, etc. and some after him, as Calvin, John Alasco,
Martin Micron, and others in England, 1 Kin. 19. 28.
whom Elias in his days was ignorant of. The Inquisitor, persisting in his old
song, pressed him with the succession of his Prelates and Bishops. James put
him in mind of another mark of the true Church, namely that it was always
under persecution; and thence inferred that himself was a true member thereof.

The Inquisitor said, we are now persecuted in

Answer. It is true that Boner late Bishop of London was committed to prison,
but not for his good deeds. The rest of them have their liberty.

Now this Inquisitor among other matters willing him to show what service was
due to the Virgin Mary, said, Is it not written, Honor 1 Pet. 2. 17.
all men? And what honor owe we then to the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ?

You give her (said James) a goodly honor in bowing the knee before an Image
of wood or stone, praying thereto as to your God. You may be ashamed of such
abominable practices and blasphemies. Much other reasonings they had, which
the said James, for lack of paper and leisure, could not commit to writing.

The same day in the afternoon Christian Luckere, who was put into prison
apart, was also presented before this inquisitor, and examined upon many
Articles. In all his answers he showed much courage; and when the other went
about to prove that Jesus Christ was corporally present in the Sacraments,
Christian used six or seven strong reasons to the contrary drawn out of the
holy Scriptures, That it could by no means be granted, being repugnant to the
truth. The adversaries perceiving the constancy of these three prisoners,
sought by all means to vex and weaken them. First they severed them one from
another to deprive them of mutual comfort and consolation. Secondly, gave
charge, that in visiting them none should be so bold as to bring them ought to
eat or drink. Thirdly, They were solicited by wicked ones to yield, and not
wilfully to hazard their lives. Moreover, they had many other greaf
provocations; and therefore by their Letters instantly requested the continual
prayers of the Churches to God for them.

When the godly strangers in England were advertised of these their assaults,
they solicited their Superintendent Edmund Bishop of London, at the request of
the Archbish. of Canterbury, and others, to send Letters to the Magistrates of
Furne, entreating that they would release these three prisoners, whom they had
apprehended as they passed along by the high ways side, without any
misbehaving of themselves, or holding any dispute with any, and were innocent
in regard of committing ought against the Laws of the Country. As touching
their Faith which some called into question, they should not for that be
molested; because in like manner her Majesty has given free power and leave in
case of Religion hitherto, that none of the Subjects of the Low Countries,
coming into England, and carrying themselves modestly, should be meddled
withal. But if they shall deal so hardly with those of the Religion, who have
submitted themselves as her Majesty's subjects under her protection, then she
shall be constrained, though to her great sorrow, to mete out the same measure
to those of other Nations; but she hoped and expected the contrary, both from
the wisdom and equity of the Magistrates of Furne.

These Letters were dated the 26. of July 1560. and subscribed.

Matthew Archbishop of Canterbury. Edmund Bishop of London. William Meyne.
William Haddon, Master of the Requests, etc.
THe Magistrates of Furne having received these Letters sent them to Bruxels,
where they were read before the Kings privy Counsel. But to extenuate the
authority thereof, it was noised that they were forged by some Lutherans; so as
in the end they resolved (notwithstanding) to proceed against the said
prisoners, according to extremity of the Laws established by the King. Now
these of Furne having in vain by all Anno 1562.
means assayed to turn the prisoners from their Faith, they resolved to
execute them. Many of the City, and others not dwelling far off, hearing the
report of their purposed dispatch, prepared to come to the sight thereof,
thinking it would have been on Wednesday which was Market Day. But the
Magistrates taking notice of the multitude were somewhat amassed, and caused him
that was to do execution to ride through the midst

The two Friars formerly mentioned were Frauds pieuses, pious beguilings,

The holy Virgin was nothing abashed thereat, but gave them this answer, That
she could not believe it; and albeit it were so, yet would she never go back
from so certain a truth, grounded not upon man, but upon Jesus Christ?

These lying Friars, nothing prevailing with her neither, went their way. Then
the prisoners

Appearing before the Magistrates they were denounced heretics. To which
Christian, in the name of the rest, said, Not one of your doctors can prove us
heretics, nor can they convince us by Scripture. It was replied that they
slighted the Sacraments. To which they freely answered, We hold and allow
those Sacraments instituted by God, in much more reverence than you. Upon this
the Magistrates consulted together apart, and after a while came to their seats
again, viz. to be strangled, and then burned or scortched, and the remainder of
the bodies to be hanged on the gibbet. They thanked the judges for their
sentence; yet advertising them well to bethink themselves of what they had
done. As they were passing forth of the house to be led to the slaughter, many
of the godly bad them farewell; comforting, encouraging, and exhorting them to
continue constant. Whereat the head Bailiffe being much vexed pushed Jane so
violently with his foot, that she fell down the stairs, at which the people
were much moved. Christian went foremost, Jane next, and James followed. In
beholding of which spectacle few there were which brake not forth into
sighings, cryings, and tears, whilst they gave the people so holy and godly
exhortations. One of the Monks called John ^els, being by, gave to Jane (many
of good credit hearing it) this counsel in his Language, Fight valiantly, the
crown of immortality is ready for you. Whilst the executioner began to fasten
their neck and feet with chanes to the stake, they sung the hundred and
thirtieth Psalm, Out of the deep.

Friar John Campone, being impatient of such an harmony, yelled out like a mad
man, saying, This shows you are not Christians; for Christ went to his death
weeping. One in the middle of the assembly cried as fast on the other side,
Thou lie thou false Prophet. Having finished the two first staves of the
Psalm, the hangman being about to strangle Christian, the other two ceased,
crying to their brother; Be of good cheer and play the man. And Christian,
lifting up his eyes to heaven, said twice or thrice, Lord God heavenly father
into thy hands I commend my spirit. And then again, Lord forgive their sin who
have put us to death. James and the maid made the like prayer. But because
James was last strangled, and the people moved with compassion began to stir,
the hangman kindled the fire upon James being but half strangled. The people
seeing him to die in the midst of the fire, were yet more moved, so as the
tormentor being in a maze got a staff out of a Boat headed with iron, and
smote the Martyr twice or thrice on the right side, to make an end of him.
These three having a while lien in the fire, they were carried thence in a cart
to the gibbet, where being put apart upon three poles they were afterward taken
down and buried.

Nicaise of Tomb born in Tournay, Martyr.
Whose constancy is to be imitated and followed of every good Christian, in
suffering for the truth of the Gospel.

NIcaise dwelling in Tournay, and following the trade of Say-making, toward
the end of his life, was then by the mercy of God brought to the knowledge of
true religion. Now that he might be the more thoroughly instructed therein, he
went with his wife and family into the City of Wesell in base Almaine. In which
City there was at that time an assembly of strangers, and especially of those
who are called Wallons, exercising themselves in hearing the word of God purely
preached, and in receiving the holy sacraments. But Satan the mortal enemy of
Gods children, envying their happiness, soon after troubled this assembly in
such wise with sundry questions, that some retired to Frankfort, others to
Strausburg, and some to other places. Nicaise returned to Tournay whence he
came, not to communicate there with the superstitions and abominations in
which he had formerly been inwrapped, but to join himself to the Christian
assembly which met together in that place; to manifest the truth of that
heavenly knowledge, which he had received out of the word of God.

Where notice being taken of him, they received him into their society, amongst
whom he carried himself in so Christian a sort, as they well perceived him to
be a man of an holy conversation, joined Anno 1566.
with an earnest desire to advance the glory of God, and the kingdom of
Christ, in the edification of his Church. Now forasmuch as affliction 2 These.
2. 9. 10.
is the true touchstone whereby the faithful are discerned from Hypocrites;
Nicaise then showed outwardly what he was within. For being importuned to take
an oath from those who were deputed thereunto by the King of Spain, to live
according to the custom of the Romish Church,

To this counsel he consented; but the Lord,

Having heard this sentence, as he rose up, he said, now praised be God; and
as he was about to have spoken more at large, the Procurer fiscall bing present
prevented him, and thrusting him forward bad him march on. By and by they
brought him to the place of execution; and as it well fell out, having no
Priest accompanying him, when he was come down to the Market place, a near
friend of his coming to him commended

Being come nigh to the Which is a watch tower standing bofore the City hall
where the Clock is.
Befroy of the City, seeing there a great multitude of people, who were
assembled together to see him pass by, lifting up his voice, he spoke thus; O
ye men of Tournay open your eyes, awake ye that sleep, and stand up from the
dead, and Christ shall give you light.

He also prayed all whom he had any way offended to forgive him, as he for his
part was ready to forgive all the world. The people hearing him

Nicaise all the while spent the time in prayer unto God, and being at the
place of execution he uttered these words; Lord, they have hated me without a
cause; and ascended up joyfully to the scaffold: where the Tormentors readily
received him, and led him to the stake; and as they were fastening him to it,
he said, Eternal Father, have pity and compassion upon me, according as thou
have promised to all that ask the same of thee in thy sons name. Other
prayers he made there to his God, and so continued to his last gasp. And
albeit the multitude made such a noise, and the beating of the drums hindered
his words from being all fully heard; yet he so often pronounced, and that with
such vehemence, the word Jesus, that it notwithstanding might plainly be
understood as long as the breath was in his body. And thus ye have heard the
godly life and blessed end of this constant martyr.

Martin Bayart, Claude du Flot, with Io. Dantricourt, borne in the Country of
Artois, and Noel Tournemine, of Hering near Seclin, Martyrs, 1566.
YOu may easily discern by the former Histories, that the cruelties exercised
against the Faithful in Flanders nothing diminished the increasing of them;
for the innocent blood thus shed was a means to bring many ignorant souls to
the knowledge of the Truth. These four above named, dwelling in the City of
Lisle, walked in the fear of the Lord, with zeal according to knowledge, as
the event well manifested.

There was a Jesuit in the said City who had a servant that was cousin to one
of the Martyrs, with whom they labored, not without some peril, first to show
him the odiousness of that sect, and then to instruct him in the doctrine of
the Gospel. To which purpose they lent him a book containing good
instructions drawn out of the holy Scriptures. The silly fellow, not
considering the hurt that might follow, showed it soon after to his Master.
The false Prophet by and by knew that this book was not forged upon his
anvile, and therefore diligently enquired of his man where he had it. Now that
he might with the more expedition attain his desire, he gave him a piece of
seven stivers, telling him he should do well to bring him to the knowledge of
them from whom he had received it; which was not hard to do, in regard they
all four wrought upon their Trade (which was to dress says) in an honest
widows house who professed the same Religion with them.

The Jesuit coming to the knowledge hereof failed not, according to their
guise, to reveal it to the Magistrate. Now lest he might be suspected to be
the betrayer of them, the Fox withdrew himself the same time out of the City,
whilst on a saturday morning about two of the clock these four were
apprehended and imprisoned by the Magistrate. It fell out the same day, that
certain writings were set up upon the Towne-house against the horrible tyranny
of the Spanish Inquisition, which was then intended to be brought in and
executed throughout the Low Countries, which no doubt was the means whereby the
Magistrates were the rather incensed against the prisoners. But forasmuch as
they were not found guilty of having any hand in this business, they were
only examined about matters concerning their Faith. To which they answered
with such Anno 1566.
courage and constancy, without varying or wavering, that the Iailour wondered
how they could answer the Judges so directly and pertinently (as it were with
one consent) being notwithstanding severed one from another in the prison.

The second of March, 1566. they were condemned for heretics by the Provost
of the City, to which they replied, that if they were Heretics then Gods word
must needs be heresy, which

The Priests standing at the foot of the scaffold labored to make the people
beeeve they were Heretics, and that their faith was the faith of devils,
because they rejected the Sacraments. But to that one of them answered, that
their Faith was nothing like to that of devils; and as touching the
Sacraments, they held so many as Christ ordained. Then said Martin, suffer us
to die in peace, for we are in the right way, and

John Dauticourt coming up recited the articles of the Creed, adding somewhat
by way of exposition upon every Article. Those who knew him before his
imprisonment marvelled to hear him speak so judiciously. The executioner
thinking Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
anguish? O Lord, we are delivered to death for thy sake,

The other three on their parts cried and said, Mat. 7. 14.
This, this is the way that leads to life; this is the strait way by which we
must enter thereinto, as Christ our Lord has taught us. Noel likewise said,
Enter you my brethren, and whilst I am alive pray for me; for after death
prayers prevail not. Lord receive us this day unto mercy, and unto thy
kingdom. And thus ceasing to cry any more, they yielded up their souls into
the hands of God. This constancy of theirs, proceeding from the work of Gods
Spirit, was not without singular fruit, for the enlarging of the Church; for
many being touched therewith went home thence, as if they had gone from a
powerful sermon.

Francis D' Alost in Flanders, Martyr, in the year 1566.
THis young man, being by his trade a Cutler, during the time of his ignorance
frequented the Court much, and took great delight in the vanity of this world,
which gat him much respect of many, but chiefly among those of the Romish
Religion, namely Priests and Monks, who willingly conversed with him, taking
much contentment in his carriage and course of life. But as soon as God of his
goodness by the means of his word had revealed unto him his son Jesus Christ,
he by and by altered and changed his former conversation: for having before
lived in great dissoluteness, he now sharply reproved such as he knew to
follow sinful ways; yea, he often taxed the Priests as well for their
scandalous living as for their false doctrine, wherewith they abused the
people; but principally for making them to fall down to such a god as could
not defend nor keep himself from Rats and Nice, and which is worse, to offer
it up for the sins of the quick and the dead.

For these with other such like speeches, those who erewhiles loved him began
now to turn their love into hatred, insomuch as he was feign to fly from
them, yea, and out of the Country also, being banished thence; threatening him,
that if he were taken there again, he should be put to death, not as an
heretic, but as one having offended the penal Laws. But not long after the
Lord wrought such an alteration not only in the Political but in the
Ecclesiastical state also, that not the Laws concerning heresy alone were
disanulled, but free liberty was granted to the Faithful of the Low Countries,
to return home into their houses again, and to have the exercises of
Religion, publicly and openly. Among these Francis returned at that time unto
the City in which he was borne. But this freedom so suddenly granted lasted
not long. For the devil, not enduring the light so to shine out, stirred up
Imps afresh to oppress the godly. Francis then apprehending the danger, was
minded one morning to depart out of the City; but God had another work for him
to do. For as he was passing along, he was apprehended in the street by one
of the City, who with the Bailiffe met him. The Bailiffe would feign have
baulked him, as if he had not seen him; but said the other, here he is, hold
him fast; so they took him. Being conducted to prison, among other speeches he
said, now ye have taken me, you think to deprive me of life, and so have your
will of me, purposing my great damage and hurt; but you are deceived, for it
is all one, as if you took Counters from me, to fill my hand with a great
sum of gold.

In prison he had many disputes with Priests and Cloister-men. But the Iailour
of all other dealt harshly with him, who could not endure to hear him speak
of God. But if at any time he heard him sing Psalms and spiritual Songs, he
would rage like a Bedlam. Once being very drunk, he set open the prison
doors, and sitting on a bench he called to Francis, saying, come out thou
naughty and wicked heretic. I will now see, if thy God can deliver thee out
of my hands. Francis said, as the case stands it might easily be effected; If I
were minded to escape away now, as I was heretofore, I could easily do it, but
I will not; for God has called me to suffer, and not to fly away, and
therefore I will not resist, but rather obey his will.

The drunkard hearing him speak with such mildnes, and moderation, and seeing
that he would

After the Lord had thus by sundry trials prooved the patience and constancy of
this his good servant, the Magistrates of the City of Alost consulted how to
put him to death, having often called the Executioner to this their consultation;
but they could not agree in the manner how to effect it. Some were of opinion
it were best to have

Francis hearing his sentence read, without any show of distemper, said, Now
seeing you are so thirsty after blood, I willingly yield it into your hands,
and my soul into the hands of my merciful Lord God Almighty. Francis, said
they, we command you to hold your peace; for if you will not, we will take
order to bridle your tongue. He then promised them to obey their command. As
he went to suffer he used that 2 Pet. 1. 14. 2 Cor. 5. 14.
the love of Christ Jesus my Lord constraines me to do. Being come into the
market place where he was to be offered up a sacrifice, he kneeled down; and
having ended his prayer, he said to the executioner, do now what you are
commandded, the will of God be done: and so presenting himself cheerfully to
the stroke of death, he was beheaded the first of May, in the year 1566. his

John Tuscaen of Andenard in Flaunders, Martyr, June the eighth, Anno 1566.
Behold here how God meant to awaken the men of this time out of their brutish

THis young man a maker of Tapistry about the age of two and twenty years, the
son of one called Simeon Tuscaen dwelling in the suburbs of Andenard, was
trained up from his youth in all godly nurtrature. He hearing news that things
went more aukly to pass in Bruxels then he could have wished, determined in
himself to make it known by the effect, that the adoring of a breaden God,
which the Roman Church so much worshipped, was nothing else but an abominable
and execrable sacrilege. Having cast to and fro in his mind, and thoughts,
the weightinesse of the business he was to undertake, at length he determined
to demonstrate the same more fully and apparently in a public assembly, which
was the thirtieth day of May in the said year 1566. (which after the custom
of the Romanists is called the feast of God, or Corpus Christi day.) Now by
reason that two Cities of Andenard and Pamelle are joined as it were in one,
there were two Temples dedicated there, not to the Lord, but the one to saint
Walburgne, called the Church of Andenard, and the other to their Lady, which is
within the jurisdiction of the Lord of Pamelle.

John Tuscaen directed his course toward this Church, to perform that which
long before he had in his own thoughts projected. Being come into the Quire of
the Church in Pamelle, beholding there a multitude of People utterly estranged
from the true worship of God, ready to fall down and prostitute themselves
before a breaden cake, forthwith (not casting what should be the issue) being
urged thereto through a zeal of Gods glory, drew toward the Priest, while he
was elevating and showing the people that which they call the host; and with
great vehemency snatched it out of his hands, cast it to the ground, and brake
it all to pieces, speaking with a loud voice; see here, my Masters, your goodly
God, who you see is not able to help himself, but is here broken all to
pieces. How long, how long, O ye senseless Priests, will you thus defile the
holy supper of the Lord? shall we never see an end of your filthy Idolatries?
If the authority of the holy scripture can nothing move you, yet at length be
warned and admonished by this present example, that there is not a jot of
divinity in this bread, seeing it is subject to be thus handled: will ye
worship a dead Idol, your selves being living men?

At this so vehement and bold an exhortation, accompanied with such constancy,
all the people there present stood amazed and in such an ecstasy, (but yet
withal such a noise and bustling throughont the Church) that the Curate of the
parish, who before was in some by-corner there, coming toward the Quire, met
Tuscaen, as he was passing through the prease without any fear or let. The
Curate saluted him, not knowing what he had done, much less suspecting that he
was the cause of all that tumult and stir; for he was his cousin. Howbeit
John would take no knowledge of his salutation, but began to reprove him for
deluding and abusing the poor silly people, being their overseer; for a day
will come, said he, in which you shall render an account to God for them. In
the hearing of this, the Curate called upon the people to lay hold upon the
said John Tuscaen, as he was going out of the Church fair and softly. So that
it had been easy for him to have quite himself out of their fingers, if he had
but hastened his pace a little, because none offered to touch or apprehend him.
The Curate seeing that, delaied not, but with all speed got him to the under
Bailiffe of Pamelle, by whose outcries and importunities the Bailiffe could do
no less but go with him to apprehend the great Heretic. As they were making
toward him, he showed no more semblance of escaping, then before.

Then they took and imprisoned him without any resistance. Dinner being ended,
he was presented Anno 1567.
before the Magistrates of Pamelle to be examined in the presence of the
Curate: after they had enquired of him who they were that incited and set him
on to do such an outrageous act unto the host, they asked him what he held the
bread in the Mass to be, and whether he did not believe it was the body of
Christ: If, says he, you consider well what the Angel said to the Apostles at
his assumption. viz. Act. 1. 11. this same Jesus, Where Christ is to be sought.
into heaven; You may plainly discern that we are not to seek him here below.

After many other questions and answers, being sent again to prison, he was
the second time examined: and being asked whether he was himself when he did
it, or distracted? He answered, That he had done it, not rashly, but upon
mature deliberation. Being further demanded what Exodus 32. 19.
God? They perceiving that he secretly aimed at their Idolatry, sent him to
prison again.

The eighth of June he was brought betimes in the morning into the judgment
Hall, to receive their sentence which was to be pronounced against him; where
two friars Minorites were purposely

Then the Magistrates of the city went up into the judgment seat, and gave
sentence against him; which was, first to have that hand stricken off, with
which he had taken the Host out of the priests hands, and his body to be
burned to ashes, which afterward was to be scattered into the river.

Hearing this sentence he was very joyful,

The tormentor willed him to stretch forth his O Lord God, it is for the glory
of thy name that I endure these things: enable me now with strength from
above, that I may finish this sacrifice. Forthwith the fire was kindled, which
made him at the first to shrink a little; but by continual and ardent prayer
to God the violence of the torment was abated and assuaged.

Thus was this valiant Martyr handled in the presence of multitudes; which
caused many to cleave the rather to the Doctrine of the Gospel, seeing him dye
so constantly. The River of Escant received his ashes, that the Sentence given
upon him might be fully accomplished,

Martin Smetius Martyr, Anno 1567.
MArtin Smetius being prisoner in the Castle of Vilvourd, there came to him a
Friar to examine him, and with a purpose to turn him from the Faith. But
Smetius being a man learned, and of a quick understanding, remained constant,
which so confounded his opposite, that he went away with shame. The Friar
invented a recantation, to which it was reported that Smetius had subscribed.
But an Elder of the Church, whose name was Cornelius Specox, coming to the
knowledge thereof (by the help of friends) got a sight of the said
Recantation. Who in the presence of diverse friends conferring a certain Letter
(which Smetius had put his name unto) with that writing, found it in nothing to
agree therewith, and therefore the recantation to be merely counterfeited,
The eighth of February being Saturday, Smetius having his feet tied under an
horses belly, on which he was set, was thus brought to Vilvourd to the He was
apprehended by his Provost with 20. horsemen as he was preaching at Malives.
When Smetins saw them, he exhorted the congregation to be quiet, for they are
come, said he, to take me: but the assembly was by and by scattered.
Provost (who himself was afterward hanged for his villainies.) His Sergeants
passing immediately along with him through Malives, went toward Malladery of
Wallen, where finding a ladder set up to an oak, they hanged him thereon.
Smetius being on the Ladder used these words; Lord forgive them, for they know
not what they do.

And then singing certain verses of a Psalm, he yielded up his soul into the
hands of the Lord.

Master John Goris and Ioris of Asschen Martyrs, Anno, 1567.
John Goris Surgeon, borne in Audenard, traveling toward Gaud, was
betrayed by two spies, who signified the same to the Bayliffe; himself also
going the same way whither Goris was traveling him. The Bailiffe, hirsting
after the blood of this poor innocent, rid on till he had overtaken him,
asking him whether he went? I am going, said Goris, to the Parish of Nazaret.
And I purpose also, said the Bayliffe, to go thither, we will bear you
company. Having passed on thus a little way, the Bayliffe thinking himself
sure of Goris, began to lay hands upon him. Goris seeing that leaped over a
ditch, and got into a little wood. The wood was presently beset with Country
people; and being there apprehended, he was carried to Audenard, as a sheep to
the slaughter, where he was committed to prison. They laid many things to his
charge, which they were not able to prove. Being examined the second time upon
diverse articles, he answered thereunto with such wisdom, that the Counsel
admired how a man of so mean account could defend his cause in so good a
manner. But after they came to question with him concerning matters of
Religion, now I see, says he, that you seek my blood.

The night following he was overtaken with By this we see that man stands not
by his own strength.
such an apprehension of the fear of death, that for saving his life he was
almost resolved to deny the truth. But by the assistance of Gods holy spirit
calling his thoughts together, he instantly and ardently besought the Lord to
deliver him out of this temptation, that by the power of his grace he might
overcome the infirmity of his flesh: which prayer of faith the Lord had such
respect unto, that from that time he manifestly resisted all Satan's assaults,
and maintained the truth Though I fall. says the Church, yet I shall arise.
Much. 7. 8. Act. 7 60.
unto his last breath.

Having received sentence he was nothing appalled thereat, but, like the holy
Martyr S. Stephen, prayed God that he would not lay his death to their charge.
Coming to the place where he was to be executed, casting himself down
prostrate, he made his prayer to God; in which prayer I am persuaded, that God
being a just Judge will not leave their sin unpunished. Which prediction fell
out not long after; for the Bailife who apprehended him, and rejoiced in
standing by whilst the martyr was executed was not long after shot with a
harquebuse, whereof he presently died like a wretch.

After Goris was thus executed, they brought forth his fellow prisoner, called
Ioris of Asschen;

A Letter written by Ioris of Asschen, to
MOst dear Father and Mother, Sister and Brother, I write here unto you
comfortable news, namely, that in all my life I never saw any day so pleasing
to me as this is; in which the Lord has counted me worthy to be one of his

Dear friends, two Priests, yea, and some of the Magistrates also have sought
to terrify me with many threats, thinking to turn me aside from my holy
profession; but the Lord of his great mercy has given me his grace to
withstand them all: for I plainly told them I was not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, but would be willing and ready to die in the defense thereof; following
my Lord and Master Jesus Christ through all afflictions,

The time which God has lent us to converse in this world is but short, and
therefore let us begin

Dear Father and Mother, I do take my last farewell of you, until we meet
together again in the Kingdom of heaven, where we shall partake of that joy
which shall last for ever, all sorrows, tears, and griefs being wiped away.
Be ye not therefore grieved I pray you, but be patient; for the affliction
which is befalne me is most acceptable unto me, for which also I bless and
praise the Lord.

The Lord prosper you in all your ways, to his glory and your good. Thank all
my friends for their love expressed toward me, and salute them kindly with an
holy kiss in the Lord.

Your humble and obedient son, John Ioris of Asschen.
Thus were these two witnesses of Jesus Christ executed the fourteenth of
April, 1567.
A worthy answer of a constant Martyr called Guy de Brez, Anno. Dom. 1567.
GUy be Brez, a Minister of the Gospel, being committed prisoner into the
Castle of Tournay, was visited by many Ladies and Gentlemen, only out of a
desire to see him, in regard he was a man so highly esteemed. Some at the
first view scoffed; others railed on him; but others were moved to take pity
and compassion on him. Among the rest, the Countess of Ren, accompanied with
certain Gentlewomen, coming into the prison, and at the first entrance
beholding the iron chain to which he was fastened; Master Guy, said she, I
wonder how you can either eat, drink, or sleep in quiet; for were I in your
case, the very terror thereof would go nigh to kill me.

O Madam, said he, the good cause for which I suffer, and that inward peace of
conscience wherewith God has endued me, makes me eat and drink with greater
contentment than my enemios can which seek my life: yea, so far off is it
that my bonds or chain do any way terrify me, or break off my sleep, that
on the contrary I glory and take delight therein, esteeming them at an higher
rate than chains and rings of gold, or any other jewels of price whatsoever;
for they yield me much more profit. Yea, when I hear the ra^ing of my chain,
me thinks I hear as it were some sweet instrument of Music sounding in mine
ears: not that such an effect comes merely from my chains, but in regard I
am bound therewith for maintaining the truth of the Gospel.

The same Martyr in a Letter to his wife acquaints her with Gods gracious
dealing with him in all his assaults.
SPeaking of his apprehension, he shows how carnal reason began to play its
part against the providence of God; for, says he, these thoughts came
througing into my head; What meant we to go so many in company together as we
did? had it not been for such and such we had never been discovered nor taken.
Under such like cogitations I lay for a while, says he, even in a manner
overwhelmed, till by the assistance of Gods holy Spirit my mind was raised up
to meditate on Gods providence. After which my heart began to feel wonderful
rest and contentment; saying thus in my self, O my God, the day and hour of
my birth was before ordained by thee, and ever since thou have preserved and
kept me in great perils and dangers, and hitherto delivered me out of them all.
And if now the hour be come wherein I must pass out of this life into thy
kingdom, thy holy will be done; I cannot escape out of thy hands; yea, though I
could, yet Lord thou know I would not, seeing all my felicity depends upon
conforming my will unto thine.

From these considerations I received no small consolation; and therefore,
dear wife, rejoice with me, I pray you, and bless our good God for these his
mercies toward me; for he does nothing but that which is equal and right. You
have been privy to, and acquainted with all the

Let us therefore aspire after our true country, namely heaven, and long to be
received into the Mansions of our heavenly father, where we shall see our head
and Brother, our husband and Savior Jesus Christ, with the noble triumphant
assemblies of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Angels not capable of being
Martyrs.
not capable of. I now rejoice in my sufferings, my heart leapeth within me; in
my afflictions, I find nothing wanting unto me; I am filled with the abundant
riches of my God; yea, so far am I comforted therewith, that I have sufficient
store not only for my self, but to impart thereof also to as many as I have
opportunity to speak unto. Which bounty and favor I beseech my Eternal Lord
God to continue to me his poor prisoner: Gods goodness to his afflicted
children is often above and beyond their expectation.
could never have imagined that God would have been so gracious as he has
been to me his poor creature.

I now taste of the fidelity and bounty of Christ my Savior; I am here taught
to practice what I have preached unto others. Yea, let me not be ashamed to
confess, that when I heretofore preached Prisons prove Gods schoolehouses to
the faithful.
for I have the holy Ghost, who is my constant instructor and schoolmaster,
teaching me how to handle my weapons in this fight of afflictions. Satan on the
other side, who is the sworn enemy of all Gods Elect, compasses me about on
every side, as a roaring Lion thinking to devour me. John 16. 33. Romans 16 20.
2 Cor. 12. 9.
me; and then I see the Lord bruising Satan under my feet; feeling the power of
God perfected in my weakness, And thus the Lord causes me one while to
feel my infirmity and weakness, that so I may take knowledge how I am but a
poor earthen Vessel (even weakness it self) to humble me, that God may
have all the glory; It is profitable for the godly sometimes to feel their
infirmities.
and then by and by he fortifies and comforts me, (I may truly say) incredibly
above all I could ask or think.

For I would not change my condition with theirs who persecute me; I take my
rest, eat and drink, with more hearts ease then they. I am indeed lodged in
the strongest and vilest prison they have, dark and obscure, which for the
darkness thereof is called Brunain; where I have no Brunain a prison of the
Valencians.
air to breath at, but a little stinking hole, where they lay all their
rubbish, and where the drunkards commonly vent their urine. I am laden with
Irons both on my hands and feet, which are a continual By reason whereof he
complains he wrote with much difficulty, and therefore could not write as
otherwise he would have done.
torment unto me, the irons eating through the flesh even to the hare bones.
The Provost Marshall comes to view my fetters twice or thrice a day, fearing
^est I should make an escape: for preventing whereof he has placed three
guards of forty men before the prison door, etc.

And thus having given unto his Wife his advice, how to behave herself during
her widowhood, and how to train up her Children, with his loving saluations
remembered to her self and other his special friends, he closes up this
Letter.

In the end of a letter written to his Mother, the rather to encourage her
willingly to offer him up to God, he puts her in mind of two memorable
examples of women who were mothers of Children, in this manner following.

I remember, says he, that I have read in the Ecclesiastical Stories, how
that in the hot persecutions of the Church in times past, the poor christians
were assembled together without a certain City, to hear the word of God. Now
a great commander was sent of purpose to see these poor Innocents put to the
sword. And being on his way ready to put his bloody commission into execution,
the report thereof came to the ears of a true Christian Woman, who hasted with
all the The first example.
speed she could, to be at this meeting, carrying her little Child in her
arms. As she drew nigh to this troop of horsemen, she rushed in, to get
through, expecting that they would make way for her. The governor seeing her
make such haste, called her to him, and examined her whither she posted so
fast? she gave him this short answers, I am going, said she, to the assembly
of the christians. What to do? said he; have thou not heard that I am
commanded to put them all to death? Yes, I know it well, said she, And
therefore am I in such haste, that I may be counted worthy to lose my life with
them. But what will thou do with thy little Child, says he? I am carrying it
thither, that even it also may partake of the crown of Martyrdom with the rest.

The tyrants heart was so wounded with these prompt and plain answers of this
silly woman, that he retired back to the Emperor who had committed the
execution of this business unto him, and told him the whole discourse; by
means whereof the Emperors wrath was appeased, and the execution stayed. Here
was an heart inflamed indeed with the fiery zeal of Gods love. Here is a
pattern fit to be presented before all women and Mothers to imitate the same.

I call to mind one other Example of a mother and her son in the times when
Romanus suffered Martyrdom. He was commanded to worship idols. His answer
was, as he stood in the place of judgment, that he worshipped one God only,
in Jesus Christ, his only son. And this, says he, is an Article so well
known, that if any child, though but of 7. years old, should be examined
concerning it, he would easily make a direct answer to it. Then a Child about
those years being presented publickely, Romanus said, come hither my pretty
boy, answer me; ought we to worship many Gods, or but one God in Jesus Christ?
The little child answered, That there be many Gods we children cannot believe;
seeing to us there is but one God.

Then the tyrant apprehending the mother caused The second example.
her child to be scourged with rods before her eyes. The babe entreated her to
give him some drink: to whom she said, Alas poor child, I have no drink to
give thee; but now my son

Then was the child's head stricken off. Hitherto may be referred the invincible
constancy of that pious mother mentioned in the 2. book of the Machabe^s, with
her seven children 2 Mac. cap. 7. Read the whole chapter
Such examples are left upon record for our use, that in such and the like
mirrors we might behold how the mighty power of God being made perfect in the
infirmity of weak flesh, all of us, with one heart and voice, should render
unto him the sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving for the same;

With this godly personage Guy de Brez was one Peregrine de la Grange joined as
Whose learned disputes with Richardot bishop of Arres do here follow,
written with his own hand.

THe bishop at his coming into the prison being

Bishop. I am much grieved Monsieur de la Grange to see you in this mean
condition, and could wish it were far otherwise with you then now I see it is.

La Grange. Sir, I humbly thank you for your love and kindness showed toward
me, altogether I confess without any desert of mine: 2. Cor. 1. 3.
Christ to abound in me also.


Bishop. It is usual with such as you are to


La Grange. Sir, if your meaning be of such as have died for the doctrine for
which I am bound with this chain, and thus fettered with Irons: 1. Tim. 6. 3.
Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
teach is according to godliness, taken out of the pure fountains of the holy
scriptures, without adding, diminishing, or varying any way therefrom.


Bishop. We read that in all times men have been wont to shelter themselves
under the Title of Gods word, in so much that all the old heresies maintained
by heretics have run to this covert; so as great heed is to be taken, lest
under this pretense men rush into errors.


La Grange. I am not ignorant, sir, hereof, in regard that Satan knows how to
transform himself into an Angel of light, thereby to establish his delusions,
causing darkness thereby to be taken 2. Cor. 11. 14. John 14. 17.
for light. But the holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of truth, has in such wise
discovered his jugglings, that none are deluded thereby, but those who at noone
day close their eyes that they may 2 Cor. 4. 4.
not behold the light.


Bishop. Do you think that the holy Ghost has given you such an
illumination, that the truth should only be revealed to you, and to none other.


La Grange. God forbid, sir, I should have any such thought. I am not of the
mind of those dreamers, who at this day brag of their having particular
revelations of the holy Spirit. He means the Anabaptists and their like. Ephesians.
2. 20.
But I speak of an ordinary and general revelation, such as is taught us out
of the Bible, which we call the holy Scriptures, according as it is therein
declared unto us by the Prophets and Apostles.

This was the effect of the Bishops first communication with de la Grange;
after which he was heard to say twice or thrice to the Kings Commissioners,
that he had no will to meddle any further with him. Being called for to be
examined elsewhere before the said Commissioners, Peregrine took his leave of
the Bishop, entreating him to intercede for him, that he might be eased of his
irons, alleging that the Prison was strong enough and sufficiently guarded.

The second time they met together, the Bishop having a prompt memory, made a
rehearsal of what passed between them the day before, and after began thus
with the said Peregrine.


Bishop. Seeing that which I hold as touching the Sacrament of the Altar is
agreeable to the Scriptures, confirmed so long since by the consent of all the
ancient fathers, wherefore do you not agree with us therein? Had you rather
hold with these Novelists, as with Calvin and with the confession of Auspourge.


Grange. Sir, I am neither Calvinist nor Papist; I am a Christian, and what I
hold concerning religion is taken out of Christ's doctrine, who to the only
Doctor of his Church. What Calvin has taught conformable to the word of God, I
am of the same mind with him: and whereas you call your Religion, the old
Religion, and ours the new, it troubles me not at all, since the Father of lies
has long since forged the same, to disgrace the truth, and to establish and
maintain the multitudes of falsehoods and absurdities of your Tenants which you
hold. For example, because Christ in giving his disciples bread in the
Sacrament, said, This is my body, thence they would make us believe that the
bread is become the body of Christ, as if the verb est signified a change of
the bread into another substance, which is found in no language whatsoever.


Bishop. We maintain not the Transubstantiation of the bread from this Verb
est, knowing that the Hebrews use the Participle of the Present tense in stead
of a Verb; but rather from hence, because Christ said, This is my body.


La Grange. I told For they had many disputes touching this point, which are
not here inserted.
you that Jesus Christ in his Supper gives us that body which was conceived by
the holy Ghost in the womb of the virgin Mary; which was crucified, dead and
buried, raised again the third day, and is ascended into heaven; yet we
utterly deny that there is any change made of the bread. Therefore if you would
have us beeeve it, let us have some proof of scripture for it.


Bish. To speak properly, the Transubstantiation of the bread cannot be proved
by the Word of God, and yet we must believe it for the reasons


La Grange. Your glorying then that you have the Word of God on your side is as
you see come to nothing. And why have you then burned so many of Gods saints
for denying that which you cannot maintain by the scriptures? For our parts,
we should blush to affirm, that the substance of bread remains after the
words of consecration, if we could not prove the same from the very form of
the institution of the sacrament, wherein 1 Cor. 11. 23, 26. 17.
the institution calls it bread thrice.


Bish. You know that in the Hebrew Tongue bread is taken for the remainders of
what was eaten; Paul therefore in that place speaks of those viands which the
Corinthians did eat in their Love-feaste, reproving their abuse. So also,
howsoever Paul calls it bread there, and that in Act. (...) 42.
made of the breaking of bread, all this serves not your turn,


La Grange. I grant that bread is taken in the Scripture in this sense; but be
it that bread be taken for the meat that was left, yet you read not that the
substance was changed into the substance of other meat, or lost the property
thereof. It is certain that the Scripture uses not this phrase, of breaking
of bread in the use of the


Bish. Let it be what it will; we hold close to the words of Jesus Christ,
where he says, This is my body; and therefore also beeeve what we speak. I
care not if I be deceived in this matter, nor for bearing reproof for the
same, either Understand the words sacramentally, and all is well.
before God or men; for before God himself I will Lord, thou have said it, and
I believe it.


La Grange. We rest in the same thing also; but withal we have an eye unto
Christ's meaning and intent, which was to establish a sacrament: we also receive
from his mouth the same words as well as you, but sacramentally, where the
outward sign bears the name of the thing signified.


Bish. As touching the sacraments in the old testament Exodus 12. 43. Cec. 71.
1^.
was called the Passover, and Circumcision was called Gods Covenant, being but
a sign thereof: but it is otherwise now in the sacraments of the new
Testament, which have their continuance unto the end of the world, containing
in them the thing signified.


La Grange. Your Distinction will be but idle

Dare you now affirm that the cup is the new Testament? But because you seem
to bring in for confirmation of your opinion the ancient Fathers, we are
content to be tried herein by them, even in our cause also, and it shall
appear that they are not so contrary to us as you suppose; and this will
clear our doctrine from the crime of novelty, wherewith ye slander it.
Afterward we will come to touch such inconveniences and absurdities as flow
from your Doctrine.


The Bishop answering that he was content, La Grange began as follows.

La Grange. Gelasius, who was an ancient doctor, Gelasius a pope of Rome
yea and a Pope also, said in a Council held at Rome, That the substance and
nature of bread and wine remained in the sacrament of the Lords Supper, even as
the humane nature of our Lord Jesus Christ was united unto his divine essence.
Chrysostom an ancient doctor, in his imperfect Chrysostom.
work upon S. Matthew, denies that the body of Christ is enclosed under the
bread in the sacrament, but holds that it is only an outward sign thereof.


Bish. I have, as you know, before answered that sentence of Gelasius, and then
I told you that he was not seen in Philosophy, and therefore could not
dispute substantially of the substance of the bread; yea, I verily think he
understood not what this word substance meant, but took it for that which we
call accidents; as some times by this word accident we understand substance;
witness Julian, who takes it in this sense.


La Grange. Sir, I cannot conceive that such a learned Father could be so
ignorant, as not to know what the substance of bread should mean, or at least
the nature thereof, feeling he ate of it daily. S. Augustine has this saying
on the third Augustine.
Psalm, That Christ showed admirable patience in receiving Judas to that
banquet in which he instituted and gave to his Disciples the sign of his body
and blood.


Bish. I doubt not but many such sentences are to be found in saint Augustine
which seem to favor your opinion; as where he says to Adimantus the
Manichee, That Jesus Christ did not shun to call it his body, albeit he gave
but the sign thereof. But such kind of speeches must be expounded by
conferring one place with another.


La Grange. Nay sir, we have not only saint Augustine, but also the most part
of the ancient Fathers (all which you say are against us) on our side.


Bishop. Well, but come now to the absurdities and inconveniences of our
doctrine, whereof you spoke.


La Grange. Amongst other, I will instance in this one; by the doctrine which
you teach you sever 1. Absurdity.
and di^oyne that which in it self is joined and united together. In the supper
of the Lord the Son of God gives us his flesh for our meat, and his blood
for our drink; which are coupled together by outward sacramental signs,
bread and wine: now according to your doctrine the bread to converted into
flesh, and the wine into blood, and ye separate the flesh from the blood of
Christ.


Bish. We separate not the flesh from the blood, seeing that by concomitancy
the flesh is never without blood, nor blood without flesh.


La Grange. If this be so, we should in one 2. Absurdity.
and the same action receive the flesh and blood of Christ twice; for taking
the bread, which you say has blood accompanying it by your Concomitance, you
receive whole Christ in flesh, and then again in blood; and thus we receive
the flesh twice, and the blood twice.


Bish. What inconvenience comes of receiving the same twice in one action?


La Grange. Christ did not institute his supper to be received twice in one
action, but says in the singular number, Take, eat, this is my body; he said
not in the plural, These are my bodies. This only absurdity, if there were no
more, overturnes

To this the Bishop made no answer.


La Grange. If we mark Christ's words, it will appear that the absurdities in
your doctrine do cross this commandment, Eat; for what eat you sir, I pray
you, in this sacrament?


Bish. The accidents of bread.


La Grange. Eat you nothing but the accidents? It is said, Eat, this is my
body.


Bish. We receive the body and blood.


La Grange. When you eat the body do you not bruise it with your teeth?


Bish. No, for Christ's body is insensible; so as when we eat or bruise the
cake, the body is not bruised therewithal, but the form; the body is not
dismembered, but every bit is the body of Christ.


La Grange. Sir, you still fall into the former absurdities; for making three
pieces of your cake in the Mass, and every piece thereof the whole 3.
Absurdity.
body of Christ, it thereupon follows, that in taking three pieces you swallow
down three bodies of Christ together.


Bishop. We must not be led thus by humane sense.


La Grange. Sir, that which I say is manifest enough, and so that which you
affirm of your forms cannot stand; for Christ says not, Eat the forms, but,
Eat, this is my body. Now we cannot eat, unless we gnaw with our teeth, in
Mat. 15. 17.
enters into the mouth goes into the belly, and is cast out into the draught,
or back chamber, as we call it.


Bish. These words must be taken of our ordinary eating, which is cast (saving
your presence) after it is eaten into the draught.


La Grange. What becomes then of this swallowed flesh?


Bish. The forms are turned into it, and the


La Grange. This answer cannot stand: the accidents, which you call kinds,
cannot be changed thereinto, it is the substance which is changed. But let us
come to a more substantial argument: you teach, That whosoever receives this
Bread, which you call flesh, receives Jesus Christ. How 1 Cor 11. 27. 29.
is it then that Saint Paul says, He that eats and drinks unworthily eats
and drinks damnation


Bish. This argument has some weight in it; for thus you reason, he that
receives Christ does therewithal receive eternal life; but by our Doctrine
all receive Christ in the sacrament, therefore they must needs have eternal
life.

I confess it is true according to your minor proposition, that they receive
him: but I deny that all receive him unto life everlasting; for if they receive
not the flesh by the holy Ghost, it profits them nothing.


La Grange. I have taken the first part of my John 11. 25.
proposition out of Saint John, where Christ says, he is the life; but seeing
we cannot receive so much as a common herb without the virtue of it, much
less can we receive Christ without that life which is comprehended in him;
otherwise Simile.
we should receive a dead body without efficacy, and not Jesus Christ, who
causes those that eat him to live ^ternally. For this sacrament was
instituted of God by his son, to manifest and set John 6 51.
forth his fatherly good will toward us, not contenting himself to have
received us once as strangers into his household by baptism, but as his own
Children: and therefore has ordained this Why the Lords supper was ordained.
We partake of Christ in the Sacrament, by the effectual working of the holy
Ghost.
second sacrament of the holy supper, that in his house we might have
wherewith to nourish and feed us continually. Now as touching the holy Ghost,
it is by him that we eat the flesh of Jesus Christ and drink his blood,
conjoyning by his powerful working those things together which by distance of
place are severed far off one from another, causing all that is in Christ to
become ours, and as by a conduit pipe conveying unto us the true partaking of
Christ's flesh and blood; so as whosoever receives Christ, has eternal life.


Bishop. That is, if he receive him by the holy spirit: for otherwise the
flesh profits nothing, as John 6. 63.
saint John says.


La Grange. Sir, the place you allege makes against you; for Christ there
reproves his disciples for thinking they should eat his flesh after a carnal
manner, as it appears by the words following; for the words, said he, which I
speak to you are spirit and life. If then we are so wise as to observe that
the Sun, sending down its substance on earth by the beams thereof, does
after a sort cause the herbs to spring forth and Simile.
grow, shall not the influence of the spirit of Christ be of much more efficacy
to bring us to the true participation of his flesh and blood?


Bishop. Then the Bishop was desirous to be gone, saying it grew late, and so
for want of time our conference ended. The Bishop commended me to God, and then
took his leave of the company. This is the sum of our communication, so
far as I can remember.

By this brief recital we may observe what holy boldness, mixed with
meekness, the Lord had endued this his worthy servant with, even in the
flower of his age, being drawn from his studies and from the place of his
birth to preach the Gospel to the Valencians, and at length to seal up the
same with his blood.


A short narration of the life and death of these two valiant Champions of
Christ, Guy de Brez, and Peregrin de La Grange, Ministers and martyrs.
NExt to the pure preaching of the word, nothing so much commends those whom
the Lord culls out to give their lives for the same, as does an holy and
blameless conversation, continued unto their happy departure out of this
world. It remains then in few words, that we set forth the conversations of
these two holy personages, that thereby the mercies and graces of the Lord be
stowed upon them may have the greater luster.

Guy de Brez borne in Mons in Hainault, being in his younger years much
addicted to Popish superstitions, came by continually reading of the Scriptures
to taste the sweetness of Christian Religion; which knowledge brought forth no
small fruit in him in due season: Yet so, as it could by no means be relished
or received by them of his Nation. Whereupon he departed from Mons, and having
learned the art of painting Glass, came to London whilst good King Edward the
sixth

The first fruits of his labors were most an end in bestwong some exhortations
in such places where he found any willing to give him audience,

But above all he clave to them of the City of Lisle, because he found there a
great number of believers who desired nothing more than to hear the Gospel
publicly preached unto them. At that time began also an holy conflict Against
which this godly man published a learned confutation in French, which book I
have in my hands.
against the pestilent sect of the Anabaptists, which as cockle mingled it
self amongst the good corn. In this city he continued until the flock of
Christ were dispersed by reason of persecution, and then went Staff of Faith,
extracted out of the ancient Fathers. After that being desirous to profit more
and more in the knowledge of such things as were requisite to be in a Minister
of the Gospel, he traveled toward Lausanna, and thence to Geneva, to
furnish himself with the tongues; and thence withdrawing himself into the
Low Countries, he there established the churches of Lisle, Tournay, and of the
Valencians; in which cities

The Duke of Bovillon obtaining him drew him to his city of Sedan, where he
also continued a while in publishing the glad tidings of salvation, until the
Church of Antwerpe began in the month of August 1576, to call him to be their
Pastor. But he could not obtain leave of those of Sedan to depart from among
them without a great deal of difficulty, because they evidently

To come now to Peregrine de la Grange, he Peregrin de la Grange.
was borne in Chute nigh to Saint Marcellin in Daulphine. In the month of June
in the year 1565 he was sent from the Schools of Geneva, at the request and
instance of the Valencians, to serve in the ministry among them. Such was His
meek disposition won him much respect.
his meek and mild disposition, that it won him much love and respect, and
made his ministry to be so much the more acceptable in the eyes of all men.
After the demolishing of Images in the City of the Valencians, two Churches
were employed by those of the reformed Religion for the use of prayer,
preaching the word, and administration of the Sacraments. Now the detaining of
these Churches, the one of them being used by a stranger^ namely by the said la
Grange who was none of King Philips Subjects, being also against the Decree of
Margaretn then Regent of the Low Countries, gave occasion to Noicurin, as then
principal Bayliffe of Hainault and Valence, not only to frustrate and break
all accords with the said Valencians, but moreover to afflict and besiege them
extremely. During which siege, because the supper of the Lord was administered
in both the said Churches, it did so much the more enkindle the rage of the
enemy against them, so as when the city was taken, La Grange was the more
cruelly used, as you shall read when we come to speak of his death.

The same adversaries, who encountered Guy de Brez his companion, assailed him
also; but he overcame them by the help of Gods holy Spirit, who gave them both
such power, as their enemies were not able to resist.

They were imprisoned the eleventh of April, and on Saturday the last of May
the Provost of the bands came into the prison about three of the clock in the
morning, to give these two prisoners warning to prepare themselves for death;
for they were to die at six or therabouts. Whereupon both of them began highly
to magnify God for his goodness, and gave the Provost thanks for the good
news which he had brought them. As Soon as they were up and ready, Master Guy
entered into the fore Court, bidding the rest of the Prisoners good morrow; and
then testifying to them his joy, spoke after this manner; Brethren I am this
day to die for the doctrine of the Gospel; and now, blessed be God, I joy and
rejoice therein; I had not thought that God would ever have done me this
honor. I feel my self replenished with joy more and more, from minute to
minute, my God adds new courage unto me, and my heart leapes for joy within
me.

Then exhorting the prisoners to be of good cheer, he told them it was no hard
matter to die, and so by way of acclamation alleged that place out of the
Apocalips, O how happy are the dead that dye in the Lord; for they rest from
their labors, and their works follow them! He further besought the prisoners
to stand fast in the doctrine of the son of God, which he had taught them,
avowing it to be the undoubted truth, which was maintained Which disputes were
formerly omited in regard that in a manner they were the same with those of
Peregrin do la Grange.
by him before the Bishop of Arres and many others.

Beware you do nothing, said he, against a good conscience; for I foresee that
the enemies of the Gospel will execute the utmost of their rage against us;
thinking thereby to weaken our faith, that so they might turn you from the
truth, and so causing you to do such things as should bring dishonor to the
cause for which you are in bonds. Take heed therefore ye shrink not; for if
ye do, you shall certainly feel such an hell in your consciences, as will
never cease to vex and torment you. O my brethren, how good a thing is it to
nourish a good conscience?

One of the prisoners asking him whether he had finished a certain work which
he had begun, he answered, No; For now I must cease to labor, because I am
passing along toward the heavenly rest: the time of my departing is at hand, I
go to reap that in heaven which I have sown on earth. I have fought a good
fight, I am at the point of finishing up my course: from henceforth the Crown
of Glory is laid up for me, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give unto
me. Me thinks (said he with a joyful and smiling countenance) that my spirit
has obtained wings to soar aloft into heaven, being invited this day to the
marriage Supper of the Lamb.

As he was speaking, the Provost came in with bands into the Court, and putting
off his hat saluted

Soon after Peregrine de la Grange entered into the same Court, who as he
carried himself I am this day to die for the Truth, and then the heavenly
Inheritance is prepared for me: my name is written in the Phil. 4. 3. Romans 11.
29.
Book of life never to be blotted out; because the gifts and calling of God
are without repentance.

He protested also, That for his part he never

Going thence, some of the prisoners came to him, and finding him sitting in
the entry of the prison upon a bench, with bread and wine set before him, which
was brought him for his breakefast, they asked him if he went to suffer with
those shackles on his heels? I would I might (said he) yea, and that they
would bury them with me to, that they might manifest the inhumanity of my
adversaries. And as those brethren comforted him, That God showed him a
thousand times more favor to take him after this manner out of this transitory
life, than if he had let him die in his bed by sickness: for now says he) I
shall dye with enjoying the benefit of all the powers of my soul, praying the
Lord to have mercy upon me.

Then every one taking his leave of him they

To be short, La Grange being brought to the place of execution, and now upon
the ladder, he protested with a loud voice (notwithstanding the

Then was Master Guy brought thither; who, kneeling down to have made his
prayer at the foot of the ladder, was not suffered to make an end; for lifting
him up they made him by and by to ascend the ladder. Being thereon he fastened
his feet in the rundles, exhorting the people to carry themselves with all due
respect toward the Magistrates, showing how some had overshot themselves in
that behalf.

Then Master Guy exhorted them to stand steadfast in the doctrine which he had
taught them; avouching that it was the undoubted truth of God. He could not
finish his speech fully, because the Commissioners gave a sign to the
Executiooner to hasten and make an end.

He was no sooner turned off the ladder, but there fell out such a tumult among
the soldiers, being in arms in the market place, that they ran up and down
the City, shooting off their pieces against such as they met, shooting off
their pieces against such as they met, as well Papists as others, yea killing
one another in a grievous manner, so as some fell down dead among many others
that were wounded and hurt. And thus were they smitten with great fear without
any ground thereof at all.

Notes touching the estate of the Faithful in the City of Venice, and of some
executed there for the Truth, in the year, 1566.
IT pleased God for a long space to free this noble City from being subjected
to the cruel Inquisition of the Pope, by reason whereof the face of a Church
was to be discerned there, from the year 1530, to the year 1542. They enjoyed
such freedom of conferring and scanning of the points of Religion there, that
they came in a manner to make profession thereof publicly; so as many strange
nations came to take notice thereof. But the Father of lies observing this
began to bestirre himself, by setting his Lieutenant on work, who has his
seat at Rome, to disturb these good beginnings: for it came to pass, that
whilst multitudes of good Christians flocked thither from other parts, in
process of time such a course was taken by Antichrists supporters, that many
of them were imprisoned, and afterward sent thence to Rome.

The rest by a new found execution, never till then heard of, were cast into
the sea, and drowned in the bottom of the same. The manner of it was thus:
After they had received sentence, an iron chain was fastened about their
middle with a stone of great weight tied thereto; and then were they laid upon
a planke between two wherries, which being come to the place appointed, the
wherries parting asunder, the Martyrs were forthwith drowned. Yet for all this
many ceased not still to assemble together in a place appointed for that
purpose, to talk and discourse of heavenly matters, yea, and to make some
collections for relief of the poor; so as in the year 1566, the called to
them a minister of the Gospel, to establish and constitute a church among
them; having also the Supper of the Lord administered to them. But some false
brethren creeping in, under pretense of making the same profession with them,
betrayed them.

Then began the Popish Inquisition to be erected there with the greatest
cruelty that might be, toward the maintenance whereof the Pope sent every
year a certain sum of money to those holy Fathers, to be distributed among
such as were appointed to be spies and revealers of such secrets as they could
come to the knowledge of. Thus were many cast into the sea and drowned; some
were sent to Rome; others were detained Anno 1567.
so long in prisons (which were like graves) that they rotted there.

Master Anthony Ricetto, Martyr.
AMongst others who were condemned to be

A true Christian (said his father) is bound to forgo goods, children, yea,
and life it self, for the maintenance of Gods honor and glory: For which cause
he was now ready and resolved to lay it down, the Lord assisting him.

The Lords of Venice offered to restore unto him his patrimony, which was
partly morgaged and sold, if he would submit himself to the Church of Rome.
But he refused whatsoever conditions they this way tendered unto him. Some that
were prisoners with him, namely one M. Julius Ferlan has reported much of the
abstinence, patience, and holiness of this excellent man, so far * This Sega
was his fellow prisoner, of whom see more hereafter
by and by replied, What tell you me of Sega? I will perform my vows unto the
Lord my God; and so he was led bound fast to the wherry. A certain Priest, who
accompanied him, presented unto him a wodden crucifix, exhorting him to return

When they were come nigh to the two castles, the Captain bound his hands;
now, because it was very cold, he called for his cloak which they had taken
from him. Then said the wherry man, fear thou a little cold? What will thou
do when

Being arrived at the place where he was to suffer, the Captain put a chain
of iron about his middle with a very heavy stone fastened thereto. Then
Ricetto, lifting his eyes to heaven, said, Father forgive them, for they know
not what And being laid on the planke, he said, Lord Jesus into thy hands I
commend my spirit: and then pulling this weighty stone toward him, not waiting
till the boats were sundred one from another, as in such kind of executions
they were wont to do, this holy man slept in the Lord; which was no small
terror to the Magistrate, in that there was never any that died this kind of
death before, with so much constancy and resolution.

Master Francis Spinola, Martyr.
THe Sunday following, Master Francis Spinola of Milaine, being about the age
six and forty years, was apprehended and brought into the prison, called Des
cless de dix, That of ten keys, where he found poor Francis Sega, Two Francis
Sega, Martyr.
days after (which as the eight and twentieth day of February) Spinola was
brought before his Judges, where they delivered into his hands a little
Treatise of the Lords Supper, of which he freely confessed he was the author;
showing that the opinion which he there maintained was this, That the bread and
wine were the signs, and not the things signified, and therefore must not be
adored. He was questioned with as touching the power of the Pope, prayer to
saints, and about Purgatory, He answered that the Popes power was from man,
which the Roman Consistory and certain Princes had given him: but that God
the Father had given Jesus Christ to be the Mat. 28. 18.
Head of the Church, and to have all power in heaven and earth. What is Peter
then, or what is Paul? He further added, that he would not worship nor pray to
any other but to God only, as it is written. The memoirall of the Saints he
well approved, Luke 4. 8. John 15. 5.
as of those who were the true branches ingrafted into the Vine Christ.

Also for his part he acknowledges none other Heb. 1 3.
Purgatory, but the blood of Christ, as it is manifest in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and in the first 1 John 1. 7.
Epistle of John.

Then as Spinola was returned into his prison, Francis Sega (whom he was
ignorant of) waited his coming, holding a candle in his hand, and passing by
with his Keeeeper, saluted him by his name; whence it came to pass, that they
two conferred together about the doctrine of the Gospel. Now howsoever Sega
differed from The consancy of one martyr puts life into another.
Spinola touching the number of sacraments, yet he referred himself to the
judgment of the true Church of Christ in that behalf. But after that he had
learned that Spinola had constantly stood to the defense of the truth, he was
very joyful and much comforted, saying, That God had reserved him for such a
time as this, to make him partaker with him of so great consolation.

He wrote consolatory letters to Spinola, committing his writings into his
hands, whereof some were preserved, and the rest lost by the carelessness of a
false brother. Upon the three and twentieth day of February, 1567. the Keepers
of the prison told Sega that he was to die within one hour after the shutting
in of the evening. At the hearing of which news he entreated Spinola to pray
with him. After prayer, Sega telling him that his soul was heavy to the death;
Spinola gave him this answer, Fear not, for it will not be long before it
shall feel those joys which shall endure for ever.

Being brought out of his dark dungeon, according to the time limited, he
took his leave of Spinola and the rest of the prisoners. As he was entered
into the boat, a certain friar began to persuade him to return into the right
way. Sega answered, that he was already in the way of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and passing on he called upon the name of God. He seemed not to be much moved
at the binding of his hands, but was a little amazed at the fastening of his
body to the chain. Yet by and by taking unto him a Christian resolution, he
took whatsoever they did unto him patiently. Being laid upon the bourd or
planke, he commended his soul into the hands of God, Anno 1568.
and being left of the two boats (upon the edges whereof the planke was stayed)
the one declining this way, and the other that way, he fell into his spulchre
the sea, and died patiently.

Spinola soon after was presented the second time before his Judges, namely
the tenth of March, where he reproved the Popes Legate with his clergy there
present, as also the Lords of Venice who sat in judgment upon him, because
contrary As he did the first time he was convented before them.
laid he, kill Jesus Christ in his members. The nine and twentieth of March
following, he was the third time brought before them, where they asked him if
he would not recant his errors. He answered that the Doctrine he maintained was
not erroneous, but the very same truth which Jesus Christ and his holy Apostles
taught and preached,

After all this, Spinola became so weak, that Spinola begins to waver.
he determined to strike sail (as they say) and to apply himself to the time;
being brought hereinto by the advice of some, namely that he should feign a
giving of his consent to what the Magistrate required of him, by means whereof
he might escape their hands. But about the tenth of But soon after recovers
himself.
espying whereunto this determination tended, he protested before all, that he
would stand in the confession he had made from the first of April last past.
Wherefore on the ninth of August he was brought again before the same Judges,
where he openly confirmed the same.

His Judges said, that he should either be drowned or burned alive. Then on the
thirteenth of January 1566. (according to the Venetian account, I am no
heretic, but the servant of Jesus Christ. At which words the popes legate
commanded him to hold his peace, telling him that he lied. The next day in the
morning (which was the last of January) he was brought into Saint Peter's
Chapel, where he was degraded,

A relation of such things as fell out under the government of the Duke of
Alva,
THe afflictions of the protestants in the Low Countries were multiplied this
year under the dominion of Ferdinando of Toledo Duke of Alva. It is well
known that the Spaniards, using all their endeavors to rule over this
Country at their pleasures, had no better opportunity

Long di dthey languish in this captivity, whilst the Duke of Alva by fair
promises dissembled a kind of meek and gentle carriage of mind toward them,
giving them some hope of a general pardon, proceeding from the Kings clemency;
that thus he might catch the lords and governors ^he more cunningly into his
nets, whereof the Lord Lemorall Earl of Egmond, Prince of Gand, Governor of
Flanders and Artois, and others of quality gave but too lamentable experience;
who being fed with vain hopes were at length inhumanely put to death.

The sixeene Provinces also subjecting themselves To wit, Brabant, Lambourg,
Luxembourg, Guelderland, Flanders, Artois, Haynaut, Holland ^ealand, Namur,
^utphein, Friseland, Malines, Vtrecht Over^seiz and Graningu^. (...) Le Conseil
de sang.
under this new government, lost their ancient liberties and privileges; which
evidently appeared by the exploits done from the year 1557. hitherto by a new
counsel of twelve, elected and settled there by the Duke; the principal of
which were Vergas and Delrio, the Fathers of the inquisition, which Council
was commonly called the Council of blood,

The death of two Barons of Battembourg, the one called Gysorecht, and the
other Thierri, brethren, with certain other Gentlemen executed the same day at
Bruxells, 1568.
AMong many Gentleman and Captains who were apprehended after the discom^ture
of the Assembly in Holland, whom the Duchess of Parma had imprisoned in the
castle of Villford, the two brothers of Battembourg a most ancient Barony
situated upon Mense, about two miles off from Nieumegne, did manifest above
others how much they had profited by being instructed in the Church of Geneva.
The elder of them was Gysbrecht, and the other Dietrich or Thierri; who from
the flower of their youth had constantly professed and confessed the pure
Doctrine of the Gospel.

On Tuesday the first of June, Anno 1568. the Duke of Alva began to declare to
the world his fained meekness, putting to death the same day these two
breathren, besides the Lords, Heter Dandelet, Philip Wingle, etc. They were
first brought into Provost Spellans house, near the horse fair, in the City
of Bruxels, compassed about with a strong guard, and many drums beating, that
none might hear what were their last speeches. As they went to their death,
Battembourg the elder seemed to be somewhat pensive, whereas Dietrich his
brother was very cheerful, comforting the other with his gracious words,
saying, Ah brother, is not this the day we have so much desired? Be not
sorrowful now; for it is the highest honor that can befall us here to suffer
for the Doctrine of the Son of God. It may be for the love you bear me, you
grieve to see me dye first: I am content that you should drink of that cup
before me, in regard you are the elder; if not, all is one, seeing we are going
to our God.

Gysbrecht by and by replied, Think not, dear Brother, that the joy of the
holy Ghost is taken from me now I am drawing nigh to the Lord, being ready to
dye for his holy name.

Then ascending the scaffold, after he had made

He desired, as some say, to see his brother, and when he had espied his head,
he cried, I shall by and by be with thee, my brother. So after he had ended his
prayer, he was by a quick dispatch united unto him.

Those who testify these things report, That

The Saturday after, the fifth of June, the Earls of Eagmond and Horn were
beheaded, and there made a public gazing flock. Of which two, the Earl of
Home, who died last, gave an

An extract of a complaint with a protestation of the Prince of Orange and the
THis year in the month of July, the Prince of Ornage, William and Nassau,
accompanied with many Lords and Gentlemen of the Low Countries, all professors
of the Gospel, for prevention of the slanders and pretenses of rebelion

And that the Prince of Orange might make known to all, what injustice and
cruelties were exercised upon those of the Religion, he discovered the
notorious subtilties of the cardinal of Gravella and others, who under the
cloaks of the pretended catholic religion, sought nothing else thereby

And for as much as tortures, vexations, banishments, executions both by fire
and water, by strait imprisonments, sword, and gibbets did still increase more
and more; that for these considerations the cause was lawful and good, in
taking upon them the defense of so miserable a people, to whom the Duchess of
Parma, Governesse under his Majesty, had expressly permitted the preaching of
the Gospel, for preventing of the perils and dangers which threatened the
ruin of the said countries.

And as the said Prince had been a faithful and loyal servant to his Majesty,
in doing him many acceptable services, without either sparing his person or
goods, so was he also ready pressed to be employed still in the like, more then
at any time heretofore. And thus proceeding on further, he made it apparent to
every one whose judgment was not forestalled, that the Duke of Alva, who in
respect of the dignities conferred upon him ought himself to be a pattern and
a protector of the Nobility and Gentry, had notwithstanding put to death
threescore gentlemen, with others of quality, rich Burgemasters of Bruxels, and
of other Cities besides; that this his ambition, being risen to a notable
height of cruelty, durst put to death the Illustrious Earls of Egmond and
Horn, without any show of law or equity, who had so faithfully served the
Emperor Charles of famous memory in his wars.

Yea, that he might yet further debase the Nobility of the Country, which is
as it were the principal support of his Majesty; he caused the heads of the
said Earls to be set upon poles and forkes; By such spectacles charging upon
their parents and friends much obloquy and disgrace. Yea, this horrible
execution did strike such a fear and terror into many, that to avoid these
oppressions they fled the country. For a conclusion he added, that all these
things laid together, the issue thereof tended to the extirpation of all true
Religion, and consequently the depriving of the faithful not only of their
spiritual, but corporal good also. And therefore as a Prince, being a native
member of the Empire, he held himself obliged, in having compassion over the
wrackes made among so many poor Christians, to lend them his best help and
furtherance for the free passage of the Gospel, and the consolation of such of
his Majesty's good Subjects, as were persecuted, imprisoned, and oppressed.

Before we shut up the History of the year 1568. we will add to the former
Martyrs some that were executed in the Low Countries at diverse times in the
said year, without tying our selves to any strict order, touching their death.

Schoblant the son of Barthel, John de Hues, Ioris Coomans, Martyrs.
THe eleventh of February there were taken and imprisoned in Antwerpe,
Schoblant the son of Barthel, John de Hues, and Zoris Coomans. After which,
they were all joyful and glad in the Lord, confessing that nothing fell out in
this regard, but by his divine providence; as it appears by Letters written to
their brethren the seventeenth of March, containing that which follows.

Seeing it is the will of God that we should suffer for his holy name, and in
the quarrel of his Gospel, we certify you brethren, that we are of good
courage hitherto, howsoever the flesh continually rebels against the spirit,
counselling it ever and anon according to the advice of the old serpent. But
we are well assured that Christ who has bruised, will also still bruise the
Serpents head, and not leave us comfortless. True it is, we are now and then
pricked in the heel, but that Ioh. 14. 18. Romans 16. 20. Genesis 3. 15. Mat. 11.
35.
is all the Serpent can do; nor are we discouraged, but keep our faith close
to the promises of God, who is the Lord of heaven and earth, having created all
things of nothing.

He forsook not Joseph in Egypt, nor left the Genesis 39. 21. Dan. 3. 25. Dan 6.
22.
three young men in the fiery furnace: no, nor Daniel in the Lions Den. This is
the God of Abraham, Psalm. 1^.
strength, and refuge. By such and the like Scriptures, dear brethren, we
comfort our selves in our bands, rejecting all confidence in any man
whatsoever. Be not dismayed then, good brethren and sisters, for our bands and
imprisonment. For so is the good will of God now toward us. And therefore pray
rather that he will give us grace to

The examination of Schoblant taken the 24. of March, in the presence of the
Marquess, of the Bailiffe, of the Secretary and many others, 1568.
Marq. WHere were you borne?


Schob. in Sommerswall.


Marq. Where did you marry your wife?


Schob. At Middleborouth in Zealand.


Marq. Where were your children baptized?


Schob. In the Church of Christ, in which true Christians are bound to baptize
their children.


Marq. Though you should say no more, we

Have you received the Lords Supper?


Schob. Ya sir.


Marq. Are ye not a Minister?


Schob. No sir.


Marq. Ought not you to submit your judgment to that which has been decreed
in a general council, where so many learned men were assembled, Bishops and
Cardinals, swaying the same.


Schob. I have read of some Councels where the


Marquess. Would you not now willingly return into the bosom of the holy
Roman Church?


Schob. I will cleave to whatsoever God shall teach me out of his holy word.
And thus for this time they parted.


On the seven and twentieth of March, Schoblant received sentence of death;
whereat he was

The night following, he wrote his last farewell to his brethren, and excuses
Ioris for not being condemned with him, although they were both presented at
the same time before the Judges. I pray you dear friends be not offended,
says he, that Ioris my fellow prisoner is not offered a sacrifice with me. It
is not, I assure you, for denying his Savior. But let us meditate on John 21.
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. This I apply
to my self at this time, for which I render humble and hearty thanks to God,
who has counted me worthy, not only to confess the Lord Jesus with my mouth,
but also to seal the same confession with my blood. I new brethren bid you
farewell, waiting with a joyful heart the call and cry of my husband, who now
invites me to come unto him.

Out of prison the same right before the day wherein I must be offered up a
sacrifice, Written with mine own hand. Schoblant the Son of Barthel.

THe next day he entreated the Iaylour with a great deal of earnestness that
he would not suffer the Friars and Monks to come into trouble him: for, said
he, such kind of people can do me no good, seeing the Lord has already sealed
up the assurance of my salvation in my heart by his holy Spirit. I am now going
to my spouse, putting off this earthly mantle, to enter into the relestiall
glory, where I shall be freed from all superstitions. And then he added
farther, would to God I might be last that these Tyrants should put ot death,
and that their thirst after blood might be so quenched with mine, that the
poor Church of God from henceforth might enjoy her rest and quiet.

Having sung the fortieth Psalm with his fellow prisoner, concluding the same
with saying the Lords prayer, they kissed one another, and commended one
another unto God with many tears.

After which the executioner came in, and when he had bound him, he led him
away. In going out of the prison he said, farewell Ioris, I go before thee,
follow thou me. Ioris answered, so will I brother, I will follow thee. In his
passage toward the place of execution, he forgot not his brethren, but
manifested his love to them by such signs as he could. Being tied to the stake
he was burned alive, calling upon the name of the Lord, in the year 1568. the
tenth day of July.

John Hues finished his course in Prison

Here follows a Letter written by Ioris Coomans, out of Prison, to the Church
of God in Antwerpe.
BRethren I write unto you being left alone, whereas we were three in number;
John Hues is now dead in the Lord. I did my best to comfort him whilst he
breathed. So as now I am alone, and yet not altogether alone, seeing the god of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob is with me. He is Genesis 15. 1^
my exceeding great reward, and will not fail to reward me as soon as I shall
have law downs this earthly Tabernacle: pray unto God that he will strengthen
me to the end; for from hours to hour I expect the dissolution of this house
of Clay.

Not long after, Ioris was examined by the Magistrates, who questioning with
him of his faith, he answered freely thereto, proving what he said by the holy
Scriptures.

The Marquess asked him if he were resolves to die for the faith he professed.

Yes, says Ioris, I will not only venture to give my body, but my soul also
for the ^tion of it.

Marquess. How came you to understand the Scripture, seeing you have not the
Latin Tongue?


Ioris. Call in hither you Doctors, and I will let them see that I have
learning sufficient to confute them. You greatly admire them, but Christ gives
thanks to his heavenly Father, for hiding his secrets Mat. 11 25.
from the wise and prudent, and revealing them to babes.


Marq. I hithero spared you in hope to see you


Ioris. Sir, during the time of my imprisonment I have shed many a salt tear,
and by the grace of God I am become much more resolute and better. But to
fashion my self according to your appetite I have no stomach at all; no,
although you burn me, as you have done my brother Scoblant,


Marq. And I can tell you that it will cost you but little better cheap.


Ioris. I am ready if it be to morrow.

Then said one of the standers by. Sir, he has neither wife, child, nor goods
to lose, and that makes him so willing to die.


Ioris. Be it that I have none of all these, yet must I suffer death for
conscience sake. But what care you for that? I would you could be silent and be
think yourselves well what you do; you shall answer these your doings at the
last day, where you must all appear, and then there will


Marq. If you use this kind of language I will commit you to the hole; where
you shall be fed only with bread and water, and that I think will tame your
tongue. Therefore be quiet and sing me no more of these Psalms.


Ioris. Well sir, I may well restrain my outward voice, but neither you, nor
all the World besides, shall ever be able to let me from praising God in my
heart; nor shall you sit as Lords over


Marq. We have heard you preach but too long. Then he said, Iaylor, take him
and cast him into the hole. Then was he put among thieves, as a Lamb among so
many Wolves. Thus this constant witness of Christ remained firm (scorning both
their threats and torments) till they had burned him as they did Scoblant.
August 14. the year 1568.


Giles Annik, John Annik his son, and Lovis Meulen, Martyrs, 1568.
Persecution grew still hot in Flanders.

GIles Annik, with John Annik his son, were driven from Renay in Flanders, and
retired unto Emden in East Friesland. But by reason

So after they had been detained in bands, they were all three condemned by the
Magistrates to death, as heretics. Giles was the first that they brought to
the place of execution, and when she Priests offered to put their Idol into
his hands, he refused it: whereat his adversaries being moved caused him to be
gagged, that the people might not hear him speak ought to their edification.
Then was he burned, dying constantly and blessedly in the Lord.

Forthwith the Sergeants were sent to fetch his son out of prison; who, being
endued with a singular fortitude and constancy, called to him one whose name
was John Camber, being the first man that laid hold on him at his apprehension,
saying, I forgive thee my death: then preparing himself to die in the Lord,
the hangman cut off his head. Likewise Lovis Meulen, who having lodged these
strangers, according to the rule of the Apostle, was executed by the sword,
which death he willingly endured for the name of Christ in the year, 1568.

Louyes de Kiken-Poost, Martyr, 1568.
THis woman was the widow of one Huges Moybert borne in Renay, about the age of
sixty years, one that truly feared God. The Magistrate of Renay imprisoned her
in the year 1568. because two years before she with her children had
consented that a Minister should preach in an outhouse on the backside of her
dwelling; she was also very charitable in releeving the poor, every way
showing forth the fruits of a true saving Faith. Having been kept in prison
seven months, she was condemned to die the nine and twentieth of July. After
her condemnation the Curate of Saint Martins came into the prison, purposing to
have heard her confession. But the woman spoke unto him with such a divine
grace, and with a spirit so replenished with zeal, that the tears trickled
down his cheeks, and going his way he said, I came to comfort you, but I have
need rather to be comforted of you.

Then being brought by the Sergeants to the place of execution she was
beheaded; unto which she yielded her self with much boldness and joy of
heart, July the ninth.

A strange accident fell out upon the death of this woman; for a cousin of hers
being with child, and ready to lie down at the same time when this Martyr was
going to be executed, hearing the sound of the Bell (which usually toules when
any are to suffer) she fell into a trembling, and remained so three weeks,
beyong her reckoning, her fruit stirring to and fro in her womb as if a Weaver
had moved his shuttle from one end of his Web to another; the neck of it bowing
down as if it had been broken with some blow. By which it appeared that these
cruel tyrants were the cause of this poor innocents death. The woman viewing
this strange sight sent for the foresaid Curate; who being come in, and
beholding this spectacle, suddenly swounded and was never well after to his
dying day.

Notes touching Christopher Gauderin, Martyr, and others.
THis Christopher was bred up under the Abbot of (...); who dying, the said
Christopher addicted himself to the making of Linen Cloth, which he quickly
grew ^pert in. But having been trained up in a bad school, as soon as the
Sunday was come, he spent and consumed all his weeks earnings. Now by reason
of a friend of his that wrought with him, called Louys Stallens, God brought
him into the right way. For the said Louis would often tell him, that he The
fruit of good counsel.
ought rather to distribute of his gettings to the Poor, than to spend them so
wastfully; for if he continued so, God would surely call him to an account for
it. These and the like exhortations so wrought upon this spendthrift, that he
began to alter and change his course; so as in stead of frequenting

Having occasion to go to a place called Audenaud, in the month March, 1567.
to make distribution of certain alms to the poor there, he was arrested and
sent prisoner to the Castle by

In prison he had many disputes touching matters of faith, which he so defended
and maintained

Some objecting against him his youth, being about the age of thirty years, he
would tell them, that man's life consisted but of two days, viz. the day of his
birth, and the day of his death, and therefore he must needs die once: for my
part therefore (said he) I am now willing by death to pass into eternal life.

Perceiving in the evening that he was certainly to die the next day, the
striking off of his

These four exhorted one another, and encouraged each other to suffer death
constantly. Which done, a Friar forthwith presented himself before them,
coming as he said to convert them. But Christopher said unto him, Away from us
thou seducer of souls, for we have nothing to do with thee. Whereupon he by
and by departed. Then came in the hangman; who as he was busy about A
confident speech.
us; for the greater wrong our enemies think to do unto us, the more
assistance we shall find from God: and so never ceased to comfort them till
himself was gagged also.

Then the Executioner brought them to the

The woman, being every way veriuously given, was condemned to be beheaded,
because she had sung Psalms, and made a certain exhortation out of the word
of God to her neighbors, at a woman's up-sitting. She was beheaded on the back
side of the Townehouse. Now because her body was much enfeebled, she was caused
to sit upon a stool, receiving three blows with the sword overthwart the
teeth. Yet she constantly sat still till she obtained the Crown of
Martyrdom, the same day in which the forementioned Martyrs dyed, which was the
second of June. Anno 1568.

Piere Coulogue, and Betken his Maid servant, Martyrs, Anno 1568.
THis Peter Coulogue, by his Trade being a Goldsmith dwelling in Bzeda, had
long served the Church there in the office of a Deacon; wherein he carried
himself with the good approbation of all. His house also was free for the
assembly to meet in, as often as the exercises of Christian religion were
performed amongst them.

But the enemies of the truth not enduring the sweet favor hereof imprisones
him, and laid him in irons: which the faithful there took very heavily, using
all the means they could to have access to visit him. But the enemies taking
knowledge thereof caused him to be conveyed into the Castle; whence both his
and the Churches sorrow was yet further increased, because they could not now
come to be a comfort one to another.

His servant Betken, being very zealous and well read in the Scriptures,
brought him his ordinary diet from day to day, never ceasing to comfort and
confirm him out of the Word of God. All which she had liberty to do nine
months together. At length they imprisoned her also: whereof she was right
glad, thinking her self happy to suffer ought for righteousness sake. Not long
after Peter was put to the torture; which after he had endured, they came in
like manner to his maid servant Betken: who spoke unto them after this manner,
My masters, wherefore will you put me to this torture, seeing I have no way
offended you? Is it for my faiths sake? You need not torment me for that; for
as I was never ashamed to make a confession thereof, no more will I be now at
this present before you; I willfreely show you any mind therein. But for all
this they proceeded on with that which they intended. Which she perceiving
said, Alas my Masters, it it be so that I must suffer this pain, then give me
leave first to call upon God. To which her request they yielded. Now whilst
she was making her prayer, one of the Commissioners was so surprised with fear
and terror that by and by he swouned, and could not be fetched again. And thus
the poor maid escaped the torture.

Soon after being examined touching her faith, they condemned these two
innocents to be burned. Now as they were led to be executed, great sorrowings
and complaints were heard among the people. But as for Peter and his Maid, they
prayed to God with ardent affection, that he would perfect the good work which
he had begun in them, and assist them with the power of his holy spirit, until
they had finished their course.

The courage and constancy of the said Betken did so move many of the godly,
both men and women, that not casting what peril or danger might ensue thereof,
they brake through the multitude, embracing the Prisoners, and praising God for
their constancy; saying, Fight manfully, for the crown is ready prepared for
you.

After they were come where they should suffer, Betken began to speak unto the
people with an Anno 1568
amiable countenance, saying thus unto them. Brethren and sisters, be you
always obedient to the word of God, and fear not those that can kill the
body, for on the soul they can have no power: as for me, I am now going to
meet my glorious Spouse the Lord Jesus Christ. And then falling both down upon
their knees, they prayed to the Lord with great devotion. Being risen up from
prayer, the executioner laying hold of them bound

Giles Meyere Martyr, Anno 1568.
IN. Flanders at a place called Vinderhout, distant from Gand about a mile,
there was a certain Curate called Giles de Meyere whom it pleased. God
illuminate with the true knowledge of his Gospel. Now having received a talent
Evil servant; but sought all means how to employ Mat. 25. 18.
the same. He had the fear of God always before his eyes, manifesting the
same as well in his Doctrine as in his conversation, being careful to instruct
those whom. God had committed to his charge. Yea, he went from house to house
comforting Acts 20. 20.
and exhorting every one, as occasion served, out of the word of God; above
all, laboring with them to beware of the abominable superstitions

He taught them that forgiveness of sins, the grace of God, and eternal life,
was not to be obtained by our own merits, but by the free and only grace of God
in Jesus Christ.

The Clergy of Gand having notice given them hereof, namely, that their
Doctrine and authority would come to be little set by, if this Curate should
proceed on thus in his course without let, they never rested until they had
pursued him

The Priests and others of that rabble ceased not likewise to ply him with
disputations, thinking by that means to make him renounce his Faith; but to no
purpose: for he remained still firm and constant, keeping himself close to
the word of God written, which so vexed them, that they procured him to be laid
in the Castle, where his sentence was to be hanged; The Spaniards

Being come to the place, they thrust him into his little Cabin piled up with
fagots and wood, and then set fire unto him; where he was heard distinctly and
plainly to use these words (albeit they had gagged him) Father into thy hands I
commend my spirit. Thus this faithful witness of Ieuss Christ dyed quiently
and constantly in the Lord, April the fourth, Anno 1568.

Among these sad relations, a little to quicken and refresh the spirit of the
reader, I will here insert a Letter full of consolations, written out of prison
to the faithful by one William Touart, Merchant, who had his dwelling in the
City of Lisle in Flanders.
THis honorable personage, being come to the age of eighty years or
thereabouts, used his house for the space of fourteen or fifteen years as a
Church, wherein the assembly in the City of Lisle commonly met. Being chased
and banished thence in the year 1561. he withdrew himself for a while to
Tournay, whence he was constrained to fly, and to go to Amiens and Moundedier
Cities of Picardy, that there he might enjoy the pure preaching of the Gospel.
Afterward returning into his own country, he came to reside in the City of
Antwerpe, where after he had continued many years, he was at length imprisoned
and condenmed to be burned with two others, who suffered for the same cause.
But it pleased God so to dispose of him, that he dyed another kind of death,
to show that his chosen servants have to triumph over the same, some one way,
and some another. For being plunged into a cisterne or tub full of water, he
was drowned in prison, and then they carried his body out of the City to a
place called Berken, where the dead bodies of the condemned are laid upon the
wheels or crutch. Among many letters which he wrote during the time of his
imprisonment, my author has selected out this one, which here follows.

DE are brethren and sisters in Jesus Christ, I most humbly thank my good God
that he has so fortified and comforted me by his grace, that I feel my self
more cheared by lying in this dark prison, then if I were walking in the open
streets or fields. I say, this I feel according to the spirit; for as touching
the flesh what does it apprehend here but stinking vapors and smoke?

Wherefore my beloved, if it so fall out that you be apprehended for the name
of Jesus Christ, fear not the prison, nor those that have power to kill the
body; for having done that, they can go no further. Be ye not afraid then,
seeing it is the reward which our good Captain Jesus Christ has promised to
all his faithful soldiers and servants. He who turns his back in this
conflict goes by the loss; but whosoever fights manfully obtaines in the end
the crown, not a crown of gold, but of glory immortal. We here lay down
Rev. 2. 10.
a fading life, filled with griefs and troubles, to change the some for a life
everlasting; we put off the rags of this mortal flesh, to be clothed with
robes immortal; we forsake a loathsome life for joy and felicity eternal;
ought any gain or exchange to be compared with this? O sweet and happy
Martyrdom, how do thou dignifie and enrich us, in despite of the world,
devil, and our own flesh? And which of us now can complain, seeing our
Sovereign Lord and Master has Anno 1569.
so expressly foretold it to all his followers? will any man come after me,
says he? Let him then Mat. 16 24.
take up his cross and follow me. Let us bear, Oh let us then bear the
cross cheerfully and with ioyfulnesse, that we may be received in the
presence of his heavenly Father: for it is not only Phil. 1 21. 1 Timothy 2. 12.
given us to believe in Christ, but also to suffer for his sake; and if we
suffer with him, then we shall also reign with him.

Oh that we could admire his bounty, who no sooner imployes us in his work,
but has the wages ready in his hand wherewith to recompense John 16. 20. Heb
12. 1.
us. Your sorrow, says he, shall be turned into joy. Let us then cast off
every weight that presses down, and whatsoever else that stands in our way to
heavenward; be if father, mother, Mat. 19 29. Mat. 13 45, 46.
brother, sisters, husband, child, yea, and our own life also. Let us with the
wise Merchant man sell all, that with him we may purchase that precious Mar.
10. 23. Luke 12. 8.
Father, and his holy Angels. They shall be clad with white robes, and shine as
the Sun in the kingdom of Heaven, filled with gladness in the presence of
the Lamb. They shall eat of the fruit of the tree of life, which is in the
midst of the Rev. 27.
Paradise of God.

Let us fix the eyes of our minds upon these so Luke 15. 7.
our faith. O dear brethren, remember me always in your prayers, who am
bound here in the Heb. 13. 3.
bonds of Antichrist. Remember those also who are Pet. 4. 5,
I say, without ceasing; for our adversary the Devil is always compassing us
about with his fetches, to cause our hearts to faint. And you are not ignorant
what a potent enemy our own flesh Gal. 5. 17. Phil. 1. 6.
is unto us. But I confidently believe that our good God, who has begun this
good work in me, will perfect the same even unto the day of Christ.

Fare ye well.
It was strange to see what spectacles of dead bodies, saline by the bloody
Inquisition, were to be gazed on in a manner in every place: especially

In the City of Valence were executed seven and fifty persons, whereof the
greater part were Burgesses of the City; only because they clave to the true
faith of Jesus Christ.

This slaughter was distributed into three several

A notable cruelty executed upon a good woman called Perrette Curtet in the
year 1569.
AS she was traveling from Orleance to a place called Moutagris where she
intended to meet her husband, called Master Authony Cha^ornter des Meringes,
who had escaped the fury of his enemies: she being in her Inn at supper, two
or three desperate villains knocked at the door, and coming in asked of the
said Curtet, Art thou not Meringes wife? she answered yes, Then rapping forth
execrable blasphemies they said, thou art she whom we look for. This done,
they stripped her into her smock, took away her montes and rings from her,
and brought her to the river side; where after great blasphemies they said,
confess thee. The woman answered, Seeing I must die, give me leave to call
upon God first. They deriding her, said, Prap then, let us hear what kind of
prayer thou will make. She having in her prayers commended her soul to God,
one of them swear, Gods death, is this all? will thou say nothing else? Then
said one of them to another, Let us cast her into the river: which they agreed
to do; some taking her by the head, and others by the heels, and so throwing
her in, heaped great pieces of ice upon her to cause her to sink, and then went
their way. But understanding that the poor woman had got upon a great flake of
ice, to save her self thereon, Peter Gouge returned, who was one of the
murderers, and had betrayed her into the hands of the rest, notwithstanding
her husband had covenanted with him to convey her to him in safety; this Gouge,
I say, finding her there, gave her a deaths wound, the which had never come to
light, had not the said Gouge confessed the same, being imprisoned by the
Duchess of Ferrare for that very fact; yet escaped he unpunished (contrary to
the law of Provosts) albeit he was sent to the Provost Marshall of Montagris
to that end, and was set at liberty, for the hatred which these bare against
the Doctrine of the Gospel, whereof the said des Meringes was a Minister.

Now the dead body floating to and fro upon the water rested no where, until
it came over against the lodging where the said des Meringes lay (as if it had
there demanded erecution of justice upon the offenders) where being known and
conveyed thence was buried by some of the assembly who yet remained in the City.

Another cruelty committed in Orleance about the same time.
A Woman in the City of Orleance was constrained by the murderers (who broke
in upon her husband in the night) to stand and hold the candle to them, whilst
they murshered him.

Of the coming of the Queen of Navarre to the City of Paris in France, with
the manner of her sickness and death there.
BEfore I come to no^^tion the bloody Messacres of France, especially that of
Paris, anno 1572. which made way to all the rest, I cannot Anno 1572.
omit to place here, as an entrance thereunto, the history of that noble and
virtuous Lady Jane de Albert, Queen of Navarre, because it contains much
matter worthy of due observation.

This good Queen, before she could be drawn to come to Paris to solemnise the
marriage of her son the Prince of Navarre with the sister of Charles the ninth
then King of France, received letters upon letters from the said King to
accompany Pope Pius whilst he lived could by no means endure to hear of, or
give his co^sen^ to this marriage: but he died, and then way was made for this
marriage to be concluded.
to that end. But when the Queen understood that the King was minded to have
this marriage solenmized at Paris, she would by no means hear of it: for I
will not, said, she, put any confidence in

Still the King persisted in his suit for the obtaining of the same at her
hands. Also having intelligence by some of his agents, that the queen of
Navarre began a little to waver, he solicited her yet once again to come,
assuring her that all things should be carried in such peaceable sort, that she
should have no cause to complain. At length the Queen came from Rochell to
Bloyes in the

In April following were the Articles concluded concerning the marriage of the
Prince of Navarre with the Kings sister. In the beginning of May the King wooes
the Queen of Navarre

The que^ene mother could by no means brook

On Wednesday the fourth of June, the Queen fell sick of a continual Fever,
and kept her bed;

The malady indeed was in her brain, which was not searched: in which the
Queen Mother had an hand, though she seemed much to mourn for the affliction
of her good friend. Now forasmuch as in the time of her sickness she
manifested with what spirit she was guided, we will here set down the true
narration of her behavior, both in the same her sickness, and also at her
death.

Perceiving in her self by the strength of the disease (howsoever others
slighted it) that she could not long continue, she made her self ready to
receive from the hand of God that which he had appointed concerning her; and to
that end requested she might have such nigh about her, as might comfort her in
this case out of the word of God, as also to pray with her and for her,
according to that which Saint James says, Is any sick among you, John 5. 14,
16.
Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over such a one,
knowing that the fervent prayer of righteous man avails much with God.

Thus according to her desire a Minister resorting unto her showed out of the
Scriptures, that Christians ought in all things to submit themselves to the
will of God, as to the Father of spirits, Heb. 1^.
that they might live. And albeit the rigor of his chastisements does sometimes
seem to our flesh as if they were sent to none other end but for our ruin and
destruction; yet ought we to consider, that because he is just he can do
nothing but justily, and being a father, he cannot but therein seek the
welfare of his afflicted children.

To which she replied, I take all this, says she, as sent from the hand of God
my most merciful Father; nor have I during this extremity feared to die, much
less murmured against him for inflicting the same upon me: knowing that what
soever he does, he does the same so, as all in the end shall turn to my
everlasting good.

The Minister continuing in his speech, added, That the causes of sicknesses
and diseases must be sought beyond the course of physiyke, which always looks
to the corruption of the humors, or to the more noble parts of the body any
way distempered: for howsoever it was not amiss to have respect to these
things as to second causes, yet ought we to ascend higher, namely to the first,
even to God himself, who disposes of all his creatures as it pleases him. He
it is That make the Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
wound and heales, that kills and makes alive. And therefore to him we ought to
direct our prayers for comfort in all our griefs and sufferings, and in the
end for full deliverance; seeing it is no hard matter with him to restore
health unto us, if his good pleasure be such.

To this she answered, that she depended wholly upon Gods providence, knowing
that all things are wisely disposed by him, and therefore be sought him to
furnish her with all such graces as he saw to be necessary for her salvation.
As for this life, said she, I am in a manner we aned from the love of it, in
regard of the afflictions which have followed me from my youth hitherto, but
especially because I cannot live without daily offending my good God, with whom
I desire to be with all my heart.

The Minister told her, that long life, how full of troubles soever it were, was
notwithstanding to be esteemed among the blessings of God, seeing Deuteronomy. 5. 16.
his promise implies so much; and not only so, but because our life may many
ways serve to his glory, and is both an honor and a pledge of his favor, even
as it is to him whom his prince imploys long in his service having had
experience of his fidelity for many years together. In which respect she was
earnestly requested to pray, that if it were the will of God to employ her yet
longer in his Anno 1566.
service, for the further enlargement of his Gospel, that he would grant unto
her such recovery of health, and good disposition of body, that with renewed
strength she might be encouraged to finish her course much more nobly than
heretofore.

Whereupon she protested, that in regard of her own particular her life was
not dear unto her, seeing so long as she lived in this frail flesh,

The Minister said, that he blessed God to see in her Majesty this assurance of
faith, and so to cast her care upon the providence of God, praying her still to
persevere therein, which would sufficiently seal unto her truth of her faith.
And thus, said, he, did the Patriarchs in times pasT commit the care of their
posterity over into the hands of Genesis 24 1. Genesis 27. and 48. 15. and 49.
God; as may appear by Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, touching their several
blessings.

But yet is was very requisite, as he said, that

Now whereas she had again declared that Because by death we pass to life.
John 8. 51, 52. John 11. 26. John 11. 13, 14. Acts 7. 60. 1 Cor. 15. 55.
not die at all, according to Christ's, words in the Gospel of John, he that
lives and believes in me shall never die. For death (to speak properly) is
no death to them, but a sleep; being often so called in the Scriptures; and
therefore Christ for their O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy
victory?

She was often admonished by him to make confession of her sins before God,
showing that bodily diseases tended to the dissolution of nature, and that
death was the wages of sin; declaring Rom 6. 23.
moreover that by this her chastisement she might discern what she had
deserved, if God should now enter into judgment with her, not only in of the
fall of our first Parents, in which guilt Romans 5. 12.
she was enwrapped, as well as others, but also by her own personal sins,
seeing the best of men or women in the world are in themselves but poor,
miserable and wretched offenders: yea, if the Lord should punish us according
to our demerits, we could expect nothing at his hands but eternal death and
condemnation.

At these words, she began with her hands and eyes lifted up to heaven, to
acknowledge, that her Psalm. 19. ^
sins which she had committed against the Lord

From the later clause of her speech the Minister took occasion to declare at
large upon what ground she was to expect the fruit of this mercy of God in
Christ; seeing the whole have no need Mar. 2. 17.
of Physician, but they that are sick: and therefore Christ says in that
place, He came not to call the righteous, but sinners unto repentance; And
that he is ready to fill the hungry with good things, Luke 1. 53.
whereas in the mean while he sends the rich empty away. Of all which, said
he, you ought so much the rather to be persuaded in your conscience, by how
much the more the holy spirit witnesses to your spirit that you are the child
of God, Crying in you, Abba, Father. For what is Romans 8. 15. What faith is.
faith else, but a firm trust and assurance of the good will of God,
manifested toward us in his blessed son?

Now the Minister, fearing he might some way offend her by his overlong
discourse, held his peace; the rather because the Physicians thought that a
long continued speech might be hurtful unto her; but she on the contrary
earnestly requested him not to forbear speaking unto her about these matters
of life and eternal salvation; adding, that she wow felt the want of it, in
regard that since her coming to Paris she had been somewhat remiss in
hearing such exhortations out of the word of God; And therefore I am now the
more glad, says she, to receive comfort out of it in this my so great
extremity.

The Minister then endeavored to set before her the happiness of heaven, and
what those joys Psalm. 16. 11.
were which the faithful there possess in the presence of God: which when the
scriptures intend to discover unto us, they only tell us that the eye 1 Cor.
259.
has not seen, nor has the ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of
man, to conceive what these things are, which God has prepared for them that
love him. To which purpose he used this simllitude; as if a King, minding
greatly to honor Simile.
some noble persome noble personage, should bring him to his court, and there
show him his state and attendance, his Treasures, with all his most precious
Jewels: even so, says he, will the Lord one day reveal to all his elect and
faithful people his magni^cence and glory, with all the treasures of his
Kingdom, after he has gathered them home to himself, decking and adorning
them with light, incorruption and immortality.

This happiness therefore being so great, her highness, he said, ought to be
the less careful about the leaving of this transitory life, seeing that for
an earthly kingdom, which she was now to forgo, she should inherit an
heavenly; and for temporal good things, which vanish and come to nothing in
the using, she should for even enjoy those that were eterenall and everlasting.
For her faith being now firmly settled upon our Lord Jesus Christ, she might be
suffered to obtain eternal salvation by him, on which words he took occasion
to direct his speech in more particualar manner unto her, saying:

Madame, do you verily believe that Jesus Christ come into the world to save
you? and do you expect the full forgiveness of all your sins, by the
shedding of his blood for you?

To which she readily answered she did; believing that he was her only Savior
and Mediator, looking for salvation from none other, knowing that he has
abundantly satisfied for the sins of the whole world, and therefore was
assured that God for his sake, according to his gracious promises in him, would
have mercy upon her.

Thus you have in part the goodly speeches, which passed from this religious
Lady in the beginning of her sickness; all which was within the space of three
or four days. Howsoever before that, and since also she ceased not to
continue the same her fruitful and comfortable communications, now and then
sending forth most affectionate slighings to God, as a testimony of that hope
and desire Anno 1567.
she had in enjoying his presence; often uttering these words, O my God, in thy
good time deliver me from this body of death, and from the miseries of this
present life, that I may no more offend thee, and that I may attain to that
felicity which thou in thy Word have promised me.

Neither did she manifest her pious affection by these her words only, but
therewithal showed a joyful and resolute countenance, as the vehemence

When she had finished these her consolatory speeches, they usually went to
prayer; entreating the Lord that he would arm her with constant patience, and
have mercy upon her. Which prayer it shall not be altogether impertinent to
insert in this place, serving as a form of prayer upon the

The Prayer.
O Lord our God, we confess he before thy Divine Majesty, that we are
altogether unworthy of thy infinite mercies, by reason of our manifold
iniquities; and that we are so far off from deserving to be heard of thee in
our requests,

Yet Lord mercy is with thee, and because thou art our father, therefore thou
desire not the death of sinners, but rather that they should convert and
live. For this cause we now fall down before the throne of thy grace, with
confidence of obtaining thy wonted mercy, which thou have promised to such as
call upon thee in truth: beseeching thee, which art the Father of mercies, to
have compassion

Endure her also with meekness of mind to bear the tediousness of her
affliction; for howsoever the spirit be willing, yet the flesh is weak, yea
full of resisting and unbelief; that so receiving all things from thee as from
as father; she may the more willingly submit her will unto thine.

And because, O good God, thou have made her hitherto an happy instrument for
the advancement of thy glory, and the defense of thy poor afflicted people; we
pray thee, if it may stand with thy good pleasure, restore her to health
again, that so the excellent work which thou have by her means begun may not
be left unperfect, but by virtue of this her deliverance she may with renewed
forces undertake the same in better sort than ever heretofore, especially for
the well educating and training up the children which thou have given her.

But Lord, if thou have a purpose now to call her home to thy self, who are we
that we should contradict thy holy will? only we pray thee that thou would
confirm her more and more in the knowledge of thy blessed Gospel, and thereby
also in the certainty of her salvation, which thou have given her by faith in
thy son Jesus Christ, that thus she may not cease to sanctify and call upon
thy holy name unto her last breath.

And as touching our selves, who are here by thy good providence gathered
together about her, being in bodily health, give us to know the uncertainty and
brevity of our life: that so, according to our duty, we may behold the same in
this mirror which thou have set before us; as knowing that even the greatest
in the world are subject to the same calamities, as well as the small; that so
our chief care may be to employ the remainder of our time to thy honor and
service: all which we cra^e of thee in the name of Jesus Christ thy son, our
only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

Thus we have as near as we could gathered the sum of the prayer. During
which she ceased not, with hands and eyes steadfastly lifted up to heaven, to
fetch many deep sighs, especially when mention was made of that mercy of God
in Christ which he extends toward poor sinners. So as there was not any
there present that might not evidently perceive, that her heart and affections
were joined to the prayer which we pronounced in her presence.

And while she thus lay, she still continued in her godly resolution to depart
hence, that she might be with Christ, taking great delight in the holy and
Christian exhortations which were usually made unto her by many godly and
learned men, who came in to visit her, to whom she also manifested no small
testimony of that faith, and hope, which she had in God, touching the salvation
of her soul, by her holy and Christian speeches, which for brevities sake are
here omitted.

Yea, albeit the Lord exercised her much with the sense of her inward disease,
yet could you not at any time discern any speech lavouring of coffeehouse,
or impatience, to proceed out of her mouth; nay, sca^sely a groan, which not
only those of her own family, but many others can testify, even the Queen
Mother, with others also, who now and then came in to see her.

But if at any time she felt any refreshings from the violence of her disease
(there being no malady so vehement which has not some intermission and
breathing time) she manifested to all her willingness to obtain the recovery
of her former health, refusing to that end no good means prescribed for her by
the learned Physicians. Again, when she perceived her sickness to increase
upon her, and that she grew worse and worse, she was no whit appalled thereat,
but showed her self to be armed with an invincible Anno 1568.
constancy, to undergooe the utmost that death could do against her, preparing
her self willingly for that last conflict.

Moreover seeing her Ladies and Gentlewomen weeping about her bed, she would
forthwith rebuke them, saying, I pray you weep not for me, forasmuch as you see
God does now by this sickness call me hence, to enjoy a better life, and to
enter in at the desired haven, toward which this

In the end, feeling her strength to decay more and more, she gave order to
have her last will and testament made, wherein she above all wished, that her
children might have but the grace to honor and fear the Lord, exhorting them
constantly to continue in the profession of the Gospel, in which they had been
trained up from their youth; ordaining especially that her daughter the
Princess should be educated and instructed therein, by the four

The eighth of June, which was the day before her death, she caused a Minister
of the Gospel to be called for, and finding that she was drawing nigher unto
her end than before, she willed him to speak somewhat largely of such
temptations as Satan is wont to assail Gods elect withal in their last
conflict.

To which the Minister answered, that then was the hour indeed wherein that
sworn enemy of all the faithful did most busily bestir himself,

The first engine then which satan uses against the Saints to cause them to
despair, is to present

To which purpose these sentences are to be well observed. It is Christ who
has borne our griefs and carried our sorrows. That the chastisement Isa. 53
4. 5.
of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. That we all
like sheep have gone astray, and have turned every one to his own way, and the
Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. Christ is our peace and the
propitiation for our sins. The Lamb of God which takes Ephesians. 2. 14. 1 John 2.
2. John 1. 29.
away the sins of the world. These with many the like sentences the Minister
propounded by way of answer to this virtuous Ladies demand: concluding the same
thus, that Gods justice ought not to terrify those that believe in Christ, of
whose 1 Cor. 1. 30.
righteousness and redemption they are partakers, knowing that Jesus Christ who
knew no sin was made sin (that is to say, an oblation for sin) 2 Cor. 5. 21.
for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

I grant, says he, that these things belong not to all indifferently, but only
to such as believing in the Son of God do wholly rest themselves satisfied in
the merit of his death and passion, which Acts 4 12:
merit of his, as Saint Peter witnesses, suffices for their salvation.

After these matters premised, he asked her whether she placed whole confidence
on Christ crucified, who dyed for her sins, and rose again for Romans 4. 25.
her justification?

To which the noble Princess answered, that she neither expected salvation,
righteousness, nor life from any else, then from her only Savior Jesus
Christ, being assured that his only merit abundantly sufficed for the full
satisfaction of all her sins, albeit they were innumerable.

This being your Faith Madam (said the Minister) you cannot come into
condemnation, but John 5. 24.
are passed from death to life. Then taking an occasion again to resume her
former speech, that she had no cause to be afraid of Gods Throne of Heb. 4 16.
Justice, seeing it was turned into a Throne of Grace and Mercy unto her, and
that the hour of death should now be exceedingly welcome to her, seeing it
could be nothing else but a sweet passage into a far better life, as also the
time in which all Phil 1. 23. Rev. 21. 4.
fears should be wiped away from her eyes: He likewise showed that she should
do well continually to be thinking on that excellent sentence, Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord, because Rev. 14. 13.
from thenceforth they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

For then, said he, the time approaches wherein she should enjoy the visible
presence and society of her husband Christ, and have fellowship with the
blessed Angels, and celestial spirits, with the holy Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles and Martyrs Anno 1572.
of the Son of God, to partake with them of the same felicity and glory.

The Minister minding yet further to sound her, whether she were loath to leave
this life, used these words: And now good Madam, said he, if it should please
God by this your sickness to put an end to this wearisome pilgrimage of yours,
where yet you remain with us, and to call you home to himself, whereof he
gives us to see some

Then he once again added, good Madam, open the eyes of your Faith, and behold
Jesus your great Redeemer sitting at the right hand of his Father, reaching out
his hand to receive you unto him. Are you, are you willing to go unto him?

The minister, not willing to continue longer in this kind of discourse, asked
if she were pleased that they should go to prayer, declaring that godly
personages there present would willingly join their desires with hers. To
which she consenting, the said Minister prayed by her a good space, whilst
this pious Lady manifested her

When prayer was ended, the Minister discerning in her the undoubted
testimonies of her repentance, and of the sorrow she conceived for the offenses
which she had committed against God, together with the assured confidence which
she had in his mercies, as a Minister of the Gospel, amd Ambassador of the
Son of God, by the authority dispensed to him, having committed to him the word
of reconciliation, he assured her in 1 Cor. 5.
God, and that they should never come into account before his judgment Seat;
yea, that she should no more dount thereof, then if the Son of God from
heaven should say unto her, Daughter thy sins are forgiven thee. And to the end
that troubled consciences might the better be quieted, Christ has used these
words, speaking to his Ministers, saying, Whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted, Mat. 16. 14.
and whose sins ye unloose, they are unloosed.

Then he asked of her Majesty, if he accepted of so gracious a Message which
assured her of the free pardon of all her sins. Yea, I do, says she, and
make no doubt thereof.

Not long after these exhortations, the Admiral coming in, and with him
another Minister, she

The greater part of this night was spent in holy admonitions which these two
ministers gave Psalm. 31. 5.
where the Prophet, among other things, does there commend his spirit into the
hands of God; because, says he, thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth.

The Queen willed them to pray with her again: and thus, as I have said, was
the most part of the night spent in such virtuous exercises, namely in
exhortation, in reading the holy Scripture, and in prayer: during all which
time the ministers never discerned in any of her speeches or behavior the
least impatiency, Nay, whereas some days before she fell sick she showed how
affectionately she was bent to provide things most magnificent for the day of
her Sons marriage, according as the State of so great an alliance required: it
was admirable to observe, that after th^s sickness had seized upon her, God
wrought in her such aforgetfulnesse and neglect of all such matters, that she
never made show of having so much as a thought thereof.

This night being thus passed and spent by this noble Queen, she persevering
in the expressions of like pious actions and ardency of Faith, the next day in
the morning between eight and nine of the clock she departed this life, to
take possession of a far better life, sweetly yielding up her spirit into the
hands of God, the ninth of June 1572. the sixth day after she fell sick, in the
44. year of her age.

She had her perfect speech always even to the hour of her death: showing not
only the stayednesse and soundness of her judgment (which ever in times past
she had) in her care about the salvation of her soul, but in her other worldly
affairs also.

Now to avoid all jealousies and suspicions of her being wronged by poison or
otherwise in this matter of her so sudden sickness, her body was opened, by
sundry expert and learned Doctors of Physic and Surgery, with all exquisite
diligence, who found her heart and liver very sound and untouched, her lungs
only excepted, which long before on the right side had been very ill affected,
by reason of an extraordinary hardness which they had contracted, and withal
a great imposthume, which, so far as man could judge, they concluded was the
cause of her death. But they had no command given them to open the brain, and
therefore finding somewhat out of frame in her body, they delivered their
opinions only concerning the same.

Thus you have with as much brevity as I could, and as the merit of the thing
required, the true report of the manner of this virtuous Princesses sickness
and death, thus ar related unto you; only my request is (says my Author) that
if any have a more perfect and particular knowledge of the excellent parts
wherewith the Lord had adorned and beautified her, they would not suffer the
same to be buried in silence, but to cause it to see the light; that on the one
side it may serve as an example to posterity; and on the other side, that we
may learn to bless God for her piety and constancy.

An Introduction first into that which Anno 1572.
leads to the death of the Admiral of France; Then, to the massacre at paris,
and so in some other Cities. --
And first, what moved the Admiral to come to Paris.
AFter the death of the Queen certain Princes were solicited by the King to
give their attendance at Paris, for the folemnising the marriage of the Prince
of Navarre (now made king by the death of his mother) according to the
ceremonies

The Queen mother and the Duke of Aniou wrote unto the Mayor also, and
likewise to the rest of the Magistrates, to the same effect; but especially to
their servants, some whereof had a little light given them touching that
device. To be short, they endeavored to take all rubbes out of his way, that
he might with the less mistrust fall into the snare.

The Admiral, not casting any perils, resolved to take his journey to Paris.
Albeit he lacked not "He gave this testimony in his answer to these
advertisements, that since France came to be a Kingdom, it never enjoyed a
better King then Charles the ninth.
he had no sinister opinion of the "King, of his mother, or any of theirs, yet
at least he was to take into his consideration the place whither he went, and
amongst what enemies he was now to venture himself. But he always leaning
upon the testimony of a good conscience, and being confident in Gods
providence, not moved by these

The marriage of the king of Navarre with the Kings sister being solemnised on
the seventeenth and eighteenth of August, 1572, and all the Triumphs and
feastings accompanying the same being finished, the Admiral determining to
take

This with other impediments were the occasions of detaining him still there.

Mauravell coming to Paris whilst these This Mauravell was he that shot the
Admiral.
Feasts lasted, having presented his service first to the King and his mother,
the Duke of Aniou, with those of the Guise; aftersome speech had with the King
and the Queen mother, one called Chaill had a command to direct him to the
house whence the blow should be given: who left him with a woman in the said
house, which woman was forbidden not only to ask his name, but also so much as
to enquire for what cause he was lodged there.

On Friday, the two and twentieth of August, in the morning he trimmed up his
harquebuse; watching secretly the Admirals coming.

The Admiral at his going forth out of the Louure meeting the King coming out
of a Chapel which is before the same, passing thence to play at Tennise, he
scarcely had gone an hundred paces from the place, but as he returned to his
lodging on foot to dine there, attended on by some twelve or fifteen Gentleme,
reading a petition; out of Mauravell hurts the Admiral.
the window of a lodging (where Villemur tutor to the Duke of Guise usually
lay) he was shot with an harquebuse charged with three brass bullets, one of
which took off the fore finger on his right hand, and he was hurt with another
in his left arm, Feeling himself thus wounded, he willed some of his
followers to enter that house, and to enquire who it was that had done that, or
who set him on work to do it: and then to advertise the King thereof, giving
him to understand how well his command was observed.

Now whilst they were busy to force open the door, the murderer fled out by
a back way, escaping thence out of the gate of Saint Anthony; where one
attended him, holding a Spanish gennet brought out of the Duke of Guises
Stable; whereon he galloped away, yet not without some difficulty; for flying
thus in some fear, he fell off his horse twice ot thrice.

A Gentleman seeing the Admiral hurt came to support his left arm, binding up
the hurt thereon with his handkerchiefe. And thus was he conducted to his
lodging, which was distant from thence about some twenty paces. In his passage
a Gentleman said it was to be feared the bullets were poisoned: to which the
Admiral replied, All must be as it pleases God.

The King hearing of the Admirals hurt left his game, where he was playing till
then with the Duke of Guise, and throwing away his racket as it seemed in an
anger, with a sad and heavy countenance withdrew himself into his Chamber; the
Duke of Guise following him within a while after.

The King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde, The King of Navarre and the Prince
Conde complain to the King.
with many other of the religion, having notice of the Admiralls hurt,
complained to the King of this untimely accident; entreating they might have
leave to depart out of the City, seeing they could expect little safety there.
The King made his moan to them of the mischance that happened, swearing and
profesting that he would execute such impartial justice upon the offender, and
on all the complotters, as should give the Admiral and all his friends
content; only he willed them to stay, promising them ere long to provide for
their security.

The Chirurgians and Physicians were presently sent for, amongst whom was
Ambrose Pare the Kings Chirurgian, a man very expert. He began first with the
Admirals finger, which put him to much pain, in regard the scissers were not
sharp enough to cut it off at once; besides he was feign to stop and open the
wound thrice. Then he came to the left arm, making incissons in two places
into which the bullet had pierced. The Admiral endured all this with an
undaunted countenance, and wonderful patience, whilst those which stood by
and saw him so nangled could not refrain from tears. Captain Monins held him
with both his arms about the middle, and Cornaton held his hands. He seeing
them astontshed, my friends, said he, why weep you? I think my self happy to
be thus handled in the cause of The admirals speech while he was in the
Surgeons hands.
God. And anon casting his eyes upon a Minister called Merlin, he said, here
ye see, my friends, Gods blessings. I am hurt indeed; but I know it is come to
pass by the will of my heavenly Father, humbly thanking his Majesty in that
he is pleased to honor me so far, as to suffer any thing for his holy name.
Let us pray unto him, that he would grant unto me the gift of perseverance.

Then looking upon the said Minister who wept This Merlin was miracylously
delivered in the massacre of Paris.
over him. Oh Master Merlin, says he, what will not you comfort me? Yes sir,
said he; for wherein

Then said Merlin, sir, you do well in turning your thoughts away from him who
has committed this outrage upon you, in looking only unto God; for no doubt
it is his hand that has smitten you: therefore for the present, cease to
think on

Now as the said Minister declared how the evils which happen to the children
of God in this

The admirals godly and devout Prayer.
LOrd God and heavenly father, have pity upon The admirals godly and debout
prayer.
me for thy goodness and mercies sake; remember not Lord the sins of my life
past, nor the offenses which I have committed against thee; for if thou
narrowly mark our sins, the loosenes of our behavior, and distoyalties, in
transgressing thy holy commandments; Lord, who shall stand? who is able to
bear the weight of thy displeasure? I renounce all Idol Gods; I acknowledge
thee to be the only true God, and worship thee alone O Eternal Father, in
thine Eternal

Having ended this prayer, Merlin asked him, The Ministers pray with him,
if it pleased him that the Ministers of Christ should now pray with him and
for him. To whom he said, yes, with all my heart; I pray you begion. Whilst
Merlin pronounced the prayer, applying the same to the present occasion, the
Admiral with his eles looking up to heaven expressed the ardency of his
affection, in consenting thereunto. Prayer being ended, Merlin began to
propound unto the Admiral the examples of the Martyrs, showing that from Abel
to Abraham, and consequently hitherto, whosoever carried themselves in any
degree of faithfulness in the house of God, felt at one time or other the
smart of afflictions in diverse kinds. The Admiral answered, that when he
called to mind the sufferings of the Patriarchs and Martyrs, it much comforted
him, and helped him somewhat to allay the fartnesse of his afflicted estate.

The King of Naverre and the Prince of Conde having bitterly bewailed this
outrags committed upon the Admiral (as you heard before) about two of the
clock in the afternoon, the King, accompanied The King and Queen Mother came
to visit the Admiral.
with the Queen MOther, his Brother, and other of the Lords, went to visit
the Admiral.

The King with tears seemed to be exceeding sorry for that which was come to
pass, promising him, with one blasphemous oath upon another, to revenge the
fact, no less than if it had been committed upon his own person: praying him
to come and take up his lodging with him, in the louvre, for his greater
security and safety, Whereupon, the Admiral, after some discourse made to the
King in secret, gave him most humble thanks for so great a favor, as to
visit him in his own person.

Upon the motion made by the King, Mazilles his chief Physician was called,
demanding of him, whither the Admiral might safely be removed thence into the
Louvre, or no? His Answer to the King was, that it could not be done without
danger. Some of the Admirals friends thought if fitting to request a guard of
soldiers to be assigned by the King unto him for his better security. The King
answered, he liked well of that device, being fully determined to provide for
the admirals safety as his own, and would preserve him no less then the apply
of his eye. After this the King called for the bullet of brass wherewith the
Admiral was hurt, that he might see it, asking whither he was not put to
great pain when his finger was cut off, as likewise touching the dressing of
his arm? Now as Cornaton showed the bullet, having his sleeve all bloody
(because he was appointed to hold the Admirals arm, while it was in dressing)
the King asked if that were of the Admirals blood? and whither so much blood
issued out of his wounds? adding (after Cornatons answer) he never saw man in
his life show greater constancy and magnanimity of spirit then the Admiral did.

Then was the Queen Mother desirous to see the Bullet, saying, I am glad the
bullet is taken out; for I remember when the Duke of Guise was killed before
Orleance, the Physician told me, that if the Bullet were gotten out, there was
no danger of death, though it were poisoned.

Then Cornaton answered, we have foreseen that Madame; for being careful to
prevent that danger, the (...) him (...) the poison, if (...) any such thing
should be. Some good hopes of the Admirals recovery.


The Saturday before the Admiral was (...) he began to be somewhat cheered, so
as the Chirurgious and Physicians gave out, that they would ^^^rant the
Admirals life: because his ar^^, having lost but little of its strength, would
soon be healed. This news was brought to the King, who seemed to entertain
the same joyfully. The

The guard there could no longer contain themselves, but began to pick a
quarrel with them; and as one of the said Gentlemen was about to speak, a
Gascoine soldier struck at him with a P^^tizan, and then they fell upon the
rest. The noise hereof spreading, the Queen Mothere said, That was the
watchword, as you would say, when the massacre was to begin. The mark or sign
by which the murderers were to be distinguished from the rest, was a white
handkerchiefe knit about the left arm, and a white cross in their hats.
Proberb.
Let the bell of the Church of S. German be touled, said she.

The Admiral coming to the knowledge of this u^rore) though he had but feld
of his followers about him, was not much moved the^^^^; trusting (as he often
used to say) upon the Kings favor, whereof he had large experience. Also he
knew that when the Paris^ans should understand how much the king disliked their
folly, though

This Cosseins was appointed by the Duke of Anjou to defend the Admirals
lodging, wherein the old proverb was verified, That the Wolf was set to keep
the sheep.

About break of day, August the four and twentieth, 1573. being saint
Bartholome was day, they began to knock at the door where the Admiral

The Admiral rising out of his bed, and putting The admirals Christian and
constant carriage of himself in these bros^s
selves if it be possible, for you cannot secure me; I commend my soul into
the hands of the merciful God. Those who were present and escaped have
affirmed, that the Admiral was no more affrighted at death, which he said
present before his eyes, than if there had been no likelihood thereof at all.

Forthwith every one in the Chamber getting up to the top of the house, and
having found a window near the roof, saved themselves there; but the greater
part, who were beneath in the next room to the Admiral were flaire, others
miraculously escaped. In the mean while Cosseins having made his way caused
certain Switzers of the D. of Anjous guard to enter into the house.

Be^^ne, Cosse^es, (...), with their Targets in one hand, and their naked (...)
in the other, broke open the Admirals chamber (...), and (...) (which was
afterward (...) himself by one Bertoville upon the way, after he (...)
escaped out of prison) coming (...) the Admiral, holding the (...) of his
(...) to his breast, said (...), Art not thou the Admiral? I am the man, said
he, with an (...), as the murderers afterward confessed. Then beholding the
(...) sword; Young man, said the Admiral, thou ought somewhat to respect my
years, and my infirmity of body, but it is not thou that can shorten my
days. Be^^^^ de^^erately thrust the Admiral into the body with his sword, and
than ^^ote him therewith on the head: the rest had every one a blow at The
Admiral wounded to death.
him; so as he presently fell down wounded to death.

Whilst this mischief was in act^^^, the Duke of Gu^e being ba^ow in the
(...), with other Ro^^sh Catholic Lords, (...) therer above, Besine have thou
done? It is done, says he. Then the Duke replied, (...), our knight ((...))
will not believe it unless (...) it with his eyes; throw him down out of the
window.

Then Besine and (...), (...) up the body of the Admiral, cast him down unto
(...), (...) he lay naked on the (...), (...) to all sort of (...) and (...) of
the multitude, (...) pling ^n him with their feet. (...) because the blow which
Bes^^^ (...) given the Admiral on his head, had so covered his face with blood
(...)thence, that his visage could not be discerned, the Duke of Gulf stoop^^g
(...) took his handkerchiefe, and wiping his face therewith said, It is he, I
know him well enouth; and giving this poor dead body a spurn on the head with
his foot (whom all the murderers in France feared whilst he lived) he passed
thence, encouraging his soldiers, saying, We have made a good beginning; now
let us go on to the rest, for the King has so commarded, the King has so
commanded, repeating it over twice.

An Italian of the Duke of (...) off the Admiralls (...), and (...) ^ sent to
Rome to the Pppe, and to the (...) The admirals head sent to Rome.
of Lor^^^, (...) that time, The (...) people on the (...) off his (...) and
(...) in this (...) being (...) up (...) ^^^^^nels throughout the streets, he
was at (...) of the (...) to (...) where they (...) him by the (...) some (...)
were well (...), (...) ^ body of the Admiral; ^he which they (...), that do
she (...) what (...) they could nver find it out, but (...), ^o as they were
^aine to (...) a (...) of (...), and hung that up in stead of the body it self,
rather than none at all.

Here, as in fittest place is briefly related the sentence which the Court of
Parliament in Paris denounced against Gasper
1 FIrst, That for his conspiracy practiced against the King and the State in
the year 1572, the said Court has condemned him of high treason.

2 That his memory shall be utterly rased

3 If his body or any figure thereof shall be taken, that the same shall be
first drawn upon a hurdle to the place called Le Grene, and there hanged upon
a Gibbet by the Executioner.

4 After which, a Gibbet shall be set up at Mountfaucon, and he there to be
hanged up in the most eminent place thereof.

5 His annes and armor to be drawn at an horse tail through the streets of
the said City of Paris, and other Cities where they should be

6 All his goods and possessions to be forfeited to the Kings use.

7 All his children to be pronounced ignoble, as also held unworthy and
incapable of any honor or dignities whatsoever.

8 His house and castle of Chastillon upon the

9 Then in the said place this sentence shall be set up engraven in brass.

10 Lastly, that on the four and twentieth of August, 1572, general
processions be made through the City of Paris, by way of thanksgiving to God for
this punishment inflicted upon the conspirator.

Pronounced and executed in Paris, the seven and twentieth, and nine and
twentieth of October, Anno 1572. Sign, Malon.

At Rome solemn masses were sung, and thanks Great joy at Rome for these
sorrowful events.
rendered to God for the good success which the Roman Catholics had obsained
in massacring the Huguenots. At night, in token of joy and gladned, were made
many great bonfires in sundry places: And, as the report went, the Cardinal of
Lorraine gave a thousand Crowns to him that brought this desired news unto
him. Touching whose death I will here insert that which I find written of it.

The Cardinal of Lorraine, a principal pillar A note touching the manner of
the Cardinal of Lorrains Death.
in the house of Guise, a crafty and cruel persecutor of the reformed
churches, soon after the reign of Henry the third, brother of Charles the
ninth, in the year 1574, died at Avignon frantique; at the hour of whose
death there happened such a horrible tempest in the air, that all stood amassed
at it. The people observing how it fell out in one of the chief Cities where
Popery bare the sway, thought it the more remarkable; not sticking to say, that
this wise worldling, who had enriched himself beyond measure by execcrable
practices, received now in the prime of his youth, and in the top of his hopes,
the just reward of all his wicked proceedings; it being not possible, that a
soul so replenished with iniquity could depart quietly.

But those of the Religion added, That in this his so sudden departure shined
the wonderful providence of God, in that one of the Popes great supporters,
coming to Avignon with a purpose to arm the King of France and Polonia
against the Christian assemblies (out of a vain confidence thinking, that at
his only word and threat the Prince would be persuaded to overthrow all) it
should fall out so contrary to his expectation, that the master builder and
upholder of violent and bloody counsels must now in the midst of his triumphs
come to so fearful and miserable an end: That he, who bent all his wits to
cross the counsel and wisdom of God, should at an instant in this City be
smitten with frenzy. To give warning to all, that there is no wisdom or
counsel against the Lord; who blasteth the ripest wits when they dare to
oppose him there with. But now to return again to the matter where we left.

The same day that the Admiral was hurt, the King advised the King of Navarre,
his brother in law, to lodge in his chamber, with ten or twelve of his
trustiest servants, to protect him from the designs of the Duke of Guise, whom
he called an unhappy boy.

The Admiral as it seems somewhat before his death made his will, in which
he gave the king counsel, that he should not give his brethren over great
portions. The Queen Mother hearing this, and reading the same to the Duke of
Alencon the Kings brother; Now you see, says she, the heart of your friend the
Admiral, whom you so much loved and respected.

The Duke answered, I know not how much he loved me, but I well perceive by
this how much he loved the King.

The English Ambassador made almost the like The Admiral a loving and loyal
servant to his Prince and Country.
answer when the said Queen told him, How the Admiral had advised the King
not to trust the English too far.

Indeed Madam, says he, hereby it appeared that though he bare but little good
will to the English, yet he manifested himself a loyal servant to the Crown
of France.

The Sieur de Brion, Governor of the little Brion governor to the Prince of
Condes son massacred.
Marquess Conde, son to the late Prince of Conde, hearing these stirs,
taking his little master even in his shirt, thinking to convey him somewhere
out of the way, met these murderers, who plucking from him the said young
prince, massacred the old man in his presence, whilst the Prince with tears
entreated them to spare his Governor. But they died his white hairs in his
own blood, and then barbarously dragged him through the mire.

This Sunday morning all that were popishly Ten thousand massacred within three
dates in the City of Paris, etc.
affected took liberty to kill and spoil; if being credibly reported, That
the number of the slain that day and two other days following, in the City of
Paris, and in the Suburbs, did amount to above ten thousand, counting Lords,
Gentlemen, Presidents, Counselors, Advocates, Lawyers, Scholars, Physicians,
Merchants, Tradesmen, Women, Maids, and Children. The streets were covered with
dead bodies, the river was died with blood, the gates and entrance into the
Kings palace painted with the same color: but the bloodthirsty were not yet
satisfied.

But going from house to house with their associats Anno 1569.
where they thought to find any Huguenots, they brake open the doors, then
cruelly murdered whomsoever they met, sparing neither sex nor age. The
pretense was this: Report was raised there that a treason of the Huguenots was
discovered, who had conspired to kill the King, his Mother, and his brethren,
having already killed fifteen of the guard.
Carts were laden with dead bodies of young maidens, women, men and children,
which were discharged into the river, covered in a manner all over with the
slain, and dyed red with their blood, which also streamed down the streets from
sudry parts thereof, whereat the Courtezans laughed their fill,

This with some others which follow, belonging to this History, because they
could not be omitted, are here under inserted.
TO begin then with Monsieur Pierre de la Place President of the Court of
Requests, whose story we will relate somewhat at large, because his singular
piety requires the same. On Sunday morning about six of the clock, one called
Captain Michael, harquebusier of the king, came

This Captain being armed, having a harquebuse This was a token by which the
murderers were distinguished form others.
on his shoulder, ap^stoll at his girdle, and his handkerchiefe tied about his
left arm, presenting himself before the said De la Place, the first words he
spoke were, that the Duke of Guise had slain the Admiral by the Kings
appointment, with many Huguenots besides: and because the rest of them of what
quality soever were destinated to

To this the Captain blaspheming answered,

After this, de la Place being refused at three several houses was constrained
to retire back again into his own, where he found his wife very pensive and
grieved beyond measure, fearing lest this Captain in the end would cast her
son in law and daughter into the river, as also for the imminent danger
wherein her dear husband and

But the said Lord de la Place, being strengthened by the spirit of God with
incredible constancy in the inner man, sharply rebuked her; and afterward
mildely demonstrated unto her, that we must receive these and the like
afflictions from the hand of God; and so having discoursed a while upon the
promises of God comforted her.

Then he commanded such servants and maids as remained in the house to be
called togeher; who being come into his Chamber; according to his custom on
the Lords days, he made a form of exhortation to his family: then went to
prayer, and began to read a Chapter out of the book of Job, with the
exposition or sermon of Master John Calvin upon it. So having spoken somewhat
of Gods mercy and justice, which as a good and wise father uses to exercise
his elect with sundry chastisements, lest they should be entangled here below
with the things of this World, he showed how needful afflictions were for
Christians, and that it was beyond the power of Satan or men to hurt or wrong
them, unless the Lord of his good pleasure gave them leave. What need have we
then, said he, to dread their authority, which at the most can but prevail
over our bodies? Then he went to prayer again, preparing himself and his
whole family rather to endure all sorts of torments, yea death it self, than
to speak or do ought that might tend to the dishonor of God.

Having finished his prayer, word was brought him, that Senecay the Provost
Marihall with many archers were at the door of his lodging, commanding the
same to be opened in the Kings name, saying that he came to secure the person
of the Lord de la Place, and to preserve his house from being pillaged by the
common sort. The Lord de la Place having intelligence of this speech commanded
the door to be opened to him, who entering in declared the great slaughter that
was made upon the Huguenots every where in the city by the Kings command;
adding this withal in Latin, that he would not suffer one to live, Qui mingat
ad Parietem. Yet have I express charge from his Majesty, says he, to see that
you shall sustain no wrong, but only conduct you to the Louvre, because the
King is desirous to be informed touching many things about the affairs of those
of the Religion, which he has now in hand, and therefore willed him to make
himself ready to go to his Majesty. The Lord de la Place answered, That he
always thought himself happy before he left this life, to gain any
opportunity by which he might render an account to his Majesty of his
behavior and actions.

But in regard such horrible Massacres were every where committed, it was
impossible for him to pass to the Louvre, without the certain danger of his
person; praying him to assure his Majesty of his willingness to come, the
whilst leaving in his lodging as many Archers as he thought fitting, until
the fury of the^ people was somewhat pacified. The Provost agreed to his
request, and left with him one of his Lieutenants called Toute Voye, with some
four of his archers.

Not long after comes into his lodging Prestdent Charron, then provost of the
merchants, with whom conferring a little in secret, going his way he left with
the four archers which were there before, four more of the city archers. The
whole night following was spent in stopping up and fortifying of all passages
from entering the house, with logs and provision of Flint-stones, damming up the
windows, so as if seemed by this so exact and diligent a defense, the archers
were left in the house, to free the said de la Place and all his family from
the common calamity, till Senecay, returning the next day after two of the
clock in the afternoon, declared that he had express charge from the King
to bring him to his Majesty without delay. He replied as before, that it was
dangerous as yet to pass through the City, in regard that even the same
morning there was an house pillaged next to his.

Seneca on the contrary insisted, saying, it was Anno 1572.
the common speech of these Huguenotes to protest that they were the Kings most
loyal and obedient subjects and servants; but when they were to manifest their
obedience to his commands, then they came off but slowly, seeming rather much
to abhor and detest it. And whereas he pretended danger, Seneca answered, that
he should have a Captain of Paris who was well known to the people, to
accompany him As Senecaco^tinued this speech,

Then his wife (though otherwise a very gracious and good Lady) out of that
entire love which she bare to her husband, prostrated her self at the feet of
the said Seneca, beseeching and entreating him to accompany her husband to the
King. But the said De la place, who never showed any sign of a dejected
spirit, came to his wife, took her up from the ground, rebuked her, and De la
Place addresseth himself to go to the King.
King, resolving upon death, which he saw he could not avoid, he took his
cloak, embracing his wife, earnestly wishing her above all things to have the
fear of God and his honor in precious esteem, and then went on his way
boldly. Coming into the street where the glasse-house is, over He is first
murdered, ^ then thrown into the river.
in the afternoon, as an innocent lamb in the midst of ten or twelve of
Senecas Archers, who led him into that butchery: and then pillaged and
embezeled away what they found in his lodging for the space of five or six
days together. His body (whose soul was now received into heaven) being
carried into a stable, and covering his face

Peter Ramus the Kings professor in Logic, Peter Ramus massacred, and
afterward disgracefully handled.
a man renowned among the learned, was not forgotten. He had many enemies;
among other, one called James Carpenter, who sent the murderers to the
College of Priests, where the said Ramus was hidden. But being discovered, he
offered a good sum of money to save his life; yet was he massacred, and cast
down out of an high Chamber window to the ground, so as his bowels

I do here, says the Historian, forbear to write what cruelties were
exercised in this foresaid City of Paris, on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, and the
days following; because in such confusions, those that survived had little
leisure to think upon the murders committed in their presence, to observe
every particular; I content my self therefore to say in a word, that no man
living in Paris, taking notice what was done there this Saint Bartholomewes day
etc. but will aver that there was never seen, heard nor read of, such
perfidious ^^sloyalties, strange ravishments, more then br^^^^^ruelties,
audacious robberies, execrable blas^^^^^es, as those that were committed in
these few ^^^es; wherein it was safe for one to be any thing, rather then an
honest man.

Of a young man who preferred his Mothers safety in these broyls before his own.
A Young man about the age of two and thirty years, a sincere Christian, and
excellently well learned above many of his age and time, going early abroad
this Sunday morning upon some special occasion, returning home, and perceiving
what a strange rumor there was concerning the death of the Admiral throughout
the City of Parts, he out of his singular and childelike affection to his
Mother, hastened to her with all possible speed, informing her what had
happened, and so wrought for her, without delay, not regarding his own safety,
that he secured her in a place, as you would say, fitted for the purpose. After
which himself being found alone shut up in his study at prayer, to which
exercise he had long before devoted himself; The furious Massacrers on that
part of the City asked him if he would obey the King, he answered, yes, but I
must also obey God.

Then they began presently with battle axes and staves to load him with blows
on the head, that he received his own blood into his hands; and then making an
end of him, they threw him into the river.

Two Ministers massacred.
TWo Ministers appertaining to the King of Navarre, the one called More, the
other Desgoris, fell also into the hand of these murderers, who killing them,
cast them into the water. I cannot learn, says the historiographer, by
report, that any more Ministers were slain at this time, then these two. At the
writing hereof many were living, who labored in the work of the Lord, in the
Church of Paris, and were also miraculously preserved.

Aninhumane Cruelty.
PHilip le Doux a great Ieweller, at his return home from Guybray saire, being
gone to bed, his wife at that time had the midwife attending upon her, being
ready to be delivered: she hearing these furies below bouncing at the door,
commanding it to be opened to them in the Kings name, as till as she was,
adventured to go down, and opened the same to these tigers, who presently
stabbed her husband in his bed. The midwife seeing them bent to murder the
woman also, now ready to lie down, instantly entreated them to tarry, at least
so long till the infant (which would be the 20. Child that God had given her)
was borne. Having contested some while with them, they took this poor woman
half dead with fear, and thrust her into the sundament with a dagger to the
very hilts. She finding her self mortally wounded, and yet desirous to bring
forth A barbarous cruelty.
her fruit, fled into a corne-loft; whither they pursued her, giving her
another stabbe into the belly with a dagger, and then cast her out of a window
next to the street; upon which fall the child came forth of her body, the
head foremost, gaping or yawning, to the great astonishment and confusion of the
Papists, who were constrained often with

Behold here another.
ONE of the Massacrers having snatched up a Whatiron heart would not have been
moved to compassion herewith.
little child in his arms, the poor ba^^ began to play with his beard, and
to smile upon

To proceed on further and fully to relate all the tragical acts committed in
this Massacre at Paris, to set down the thundrings of Guns and Pistols, the
lamentable voices and outcries of the slain, the roarings and horrible
blasphemies belched

Not to stay the Reader therefore any longer in this, having many things of the
like nature to present unto thy view, we will pass from the dolorous City of
Paris to other cities in France, and set before thee as in a glass a company
of horrible and rufull spectacles.

Massacres committed upon those of the Religion, at Meaux in Brie.
LEt us begin then with those of Meaux in Brie, which is not above a days
journey from Paris.

The poor Protestants in this City were destinated There was a roul^ drawn
where the massacre should begin, continus, and end.
to drink of this cup of Martyrdom after their brethren and sisters in the
aforesaid City of Paris. Therefore on the same Sunday the four and twentieth
of August, about four of the clock in the afternoon, a post was sent to Meaux
with letters, accompanied with a seditious fellow called le Froid. Being come
thither, the Packet was presented to Monsleur Lovis Cosset, the This Cosset was
then branded for notorious villainies, and a misshapenfellow.
Kings Attorney there. Upon the receipt whereof,

The time prefixed being come, which was about supper time, the gates were
shut, and then

On the next day, which was Monday, about three of the clock in the morning,
these good Catholics began to pillage the houses of the Protestants, of the
best things they had, which continued till eight of the clock, their trading
liked them so well. But the principal of all the spotles were conveyed into
the Court and house of this noble Attorney Cosset; yet these were only the
beginnings of sorrows.

For after robbing and spotling they fell to shut them up in prisons: which
being filled, the massacrers having Cosset for their Captain (who usually
carried in each hand a Pistol ready to discharge) went into the said prison on
Tuesday the six and twentieth of August, about five or six of the clock at
night, with swords, daggers, and butchers knives.

Nigh to this prison there was a great Court, enclosed on every side with walls
and a very strong Gate. In a corner whereof is a large pair of winding
stairs, containing five and twenty, or thirty steps, by which they go up to
the Judgment Hall to the Seat of Justice. Into this Court were the murderers
assembled; which done, Cosset went up into his seat. Then they had a scroule or
bill containing the names of the prisoners there imprisoned, who were called
over one by one to the number of two hundred and upwards, as some of the
murderers themselves have since reported, when as they impudently made their
brags of these their horrible impieties and injustices.

Then the Attorney laughing began to call for the first man named in the bill;
who being brought forth, and seeing naked swords before him, falling down and
craving forgiveness of his sins at the hands of God, was suddenly butchered by
five or six.

One Quintin Croyer, an Eiver of the reformed Church, being called forth, and
seeing many of his companions massacred before his eyes, kneeled down, praying
God to pardon thesee murderers; at which prayer they fell a laughing, and not
being able with their daggers to pierce a Ierkin of double Busse which he ware,
and which they were loath to spoil, (for it was a good booty) they cut asunder
the points, and then gave him five or six ftabs with a dagger into his body;
and so this good man wounded to death, calling upon God, rendered up his spirit
into the hands of him that gave it.

Faron Haren, a man zealously asserted to religion, who had been Sheriff of
the City in the first troubles, having by his endeavors chased the Mass out
of Meaux, for a time was mortally hated of these seditious Papists; and
therefore they were not contented simply to kill him, but first cut off his
nose, ears, and secret parts, then giving him many small thrusts into diverse
parts of the body, they constrained him to and fro among them, as if he had
gone through the pikes. But being weakened, and not able any longer to hold out,
in regard of the blood that issued from all the parts of his body, he fell with
his face to the ground, and instantly calling upon the name of the Lord,
received infinite gashes and wounds after he was dead.

By this time it grew late; therefore these bloodsuckers, having almost wearied
themselves in worrying these poor lambs and sheep of Christ, deferred the
execution of the rest till after supper, as well to take some breathing and
refection, as also to murder the residue with the greater alacrity. For in as
much as the blood of the slain shined yet upon the swords and arms of the
murderers (their sleeves being tucked up) which something hindered their
proceeding; after they had drink wine their still, they meant to return and
make themselves drank with blood also; which that they might shed the more
freely, they took with them Butchers great axes wherewith they smite down
their Oxen, and in the presence of this honest Attorney felled these poor
prisoners one after another; who called upon God, and crying so loud for mercy,
that all the City in a manner rung thereof. This massacre lasted from nine of
the Clock at night till it was midnight. And for as much as there yet remained
many prisoners alive; they deferred this their bloody business till the next
day.

But this may suffice to have been said as touching this massacre at Meaux in
Brie; pass we on now to the City of Troys in Champaigne, and there take
notice, as it were by the way, what

Persecution of the Faithful at Troys in Champaigne.
News coming to Troys of the Massacre executed at Paris, the greater part of
the Judges and Officers of the King were sent to the

In this city there was a Merchant called Peter Belin, a man of a turbulent
nature. This Belin was at the massacre in Paris on S. Bartholomews day; from
whence he was sent with Letters from the King dated the eight and twentieth of
August, to the Mayor and Sheriffs of

But at the first entrance into the City, he began to enquire, that all might
hear him, whether they had not executed the Huguenots there as

Yet he showing himself more just and humane than the rest, peremptorily
refused to have his hand in an act tending to so great cruelty; answering, that
it was contrary to his office to execute any man before sentence of death had
first been pronounced by the Magistrate. If they had such

Now albeit this answer, proceeding from such a kind of person whose office
and custom it was to shed blood, might somewhat have assuaged and taken off
the edge of the most barbarous Tiger in the world; yet the Bailiffe sleighting
it, was the further enraged. Upon this he sent for

The Bailiffe telling him at large what Belin had signified to him in private;
as also, that on a sudden all the prisoners of the Religion must be put to
death, that so the place might be purged of them: This (he said) you must not
fail to do. But (said the Bailiffe) that the blood may not run into the
streets, you shall cause a trench to be dug in the midst of the prison;
and at the two ends thereof set certain vessels to receive the same.

But this de Bures for some considerations, as namely thinking the Kings
Letters (whereof he had had some intelligence) might be proclauned, made no
have to perform his charge, acquainting no man with ought that had passed
between the Bafliffe and him; no not Perennet the Keeper, who then lay sick in
his bed.

The next day, being Tuesday, which was the fourth of September, the Bailiffe
came into the prison about seven or eight of the Clock, and calling for
Perennet asked of him with a smile, Perennet, is it done? Perennet, knowing
nothing either more or less, asked of him what? Then says the Bailiffe, Why,
are not the Prisoners dispatched? and thereupon was ready with his dagger to
have stabbed him. But coming a little better to himself, he told Perennet
what his purpose was, and now he was to behave himself concerning the
execution thereof; willing him by all means not to forget to make the said
Trench. At which words this Perennet standing amassed, though otherwise he was a
fellow forward enough of himself to commit any outrages against the
Protestants, certified the Bailiffe, that such an inhumane act could not be
committed over to him, fearing lest in time to come Justice might be followed
against him by the Parents or Allies of the Prisoners. No no, said the
Bailiffe, fear not, I will stand between you and all harms. Others of the
Justices have consented thereto besides my self, and would you have better
security than that?

Within a while after, the Iaylor coming into the court of the prison, where
the prisoners were abroad recreating themselves, caused every one to resort to
his cabin or hole, because, said he, the Bailiffe will come by and by, to see
whether the Keepers have done as he commanded them: which they did. Then began
these poor sheep to fear they were destinated to the slaughter, and therefore
went presently to prayer. Perennet instantly called his companions about him,
reporting to them what the Bailiffe had given him in charge. Then they all
took an oath to execute the same; but approaching nigh to the Prisoners, they
were so surprised with fear, and their hearts so failed them, that they stood
gasing one upon another, having no courage to act such a barbarous cruelty: and
so returned to the Iaylors lodge, whence they came, without doing any thing.

But in stead of laying this to heart, as an advertisement and warning piece
sent them from above; as if of set purpose they meant to resist against the
checks of their own consciences, and so kick against the pricks, they sent to
the Tavern for sixteen pints of the best wine, Troys measure, with sheep
tongues, and other viands, and intoxicating their brains with wine, they drew
a list or Catalogue of all the prisoners; which they delivered to Nicholas
Martin, one of their Confederates, who was to call them forth as he saw their
names set down in the scroule; and thus as they came forth they massacred them.

Ludot one of the prisoners, being called forth as his turn came, presented
himself before them with a cheerful countenance, calling upon the name of
the Lord. Now as he was to receive the stroke of death from these desperate
blood-spillers, he prayed them to forbear him a little, till he had put off
his doublet, being oiletted, which he was wont to put on when any tumult grew
in the City: and having himself unlaced it, presenting his naked breast unto
them, he received the blow, and Anno 1569.
fell down dead.

But poor Meurs escaped not so good cheap; for his turn being come, he was
no sooner in their sight, but one of them let drive at him with the point of
his Halbert, redoubling the same often to have killed him, yet could not. The
poor man seeing himself thus dealt withal by the Caitiffe, and no end made,
took hold with his hands on the point of the halbert, and himself pointing
Here, soldier, here, right at the heart, right at the heart, and so finished
this life.

Howsoever in this massacre these two formerly mentioned are for brevities sake
only named, yet by that which immediately follows you may perceive they were
not a few who suffered in this tragedy.

The Massacre (says my Author) being ended,

This was presently noised through the City, insomuch as some went to inform
the lieutenant and bailiffe thereof. But what? it was as if they had run to the
Wolves to tell them the Sheep were devoured.

Whilst this so savage a cruelty was committed in the prison, one Bartholmew
Carlet a Cooper, prisoner there for debt (who of all the troop

The next day after, which was the fifth of September, this worshipful
Bailiffe of Troys, that he might apply the plaster when the parties were dead,
causes the Kings Letters, which he had received the thirtieth of the month of
August

Of the massacre at Orleance.
IT now remains that we proceed unto the City of Orleance, and to take notice
whether the papists there were less cruel than those of Paris. But, says the
Historian, when I call to mind what has been the report of those that were
present at that time in Orleance, it causes the hair to stand upright on my
head. Yet for as much as it is convenient that posterities to come may be
acquainted with the fury of these monsters in nature, we will commit that to
writing whereof we have credibly been informed.

On Saturday, the three and twentieth of August, Letters were sent from the
King to Orleance, unto Sieur de la Renic President of Diion, to prevent all
disorders, murders, etc. With command, that he should advertise the Citizens,
how the Admiral was hurt, as also to assure those of the religion, that ere
long such justice should be executed on the actors, as all France should take
warning thereby not to enterprise the like.

This was carefully performed by the said Sieur de la Renic the same day; who
caused those of the best rank of both religions to be present at the publishing
of the Kings mind. The faithful thinking themselves secure, were quiet, and
on the Sabbath day assembled in the place appointed for their meeting, to the
number of 300. persons, men, women, and children.

But on the same day toward night came a new order to the Justices, Mayor, and
Sheriffs of the said City, by which they were enjoined to be up in arms, and
to gather to them what strength they could; with express charge to make havoc
of those of the Religion. To this purpose the Captains of twelve companies
were appointed to be the leaders to the rest, divided into eight and forty
squadrons.

The cruel massacre of Dechampeaux a worthy Counselor in the City of
Orleance, by a wretched Villain his neighbor.
ONe of these blood-suckers called Texier came with a small troop to a
Counselors house of Orleance, whose name was Dechampeaux Lord of Bonilli,
bidding himself and his company to supper with him. Dechampeaux bid them all
kindly welcome, making them good cheer, being ignorant of that which had
happened at Paris. But supper being ended, and all of them being risen from the
table, Texier bad him deliver his purse. Dechampeaux laughing thereat, thinking
that he had been but in jest, this cruel and unthankful guest with
blasphemous oaths told in few words what had happened in the City of Paris, and
what preparation there was among the Roman Catholics of Orleance, to cut off
and root out the Protestants there. Dechampeaux seeing there was no time now to
contest with him, gave money to this thief: who, to requite the courtesy and
good entertainment he had had, embrued his honds in the blood of his host and
neighbor, a man A cruel and unthankful guest.
of as good and upright a carriage as was in all the City, and afterward
himself with his troop pillaged the whole house.

The six and twentieth day of August following the massacrers began the
execution about the ramparts, after such a strange manner; as he that had but
a spark of humanity left in him, out of compassion would be moved to abhor
and detest {Anno 1572.}
it. In these quarters there inhabited many of the Religion. All the night long
was heard nothing but shooting off of Guns and Pistols, forceing open of doors
and windows, fearful outcryes of the massacred, both of men, women, and
little children, trampling of horses, and rumbling of carts, hurrying of dead
bodies to and fro; the street s^rarming with unwonted exclamations of those of
the common sort, with horrible blasphemies So all must go to wr^ck.
all, and then take the spoil; others, spoil not, but kill all.

On Wednesday the massacre began more fiercely, and so continued to the end of
the week, These were miserable comforters.
not sparing to break these and the like jests upon the poor massacred: Where
is now your God? What is become of all your prayers, and Psalms now? Let your
God, whom you called upon, save you if he can. Yea some of them, who in times
past had been professors of the same Religion, whilst they were massacring the
poor innocents; durst sing unto them in scorn the beginning of the three and
fortieth psalm: Which in the French meeter runs, Revenge moy pren le quarrelle
de moy, Judge me O God, and plead my cause. Others striking them said, sing
now, Miserecorde aupaure vicieux, Have mercy on me O God, which language they
used to this poor people in Paris,

Touching the multitude of the slain, the murderers did not stick to vaunt
that in this City they caused more than twelve thousand men to perish: Also an
hundred and fifty women, with a great number of Children of nine year old and
upward. But as some of themselves have since reported, there were eighteen
thousand murdered,

On Tuesday at night certain of this bloody crew came and knocked at the door
of one that The f^rce of servent prayer
must die. Whereupon he fell to prayer, and that with such constancy and
affection, that the massacrers being astonished, and by a secret celestial
power restratned, contented themselves only

The day following certain Scholars resorting to his lodging, requested of
him that they might see his Library, into which having brought them, one asked
this book of him, and another another, the which he willingly gave them. At
length they told him they were not as yet satisfied, their purpose being to
kill him. He prostrating himself upon

A rich Burgess of the City called Nicholas Bougars Sieur de Nove, a man of
singular worth, and highly esteemed of all, was at that time deadly sick. Some
of the murderers came into his Chamber with a purpose to kill him; but seeing
him in that case spared him: yet finding there Noel Chaperon, an Apothecary who
brought him Physic, they cut off one of his arms, then drew him into the open
place, where they made an end of him.

The next day there came one to the lodging of him that was sick, who was wont
heretofore to visit him. Nowas he was entering in, he met the mother of the sick
party at the door going unto Mass, and coming up into the Chamber he stabbed
the said sick man with a dagger in many places, and so killed a dying man. Then
with all sil^nce, as if he had done no such act, wiping his dagger, he went
down the stairs again, and meeting one at the door who came to visit him that
was sick, this fellow saluting him passed along by him, without any change
either in his behavior or countenance.

A Cook, having hid himself three whole days, was enforced for hunger to come
forth, for lack of meat. But whilst he went about to escape one death, he fell
into the talents of these Lions, who devoured him, and that forthwith.

Francis Stample a rich M^rchant was threatened to have his throat cut
presently, if he gave not the murderers money: but having none about him, being
taken by them out of his house, calling for pen and ink he wrote a letter to
his wife, willing her forthwith to send him his ransom: he had no sooner
sealed the letter, but the murderers deprired him thereof and his life
together, laughing at that they had done. And though they got from his widow a
round sum^ne of money, yet could she not obtain at their hands the body of her
dead husband.

But to fill up the measure of the popelings cruelty, that those of the
religion might taste thereof to the utmost, the Papists were not content to be
massacrers themselves, but constrained such of the Protestants as through fear
had revolted, to play the murderers also. Thus placing these wicked revolters
into the forefront of their companies, and arming them with weapons fit for the
purpose, they pressed them to march on before, and to give the first onset,
crying to them, Smile them, smite them; are they not of your brethren and holy
sisters? And if they refused to do as they were commanded, their turns were
like to be next.

The Massacres committed at Bourges and la Chanite, are the rather passedover
in silence, because the history requires at this time to touch only upon such
things as are most remarkable, and shall after follow.
YEt one thing ought not to be forgotten which fell out in the City last
mentioned. There was ^re John Sarrazin of the age of seventy years and above,
who for a long time had exercised the office of a Deacon in the reformed
Church; the which he so faithfully performed, that he was esteemed a father of
the poor. This good old father was set upon on Tuesday night in his own house
the fourth of September, 1572. and laid at with swords by these furious
murderers: who with a venerable and smiling countenance looking upon them,
said, my friends, what will ye do with me? have I ever offended any of you?
And if I have, let him speak. But nothing could any whit prevail

The poor man seeing himself thus wounded, and perceiving who had done it,
said, Ah Godson, do you use me thus? I never hurt you, but have

The horrible Massacre of the faithful
ON Wednesday the seven and twentieth of August in the year 1572. about six
of the clock in the morning, Sieur Mandolet governor of Lions was advertised
of the Massacre at Paris; and within an hour and an half after, a soldier
passing through the streets made it known to the people, that the Admiral,
and all the Protestant Huguenots he called them.
the City were shut, and guards of soldiers placed here and there.

But lest those of the Religion should be moved with such an unwonted and an
unexpected shutting in of the gates (as in the time of open war) the Roman
Catholics caused it to be bruited that all was done to secure the
Protestants, To which report some gave too much credit (for beside the ordinary
guard of the governor, and that of

The day following, notwithstanding all these fair shows, they evidently
perceived that their lives were at the mercy of the Papists, who had sucked the
blood of many of them in the first troubles. For albeit they found no more
passage for them out of the City then they did the day precedent, they might
not now either freely go out or

On Friday after there was a Proclamation with sound of trumpets in all the
chief places of the City, the sum of which was this, that those of the
Religion were to appear before the governor at his house, there to be
informed what the Kings pleasure was concerning them. The greater part, being
but too credulous, feared not to make their appearance at the place assigned,
whence soon after they were committed to sundry prisons. The night following
there were heard from all parts of the City lamentable cries and shreekings,
not only of such as were massacred in their houses, but of others half
wounded to death whom they haled to the river.

From that time forwards there were such murders and outrages committed,
throughout the City, that it seemed hell was set open, and that Devils in the
likeness of men coming forth thence ran roaring to and fro in the streets.

On Sunday which was the last of this month of August, about eight of the
clock in the morning, the rest, who were left unmassacred the Friday before,
were made an end of then.

About one of the clock the same day, commandment was given, that under every
Ancient twenty five armed men with twelve Porters should be gathered to conduct
them to Saint Georges gate, which is by the Archbishops house, in which were
more then three hundred and fifty prisoners; in which place the great Massacre
was to be executed. The ^eyes of the Archbishops house, wherein so many
prisoners were enclosed, were delivered unto this bloody crew; who joyfully
offered themselves to perform so horrible a business; The which the ordinary
executioner refused, and common Soldiers abhorred to undertake, when the same
was first propounded unto them; they answering peremptorily they would never
do it.

The first alleged, that if according to the course of Justice sentence of
death had been denounced against them, he knew what he had to do; but for this
their purpose he told them he thought they might have but too many executioners
in the City to satisfy their desire. The soldiers answered, they thought it
more then inhumane, to cut the throats of such as never offended them. But if
the prisoners had made any Insurrection or sedition in the City, they then
might have some color of reason to do it; otherwise they meant not to stain
the honor of their profession (which is accompanied with nobleness of spirit)
with so villainous an act, more besitting butchers then soldiers.

But Mandelot and his accomplices were not so scrupulous; for within three
hours after, Clou Captain of the Harquebusters of the City came with an
enraged troop, etc. the greater part whereof were furnished with short swords
and hangers.

As soon as Le Clou entered into the great Court, he gave the prisoners to
understand with a loud voice, that they must die; and turning him toward his
slaughter men, he said, on, on, go in, and to your work: but first he forgot
not to demand the prisoners purses for his booty, which when he pocketted up,
he gat him into a Gallery there, to satisfy his hellish lust in taking a view
of this rufull spectacle.

The murderers hegan to fall upon the poor prisoners with such barbarous
cruelty, hacking, and hewing them, in so furious a manner, that within less
than an hour they were all cut in pieces, not so much as one escaped their
hands. All these for the most part were massacred kneeling on their knees, and
lifting up their eyes and hands to God for mercy, whilst they had their hands
and fingers cut off.

The death and martyrdom of Francis le Bossu, a merchant, together with his
sons.
AMong all those who confessed the name of Jesus Christ, and gave their lives
for his truth, a certain Merchant of hats and caps called Francis le Bossu
well deserves to be set in the fore rank, with his two sons; for whilst he
trampled in the blood of his brethren, being besmeared therewith, and spiriting
as it were in his face; he encouraged his children to take their

When he saw the murderers come, he clasped his arms about his two sons,
and they likewise embraced their father, as if the father meant to be a buckler
to his children, and the children as if by the bond of nature (which binds them
to defend his life from whence they received it) they

Now after this furious assault, these impudent creatures went up and down the
City, showing their white doublets all besprinkled with blood; boasting, that
some had killed an hundred, some more, some less. Forthwith the great gates of
The Papists abhor their own cruelties
this so inhumane and cruel an act, That certainly they were not men, but
devils in the habit of men, that had done this.

The next morning which was Monday, the first of September, the remainder of
corpses, which were not cast into the water, were put into great

Now as the multitude were dragging them in thither, an Apothecary came and
informed them, that money might be made of the grease that was taken out of
their bodies. Then were the most corpulent bodies presently sought out, which
when they had ripped up, a great quantity of that commodity being gotten
thence, was sold by these Merchants for three shillings the pound. And then not
knowing how to wrecke their malice any further upon them, after many derisions
and scorns which the standers by, but especially the Italians, had done to
these poor despised carcasses, they were tumbled into a great pit, and the
rest thrown into the river.

Those of Daulphine, of Languedoc, and Provence were amassed to see so many
bodies floating upon the water, some dismembered, others fastened together with
long poles, others lying on the shore, some having their eyes put out, others
their noses, ears, and hands cut off, stabbed in with daggers in every part of
their bodies, so as some among them had no humane shape remaining. Yea, so
great a number of these mangled corpses presented themselves on the port of
Tournon, that the men and women of the place began to make an outcry, as if the
enemies had bin at their gates.

Not many months after, when all these bloody Tragedies were ended, the Pope
sent a Legate to the King, called Cardinal Vrsin. This Legate was received with
great solemnity at Lions, and the streets hung with tapestry. Now having heard
mass at Saint John's Church, and returning by the same door which he went in
at, the greatest number of the massacrers attended his coming there, and as he
passed by they all kneeled down for his absolution. But the Legate not knowing
the reason why they kneeled so before him, one of the principal agents
kneeling there amongst them, told the Legate that they were those The massacrers
absolved by the Popes Legate.
who had been the actors in the massacre. When the ^legate perceived that to be
the cause, he absolved them all with making the sign of the Cross.

Persecution at Angiers in France. Master John Mason, a learned Minister,
together with his wife and some others, Martyrs.
AS soon as the massacre was begun at Paris, A Protestant minister murchered
in his garden.
a Gentleman of Paris called Monsoreau obtained a Pasport with letters to
massacre those of the Religion at Anglers, Who, being disappointed of his prey
in one place, came to the lodging of a reverend and learned Minister called
Master John Mason, surnamed de Launay, Sieur of Riviere. Meeting his wife at
his entrance into the house, he saluted her and kissed her, as it is the manner
in France, especially among the Courtiers, and asked her where her husband was?
She answered him, that he was walking in his garden, and then directed him the
way unto him.

Monsoreau having lovingly embraced La Riviere, said unto him, Do you know
wherefore I am come? the King has commanded me to kill you forthwith, and has
given me express charge to do it, as you shall know by his letters. After
which words he showed him a pistol ready charged. Riviere reylyed, that he
knew not wherein he had offended the King; but seeing, says he, you seek my
life, give me a little leave to cry to God for mercy, and to recommend my
spirit into his hands.

Having made a short prayer, he willingly presented his body to the murderer,
who shot him in with his pistol, and so he died by and by.

Not long after the King sent Puygaillard, who drowned nine or ten, and amongst
other the wife of this Minister de la Riviere above named, who expressed a
singular constancy of faith even to her last breath.

This Minister and Martyr formerly mentioned, surnamed Launay, was the eldest
son of Sieur de Launay, a man exceeding rich and wealthy, but an obstinate
Papist. When as the old man observed how his son was inclined to be a professor
of the Gospel, he threatened to dismherit him unless he would abjure,
promising on the contrary to bestow great matters upon him, and to marry him
honorably,

Persecution at Rovan.
WHen the Massacrers began to play their parts in this City, they counseled
those of the religion to get themselves into the prisons, as into places of
greatest security from the fury and rage of the people. But such as followed
this advice,

Those who were murdered in the city in a few Six thousand massacred in few
days at the city of Rovan
days, some in their houses, and others in the prisons, amounted to six
thousand, besides more than fifty women, upon whom they exercised no less
cruelty than upon men.

Their names for brevities sake are here omitted. The dead bodies being piled
together were conveyed in tumbrils out of City, and thrown

A Note touching the shameful revolt
WIthin a mile of Paris there is a place where those of the Religion, which
dwelt thereabouts, were wont to assemble to hear Sermons, and to participate
of the Sacraments. Over this flock was Huges Sureau (called Du

Being in times past Minister at Orleance, he was discharged from thence, as
one of a contentious spirit, and given to affect novelties.

In process of time he came to be established the Minister of this foresaid
Church nigh unto Paris.

Hearing news of the Massacre, he fled with the rest for company. Being
apprehended, he began to waver, persuading many prisoners

The Judge who had him in bonds sent letters presently to Paris, to give notice
of his apprehension, as also of some apparent signs which gave him hope of the
Ministers conversion.

The King by and by sent for him; who being brought into his presence,
subscribed instantly to an abjuration with detestation of the Huguenots
profession, before the King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, maintained the
Romish Religion, consented thereto with the Sorbonists at that time there
present; against whom a few years before he had learnedly defended the truth.

In this abjuration he endeavored to confute many articles which were
maintained by Calvin and Beza against the Romish Religion. In these disputes,
this Minister being of a prompt wit, and having ability to express himself
well, handled the matter so cunningly, that the King of Navarre, the Princess
his sister, and the Princess of Conde so far yielded, that within five or six
days after they went to mass, and received absolution of the Cardinal of
Bourbon.

The points about which this Roster disputed were these, First, concerning the
marks of the Church; Secondly, of the Trinity of Persons; Thirdly, of the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ; Fourthly, of Christ's descent into hell; Fifthly,
of original sin; Sixthly, of the providence of God; Seventhly, of
predestination and reprobation; Eighthly, of man's free will, Ninthly, of
Justification; Tenthly, of succession; Eleventhly, of intercession of Saints;
Twelfthly, of the sacrifice of the mass; and lastly of Transubstantiation. The
Sorbonists caused this confession to be printed, to which the Ministers of the
reformed Religion would not vouchsafe an answer, knowing that he who made it
did it contrary to his own conscience, adding nothing thereto which had not
been confuted a thousand times.

All this upon his repentance he afterward revoked, as is to be seen by his
book printed here in London in the French tongue, in the year 1573, which
confession of his contrary to his abjuration I have in my custody.

Now touching the Prince of Conde, the King propounded to him three things,
either to go to mass, to die, or else perpetual prison: and therefore to
bethink himself well which of the three he liked best. The Prince answered as
it is reported, That by Gods grace he would never choose the first: as for the
two later he referred himself to the Kings pleasure.

A massacre at Toulouse in France.
ON Sunday which was the eight day after the massacre of Paris, about eight of
the clock in the morning, the chief of the Papists received advertisement of
that which had passed, with letters directing them what they were to do. Then
a Council was called, at the breaking up whereof the great gates of the City
were shut, only the wickets left open, at which there was set such to watch as
they thought fitting. Soon after it was noysed through all the City, that the
Lords and Gentlemen of the Religion were massacred at Paris. Which the
Protestants at Toulouse nothing, being gone forth about five of the clock in
the morning to hear the Sermon at Castanet, some thought it fit not to
return, but to resort to some other place: others resolved to go back
again, that they might take order about their affairs. These, being ill
advised, were suffered to enter in peaceably, leaving their swords and daggers
at the gate. At evening soldiers were placed Anno 1527.
here and there; but in regard many Counselors of the Religion were abroad
(that they might the better entrap them) the next day the gates were not so
carefully looked unto, but who would might come in, and go out at their
leisure, without being questioned at all. This who done to draw in the simple
people who wandered up and down the fields. The first president called Dasis, a
subtle headed man, sent to the Counselors abroad

Some of them were persuaded and returned; others casting some peril resolved
to retire to

On Wednesday next then, about ten of the clock in the morning, having
separated their

The three weeks being expired, they put all these prisoners together into the
Consciergery, which is a special prison. After which they began

On Saturday morning before the Sum was up, certain scholars who were night
walkers, Three hundred massacred in the City of Toulouse in France.
being only covered with a piece of paper. They were exposed to the view of
all for the spare of two days; whilst they dug great pits, whereinto the
corpses thus cruelly massacred were cast naked one upon another. The
Counselors whom they had imprisoned, after they were massacred, were hanged in
their long ^^^ones upon a great Elm which was in the Court of the Palace; and
in the mean while the houses of those of the Religion were sacked and pillaged.

Many among these, by reason of the barbarous cruelties used against their
Brethren, adjured daily. Now because the Sorbonists provided a form of
abjuration to that purpose, for saving the lives of such as recanted, it shall
not be impertinent to insert the same in this place; it being imprinted at
Paris by Nicholas Roffet.

The abjured minding to return into the lap of our holy Mother the Roman
Church, must present themselves first to their Parsons or Curats, to be
directed by them what they ought to do. Afterward to be sent thence to their
reverend Bishop and Diocesan, or his Official, to pronounce the said
adjuration in manner and form following.

The form of their Abjuration.
1 I Such a one of such a Diocese, and dwelling in such a place, acknowledge
by the grace of God the true Catholic and Apostolic Faith, from which I have
wilfully gone astray and separated my self; and now desiring to return into
the true Sheepsold, which is the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, I
do profess to have adjured, and here before you my superior do abjure and
detest all the Huguenote errors of Luther, Calvin, and all heresies whatsoever,
wherewith heretofore I have been infected and defamed, consenting now to the
doctrine of our holy Mother the Church, be seeching you in the name of God, and
of his son Jesus Christ, and of the glorious Virgin Mary his Mother, with all
the he saints and she saints in Paradise, that it will please you to receive me
into the fold of the Christian flock and people of God, who live under the
obedience of the Pope, ordained Christ's Vicar in the said Church, submitting my
self patiently to bear, and willingly to perform the penance you shall think
fit to impose upon me; absolving me from all my offenses committed whilst I
lived in such errors, for which I here ask pardon of God, of the said Church,
and of you my Pastor (set over me by God the Creator) to absolve me with such
penance as you shall judge to be availeable for the satisfaction of my sins and
offenses. And that it may be seen that from the heart I have made and do make
this abjuration.

2. I further confess, before God and you, that I believe all that is
contained in the Apostles, (...) and Nicene Creeds, with all the confessions of
faith besides, allowed and approved by the Councels of the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Roman Church, and so forth as it follows in th^^^ Creeds.

3. I also believe, acknowledge and confess whatsoever is contained in the old
and new Testament, approved by the said holy Catholic Apostolic Roman
church; according to the sense and interpretation of the holy Doctors, and by
them received rejecting wholly all other Interpretations as false and erroneous.

4 I acknowledge the seven Sacraments of the said Church to have been
instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, as necessary for the salvation of
mankind, although all of them are not of necessity to be conferred upon all;
namely, I acknowledge that the seven Sacraments be, Baptism, Confirmation, the
Eucharist, which is the holy Sacrament of the Altar, Penance extreme

5. I further acknowledge, that the holy mass is a Sacrifice and oblation of
the true body and blood of Jesus Christ, under the forms of bread

6. I acknowledge and confess the concomitance,

7. I confess that prayer to, and intercession of Saints for the living and
for the dead, is holy, good, and profitable for Christians, and in no sort
contrary to the honor of God.

8. That prayers made in the Church for the faithful departed are beneficient
for them, for the remission of sinss and mitigating of their pains

9. That there is a Purgatory, where the souls of such as are detained there
are relieved by the prayers of the faithful.

10. I confess that honor ought to be given to th Saints (...) with Christ in
heaven that they ought to be prayed to, and that they make intercession for us
to God, and that their relics ought to be worshipped.

11. That the commandments and traditions

12. I likewise believe and consent to all the Articles concerning original
sin and Justification.

13. I also steadfastly believe that the (...) or Christ, of his holy Mother,
and of all the Saints ought to be re^^^^^^ (...) the Church (...) the uses of
them are very profitable, and that they ought to be worshipped.

14. I confess that the power of (...) and pardons is left to the Church by
Jesus Christ and the use of them is greatly a^^^^^le; as also I acknowledge the
Church of Rome to be the (...) Mother of all Churches and that she has the
holy Ghost for her guide: and that all private and pretended inspirations ^ing
the same are of the Devil the (...), who would rent in sunder the ^^^^^^esse
Coat of Jesus Christ.

15. Lastly; I strictly promise to observe and keep whatsoever was decreed and
ordained by the last Council of Trent, and do promise before God and you;
never to depart from the Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church. And if I shall
(which God forbid) I submit me to the correction and Canons of the said Church,
made, decreed, and ordained against them which fall into Apostasse.

To which abjuration and confession I have subscribed with my hand, etc.

Some of those who for fear abjured afterward relented; others grew more and
more hardened; insomuch that in going often to Mass they took part with the
priests and murderers, as if they had never made any profession at all of the
truth.

Persecution at Boardeaux the third of October, 1572.
Soon after the massacre at Paris, tidings



Instantly thereupon there arrived at Bourdeaux the Lord of Montpesat from the
King, who at his first coming fained as if he meant to settle all things in
peace. Yet he wrought under hand in such wise with the Governor, that the
massacre was resolved of, to which he was solicited by a Jesuit called Edmund
Angier, who out of the pulpit used horribly and bitterly to thunder and

Many being terrified with these threats, as also by the entreaties of their
kindred, who set before fore them the imminent danger which hung over Anno 1572.
their heads, revolted and abjured. The said Sieur of Montpasset caused Master
William Blanck, an Advocate in the Court of Parliament, to be called before
him, who was counselor to him and to his father in law; exhorting and
persuading him to return to the unity of the Roman church.

Le Blanck answered, that he had sufficiently weighed and compared all things
together, before he took upon him the profession of that Religion

Montpessat hearing this, rebuked him sharply; saying, that then he thought
himself wiser than the King and all those that professed as his Majesty did.
Insomuch as they who stood about Le Blanck began to handle him roughly; so that
he had much ado to escape with his life, had not Montpessat rescued him from
that danger, because

The Governor, being pressed to dispatch this massacre at Bourdeaur, wist not
well what to do. For on the one side La Sieur de Vesins, with sundry others
coming from the Court, assured him from the King, that he wondered why the
business was deferred so long; showing, that he could not perform a more
acceptable service unto

For the truth is, the army by sea, which was prepared against Rochel, lying
for a time at Bordeaux, under pretense of conquering Florida, would have been
ready enough to have made a general massacre there, but that they were afraid
the Rochellers would be incensed thereat.

Yet in conclusion the Governor, having balanced things on both parts, was
persuaded by the Sieur Montpessat to put the massacre in execution. To which
purpose an oath being taken, a

On Saturday then, which was the third of October, 1572. the Governor having
assembled together all the scum of the City to aid and assist him in so
barbarous an act, commanded them with other soldiers to be ready presently
after dinner to put the Kings command into execution. To which they were very
forward, coming in their Liveries, attended on by Captains of tens, to

At that time they brought a certain Minister out of the Consciergery, who a
few days before coming from the country Saintong to Bourdeaux (for his better
safety as he thought) was there apprehended and imprisoned: and as soon as he
was come out of the prison they massacred him before the gates of the Palace.

Master William Savins house (a Counselor of the said Parliament, who was one
of the Religion) was forced open, pillaged and spoiled, and himself cruelly
murdered. His Clarke called Simonet, seeing his master about to be massacred,
embraced and comforted him: and being asked whether he were of the Religion, he
answered yea, and would die with his master for the same. Thus they were slain
one in another arms.

The cruel Martyrdom of Du Tour, a Deacon of the Protestant Church.
A Deacon of the reformed Church called Du Tour, an old man, who in the days
of his ignorance had been a Priest in the popish church, being sick in his
bed, was haled forth into the open street; of whom it being demanded, whether
he would go to Mass, and thereby save his life; he freely answered, No,
especially now drawing so near his end, both in regard of his years and
greevous sickness: I hope (says he) I shall not so far forget the eternal
salvation of my soul, as for fear of death to prolong this life for a few
days; for so I should buy a short term of life at too dear a rate. They
hearing him say so, massacred him instantly.

It was lamentable to see the poor Protestants wandering up and down, not
knowing where to save their lives: some were rejected of their own parents and
kinsfolks, who shut their doors against them, pretending as if they knew them
not; others were betrayed and delivered up by those to whose trust they had
committed themselves: many were saved even by Priests and others, from whom a
man would have expected no such security. Some were saved by their very
enemies, whose hearts abhorred such detestable outrages.

All the City was full of terrors and horrible threats against those of the
Religion, saying, that the Kings commandment was, that he would not have so
much as one of them left in his Kingdom. And if any refused to go to Mass,
that an hole should be dug for him in the earth, in which he should
forthwith be buried without any more ado.

Scoffing Ballads sung in contempt of the Admiral of Chastillon and other
Protestants.
Near the Palace and thorowout the City were defamatory Libels sung against
the Admiral of Chastillon and the Huguenots. In which regard, such in whose
hearts God had reserved but any sparkle of piety, were so terrified and vexed
with their blasphemies, that the condition of the massacred seemed to be much
better than theirs who were left alive; who heard and saw those things without
ceasing, which to an honest mind was more bitter then death it self.

The Governor was very careful after the massacre was ended, to advertise the
Sieur Montpessat, by a Gentleman, of all things which had passed, according to
the promise he had made unto him. Which Montpessat was suddenly surprised with
a disease; wherein feeling Gods hand heavy Anno 1573. Montpesat suddenly
surprised with a strange disease.
upon him, he uttered such lamentable outcries, that his blood and soul were
poured out at once, a judgment justly inflicted upon him, for all the innocent
blood the which he had shed without a cause.

The judgment of God upon one Vincent.
THe like judgment of God fell not long after upon another of these massacrers
called Vmcent, Advocate of the Court, one who had had his hand deeply dyed in
this bloody enterprise, not sticking to boast that with his own hands he had
murdered Agraulet door keeper of the Court. This man also fell dangerously
sick, but in the end

This bloody wretch then, who breathed forth Vincent dies drenched in his own
blood.
nothing but blood in the time of his health, nor could have his eyes satisfied
with seeing the blood of innocents poured out, was forced whilst he lived to
see himself drenched in his own blood, even until his last gasp.

Another of them, thirsting after blood as much Another of this wretched crew
swelled so long that he burst in sunder. God meets with the Governor himself at
length.
as any of the rest, was taken with such a swelling in all the parts of his
body, that there was scarcely

The Governor himself who was the chief actor in this massacre, about two
years after gathering all the forces he could to besiege Genses, with an
intention to do wonders there, presenting himself ready for the purpose, was
chosen to go in the rank of five and twenty or thirty brave Gentlemen, and he
only shot with an harquebuse

Thus we have taken a view of the extreme afflictions and oppressions of the
reformed Churches in many parts of France, wherein within a Thirty thousand
massacred within a few weeks in the Cities of France.
few weeks well nigh thirty thousand were put to death.

Now in the year 1573, many places whither the faithful were fled for refuge,
were assailed by open war; namely, in the first place that of

A relation of the extreme famine which happened in the City of Sancerre in
France, being besieged with five hundred The Siour of Chastre was then General
of the Kings army.

BEing (says the story) compassed about with irreconcilable enemies, from
about the beginning of April; the want of victuals having caused them to
gather together all the asses and mules they had in the City, they were eaten
up in less than a month.

Then they came to horses, cats, rats, moules mice, and dogs. After these
were spent, they fell to eat ox and cow-hides, sheepskins, parchment, old
shoes, bullockes, and horsehoofes, horns of lanthornes, ropes, and horse
harness, leather girdles, etc.

In the end of June the third part of the besieged had not bread to eat. Such
as could get hemp seed, ground it, or stamped it in mortars, and made bread of
it, the like they did with all sorts of herbs, mingling the same with branne
if they had it. There they eat meal of chafe, nut-shels, and of slate,
excrements of horses, and men, yea, the offall which lay in the streets was not
spared.

The nine and twentieth of July, a poor man and his wife were executed for
having eaten the head, brains, and entrails of a young child about three
years old which died of hunger; having made ready the other parts to eat at
another meal. An old woman lodging in their house, eating a part of this
mournful diet, dyed in prison, within a few hours after her imprisonment.

They were found guilty of other offenses; but this aggravated the same the
more. All children under twelve years of age dyed. It was lamentable to hear
the pitiful voices uttered by poor parents for the misery wherein their eyes
beheld their languishing and dying infants.

To which purpose you may take notice here of a memorable accident. A boy of
ten years old, being ready to yield up the ghost, seeing his father and mother
weeping over him (whose a^nes and legs when they handled, felt as if they had
been dried sticks) said unto them, wherefore weep ye thus, in seeing me
famished to death? Mother, says he, I ask you no bread, I know you have none:
but seeing it is Gods will I must die this death, let us be thankful for it.
Did not the holy man Lazarus dye of famine? Have I not read it in my Bible? In
uttering these with the like speeches he yielded up the ghost the thirtieth day
of July.

That all the people died not of famine in the end of this month, it was by
reason of certain horses which were reserved for service if need should be, and
six kine which were left to give milk for the sustenance of young infants.
These beasts were killed, and their flesh sold for the relief of such as were
living, with a little corn which by stealth some brought into the City; so
that a pound of wheat was sold for half a crown.

There died by fight in Sancerre but eighty four persons, but of the famine
more than five hundred. Many soldiers getting forth as they could out of the
City, flying from the famine, chose rather to dye by the sword of the enemy;
whereof some were slain, others imprisoned, and the rest put to death by the
executioner.

But when all help of man failed, the King having sworn that he would make
them eat up God sent these good men in due season from a far country to
preserve this distressed city thom utter ruin.
one another, the King of Kings delivered them by his wonderful providence.
For at this instant the ambassadors from Poland came into France to accept the
duke of Anjou for their king, at whose entreaty (which could not well be
dented) poor Sancerre, more than half famished, was now set at liberty by
raising the siege, who otherwise were determined to leave their bones there,
rather than to yield themselves into their enemies hands, in regard they had
often threatened them with a general massacre. Whereas now by the Kings
appointment they were permitted to pass out of the City armed; if any would
tarry, that they should Anno 1574.
not be molested: having liberty granted them to dispose of their affairs, as
they pleased, with promise of conserving the honor and chastities as well of
virgins, as women, etc.

Now let us come to the City of Rochel, which Of this siege Marshall Mon Luc
said, that it was great, long, and sightly: but though well assailed. yet
better defended.
being at this instant strongly besieged by the forces of France, both by sea
and land, with about forty or fifty thousand men, was yet in the end also
delivered, though not without many hot conflicts,

He restored to the Rochellers and others their rites and privileges, letting
fall all the decrees given out against them, approving of their defensive war;
giving them leave, according to their ancient custom, to retain in their
Cities, Towers, and Fortresses men and munition, yea, to receive in Governors
among them, provided

By virtue of this Edict, upon the tenth day of July, about ten of the clock
in the forenoone, the Sieur of Biron entered into the City at the gate called de
Coigne, with an Herald of arms, and four of the Kings Trumpetters (at which
hour peace was proclaimed in the most eminent places thereof) accompanied with
the Lieutenant of the City, and with the Lord of Villiers.

The same day many small Vessels laden with Biskets, Corn, Meal, Fish, and
other provision Acertaine Gentleman, Nephew to Puygaillard Governor of
Angiers, bragging that he had been one who murdered the Admiral, showing a
short sword which he had used in that slaughter, threaten^d the like to the
Rochellers, but God cut him short also, at the siege of Sancerre.
entered into the Haven. At this siege the Duke D' Amaule lost his life, with
Cosseins, who had broken into the Admirals Lodging, and began the massacre at
Paris: besides many great Lords, Gentlemen, Captains, Lieutenants,

One thing ought not here to be passed over in silence, to wit, the provision
of victuals which God furnished this besieged people withal, when all other
provisions began to fail them, namely, an

Although this relation following, touching another siege of this City of
Rochel, suits nothing

An extract of a Letter written on board the Saint George, his Majesty's Ship
in Saint Georges Island.
THere dyed in this siege of Rochel, the thirtieth of October, 1628, sixteen
thousand persons, the rest enduring a world of miseries; most of all their food
being hides, leather, and old gloves: other provisions being very scarce were
at an excessive rate; viz.

A Bushel of wheat -- xx. li. A pound of bread -- xx. s. A quarter of Mutton
-- vi. li. od money. A pound of Butter -- xxx. s. An Egg -- viii. s. An ounce
of Sugar -- ii. s. vi. d. A dried fish -- xx. s. A pint of Wine -- xx. s. A
pound of grapes -- iii. s. A pint of Milk -- xxx. s.
Also it is reported, that through the famine, young maids of fourteen or
sixteen years of age did look like old women of an hundred years old, The
famine was such, that the poor people would cut off the buttocks of the dead
as they lay in the Church yard unburied. All the English that came out looked
like Anatomies. They lived two months with nothing but Cow hides and Goats
skins boiled; the dogs, cats, mice, and frogs being all spent. And this with a
world of other miseries did they suffer, in hope of being releeved by others.
Thus much I thought good to let you understand.

A description of the manner of the death of Charles the ninth, King of France.
IN the year 1574. Charles the ninth, King of France (in the time of whose
reign these forenamed execrable massacres were executed) fell sick; which
sickness seized upon him before his brother the Duke of Aniou took his voyage
into Poland: from which during the winter season he obtained some recovery. But
that which then seemed to lie hidden brake forth again afresh in the Spring; so
as this Prince, after he had languished three whole months, viz. February,
March, and April, drew his Physicians to a consultation about the state of his
body; who in the end concluded to purge and let him blood. But these remedies
took not such an effect as the King and they expected; for he still wasted and
consumed away, being in the flower of his age, to the wonder of many. Some
guessed he had taken a surfeit either in eating or drinking; others, that he
was enchanted.

The thirtieth of May he dyed, in the presence of his mother, and of the
Cardinals of Bourbon and Ferrare, etc.

He was borne on the twenty seventh day of June, 1550. He began his reign the
first of December, 1560. and so reigned, as that it gives to posterity just
cause both of admiration and detestation. Thus this Prince lived not forty
years fully complete. Now if any desire to be further {Anno 1588.}
satisfied as touching the manner of his death, I refer them to that which
Master John Fox has written thereof not many lines before the conclusion of
this book, commonly called the book of Martyrs.

A note touching a Bull of Pope Sixtus the
IN September 1585. Pope Sixtus the fifth, by

The Court of Parliament of Paris made a notable remonstrance to the King
concerning these Bulls, in the which they sought to maintain

Further they added, that seeing the pope in stead

This remonstrance took small effect; for not long after, the King being
solicited by the principal of the league, set forth a declaration the seventh
of October, upon the Edict published in July next before going; wherein having
confiscated the body and goods of these of the Religion with their associates,
who in any Province had taken arms against the fury of the league, it was
ordained, that those of the Religion within six months were to depart out of
the Kingdom, unless within fifteen days fully accomplished after the said
declaration they should abjure.

The Parliament, suffering themselves to be carried down by the violence of
this stream, accepted and admitted of this Edict. The Princes framed an
opposition against the Popes Bull, appealing therefrom, as a wrong done unto
them, offering to make it appear in a free and lawful Council, that the Pope
had maliciously belied them, in calling them Heretics; so as if he refused
this fair and lawful course by them propounded, they would hold and esteem
him for that great antichrist, and would proclaim an openirre^ concileable war
against him. This opposition was affired and set up at Rome the seventh day of
November.

Not long after, among those of the Religion which were imprisoned, others were
more severely handled. Among many, take notice here of two honorable Women,
whose memory ought to be celebrated in this History of the Martyrs; namely,
Radagonde daughter of Master John Foucoult, Attorney in the Parliament of
Paris, Widow, of the age of forty years, and Claude Foucoult her sister, a
Virgin about thiryt six, who were apprehended the nine and twentieth of October
1585. the one of the Village of Pierrepit near Paris, and the other in the
suburbs of Saint German, and brought prisoners into Cha^^elet because they
denied to go to mass, and would not abjure and forsake the true Religion.
Being severed one from the other in prison, they were examined upon sundry
Articles To wit, touching the supper of the lord, prayer to saints, prayer for
the dead, and about abstaining from meats.
to which they made their direct answer according to the word of God.

Then being put together, they were accused for disobeying the Kings
commandment, which was that these of the Religion were either tode part the
Kingdom by such a time, or else abjure, They answered, that they were willing
toleave the Kingdom, if they might obtain a convenient time to take order
about that little which they had there; but refusing to yield to their request,
they were shut up again and theseventh of November in the presence of the
Lieutenant, as also of the Advocate for the King, and a sorbonist, they pleaded
their Innocence. These men getting no advantage against them, but being rather
confounded by the Wisdom of Gods Spirit, speaking by these two sisters, went
and complained to the King, that they were obstinate Heretics. This was in
the beginning of the year 1588.

They continued in prison many weeks, being cumbred with many disputes, yet
remained unshaken. The Friday before Easter the "King Hen. the third.
himself was to see them, asking them whether they would conform themselves
to the Catholic Apostolic Roman church (as he called it) They with such
reverence and obeisance, as became them, gave him their reasons why they could
not so do, confirming the same by texts of Holy Scripture. His second question
was, why they had not obeyed his last Edict. The Widow answered, sir, says
she, I have three small Children to care for; and whereas your Majesty allotted
those of the Religion the tea^me of fifteen days after six months ended to
depart the Kingdom; I have done my utmost to take up such moneys as were due
untome, but those who were indebted unto me neglected to pay me. Besides, he
that kept my vineyards of Pierrepit, to quit {Anno 1588.}
himself of me, accused me of heresy, causing my sister and my self to be
here imprisoned, where we have lien six months, and if so be our petition
presented by us find no acceptance in your Majesty's sight, we most humbly
beseech you to grant that we may be freed out of prison, and we will be gone
instantly out of the Kingdom according to your Majesty's Edict.

The date is past, said the King, nor will I show

Within half an hour after, the Duke of Longueville came to visit them,
saying, he was sorry for their affliction, counselling them to go to mass,
alleging, it is written, Thou shall obey thy Prince, and if he therein force
you to it against your conscience, he shall answer^ for it; adding, that they
were to remember their sex, and therefore to be teachable upon the point of
obedience. They answered, that no earthly potentate had any warrant to command
Christians to sin against their consciences.

They further besought him to be a means for them to the king, that they might
be delivered: but all the answer he gave them was this, That if

The next day being Easter Even, the Queen with the Duchess of Ioyeuse came
into Chastelet to visit the prisoners. But in stead of speaking to the two
sisters her self, she sent unto them a wicked Apostata, called Matthew de
Launy, who being a Minister turned popish priest, and one

On the Even before Saint John Baptists day in the month of June, the common
people in Paris making fires as they were wont to do, amongst other
insolences, burnt in diverse parts Queen Elizabeth's picture burned in Paris.
of the City a picture representing the Queen of England.

The next day the curates and preachers began

The next day the eldest son of Radegonde presented a petition to the Duchess
of Nemours, daughter to the late lady of Ferrare. Her grace solicited the Duke
of Guise her son, for the prisoners: whose answer was, That his coming to
Paris was not to petition the King in favor of those of the Religion; and if
he would do so (in regard of the services which the prisoners had done his
grandfather) yet he could not, fearing lest the mad multitude might set upon
him.

The eight and twentieth day of the same month of June, the Court having
confirmed the sentence given at Chastellot, sent them back thither to be
executed, so as about noone they were gagged, because the maid professed, that
if they brought her into any Idols Temple, she would extend her voice so loud
against the same, that every one should hear it. About three of the clock
they were led as sheep to the slaughter, where they constantly persisted in
the profession of the true Religion.

The widow being ascended the Ladder shook out of her hands a wooden cross,
which they had by force affixed thereto, whereat the multitude were so
provoked, that they began to throw stones and staves at her, so as the hangman
having turned her off the Ladder cut the rope by and by, letting her fall half
dead into the fire, wherein she yielded up her soul into the hands of God, as
also her sister did.

Being now come to the year, 1588. it gives us just occasion to call to mind
that miraculous deliverance of our noble Queen and Country, from the intended
invasion of the Spaniards the same year. The memorial whereof, that it might
the rather be continued to the ages succeeding, deserves by way of history here
to be inserted as in its due and proper place. Of which deliverance it may
truly be said (all things considered) that it was the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes. The true relation whereof here follows.

A brief discourse touching the great preparations made by the Spaniards, and
other Romish Catholics, for that invincible Navy, intended for the invading
and surprising of the Realm of England, together with their utter overthrow.
HEr Majesty of England having had intelligence from sundry places of the great
and diligent preparation of the King of Spain in diverse parts both by sea and
land, not only of the strongest ships in all places within his dominions, but
of all sorts of provision necessary for so mighty a Fleet, as he intended to
set forth; and these rumors of war, which before were but The Spanish navy
prepared to invade England.
slight, daily increasing, at last it was certainly confirmed by the news on
all sides, that in Spain there was an invincible Navy preparing against
England; that the most famous captains in military knowledge, and the best
soldiers were sent for into Spain, from Italy, Sicily, yea from America. For
the Pope and some religious Spaniards, and English fugitives, now recalled the
Spaniard to the cogitation of surprising of England, which purpose was
interrupted by the Portugal wars. They exhorted him earnestly to do God
this service, that had done so much for him; now that he enjoyed Portugal with
the West Indies, and many rich Islands, to add England to all, were an
especial service of God, fit for his Catholic Majesty. By this means he
might add these flourishing Kingdoms to his Empire, and so keep the
Lowcountries in peace, and secure the navigations to

Hereupon the consultation began to be had, of Consultation about the best way
and means how to oppress England.
the best way and means to oppress England. Alvarus Bassanus, the Marquess
of S. Cross, who was chief commander in the Navy, advised first to make sure
some part of Holland or Zealand, by the Land forces of the Duke of Parma, and
by sending before some Spanish ships, so to take some place on a sudden, where
the Spanish Navy might have a receptacle, and from whence the invasion might
with convenience begin. For in the English sea, which is troublesome, the
winds often changing, and the tides unknown, the

The Duke of Parma also in Flanders, by the The Duke of Parma plays his part.
commandment of the Spaniard, built ships, and a great company of small broad
vessels, each one able to transport thirty horse, with bridges fitted for them
severally, And hired mariners from the East part of Germany. And provided long
pieces The Pope excommunicates the Queen, etc.
Flanders, and renewed the Bulls declaratory of Pius 5. and Gregory the
thirteenth. He excommunicateth the Queen, deposes her, absolveth her subjects
from all allegiance, and as if it had been against the Turks and Infidels, he
set forth in print a Conceat, wherein he bestowed plenary indulgences, out of
the treasure of the Church (besides

Queen Elizabeth, that she might not be surprised at unawares, prepared as
great a Navy as she could, and with singular care and providence makes ready
all things necessary for war. And she her self, which was ever most judicious
in discerning of men's wits and aptness, and The Queen selects out such able
and serv^ceable men as were fit^ est to undertake so great implosment.
most happy in making choice, when she made it out of her own judgment, and
not at the commandment of others, d^signed the best and most serviceable to
each several employment. Over the whole Navy she appointed the Lord Admiral
Charles Howard, in whom she reposed much trust; and sent him to the West parts
of England, where Captain Drake, whom she made Viceadmirall, joined with him.
She commanded Henry Seimor, the second son to the Duke of Somerset, to watch
upon the Belgicke shore with forty English and Dutch ships, that the Duke of
Parma might not come out with his forces. Albeit some were of opinion, that the
enemy was to be expected, and set upon by land forces, according as it was upon
deliveration resolved, in the time of Henry the eighth, when the French brought
a great Navy upon the English shore.

For the land fight, there were placed on the Order taken about the land fight.
South shores twenty thousand: And two armies besides were mustered of the
choicest men for war. The one of these which consisted of 1000, horse, twenty
two thousand foot, was the Earl of Leicester set over, and camped at Tilbury
on the side of Thames. For the enemy was resolved first to set upon London. The
other army was governed by the Lord Hunsdon, consisting of thirty four
thousand foot, and two thousand horse, to guard the Queen.

The Lord Gray, Sir Francis Knolles, Sir John Norice, Sir Richard Bingham, Sir
Roger Williams, men famously known for military experience, were chosen to
confer of the land fight. These thought fit that all those places should be
fortified, with men and munition, which were commodious to land in, either out
of Spain, or out of Flanders, as Milford haven. Falmouth, Plimmouth, Portland,
the Isle of Wight, Portsmouth, the open side of Kent called the Downs, the
mouth of Thames, Harwich, Yarmouth, Hul, etc. That trained soldiers through
all the maritime provinces should meet upon warning given, to defend these
places: that they should, by their best means and power, hinder the enemy to
take land; if he should take land, then should they wast the Country all
about, and spoil every thing that might be of any use to the enemy, that so
he might find no more victuals then what he brought upon his shoulders with
him. And that by continual alarums the enemy should find no rest day or night.
But they should not try any battle, until diverse Captains were met together
with their companies. That one Captain might be named in every shire which
might command.

Two years before, the Duke of Parma considering how hard a matter it was to
end the Belgicke A Counsel about peace pretended on the adversaries part,
whilst they intended to make war.
war, so long as it was continually nourished and supported with aid from
the Queen, he moved for a treaty of peace, by the means of Sir James Croft
one of the privy Counsel, a man deshous of peace, and Andrew Lo a Dutchman,
and professed that the Spaniard had delegated authority to him for this
purpose. But the Queen fearing that there was some cunning in this seeking of
peace, that the friendship between her and the confederate Princes might be
dissolved, and that so they might secretly be drawn to the Spantard; she
deferred that treaty for some time. But now, that the wans on both sides
prepared might be turned away, she was content to treat of peace; It is the
honor of a King, says Solomon, to search out a thing. Delegats sent into
Flanders about a treaty of peace
but so, as still holding the weapons in her hand.

For this purpose in February Delegats were sent into Flanders, the Earl of
Darby, the Lord Cobham, Sir James Croft, Doctor Dale, and doctor Rogers. These
were received with all humanity on the Dukes behalf, and they presently sent

Not long after, Doctor Rogers was sent to the Prince, by an express
commandment from the Queen, to know the truth, whether the Spaniard had
resolved to invade England, which he and Richardotus seemed to signify. He
affirmed, that he did not so much as think of the invasion of England, when he
wished that the business might proced

The twelfth of April the Count Aremberg, Champigny, Richardotus, D. Maesius,
and Garnier, delegated from the Prince of Parma, met with the English, and
^eelded to them the honor both in walking and sitting. And when they affirmed
that the Duke had full authority to treat of peace, the English moved, thot
first a truce might

Touching those Towns taken from the king of Spain, and the repaying of the
money, they answered, That the Spaniard might demand for many myriads of
Crowns to be from the Queen repayed him, as the Belgicke war has cost him
since the time that she has favored and protected the Dutch against him.

At this time Doctor Dale by the Queens command, going to the Duke of Parma,
did gently expostulate with him touching a book printed there, set out lately
by Cardinal Allen, where in he exhorts the Nobles and people of England and
Ireland to join themselves to the King of Spains forces, under the conduct of
the Prince of Parma, for the execution of the sentence of Pope Sixtus the fifth
against the Queen, declared by his Bull; in the which she is declared an
heretic, illegitimate, cruel against Mary Queen of Scots, and her subjects
were commanded to help Parma against her: (for at that time a great number of
those Bulls and Books were printed at Ant werp to be dispersed through
England.) The Duke denied that he had seen such a Bull or Book, neither would
he do any thing by the Popes authority, as for his own King, him he must
obey. Yet he said, he so observed the Queen for her princely virtues, that
after the King of Spain he offered all service to her. That he had persuaded
the King of Spain to yield to this treaty of peace, which is more profitable
for English than Spanish: for if they should be overcome they would easily
repair their loss, but if you be overcome the Kingdom is lost.

To whom Dale replied, That our Queea was sufficiently furnished with forces to
defend the Kingdom. That a Kingdom will not easily be gotten by the fortune
of one battle, seeing the King of Spain in so long a war is not yet able to
recover his ancient patrimony in the Netherlands.

Well, quoth the Duke, be it so, these things are in Gods hands.

After this the Delegates contended among themselves by mutual replications,
weaving and unweaving the same web. The English were earnest in this, that
freedom of religion might be granted at least for two years to the
confederate Prov^^ces. They answered, That as the King of Spain had not
entreated that for English Catholics; so they hoped the Queen in her wisdom
would not entreat any thing of the King of Spain which might stand against his
honor, his oath, and his cons^tence.

When they demanded the money due from the States of Brabant, it was answered,
That the money was lent without the Kings authority or privity: but let the
account be taken, how much the money was, and how much the King has spent in
these wars, and then it may appear who should look for repayment.

Thus the English of set purpose were from time to time driven off, until the
Spanish fleet was come near the English shore, and the noise of Guns were
heard from Sea. Then had they leave to depart, and were by the Delegates
honorably brought to the borders near to Calts. The Duke of Parma had in the
mean time brought all his forces to the Sea shore.

Thus this conference came to nothing; undertaken by the Queen, as the wiser
then thought, to avert the Spanish fleet; continued by the Spaniard, that he
might oppress the Queen, being as he supposed unprovided, and not expecting
the

In fine the Spanish Fleet well furnished with Preparation for setting forth of
the Spanish fleet
men, munition, Engines, and all warlike preparation, the best indeed that was
ever seen upon the Ocean, called by that arrogant title the Invincible Navy,
consisting of a hundred and thirty ships, wherein there were nineteen thousand
two hundred ninety; Mariners eight thousand three hundred and fifty: chained
rowers eleven thousand

The 30. of May they loosed out of the River The time when the navy set out.
Tagus, and purposing to hold their course to the Groine, in Gallitia, they
were beaten and scattered by a tempest: three Galleys by the help of David
Gwin an English servant, and by the perfidiousnesse of the Turks which rowed,
were carried away into France. The Fleet with much ado after some days came to
the Groine and other harbors near adjoining. The report was, The great fleet
sore shaken with a tempest.
that the Fleet was so shaken with this tempest, that the Queen was persuaded,
that she was not

Now with the same wind, the twelfth of July, the duke of Medina with his
fleet departed from

The sixteenth day (says the relator) there was The Spanish Navy the second
time scattered.
a great calm, and a thick cloud was upon the Sea till noone: then the North
wind blowing roughly, and again the West wind till midnight, and after that
the East; the Spanish Navy was scattered, and hardly gathered together until
they came within the sight of England the nineteenth day of July. Upon which
day the Lord Admiral was certified by Flemming (who had been a Pyrate) that
the Spanish Fleet was entered into the English Sea, which the Mariners Flemming
a Pyrate discovers the Spanish fleet to the English.
call the Channel, and was discryed near to the Lisard. The Lord Admiral
brought forth the English Fleet into the Sea, but not without great difficulty,
by the skill, labor, and alacrity of the soldiers and mariners, every one
laboring; yea the Lord Admiral himself put his hand to this work.

The next day the English Fleet viewed the The fashion of the Spanish fleet
described.
Spanish Fleet coming along with Towers like Castles in height, her front
crooked like the fashion of the Moon, the horns of the front were extended
one from the other about seven miles, or as some say eight miles asunder,
sailing with the labor of the winds, the Ocean as it were groaning under it;
their sail was but slow, and yet at full sail before the wind. The English
were willing to let them hold on their course, and when they were passed by,
got behind them, and so got the help of the wind.

Upon the one and twentieth of July, the Lord Admiral of England sent a Pinace
before, called the Defiance, to denounce the battle by shooting off some
pieces. And being himself in the Arch-Royall (the, English Pretorian ship or
Admiral) he set upon a ship which he took to be the Spanish Admiral, but it
was the ship of Alfonsus Leva. Upon that he bestowed much shot. Presently
Drake, Hawkins, and Forbisher came The first fight
in upon the Spanish hindmost ships which Ricaldus governed. Upon these they
thundered. Ricaldus labored as much as lay in him to stay his men, who fled
away in their Navy, until his ship beaten and much battered with many shot
hardly recovered the Fleet. Then the Duke Medina gathered together his
dissipated Fleet, and setting up more sail, held on their course, Indeed they
could do no other, for the English had gotten the advantage of wind, and
their ships were much more nimble, and ready with incredible celerity to come
upon the enemy with a full course, and then to turn and return, and be on
every side at their pleasure. After a long fight, and that each of them had
taken some trial, as of their own courage, so of the Spaniards also, the Lord
Admiral thought good not to continue the same any longer, in regard that forty
ships were then absent, which at that instant were scarce drawn out of
Plimmouth Haven.

The night following, Saint Katherine a Spanish ship, being sore torn with the
fight, was received into the midst of the Navy to be mended. Here a great
Cantabrian ship of Oquenda, wherein was the Treasurer of the Camp, by force of
Gunpowder that had taken fire, was fired: yet it was quenched in time by the
ships that came to help her. Of these that came to help the fired ship, one
was a Galeon, in which was Petrus Waldez; the foremast of the Galeon was caught
in the tak^ing of another ship, and broken. This was taken by Drake, who sent
Waidez to Dartmouth, and a great sum of money, viz. fifty five thousand
ducats, which he distributed amongst the soldiers. This Waldez coming into
Drakes presence, kissed his hand, and told him they had all resolved to die, if
they had not been so happy as to fall into his hands, whom he knew to be
noble. That night be was appointed to set forth light, but neglected it; and
some Germane Merchant ships coming by that night, he thinking them to be
enemies followed them so far, that the English Navy rested all night when they
could see no light set forth. Neither did he nor the rest of the Navy find the
Admiral until the next day at Even. The Admiral all the night proceeding
with the Bear and the Mary Rose did carefully follow the Spaniards with
watchfulness. The Duke was busied Anno 1620.
in ordering his Navy. Alfonsus Leva was commanded to join the first and last
companies. Every ship had his station assigned according to that prescribed
form which was appointed in Spain; it was present death to forsake his
station. This done, he sent Gliclius an Anceani to Parma, which might declare
to him in what case they were, and left that Cantabrian ship of Oquenda to the
wind and Sea, having taken out

The three and twentieth of the soon month, the Spaniards having a favorable
North wind turned sails upon the English; the English being much readier in
the use of their ships, fet about a The Admiral would not suffer his ships to
come to grapple with the Spanish.
come to board their ships, because they had a full army in their ships, which
he had not; their ships were many in number, and greater, and higher,

The four and twentieth day of July they gave over fighting on both sides. The
Admiral

The five and twentieth day, being S. James The third fight.
day, S. Anne the Galeon of Portugal, not being able to hold course with the
rest, was set upon by some small English ships. To whose aid came in Leva, and
Didacus Tells Enrigues with three Galeasses: which the Admiral and the Lord
Thomas Howard espying, made in against the Galeasses (the calm was so great
that they were drawn in by boats with cords) and did so beat upon the
Galeasses with great shot, that with much ado, and not without great loss,
they hardly recovered the Galeon. The Spaniards reported that the Admiral of
Spain was that day in the hindmost company, and being come nearer the English
ships then before, was sore beaten with the English great Ordnance, many men
flaine in her, her great mast overthrown. And after that the Admiral of
Spain, accompanied with Ricaldus and others, did set upon the English
Admiral, who by the benefit of the wind suddenly turning escaped. The
Spaniards hold on their course again, and send to the Duke of Parma, that with
all speed he should join his ships with the Kings Fleet. These things the
English knew not, who write that ^he^ had stricken the Lantern from one of
the Spanish ships, the stem from another, and had sore beaten a third, doing
much harm to her. That the Non Parigdy, and the Mary Rose fought a good while
with the Spaniards; and the Triumph being in danger, other ships came in good
time to help her.

The next day the Lord Admiral knighted the Knights made.
Lord Thomas Howard, The Lord Sheffield, Roger Townesend, John Hawkins, and
Martin Forbisher, for their valor well employed in the last fight. After this
they resolved not to set upon the enemy until they came into the straight of
Calis, where Henry Seimor, and William Winter staid for their coming. Thus
with the fair gale the Spanish Fleet go^th forward, and the English followed.
This great Spanish Armadoe was so far from being esteemed Invincible in the
opinions of the English, that many young men and Gentlemen, in hope to be
partakers of a famous victory against the Spaniards, provided ships of their
own charges, and joined themselves to the English Fleet; among whom were the
Earls of Essex, of Northumberland, of Noblemen and Gentlemen join with the
fleet.
Cumberland, Thomas and Robert Cecilles, Henry Brooks, William Hatton, Robert
Carry, Ambrose Willoughby, Thomas Gerard, Arthur Gorge, and other Gentlemen of
good note and quality.

The seven and twentieth day at Even, the Purposing to execute their design on
friday the 12. of August, the night being dark, but how happily the same was
prevented, read the next section following.
Spainards cast anchor near to Calis, being admonished of their skillful
Seamen, that if they went any further, they might be endangered by force of
that tide to be driven into the North Ocean. Near to them stood the English
Admiral with his Fleet within a great Guns shot. To the Admiral Seimor and
Winter now join their ships; so that now there were an hundred and forty ships
in the English Fleet, able and well furnished for fight, for sail, and to
turn which way was needful: and yet there were but fifteen of these which
bore the burden of the battle and repulsed the enemy. The Spaniard, as often
he had done before, so now with great earnestness sent to the Duke of Parma to
send forty fly boats, without the which they could not fight with the English,
because of the greatness and slownesse of their own ships, and the agility of
the English ships: And entreating him by all means now to come to Sea with his
army, which army was now to be protected as it were under the wings of the
Spanish Annadoe, until they took land in England.

But the Duke was unprovided, and could not come out at an instant. The broad
ships with flat bottomes being then full of chinkes must be mended. Victuals
wanted and must be provided. The Mariners being long kept against their wills
began to shrink away. The Ports of Dunkerke and Nieuport, by which he must
bring his army to the sea, were now so beset with the strong ships of Holland
and Zealand, which were Anno 1588.
furnished with great and small munition, that he was not able to come to Sea,
unless he would come upon his own apparent destruction, and cast himself and
his men wilfully into a headlong danger. Yet he omitted nothing that might be
done, being a man eager and industrious, and inflamed with a desire of
overcomming England.

But Queen Elizabeth her providence and A notable stratagem of the English.
care prevented both the diligence of this man, and the credulous hope of the
Spaniard: for by her commandment the next day the Admiral took eight of
their worst ships, charging the Ordnance therein up to the mouth with small
shot, nails, and stones, and d^essed them with wild fire, pitch, and rosin,
and filled them full of brimstone and some other matter fit for fire, and these
being set on fire by the ministry and guiding of Young and Prowse, were
secretly in the night by the help

When the Spaniards saw them come near, the flame shining and giving light all
over the sea; they supposing those ships, besides the danger of fire, to have
been also furnished with deadly Engines, to make horrible destruction among
them; lifting up a most hideous woeful cry, some pull up anchors, some for
haste cut their Cables, they set

The Spaniards report, that the Duke when he saw the fiery ships coming
commanded all the fleet to pull up their anchors, but so, as the danger being
past, every ship might return again to his station: and he himself returned,
giving a sign to the rest by shooting off a Gun; which was heard but of a few,
for they were far off scattered,

Over against Graveling the Spanish fleet began to gather themselves together.
But upon The 4. sight before Graveling, Aug 8.
them came Drake and Fenner, and battered them with great Ordnance: to these
Fenton, Southwell, Beeston, Cross, Riman, and presently after the Lord
Admiral, Thomas Howard, and Sheffield came in and all joined together.

The last day of this month, the Spanish fleet striving to recover the
straights again, were driven toward Zealand. The English left off pursuing
them, as the Spaniards thought, because they saw them in a manner cast away;
for they could not avoid the shallowes of Zealand. But the wind turning, they
gat them out of the shallowes, and then began to consult what were best for
them to do. By common consent they resolved to return into Spain by the
Northern Seas, for they wanted many necessaries, especially shot, their ships
were torn, and they had no hope that the Duke of Parma could bring forth his
forces. And so they took the Sea, and followed the course toward the North.
The English Navy followed, and sometimes the Spanish turned upon the English,
insomuch that it was thought by many that they would turn back again.

A description of the Queens coming to the Camp at Tilbury, with the manner
of her behavior there, as it is related by a Popish Spy, in a letter written
here in England to Mendea. The Copy of which letter by good hap was found in
the chamber of one Richard Leigh a Seminary Priest, as well in French as
English: which Priest was executed for high Treason whilst the Spanish Armado
was on the Sea.
She caused also, says he, an army to incampe near the Sea side upon the
river of Thames. The Queen comes to the camp at Tilbury.
After the army was come thither, she would not by any advice be stayed, but
for comfort of her people, and to show her own magnanimity of heart, she went
thereunto, lying at that time between the City of London and the sea, under the
charge of the Earl of Leicester, placing her self between the Enemy and her
City; and there she viewed her army, passing through it diverse times, and
lodging in the borders of it, returned again and dined in the army. First
viewing from place to place the people as they were by their Countries lodged
and quartered by their several camps. Afterward when they were all reduced
into battle, prepared as it were for fight, she reduced round about with a
Leaders staff in her hand, only accompanied with the General and three or
four others attending upon her: but yet to show her state (I well marked it)
she had the sword carried before her by the Earl of Ormond. There she was
generally saluted with cries, with shouts, with all tokens of love, of
obedience, of readiness, and willingness to fight for her, as seldom has
the like been seen in an army, considering she was a Queen. All which tended
to show a mavelous concord in a mutual love between a Queen and her
subjects, and of reverence and obedience of subjects to their Sovereign; all
which she requited with very princely thanks and a good speech.

I could enlarge the description hereof with many more particulars of mine own
sight; for thither I went as many others did, and all that day wandering from
place to place, I never heard any word spoken of her, but in praising her for
her stately person and princely behavior, and in praying for her life and
safety, with cursing of all her enemies, both traitors and all Papists, with
earnest desire to venture their lives for her safety. And besides such
particular acclamations, the whole army in every quarter did so deboutly at
certain times sing in her hearing, in very tunable manner, diverse Psalms put
into form of prayers, in praise to Almighty God, no ways to be misliked, that
she greatly commended them, Anno 1588.
and with very earnest speech thanked God with them. This that I write you may
be sure I do not with any comfort, but to give you these manifest arguments,
that neither this Qeene does discontent her people, nor her people do show any
discontent in any thing they be commanded to do for her service, as heretofore
has been imagined.

The same day wherein the last fight was, the For which a Papist sticks not to
tax him, writing upon this subject to Mendcza. The Spaniards dismayed fl^e
away for fear.
song before the victory. The English Admiral appointed Seimor and the
Hollanders to watch upon the coast of Flanders, that the Duke of Parma should
not come out; himself followed the Spaniards upon their backs, until they

The Spaniards seeing all hopes fail, and finding no other help for themselves
but by flight, fled amain, and never made stay. And so this great Navy, being
three years preparing with great cost, was within a month overthrown, and
after And all their preparations blasted: the English receiving small loss,
viz. not one hundred men in all, nor one ship but that of Cocks.
many were killed, being chased away (of English there were not one hundred
lost, nor one ship lost, saving that of Cocks) was driven about all Britain by
Scotland, Orcades, Ireland, tossed and Venit, Vidit, Fugit, Other were coined
with the ships fired, the navy confounded, in honor of the Queen, inscribed,
Dux foemina facti. As they fled, it is certain that many of their ships were
cast away upon the shores of Scotland and Ireland. More then seven hundred
soldiers and Mariners were cast up upon

Queen Elizabeth came in public thankesgiving to Paul's Church, in a Chariot
drawn Queen Elizabeth gives thanks to God for so unexpected a deliverance.
with two horses, her Nobles accompanying her with a very gallant train
through the streets of

The King pleasantly answered, That he looked for no other benefit from the
Spaniard, then that which Polyphemus promised to Ulysses, to devour him last
after all his Fellows were devoured.

To close up this whole relation, hear what The odore Beza writes in certain
gratulatory Verses written in Latin, and sent unto her Majesty: the effect of
which Verses is this in English.
WIth Navy huge the Spaniard proud
The English seas had spread,
And all to set the English Crown
Upon the Spanish head.
And would you gladly understand
The cause of all this rout,
Ambition first did lay the plot,
And lucre brought them out.
How well this pride thus puffed up
A puff did overthrow:
And swelling wave such swelling wights
How well did overflow.
How well that Worrier of mankind,
That Spanish cruel Wolf
Was tossed and tumbled up and down
Within the Ocean gulf.
And you for whom both all the winds
And all the waters fight,
O noble Queen, of all the world
The only true delight.
Go forward still to rule for God,
Ambition laid aside;
Go forward still for Christ his Flock
In bounty to provide.
That thou may England govern long,
Long England thee enjoy,
As well a love unto the good,
As to the bad annoy.
From Geneva, besieged by the Duke of Savoy, the twelfth day of August, Anno
1589. Your Majesty's most humble Orator. Theodore Beza.

The death of the Duke of Guise, and Henry Anno 1598.
the third King of France.
IT was not long after that the Duke of Guise, who was slain by the Lord Lougna
at the kings Chamber door, and King Henry the third were taken away; he being
the last of the house of Vallois, and dying without any lawful heirs of his

The manner of whose death was thus. A Friar of the Order of Saint Dominicke,
called James Clement, pretended he had matters of great consequence to impart
to the King: who being admitted into his presence, upon his knees presented the
King with a Letter which he drew out of one sleeve; which whilst the King
attentively read, the Friar pulled forth a poisoned knife out of his other
sleeve, wherewith he stabbed the King into

Thus the sovereign Judge of the world made The reign of Henry the fourth
over the kingdom of France.
way for the entrance of Henry the fourth to have dominion over the Kingdom of
France. Now howsoever from the year 1589. to this present year 1598. the
Churches of Christ have seen

A Note touching the Popes Bull.
THe Leaguers seeing what prosperous success

Then taking the Popes Bull, he caused it to be fastened to a Gibbet at Tours,
by the common hangman of the town, and there to be consumed to ashes, to the
great rejoicing of all the beholders.

The History of one Margaret Pierrone, who chose rather to be burned her self,
than willingly to burn her Bible, Anno 1593.
THere was one Margaret Pierrone borne in a village of Cambray called Sansay,
who with her husband retired into the City of the Valencians. Now because she
could not endure the bad qualities of a maid servant of hers, she was by her
said maid accused to the new sect-Masters surnamed the Jesuits, for that she
had not been in many years at the mass, as also for keeping in her house a
Bible, in reading whereof was her whole delight. They acquainting the
Magistrate herewith, she was by and by apprehended: some friends sent her an
inckling thereof before hand once or twice, that she should get her some where
out of the way: but the errand was not done, God having a purpose that she
should bear ^vitnes of his truth, to fill up the number of those that were to
die for the name of Jesus.

Being in prison, the Judges calling her before them, said, Margaret, are you
not willing to return home unto your house, and there live with your husband
and children? Yes says she, if it may stand with the good will of God. They
added further, that they had so wrought with their Fathers the Jesuits, that
in doing a small matter she might be set at liberty, If, says she, it be not a
thing contrary to Gods glory and mine own salvation, you shall hear what I
will say. No such thing Margaret, said they: for a scaffold shall be erected in
the chief place of the City, upon which you are to present your self, and
there to crave pardon for your offending the Law; then a fire being kindled,
you must cast your bible therein to be consumed, without speaking any word at
all.

I pray you my masters tell me, says she, Is my Bible a good book, or no?
Yes, we confess it is, said they, If you allow it to be good, said the woman,
why would you have me cast it into the fire? Only said they, to give the
Jesuits content. Imagine it to be but paper that you burn, and then all is
well enough, do so much for saving your life, and we will meddle no more with
you; you may buy you another when you will.

They spent about two hours in persuading her hereunto, showing how she might
do a less evil, that a greater good might come of it. By the help of God,
says she, I will never consent to do it. What would the people say, when
they see me burn my Bible? will they not exclaim and say, yonder is a
wretched woman indeed, that will burn the Bible wherein are contained all the
Articles of our Christian faith? I will burn my body sure, before that I will
burn my Bible.

Then seeing she would in no sort conform her self either to the will of the
Jesuits, or to theirs, they caused her to be committed close prisoner, and to
be fed only with bread and water, none to be permitted so much as to speak
unto her, thinking by this hard usage to overcome her: but all was to no
purpose. Being thus long shut up, and no news heard of her one way or other,
every one imagned that they had put her to death privily. Her Judges were
wi^^ing to have saved her life, sending often a Doctor unte her called N. of
Vivendyne to turn her from her resolution; Anno 1593.
but he found it too hard a task for him to effect, often confessing to them
that sent him, that he found no cause at all in her why they should put her to
death.

But on Wednesday the two and twentieth of January 1593. she was condemned to
be brought upon a stage set up in the Market place before the towne-house,
there to see her books burnt; then her self to be strangled at a post, and her
body dragged Precious in the sight of the Lord is the martyrdom Psalm. 116. 15.
of his Saints; and to the Judges, and her hangmen the Jesuits, a perpetual
corrasive to their consciences.

An English man burned at Rome.
IN the year 1595. about the end of May there was executed a young man at Rome
about the age of five and twenty years, who went into the Church of Magdalen,
where beholding their behavior, being pricked forward with religious zeal and
constant resolution, not being able to endure the sight of those horrible
impieties which were there committed amongst them: As the Bishop was setting
forward to go on procession, this young man directed his way toward the
Church Such was the will of God.

When they saw they could not prevail, his indictment was framed, and his
sentence registered, namely that he was to pass from the Capitol, naked unto
his middle, and to wear on his head the form of a Devil, or Dragon, his
breeches painted all over with flames of fire, and thus being bound in a cart,
to be burned alive, being first carried in this manner about the City.

The Patient understanding how he was to be handled, lifting up his eyes,
implored help from

In this plight he was brought to Magdalens, where he had cast down the Idol,
and there one of the hangmen cut off his hand before the door: at which the
patient being not much moved, his hand being set on a pole in the cart, the two
tormentors made him feel the force of the fire, taking each of them a great
torch in his hand flaming, with which they scortched and burned his flesh
through all the city of Rome.

At length they arrived at the place called Campio de Pior, by which time the
young man was brought into a pitiful case, being scortched all over his body,
all blistered, and bloody, having nothing whole but his head, which he now and
then lifted up.

Being taken down out of the cart, and seeing the post whereunto he was to be
fastened with three chains of iron; he went of himself to the post, and
falling on his knees kissed the chains with which he was there to be bound
till the sacrifice should be ended.

But before the fire was put to him, he was urged by Friars and Priests to
worship an Idol which they presented there before him. From which turning away
his face, he showed unto them his constant resolution to the contrary, holding
on his Christian course unto the end: which he truly testified; for as soon as
the flames of fire seized on him, bowing his head he quietly yielded up his
soul into the hands of God.

The death and martyrdom of an old man of Millan, who was burned at Rome.
THe same year they burned an old man who for a long time had lain in the
Inquisitors cares. He dyed with great constancy and resolution. Before his
death he was exhorted and importuned by the Monks to kiss a crucifix. He
seeing their impudency, said, If ye take not this Idol out of my sight, you
will constrain me to spit upon it, which when they heard, he was sent away to
the fire, and consumed to ashes.

The troubles and persecution of Bartholomew Copin, a godly and religious
martyr of Christ.
IN the year 1601. Bartholomew Copin of the valley of Luserne resorted unto a
place called Ast in Piemont, with certain merchandise, purposing to vent the
same at a Fair there, which was to be kept the day following. It so fell out,
that sitting at supper in the evening with sundry other Merchants, one amongst
the rest began to use some speech about the diversitios of Religions, and there
withal spoke somethin^ tending to the disgrace of those of the valleys of
Angrougne and the neighbor villages.

Copin hearing such speeches cast forth against his Brethren, as he little
expected from men of that sort, and also against their Religion, all which
tended to the dishonor of God; he feared lest it should be offensively taken,
if he should not make some reply unto those blasphemies which he heard with
his, ears, and so answer him who held such a discourse against the religion
which himself professed. He who reproved Copin asked, Are you one of Vandois?
He answered, yes I am. And Anno 1601.
what? said the other, believe you not that God is in the Host? No, said Copin.
Oh, said the other, see how false your Religion is? My religion, said Copin, is
no less true then God is God, and as certain as I am sure to die.

The next day Copin was called before the Bishop of Ast, who told him that
report had been made to him of some offensive speeches which he had used the
night past in his lodging: and therefore

Copin answered, he had uttered nothing, but that which he was first provided
to speak; nor had he said ought, but what he was resolved to maintain to the
hazard of his life. He affirmed that God had bestowed upon him some worldly
goods, as Luke 9 23.
content to forgo them all, rather than the peace of a good conscience.

As touching his carriage and behavior, if it pleased him, he said, to make
enquiry thereof among the Merchants of Ast, they could all resolve him as
touching his honest dealing: who also he knew would witness with him, that
he had wronged none in all that time he had conversed among them. And
inasmuch as he was a Merchant

The Bishop regarded none of these allegations,

Copin answered, that his life was in the hands Psalm. 89. 47, 48.
of God, and that he would never seek to save it to the prejudice of Gods
glory: also, that he had not above two or three turns to fetch here in this
world, before he arrived in heaven; and therefore

A few days after he was examined by a Monk, who was an Inquisitor, in the
presence of the Bishop, who vexed him a long while with his sugared discourse,
and by fair words endeavored to draw him to abjure his Religion. But Copin
resisted him still by the holy Scriptures; showing Mat. 8. 38.
and deny him, Christ might justly be ashamed of him, and utterly deny him
before his heavenly father.

The Monk finished his dispute with this dogged farewell, Away thou cursed
Lutherane, thou shall go to all the Devils in hell; and when thou come to
be tormented amongst those unclean spirits, then will thou remember these holy
admonitions which we have tendered unto thee for the saving of thy soul, but
thou had rather go to hell, than to reconcile thy self to thy holy Mother
the Church. It is not long since, said Copin, that I was reconciled to the true
Church.

After many violent assaults they gave way for his wife to come unto him, and
with her one of his sons, promising them to set him at liberty to go home with
them, if he would make amends for his fault committed, by acknowledging the
same. They gave his son and wife leave, to this purpose, to stay supper with
him in prison: during which time he used many exhor^ations tending to patience;
albeit the wife should depart to her house without an husband, or the child
without his father: for be you well assured, said her, that God will be a
better husband and a father unto you than ever I was or can be. For his own
part, he said, he was not bound to love wife or children more then Christ:
besides, they had cause to rejoice, and to think him happy, that God would
honor him so far as to bear witness to his truth with the loss of his
life, and hoped, he said, that God would be so favorable to him, as to support
him under any torments he was to endure for his glories sake.

In conclusion he commended his son and one daughter to his wives care,
which God had given them in the married estate; charging her again and again
to see them brought up virtuously and in the fear of God. He charged his son
to obey his mother, so should he be made partaker of the promised blessing. He
entreated them both to pray, for him, that God would fortify him against all
temptations. And thus having blessed his son, and taken leave of his wife, they
were conducted out of the prison, and he shut up as he was before.

The woman and her son were dissolved into tears, sighing and crying out, that
it would have moved the stoniest heart to compassion: but this holy man, not
contenting himself with that he had said to them by word of mouth, writ unto
his wife this Letter ensuing, the original whereof she has exhibited to us,
written and signed with the hand of the said Copin, the inscription thus
following.

To my wel-beloved wife, Susanna Copin, from the Tower of Lucerna.
Dear yoke fellow, I received much consolation by your coming to this place,
and by so much the more as it was beyond my expectation; and I suppose you also
were not a little comforted that you had such an opportunity offered you, as to
sup with me the last night, being Saturday the fifteenth of September, 1601. I
know not well what they aimed at in permitting you so to do. But God orders
all these things. But as far as I can guess, it shall be the last time that
ever we shall sup together in this life: and therefore pray to God that he
will not cease to be a comfort unto you. Trust you still in him, for he has
promised never to leave nor forsake those that put their trust in him. God has
endued you with wisdom, govern your own family in such sort, that our
children Samuel and Martha may be obedient unto you: whom in the name and
authority of God, I command that they obey you, for so the blessing of Almighty
God shall light upon them.

Dear wife, be not over pensive for me, for Anno 1605.
if God has ordained me now to attain unto the end of my race, and that I
must render into the hands of the Almighty my soul, which so long time he has
lent me; my hope is, that of his holy and divine mercy he will receive it into
his Kingdom, for his own beloved Sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord, through
whom I believe that my sins are forgiven, for the only merit of his holy
death and passion. Also my prayer is, that he

Be fervent in prayer, and in all other parts of Gods worship and service, for
this is the way to true blessedness. Take no care about sending any thing unto
me for these three weeks, and then I pray you send me some money if you think
good to give the Iaylor, and somewhat more for mine own necessaries, if it
please God I live so long. Isa. 38 5.
life for fifteen years. But he has preserved my life much longer; for it is
many years ago since you saw me at the point of death, and through Gods
goodness I am alive; and I hope, yea I am assured that he will so long
preserve me as shall be for his glory and my eternal good, through his only
free grace.

From the prison of Ast, the sixteenth of September, 1601.
The Bishop of Ast was somewhat troubled about this his prisoner; for if he had
let him go, he feared it would breed some scandal, and many might thereby be
emboldned to open their mouths wide against the Roman religion. Besides, there
was a clause in the Contract made between his Excellency and the people of
Vandois, which exempted those of the religion from offense, in these words; And
if it shall fall out that they be asked

Now Copin had a question put to him, in which respect he ought to have been
cleared. But the Bishop would by no means hear that he had un^ustly
imprisoned him; and therefore that his death

Being dead, he was condemned to be burned,

Thus have you the last among the Vandois, which is come to our knowledge, that
were persecuted to death for the cause of Religion.

Mention has heretofore been often made of sundry bloody massacres in foreign
parts; but we are now come to fall upon the report of a business nearer home,
which if the most wise and

A discourse touching the manner of the discovery of the Pouder-treason, with
the examination of some of the Prisoners.
WHile this land and whole Monarchy flourished in a most happy and plentiful
peace, as well at home as abroad, sustained and conducted by these two maine
pillars of all good government, Piety and Justice, no foreign grudge, nor
inward whispering of coffeehouse any way appearing; the King being upon his
return from his hunting exercise at Royston, upon occasion of the drawing
near of the Parliament time, which had been twice prorogued already; partly in
regard of the season of the year, and partly of the Term; as the winds are
ever stillest immediately before a storm; and as the Sun blenks often
hottest to foretell a following shower; so at that time of greatest calm did
that secretly hatched thunder begin to cast forth the first flashes and flaming
lightenings of the approaching tempest. For the Saturday of the week
immediately preceding the Kings return, which was upon a Thursday (being but
ten days before the Parliament) the Lord Mountegle son and hoire to A letter
delivered to the L. Mountegle
the Lord Morley, being in his own lodging ready to go to supper at seven of
the clock at night, one of his Footmen (whom he had sent of an errand over the
street) was met by an unknown man of a reasonable tall personage, who
delivered him a Letter, charging him to put it in my Lord his Masters hands.
Which my Lord no sooner received, but that having broken it up, and perceiving
the same to be of an unknown and somewhat unlegible hand, and without either
date or subscription, did call one of his men unto him for helping him to read
it. But no sooner did he conceive the strange contents thereof, although he
was somewhat perplexed what construction to make of it (as whether of a matter
of consequence, as indeed it was, or whether some foolish devised Pasquil by
some of his enemies to ^karre him from his attendance at the Parliament) yet
did he as a most dutiful and loyal subject conclude, not to conceal it, what
ever might come of it. Whereupon, notwithstanding the latenesse and darkness
of the night in that season of the year, he presently repaired to his
Majesty's Palace at Revealed to the Earl of Salisbury.
Whitehall, and there delivered the same to the Earl of Salisbury his
Majesty's principal Secretary. Whereupon the said Earl of Salisbury having
read the Letter, and heard the manner of the coming of it to his hands, did
greatly encourage and commend my Lord for his discretion; telling him plainly,
that whatsoever the purpose of the Letter might prove hereafter, yet did this
accident put him in mind of diverse advertisements he had received from beyond
the seas, wherewith he had acquainted as well the King himself, as diverse of
his privy Counselors, concerning some business the Papists were in both at
home and abroad, making preparation for some combination among them against
this Parliament time, for enabling them to deliver at that time to the King
some petition for toleration of Religion: which should be delivered in some
such Purpose of the Papists for delivering a petition to his Majesty to crav:
toleration of religion.
order, and so well backed, as the King should be loath to refuse their request.
Like the sturdy Beggars, craving alms with one open hand, but carriing The
Lord Chamberlain made privy to the letter by the Earl of Salisbury.
thus did the Earl of Salisbury presently acquaint the Lord Chamberlain with
the said Letter. Whereupon they two in the presence of the Lord Mountegle,
calling to mind the former intelligence already mentioned, which seemed to
have some relation with this Letter: The tender

Wherefore they resolved for two reasons, first Thought meet by the Counselors
to acquaint the King with the Letter.
to acquaint the K. himself with the same before they proceeded to any further
inquistition in the matter, as well for the expectation and experience they had
of his Majesty's fortunate Judgment in clearing of obscure riddles and
doubtful mysteries; as also because the more time would in the mean while be
given for the practice to ripen, if any was, whereby the discovery might be the
Upon Alhallow day the Earl of Salisbury, showed the letter to the King.
arrival, and none but himself being present with his highness at that time,
where without any other speech or judgment given of the Letter, but only
relating simply the form of the delivery

MY Lord, out of the love I bear to some of your friends, I have a care of
your preservation. Therefore, I would advise you as you tender your life, to
devise some excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament. For God and
man have concurred to punish the wickedness of this time. And think nor
slightly of this advertisement, but retire your self into your country, where
you may expect the event in safety. For though there be no appearance of any
stir, yet I say, they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament, and yet
they shall not see who hurts them. This counsel is not to be contemned,
because it may do you good, and can do you no harm; for the danger is past
so soon as you have burnt the Letter. And I hope God will give you the grace
to make good use of it: To whose holy protection I commend you.

The King no sooner read the Letter, but after a little pause, and then reading
it over again, he His Majesty's judgment of the Letter.
delivered his judgment of it in such sort, as he thought it was not to be
contemned, for that the style of it seemed to be more quick, and pithy, then
is usual to be in any Pasquill, or Libell (the superfluities of idle brains.)
But the Earl of Salisbury perceiving the King to apprehend it deeplier then he
looked for, knowing his nature, told him that he thought by one sentence in it,
that it was like to be written by some fool or mad man, reading to him this
sentence in it, For the danger is past so soon as you have burnt the Letter,
which he said was like to be the saying of a fool: for if the danger was past
so soon as the Letter was burnt, then the warning behooved to be of little
avail, when the burning of the letter might make the danger to be eschewed.
But the King on the contrary considering the former sentence in the Letter,
That they should receive a terrible blow at this Parliament, and yet should not
see who hurt them, Ioining it to the sentence immediately A terrible blow
indeed; at once to have wracked King, Queen, Prince, and Progeny, Religion,
State, and all.
following, already alleged, did thereupon conjecture, That the danger
mentioned should be some sudden danger by blowing up of powder: For no other
insurrection, rebellion, or whatsoever other private and desperate attempt
could be committed or attempted in time of Parliament, and the Authors thereof
unseene, except only it were by a blowing up of Powder, which might be
performed by one base knave in a dark corner; whereupon he was moved to
interpret and construe the latter sentence in the Letter (alleged by the Earl
of Salisbury) against all ordinary sense and construction in Grammar, as if by
these words, For the danger is past so soon as you have burnt the Letter,
should be closely understood the suddainty and quickness of the danger, which
should be as quickly performed and at an end, as that Paper should be blazing
up in the fire; turning that word of As soon, to the sense of, As quickly: and
therefore wished, that His Majesty's opinion for searching of the under rooms
of the Parliament house.
before his going to the Parliament, the under rooms of the Parliament house
might be well and narrowly searched. But the Earl of Salisbury wondering at
this his Majesty's commentary, which he knew to be so far contrary to his
ordinary and natural disposition, who did rather ever sin upon the other side,
in not apprehending nor trusting due advertisement of practices and perils when
he was truly informed of them, whereby he had many times drawn himself into
many desperate dangers: and interpreting rightly this extraordinary Caution at
this time to proceed from the vigilant care he had of the whole State, more
then of his own person, which could not but have all perished together, if
this designement had succeeded: He thought good to dissemble still unto the
King, that there had been any just cause of such apprehension; and ending the
purpose with some merry jest on this subject, as his custom is, took his
leave for that time. But though he seemed so to neglect it to his Majesty, yet
his customable and watchful care of the King and the State still bolling
within him; And having with the blessed Virgin Mary laid up in Anno 1605.
his heart the Kings so strange judgment and construction of it; he could not
be at rest till he acquainted the foresaid Lords what had passed between the
King and him in private.

Whereupon they were all so earnest to renew again the memory of the same
purpose unto his Majesty, as it was agreed that he should the next day, being
Saturday, repair to his Highness: which he did in the said privy Gallery, and
renewed The determination to search the Parliament house and the rooius under it
then being present with the King. At what time it was determined, That the
said L. Chamberlain should, according to his custom and office, view all the
parliament houses, both above and below, and consider what likelihood or
appearance of any such danger might possibly be gathered by the sight of them:
but yet, as well for staying of idle rumors, as for being the more able to
discern any mystery, the nearer that things were in readiness, Wood and coal
found by the L. Chamberlain in the Vault.
the lower rooms, he found in the vault under the upper house great store and
provision of billets,

The Lord Chamberlain looking upon all things with a heedfull indeed, yet in
outward appearance with but a careless and recklesse eye, The Lord
Chamberlaines report and judgment of what he had observed in the search.
that Montegle had told him, That he no sooner heard Thomas Percy named to be
the possessor of that house, but considering both his backwardness in
Religion, and the old dearness in

This could not but increase the Kings former Disputation about the manner of
the further search.
Kings safety, that they all agreed, that there could not be too much caution
used for preventing his danger. And yet upon the other part they were all
extreme loath and dainty, that in case this Letter should prove to be nothing
but the evaporation of an idle brain; then a curious search being made, and
nothing found, should not only turn to the general scandal of the King and
the State, as being so suspicious of every light and frivolous toy, but
likewise lay in ill favored imputation upon the Earl of Northumberland one of
his Majesty's greatest subjects and Counselors, this Thomas Percy being his
kinsman and most confident familiar. And the rather were they curious upon this
point, knowing how far the King detested to be thought suspicious or jealous of
any of his good subjects, though of the meanest degree. And therefore though
they all agreed upon the main ground, which was to provide for the security of
the Kings person, yet did they much differ in the circumstances, by which this
action might be best carried with least dinne and occasion of slander. But the
King himself still persisting that there were diverse shrewd appearances, and
that a narrow search of those places could prejudge no man that was innocent,
he at last plainly resolved them, that either must all the parts of those
rooms be narrowly searched, and no possibility of danger left unexamined, or
else he and they all must resolve not to meddle in it at all, but plainly to
go the next day to the Parliament, and leave the success to Fortune; which he
believed they would be loath to take upon their consciences: for in such a case
as this, an half doing was worse than no doing at all. Whereupon it was at
last concluded, That nothing should be Agreed that the search should be under
color of seeking for Wardrobe stuff missed by Whyneard
left unsearched in those houses: and yet for the better color and stay of
rumor, in case nothing were found, it was thought meet, that upon a pretense
of Whyneards missing some of the Kings stuff or hangings which he had in
keeping all these rooms should be narrowly ripped for them. And to this
purpose was Sir Thomas Knevet (a Gentleman of his Majesty's privy Chamber)
employed, being a Justice of Peace in Westminster, and one, of whose ancient
fidelity both the late Queen and our now Sovereign have had large proof: who,
according to the trust committed unto him, went about the midnight next after
to the Parliament house, accompanied with such a small number as was fit for
that errand. But before his entry into the house, finding Faux found at
midnight without the house.
Thomas Percies alleged man standing without the doors, his clothes and
boots on at so dead a time of the night, he resolved to apprehend him, as he
did, and afterward went forward to the searching of the house: where after he
had caused to be overturned some of the billets and coals, he first found one
of the small barrels of powder, and after all the rest, to the number of thirty
six barrels, great and small. And thereafter searching the fellow whom he had
taken, found three matches, and all other instruments fit for blowing up the
Powder, ready upon him, which made him instantly confess his own guiltiness,
declaring also unto him, That if he had happened to be within the house when he
took him, as he was immediately before (at the ending of his work) he would
not have failed to have blown him up, house and all.

Thus after Sir Thomas had caused the wretch to be surely bound, and well
guarded by the company he had brought with him, he himself returned back to
the Kings Palace, and gave warning of his success to the Lord Chamberlain,
and Earl of Salisbury; who immediately warning the rest of the Counsel that
lay in the house, as soon as they could get themselves ready, came with their
fellow Counselors to the Kings B^d chamber, being at that time near four of
the clock in the morning. And at the first entry of the Kings chamber door,
the Lord Chamberlain, being not any longer able to conceal his joy for the
preventing of so great a danger, told the King in a confused haste, that all
was found and discovered, and the Traitor in hands and fast bound.

Then, order being first taken for sending for the

All that day could the Counsel get nothing out of him touching his accomplices,
refusing to answer to any such questions as he thought might discover the plot,
and laying all the blame upon himself;

The true copy of the declaration of Guido
I Confess, that a practice in general was first broken unto me against his
Majesty, for relief of the Catholic cause, and not invented

This being resolved amongst us, Thomas Percy hired a house at Westminster for
that purpose, near adjoining to the Parliament house, and there we begun to
make our Mine about the 11. of December, 1604.

The five that first entered into the work were Thomas Percy, Robert Catesby,
Thomas Winter, John Wright, and my self: and soon after we took unto us
Christopher Wright, having sworn him also, and taken the Sacrament for secrecy.

When we came to the very foundation of the wall of the house, which was about
three yards thick, and found it a matter of great difficulty, we took unto us
another Gentleman, Robert Winter, in like manner with oath and Sacrament as
aforesaid.

It was about Christmasse when we brought our Mine unto the wall, and about
Candlemasse we had wrought the wall half through; and whilst they were in
working I stood as sentinel to descry any man that came near, whereof I gave
them warning, and so they ceased until I gave notice again to proceed.

All we seven lay in the house, having shot and powder; being resolved to die
in that place, before we should yield or be taken.

As they were working upon the wall, they heard a rushing in a cellar of
removing of Coals, whereupon we feared we had been discovered, and they sent me
to go to the cellar; who finding the Coals were a selling, and that the cellar
was to be let, viewing the commodity thereof for our purpose, Percy went and
hired the same for yearly rent.

We had before this provided and brought into the house twenty barrels of
Powder, which we removed into the. Cellar, and covered the same with billets
and fagots, which were provided for that purpose.

About Easter, the Parliament being prorogued till October next, we dispersed
our selves, and I retired into the Low Countries, by advice and direction of
the rest, as well to acquaint Owen with the particulars of the plot, as also
lest by my longer stay I might have grown suspicious, and so have come in
question.

In the mean time Percy having the key of the cellar, laid in more powder and
wood into it. I returned about the beginning of September next, and then
receiving the key again of M. Percy, we brought in more powder and billets to
cover the same again, and so I went for a time into the Country till the
thirtieth of October.

It was further resolved amongst us, that the same day that this act should
have been performed, some other of our Confederates should have surprised the
person of the Lady Elizabeth the Kings eldest Daughter, who was kept in
Warwickshire at the Lord Harringtons house, and presently have proclaimed her
queen, having a project of a proclamation ready for that purpose; wherein we
made no mention of altering of religion, or would have a vowed the deed to be
ours, until we should have had power enough to make our party good, and then
we would have avowed both.

Concerning Duke Charles the Kings second son, we had sundry consultations how
to seize on his person. But because we found no means how to compass it (the
Duke being kept near

The names of other principal persons, that were made privy afterward to this
horrible conspiracy.
Everard Digby Knight. Ambrose Rookewood. Francis Tresham. John Grant. Robert
Reyes.
Commissioners.
Notingham. Suffolk. Northampton. Mar. Worcester. Devonshire. Salisbury.
Dunbar. Popham.
Edw. Coke.
W. Waad.

And in regard that before this discourse could be ready to go to the Press,
Thomas Winter being apprehended, and brought to the Tower, made a confession in
substance agreeing with this former of Fawkes, only larger in some
circumstances:

Thomas Winters confession, taken the three and twentieth of November, in the
My most honorable Lords,
NOt out of hope to obtain pardon; for speaking of my temporal part, I may
say, The fault is greater then can be forgiven; nor affecting here the title of
a good subject; for I must redeem my Country from as great a danger,

I remained with my brother in the country from Alhallow-tide until the
beginning of Lent, in the year of our Lord 1603. the first year of the Kings
reign; about which time Master Catesby sent thither, entreating me to come to
London, where he and other my friends would be glad to see me. I desired him
to excuse me: for I found my self not very well disposed; and (which had
happened never to me before) returned the messenger without my company.
Shortly, I received another Letter, in any wise to come. At the second summons
I presently came up, and found him with Master John Wright at Lambeth, where he
brake with me, how necessary it was not to forsake our Country (for he knew
then I had a resolution to go over) but to deliver her from the servitude in
which she remained, or at least to assist her with our uttermost endeavors. I
answered, that I had often hazzarded my life upon far lighter terms, and now
would not refuse any good occasion, wherein I might do service to the
Catholic cause, but for my self I knew no mean probable to succeed. He
said that he had bethought him of a way at one instant to deliver us from all
our bonds, and without any foreign help to replant again the Catholic
Religion; and withal told me in a word, It was to blow up the Parliament house
with Gunpowder; for, said he, in that place have they done us all the
mischief, and perchance God has designed that place for their punishment. I
wondered at the strangeness of the conceit, and told him, that true it was,
this struck at the root, and would breed a confusion fit to beget new
alterations: but if it should not take effect, (as most of this nature
miscarried) the scandal would be so great which Catholic Religion might
hereby sustain, as not only our enemies, but our friends also would with good
reason condemn us. He told me, The nature of the disease required so sharp a
remedy, and asked me if I would give my consent. I told him, yes, in this or
what else soever, if he resolved upon it, I would venture my life. But I
proposed many difficulties, as want of an house, and of one to carry the Mine,
noise in the working, and such like. His answer was, Let us give an attempt,
and where it fails, pass no further. But first, quoth he, because we will
leave no peaceable and quiet way untryed, you shall go over and inform the
Constable of the state of the Catholics here in England, entreating him to
solicit his Majesty at his coming hither, that the penal Laws may be
recalled, and we admitted into the rank of his other subjects; withal, you
may being over some confident Gentleman, such as you shall understand best able
for this business, and named unto me Master Fawkes. Shortly after I passed the
Sea, and found the Constable at Berghen near Dunkirke, where by help of Master
Owen I delivered my message. Whose answer was, that he had strict command from
his Master, to do all good offices for the Catholics, and for his own part
he thought himself bound in conscience so to do, and that no good occasion
should be omitted, but spoke to him nothing of this matter,

Returning to Dunkirk with Master Owen, we had speech whether he thought the
Constable would faithfully help us, or no. He said, he believed nothing less,
and that they sought only their own ends, holding small account of Catholics.
I told him that there were many Gentlemen in England, who would not forsake
their Country until they had tried their uttermost, and rather venture their
lives, then forsake her in this misery. And to add one more to our number, as
a fit man both for counsel and execution of whatsoever we should refolve, w^
wished for M. Fawkes, whom I had heard good commendations of; he told me the
Gentelman deserved no less, but was at Brussels, and that if he came not, as
happily he might, before my departure, he would send him shortly after into
England. I went soon after to Ostend, where Sir William Stanley as then was
not, but c^^e two days after. I remained with him three or four days, in
which time I asked him if the Catholics Sir Edward Cook knight at the
araignment of Garnet adds further, that Catesby and Thomas Percy meeting
together complained one to another of the Kings proceedings: and therefore the
only way was to kill the King, which Percy himself would undertake to do. No
Com, sa^ Catesby, thou shall not so adventure thy self, there is a plot to our
greater advontage, and then discovered to him the powder ^reason.
was the beginning of Easter Term, and about the midst of the same Term
(whether sent for by Master Cute ^by, or upon some business of his

Some forthnight after toward the beginning of the Term, Master Fawkes and I
came to Master Catesby at Moorecrofts, where we agreed that now was time to
begin and set things in order for the mine. So Master Fawkes went to London,
and the next day sent for me to ^ome over to him; when I came, the cause was,
for that the Scoltish Lords were appointed to fit in conference of the union in
Master Percies ^oufe, This hindr^ed out beginning until a forthnight before
Christmas, by which time both M. Perty and Master Wright were come to London,
and we against their coming had provided a good part of the powder; so as we
all five entered with ^ooles fit to begin our work, having provided our selves
of Baked meats, the less to need sending abroad. We entered late in the night,
and were never ^^^ne, save only Master Percies man, until Christmas eve. In
which time we wrought under a little entry to the wall of the Parliament house,
and underpropped it, as we went, with wood.

Whilst we were together, we began to fashion our business, and discounted
what we should do after this deed was done. The first question was how we
might surprise the next de^re: the Prince happl^y would be at the par^^^ment
with the Bi^^ his Father, how should we then be able to self on the Duke? This
hurthen Master Percy undertook, that by his acquaintance, he, with another
Gentleman, would enter the Chamber without suspicion, and having some dozen
others at several doors to expect his coming, and two or three on horseback
at the Court gate to receive him, he would undertake (the blow being given,
until which he would attend in the Dukes chamber) to carry him safe ^^uty: for
he supposed most of the Court would be absent, and such as were there, not
suspecting, or unprovided for any such matter. For the Lady Elizabeth, it were
easy to surprise her in the country by drawing friends together at an hunting
near the lord Harringtons, and Ashby Master Catesbies house, being not far
off, was a fit place for preparation.

The next was for money and ^orses, which if we could provide in any reasonable
measure (having the Heir apparent, and the first knowledge by four or five
dates) was obdes sufficient.

Then what Lords we should save from the Parliament, which was first agreed in
general, as many as we could that were Catholics, or so disposed; But after
we descended to speak ^^ particulars.

Next what foreign Princes we should acquaint with this before, or join with
after. For this point we agreed, that first we could not enjoyne Princes to
that secrety, nor oblige them by ^ath; so to be secure of their promises:
besides we knew not whether they will approve the ^^^ject o^ dislike it. And if
they do allow thereof, to prepare before might beget (...), and (...) to
provide until the business were acted, the same letter, that carried news of
the thing done, might as well entreat their help and furtherance. Spain is too
slow in his preparations to hope any good from in the first extremities, and
France too near and too dangerous, who with the shipping of Holland, we
feared, of all the world might make away with us.

But while we were in the middle of these discourses, we heard that the
Parliament should be anew adjourned until after Michaelmas, upon which tidings
we broke off both discourse and working

We wrought also another forthnight in the mine against the stone wall, which
was very hard to beat through; at which time we called in Kit Wright, and near
to Easter, as we wrought the third time, opportunity was given to hire the
cellar,

Now by reason that the charge of maintaining us all so long together, besides
the number of several houses, which for several uses had been hired, and
buying of powder, etc. had layne heavy on M. Catesby alone to support; it was
necessary for him to call in some others to ease his charge, and to that end
desired leave, that he, with Master Percy, and a third, whom they should call,
might acquaint

After this Master Fawkes laid into the cellar (which he had newly taken) a
thousand of billets, and five hundred of fagots, and with that covered the
powder, because we might have the house free, to suffer any one to enter that
would. Master viz. to keep it secret from all the world. The reason why we
desired sir William Stanley should be acquainted herwith, was, to have him with
us so soon as we could;

About this time did Master Percy and master Catesby meet at the Bathe, where
they agreed, that the company being yet but few, M. Catesby should have the
others authority to call in whom he thought best; by which authority he called
in after, Sir Everard Digby, though at what time I know not, and last of all
Master Francis Tresham. The first promised, as I heard master

Mean while Master Fawkes and myself alone bought some new powder, as
suspecting the first to be danke, and conveyed it into the cellar, and set it
in order as we resolved it should stand.

Then was the parliament anew prorogued until fifth of November, so as we all
went down until some ten days before, when Master Catesby came up with Master
Fawkes to an house by Enfield Chase called White Webs, whither I came to them,
and Master Catesby wished me to enquire whither the young Prince came to the
Parliament: I told him that I heard that his grace would not be there. Then
must we have our horses, said Master Catesby, beyond the water, and provision
of more company to surprise the Prince, and leave the Duke alone.

Two days after being Sunday at night, in came one to my Chamber, and told me
that a letter had been given to my Lord Mountegle to this effect, That he
wished his Lordships absence from the Parliament, because a blow would there be
given; which letter he presently carried to my Lord of Salisbury.

On the morrow I went ot White-Webs, and told it Master Catesby, assuring him
withal that the matter was disclosed, and wishing him in any case to forsake
his country. He told me he would see further as yet, and resolved to send M.
Fawkes to try the uttermost, protesting that if it were his case, he would try
the same adventure.

On Wednesday Master Fawkes went and returned at night, of which we were very
glad.

On Thursday I came to London, and on Friday M. Catesby, M. Tresham and I met
at Barnet, where we questioned how this letter should be sent to my Lord
Mountegle, but could not co^ceive; for M. Tresham forsware it, whom we
suspected.

On Saturday night I met Master Tresham again in Lincolnes Inn walks. Where
he told such speeches, that my Lord of Salisbury should use to the King, as I
gave it lost the second time, and repeated the same to Master Catesby, who
hereupon was resolved to be gone, but stayed to have Master Percy come up,
whose consent herein we wanted. On Sunday Master Percy being dealt with to that
end would needs abide the uttermost trial.

This suspicion of all hands put us into such confusion, as Master Catesby
resolved to go down into the country the Monday that Master Percy went to
Syon, and Master Percy resolved to follow the same night, or early the next
morning. About five of the clock being Tuesday, came the younger Wright to my
chamber, and told me that a Nobleman called the Lord Montegle, saying, Arise,
and come along to Essex house, for I am going to call up my Lord of
Northumberland; saying withal, The matter is discovered. Go back Master
Wright (quoth I) and learn what you can about Essex gate. Shortly, he
returned, and said, Surely all is lost: for Lepton is got on horseback at
Essex door: and as he parted, he asked if their Lordships would have any more
with him; and being answered no, is rode as fast up Fleetstreeet as he can
ride. Go you then (quoth I) to Master Percy, for sure it is for him they
seek, and bid him be gone, I will stay and see the uttermost. Then I went to
the Court gates, and found them straightly guarded, so as no body could enter.
From thence I went middle of Kings street found the guard standing, that would
not let me pass. And as I returned I heard one say, There is a Treason
discovered, in which the King and the Lords should have been blown up. So then
I was fully satisfied that all was known, and went to the stable where my
gelding stood, and rode into the Country. Master Catesby had appointed our
meeting at Dunchurch, but I could not overtake them until I came to my
brothers, which was Wednesday night. On Thursday we soo^ the armor at my Lord
Windsors, and went that night so one Stephen Littleto^^ house, where the next
day (being Friday) as I was early abroad to discover, my man came unto me, and
said, That an heavy mischance had severed all the company; for that Master
Catesby, Master Rookewood, and Master Grant were burned with Gunpouder, upon

And so IU remain yours, ^c.

Commissioners.

Nottingham. Suffolk. Northampton. Mar. Worcester. Devonshire. Salisbury.
Dunbar. Popham.
Edw. Coke.
W. Waad.

The names of those that were first in the treason, and labored in the Mine.
Esquires.
Robert Catesby. Robert Winter.
Gentlemen.
Thomas Percy, Thomas Winter. John Wright. Christopher Wright. Guide Fawkes.
And Bates Catesbies man.
Those that were made acquainted with it, though not personally laboring in
the Mine, nor in the Cellar.
Everard Digby, Knight. Esquires.
Ambrose Rookewood. Francis Tresham. John Grant, Gentleman. Robert Keys.

But here let us leave Fawkes in a lodging fit for such a guest, and taking
time to advise upon his conscience, and turns our selves to that part of the
history, which concerns the fortune of the rest of his partakers in that
abominable Treason. The news was no sooner spread abroad that morning, which
was upon a Tuesday, the fifth of November, and the first day designed for that
session of Parliament; The news, I say, of this so strange and unlooked for
accident was no sooner div^^^ged, but some of these cons^irators, namely,
Winter, and the two brothers the Wrights thought it high time for them to
hasten out of the Town, (for Catesby was gone the night before, and Percy ^^
(...) of the clock in the morning the same day of the discovery) and all of
them held their course, with more haste than good speed, to Warwick shire
toward Coventry, where the next day morning being Wednesday, and about the same
hour that Fawkes was taken in Westminster, one G^ant a Gentleman having
associated unto The taking of the horses out of the stable at Warswicke by
^rant and others.
him some others of his opinion, all violent Papist^ and strong Re^ustants,
come to a ^table of violently broken up the (...), carried along with them all
the great horses that were therein, to the number of soven or eight, belonging
to diverse. nobleme^^nd gentleman of that, country, who had put them into the
riders h^^ds to be made ^it for them ^er^ice. And for both that company of them
which fled out of London, as also Grant and his complioces met all together at
Dunchurch at Sir Eve^^rd Dighy his lodging the Tuesday at night, after the
discovery of this ^reacherous attempt a the which Dighy had likewise for his
part The hunting match appointed by sir Everard Dighy.
appointed a match of hunting to have been hunted the next day, which was
Wednesday, though his mind was Ni^^rd like upon a far other. manner of hunting,
more bent upon the blood of reasonable men than brute ^easts.

This company and bel^ish society thus convened, finding their purpose
discovered, and their Their going into arms after the plot discovered.
treachery prebented, did ^^^^lbe to run a desperate course, and since they
could not prevail by so private a blow, to practice by a public rebellion
e^ther to attain to their intents, or at least to save themselves in the
thr^^^ of others. And therefore gathering all the comapny they could unto them,
and pretending the quarrel of Religion, having intercepted such pro^istion of
armor, horses, and powder, as the time could permit, thought by running up and
(...) th^coun^rey, both to a^^^^^ent p^ece and (...) their number (dreaming to
themselves that they and the virtue of a Snow-ball, which being little ^^ the
first; and tun^^^ing down from a great hill grows to a great quantity, by
increa^^^^^g it self with the snow that it meets by the way) and also that
they beginning ^^^st this brave show in one part of the countr^y, should by
their Sy^^pathy and example ^^irre up and en(...) the rest of their religion in
other parts of England to rise, as they had don there. But when they had
gathered their force to the greatest, they came not to the number of
fourscore, and yet Their number never above fourscore.
were they troubled all the hours of the day to keep and contain their own
servants from stealing from them; who (notwithstanding all their care) daily
left them, being far inferior to Gedeons host in number, but far more in
faith or justness of quarrel.

And so after that this Catholic troup had wandered a while through Warwick
shire to Their flight.
by the ordinary Sheriff of Worcester shire were they all beaten, killed,
taken, and dispersed. Wherein ye have to note this following circumstance so
admirable, and so vively displaying the greatness of Gods justice, as it could
not be concealed

Although diverse of the Kings Proclamations were posted down after these
Traitors with all the speed possible, declaring the odiousness of that bloody
attempt, the necessity to have had Percy preserved alive, if it had bin
possible, and the assembly together of that damned crew, now no more secret
conspirators, but open and avowed rebels; yet the far distance of the way
(which was above Overtaken at Holbeach, in Staffordshire, in Ste. Littletons
house.
these rebels, which was on the Friday next after the discovery of the plot,
they were most of them all surprised by the Sheriff of Worcester shire at
Holbeach, about the noone of the day, and that in

Grant, of whom I have made mention before, for taking the great horses, who
had not all the preceding time stirred from his own house till the next
morning after the attempt should have been put in execution, he then laying his
account without his Host (as the Proverb is) that their plot had, without
failing, received the day before their hoped for success, took, or rather,
stole out their horses (as I said before) for enabling him; Grants attempt to
surprise the Lady Elizabeth.
her Father, her Mother, and male Children being all destroyed above.) And to
this purpose also had that Nimrod Digby provided his hunting match against the
same time, that numbers of people being flocked together upon the pretense

Now the violent taking away of those horses long before day, did seem to be
so great a riot in the eyes of the common people, that knew of no greater
mystery: And the bold attempting thereof did engender such a suspicion of some
following rebellion in the hearts of the wiser sort, as

But before twelve or sixteen hours past, Catesby, Percy, the Winters,
Wrights, Rookwood, and the rest bringing then the assurance that their maine
plot was failed and bewraied, whereupon they had builded the golden mountains
of their glorious hopes: They then took their last desperate resolution to
flock together in a troop, and wander, as they did, for the reasons
aforetold. But as upon the one part, the zealous duty to their God and their
Sovereign was so deeply imprinted in the hearts of all the meanest and poorest
sort of the people (although then knowing of no further mystery then such
public misbehaviours as their own eyes taught them) as notwithstanding all
their fair shows, and pretense of their Catholic cause, no creature, man or
woman through all the country, would once so much as give them willingly a cup
of drink, or any sort of comfort or support, but with execrations detested
them: So on the other part, the Sheriffs of the shires, wherethrough they
wandered, convening their people with all speed possible, hunted as hotly after
them, as the evilnesse of the way, and the unprovidednesse of their people upon
that sudden could permit them. And so at last after Sir Richard Verney,
Sheriff of Warwickeshire, had carefully and straightly bin in chase of them to
the confines of his County, part of the meaner sort being also apprehended by
him; Sir Richard Walsh Sheriff of Worcester shire did likewise dutifully and
hotly pursue them through his shire; And having gotten sure trial of their
taking harbor at the house above named, he did send trumpeters and messengers
to them, commanding them in the Kings name to render unto him his Majesty's
Minister; and knowing no more at that time of their guilt then was publicly
visible, did promise upon their dutiful and obedient rendering unto him, to
intercede at the Kings hand for the sparing of their lives: Whoreceived only
from them this scornful answer (they being better witnesses to themselves, of
their inward evil consciences.) That he had need of better assistance, then of
those few numbers that were with him, before he could be able to command or
control them.

But here fell the wondrous work of Gods Justice, that while this message
passed between The preparation to assault the house.
the sheriff and them, the sheriffs and his peoples zeal being justly
kindled and augmented by their arrogant answer, and so they preparing
themselves to give a furious assault; and the other party making themselves
ready within the house to perform their promise by a defense as resolute; It
pleased God that in the mending of the fire in their chamber, one small spark
should flee out, and light among less then two pound weight of powder, which
was drying a little from the chimny; which being thereby blown up, so maimed
the faces of some of the principal rebels^ the hands and sides of others of
them (blowing up with it also a great bag full of powder, which notwithstanding
never took fire) as they were not only disabled {Anno 1620.} Catesby, who was
the first Inventer of this treason in general, and of the manner of working
the same by powder, in special, himself now first maimed with the blowing up
of powder, and next he and Percy both killed with one shot proceeding from
powder.
and discouraged hereby from any further resistance, in respect Catesby
himself, Rookwood, Grant, and diverse others of greatest account among them were
thereby made unable for defense; but also wonderfully stricken with amasement
in their guilty consciences, calling to memory how God had justly punished them
with that same instrument which they should have used for the effectuating of
so great a sin, according to the In quo peccamus, in eodem plectimur: as they
presently (see the wonderful power of Gods Justice upon guilty consciences)
did all fall down upon their knees, praying God to pardon them for their
bloody enterprise: and thereafter giving over any further debate, opened the
gate, suffered the Sheriffs people to rush in furiously among them, and
desperately sought their own present destruction; the three specials of them
joining backs together, Catesby, Percy,

And thus these resolute and high aspiring Catholics, who dreamed of no less
then the destruction of Kings and Kingdoms, and promised to themselves no
lower estate then the government of great and ancient Monarchies, were
miserably defeated and quite overthrown in an instant; falling in the pit
which they had prepared

Anno III. Iacobi Regis.
An Act for a public thankesgiving to Almighty God, every year, on the fifth
FOrasmuch as Almighty God has in all ages showed his power and mercy, in the
miraculous and gracious deliverance of his Church, and in the protection of
religious Kings and States, and that no nation of the earth has been blessed
with greater benefits then this kingdom now enjoys, having the true and free
profession of the

Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the authority of the same, That all and singular Ministers in every
Cathedral and Parish Church, or other usual place for Common prayer within
this Realm of England and the dominions of the same, shall always upon the
fifth day of November say Morning prayer, and give unto Almighty God thanks
for this most happy Deliverance: and that all and every person and persons
inhabiting within this realm of England and the dominions of the same, shall
always upon that day diligently and faithfully resort to the Parish Church or
Chapel where the said morning Prayer, Preaching, or other service of God
shall be used, and then and there to abide orderly and soberly during the time
of the said prayers, preaching, or other service of God there to be used and
ministered.

And because all and every person may be put in mind of this duty, and be the
better prepared to the said holy service, Be it enacted by authority aforesaid,
that every Minister shall give warning to his Partshioners publicly in the
Church at morning Prayer, the Sunday before every such fifth day of November,
for the due observation of the said day. And that after morning Prayer, or
preaching on the said fifth day of November, they read distinctly and plainly
this present Act.

God save the King.
A Prayer and Thankesgiving for the { Anno 1611.}
happy deliverance of his Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, and the States of
Parliament, etc.

ALmighty God, who have in all ages showed thy power and mercy, in the
miraculous and

Franco di Franco, an Italian made away in secret in the City of Vilne.
IN the year 1611. on the day which the papists call the feast of God, a young
man of six and twenty years old, being miraculously called unto the knowledge
of the Gospel, was by certain Italians led through a Church where mass was to
be sung, and being urged to show how he liked it, began to refuse their
Idolatry with great zeal, admonishing the people there present, not to suffer
themselves to be so seduced by the pompous splendour of such vain
superstitions: Telling them, That that God which the Priest held up was no God,
as those seducers made them believe, but a mere Idol, seeing it was not able
to remove it self from one place to another unless it were borne. Jesus
Christ the Son of God ^ir Savior is to be sought, says he, at the right hand
of God the Father Almighty. This young man was forth with compassed about with
an innumerable company of people, who buffeting him often on the face, and
spurning him with their feet, haled him thence into the common Gadle of the
City.

After many days the Bishop with sundry other Lords, calling him before them,
asked him if the heretics had not persuaded him to use such words as he had
spoken: also whether he had not a resolution to kill the Queen, or her son the
King, or the Bishop of Vilne? The prisoner wisely and resolutely answered, That
no man had set him aworke to do it, but only the zeal he had of Gods glory,
his conscience provoking him thereto; holding it impossible for him any longer
so suffer that men should attribute that honor to a dead Idol, which is only
due to Jesus Christ his Savior.

As touching their other demand, his answer was, that Christian Religion
teaches us not to murder men, as Papists have hit^erto done in France,
England, in the Low Countries, and elsewhere, as histories do daily show. The
prisoner also admonished the Biship of Vilne to forsake all Idolatry, to preach
Gods truth and verity, and cease to be witch the poor people with humane
inventions: moreover this faithful witness did with much vehemence and
constancy maintain the truth of God, that the Bishop of Vilne dro^e out of his
Hall his servants and such as came in there to hear him, But he ^oot little by
it, for as they went here and there in the City, they thid it abroad, how in
all their lives they never heard man speak with that courage and boldness of
divine things to so good purpose, as this young man had done.

Not long after he was again brought before the same Judges, and questioned as
before: but in stead of yielding, he ^ardened his face against the impudency of
his adversaries. They purposing to quail this magna^unity, caused him to feel
the forture. When he had suffered the utmost of their cruelty, he was so far
off from abjuring the truth, that on the contrary his confession discovered in
him a greater resolution then ever before, being desirous and showing himself
ready pressed to receive the Crown of Martyrdom.

To be short, the last of June 1611. which was the same day twelvemonth 1610.
where in the City of Vilne, being the capital City of the great Duchess of
Lithuany, at eight of the clock in the morning there happened as terrible a
fire as has been heard of, at the hour in which the said Bishops and a great
company of Iesu^^es there going on procession: the fire was so vehement, that
within the space of seven hours it deboured ^^re thousand (...) hundred and
(...) houses; which tell out as the Jesuits supposed, because they spared the
Here^^ues there Where upon the (...) of Christ was cruelly butchered there by
the enemies of the Gospel not in a public place, ^or by day, though he
instantly requested the same at the (...) of his Judges; but privately in the
night, hi apeare walled about nigh to the Governors house. Before they put him
to death, he was ^ruelly tor^^ned, and then bound by the executioner to a post,
where they drew out his tongue under his chinne; which done, cutting off {Anno
1595.}
his head, his body being divided into four quarters, was carried the next day
through the City upon so many poles.

An history of three Englishmen put to death at Rome.
THree English men meeting together entered into a conference concerning the
state of the Church at that time, complaining that the zeal of Gods glory was
wonderfully cooled among men, yea and that even those of the religion were
grown but too worldly wise; that satan by little was sowing the seeds of
Atheism every where, by rocking men asleep in the cradle of security:
whereupon having in humble manner commended

The third, having resolved to act his part in public, gave over himself to
suffer all the extremities

The learned author, who set forth this History in a notable work of his, notes
neither the year nor the names of these Englishmen. It should seem to be
about the time of Pope Clement the le sage veillard burned at Rome (after these
English men) who before he went to the fire, spoke with such efficacy to his
confessor sent unto him (who also left him not till he yielded up his spirit in
the midst of the flames into the hands of Christ) that this confessor going
the next day into the Pulpit, maintained t^^^rause of the old wise man with
such boldnesse^nd zeal, that all the audience hearing

But in Lent following, a Capuchin Friar An admirable Eapuchin.
preaching before Pope Clement the eighth called him Antichrist, and during
that Lent ceased not to Preach the truth of the Gospel, in the Chair of
postlience, under the robe and habit of a Liar, etc, In the same work my author
(says our Historian) mentions another Italian preacher called N^ Montalchin,
who in describing his History has these words: The Pope perceiving that by
executing the Martyrs thus openly in the sight of the people, in stead of
terrifying them, thereby many were the more encouraged, he resolved with
himself thenceforward to conceal his open violence out of the sight of the
Sun, and to exercise it rather in the dark, and in the night season. The
inquisitors, who had Montalchin in their hands, were preparing a way to murder
him priv^ly, according to the Popes intention.

It so fell out, that the Iaylour smelling the injustice which these reverend
Fathers were devising against the poor prisoner, adventured to give him notice
of it, to the end he making his peace with God might fit himself for death.
This experienced soldier of Jesus Christ plotted a way under hand, by a
spiritual wile, to catch the wise in their craftiness: faining therefore a
repentance, he called for his judges, telling them he was now minded to revoke
his errors, after they had pronounced sentence against him, and would in the
hearing of all recant what he had in public maintained against the truth.

His Judges, believing he had spoken in good earnest, promised him his life
upon those terms. Now that they might the rather satisfy their pride, they
made known to every one the time and place appointed for his abjuration. All
the city assembled together to take knowledge of this so unexpected a novelty.
Montalchin was brought and placed on a scaffold for that purpose. He stood
there in his shirt, holding in his hands two torches lighted: then silence
being obtained, he began to speak to the people as follows.

Dear brethren and Children, I have a long time taught you such a doctrine as
has troubled you. I am now brought hither to open my mind unto you.
Montalchin is a sinful man and therefore may err. But lend me your attention
a while, and I will let you see the difference between both opinions: Three
words (seul, seule, seulement) will serve to distinguish between falsehood and
truth.

1 I have taught you that Christ is our only sacrifice, our only priest, who
only was once offered for us. But the Doctors teach the contrary, to wit, that
the true body of Christ without bread is offered up for the living and for the
dead, that the priests ought daily to offer up the natural body of Christ
really in the Mass.

2 I have taught that in taking the visible signs in the Sacrament, we do
therein by faith only take the spiritual and heavenly bread of our souls.

The Doctors say, that Christ's body is taken flesh and blood into the mouth and
belly of the communicant.

3 I have preached that Jesus Christ is our, only mediator, and that by him
alone we have access unto the Father.

But the Doctors go further, and will have us to come to the Virgin Mary,
making her and all the Saints departed our Mediators and Intercessors.

4 I have declared that we are justified only by faith in Jesus Christ, and
that the free mercy of God is the foundation of our salvation.

The Doctors would have us to help out faith and grace by good works as
meritorious causes of salvation.

5 You have heard me preach that Christ only gives grace; and that he alone
pardons this.

They affirm that the Church has a Coffer or Chest, of which the Pope keeps
the keys, whereinto are put the merits of saints, which he largely distributed
abroad to such as will buy his pardons Anno 1611.
with money.

6 I have told you that the Canonical books of the old and new Testament are
the only ground of our faith and salvation.

The Doctors add thereto their unwritten verities.

7 I have taught you that after this life ended there are only two places
prepared for them to go unto who die and depart out of this world;

The Doctors say, there are four, viz. Paradise, Hell, Limbus, and Purgatory.

8 I have preached that the Pope is not a god on earth, but only a Bishop, and
that only of one place, if he therein behave himself as a good Biship ought to
do.

The Doctors make him Lord of the world, and the head of the visible Church.

9 Now O Christian brethren, Judge you of that which I have said, and see if
you can discern Truth from Error; Truth leads you to life, honor, and
blessedness; Error and lies to death and destruction.

Be now either servants of Truth, or the slaves of Error. For my part I will
cleave to the truth of the Gospel, and do condemn all errors and lies: let
Montalchin die, and live thou, O Lord Jesus.

Then threw he down his two burning torches, one this way, and another that
way, offering his hands to be tied and bound, which caused a great tumult among
the people. Montalchin was returned back again to prison.

Now Reader, it will not be hard for thee to imagine what entertainment he
found there: whether or no the Popes Which was to put the martyrs to death,
privily, as was noted in the beginning of this history.
Decree was executed to the full upon this worthy Confessor, who in the face of
the world did so nobly triumph over Satan and Antichrist his Lieutenant.

Conclusion.
The invincible constancy of the Martyrs tired the Persecutors; their fiery
burning zeal dried up the Rivers; the slaughter of men's swords seemed to be
blunted; the Hangmens halters to be utterly spent and wasted, etc.

A TRVE NARRATION Of a bloody massacre committed upon the Protestants by the
Papists in the greater part of the Valtoline, in the year 1620. after the new
style: Published for a necessary admonition to all Estates, wherein the Gospel
is professed amongst the Papists, and for an example to all true Christians of
constancy in the Profession of the Holy GOSPEL.
MAT. 5. 10. Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake, for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
The true declaration of the Massacres of the Valtoline.
ALbeit that the Grison Lords, being as it were the Sovereign Magistrates, had
by sundry Decrees, according to the common liberty of the two An. 1619. a^ the
month of May: The Minister of the Church of Tell with the Ministers of Irian
and Bruise, together with the assistance of the principal Lords of Tyrano and
Tegly, did meet together in the said place of Boalez, to preach in the Church
of that place. But so great was the multitude and concourse of the papists in
that place in Arms, that they were of necessity enforced to give over their
purpose; and at that time was Master Gaudentius Taches the Pastor of Bruise
al^^^^ beaten to death with staves, a young man ^^ Tyrano was slain outright,
and others very cruelly handled by some of these villains, who by that
occasion may worthily be called the first martyrs of the Country of Tyrano.

Within a short time after was murdered a servant of the Governor of that
place, where the rage and fury of those murderers grew unto that height, that
they did not only contemn the Proclamations published by the Governor, but in
Anno 1620.
scorn and despite thereof they passed up and down before the Palace,
threatening to kill the said governor, and other principal persons of the
Church of France.

Now for that the ordinary Magistrate of that place was not strong enough to
repress the outrages and insolences of those villains, from whom none could
be secure either in their houses or abroad, by reason of the frequent attempts
which viz. the Lords Ioachinas Montalta, at this time

By these persons, besides the processes framed already by the Lords, John of
Cappaul, Governor of Tyrano, and Andreo Enderlino of Tegly, there were again
diverse processes framed anew, and upon the imprisonment and revealing of
certain

And therefore, the importance of the business being of great consequence, it
was thought expedient, that those Lords, Commissioners, should return to Tavoz,
and report to the Court of justice, which there resided, all the business
which resulted of these processes; which they accordingly did about the midst
of April last past. Moreover, they were entreated by diverse noble persons of
the protestant Church of the Valtoline, that they would with all possible speed
provide a garrison of Grisons for the

All these businesses were considered, but it was not possible to put same in
effect for many reasons, had it not been that they received intelligence that a
number of Spaniards approached near to the three pleves, which were places
adjoining to the Valtoline, by which occasion the Magistrate and governors of
the Valtoline were constrained to put a guard near the trenches of Trahona,
and Morben, about the Calends of July 1620, thinking to secure the valley from
the foreign enemy: and

The massacre of Tyrane, wherein were murdered about threescore persons.
THe beginning of their murders was made at Tyrane, wherein those barbarous
and wicked fellows were assisted by certain villains who lived near in a
foreign jurisdiction, of whom the principal captains and tingleaders, were
Iacopo Robustello of Grossot, Macro Anthonio de Venosta, a Doctor of physic
of Mazzio, and Francis Venosta of Tyrane, a Doctor of the Civil Law. These
together with their confederats and dependants, both such as were domestique,
and came from foreign places, that were the most cruel and bloody villains
which could be picked out thereabouts, before any enterprise covertly made,
gave order, that all the ways and passages of every side should be well
guarded, to the end that their cruel enterprise upon the Protestants of the
Country should not so readily be discovered, and they the attempters
themselves should be the less troubled in the execution.

Then about six of the clock in the night, they entered into the Country of
Tyrane, like so many foming wild Bores, (...) their rendevous of Doctor
Francesco Veno^^^ They caused four muskets to be discharged before the Palace
of the Seignior Podesta the principal magistrate of the place, and rung the
great Bell of Tyrane, Upon which signal all the inhabitants in that vicinity
took the alarm, and made head toward the said house. They gave order to break
the bridges which lay toward Bruise, and on the place they planted a strong
guard, and this was done before day. Suddenly upon the dawning of the day, the
Bells began to ring another peale a Matello, and then these traitors began to
bandy and to range themselves together. The Protestants, who without fear or
suspicion of any practice against them, came out of their houses into the
streets to see what the matter was, were suddenoy shot and most cruelly
murdered in the place. Others by force entered into the houses of the
Protestants, drew them out of their beds, and without any compassion slew all
they could meet withal.

John Andrea Cataneo was by his wife delivered from the hands of those
murderers, but was again by force recovered by them. And although this
Gentlewoman was a near kinswoman of Robustello, and of Doctor Venosta, as
cousins once removed, and this Cataneo had ever esteemed them among his better
friends, yet could not he obtain the favor to have his life spared. He prayed
them that first he might have leave to speak with the said Doctor, which
could not be obtained. In the mean time he escaped into another house
adjoining, and hid himself in a Garret in the top thereof, hoping to escape
the hands of those his furious persecutors: but all in vain, for they
nevertheles pursued him into the house, where he poor Gentleman hid himself,
they took him, and cast him down out of the house into the street; and when
they found there was yet life in him, they with a most inhumane and
unspeakeable cruelty dispatched him with a piece of Timber.

Antonio de Salve, a Chancellor in that Valley being appointed Judge upon
criminal causes, a man of the greatest authority in the pregella, and oth^^
places, who at that instant was resident at ^ondres, being desirous to save
himself together with his Deputy, Marco Antonio Venosta a Doctor of Law in the
house of Iaco^o Homodeo was drawn out of the house into the street, with
Venosta and his servant Antonio Keller of Soglio in the said Pregella, and
slain with a shot of musket, being of the age of forty two years.

Seignior Andrea Enderlin of Kublis in Prettigonia, a Gentleman of great worth,
very singularly learned, and skillful in many languages, being at that time
Governor of Teglie, in the

In mean time, with this Governor also was slain John the son of Senior
Michael Montio of Bruise, a Gentleman of singular goodness and wisdom, who
before time had been Deputy to his father in the government of Trahona, and in
the same demeaned himself with great commendation Who being desirous to
withdraw himself from Tyrane to his own house, was entreated by Ambrosio
Barussino, son of the

The reverend Gentleman Senior Antonio Basso, Pastor of the Protestant Church
of Tyrane, a man of great sanctity and wisdom, and a lover of the peace of
the Country, hearing the noise of these uprores, he and Master Samuel

Neither did those furious persecutors rest here, but besides they cut off
Bassoes head, and carried it into the Church, and fixed it upon a pole in the
pulpit where before time he was wont to preach, saving with all disgrace and
scorn, Come down

In like manner at the same time the Palace of the Chequer of Tyrane was
besieged by those helhounds; wherein dwelt Senior John de Cappaul being at that
time governor. To which place Michael Lazarone, a man of good account and
chancellor of that office, had retired himself early in the morning to save
his life. But because he was extremely hated of the Papists, by reason of his
singular piety, religion, and sincerity, he was

The very same evening was the gate of the palace burnt to the ground by those
rebels, who the next morning entered into the same, raging with fury, and took
the Governor prisoner with his young son; spoiling and ransacking wives, and
maidens, and carrying away all they could lay hands on. The Governor of the
Palace was carried away prisoner to the house of the foresaid Dort Francesco,
and at last, after he had long time been tugged to and fro, he was miserably
slain with a shot.

John Antonio Mazano endeavoring to make resistance against those rebels, and
his wife defending him, was with her self and two young children miserably
killed.

Another called John Antonio Schlosser, a Gardonese, having made long
resistance, and killed one of the rebels, was at the last taken, and tied to a
tree, and so shot to death.

To be short, these villains had no regard of any person, neither young, nor
old, nor weak, nor strong, but all of all sorts were either shot unto death,
or cut in pieces, or in one manner or other destroyed; and the number of those
persons in estimation, who in Tyrane received the crown of martyrdom for the
profession of the Gospel, was about sixty.

Of those who by the grace of God, although with great danger, escaped through
the horrid and vaste Alps into Retia and other parts, were only three persons,
that is, Doctor Iacobo Albertino, Iacobo Nevio de Coyra, and Egidio Venosta,
who left behind them wealth, wives, children, and whatsoever goods they had.

The Ladies who were not slain were constrained to change their Religion, and
at this day go to mass, saving the wife of the said Lazarone and her
daughters, and her niece, being the wife of the said Egidio, who by the
assistance of Almighty God continued in safety. And there also the eighth of
August, the said Ladies were released, who retired themselves into Retia, viz.
the wife of this Lazarone, and her two daughters, leaving behind them in the
Valtoline one daughter and two young sons who cannot obtain leave to depart
the country.

CHAP. 2. The massacre of Teglie, wherein were murdered about sixty persons.
THese wicked traitors having in this manner committed the foresaid execrable
massacre in Tyrane, suddenly the strangers and the outlawes of the mountains,
apparrelled in red cassockes, and well mounted on horseback, marched in the
morning to Tell at the hour when the Sermon was, and ran like ravening Wolves
to the Volta Church, being guided by two Friars, Azzo and Carolo Besta, and by
Antonio Besta their cousin germane. The Protestants who were in the Church,
observing the evil intention of those villains, arose suddenly from their
seats, and endeavored to shut the Church door, and to barricadoe the place with
the benches. They without labored

Amongst those who were slain in the Church, the chiefest of note was the
reverend Lord John Piere Dante of Rozu of the higher Engadin, a minister of the
Protestant Church of Tell, a man rarely endued with learning and the fear of
God, and in those respects honored even of his enemies themselves; who after
he had with lively reasons exhorted that afflicted Church of his constantly to
persevere unto death in the known and confessed truth, to the honor of his
Savior, even so long as the

Amongst these was one Iosui Gattia Doctor of the law, Lieutenant to the
Podesta of Tell, and principal Justice, an honorable Gentleman, and of
excellent virtues, about 43 years of age, together with Daniel Gugelberge.

Gaudenzo Guizziardi a Gentleman of like worth and honor, Cousin germane to
the father

Antonio the son of Scipion Besta, a Gentleman very rich and of excellent
parts, although he was the near kinsman of Azzo Besta, was shot to death, and
died in the arms of his wife, being of

Ascanio Gatti an Apothecary of Tell, being seven and twenty years of age,
George his brother eighteen years old, Ionata Piatti sixty five years old,
Maximilian Piatti four and twenty years, Vincenzo Frigerio, Notary and
Procurator of Tell, age 39. Marssilio Piatti, age 38. Filiberto his brother,
age 19. Virginio Piatti, age 28. Lorenzo Piatti of Boaltie, age 23. slain with
a musket shot at the window of the steeple. Philippo Nova

In the Steeple of the Church were burnt these which follow; Horatio Gatti,
some of the abovesaid Iosue Gatti, age 6. Doctor Lelio Paravicino of Berbenno,
a Physician of great worth, and excellently practiced in his profession,
dwelling in Tell, age 43. Azzo Guizziardi nephew of the above named Gaudenzo, a
young courteous gentleman; and of rare hope, age 22, Friderico Guizziardi, age
34. Horatio Paravicino son of Francisco, age. 6. Margareta Marlianica wife of
Raphael Nova a Doctor of the Law, a Gentleman of great worth, age 43. Madalena
her daughter, wife of Daniel Gatti, age 18. Anshelino Gatti Chancellor of the
State of Tell, age 67, Giovan Pauli Piatti son of Ionata, age 48. Claudia
Piatti daughter of Massimiliano, age 7. Violante late wife of Theodore Gatti,
age 64. Giovanninna widow of Vincentio Nova, age 34. Pietro Regenzano.
Chancellor of the above named Podesta of Tell, age 46. Iosue Meda, age 50.
Martua of Borum, age 53. Madalena Girardona wife of Claudio Gatti, age 33.
Augusto Gatti son of Abraham, age 22.

Abroad without the Church and Steeple were slain Vincentio Gatti, brother of
Anthelmo, age 73. Andrea his son, age 32. who was murdered in the street
called Lagone. Claudio Gatti son of Theodoro, Ionatan Medasonne of Iosue,
Daniel Lazeroto, Vincentio Cattaneo, and Giovan Pietro Regenzano, who, coming
from Morbegno from the garrison, were slain in a certain place called
Buffetto, age 18. or thereabouts. Thomazo Reaenzano brother of Giovan Pietro,
age 38. Melchior Marcionino wounded in the head, but after five days being
found in his bed, was solicited with great promises to renounce his Religion:
but he with great earnestness and resolution refusing was murdered in his
bed, age 65. Giovanni Antonio Federici, Doctor of Law in Sonico, in
Valeamenica, age 38. was very near to be murdered in prison, from whence at
the instance of Antonio Piatti Curate of Tell he was set free.

In this place it is worth the noting, that Giovan Abondio Nova son of Doctor
Raffaele, a very learned young man, albeit out of humane infirmity to save his
life he had promised in the Church of Tell to go to mass, yet in short time
recovering himself, and acknowledging his oversight, with much grief and
repentance for his fault, he with all speed departed from Tell toward Sondres,
supposing that he should be safely protected by his dear kinsman Nudar
Marliemion; but being required by the soldiers who kept the passage of
Trisiria, to deny his Religion, for refusing the same, he was slain in the
way, being 22 years of age. This young man is a singular example for them who
fall merely through infirmity and danger of death, not in other respect, but
yet after their fall, through the grace of God, and the crowing voice of the
word do return to repentance, confessing their fault, and with unfeigned
sorrow of heart bewailing the same; which even befell the blessed Apostle Peter
himself.

CHAP. 3. The massacre following committed at Sondres in the mountain of
Sondrium and Malenk; wherein were left dead above 140 persons.
THese wicked and savage wretches, having in this manner executed and finished
this their impious and execrable enterprise at Tyrane and Tell, assembled
themselves in the midst of the Valley of Sondres, where the principal and
chief Justice of the Country made his residence, having before placed secure
guards upon every passage of the country about. They came principally by the
conduct of Giovani Guizziardi, Prospero Swadino, and Guilio Pozalis, being all
three of Ponte, with an entire company of soldiers from Ponte, Chiur, and some
few from Porti, who the very same Sunday marched to the gate of Albosagia: in
which place they found Lorenco Paribello a doctor, Giovan, Iacomo, and Floratio
his sons, with another company of soldiers attending the coming of the
abovesaid John

This business was freely divulged all abroad in Sondres by the Roman
Catholics themselves, that these banished came toward Sondres to execute the
same design which they before had practiced at Tyrane and Tell, who offered
their aid to the chief Justice to defend him against the invasion, protesting
that they would no more endure any such villainous attempts. Wherefore they took
arms, under pretense and show of defense,

These persons, concealing their mischievous intent, killed at times sometimes
one, sometimes

Some of them endeavoring to flee toward the valley of Malenco, which lies
against Poschiaro, Agnedma, and Pregalia, were murdered by certain villains
of Ponchiero, a place about Sondres: and amongst other Gentle women were
wounded and run through in many parts Frances Marliamio, Giovanni Andrea
Chissa, and

The day after was slain in the morning Nitholo Marlianco, son of Fellos^o,
a man singularly affected to the public good, and to the advancement of the
Gospel. He was shot by his cousin germane Emilio Luvizaro meeting him in the
street, the said Marlianco going in the company

At this time it was delivered for certain, that the day before was murdered
Caesar the son of Prospero Paravicino, and of Hortensia Marteninga, Countess
of Barco, a Gentleman of most rare abilities, traveling about his business
toward Tresiar, age 50. Besides Prospero his son was slain, of age 27. also
Battista Girrardo

Only the Chancellor Giovan Andrea Migardino, calling to remembrance the
matters contained in the abovesaid processes, the same sabbath day the ninth of
July, with his brother Gregory, and others of the Church of Sondres, withdrew

The enemy, that is to say, the proper Inhabitants of the valley, with their
ringleaders James Robustello, Azzo Besta, John Guizziardi, Lorenzo Paribello,
and others entered into the Palace, they deprived the Magistrate of his office,
that is to say, Giovanni, Andrea Traersio of Scants, of the upper Agnadua,
Captain and Governor of the Valtoline, who with his family had retired
himself into the house of Paul Clamar until Wednesday the eleventh of July;
on which day, under protestation to secure them, they were conducted to
Malenco, where in the Village of Chissa, against their faith given, they were
mads prisoners, and detained for eight days following. They who by the
commandment of the said captain found themselves to be made prisoners were
delivered, putting in their room certain of the Religion. They immediately
changed the Calender, and gave for a prey the goods of the Protestants: by
which occasion great multitudes of persons assembled from all the parts of the
Valtoline to rob and spoil; and by reason of the sweetness which they found
in pillaging the goods they met with in diverse noble houses excellently well
furnished, grew an intolerable heat and outrage to spoil, insomuch as brother
robbed brother, and the nearest of kindred pursued and robbed one another, and
followed one another to the death. The peasants, hoping by means hereof to be
exempted from paying their yearly rents, ran with all fury and madness about
the woods, bushes, and mountains, searching after the poor Protestants, who
were scattered by fear, whom they murdered as they found them with extreme
cruelty.

Amongst these were these Gentlemen of greatest worth and resolution, Doctor
Bartolomeo Paravicino of Sondres, from whom they took about two thousand
crowns; Doctor Nicolas his brother, whose brother Doctor Lelio had before been
slain in the Church of Tell; Petronio Paravicino, Doctor, and Giovan Battista
Mallerio of Antwerpe in the Low Countries, a man endued with excellent rare
qualities of mind and body; for he was both a good Philosopher and a learned
Divine, and very fit to instruct youth he was surprised in the house of Morone,
and when they had stoned him to death, they cut off his head, ripped his belly,
and took out his entrails. His Children, Giovan, Andrea, and Catharine were
carried to Millane.

Annaidi Lita, wife of Anthony Grotti of Chio in the territory of Vincentine,
of an honorable and ancient house, was come out of Italy but some few years
before for the liberty of her conscience. This Anna was first by them exhorted
with fair words to change her Religion; but she constantly persevering
therein, was admonished that she would at the least have a care of her young
infant which she held in her arms, being about two months old; otherwise she
would make reckoning that in the twinkling of an eye both she and her babe
should die: but she with a bold and undaunted courage answered, That she had
not A holy resolution.
departed out of Italy her native Country, neither had she forsaken all the
estate she had, to renounce at last that faith which had been inspired Behold
here the power of faith.
her breast, and said, Here is the body which you have power to kill; but my
soul, on which you have no power to lay hand, that I commend to my God, and
presently she was slain, and afterward cut in pieces, being thirty five years
old. The infant, because it was a lovely and a sweet babe to look on, was
suffered to live. God restraining the cruelty of those butchers, and was
delivevered Gods Word and Gospel can never be bound in the^ hear^ of Gods
elect.
of the Gospel having continued in the said Chio, and endured a grievous
imprisonment two years together, was at last condemned to the Galley, where he
died within two months after. When he was bound in chains, being carried from
Chio, he said, You may indeed bind my person, but the

According to this most Christian example John Steeven Moron and Rodulfo
Rivello, being both of them of the Valley of Sondres, did not only in their
proper persons seal with their blood the truth of the Gospel, but moreover
exhorted their children, John Andrea, and John Antonio, the one of them being
fifteen years of age, the other ten,

And yet by reason of the money and jewels found in the houses and chests of
the Protestants, the eagerness and fury of each of those miscreants increased
daily more and more; insomuch as that there were neither noble nor ignoble, nor
Lady, no neither man, woman, young nor old, of

The same befell to D. Io. Battista Salici of Soglio in the Pregaglia; for
although that his life was promised him, nevertheless he was brought into the
market place of the said Campello pinioned with a cord, and miserably slain
with two musketeers, being of the age of 72. after he had bin robbed of his
gold and silver, whereof great store was found in his house, according to the
common and too much practiced rule of the Roman Catholics, Haereticis non est
servanda ^ides.

Dominico Berto, an aged man of 67 years, was set upon an Ass, his face turned
to the tail, which he held in his hand in stead of a bridle, and in his other
hand a book, whom in this manner they carried through Sondres, saying,
Alessio, Alessio, etc. they cut off his cares, his nose, his cheeks, boring
holes in diverse parts of his body, with a strange and unheard of
barbarousnesse, until they had quite killed him; but he for the love of Christ
his Savior with great and incredible courage and cheerfulness endured all
those varieties of torments and martyrdom. And by this it may be gathered what
they would have don with Seignior Alessio, a faithful Pastor of the Church of
Sondres, if he had fallen into the hands of these raging beasts. But he by the
great mercy of God was preserved with his wife and children, in the company of
seignior Georgio Ienatro Minister of Berbenno, and Charles Salice son of
Cavaliere Hercole of happy memory, and others, not without great travel,
danger and difficulties, among the craggy and dangerous mountains, whereon they
traveled, it so pleasing the gracious God by the virtue of his spirit
graciously to assist him, although he was in the midst of his persecutors.

Anthony de Prati of the hills was with many words exhorted to abjure his
Religion; but he constantly persevered, and with a generous courage replied in
these words, My soul shall be taken up into Abraham's bosom, and after my
death my enemies shall see the Angel of God hard by me, etc. and accordingly
an Angel appeared over his body in a white garment, being beheld of the
bystanders, who of their own accord have publicly confessed the same.

Theophilo Mossino received into his body a shot with a musket: but before he
was dead a gag was put in his mouth, which being filled with gunpouder, fire
was given to it, and in that manner he passed miserably out of this life;
Giovanni his son was slain with seven wounds.

Seignior Salvetto, being delivered out of prison, was instantly exhorted to
embrace the catholic Roman Religion. But notwithstanding he constantly
persisted, although he was both young in years, and a lover of worldly
vanities: and having received a shot of a musket was carried by a ladder out of
the Palace to the ground, from whence he raised himself, and besought them to
finish the work they had to do about his body, that he might render his soul
to his Creator, being 28 years of age.

Io. Battista Mingardino, having received many wounds, and being stripped of
his garments, and left naked in the woods, nevertheles after this so evil
entreaty he returned to his house: and although the Priests of Sondres did
with all diligence possible exhort him to change his Religion, promising him,
in case he would do so, mountains of gold; nevertheless he constantly
persevered in the truth of the Gospel even to the end.

Christina Ambria the wife of Vincenzo Bruno of Prada, Mudalena Merli of
Montagna, and John Garato of Fruxagiola, were thrown down headlong into the
river Adda, from diverse bridges of Boffetto, S. Petro and others, and so
drowned, because they had refused to embrace the Catholic Roman Religion, and
that with so manly and constant a resolution, as did work an admiraration in
the persecutors themselves.

In this mean time notwithstanding the reverend Seignior Bartholomew
Marlianico received the crown of Martyrdom, who sometimes had preached at
Sondres, a true servant of God, and for his life and manners unreprovable.
Others had their mouths slit up to the ears; others received other flashes in
the face, others were in other manner most cruelly mangled to the death,
Battista of Grilio, called of the Bajacca, an aged man of seventy five years,
being found in the house of the

Paulo Baretta of Chio in the County of Vicence,

There were diverse other good Christians, honest men, and fearing God, both of
rich and of mean estate of Sondres from the mountain of Sondres,

And these were the reverend Gentlemen, Marco Antonio Alba, of Casale, of Mont
ferrato, Pastor of the Church of Malenco, a man full of zeal, of the age of
sixty three years; John Ptedro Mingardino, Anastasia his sister, Lorenzo Hicke
slain above the bridge of Sondres, and thrown down into the water; Andrea his
son, who had his nose cut off, and his cheeks even to the furthest part
thereof, that they might afterward put him to the more cruel death; Andrea
the son of Peter called Luther near to the butchery of Sondres; John Oswaldo a
carpenter of di Cyra near to the palace of Sondres, Daniel Newbecher near to
the flood of Sondres, whereinto he was cast, being half dead before, John
Lorence near unto the Church at the mount of Sondres, Gaudenzino di Mossini,
John in Bonginono, Battista and Andrea his sons, John Antonio son in law of
Vicenzo Bruno, Steffano Pagano of Poschiavo. Antonio son in law of Vicenzo
Bruno, Stephano Pagano of Poschiavo, Antonio Samadeno Paolo, and Iacobo
Demonegoni, Andrea son of Pietro Ducheno, Domenico his brother, Pietro his son,
Nicolo Feacaiolo sometime Deacon of Sondres, Eugenio Chiesa, Giovanni Chiesa,
Barnardo his son. Radolpho his brother dwelling in Malenco had promised to
go to mass, for which cause his life was given him: but because he had
furnished with victuals Signior Alessio, and his company, when they passed the
mountains, he was shot to death.

John Vientius Andreone Cani was he wed into many pieces, of age 84. Zacharia
Ventura of Bresdiano, a poor, lame, dumb, beggar, yet made he a sign with his
finger, how small account he made of the mass.

Moreover John Patara a member of the Church of Sondres, being discovered to be
one of the Religion, was on the sudden shot with a musket in the back and so
died.

Many hid themselves in holes, and caves, and in woods, out of which they durst
not come but by night only to get some food, and that with great fear and
terror of the watching enemy; others for want of convenient food to eat, and
others that fed only upon roots, leaves, and grass, made an end of their
lives; and many were murdered in diverse places, who had no burial at all; so
as many carkases were to be seen in groves and woods in the mountains, and in
waters in many places.

CHAP. 4. The massacre of Berbenno, wherein were slain about eleven persons.
IN what manner also businesses passed in the noble Country of Berbenno it
does likewise plainly appear; for in that place also the rebels played their
part of killing and spoiling the professors of the Gospel. For after they had
executed their cruelties and outrages, as has bin delivered before in Tyrane,
Bruise, Tell, Sondres, in the mountain of Sondres, Malenco and other places,
they also received special commandment, as may appear by a letter written to
them by John Guizziardi, of the twelfth of July of the present year, that they
should with all their power and courage, murder, strangle, massacre, and in
sum should use all diligence, without favor or mercy, to destroy all
Lutheranes wheresoever: by virtue of which commission they have not for their
parts omitted any manner of outrage and villainy against the Protestants. And
first there were presently murdered certain persons of good rank and
quality, and that with great cruelty, against faith and promise given them. The
which was with so much the more rage and fury put in execution: for that those
Catholic Romans themselves, who upon the first proposition refusing to give
their consents on the sudden to those murders, were without respect or favor
on the sudden murdered themselves, as happened to Bartolomeo Porret to, and
other Roman Catholics.

The Protestants that were massacred were these that follow, Theophilus de
Piscatory of Ognano in Romagna, who had dwelt in Berbenno

Anna di Cassavia of Pregaglia, wife of the abovesaid Theophilus, was before
murdered at a house called the Chanons of Berbenno the day abovesaid, aged
fifty years.

Concordia Crotta of Tyrane, the wife of Giovan Gugelman of the territory of
Zuriz, who

Aurelio the son of Nicolas Paravicino, going from Berbenno to Sondres, was
slain in the plain of Castione, the eighteenth of July, aged fifty seven.

Bartolomeo the son of David Paravicino was wounded to death in the head with
the shot of a Musket, who, quite against the hope and expectation of the
Chirurgions, lived five days after, and

Dttavio Paravicino of Capelli, an honorable Gentleman, was together with two
others underwritten, John Battista and Horatio Paravicino detained as prisoners
in the Chanons of Berbenno, from the eleventh unto the six and twentieth day
of July, on which day they were requested and accompanied to Sondres by the
commandment of Robustello, who pretended

John Battista Paravicino of Capelli a Gentleman also of great honor, who was
kept prisoner as aforesaid, and conducted to Sondres, in his

Horatio, brother of the said John Battista, was wholly and in all things his
faithful companion, and in like manner rendered his life the day abovesaid,
being thirty two years of age.

Anna de Beveri of Gineura, wife of the abovenamed Ottavio, a Gentlewoman of an
honorable estimation, being desirous for the safety of her

Theosina Paravicina of Capelli, mother of the abovesaid John Battista, and
Horatio, a Gentlewoman of great worth, was slain in her own

Adamo Scarumveio of Tyrane was at the time of the barbarous massacre of Tyrane
in the garrison of Morbenno, from whence notwithstanding he escaped and came to
Clavenno, afterward meaning to return with the Land of Grisons to the
Valtoline, and to accompany the said Theosina to Sondres, was murdered, being
twenty years of age. He was a young man of singular expectation.

CHAP. 5. The Massacre of Caspano and Trahon, wherein there were murdered
eleven persons or thereabouts.
BUt for all this the Trahonesse could not pass in the lower Valtoline, but
that he received his part in this persecution with the persecution of diverse
persons, which the Reader may see by the Catalogue ensuing.

Joshua the son of Hortensio Malacrida, coming from Gaspano, in his journey to
Bulio, being encountered at the bridge of Masino, and being demanded if he would
go to Mass, answering that he would not, was forthwith slain and cast into
the river of Masino, being of the age of thirty years.

The like befell to his brother Plinit, he was sought for in Bulio by 25.
persons, and not being found there, was met in his return betwixt Arden and
Bulio, and killed, being 26. years of age.

Andrea Paravicino of Bugo, of Caspano Sarto, by his trade a Tailor, stayed
there from the 9. of July, until the coming of the Grison Band into the
Valtoline: but after the sudden departure of the said Band, being discovered by
his countrymen and kinsfolks, was taken and carried to Morbegnio, and being
solicited to forsake the true Religion, and to embrace the Roman, and standing
constantly with great manfulnesse thereto, was condemned to the fire, and was
placed between two heaps of wood, to make him to recant. But all was in
vain; for being asked if he were a Catholic, he answered, That he was. Then
if he were a Roman Catholic; he also affirmed likewise, that he was so. But
being demanded if he held the Roman faith as it is at this day, he answered,
no. It is true, said he, that I hold the ancient Catholic Roman faith, which
was preached by S. Paul, That a man is saved hy grace by the means of faith,
and not by works, lest any man should boast. Being demanded, if he believed
the Pope to be head of the Church, he answered, No; because Christ only is the
head of the Church, according to the promise, I will be with you unto the end
of the world.

And although the fire was first kindled, and then put out, of purpose to draw
him to a recantation, nevertheless he persevered and endured that cruel death
with admirable cons^^ncy, the 15. of August, being sixty years old.

Giovan Pietro Malacrida, although he were little of stature, yet was he great
and mighty in the confession of the truth, insomuch that for the love of his
Savior he suffered death with singular cheerfulness, being forty years of
age.

His example was devoutly and constantly imirated by Elizabeth his wife, who
was killed in the eight and thirtieth year of her age: and moreover these
Herodian murderers not therewith content, but joining one barbarous inhumanity
to another, observing a daughter of hers, being an infant of three years old,
to lie in the cradle, although it was a child of a sweet countenance, and
these wretches seeing that the babe did look lovingly and cheerfully on them,
which would have been enough to have moved any adamantine heart to compassion,
notwithstanding they took the poor babe by the feet, and pashed her against
the wall, and in this manner most barbarously murdered the same.

Thomaso Maestreilla Carpenter, and a principal enginer, excellent in building
of mills and other buildings, was murdered in one of his mils at Melle, being
eighty years of age.

Dominico of Paguno, called Luther of Scermele of the hundred of Canvicke in
Trahonesse, being at his work at Morbegno, was killed the fourteenth of
August, age forty eight; he was followed by his son Iacomo, age eighteen, and
Peter his son, of age fifteen; also of Maria his sister: all which in one day,
being the fourteenth

CHAP. 6. The Massacre of Bruise, in which were murdered to the number of 27.
persons.
THese wretched murderers were not contented in the places abovenamed, which
were subjects to the Lords Grisons at Tyrane, Tell, Sondres, Monte di Sondrio,
Berbenno and Malenco, to have massacred so many persons who feared God,
honorable, noble, learned, wise, and sober, of authority and reverence, young
and old, men, women,

For example, on Sunday the ninth of July, a young man called John the son of
Dominico of

There were slain at that conflict twenty seven persons, and among them these
which follow.

Bettino of Azzala, son of Pietro, of age forty five years; Perrotta his
wife, being of the age of forty; Pietro their son, being of age twelve
years; Andreino Zopo, son of Ianotto, age forty; James son of John
Domenico, Quadernetto, age thirty. John Monegatti, age fifty eight; Michaele
della Kosa, age 38. Iacomena de Burieo, age thirty years; Iean Moneta age
eighty. This Woman was oftentimes advised to become a Roman Catholic, and to
favor her age, telling her that if she would, she should have her life given
her: but she with great resolution replied, God forbid that I, who now of long
time have had one foot in the grave, should come to forsake my Lord Jesus, who
has so long time preserved me in the knowledge and confession of his truth,
and to put my trust in creatures, and to receive in stead of his holy word the
traditions of men. Upon which words this worthy Matron was instantly slain.

Now there is no doubt but in this furious persecution at Bruise and in other
places, there have been murdered many good men for the foresaid cause, whose
names have not been mentioned in this discourse: but whosoever they were, they
have departed with this comfort, that they have not suffered as murderers or
robbers, or malefactors, or as busy bodies in those things which belong not to
them, but as holy Christians, who at no hand would worship Images, they
believed that the blood of Christ has purged them from all sin; That Christ
has offered one only sacrifice once for sins; that we ought to worship the
Lord God alone, and only serve him; that we are saved by grace, by the means
of faith, and that not of our selves, the same being the gift of God, not by
works, to the intent none might boast; That we ought to worship God in all
places, holding up clear hands unto him, that every creature of God is good,
and none to be rejected, being used with thanksgiving; that marriage is
honorable in every sort and condition of persons, according to the express
words of the holy Apostolic Scripture: and by reason of this very confession
were the inhabitants of Tyrano, Teglio, Sondro, Malenco, Berbenno, Trahono,
Mor^em^o, Dabino, Caspano, and Bruso, so cruelly persecuted and massacred.

There was of late time a book printed in Italy, how the pretestants of the
abovesaid places should practice to execute upon the Catholics, about the 15.
day of August, the like, which since has befalne themselves: but how divellish
a slander and calumny this is, may cleer^ly be gathered by this, that where the
protestants of those places are ten, the popish Catholics are a thousand. Who
then would believe that so small a number should be able to make resistance
against so great a multitude, and especially against those desperate rebels,
and outlawd villains, who for their murders formerly committed, for their
corruptions of the commissaries, and transgressions of the commandment of the
Magistrate had before been banished out of the Country, being also suspected
of sodomy, of falsification of money, and like ravening wolves, being thoroughly
armed, entered like a most furious torrent on the sudden, slaughtering the
poor naked protestants, who suspected no such wrong, even in those Churches
which before had been privileged even among the Barbarous Pagans, to the
intent that they might put in execution that bloody design which had been
resolved on about 17. years before, according to a Letter intercepted of a
principal rebel in this action, who is neither afraid nor a shamed to term
the same a holy resolution, and an honorable enterprise: which it is indeed,
if to spoil, to rob, to strangle, to massacre, to burn, to hew in

Therefore it appears most clearly every way, that the aforesaid persons
underwent those

Which martyrdom they endured willingly, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer blame for the name of Christ Jesus, remembering the promise of
this our Lord, Blessed are they who Mat. 5. 10.
are persecuted for righteousness sake, because the Kingdom of heaven is
theirs. Blessed are you when others shall revile and persecute you, and shall
falsely speak all evil of you for my sake. Rejoice and triumph, for your
reward is great in heaven, for so have they persecuted the Prophets who were
before you. Read to this purpose. 1 Pet. 4. Verses, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. which
words, of all good Christians are to be well pondered and weighed: For first
by such trial we perish not. Secondly, we are thereby made conformable to
Christ our head. Thirdly, such sufferings cause unto us greater joy than
sorrow. Fourthly, they are infallible marks that the spirit of God rests upon
us. Fifthly, they manifest to all our unfeigned love to Christ and his Gospel.

Sixthly, hereby we have good proof that the Lord does correct us, not as a
severe Judge, but as a most loving and tender hearted Father: to whom therefore
with his blessed Son, and holy Spirit, be all glory and honor ascribed in all
the Churches of the Saints, world without end, Amen.

SIGNS AND PRODIGIES, WHICH HAPPENED BEFORE THE MASSAGRE IN THE VALTOLINE.
THe Protestants having appointed Gards and Sentinels in the steeples of the
Churches of the Valtoline, besides others which were commanded to watch in
certain places, to give the sign by fire, to the intent that the whole Valley
being warned partly by the Becons, partly by the sound of the bells, might
together be ready on the sudden to take arms for their defense against the
Spaniard, if he should make any incursion upon the Valley: about the Calends of

Likewise in Tyrane, there were heard the like

Signs and prodigies heard and seen in the Valtoline after the massacre, as
has been affirmed by diverse persons of credit, being departed from the said
Valley, and lying in the Valtolin^ after the massacre. In the Evangelike
Protestant Church, and principally from Teglio and Tyrane a voice has been
heard to cry, woe, woe to you. The vengeance of God is upon you for the blood
of the innocent.

Moreover there was heard the Bell of the Evangelike Church of Tyrane, to ring
even at the same time that the sermon was used to be: and in that Church a
voice was heard, like the voice of Senior Anthonio Basse, who sometimes had
been there a Minister, and was murdered in the said place, as if himself had
been preaching in the same place.

In Londres there was seen to descend an army from the Mountains every way
furnished; which sight was the cause that many took their flight, and departed
out of Sondres; but suddenly this apparition vanished like a cloud. The which
struck a great terror into the minds of the people, insomuch as many departed
out of the Valley, as men that feared a castigation and punishment from heaven.

FINIS.

