CONSIDERATIONS TOUCHING TRADE, With the advance of the Kings Revenue, and
present Reparation of His MAJESTY;

Containing these four Heads viz. 1 From the Customs. 2 From Fines and
Confiscations. 3 From Acts of Resumptions. 4 And from Subsidies.


Humbly Represented to the view of the Right Honorable high Court of
Parliament.

Printed in the year, 1641.

CONSIDERATIONS TOUCHING TRADE; With the advance of the Kings Revenue, and
present Reparation of His MAJESTY.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
AS one of the meanest (amongst millions) carried in the public Bark, so
lately in an impetuous storm; neither can I (as yet) say secured from the
Naufrage; I have taken the boldness to present your Honors (the members of
the great Council, of the King and Kingdom) with some considerations touching
the heads of the title, which (as you like them) dispose as you please and
suffer me to be (as I desire) obscured, and to stand in the dark, as a well
Wisher to my King, and Country, hoping that you will pardon my boldness, if I
present you with the public fear; which is, that this Parliament will not be
so propitious as it has been hoped, through your own faults, and the desire
that transports many of you to save his friend; whereby the reformation cannot
have the full effect which it ought to have, which may cast a brand on your
endeavors, in frustrating the public work, or at least leave an aspersion on
you for a lame and imperfect emendation.

It was the late Kings Oracle, that the seat of Justice, which now you hold in
the greatest Iudicatory of the Kingdom; is neither a place to pleasure
friends, nor to wrong enemies; for you are suum cuique tribuere, without
respect of persons. And then as soon as you can, to remember the Kings graces,
in conferring power upon you, whereby to right the publiques, who (in respect
of his reparation) has hitherto been left out of your first considerations;
which in due time is hoped, shall neither be forgotten nor so stinted, that the
Limitation may leave behind it the least resentment of your neglect toward his
Majesty's particular.

The advance of the Kings Revenue, with the payment of his debts, is doubtless
a task of very great difficulty; so to do it, as that the subject in general
(of late years strangely oppressed) may not again sink under that burden,
which may be imposed by the Parliament, but that the house in Justice will
endeavor to saddle the right horse.

Wherefore it is conceived, that there are but four ways, how (as from four
Fountains) this work may be best done, and with least grutch, to set the
King upright.

And these are first: 1. From the Customs. 2. From Fines and Confiscations. 3.
From Acts of Resumptions. 4. From Subsidies.


Now the greatest of any one Income of the Kings, and that which may be much
more if well managed, without doubt, is that which issues from the trade, and
commerce of the Kingdom, which are the customs; so that if trade be oppressed,
or imprisoned as now it is; and the moneys of the Kingdom imbeziled and
carried out, as since the last three years troubles it has been most
excessively, both by the Dutch and French, you may be sure to see (in a very
short space) all the land in a general Indigency and Beggary. For remedy
whereof besides diverse pieces tending to this purpose; I have surveyed three
Gentlemen's honest endeavors. First, that of Sir Ralph Maddisons. 2. Secondly,
that of Captain Roberts (both in print.) Thirdly, a short paper in Manuscript
of master William Turnours. And from these you may draw excellent instructions,
but I presume Master Turnours paper of heads will yield you more, and by far,
the best furnishments, both for home and foreign trade, with the advance
thereof; if the over-merit of them hurt not, and that they be well understood
and secretly carried; with this Maxim; that a rich subject makes a rich Prince.

That the customs in future shall be executed by Commission, is already
conceived, to be resolved by the wisdom of the House: for by this way the King
shall be sure, to have all that which the Farmers, and some others have (for
many years past) shared and taken from His Majesty by a great deal of
Artifice, and to the great damage of the universal trade of the Kingdom.

The whole proceedings whereof during these forty years and upwards, no man
knows so well as Master Turnour, as one long versed in trade, and studied in
the advance thereof, together with the secrets of the Farms, and ways of the
Farmers.

The Contents of Master Turnours secrets are as follows.
1. An evident way how to advance the trade of the kingdom.

2. An infallible way, how to preserve the Kings customs from stealing, which
should it be put in practice, and presently to vindicate the man, or the party
from whence it was stolen.

3. How to vent all the native commodities of this Kingdom, were they far
more then now they are, at reasonable and gayning rates, both to the Gentleman,
Merchant; and country man, and therewith to buy up all strangers commodities
which may lie on their hands, and to serve the subject at reasonable prises,
with as much as may suffice the Kingdom, and to vent and transport the rest
with advantage.

How to supply His Majesty within ten days warning, with the value of his
whole Revenue on any sudden occasion, or foreign Enterprise, (gratis) and so
from year to year on the only credit of his own Revenue.

How to make the city of London the great Mart and Empory of the world.

How to manage the fishing business with ease, and to the incredible enriching
of the King and the Kingdom, and to the perpetual honor of the English
Nation.

These are Master Turnours principals, besides some particulars, which are
utterly lost, if but publicly disputed.
For furtherance whereof a principal consideration will be how to settle a
Commission for trade, by the authority of the King and the Parliament, with
correspondency to the Commissioners, for managing the Kings Revenue, wherein it
is further to be considered, what the house shall think fit to leave on His
Majesty of the present Impositions, lest by taking away too much before it be
consulted by the Commissioners for trade, when and where to take it, the Kings
Revenue may be made of little consideration: especially when you shall look
back to the many Alienations and diminutions of the Crown Lands, and the
house thereof may be deprived of doing that service, which it is presumed they
mean to do, and in that bountiful measure, as that it may remain unparaleld
to posterity.

Wherefore it is conceived, that excepting some Monopolies which invade the
liberty of the land, and entrench on the native commodities of the Kingdom,
you can not well as yet and at present take away much, but rather leave it to
be taken away by the Commissioners for trade, which should be most of them of
both houses with some Merchants, whereby as occasion shall present it self,
both the native and foreign Merchant might be encouraged, and the King with
the subject in general well pleased, with your discreet and provident
proceedings, for as one of our weightiest Authors observes, it cannot be well
with a state where the Prince and people seek but to obtain their several
ends, and to work upon the advantages of each others necessities,; where they
should go hand in hand in a reciprocal cooperation, for the advance of the
public, wherein the benevolence of the subject should ever preceed, the better
to draw on the Prince to a Royal retribution, and to comply with his people in
all just and honorable conjectures.

The second Fountain, from whence His Majesty may best cheap be repaied, is
from fines and confiscations, which in the Justice of the house may be laid on
delinquents without partiality, and for the ease of the subject in general,
since it is impossible to set the King upright (only by subsidies without
beggering of the Countryman: Wherefore it is presumed, that such will be the
wisdom of the house, that they will lay a good part of the burden on those
which would have laid perpetual slavery and bondage on us all.

3. The third Fountain from whence to repair the King, is from Acts of
Resumptions, and these are of two sorts.

1. First, Bargains and sales made by the late Commissioners for sale of His
Majesty's lands, wherein if it may be made apparent, that the King has been
abused, and cousened in any particular of consequence, and that there has
been diverse Bargains not legally contracted for, and according to the
limitation, and warrant of His Majesty's Co^ (...) King ought to be righted,
since (...) that in this way there has bi^ (...) fraudulent conveyance.

A second sort of Res^ (...) ^ch you account me no Heretik^ (...) (I do not
say ought to be taken (...) ^ch, for that were sacrilege) should be the
Bishops lands, which in the potency of the (...) ^apacy have been, quo jure,
engrossed God know^s, and cui bono-with-held, judge you; and to what end, more
then to the perpetual disturbance of this Kingdom, and all the world: where a
needless superfluity of temporal fortune has been ever the bellows to
pride, and arrogance, and a restless ambition throughout all Ages inseparable
and incident to the pontificiall Clergy which can never be extinguished, till
the original cause, abundance of temporal fortune, be removed, which has
ever bin the poison of the Church. But with this proviso, that the Church may
first be righted, I mean, that all the Impropriations of the land, heretofore
merely raped by the excess of Episcopal power from the church, and annexed to
their own fees; or to the useless and idle Monasteries, may be first redeemed
out of the Bishops lands, and resetled in the old and right place, for the
better maintenance and encouragement of Scholars and able Divines, whereby the
cures and chapels of Ease converted into Barnes and Stables in many places of
the Kingdom, as well as the Mother Churches, may be better served then they
have been, the remainder to be settled on the Duke of York. And of this with
the many and further reasons thereof, both for the security of the King, and
quiet of the Kingdom; May you be pleased to receive fuller satisfaction from a
few papers apart, which happily may not be altogether unworthy of yours, and
the Parliaments serious and second consideration.

4. The fourth Fountain from whence to repair, the King is from subsidies,
which should they not be sparingly imposed. It must necessarily beggar most of
the poor inferior Yeomandry of the Kingdom. Since it is conceived, that 20.
subsidies cannot set the King upright, which (I say) should they be levied upon
poor Renters and Farmers (generally indebted) and of late years much cast
behind hand, through the late troubles and fall of their commodities, would
ruin many a poor man. For twenty Subsidies amounts to 20. marks to him that
is rated at 5 l. goods, and to 20. l. to him that is rated at 4 l. lands, which
must enforce one of these evils, if he be not aforehand, to sell half his
Cowes, or half his Teame to pay the King, who may perhaps owe the Usurer for
all the stock he imployes.

And here the inequality, and unconscionable disproportion of rating of the
subsidies, may be opportunely presented unto your consideration, wherein the old
Riddle is fully verified, that Dewce ace cannot, sice sink will not, but cater
trey must, the poorer sort cannot pay the King: the greater sort, as having the
law in their own hands, will pay but what they please, but the middle sort,
they must and shall pay; and in such a disproportion as is insufferable; for
demonstration whereof.

John a style has in the parish of Alcat 100 l. land per annum: And it is all
the estate he has, the Sessors rates him at 5. l. lands, which is the usual
ratement for men of that quality; Sir William a Downs has in several
counties and parishes 1000. l. per annum, resides at Grantham, where he is of
the Commission of the peace; and can ease himself, and is rated at 20. l.
lands, and sends his Certificate from Grantham, how he has there paid the
subsidies, which acquits him in all other places.

Sir John a Nokes has in diverse counties and parishes 10000. l. land per
annum, and is rated 100. l. lands. Now the Parliament for relief of the King,
grants His Majesty's tenentire subsidies, which for John a styles, payment,
arises to ten pounds: Sir William a Downs payment, (whose estate in true
valuation is ten times to that of John a styles) arises to 40. l. which
ratably should be 100. l. so that the King is cousned by Sir William a Downs
60. l. in one hundred.

And Sir John a Nokes, payment arises to 200. l. which rateably to Sir William
a Downs true valuation, and to John a styles sesment, it should be 1000. l. So
that on true valuation, the King is cousned in 11000. l. land per annum, (and
held by great men) 860. l. declaro; which through the Kingdom, loses the
King two thirds (at the least) of that which of right his Majesty should have;
which would treble his Majesty's Subsidies, were he well dealt with all: and
this is without all contradiction: the remedy whereof is easy, let every man's
estate (where so ever it lies) be made liable to pay proportionably. And as
your Cater treys and middle sort of people, are usually rated by the Justices
or their appointment, then shall you do right, both to the King and the middle
sort of subjects.

Wherefore you can never do your selves more right, then to redress this
abuse, where you may do such a service for the King, as that his Majesty may
be brought in love with you, and with Parliaments, and therewith manifest it
to the world, that you came not to the house to contest and capitulate with
Sovereignty, but to win his Majesty your loyalty and bounty, and to cure
that wound, which others have made almost incureable through their insincerity,
and preferring of their perilous and desperate counsels, before safe and
faithful advise. And for the better explanation of the even and just rating of
lands. If the Parliament shall think fit to sesse every 100. l. land a year
that a man has, to pay 20. s. for a Subsidy.

Then if John a Nokes has 100. l. a year, (whereof 50. l. a year lies at
Lambeth) there he must pay 10. s. and has 25. l. land a year at Kensington,
there he must pay 5. s. and other 25. l. at Islington, where he must pay the
other 5. s. And this proportion to be sessed ratably for every man's estate, in
several parts where it lies.

Some considerations which have not as yet been spoken of in Parliament, from
whence both the King and the Subject (as they may be handled) may reap both
infinite profit and contentment, whereof two principals are here offered to
your consideration.

The first is touching the Court of Wards which concerns none but the rich men
of the Kingdom.

The second is touching such a Manufacture, as concerns both all the poor and
rich men of the Kingdom, which (introduced) will necessarily set all the idle
and poor people of the land to work; and enable them to get an honest living,
after the pattern of Edward the third, who first introduced the woollen
Manufacture, which (to this day) imployes a Million of poor People, which
without it, within 3. Months would starve for want of a subsistence, for let
no man flatter himself that the wools in England (were they double in quantity
to that which now they are) can employ all the people of the land; for that the
fourth part of the Inhabitants of most of the parishes of England, are
miserable poor people: and (harvest time excepted) without any subsistence,
the number whereof, daily grow and increase, without any regard to the redress.

And therefore there can be no such prevention so ready and profitable, both
for the enriching of the King and the subject, as the re-inforcing of the
sowing of hemp and flax throughout every parish of the Kingdom, which
amongst diverse others, (I know not on what ground) were repeald, ultimo of the
late Queen, the effects whereof, would be many, both pious and profitable, as

First, this manufacture alone, would without doubt employ all the poor people
of the land in the very places of their aboade.

Secondly, in very short time we might all wear our own lynnen, and
therewithal export some.

Thirdly, we might use our own sails, and cordage, and as good as any is in
Europe.

Fourthly, we might save the Kingdom, 500000. per annum, with the least,
expense for lynnen and cordage, to foreign nations.

And of both these, as you shall approve, you may receive many notable
remembrances, both concerning this Manufacture, and the proceedings of this
Parliament, touching the Court of Wards, about 11. Iacobi, where it was then in
question to be compounded for, by the Parliament, with diverse passages therein,
not unfit for your present consideration, if compared with the excessive
compositions there now imposed, with what in future they may come unto, to the
utter ruin of your posterities. Since the world knows that the undoing of
poor Orphans (committed by the laws of the land to the Kings Protection)
suits not with the nobleness and goodness of the Kings nature: Besides, the
worke-manship of Feoders and Escheators in the inthraling of the subject, and
deflowring of the ancient Tenures of the Kingdom; and in drawing in of all the
lands (as in short time it may be expected) held in soccage, within the Tenure
of military service. For if his Majesty may have more rent then now is, raised
by the Compositions, and the subject better concented; when in his life time,
he knows both his own and his sons payment. I see no reason but this
proposition may be acceptable, both to the Sovereign and subject, especially
when you shall not only know the utter-most of your pains, but preserve your
posterity from falling into a more intricate Laborinth, then is commonly taken
into every man's regard.

FINIS.

