THE ULTIMUM VALE OF John Carleton, OF The MIDDLE TEMPLE LONDON, Gent.

BEING A true Description of the Passages of that Grand Impostor, Late a
Pretended Germane -- Lady.

Sta, Lege, Plora.

Published by the Order and appointment of the aforesaid right worthy and
ingenious Author Mr. John Carleton.

LONDON, Printed for J. Jones, 1663.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Gentlemen and Ladies,
THink it not strange, if you perceive an alteration in me, from my usual
method of prejudicary and modest expressions, both in my speaking and writeing.
And though perhaps you may find more passion, so you shall find more cause for
it; and as much reason and truth, nay more of the truth then ever yet I have
published; which because it has been absconded and hid, from those that are
real Lovers of it, and owe allegiance and supremacy to it, and have earnestly
desired to know it, and I my self bound by the same Allegiance to declare it;
though in the midst of trouble, yet to prevent farther trouble, I thought good
to trouble my self once for all, that all and each single inquirer might not
trouble me once. For this cause I say, because the truth it self has been
Clonded by such thick Mists of some persons Imaginations, others Narrations,
other wilful Additions, other Jealousies, others Suppositions, others
Suspicions, others Inquisitions; some being malicious, others captious, others
Censorious, others parasitical, others mercenary, others biased by hopeing to
obtain a self interest in her, or procure a satisfaction of their Lustful
desires of her, who is the cause of these reports. Others missed by a soft and
Candid Nature and easy Belief, being won thereto by her Charmeing tongue and
Sycophantick style: some wilfully blind, others blind, yet wilful I say the
truth, being glossed over and darkened by such varietyes of dispositions,
multitudes of Errors and forged (though believed) falsities has made and
justly to, the humor of passion most prediminant, and my soul restless till
the truth be known. And though, there is no one so unfit to write as my self at
this time, so there is none more fit to write the truth of some part of this
then my self. I should have thought my self in Paradise had I not had this last
occasion to write (which was the Judgment of Judges that I should have a Wife;
a Judgment indeed to me) so I think my self in Purgatory that I have so sad a
subject to write on; but I ^esteem my self most miserable, when I foresee how
little my writing will do me good in removing the cause, of which sad effects
might follow, did not my faith bridle my passion, and tell me my Maker has a
great work in hand for me to do, otherwise I should with St. Paul, not only
desire to be dissolved, but ere this might had exceeded that desire, and
dissolved my self; but a mighty hand of Providence has, and does guide and
protect me, and leads me to holy David in his afflictions, where he says, It
was good for him he was so. As yet my affliction seems so great, that though I
possess a being, I enjoy it not: and my very Soul serves for no other end, but
to make me sensible of my sorrow, and him that sent it, and her that caused it.
That you could but Sympathize with me a while! or but see how grief like
sparks in Embers lay shrouded in my breast, which must flame out, least it
consume me. Strangulat inclusus dolor, Had you but seen me when I wrote this,
how the motions of my mind and of my body were so alike, that there was no
resting place for either. That you could but resent and read thus far as I
wrote it, where every word Tulit punctum -- bears a full stop. There is no
Physic, no Grave, no Charm, that can content and cast the molestntion of my
working Soul into a dead sleep. They that never knew the happiness of settled
thoughts, and a private, studious, free, contemplative Life, think Troubles but
Pastimes. But as it is a maxim in Law, Unumquodque dissolvitur eo modo quo
colligatur. So thus I will apply it, -- That as a mighty hand has brought me
into trouble: so the same hand is as mighty still to lead me out, and here I
cast Anchor: I am something better satisfied when I consider this true saying,
Estque pati paenam quam meruisse minus. That is, It is less to suffer a
punishment then to deserve it.

Afflictions here in this Terrestial Globe are but the appurtenances that
belong to our Inheritance, which all of us hold in Fee-simple: Or like bitter
Pills prescribed and sent to us by the Great and wise Physician of Heaven and
Earth, to purge us from the dangerous Disease of security. No one is exempted
from his Gross be it light or heavy, Quisque suos patimur manes, I am not
single yet.

(...)
(...).
He is happy to whom no ill happens.
But I will not be to prolixe here Cutteous Reader) nor entertain your
expectation too long, before I draw up this Curtain, to let your eyes be
satiated with the true Idaea of this Outlandish Canterbury-Monster, One part
of whose various actions at some persons entreaties, and for the satisfaction
of all inquisitive Spectators, I shall hereafter set forth. My present
discomposedness makes me fearful least I may commit many Errors; If so, I am
apt to believe I may be excused, and I hope every judicious person will impute
it to the ignorance of the Error, not an error of ignorance. I shall not relate
every circumstance; for I should give both, you and my self too much trouble;
but as I affect brevity, so I greatly respect verity; and as I intend to relate
nothing but truth, so I will relate so much of it as may be material, to let
you see her design; and every ingenious Reader may suppose what additions she
made, and how politickly she enlarged her self in every action, and when the
real truth is known to all (which is already to some scores in and about the
City of London) I say, though it will not cure my Malady, it will ease my mind;
and though many may and do desire to hide, yet they cannot detract from verity.
I heartily wish there were fewer writings and more truths; and though I do not
endeavor to force and extract a belief from any, who have not been acquainted
with the truth, nor my self, yet (to what I shall relate of my own knowledge
after my acquaintance with her) the greatest attestation that a Christian can
make, I will at the desire of any person that scruples at the truth of my
relation, and in the face of the whole Church of England will salute the Holy
Bible, and will attest by that Almighty Power that made me with Reverence to
the Oath. I think now I have bound my self strictly, and if this will not be
sufficient security to any, then believe what you please; I shall but do what
my Allegiance to verity commands me, And so with Christian prayers for, and
well wishes to you all, I take my leave, presuming to subscribe my self still.

Idem qui pridem, Your Friend JOHN CARLETON.
Septimo Julij, 1663. A Cognito Loco Incognito.
A true Description of the Passages of that Grand Impostor, late a pretended
GERMANE-LADY.
TO begin the Story of my first acquaintance with the late pretended Germane
Lady, by name Henrietta Maria de Wolway, the name I first knew her by, alias,
Mary Modders, daughter of William Modders late of Canterbury Musician deceased,
alias Mary Steadman, alias Mary Vaughan, alias Madam Day, alias Madam Gorge,
alias Mary Fixch, alias etc. I refer you to a late printed sheet of mine,
termed my Replication, which if you repair to, you may see the Original
thereof; But least it be not met with by all, and every person that shall read
or hear this Book, I shall speak briefly of it again in the ensuing relation:
And I will bring her now from Graves-end to the Sessions House.

About a Month before last Easter, this Canterbury Walloon came in a Gravesend
Barge to Billingsgate, and amongst other company she came up with a Parson (for
so his habit spoke him) that sat near her, became acquainted with her, or she
with him; and as she related to me, (for now Gentlemen I speak but at second
hand, yet still I keep to my first Assertion, to write the truth, though it be
of another relation, and this was hers to me and many others, since my
acquaintance) The Gentleman began to be familiar and sportingly to offer some
uncivillity to her unblemished Honor; as she termed it, for which presumption,
she seemed much to check him. It being early on a Tuesday morning when they
landed, they went into a house at Billinsgate, that waits for the Custom of
Passengers that come up with the morning Tide, to repose themselves. The Parson
offered to salute her, whom with great anger she denied, telling him, That she
was never kissed by any man yet, and that in her Country, If any man,
especially a Priest, should be seen to speak to, much more to salute a
Gentlewoman, he might be sure of a sta^. And for this misbehaviour of his, she
said, she conferred the Title of Bawdy Priest on him. He out of his respects to
her, I suppose, as a stranger, still offered his service to wait on her to
find a lodging, and would not be denied: so between 5 and 6 of the clock, they
walked along the City, and assaulted many Tavern doors for admittance, but
finding none open until they came to the Exchange Tavern, where it happened
the door was open to admit in some Laborers to work, and there they entered;
for the Parson would needs treat her with a Glass of Wine, which they had, and
the Gentleman of the house being up, They desired his company, she, as she
said, being willing to shift off the Parson, told him, she would stay there
till people were more stirring, and would leave word at that house where she
would go. So after two or three pints he paid and departed, with the hopes of
finding her again, And being alone with the Gentleman of the house, the tears
standing in her eyes, she began to bewail her self. Mr King asked her the
reason? She with Crocodile tears, and in a canting style, began to recollect
her Adventure: How she was a Stranger, and Sr. said she, I would willingly be
private and unknown, and therefore beg you to do me excuse; Only this favor I
entreat of you, to inform me of a convenient Lodging, fit for a Gentlewoman,
though a stranger. The Gentleman replied he knew of none at present, but wished
he could serve her desire; And after such like discourse, Madam, said he, I
condole your condition, and if you please to accept for the present of such a
one as I have, which sometime has been, and is in some measure fit to
entertain a person of quality upon an exigent, it shall be and is at your
service. She seemingly reflecting on her Honor, in respect that the house was
public, earnestly entreated his privacy, for that would salve her honor; And
with many thanks for so great a courtesy accepted thereof very willingly, And
Sr. said she, only I desire your concealment of what I shall relate to you,
for you seem to be a person of gravity, and of great civility to me; And that
you may not mistrust and disesteem of me, though I am unwilling as yet to be
known, but especially by my own Declaration, yet I will in brief inform you
what I am, and my present condition, which is thus, Sir, I am a Person of
honor lately come out of Germany, my Native Country, my Father was an Earl, my
Mother dyed in Chilbed with me, about three years after my Father dyed, and
left me to the tuition of an English Lady, a Maiden, to be my Governess, one of
my Mothers Kindred that lived with her; And the better to secure my person and
Estate, she out of her great love to me went with me into a Monastery, for
Protection, from whence I came out about a year since, and have lived at mine
own house. Our Emperor and the holy Fathers were willing to force me to a
Marriage with an old Count, because, having no Children, my Estate might return
to the Monastery; the profits thereof they received for my maintenance there;
and had I staid a little longer it had been completed: and you may imagine
Sir, how miserable a Life I should have lead, in this unagreeable Marriage; For
I am now but nineteen or there abouts, and he was near fourscore. So being in
my own Park that belongs to my house, my Governess came and told me, I must
then lay hold on an opportunity for my escape, if ever, which I willingly
consented too and stayed no longer then to disrobe my self, and put on this
disguise wherein you see me, (where by the way I will set down what that was,
an old black Velvet Wastecoat, and a Black Silk Petticoat, and black Hoods over
her Face) And I will speak of one thing more while she was relating this story,
I asked her, why she would have no attendance? She answered me, that indeed she
had very many Pages and Lacquies, and several Maidservants and Gentlewomen,
but she did not think it safe to take any with her, least they might discover
her in her slight; But I took a Page with me to bring my horse back that I rod
on near to the Seaside, where in a little time I took shipping.) I was, said
she, last Sunday morning in France, landed at Dover, rod Post to Gravesend,
took the opportunity of the Barge that was coming off, where I met with this
Priest, who would needs wait on me, which I wondered at, for I was never in any
man's company before I made my adventur. And Sir, said she, If he comes again
to ask for me, let me be denied. And since I have related to you what I am, and
that you do not entertain a Beggar though a stranger, so I entreat your
secrecy; and whatever I shall presume to call for, during my stay here, though
I have little Silver, yet I have that whereby I shall discharge and satisfy
you. After such like discourse, she retired her self to her Chamber, and lay on
the Bed till about Dinner time; when at her desire, the Gentlewoman of the
house (my sister) went up to give her a civil welcome, and to accompany her,
whose acquaintance she having got, after some salutes past on either side, and
some familiarity begun on both sides, she related to her in her discourses the
former story, with more additions, and with the obligation of secrecy also.
Thus privately in her Chamber she remained some time at her work she had
procured, which she would do quick and well, which was to be expected from
those that come out of Nunneries: Sometime at her seeming devotion. The
afternoon of the same day, the Parson came again, and according to her order
was denied. The next day they Tabled together, and she desired the Gentlewoman
of the house to be private, and also to honor her with the title of Cosen, to
prevent the mistrusts and questions of such persons, as might accidentally see
her in her company. The Gentlewoman (my sister) hearing her propable well set
Story and good Language, supposed her to be as she said, and did much
comiserate her present condition, and remained no less compassionate for her
sorrow then admired at her parts; and being of an excellent loving Nature, and
friendly* courteous, disposition, did much resent her Adventure, and gave her
handsome entertainment, and consented to her obliged secrecy and desired Title.

Here ( Courteous Reader) you may see, how this Sycophant baited her hook with
seeming obliged secrecy. I suppose she first intended to catch the Gentleman of
the house, to trust her by degrees with something of good value, and so left
him to look her: A trick she and her Agents have practiced by slight of hand,
very many times, as you shall one day fully know, though not by my hand, yet by
my order.

Now Reader, I am come to relate what I am Ey-witness of, and to begin my
acquaintance with this Grand Impostor. After she had been two or three days at
the aforesaid house, my occasions called me that way, (not thinking to meet or
see such a person as this) and after I had completed my business, I called in
at this house, to give my Relations a visit and repose my self a while being
somewhat weary. When I came in* I was informed there were some Gentlemen
persons of quality in the house, (who had dined there that day) that had lately
obliged me by some civilities, and I being alone did embrace their company,
where I found the Gentleman of the house and his wife, and this Canterbury
German; that is, (a little to leave my Story) A she Creature like a Spanish
Jennet, got by the wind, for she knows nor owns no Father, Cui Pater est
populus pater est sibi nullus et omnis, Cui Pater est populus non habet illa
patrem. In English a Bastard, or, a German Soul transmigrated into the Body of
a Canterbury Fiddlers Daughter: or a German Fiddle-stick, played upon a
Canterbury Fiddle: or, the Sperm of a Germane Lord mixed with, and evacuated
into an Ale-Tub, and drank up by a Canterbury Hosts, of which came this
Prodigious Excrescens, or, etc. I will not be tedious, this two-legged Monster
then) a pretended German Lady, was amongst the aforesaid company, who, at my
entering the room and making toward the company, as it was observed, and she
her self has many times declared, did very much eye me; and before I came near
her, I was stopped sometime with the salutes and complements of the Gentlemen my
friends, who singly accosted me. In this time she asked the Gentlewoman of the
house who I was? She resolved her, I was her Brother, which answer did not
satisfy her; For, as she has declared sundry times to very many persons, who
as I said before will subscribe, at that instant, she was possessed with a
strange kind of an affectionate passion, and suddenly surprised by Love; and
as she expressed it, her blood boyld within her, in such a strange manner, she
knew not what she ailed. By this time it came to my turn to salute her, which
done, We began to enterchange friendly Glasses for about an hour. My Friends
and my Self were then about to take our leave, occasions calling us away; but
my Sister being desired by her to detain me, would not permit me to go: So
taking my leave of the Gentlemen I remained there. The Gentlewoman of the house
and she entertained some Female discourses of Fashions, and I was ordering my
business in my mind, and sat fumigating Sr. Nicots Herb; and though my eyes
were on them, my mind was remote. But being unwilling to come under the notion
of a Clown, she seeming by her broaken Langnage to be a Stranger, I did now and
then pass a Complement with a Glass of Wine to her, which she did as often
return to me. I then little thought of a Wife; for my mind being intent on a
considerable business, which I was engaged to do in the behalf of a friend, I
was not so active in my expressions, and courteous in my actions and behavior
to her, as being a stranger both to me, and as she seemed to the Country too*
Nor did I then know more of her, then by discourse I understood she had been a
Nun; she had strange careless and modest glances on me with her eyes, and I am
sure mine were more careless then hers could be, for it never once past my
thoughts to be exposed to her.

After a considerable stay, and the dark had overshadowed the world, I was
willing to depart, but still her oblidgeings detained me. And amongst other
discourses, we began to speak of an excellent Play next day to be Acted, she
presently desired to see this Country mode in Acting, and procured a promise
from me to accompany her and another Gentleman, which I had kept and performed
the next day, had not the urgency of my occasions pressed me to admit of no
delay. After the revolution of 2 or 3 days, I was summoned by my occasions
that way again, and being in the House, she came and checked me for
nonperformance of my promise, telling me what a great degradation in point of
Gentility it is in her Country, and Drollingly put a name on me, which name
with the title of ( My) before it, she often called me. Still she would act and
speak so modestly and majestickly as could be expected, to maintain and make
her pretenses seem real, and she used good language, though in a broken tone,
ever relating of sublime honorable actions, and when she was put to a dilema
in her discourse, she would seem to be so angry with her self, because she
could not express her self in our tongue to that highth as she would; and
indeed I wondered she could speak English so well, and I would ask her how she
came to learn it, she answered, that her Governess being an English Lady, she
would speak English to her, and discourse and write in no other tongue on
purpose to be perfect in it, for said she, It is a great piece of Honor for
Persons of Quality in our Country to speak many Tongues, and I over fancied to
learn English more then any other, though I can speak several tongues. Thus
would she answer all objections as readily as you could ask her; and she when
she was with me, would commonly fall into a sudden exclamation, saying, me
thinks it is so strange to me to be in a man's Company; what should I be thought
of and esteemed, and what would you be done to Sir, should I be seen to sit
with you thus in our Country; It is a great freedom that the English Ladies
have, yet I could not do it, but that I see you are a very civil person, and
such like smoothing sayings she would (...) to me, yet seeming loving but
careless; which because I was not forward, but as careless as her self, though
I then perceived her parts, yet not knowing what she was, I seemed to mind
nothing of her; till upon a third opportunity she had of seeing me, I was
pretty jocose with her, and being left alone awhile, she began to break her
mind to me at a distance, and then came nearer, that I might perceive her
fancy, which I did, and stood suspended at her speech; and after some serious,
yet amarous expressions, she related to me the full story (which till then I
knew not) of her great Adventure; It seemed to me to be a pretty Romance. she
declared to me the cause why, the manner how, and a fuller Relation then I have
inserted before, and so went on in her discourse, ever now and then calling to
mind Gods mercy to her in preserving her, though she said, she was so resolved
that she had rather the Sea had been her Grave, then to be confined to the
embraces of the old Count. I could do no less then applaud her Adventures and
noble resolution, though all my senses were even converted into eyes and ears,
being plunged in so great an extacie.

Thus she went on, still interweaving with her discourse such kind of holy
expressions and Religious sayings (the better to ground a belief in me)
sometimes acting the part of a Saint, for in that she imitated the Devils
craft; when he means to deceive one that is vigilent and careful, he translates
himself into an Angel of Light, and laying before on some apparent seeming
goods, at last brings his intention to pass, and sometimes of a person of great
quality in a misfortunate discontent.

And when she spoke of the Lord, her pretended Father, (by name as she told me,
John de Wallway, Earl of Roscia in or near Colonia) and her Lady Mother, she
would offer a kind of devotion to their Shrine; and then she would seem to cu^b
her self when she told me of her great Birth and Fortune, because she was so
much her own Trumpet, and might be thought to brag of what God had made her and
gave her, a thing says she below my Honor, but I see you are so much a
Gentleman you will scorn to betray me, or have any hard censure of me, and
knowing your Gentility will oblidge you to secrecy, I presume to be free with
you, for noble souls cannot act basely; For (said she) should it be known at
this Court that I were in England, and also where I was, I am sure his Royal
Majesty (Pardon (My Liege) him whose saithful heart and hand like a true
Subjects are always ready armed, and so shall continue as long as it shall
please Heaven to lend me breath) to show their allegiance to their Sovereign,
and the humble desire they have to be employed in your Majestyes Royal Service)
who is allied to me, by my Mothers side, would quickly send for me. His Majesty
was in the Monastery with me when he came to see the Princes Lenitia, who was
in the same Monastery, and their Highnesses the Duke of York and Gloucester
were with him there, after they came from the French Court and were entertained
by our Emperor; and said she, as soon as my Attendance come over, that I may
go as my self and his Relation, I shall give his Majesty a Visit and kiss his
hand. Should his Majesty see me in this Disguise, I am sure he would know me;
for when he was in the Monastery (as Princes have that liberty to come in) his
Majesty called these Moles or Warts (which are 3 over and 3 under her right
eye) Charles his Waine, and these spots on my hand, his Highness the Noble Duke
of Gloucester made himself. Nay further still, this pretended Germane Lady, had
in her pocket a Pass as she called it, for her Steward, written in French,
which she said his Majesty Signed and Sealed at Brussels, and several Gentlemen
that saw it, said it was his Majestys Hand and Seal; (But this when we searched
for it at the Justices, when she was apprehended, could not be found, for I
believe she burnt it the night she burnt those Counterfeit Letters, that were
by her order sent her, which was the night we discovered her, as you shall
hereafter read.) And said she, I know our Emperor will send to this Court, but
first he will send to the French Court, and by that time I hope to have all
things over and secured here.

Courteous Ladies and Gentlemen, Imagine what you should had thought, had you
been in my place and Condition; had you heard her speak this, seen her
deportment, and had accompanied her so much as I did, and observed all her
probable stories and circumstances, which I do but abridge and contract here,
and to have found her so ingenious a Woman (as indeed she is, to give the Devil
his Due) and were she honest, she were excellent; but having lost that she is
(truly I cannot tell what, I will not call her Woman, because I will not
disgrace her Sex) a mere shape only? It is true, an Army of jealousies did
assault my breast, and entered, some I sent forth by my objections to her,
which she presently struck dead. For the next sentence she spoke, she would
meet my objections above half way with so ready an answer, and reply without
the least pausing, being ready charged, and as readily presented, which made
the other spies fear to go forth. Indeed as there is no man that has the
least spark of Honor in his breast, but would had believed such seemingly,
probable, noble acted, serious and religious pretended truth, so there is no
person that has the least spark of Wisdom, but would make some mistrustful
queries: And I dare affirm it, that when I was absent from her, I made as many
as any man could, and when present, I objected to her as many as I could in
point of Honor. Suppose the thing a while but to be real, that after she had
broached her mind to me, how much she loved me, which did daily seem to
increase also, and notwithstanding I objected my inequality of Birth and
Fortune, the last whereof I attested was not as yet a younger Brothers Portion,
though a younger Brother and denied that it was fit to carry single, which was
the most; (a Circumstance I thought material to try her fancy) yet still she
vowed to like me the better, and that she did neither desire nor look for any
thing of me, not with me, but only my love, and I thought she did really
deserve that; but if I pleased I might dispose of all I had; for God (said she)
has bestowed a sufficient and a plentiful Estate on me, which with my self I
freely offer and give to you Sir. Such Nobility had she but acted with reality
(which then was thought so, and not without just grounds) could not but force
and attract a love and likeing from a stone if possible, and indeed I made some
scruple of danger by reason of her birth and pretended great, yet near
Relation. And also I asked her why she would condescend to incline her
affection to so (then seeming) unequal marriage; she did reply, that whatsoever
my Fortune was, was not material in a noble breast, neither did it complete a
Gentleman; but said she, Nature has dealt very liberally and bountifully by
you, both in your person and parts, on which I set my affections, I can supply
Fortune. And said she, I am not the first as we daily see, when affection has
induced to make choice of a Consort far underneath and below the sphere where
you move, nay those that move in a higher Orb then my self, and then would she
bring in an example, and I did sensibly imagine, (had her pretenses been real)
that I should create no new Custom, or commit any error to embrace the smiles
of Fortune, but did and should rather impute it to a great hand of Providence,
whose hand is as great and good still as ever, and truly she said such things
as I knew not how it was possible that untruth should have the ability to feign
things resembling so much in show truth it self, and I am confident her seeming
excellent parts, variety of tongues, sweet disposition, and indifferent comely
feature, noble presence and modest carriage, accompanied with so many
protestations and arguments of unfeigned and real high affection, and then
seeming great trouble at her spirits, and amorous words were able to conquer
and enthral any other heart, though as free and careful as mine. And indeed she
fained excuses so plauseable, that I being overpowered, either by my nature,
will, or affection, admitted them for being reasonable, many queryes my
Jealousy would summon up and object to her: And in answering one, she would
traverse over so much, and such a seeming real story, that she would satisfy
me in very many points, that my private suspicions thought to propose to her;
by which freeness of hers to declare her self, she not only procured of me a
greater belief to what she said, but also gave me a further insight to her
good language and parts, and likewise to her passionate love she then seemed to
have for and toward me, all which discourses she would commonly conclude, with
my self by saying, All this I freely offer to thee my Dear, and all these
sufferings are nothing considering God has provided such a blessing for me as
thy self, and such like conclusions, whose Amen was commonly an Embrace, or a
(Lime Twigge) Kiss, with a Hymn of Thanksgiving to Providence. Her freeness in
relateing, did much please me, for this reason, because it did stop all strict
inquisition, which in point of Honor I could not make to her, that seemed so
free; notwithstanding I told her my Fortune was altogether unequal and unfit to
ca^y double, and also only secundum voluntatem Domini, as I may so say, but yet
my fearful mind would make a multitude of private questions, some open ones,
which when I had opportunity I would fetch over at a distance, by a Similitude
or a Romance of some former adventure, or some such story; and I do not deny,
but declare that her freeness in acting so nobly pleased me, because she so
freely offered that then seeming noble offering, her self, (whom indeed I
thought then a rate present, and should think so still, were she but honest,
which greives me she is not:) and also the free offer of her seeming Fortune,
which I Vow to all the world I esteemed of as nothing (had it been real)
compared with her, if honest; for as to fortune my desires are limited, and if
they do exceed, it is rather to contemplate the beauty of Heaven, then the
pleasures of Earth, steps whereby the soul Travels toward its first dwelling:
For as I told her, I desired her to License my Fortunes to roll in their own
Sphere; and it was thought I was of years sufficient though under age to make
an election of my state it self, and I protest I never did look at what she
spoke as to that, any further then a blessing and comfortable help, to ease the
trouble and defray the growing charges of a Matryed Life; and to maintain Love,
which like a fire without fuel would grow cold in some, as is too commonly
seen, though I dare speak it, and I make no doubt, my love without it should
had n'ere gone out; for I here solemnly attest, I could rather drive a Plow, or
dig and delve for one that I Love, (as I did her) though nothing but her parts
took my fancy, then to live a Princes life and be forced to enjoy one that I
cannot fancy,

For I am too effeminate; a tear
From one I love, goes deeper then a spear:
Nay when I thought her mine, if she were ill,
Love sympathiz'd so much, I was not well.
My love was so much, that I dare not think
of some things past then, but my heart does sink:
But that I know she is false, I else should swear
There were no faith, no honesty if not here:
Let her be witness that betrayed me has;
But who will believe a witness without Faith.
Me thinks I could love still, and still believe,
But Siren like i am sure she will still deceive.
Providence whispers me, and faith i am gone,
If I give room unto affection.
Lord mark these Serpentt, that the world may know
Whom they may trust, and whom they may forgo.
Proclaimed foes we easier may evade,
Then those base traps that are in friendship laid:
But Reader, let not these rimes thee offend,
Grief brought them in, not a designed end.
Reader, When I had even thus far proceeded, there came to my hand by a friend
of mine, a cursed Volumne of hers of 3 Sheets in Quarto,, termed An Historical
Narrative of the Germane Princess (alias Pickpurse) each of the words have but
two Syllables, and I am sure the last Character is the truest,) which she ownes
to have wrote her self, as by her Epistle thereto you may perceive, though not
believe, for I can testefie, and shortly may to some purpose produce the
unmannerly, base and beggarly detractor, her true Companion, who being joined
with her, make a cursed pair of Machavilians, and who wrote and composed the
book for her, but I will not defile my paper with his Name; for though I remain
in Tenebris I have information of her actions and Hectoring Companions: In
which book she Courts the world to believe that she is a great Philosopher, or
well read in the sayings of both ancient and modern Philosophers and Divines:
Which acquaintance of hers with them, as I do not at all believe, but utterly
deny, so I do not endeavor to tie up any one to my opinion herein. The first
Philosopher she (or some one for her) names, is Diogenes the Cinick, who had he
lived now, would have ascribed to her, her just title, and styled her (what she
really is) a Viper, The opinion and Thesis she first inserts, from her or some
others collection, is this, that detraction is the chief branch of envy, which
is nourished by lying, by which people of honest conversation, are grievously
wounded. The last clause we have suffered, as the world is sensible of, the
former she has fully performed; and I truly think, that if she should live
till she speaks and writes nothing but truth, she would never dye. As to her
Conversation it is well known to some hundreds in this Nation, how dishonest it
has been even from her Infancy, to the ruin of many persons and Families
almost, Quo semel est imbuta recens survabit odorem orta. Indeed there is none
can wonder that she writes such a multitude of falsityes in plain English
horrible lies, for should she write the truth of her actions, nay of any one
act (which act of hers as to my self, I will declare for her) she would then
quite shame her self for ever, which in a little time if she has any shame in
her, will be done nevertheless. Read the fourth page of her book in her
Epistle, where she blames me for not affording her a civil defense (though this
is only to blind the world, and make them believe I had permitted her to be
uncivilly dealt by, when as I Vow to Heaven there was no such thing) in regard
she says I had so lately enjoyed Hymen's rites with her, would the Devil had
had his right, then I should not have been troubled with such a crafty
Strumpet; But he may take it now, there is flesh and bones enough for him to
pick, it is his own and she will hardly cheat him, he will have his own, aut
serius aut citius. And in the same page she commends the prudence of our
Ancestors, in insituting several Orders of Knights to defend innocent Ladies;
and she says, that she never read of any Knight that undertook a distressed
Ladies quarrel but he overcame, and then brings in an example or two. It makes
me smile methinks to see, how cunningly her guilt seeks to be protected by some
of the Dubbed souls of this age, whom at one and the same time she Courts and
applauds at a distance to contiuue their protection to her still. I say how
finely she wyre-draws these Dons to defend her impudency, under the notion of
innocence. A favor she has already received of some Quixots, or perhaps ere
this she might have had her expressed not intended choice, and have been
dissolved into Atoms for her just deserts, which she acknowledges, only she
says in the aforesaid page, That she was insufficiently prosecuted; which
because we were not so rigid as we might, being well advised, as you shall
hereafter hear, or as it has happened rather ill advized, it was sufficient
evidence against her to disanul my Marriage, had there been less witness then
was produced, which by the Oath of the Witness that swore was void, ipso
facto. I will not speak all I know as to her practices therein, as to this
matter, for it is past, and notwithstanding this, the world will shortly find
enough that will know her and will speak their mind. Did you but hear the curses
and exclamations of so great a number that know her and her actions, some
whereof she has abused highly, as the Cities of London and Canterbury will
produce, who would think it no sin to stone her to death for the wrong she has
done, and would at any time travel a hundred miles to see Justice executed on
her.

Whose cursed Actions, though as yet we see
Have Justice escaped, her end will [ a rope.
Finis] be.
And they that would endeavor to defame her,
Need use no other words, but only name her.
I shall leave every Judicious Reader to see how impropably she relates, and
how disjoynted her story hangs, which fained and cursed relation of hers (for
she owns it and it is like her) Do but compare it with the truth it self, which
by all my aforesaid asserations you shall and have read here, then you may give
your Verdict^, and you will find her justly Guilty, which by Justice it self
she is; For here every word and sentence shall carry so much, and such
undeniable and well known truth, both to her self, and many others to whom this
Books relation will be no news; That I say every sentence shall bring her in
Guilty in the great and just Court of Conscience, though she seems by her great
and damnable stock of impudence to allow of no such Court of Equity and Chamber
of Justice.

Read the sixth page of her Book, where you shall find some mite witted
pedantick Coxcomb has collected for her, the opinion and great respects
several Philosophers and Nations have had to that great Virtue called Truth:
and you shall see the disrespects he or she has for it; For they do not desire
to tell you the truth, only what Truth is in the eye of the virtuous. She says
she will observe its Precepts in her discourse; but she does not nor dare, not
dare not promise you to practice it, so cunningly she goes on that a cursitory
eye shall not find out her double meaning. I will not singly object here
against her writing, but in my relation I shall fully demonstrate the truth of
her, and her politic and printed lies. I will speak but to one thing more
particularly, (though I am unwilling to leave off he^e) that is this, In the
twelfth page of her Book she insetts a Letter as if it should come from me, and
I should send to the Gate House to her, which she says She will keep as a
Relict. To this I answer, by all my aforesaid attestations or what more any one
will, I never wrote or caused to be wrote, sent or caused to be sent, or knew
of any such Letter till I saw such a thing in her Book. Nay further, I was at
that time and as on the day of the date of that pretended letter in Canterbury,
at the house of one that calls her daughter Law, by name Richard Foud a Fiddler
and Alehouse-keeper, where I saw her own Mother and brethren, as he
acknowledged to us. And though she in the fifth page of her book, is so
cursedly impudent (though here rather but cunningly wondering at) as to seem to
deny my former Relation as to her Father, in my late printed sheet, which is to
the aforesaid purpose of his acknowledging her; yet I say, here she craftily
uses these words by way of admiration, saying, It is strange this Father of
mine could not be produced at my Trial, if it had been true. Thus does this
politic Devil by her musical speeches cheat the World, especially the ignorant
still. For what need had we to have her Father up, and being her Knavish Agent
what good would he do? Such a Michanick fellow as he is, a little thing might
have perhaps made him say any thing. Nay further, as to a Letter, I never sent
her one in my Life; but one time before marriage and after great acquaintance,
and I think contraction, She desired me, If I could not come to her once a day
to send her a Letter how I did, that she might understand my health, and do her
respects to my hand when she had not my person present, which would give her
much comfort, to read my words when she could not hear me speak them, and such
like amorous discourses and reasons she alleged to me. And remembering her
desire I wrote one once, but being (...) sent it not: and the next time I saw
her, it happened to drop (...) me, which she taking at her earnest request, she
kept it, vowing so to do ever during life. And this is that Letter she makes
mention of in the ninth page of her Book, which she lost, (and I fou^^) (...)
storming of her Out-workes, whose Inn-workes have been (...) with a P -- (I
mean plainly Gentlemen) often enough, (...) (though I thank providence I
cannot) will still subscribe (...) est. But I will desist in answering the
perticulars, for in my (...) proceedings I shall perticularly answer all
things. I am unwilling to be tedious, and therefore will but abridge as I
proceed; and though she in a bad Cause writes often and much, thinking sure
either I cannot or dare not answer: so I will do it once now and to the
pu^pose; and she will find the English Proverb true, What her much stirring now
will shortly do.

-- For be assured none (though they may awhile)
Can glory long in Perjury and Guile.
Vice may find fa^ou^ and protection get,
But Virtue quickly will a an end
Finis set.
Nature was out of tune sure, when she ma'e
This Soul-less Monster, this prodigious shade,
This Carkas of pollutio^, a heart she has
But empty, neither Soul in it, nor Faith.
Only in shape a^oman, nay scarce so,
For Proteus like she can in all sha^es go.
Her qualities are painted like (...):
Her Actions glosses, better (...) to (...)
Religion is her Mask, whereby the plays
Both fast and lo^se a Devil in a maze.
The very breath one uses to declare
Her name, sufficient is ^^infect the Air.
And may those keep her to themselves alone
That finds a Soul in her, for I found none.
In brief, this Maxim ever take for granted
There Is no such Devil, as a Woman Sainted.
But I have a little deserted my intended relation, and I hope Gentlemen you
will not be offended that I have shifted the Scene so often, to represent the
Act more lively and with better perfection. And now I must alter the Sc^ne
again, and passing by the several questions of the state and fashions of her
pretended Country, which she readily answered, I desired her to give me and
some others, A Narration of the Ceremonies of a Nunnery, which she willingly
did, relating also some passages and accidents whilst she was there, and the
Ceremonies they use in consecrating a Nun. And amongst other relations, she
brought into discourse the cause why, and the manner how the Princess Lewitia
came to the Monastery, (wherein she pretended she was which was the strict
order of St. Clare, relating the manner of her knocking at the Gate, and how
attended, and how received by the Lady Abbes, and of the stately Robes that
every Nun at Consecration is adorned with: and how they dis-robe themselves and
offer their rich attire at the high Altar, and then they slip behind a hanging
and put on a hair shift as Nuns wear; And during the time of this Ceremony,
what rare Antheams are Sung, and then how and where they dispose and put the
Riches and Jewels they bring in with them: How often they go to Chapel in a
day and night, and how little time they rest at night in their stone Cells. And
said she, into this Order none but great Persons and Heiresses are received
some for Protection, some upon discontent will go in and be Consecrated, and
many such like discourses, how a handsome young Lady (whilst she was there)
made her escape through a narrow sinck. Thus would she go on, and express her
self with a great seeming devotion, and much pity that so many noble and fine
Ladies should do so much Penance and Mortification (a great word with her which
she would much use to me) as they do in a Monastery. And that those Heiresses
that go in for Protection, may be consecrated if they please, And at such an
age they have a year and a day allowed them for Probation or Trial; during
which time, the Consecrated Nuns would Court them that were on Probation, to be
Consecrated also: Setting before her or them that was so upon Trial, the holy
Service they are devoted to, the cares of the world they are freed from, the
dangers of Marriage, and the continual grief that waits it, and many such
frightful and weaning ^ storys which (said she) they used to me also to court
me to stay, and asked me if I did intend to marry, I answered (says she) I
could not tell that as yet, but I could serve God abroad in the world as well
as here, and might do much good and Charity with my Estate; and as to marriage,
that (said she) I leave to decrees of Heaven; for if I should fancy any one to
come to my embraces, I desire of God, and did use to say to my Governess (here
perhaps was a sigh) that I would marry a private civil Gentleman, and a younger
Brother, and one that is free from the wickedness and debauchery of all Courts;
for I should oblidge such a Gentleman I am sure (said she) to love me heartily,
nobly, and in a high nature, for without Love, should I meet with one, as
Courtier like said she, only loved and Courted my Estate, it would quickly end
my days, or by a violent death I should end them my self.

And here Reader I dare leave her to judge how my love was linked to her,
whilst I esteemed her virtuous; and she cannot say, nay I believe she will not
say, but that I loved her heartily, honestly and nobly, until the world (which
cut my very soul asunder) proved her dishonest, though she will not seem to
acknowledge it; and indeed I cannot blame her, to hide that which would quite
shame her. Nay upon her discovery, Witness many persons and actions, I could
not but love her and believe her till so many attested it, that they cast my
soul into a trance, yet I did civilly by her; But in regard it concerns my
self, I am silent. But to go on, my Dear said she, God has sent me a mighty
blessing, Mine Heartchie, Mine escape, Mine Leiveta, Mine Egin, Egin Leiveta,
breaking off with these and such like Dutch expressions of Love (which laughing
with one or two more she could chatter in, and an embrace or a salute) in
providing me one so much to my souls desire and earnest prayers. The greatest
earthly blessing God could bestow on me, and I shall day and night express my
gratitude to Almighty Providence for thee my heart; for amongst all the favors
God of his bounty has bestowed on me, in giving to me with so liberal a hand
the Goods of Fortune, for which though I cannot answer with sufficient
gratitude, yet I esteem my self for ever highly bound to pou^e out my soul with
thanks and tears of joy for that noble and high prized gift of thee my Dear
and right noble soul; then would she seem to cry for joy, and wish her self
surer mine, and I hers; and then again she would sigh for sorrow that she could
not demonstrate her self in actions as yet; but says she my words will
speedily now be fully compleatea and nobly acted, and I shall be in a capacity
my Dear to gratefie your great civility. Me thinks I see her passages, and by
all that is true, I can hardly go any further, and scarce dare to think her
false, but that her detracting prints her absence from me, and mine from my
self, as I may properly say, and such like occurrences makes me remember the
cause, and the late false reports commands me to go on and speak the truth
which as yet I have, and have put in as good security for that which ensues;
that is, what I relate before my acquaintance is as she told me; that I declare
since, I do attest to, and though I cannot remember, neither do I promise to
set down every word she expressed her self by, though I have used very many of
them, yet I have and will truly (though briefly in respect of her words and
gestures) set down and insert the manner, matter and substance of her
disc^urses and acts. You may imagine better perhaps then I can express, that
she having begun such a design, and pretending to be such a person, how
cunningly she glossed over her Romantic stories and pretenses with great zeal
as comeing from a Nunnery, a handsome and noble deportment as a person of
quality, and good language as being well breed; all which are but suitable, and
to be expected to make her self out, had she been what she pretended and
represented her self to be, which seeming reality did in a growing familiarity
and acquaintance increase mine and many wise persons belief. But I will not
tire your patience Gentle Reader, and therefore will forbear to relate the
several further (though material) plots and stratagems she used to undermine
me, and to discipate my jealousies, and extract a credit: How upon her first
comeing to the Exchange Tavern, she sent Letters by the post to Germany, and
before an answer was returned, and while her design was going on, how she set
her Agents ac work to give out at some public places, where she knew and had
heard me speak of in discourse (but seeming to take no notice) I had familiar
acquaintance, and often frequented in and about London, what gratuity should be
given to any one that could make a discovery of a German Lady of great Quality
and Fortune, which was a 100 l. and also her obligations she laid upon me,
under pretense of a passionate Love, whereby she desired and commanded me daily
to be with her, that her soul might find rest: And when I did visit her, how
neatly she would relate to me the dreams of the last night, and the unquietness
she had in her bed, sometimes so amarous, that she imagined she embraced me,
sometimes fearful that she thought I was sick, with such like amplifications.
And then how earnestly she desired to enjoy my company alone, to take the Air
in a Coach, or by Water, which we often did; and then she would so bait my
fancy by her many and high expressions of Love to me, and care of and for me,
and such like Love passages. And after such pastime, when we returned to her
Lodging, how unwillingly she was to let me depart, being angry with the Night
that it grew on so fast. And then to see how melancholy she would sit down,
and seem to bewail her present unsetledness, and the absence of her Dear
Governess, which name commonly produced a sigh or a tear, to whom she said she
was for ever oblidged to show Love and respect, not so much for Relation sake,
as for her great Love, in leaving all the world, and her many noble proffers of
Marriage to go into the Monastery with her. And thus for about three weeks did
she linck my fancy to her. And here I think good to speak to one most untrue
(yet politic) Relation she w^ites concerning me. That I should pretend to be a
Lord, and Courted her in a great Aequipage, I suppose she has a double meaning
in it, and shows how she acted her part, only she puts my name to it Mutato
Nomine De te, fabula Narratur: Change but her name and title, and she means and
speaks of her self, for by all my aforesaid asseverations I never assumed any
other title, or set my self in a higher rank then Providence had placed me in,
neither did I alter my Habit any otherwise then I used to go in which was
commonly black, decent, and civil enough I am sure, nay something unfit to Court
a Mistress; but my Habit was pleasing enough to me, for I neither had a desire
nor a design to Court any one, though I was Courted by her: But I never had any
great respect to a Habit, whereby to make any distinction of days, times, or
place, which all that know me can justify; and therefore I will not stick
here. This is but like the rest; Who can expect that she should write any thing
but prodigious and execrable falsifies, for she has no truth in the least to
be a plea for her self, but I will hasten and will ship many Circumstances and
well baited hooks, and turn over many leaves at once, because I will not be
tedious, and will relate 2 or 3 passages more before I come to enter the sacrid
Lists of Matrimony with this Saint-like Devil, with whom my acquaintance was
above three Weeks before I was married to her; for as I told her in such
weighty affairs, as to consent to marry, especially with a strange or mature
deliberation was very requisite, and not to run post have to hazard ones
welfare, But she being so highly in love with me as she pretended by her
expressions, how little rest her soul had in my absence, and what raptures of
joy and delight in my presence, and so earnestly soliciting and praying mine
integrity, though acquainted with my quality, husted me forward to that too
late repented action of Matrimony; for in Love adventures, none are
accomplished with more facility and brevity then that which is favored by the
Woman's desire, and pricked on by her Prayers and tears. About a week before
Marriage we were contracted, for though she wished her self mine, yet she would
not Marry until Lent was out, for her Religion would not permit that, and till
she could demonstrate her self more by her actions, and that she had either a
return of her Letters to see how things stood, or that her Governess and her
Goods and Moneys were come over which might soonest happen she could not tell,
but she expected all in Easter week at the furthest. And here I will relate one
passage that presently after Contraction she damnably acted, which was this;
She did but rise and sit down in a Couch, and instantly she fell into a strange
sounding fit: (Which trick, many that know her in London, say, was a pretended
and usual Custom with her to do when she pleased, and they say, the first time
as she did ever so, was when for some of her former cheating actions she was
whipped about the streets, and I suppose to prevent the stripes she counterfeited
that fit) in which strange fit then as it seemed to me, she remained a good
while: the Gentleman that was with me, well understanding Physic, fought and
gave her somewhat to drink in a glass, which being put to her mouth, she bit a
piece off; that doing her no good, he went down (leaving me to hold her, which
was as much, nay more then I could well do from falling on the floare) to fetch
some feathers to burn under her, which being burnt, and she not coming to her
self, he went for more, she strove hard with me in his absence, she being still
in her fit, though beginning to come to her self, she earnestly cried out Where
is my Governess, where is my Woman, at which time the Gentlewoman of the House
where we were came up into the Room, I said she is here, and opening her eyes,
she stared at her, but could not, or would not speak as yet; thus did this
Devil incarnate still Counterfeit. When she was well, a Coach waiting at the
door, we rode further to take the Air; I asked her the reason of this Fit, she
replied she could not tell, but thinking what she had done, struck a sudden
passion in her, for said she, I never had any before.

Sometime after this, and about 3 days before my (not then so soon ^^pected)
Marriage, coming from a Play in the Evening, she would needs give that most
discreet and excellent natured Gentlewoman (...) Mother a visit, and come
acquainted with her: After salutes past on each side, they fell into discourse;
she called her Mother, for said she, Nothing but Death shall part my Dear and
I, pointing to me: My Mother wondering at her affectionate passage, asked her
the Reason of her fancy to me, of so unequal and small Fortune: She replied
mine is sufficient; you may suppose Reader I abridge every passage. She having
heard of some mistrusts my friends had made and given out, began to argue the
Case the better to satisfy and procure a Credit in my Mother: For said she,
had I a design to Cheat, I should had sored very high; my Mother then replied,
that none were ignorant, that a Married life without a plentiful Estate was
very uncomfortable; Mother said she, it is very certain; do you think I am a
Jew, a Turk, a Heathen (these were her words) that I should think of, much more
do such a thing as go about to ensuare any Gentleman; I would not for a World
be found in an untruth, for what I say, is as true as Heaven. Ah Cursed
Atheist, thus did she endeavor to satisfy her in all her objections, who
thought it not a piece of civility to object further, and was for the present
satisfied from then further objecting, yet could not be free from mistrusts
when absent, and out of her Motherly love and care to me, would still put in a
Cave, and bid me take heed, which I then thought needed not; for I would say,
as indeed any one would, that she could not be false, so much I believed her:
To be short, the next day being Good Friday, she came with me again to desire
my Mothers Company to take the Air, and then she did see that Learned,
Judicious and Worthy ancient Gentleman my Father, whom she after salutes past
termed so also, and in discourse relared to him, (he objecting as my Mother
did) her great affection to me even from the first minute she saw me, and she
was so free in declaring every thing to them both, that they did not, nor
needed not to ask much, and from that time (they to whom I owe the duty of a
Son, which could I double, they do nobly deserve) had a very good opinion of
her parts, whose deserts they did acknowledge claimed high; as to the other,
they could but hope the best; and by my soul, I think and know that in their
thoughts for my sake and her seeming deserts, they had Adopted her an own
Daughter, but Optima Corrupta, pessima. And though she has since aspersed them
with cruelty, the world knows there was none acted on her in the least, nay
nothing was done that can come within the term of incivility; but what was
done to her for that unspeakable abuse she acted (...) me was but according to
Law and honesty, and I could do no less. But she cannot detract from their
reputation, though she may make here smell more loathsome. The next day she
dined there, after dinner we ^od forth to take the air with my Mother, my
Brother (who then I think had seen her four times) and another Gentleman, which
afternoon, had you but heard her discourse tending to her former Narration, and
seen her so well and nobly act Love passages to me, before my friends you would
stand amazed to think what she said, and how she has acted. Before we returned
home, Letters were come for her by the Post, as she had ordered them, (but they
were dictated by her self, and writ at a Scriveners Shop in this City by the
servant, as he will justify now and well remembers) By that time we got to my
Fathers, they were brought her; she opened them and read them with great
seeming joy for the good news, and then I took and read them. These Letters
upon the discovery of her she burned; the contents whereof I can well remember,
and will briefly set down. One was from -- Hamond her Governes Directed on the
Superscription thus, A Maddam Maddam Henrietta Maria de Wolway; wherein she
wrote after her respects and salutes to her Ladyship, and joy to hear she was
safe arrived in England, and what longing desires they all had to be with her,
to wait on her Ladyship and kiss her hand, How that the old Count was almost
mad for her, and the Emperors Nephew likewise: and that they made great search
for her. And that the Emperor had sent to the French Court, and would speedily
send to England, therefore desired her Ladyship to keep very private: And how
her pretty Page (which she said was Mine Here Breants Son the Emperors
Privy-Counsellor) thought it very long, and was very desirous to be with her
Ladyship to do his Duty. And such like matter was contained in her Letter.

The other Letter was as from Mine Here Breant as she called him, who was her
great friend and Agent in her flight; and as she told us asking her what he
was, She said, He was one of the Emperors Privy-Counsellors, and that her
Governess and some of her servants lay at his house for privacy, and he could
fetch what he would out of her own house and not be mistrusted being so great
with the Emperor. In this Letter, after his great respects and service to her
Honor, he informs her, of the receipt of her Letter and of her desire to have
the money returned, which he says he thought not convenient to venture, and the
rather because he did intend to set sail speedily for he had kept a Ship on
purpose a whole week, expecting a good wind, and then he and his Lady, and her
Governess, and her servants with her goods, Jewels and moneys, would come over
to her. He informs her also, how that the Emperor mightily checked the holy
Fathers for being too rigid and severe, and that he was much troubled for her:
He informs her also, what things he had got out of her house, and desired her
commands speedily by a Letter what other things she would have: And so after a
long Epistle to this purpose, he takes leave of her Ladyship, desiring her to
be satisfied that all things shall go well by her Servant his means, etc.

The other Letter, wherein the other two were enclosed, was sent to Mr. King,
which I will insert here word for word. The Superscription thus,

For Mr. William King at the Sign of the Royal Exchange in the Poultry nigh
Cornhil, London these.
Sir,
BY the information of my Ladys Letter, she is greatly oblidged to you, and so
are we her friends also, I hope your just friendship will continue, till we her
friends do wait on her, where she is. And know Sir, for what obligations you
may do her, she is so grateful to retaliate for the least of favors, and that
shall be also acknowledged, By Sir,

Your ready servant though at present unknown, Wilhalme Breaut.
I pray deliver this enclosed to the honorable my Lady. April 10th 1663.

Here Gentlemen by him that made me, you have the exact Copy of this Letter,
which you may see if you are curious and desirous to do, of him to whom it was
directed. Pray mind this Letter, and see how cunningly she indicted this and
also the other two, of which you have the true contents though short. In the
Superscription of this last received Letter, because (as she told me her self)
it should not be known to her friends that she lay in a public house, she left
out the word Tavern. In the Letter pray observe those words, For what
obligations you may do her etc. That was a Bait for Mr. King, if her hook had
not caught me. In brief, thus you see the Devils Policy.

And now Ladies, I wish I could leave her here, for I am even tired with going
so far. I could wish her Coach (which she said my Lord Taff bought for her in
England, and sent it over to her, made of the new fashion with Glass very
stately, and her Pages and Lacquies were of the same Livery) was come for me,
which after the receipt of these Letters she sent an express order for with
other things. I shall be so out of breath before I get to Church with her, she
being so big as you see here she is, that I shall not be able to speak (or at
least willing to say) I John take thee etc. especially for bad or for worse,
for good or for better, I could strain my self very much. As she is I dare not
promise you to heave at her hole, I mean to have and to hold her; for she may
go when and where she please. These excellent Chimaera Letters have somewhat
raised my fancy to a private smile, and for the present have much diverted my
serious humor. But, I hope Ladies you will excuse this diversion of my fancy,
and pardon these Jocks the rather, because variety hits the humor of every
person, and the more parts I make the more pleasant it is.

Sometime after this we joined hands in Matrimony; and my Religion makes me
stand amazed, to think of the corrupted and sinful soul of this miserable
Creature. First in violating the Laws of holy Matrimony, which signifies and
represents the Mystical union between Christ and his Church. How will this
defiled member answer that dreadful Charge and Position which is used in the
Ceremony of Matrimony by the Priest, in these words, saying, I require and
charge you (as you will answer at the daeadful day of judgment, when the
secreets of all hearts shall be disclosed) That if either of you do know any
Impediment why you may not be lawfully joined togather in Matrimony, that ye
confess it; For be ye well assured, that so many as be coupled togather
otherwise then Gods word does allow, are not joined togather by God, neither is
their Matrimony lawful -- I will not stand to apply this, The world is sensible
how unlawful hers was; And I am satisfied how clear I am from her, and how free
I am in my Conscience, as well from the breach of that Charge, as to enter into
that Sacred Order again. But this is between God and my own Conscience, and I
will say no more to it.

Heaven made this match, but did cut off the entaile
of future comfort, else my Judgment fails.
As to the several Passages after Marriage, my modesty commands privacy, to the
objections that have been or drollingly can be made, I do not desire, nor will
I publish, but privately I can satisfy any rationable person what an artificial
made she was, whose seeming purity of a true Maiden Bride, was sophisticated
and made strict by the power of Druggs and help of Art. As to the cloths she
speaks of, I am certain I left her better then I found her, as many can
justify, besides that which she had unknown to me made away. I continued and
lived with her about a fortnight after Marriage before she was discovered; In
which time some persons of quality that were curious to see her, did visit us
at our Lodgings, and after a considerable stay and time of satisfying their
cursosities and making a Trial, departed with great credit and belief of her
worth. She still continued in her former pretenses of Birth and Fortune, and
when she was better habited she did better represent. After marriage, during
the time I remained with her, my expenses on her was as high as her pretenses.
She, the nobler to entertain those persons of quality her friends who she said
were coming over, was very willing and earnest with me to fit her with a noble
House; But for the present I satisfied her with handsome Lodgings, Clothes and
sufficient attendance. But as to this it concerns my self, and is the least
thing I care for; it is done, and what I have expended on her, though it be
very considerable, yet it is not material to insert for any ones satisfaction.
The Counterfeit Jewels, like the rest of her storys and her self, are scarce
worth taking off from a Dunghill. These with other things of value, as she
said, she had hid about her, she only told me of for a great while, and she
said, she would not produce them, that it might be said to her friends when
they came over, and to all the world also, that I loved her nobly, and not for
what she had; This I protest was her Plea to me. As to Money, I here attest I
never saw 10 s. of hers in my life, but she was extraordinary free of my
Pocket. I will not insist here, I thought not to speak of it all, for I would
have scorned it, but that she has given out such cursed reports of what things
she brought to me; And to speak very much within compass, I am confident all
the counterfeit Rings, Jewels and gilded brassewyre worked Bracelets,
counterfeit Pearls (which the night she was discovered she thought to Coxeme
with still) as you shall read hereafter) her Clothes, which was the disguise
she came in and no other, nay and put her soul in also, if she has any, for a
grain of allowance, are not worth a Collation of Ten pieces. I am brief in
every particular, give me leave to smile at one or two passages, which I will
contract and insert here, before I leap over many transactions during the
fortnights time, and come to the discovery of this disguised Curtizan. Upon a
rumor of some vulgar heads that were talking of the Marriage, who credibly
reported that she was a Princess, and what danger the young Gentleman that
married her was in, I sometime after I had heard this talk, when it came in my
mind, smiling at the conceit began to tell it her for news, which she seemed to
start at, as if it had been true. Upon that, Madam said I, Prithee relate to me
the truth of your Birth and Fortune Good or bad; for I am bound to stand to it
now. She replied, That she desired me not press her to it, that I might truly
attest I knew not what she was, but that I loved her as she was. But, said she,
this satisfaction I will give you, I am nigh related to the Crown of Denmark,
let that suffice with what I told you before, and I protest I ever told you the
least of what I am. Had I been a Boy, said she, I should have had the Earldom,
which was 24000 pounds per annum, which for lack of Issue Male, went to the
Emperor who has 6000 li. of mine in his hands now. But said she, my Father
dying without Heir Male, I only enjoy what he purchased, which is but 3000 li.
per annum, as I told you and that is in your English C^int 1500 li. sterling,
besides Monys, Goods and Jewels of the Lord my Father and my Lady Mother of a
very great value. But to be short, the other passage is this, Her Father in Law
the Lord Fiddler, the morning before she was discovered, (as I have heard but
relate it not for a very truth, though I am apt to believe it by reason he told
me and others that he was in Town at that time and long before) with some other
of hs Consorts, came early to our lodgings with their music to play us up. She
rose, slipped on a morning Gown of mine: and taking money of me, which sum I will
insert, it was half a piece besides what addition I suppose she made, and
presently flung it out of the Bellcony, and after a Tune or two they departed.
I could not mistrust any thing then (though I asked her the reason of her
freeness? And indeed in all her expenses whilst with me, she passed the bounds
of Liberality, and touched the Confines of Prodigality, a thing nothing
profitable to any condition, especially a married life: but I then did impute
it to the liberality of her disposition and breeding. (She replied, There were
4 or 5 of them, she could not do less in honor, neither did I value it) For
it was to be expected in some nature, and she always, both before and after
Marriage, when we went forth, was free to servants and very Charitable to the
poor, with good admonitions likewise to them. I will not stand to relate any
further, how many Pater-nosters, Aves salves and Creeds she said over, and how
strict an observer she did pretend to be of the times: as on Good-fryday night,
she would not go to Bed, she said, but be at her Devotion: and how she crossed
every ^up she drank out of, and every Dish of meat, and accompanied every word
of her Grace with a Cross inform of Benediction, and such like see^^ing great
zeal. I omit many serious, some excellent humored actions between us and
others; and now we will take Coach to visit some Relations, and as we go along,
we will call and see them to whom I owe my Duty. After some stay there, She
tells me She would have 10 li. to go to Mr. Kings and redeem a Diamond Ring of
80 li. price that she left with him before Marriage for 7 li. in money, and
also because she being a stranger would not be mistrusted that she might do
them wrong, and might carry any thing away with her when she went in her
disguise to recreate her self in the fields, with which by walking sometimes
with me and some others she became acquainted and knew the way, wherefore she
left that for security, with the obligation of privacy; and therefore desired
me and my friends to take no notice to him of such a thing. The money she had,
and we went and my Mother with us, to see a friend near Mr. Kings house; She
and I went to Mr. Kings, I meeting with a friend there, retired into a room to
drink a Glass of Wine, She said, she would go and ask Mr. King for the Ring. A
little after she came to me again, and told me, he was so busy he could not
give it her now, but desired her to come the next morning or any other time.
The next morning she said she would go. So we departed thence, and went to my
friends house where we had left my Mother. And here Reader she is discovered;
for Mr. King sends presently for my Mother to show her a Letter that came from
Dover, in answer to a Letter sent at Rivers by a friend of ours to a friend of
his, which Lettet they just were reading as we went into the house, but told me
nothing of it, neither did they give her any notice of it until my Mother
returned again. A true copy of the Letter I will here insert.

Dover, May the 4th. 1663.
SIr, This morning I received your Letter, dated May the 2d. instant, and
accordingly have made inquiry; By what I can discover, it is a Gentlewoman that
is the greatest Cheat in the World. She has now two Husbands living in this
Town, the one a Shoemaker named Thomas Steadman, the other a Surgeon named
Thomas Day. She was borne in Canterbury, her maiden name is Mary Modders, her
Father was a Musician belonging to Christ-church Canterbury. She was lately in
Dover-Castle a Prisoner, taken out of a ship bound for the Barbados, where she
cheated the Mr. of 50 li. if it be she, I am sorry for your friends misfortune.
If I shall refer you to Mr. John Williams his Wife, who lives near St.
Saviors Dock New-staires near Rederiff, she is the Masters wife of the
Barbados ship; and if you can prevail with her to go see her, she will give
you full satisfaction whether it be she or no. I pray you send me a line of the
appearance of the business, and the man's name that is married to her, and his
Calling; for it is reported A Minister took her up at Gravefend. My respects to
your self and Father, I remain,

Your Loving Friend


Mr. King having read this to my Mother, and the rumor by one means or another
being spread, it happened, there was a Gentlewoman then in the house, that
hearing of it, did mistrust it was the same person that formerly lay at her
house, at the backside of the Feathers Tavern in Paul's Churchyard; where she
had like to have married a Mercer in Paternoster Row, but was discovered
before it was quite completed. The same Gentleman I understand she has
chea^ed of a very considerable sum in Silks and Satin. This Gentlewoman
desired my Mother to permit her to go and see her. When they came into the room
at my friends house where we were, as soon as she had cast her eye upon the
Gentlewoman, she put on her Hoods and hid her Face. I wondered who she was that
came up. My Mother asked her, If she knew this Mary Moders? She replied, She
knew her by her Gate. Then it was no time to dissemble, and my Mother desired
the Gentlewoman to go near her, and look in her Face; for she hid her Face and
turned her back toward them, and made as if she looked out at the Window. The
Gentlewoman went, and looking on her said, How do you Madam? She replied, I do
not (...) now you. No Madam, did not you ^ly so long at my house? and such like
proofs she brought. She still replied, I never saw you before. In brief the
Gentlewoman would have swore it was the same person, and she departed. By and
by her husband came, but she would not let any one come up to see her; but he
by description knew her also, and told ^s some other former Cheats. When she
was gone they showed me the former Letter, which I read to her, and asked her
if she was such a person? she utterly denied it, and protested she was not. And
I protest the imagination of this misfortune gave me such a terrible Charge,
that I could hardly recover my right sense; but to try her the better, I then
bid her give me her Jewels off. She would not consent to it a great while, at
length she did, I sent them by two friends to the Goldsmith, which when he
looked on them, he wondered at their question, which was to know what they were?
She had a Ring likewise she protested cost 50 li. which I sent after the rest,
and they were all false, and worth nothing but the Gold, which will hardly
purchase a gallon of Ca^ary; finding things thus, we did believe the aforesaid
Letter and witness. So we desired her to give us seven of the ten pounds she
had just before, and we would redeem the Ring she said Mr. King had: So
receiving the money of her (she being unwilling to part from it at first till
she see we found her out very plainly) we went for the Ring, which made Mr.
King amazed at the question, for never any such thing was; But ^ere ^ay her
plot, she the morning before said, She would go to my Fathers, and it seems
carried a great bundle out with her that I knew not of, to a place I know not
where, and after called there where she said she would; so she thought being
provided with the 10. l. in silver, besides several pieces of Gold she had of
me the same time, the Clothes I bought, her Ring, Picture and Watch she had of
me, and other things; she imagined her self in a good Equipage for another
design and a speedy flight. After this discovery, my Relations and my self
pressed hor to speak true, whether she had any other Husband, and told her how
little regard we had to her pretended Fortune, and that if she could Vindicate
and prove her honesty (which upon their attestation was justly feared) she
should live happily and contentedly with me that loved her nobly and heartily;
and there she presently (though we could not make her speak before) fell down
on her knees in the presence of several persons, weeping exceedingly; wished
for a sudden judgment to befall her, and that her soul may eternally hang in
Hell, if ever she was Contracted, Married to, or knew any man besides my self.
Upon this I prevailed with my Friends (who advised me to secure her there all
night) to let her have her desire, and go home with me to our Lodgings; when we
came home she presently undressed her self, and slipped on the Indian Gown, and
having put on clean Linen and Gloves, and such things, she pulled off the
Rings from her fingers, and Christals from her ears, and her Bracelets all
Counterfeit, and gave them me, desiring me when she was dead, not to let the
Rings in her ears be taken out, nor her Gloves off her hands, and such like
foolish desires: I wondered at her fancy, and asked her why she talked of dying;
Madam said I, do you mean to do your self a mischief; No Sir said she to do my
self good, before to morrow morning you shall see me in another Condition;
hearing this and such like discourse, the Man and Maid standing in the Chamber,
I commanded them not to stir thence that night, but to fetch me such and such
things, for I would sit up my self also.

Then she opened a Paper of Counterfeit Pearl, and gave me a couple, saying,
These my Dear will make you amends for all: Within half an hour after, my
Father and Mother, Sister, and another Gentlewoman came with a Shoemaker that
was sent by the aforesaid Mrs. Williams, mentioned in the Letter to Mr. Kings
to know the truth of this: When he came there, my Friends told him she was gone
with me to our Lodgings, and notwithstanding it was so late at Night, and
Rained, and he had as far as Horsly-Down to return home, yet he came with my
Friends in a Coach, whom he desired not to leave me alone with her if they
loved me, but to stay themselves all-night. When he came into the Room, he
asked her how she did do? she replied as she did before, and always does in
the like Cases, that she did not kun-now him; he replied, you impudent Woman,
do not you know you owe me so much money for Slops and Shoes when you lay at
Mrs. Williamses, she will know you to morrow morning, and I believe will go
near to tear thee to pieces, you know you owe her 44 l. and then began to jeer
her and said what a P -- makes you so fine in this brave silk Gown, I cannot
maintain my Wife so, and I am a Master-Shooe-maker, and your Husband T. S. a
Journeyman-Shooe-make^, and such like slouts he used and so departed, earnestly
desi^ing us not to leave her alone, or stir from her, for she will cheat the
Devil himself she has so many tricks. In this Dress she sat all Night on the
Bedside, and would not speak one word, ask her what you will, and that is her
trick upon all discoverys; but let any one back her, and she will speak as
boldly as a Devil. About the middle of the Night my Friends and asked her if
she would eat or drink a glass of Wine, or any thing else? she replied to me
safely, yes, she would eat, and desired me to bring her a Knife, which when
she had got, I think she had eat nothing, but she put the Knife in her Pocket;
by and by she pulled out the Dravve^s of my Trunk, and took ou^ her Letters,
and desired the Candle of me, set them on fire within the Curtains, and when
they were flaming, flung them on the ground. I shall pass over many things she
did say to me, how dearly she loved me, and longed to be with me alone, and
when I asked her any thing to press her to the truth she would, for indeed
she could say nothing, but seemed to deny it still. In the morning about 4 of
the Clock, she took an opportunity when my Father was in the Dineing Room a
reading, my Sister, the other Gentleman and my self lying on the Bed in a
slumber, and only my Mother sitting by her at the fire side, she cast her eye
toward the Chamber door, and the light appearing on the Stair-head, my Mother
feared she would run ^ovvn and get away, and therefore went to the Stairs
and stood there; she seeing this opportunity, drevv out my svvord that lay on
the Chimney-piece, and run as fast up Stairs as she could possibly, which
being perceived, some one cried out she was gone up with a Svvord, and with
that vvaked me, and I taking the boys svvord, follovved her up, calling to her
to forbear, which I believe I need not have done, for she would have been
hanged before she would have hu^t her self; when I came up I found her
leaning as it were with her breast open on the svvords point, took hold of
the svvord and brought her down again; and she told me, but that she heard
my voice, and desired to speak with me, else she would have killed her self.
The day growing farther on, we bid her provide and put on her own Clothes,
for Mrs. Williams and the rest of the Witnesses would come presently, which
she did though unvvillingly, and cried very much, and desired to speak with
privately me in the next room, where she used many protestations of her Love to
me, and sorrow for the abuse she had done me, and begged of me to let her
escape, and she would never see England more; I answered her I will, for all
this abuse, show you all the Civility I can, and if I can be cleared from you
and your actions, you shall go as you please; till then, we must proceed
according to Law and Justice; you see what Witnesses come against you, and how
reports increase; and I cannot with safety to my self let you escape; and said
I, what will the world think of it, if I should? therefore I must publ^sh it
now, that they may see the wrong you have done me, or else they will wonder at
the reason, and think I have abused you. Some time after Mrs. Williams, and
many others that knew her came, and were ready to tear the Clothes off from her
back; and Mrs. Williams challenging a Sca^fe that she had on, Moders replied,
Indeed Mrs. Williams it is none of yours, for this I lately bought, and there
are all the words she spoke in answer to any ones accusations, only she cried
very much all the while, and talked to me privately, and begged me to let her
escape for Gods sake, and she was heartily grived she had abused me that was so
lov^ng and civil, and that she loved me Cordially, and with all her soul which
I could hardly believe; for if she had, she would not have abused me, as I then
told her; but entreat her never so earnestly and much, she would not tell me
why she did so, nor speak one word to that, only weep and say that she should
dye if we prosecuted her; but she would hant some bodies Ghost, and such Bugbear
storys she would use, thinking to terrefie me, and so to let her escape. You
may imagine Gentlemen and Ladys what a damp it struck to my spirits to see this
sudden alteration; I could not withdraw my affection, though her actions
forced me to do what I did. Presently after in a strange manner, the rumor
being ab^oad there came the Gentlewoman that l^ved over against our Lodging^,
in whose House she lodged with Mr. Day* and with her came her Bride Maid, and
others of Mr. Days acquaintance and Relations, and with strange Exclamations
did even Curse her and her actions; so many Witnesses appearing together, we
all (near a score in number) went back to the Justices, who after several
Examinations, justly committed her, she being asked her name, would not declare
it, nor nothing else. The Glark being about to make a Mitti^^us, she desired me
for God sake not to let it be to Newgate, my affection not being extirpated, I
was willing to perform any civil request still, though I must confess I did
deserve, and justly was blamed by many Strangers, that I did so much un-man my
self; for I am certain, had it been some men's case, she had not breathed long
after; but it is best as it is, I had more Charity for her, and Civility to her
then she did deserve; My thinks it should pierce her heart when she seriously
considers of her abuses and discourtesie to me, yet my civility always to her.

But Courteous Reader, I have been pretty long and very plain in relating the
discovery of her, and the rather, by reason it was so strange, and because
every person is very inquisitive in this point. The reason why she so earnestly
entreated me not to let her go to Newgate, was because she has been there
before, and lay in a miserable Condition there in the Common Goal a great
while, and would had been well known there; For an Exchange woman, to whom this
Moders owes some money, for which she was in Newgate, to satisfy the desire
of the Foreman of the Jury, Mr. Rutland, who would not believe but that she
was what she pretended her self to be; after her Trial, being at the Keeper of
Newgate's House, went with some others to see her, she then standing in the
Belcony of the Keepers House, seeing the little Gentleman come into the Yard,
run presently away and locked her Chamber Door to her, and though they Feed the
Keepers, yet could not procure Admittance; For she told the Keepers through the
Door, that that little Gentleman should not come in; then the Foreman desired
her to admit him in, who had done her a late great Courtesy as to saving her
Life, she answered, he should be admitted without his Company; the Jury-man
replied in brief, Madam I understand you owe this Gentleman my Friend some
moneys, she replied Yes, but he must go to her Husband for it, but which of her
Husbands, I cannot tell; For I cannot imagine whose Wife she will be at the
Resurrection, and the debt must remain till then, and there we shall have true
Justice done without favor or respect to any person, and therefore we will let
that rest and sleep quietly in the U^. But now we will leave her at the
Gate House, where if any person came that knew her as many scores did, she will
own none; and to strangers she still carrys on a design to procure Friends and
money under her former pretenses, and here she remained sporting with, and
Courted by the young Gallants of this age, who either wilfully or ignorantly
believe her still; but the Civilized Gentry (though Gentility cannot be termed
properly without Civility) did after a little satisfaction of their curiosities
perceive her Craft and Impudence; nay I protest I have heard I may say
hundre^ds of my friends, acquaintance and accidental company, that have and do
in their discourse, confess she has a notable cunning and flashy wit, but a
very Bawd to all lewdness and vice, and (in the Term all the World almost gives
her) a Damned Whore. And sundry persons of great quality and Estates, and good
Conscience, wonder she is permitted to breath, and that she should be so upheld
in her villainy; but she will shortly smell odious, and perish miserably; For
Est natura hominum novitatis avida. The greatest fault of our English Nation,
as is the doom and sentence of other Countries of us. Her passages there are not
unknown to many hundreds, and therefore I will fo^bear to ^nsert any here.

Two days after her commitment, being Friday the eighth of May last past, for,
a diversion and satisfaction of my mind, I went down to Canterbury, where
unknown to any who I was, upon discourse of such a person I heard of her
damnable actions, and wondered to hear the cursed exclamations that very many
persons made against her. Finding things, so true, after a little stay there,
the Gentleman that accompanied me and my self, we went to the worthy Gentleman
Frances Lovelace, now Recorder of Dover and Canterbury, whose civility he very
readily expressed to us, by satisfying our Queries. He informed us also of a
former Trial before him at Dover: and that Justice had been then executed on
her life, but that the Power being then usurped, and in the hands of the
Keepers of the Liberty of England by authority of Parl^ament, they were
unwilling to execute their Commissions to the full by reason of the aforesaid
Power that gave them; And at that time they passed by many great and criminal
faults at all Courts in England, excepting Murder. And that if he recovered his
health (being then dangerous ill) his occasions would call him up to London,
and then he would assist us sufficiently in our business, whom we did daily
expect and depend somewhat on; but his sickness continuing he was prevented.
After we returned to London, upon a Letter sent to the aforesaid Esquire
Lovelace, he returned this answer, which is a true Copy, some private things in
answer to our requests only left out, as being not material nor concerning the
business.

Sir, I received your Letter, and according to your request, have sent you the
Indictment against Mary Mo^lers, and her own Examination taken before the Mayor
and Jurats of Dover, whereby you may receive good light. Her first husband
Thomas Steadman is yet living, and a Soldier in Dover Castle. Upon the trial
of life and death, she was found not guilty by the Jury; and though her
Examination will be no evidence against if she deny it, yet by that you have
instruction to prove her first marriage to Steadman. The Town-Clark of Dover
cannot be at London. I am yet so ill that I dare not venture to go to London;
yet it will be very necessary for you to prove her first marriage to Steadman,
which you may do if you send a Witness down that can write and read, to see the
Church-Book of St. Mildrids Parish in Canterbury, or the Register Office there;
and to take a Copy thereof, and be able to swear it to agree with the Original.
There is one that lives in or near Canterbury, that I am informed was present
at her first marriage to Steadman, and gave her to him in Marriage, he may be
had to London to be a witness. And I would have yours that you send down, go to
Dover and see Thomas Steadman, and be able to prove him to be living. I doubt
not but you can prove her Marriage to the Gentleman your friend, and a Witness
that knows her, and your work will be done.

Yours, etc.


And according to this Gentleman's advice we not only proceeded but exceeded.
For in order to her Trial which was on the 4 th day of June last, at
Justice-hall London, first, we brought him up who did testify he her in
Marriage to Tho. Steadman, and did answer all the objections that gave the
Court did several times make to him. As to the Register none was ever Recorded,
through the negligence of the former Clarke of St. Mildrids Parish, But the
Register-book was strictly perused by two Gentlemen that wen^ down for
Witnesses, and also the Clark now in being, who said the former Clark did
seldom or never Register any Marriage, and also that it was a rare thing to
state a Wedding at the Church; As to a Witness he advised us to send down some
that could write and read; There did for better security two persons of good
repute go on purpose, who did speak with the said Thomas Steadman, and one of
the aforesaid Gentlemen with James Knot, whom they carried from Canterbury to
Dover, to testify that Steadman was living, did also see and accompanied Mr.
Day the other husband. They both acknowledged their Marriages, and the said
Steadman confessed he had two children by her, both dead; and that James Knot
(who was then present) gave her in Marriage. He would willingly came against
her; and when we sent a Letter for him afterward, he returned an answer, he
could not without leave from the Governor who was then in London, or the
Ensign of the Castle who came with her to Gravesend, and lodged with her (as
many in Canterbury said) To which Governor, I am informed by a Gentleman that
knows the proceedings, she sent a Letter from the Gate House, desiring man's
apparel for her escape: and that if they let Steadman come up, when she was
dead she would haunt them. And thereupon Steadman was not permitted to go out
of the Castle; but was secured by strict order from the Governor, that rod Post
down or sent on purpose, who protested to secure him in chains before he should
come up; at this instant we understand from Canterbury he remained so kept up.
As to a witness that knew her Sarah Williams was sworn, who attested that this
woman was bound for Barbados, to go along with her Husband, and she desired to
Lodge at her house for a time, and did so. And when the Ship was ready to go,
she went into Kent to receive her means, and said she would meet the Ship in
the Downs, and missing the Ship took Boat and went to it. After some days,
there came her husband Thomas Steadman with an Order, and fetched her a shore,
she sending him a Letter, that she was well stored with Monys and other things,
and therefore desired him to fetch her away per force, and carried her to Dover
Castle. But I will be short in this relation, for her favorable Trial is well
known, and her preamble and altogether imaterial Plea she made at the Bar, and
the Witness she was allowed, and the Council that she had privately ordered and
provided to prompt her. As to Mr. Days Marriage we had 5 or 6 Witnesses ready;
but I know not how, nor why the Indictment was not took notice of. As to her
Marriage with Mr. Billing the Bricklayer, he was in the Court, and did declare
it to many scores there; the Parson that married him, and the Clark that gave
her to him, were there also, and this Indictment was thrown away unregarded.
His daughter also who had lodged with this Mary Monster alias Moders, did
testify she was her Fathers Wife, but she utterly hated her. Notwithstanding
this Indictment was not minded; what the reason was I leave to every Christian
to Judge of her; my green years do not afford me Wisdom enough to see into it.
In proving her Marriage to Steadman, the Copy of the Indictment and the Records
were offered to the Court, but were termed Pamphlets, and not looked on or read.

It would he to tedious, to recite the full Copy of her examination and Trial
she had at Dover; But in short thus it was, she owned and confessed her self to
be Mary Moders daughter of William Moders, late of Canterbury deceased; but
called her self, and was Indicted by the name of Love Maria Moders. She
acknowledged and confessed she was married to The. Steadman of the City-of
Canterbury Cordweiner, Owned her Marriage to Mr. Day, which was proved; but she
pleaded Not guilty, because she said Thomas Steadman her husband was gone a
Soldier ^o Du^kirk; and she was told by a Soldier that came thence that he
dyed there. The aforesaid James Knot proved her Marriage to Stedman on this
Trial at Dover. The Jury (after directions given them by the Judge) found her
not Guilty, upon which it was thus ordered.

Dover ss.

At a general Sessions of the Peace and Goale-delivery, holden there on
Thursday the 26 day of April 1660 before ho^ Brown, Esquire Mayor of Dover, Tho.
Sidenham, Tho. Day, Luke Brailsford and John Bryan Jurats.

The Court does Or^er Love Maria Moders, otherwise called Mary Steadman, to
fina Sureties to be of good behavior, and to appear here at the next General
Sessions; and in the mean time, she is to forbear to accompany with Tho. Day
Surgeon as his wife, unless (in the mean time) she brings a sufficient
Certificate that Tho. Steadman is dead. And Tho. Day is to keep her till next
Sessions, unless she brings a Certificate Steadman is dead.

A true Copy examined by John Pepper Town-Clark of Dover.


Here was Justice Gentlemen, and I am informed that she did not appear at the
next Sessions; for it was thought she needed not, by reason that Steadman, who
at her Trial absconded (as on the la^e Trial on my behalf, He was strictly
secured against his will or) desire, for as he said, God did never prosper him
since he denied to come against so wicked a Creature) did afterward return,
being at that time by her means and Fees hid in the County of Kent till after
her Trial; and it being so apparent, as in my Case it is likewise, the Be^ch
was troubled no further with the matter. But by the Law of God, Nature and
Reason, Mr. Day gave Stea^man his wife. But before Steadmans appearance, Mr.
Day was Arres^ed (as it is her treacherous design to serve me so if possible,
by which very design the world may know what she is) he came to Trial, and
justly cast the Plaintiff with cost and damages allowed; bringing sufficient
proof by other Witnesses, as I also can produce upon occasion, That she had a
husband living when she was married to Mr. Day in London (which marriage was
both strange and sudden, for Mr. Day, a person well struck in years, meeting
her at Gravesend, both coming to London, She by her hypocritical deluding
carriage and soothing speeches did p^ocure that affection of him, and so
charmed his very soul to her, that he forthwith married her, (she then
pretending to be a rich Widow of the County of Kent) for she is Omnium
Scenarum Mulier, a woman for all parts) within two or three days after this
accidental acquaintance) but because Steadman could not be produced upon her
Trial at Dover, she saved a stretching till another time. And after this Trial,
wherein Mr. Day cast the Plainti^^, he was troubled no further with her; but
did presently after, and still so remains, married to a Gentle woman he
formerly Courted and was promised to. Neither will I ( Courtious and judicious
Reader) admit of any further trouble with her, though I can hardly break ost
here, and let so many, to true and material Passages, Relations and
Circumstances (which might be further evidence against her false pretenses and
monsterous lies) pass unregarded. a full Narrative of whose innumerable cursed
actions would fill a Volumn of the best part of 500 quires; But I am satisfied
that the world shall know thus much, which is but the abstract and abridgment
of some part of her late acted Cheat on me. I am sufficiently tired with, her,
not only in suffering and bearing the burden of her abuses: but also in
relating what I here have done in Quarto, Epitomized as I may properly say. I
would had willingly made a briefer Narration, fearing the prolixity of this
discourse (wherein I am forced to be my own Historiographer, through my desire
to Allegiance and Truth) might not prove savory; But I hope it will be rather
grateful then disgustful to every Christian Spectator. I might recount many
more passages, and proceed further with her, and tell you, How after she
removed from Newgate, she took Lodgings in Fullers Rents in Grayes-Inne, In
which Inns of Court I know not how or why admitted (but I am sure detected,
hated and neglected by all the Civil and Ingenious Gentlemen of that honorable
house and society.) She has procured and retained a grand Counselor of the
Law to be her Tutor, and she is his Pupil, where she admits of no Vacation; But
keeps Hillary Term altogether. And I would advise all such as shall desire to
try a Title with her, if their evidence be good and sound, to secure it by all
means, and rather compound then join Issue with her and proceed to Trial: for
the Devil and the Frenchman are on her part, and many have almost lost their
Evidence; and though I did venture a Trial, I am sure I am come off with Costs
and Damages notwithstanding I brought sufficient Evidence, which (Thanks to the
Judge of Heaven and Earth is as perfect and sufficient still. I understand also,
she is a great Student of Astrology, and very, very, very often lies a
Star-gazing; and she her self represents the true Effigies and shape of Ursa
Major, Anglice, the great Bear. She has much practice in that way, and takes
great delghit in the Conjunction of Mars and Venus: The Sign with her is in
Scorpio, and I would advise her to Invoak Gallen to look to her Secrets: or
else I am certain her Comical heat will scortch, if not set fire on the
Meridian of the Micro-cosme or little World of many a Gentleman; for whose
admonition I have (though unwillingly, by reason of the insuitability with my
present calamity, and also this solid discourse) modestly wrapped up this Cave.
But to return, I say I might insert many passages, and amongst the rest her
Epistles she sent to me since her Trial; and you might therein see the soothing
adulation and Sycophantick expressions, she still, under the pretense of
affection, sollicites and pursues me with, to betray my person the next
opportunity she can get: Styling me Dear Sir, My Dear, my Heart, my Love, my
dearest Self, and telling me, what a sad, heavy and bleeding heart she has, by
reason she does not enjoy me, and that she tenders me more then the Apple of
her eye; And upon my just suspicion of her treach^ry, wha^ Paotestations she
used, and how highly, she expressed her self, saying, I might be confident of
my safety, she would rather dye, nay the Heavens and Earth shall ceaese to be
no more, before she would betray me her dearest Love; and therefore, Pray my
dear heart let me be so happy as to see you, etc.

But no: never expect to see me more,
I Will not degrade my self to see a Where.
I know thee now, thy Tears, thy Parts, thy Prayers
Were the chief motives, brought me in these snaires.
It Is you, vile Woman, you I say, have moved
Me to abhor, thee, whom I dearly loved;
Who would had thought, that thou so base would prove
Under pretense of zeal, and earnest love?
Or that such monstrous treachery should find
Room, in a seeming brave Celestial mind.
Perfidious Woman, would thou still deceive?
And by thy flat'ring Charms make me believe?
I Will trust no further. Now I know most sure
They are most subtle who do seem most pure.
Therefore Farewell, thy words and tears are vain
To Court my stay, it is that will breed my pain.
Thus, gentle Reader, you see the troubled Seas of my misfortunes Ebbs and
Flows, with the various Imaginations of present and future successes; and the
method of my writing here represents the confused state of my mind. But all I
aim at or intend, is only an infallible conveyance of the truth of this
Come-Tragedy to the world, whose confusion and last act is depending, and
threatens much disaster, which I beg of Heavens to prevent on all sides; and I
hope the Corroding teeth of time will consume and eat away these late acted
storys. But I will proceed to an end, that I may quickly put an end to my
proceedings; I must a little look back upon the tender care this pretty piece
of Machiv I has for me, and see what neat terms of art she uses, as if she
had been accustomed to this kind of Courtship; but I fear the recital of those
Letters and other material stratagems and designs would be too prolix. I will
not stand to tell you, how this pretty Fiddlers brat went to the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor in man's Apparel, as this Hermophrodite told me her
self on Sunday the 14th. of June last, when I happened to see her, she being
informed where I was walking, came to me, which was the last time I did (and I
believe the last time I shall) ever see her. Before which sight she had sent me
a Letter to Court my love and consent to live with her, thinking by her
flatterys to gain my consent, and so get some considerable things of me:

As the Clothes and other valuable things that I gave her to supply her great
necessityes, and ador^e her poverty with, which I thank Fortune I have again,
that is, the best part of them, and will keep them perhaps for another, nay
give them away to a stranger, rather then to re-bestow them on her Ale tub
Lady-ship, whose seeming love still aims at nothing else, but to trouble me;
get what she can from me, and so go away, and then she would be fitted for
another Cheat. I say she told me she went to his Lordships and showed me the
very Clothes and habit she wore thither, and she makes sport at the (Impudence)
humor, and she gives out that her business was only to return his Lordship
thanks for the favor he demonstrated to the Germane Princess his
Country-woman, she then represented a Man! I admire at her impudence, but I am
apt to think his Honor is ignorant of her actions? nay when I told her of the
favor she had at the Bench, she laughed at and made ascoffe of her Favorites,
and told me how confident she was to escape had I summoned up a Regiment of
Witnesses. And when I asked her how she lived so high, she replied she was
cried up for a Wit, and by her Wit Coaxed her Visitors and so get money enough,
and if I would live with her, she would be as good as her word; for she would
undertake to keep and maintain a Coach and Horses, and made a very scoff of
her Benefactors,

Whom like a Horse-leach she does suck and drein
As long as they have blood in any Vein.
Many other passages I purposely omit and remit all to your discreet opinions,
to coment and make private Annotations within your selves, as you revolve the
proceedings in your mind, and to sound the intents Ambages, Plots and
undermineings of this base vile, detestable, yet cunning Diabolical Infidel. I
shall therefore for brevity sake, leave many material Circumstances and
passages to remain in the Ink-horne, which I shall hardly open again, unless it
be to whet my Pen, and send a Satyr to her to scratch and lash her till the
blood comes for her just deserts. And here I set a period, with my hearty
wishes of prosperity and better Fortune to all, I salute you with a Vale.

Postscript.
Worthy and Ingenious Reader,
THese sheets when first begun were intended for the Press; But before I had
proceeded in one quarter of the Narration, upon second thoughts I put a demur
to my former intention, and so unperfect they remained scattered and neglected
till even now; At length I resolved to go thorough with it, in any careless
manner of description, but true matter, and leave it to be perused by my worthy
Friends and acquaintance, only in the original Copy of my hand writing; and if
they were curious to have it, to transcribe it themselves; but through her much
untrue and abusive Prints, not by her composed, though by her means; and by
reason of the earnest desires and entreatys of some Friends, persons of very
great quality that had seen, and to whom I read this almost abortive and scarce
reviewed work, at whose desires I stood suspended and utterly denied the
permission to print this, until recollecting their satisfactory reasons, and
their friendships, I thought my self oblidged and interessed to accomplish
their desires since they laid in my power, in communicating this unliked
production to the Treasury of the world; and by reason of the prolixity of it,
I would not, nor did I give my self the trouble as to transcribe, much more
unwilling to dress it in any better language and style then freely and
spontaneously proceeded from my (at this time discomposed) invention; knowing
that Nakedness best becomes verity, and truth is truth still, though it be ill
recounted or disputed. And therefore I condiscended to their desires to publish
it, and to my own also in not giving my self further trouble in transcription
or alteration. But had I thought it should have been exposed to public view,
it may be expected I should have made a handsomer order and method in the
Composure of this too true Narration; wherein it seems to me I have used
significant, plain, honest, and true expressions, though neither polite, not
politic. My misfortune touches me so near in some points, that I am
constrained violently to break forth in despite of my discretion; and I am
sorry that I am forced so unhappily to change my style, that instead of writing
of a Friend, nay a nearer Relation a ( Quondam) Wife, I must (to relate and set
forth the truth) write as of an Apostate and an Adversary.

But I am apt to believe every ingenious Reader will so much resent as to hold
me excused, for the feeling affection that attends my expression, can hardly be
conceived, much less delineated and set forth by any. But it cannot sure be
pleasing to any to read or hear the disgusts that my oppressed heart endures; I
hope it will not be irksome to listen a while to disasters, where Nature is
such, that they deprive those of their memory whom they torment; and if in any
part of my aforesaid Relation I have exceeded, or not observed a due Deco^um, I
hope you will impute it to her abusive writings and the aforesaid reason. It is
a true saying, secunda cogitationes meliores, second thoughts prove best, for
first motions are not in our hands. And since I have not time now to recollect,
accept of and absolve the errors of my first motions; and I presume my Youth
may serve to excuse all errors, either in acting this Relation, or in relating
their Actions. And here worthy Reader, I would willingly subscribe to this my
intended Ultimum Vale, but I am encountered again with another execrable Volumne
in Octavo, that goes under her name, Entitled, The Case of Madam Mary
Carleton; wherein, notwithstanding her actions are so well known to the world,
which are the truest Idaea of every person, yet her unparalleled confidence
has permitted the Counterfeit Effigies of her ill-shapen painted face to be
inserted as a Prologue, and for a better gloss to the book, whereby she
endeavors to make the world believe her innocence makes her dare to expose it
to view, but

Behold her Impudence, after such disgrace,
Dares show a Brazen and ignoble face.
It seems strange to me that she should be so presumptious (considoring that
the world is well satisfied, what and who she is) and it is now generally known
that she is the Production of an infamous brood, dropped from an Ale-tap, and the
filthy base extraction of a Dunghill; and that she has been and is a common
and confident Curtizen, a Cursed Apostate, a Store-nouse of untruths, an Armory
of falsehoods, a Castle of impudency, a Treasury of Vice, an Enemy to all good,
a receipt and Exchequer of all Roguery, an inventer of Villainy, and Blasphemous
detractor from all goodness good people, nay even from God himself; and this I
protest (with grief of my soul and pity for her I relate) is the perfect and
true Character of her.) I say I wonder at her presumption in dedicating a book,
which only bears the name she now owns, to that thrice noble and illustrious
Prince Rupert, wherein she abuses (though none can detract from his renowned
fame) the Honor of his Highness, by saluteing him with a book, neither
believed or received, and by dedicating to his Honor a piece containing such
and so many lies, only well wrapped up, and by endeavoring to procure his
greatness and virtue to be a protection for her meanness and vice, and in sine
by making his Honor to be called in question, and to be the table talk of
every Vulgar person, they supposing, that his Highness allows and winks at her
Vice; which I here declare, I am sufficiently informed is altogether false,
though she professed to me that his Highness was daily with her; yet all the
protestations she can use, cannot make me believe she can speak truth; but it
is only her great guilt makes her soar so high for Protection; and I am by
persons of Honor made to believe, you shall see a just punishment inflicted on
her by his Highness for this her unwarrantable presumption. But I will not
stand to arm my reason by way of defense to every loud Alarm she beats up
against me in that most cursed and false Relation written in that book by her
dictates; it is better worded then believed, as all that read it do pass their
Verdict, and agree with me in this my short censure, (...). I have read it,
understood it, and condemned it: For I protest, whosoever beleives and receives
that book for truth in the Relation, may as well, nay better believe that the
Devil himself never told an untruth; I will not therefore enlarge here, nor
stand to answer, that innumerable and horrible company of new invented,
prodigious and execrable lies, which are inserted therein: nor tell the world
what wages was allowed to that ingenuous, though: Me^cin^y Pedant, that wrote it
for her, and assisted her in contriving and ^etting out those cursed untruths
to the best advanatge, in fa^^cious and politic method and style; for let any
person peruse the Book, and you may often entrap him in C^n^radicting himself,
and in the impr^bability of the Na^^ation; But you may see now the Devil and
his Pimps work together. It is said there, that she would shortly-return
homewards and I would advise her so to do, for I know she will be welcome; And
Pluto stands ready big with expectation to receive het, and thinks her absence
tedious, for he lacks his Consort. He would rejoice to see her traveling in
Duns Chariot; but perhaps he may pe^mit her to Whore Errant-ys^^ while, that
she may by her impudence be his famous Agent, and ^^onicle he^self to be the
lewdest Strumpet of these many ages; and to that end she had best go to
Wittenberg (a pla^e in her pretended ^^ountry) and Comence Bawd. She is
sufficiently beholding to ^eve al persons for they Fees and Kisses: and all
civil persons are now truly sensible of the disgace that acc^ues by
accompanying her, who is a poo^ prost^^at Cu^^zan. For my part I am heartily
sorry that such a defiled Creatu^e has been so near related to me, though now
the Law of God and Nature has Cancelled those Bonds.

I he^e declare to the Wo^^ld, that I neither can or will assist her impudency
or che^ish he^ wickedness. She says she will own me till death dissolve the
u^ion: and I say, I will own her to be a cursed infamous Strumpet and vagabond,
till a Haller dissolve the union between her execrable soul and polluted body;
And I will surrender all my right to her (if I have any) to him that will
embrac^ it Gratis; For though I once loved the Traitor, I ever did and shall
hate the Treason, And therefore think it not strange that I am so bitter
against her in my writing, and have upon the sight of her cursed Pamphlets
added suc^ invective, but true Epithites to the description of her, in which
upon the review of this uncomposed piece, I did insert as Marginal notes, by
inte^liuing them; For she was the Cause that moved my passion to this effect,
not only by that grand abuse she offered to me in acting: but also by those
scurulous and unt^ne Prints, lately come forth by her order. It grieved me very
much that she does abuse so many persons of great worth in those ignominious
Pamphlets but they are well satisfied that her tongue is no slander. She
endeavors to ground a belief in the World that I have a great respect for
her, but over-powred; and she will not seem to believe that I wrote the former
sheet called my Replication, because I did therein, though very modestly strike
upon the galled part of her Actions, But I would have her know that both that
sheet and this also, I do and will own to be Legicimate (be they disliked or
approved I care not whether,) for as I am ambitious of no persons applause: so
I neither care for, nor fear any persons rigorous censure especially in a
matter of truth, which by Truth its self, you have nothing else herein inserted
for I should, and do scorn to own any thing by subscribing my name to it, that
I did not solely compose and complete myself. And if she moves me further, she
shall find I will let her blood in the right Vein, and complete the whole
History of her and her actions, which by my directions and order shall be
brought to view. I will (if her impudence stirs further) send her Companions
enough, (...) Satyrs, as she had better have no being then to feel the smart of
their sharp wounding lashes. But since the World shall be made acquainted with
the truth of the late great noised ^umour, I can more willingly put a quiem to
all passi^ra ^e grief.

For swelling Passion made me to unfold
My Grief, which eased will be when it is told.
And though I suffered so great an injury and abuse by her, I freely forgive
her, and shall endeavor to forget both; for Injuriarum ^^remedium est oblivio.
Oblivion is the best Corrasive for inju^^es. But I will now take my Pen from
Paper, and I presume you will absolve my prolixity, for I shall not willingly
troub^e, you again, especially in this Tragical matter and manner. But if ever
hereafter, I shall expose any thing of mine to view. I shall endeavor to make
you amends for this, by sending somewhat to delight the eyes and ears, and
tickle the fancy of every Spectator. And therefore worthy Gentlemen and Ladies,
I hope for, and beg a charitable construction, that you will balance all
Venial Errors, with my young experience and present discomposedness. And If you
seriously reflect on my real de lorable condition, as being brought thereunto,
not by my own fault, but by another (u^heard of) craft ^m made thus miserable.
I know it will warm ^our Souls to pity, and Christianity will (I presume)
oblidge you, justly to help and assist me upon occasion; and I shall strive to
retaliare your Courtesies and goodness by my gratitude, and ready service to
you all, to whose maturer discernments and Christian Judgments; I here humbly
offer my care, for it is a maxim in Law, Ne^o debet esse Judex in propria
Causa. No person ought to be Judge in his own Case.

I humbly conceive I may promise to my self a full Verdict; and that you will
find her Guilty, and so clear me from any just concerns with such a monstrous
Creature; and though my Stars have not been very propitious to me, and things
have succeeded contrary to my expectation, I will endeavor to fortify my self
against my present conflict and agonys and if once Heaven brings me out of this
Labirinth (which I heartily pray for) I hope my joy and contentmt may arrive to
that pass my discontents have brought me, and may be freed from the anguish
that at present possesses me; and that the Sunshine of Gods delightful
Consolation, may break through, and for ever discipate the black Clouds of
despair, and that I may not walk in Nubibus but openly, and appear to show my
hearty thanks and open soul (which I wear Charactered in my brow) to all
judicious persons and my worthy Friends, and my love even to my very Enemies;
and thus I leave you to him that made all things, wishing and praying for
Internal, External, and Eternal joy and prosperity to my Sovereign Lord the
King and his Kingdoms, and to the Loyal Subjects of this my Native Country, and
to my right noble and worthy Relations, and to that Honorable right Noble and
learned society, (whereof I am an unworthy member) and to all those ingenious
Gentlemen my friends and acquaintance therein, which is the Ultimum Vale of a
highly abused Christian; and as it is well observed they are subject to evil,
whose virtuous life least deserves it; but it is better to be passive and
suffer, then act^ve and do any injuriocs evil. And here I cast Ancho, being
arrived to a wished end, the happy Haven of my present desires.

Qui non est hodie Cras magis Valete Aptus erit.
AD MARIUM, etc.
BU^ stay! I Will Charm my passion for a while,
And turn my anger to a mournful smile.
Before I quite depart, i will w^^it^ to thee,
Who art the cause of all my misery.
I think it not amiss to bid adieu:
Not to your noble Sex but unto you:
You faithless woman, once the better part
Of a right noble, faithful loving heart,
But now fo^^ever ^xi^^d, ne^^re to be
Admitted there, nay, not return to see
The owner of it: for thy Treason has
Condemned thy self, thou forfed'st all thy Faith,
Being a Traitor: therefore it is good reason,
The Pray^er should be punished for the reason
What was the cuuse that moved thee to betray
My real I ^^oce^^te? who did thou say
Thou lov'ast me so? thy protestatious Won me,
Which I believe, and that Faith has undone me.
I often heard thee sing, that ' it is more rare
To be a Constant Woman then a Fait^:
If so, as it is most true, why did thou prove
Untrue to me, unconstant in thy Love
But hol^ my weeding Pen, Not, Not so fast;
I dare not recollect the Vows she past,
And term her Faithless: No, I here must halt:
Yet not look back; least doing the same fault
As Lots ^ife did, I might co^verte^ be
Into a shape, and so he like to thee.
Perjured Maria; for thou art scarce more
Then a mere moving Statue; yet the score
Of my just mind, from whom, since I have found
Thee false, by God and nature am unbound;
For (...) in appearance I did (...)
Saint in thy Fate but Satan in thy mind.
And I assure you, I can well remain
Without a woman, so unsure and vai^
Thou id'st ^^ceive me: true, yet I forgive,
And my revenge is this. Long may thou Live:
For that revenge will be sufficien^^:
Live to disgrace av^^ ve thou to repent
I Will not ande^^ non to revenge a wrong
That carrys with it the revenge along:
Yet Charity and pity I have still,
Forgive I do, and pray for thee I will:
Live happy if thou can, I envy not
Thy happiness, but wail my own hard Lot:
But fure it cannot, but much greive thy heart
To think thy Vice, made thee from Virtue part:
And so Farewell for ever; here you have
My last Farewell, betwixt this and my grave.
FINIS.

