Considerations ABOUT SUBSCRIPTION,

Considerations ABOUT SUBSCRIPTION, Humbly Submitted to The Convocation, ON
BEHALF Of the Conformable Clergy. With some Reflections on the late
Subscription, made by our Dissenting Brethren.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1690.

Considerations about Subscription, humbly submitted to the Convocation on
behalf of the conformable Clergy, etc.
ALthough our Learned Divines have different Apprehensions about the most
convenient time for settling a Firm and Lasting Union amongst Protestants, and
about what Condescensions are to be made by us in Order thereunto; whether the
Dissenters must in the First place be consulted, or whether without knowing
their thoughts, we give them Terms, etc. Yet as to the Union it self, there is
a general readiness on our Parts, and notwithstanding the Warm Reflections of
the Author of Vox Cleri, it must be yielded that there are good Reasons why the
Convocation should know, whether any thing less than the subverting the
Foundations of our Constitution will satisfy the Dissenters, and what that is?

The Convocation is to Act the Part of a Wise, as well as Compassionate
Physician, to heal if possible, the wounds, which have been made in the Church
by the Division; and it is the Dissenting, that is the Sick Party, which must
be discoursed with before the Physician can safely Prescribe.

It Is well known what may be done by the Church toward a Union, but whether
what we offer will effectually reduce Dissenters, we are not sure.

Tho we abound with choice Medicines, yet wanting an Ovietan, we can never know
whether this or the other is most Proper, till the Nature of the Disease be
thoroughly understood; and to that end, the first thing necessary is an enquiry
after the Dissenters thoughts, about what it is they Judge a Grievance, and
what it is that will relieve them.

But however these things Issue, what does more nearly touch the Church it
self, must in all Debates in both Houses of Convocation have the Preference. We
must neither Hurt nor Neglect our own Constitution; nor must the Church in
hopes of a Prodigals Return, lay aside those Motherly Compassions she has for
her Obedient Sons. Whatever Bishop of Worcesters Unreas. Sep. Pref. page 89.
is offensive to any of them, deserves the first Consideration: For a Faction
in the Church does more endanger it than External Opposition. Seeing then there
have been some Unhappy Wranglings amongst our selve, such Odd contests, that we
have had the Ill-Luck of being Represented as a Church divided into at least
two opposite Parties, into a more Moderate, and Violent one, say some, a
Melancthonian and Calvinian, as Doctor Heylin; and as others Phrase it, True
Sons of the Church, and Grindalizers, 'twill be the chief care of the
Convocation to Heal this Distemper.

And whereas there have been different Opinions about the Sense, in which we
must subscribe, for which the Dissenters have often boldly Upbraided us, to Solve
what is matter of Difficulty, it is the proper Work of the Convocation to make
the first step.

The thing in Controversy amongst our selves is, Whether our Subscription be
expressive of our Assent unto, and Belief of the Truth of every one of the
Subscribed Articles, or only an Assurance, that for the sake of Peace we will
not contradict, nor oppose them.

The Learned Chilling worth declares his Sentiments thus: For the Church of
England I am persuaded that the constant Doctrine of it is so Pure and
Orthodox, that whosoever believes it, and lives according to it, shall be
undoubtedly Saved, [which is as much as to say, He believes Salvation may be
had in our Church] and that there is no Error in it, Preface to the Author of
Charity maintained.. 40.
which may necessitate, or warrant any Man to Disturb the Peace, or Renounce
the Communion of it. [To which He adds] this in my Opinion is all intended by
Subscription.

A Subscription in this sense may be without an Assent to every Article as
True, yea with the Belief that some are False; if not so false and Erroneous as
to necessitate or warrant a Man to disturb the Peace of the Church, and
renounce it is Communion. Nor does the Excellent The part of a Letter of the
Primates about Heylins History of the Sabbath.
Archbishop Usher look on all the 39 Articles to be received as Articles of
Faith. He that would have every thing which is put into the Articles of
Religion (agreed upon in the Synod for the avoiding diversity of Opinions, and
for the maintenance of Peace, and Uniformity in the Church) to be held for an
Article of the Faith, should do well to tell us, whether he has as yet admitted
the Book of the Ordination of Bishops and the two Volumes of Homilies into his
Creed; for sure I am He shall find these received in the Articles of Religion
agreed upon in the Synod held at London 1562.

The Learned Primate does in this place say enough to Establish that
distinction Schism Guarded.. 1. c. 11.
of subscribing to the Articles, as Articles of Peace, and not as Articles of
Faith, which by his most Learned Successor Archbishop Bramhall, is more fully
explained. We do not (says he) suffer any Man to reject the 39 Articles of the
Church of England at his pleasure, yet neither do we look upon them as
Essentials of Saving Faith, or Legacies of Christ, and of his Apostles: But in
a mean, as Pious Opinions fitted for the Preservation of Unity; NEITHER DO WE
OBLIGE ANY MAN TO BELIEVE THEM, BUT ONLY NOT TO CONTRADICT THEM.

If the Injunction of Subscription be only thus, 'twill afford great ease to
the minds of many worthy Divines of our Church, 'twill remove the Bone of
Contention, that has been amongst our selves, and for ever prevent the
Dissenters reproaching us for subscribing in a sense we do not believe to be
good.

But that this is the sense of the Church, does not yet appear by any thing she
has declared; and, as there are many Learned Men for this sense, so there are
many as Learned of the contrary Opinion.

The Learned Doctor Stillingfleet, now Bishop of Worcester, in his Proposals
for Union, supposes the Subscription to be Absolute, and offers as an
Expedient to accommodate the Difference, a Mitigation as to the manner Preface
to the Unreason. of Separ. p. 91.
of Subscription, which he supposes may be done by an Absolute Subscription to
all those Articles, which concern the Doctrine of the true Christian Faith, and
the Use of the Sacraments, and a solemn Promise under their Hand, or
Subscription of Peaceable Submission, as to the rest, so as not to oppose, or
contradict them, either in Preaching, or Writing.

The Mitigation, as to the manner of Subscription, is by making the
Subscription in the same sense Archbishop Bramhall does take our Subscription
at this time to be, but this great Person by offering it as an Expedient for
the Dissenters relief, must look on our Subscription as Absolute to all the
Articles, which must therefore be received as True, and the Title given these
Articles declare the same, in saying, that they were Agreed upon for the
avoiding of Diversities of Opinions, which cannot be, if notwithstanding the
Subscription, Men may consistently therewith continue to be of diverse Opinions.
Besides, King James the First, in his Declaration set before the Articles, is
positive, that no Man hereafter shall either Print, or Preach, to draw the
Article aside any way, but shall submit to it in the plain and full meaning
thereof; and shall NOT PUT HIS OWN SENSE, or COMMENT to be the meaning of the
Article, but shall take it in the Literal and Grammatical sense. And my Lord
Chief Justice Coke Reports, that the Judges of the King's Bench would not admit
of a Subscription with this Addition, [so far as agreeable to the Word of God,
and Law of the Land,] because it contradicted the end of the Injunction, which
was to prevent Diversities of Opinion.

Moreover, according to the common usage of the word [Subscribe] it signifies
Assent and Consent unto; Allowance, and Approbation of what is Subscribed.

Thus in the Ancient Councils, the Fathers expressed their Assent, Allowance,
or Confirmation, by subscribing their Names and Affixing the Sign of the Cross.
In Charters of Donations of Lands and Grants of Privileges unto Abbeys, or
Convents, our Kings, Nobles, and Bishops Subscribed, and with them Subscripsi,
Consensi, Favi, Confirmavi, etc. were Terms Aequipollent; and Anciently the
Competentes to express their consenting to Baptism and Christian Religion
Subscribed their Names and were therefore called Subscripti.

It is a generally received Opinion, that whether the Subscriber does expressly
mention the words Assent, Consent, Allowance, or Approbation, or not, their
meaning is included in the Subscription, which is but a Declaration thereof.

The great end of Subscriptions to Articles of Religion is to secure Truth, as
well as Peace amongst Christians, and the Subscription imports Assent unto, and
Allowance of the Article as True.

Subscription (says our great Casuist, the Learned Bishop Tailor) Duct. Dubit.
lib. 4. c. 4. r. 23.. 1. 2. 4.
is undoubtedly an Attestation, or signification of Assent, Allowance and
Approbation. Whoever subscribes, He does actually approve of the Articles
over-written, that he does at that time believe them to be such as it is said
they are; TRUE, if they only say they are True; Useful, if they pretend also
to Usefulness; Necessary, if it be affirmed that they are Necessary. If the
Subscriber believes not this, he by Hypocrisy serves the ends of Public
Peace, and his own Preferment.

To the enquiry, whether it can be Lawful for any Man to Subscribe what he does
not believe to be True, giving his Hand to Public Peace and keeping his
Conscience for God; The Bishop tells us, The Answer is easy, if Subscription
signify Approbation; for in that case it is Hypocrisy and a denying to
confess with the Mouth what we believe with the Heart. -- In Subscription to
Articles of Confession, or Censure of Propositions as Heretical, every
Ecclesiastic does it for himself, and if he Assents not, nor Consents, he must
by subscribing Declare he does. Let the Articles be made with as great Latitude
of sense as they can, and so that Subscriptions be made to Forms of Words, let
the subscribers understand them in what sense they please, which the Truth of
God will suffer, and the words can be capable. This is the last Remedy, but the
worst; it has in it something of Craft, but very little of Ingenuity; and if
it can serve the ends of Peace, or of External Charity, it cannot serve the
ends of Truth, Holiness, and Christian Simplicity. If the Words admit of
various Senses, some True, some False, the Question made by the Subscriber must
be, what is the Imposers sense, for to that by subscribing we Assent. If the
Intention of the SUPERIOR be to require our Assent to be testified by
Subscription; he that subscribes does Profess his Assent; and whatever he
thinks himself, it is the intention of the Imposer, that qualifies the
Subscription: He that Subscribes must do it to those purposes, and in that
sense, and signification of things, which the Supreme Power intends in his
Commanding it.

These Reasonings appear to many Wise and Good Men of our Church very
convincing, who comparing their subscriptions with the common sense of the
Imposers, are startled, and at a loss what to think or say of it, on which
occasion some Men, whose Zeal has by far exceeded their Judgments, have been
too intemperate in Reflecting on one another; all which Reflections, for the
sake of the Churches Peace, we wish may be Eternally Buried in Oblivion.

We will therefore only mention what is matter of GRIEF to some judicious and
good Men of our Communion, for on this account several when they fixedly
consider that their subscription is the attestation of Assent unto every thing
they subscribe, are greatly afflicted in their thoughts about it.

There are some, who by their Subscription to the 4 Controverted Articles,
intend no more than a solemn Promise of Peaceable Submission, not determining
one way or other about the Difference there is between a Bishop and a
Presbyter. Though they subscribed the Articles, yet they never took the Book of
Ordering Bishops, Priests and Deacons (as Archbishop Usher observes) in their
Creed, nor did they think themselves by their Subscription obliged to a strict,
Rigorous and constant observation of every Ceremony, etc. There are others no
way Inferior to these for Learning, or Integrity, who, tho they have no
scruple about matters of Church Government, or Ceremony, have as many
concerning Points of another Nature, to which they subscribe in Chillingworths
and Bramhals sense.

These Persons by Preaching, Printing, or otherwise will never contradict, or
oppose the scrupled Articles, but cannot bear the thoughts, that their
Subscription signify their Assent unto them as True. I will only Instance in
one or two.

Art. 8. The three Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius's Creed, and that which is
commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received and believed.

These words [THROUGHLY to be received and believed] seem to signify nothing
less than that every Part, Branch, Article and Clause of every one of these
three Creeds must be received and believed, so that although the Word Believe
is not set before every Article in any one Creed, yet as the Learned Bishop
Pearson Observes, This Word [I Believe] is not to be On the Creed. p. 1.
imagined to stand only where it is expressed, but to be carried through the
whole Body of the Confession, for, tho it be but twice actually Rehearsed [in
the Apostles Creed,] yet must we conceive it virtually prefixed to the Head of
every Article; -- Neither is it to be joined with every complete Article only,
but where any Article is not a single Verity, but comprehensive, there it is to
be looked upon as affixed to every Part, or single Truth contained in that
Article, -- so that this Credo rightly considered multiplieth it self to no
less than a double number of the Articles, and will be found at least twenty
four times in the CREED.

What this Reverend Prelate, to the great satisfaction of our Church, says of
the Apostles Creed, may for the same reason be spoken of the Athanasian, and
until the Church declares otherwise we must take the Minatory Clauses for Parts
of the Creed, especially it is in the very Body of the Creed it self, [He
therefore that will be saved must think THUS of the Trinity.] For this Clause,
as every other Part in the Body of the Creed is every way guarded with a
Minatory Sentence. The beginning of the Creed is thus; [Whosoever will be saved,
before all things it is necessary that he hold the Catholic Faith; which
Faith, except every one do keep Whole and Undefiled, without doubt he shall
Perish everlastingly.] Then follows the Doctrine of the Trinity and
Incarnation, and in the close of the Creed it is [This is the Catholic Faith,
which except a Man believe Faithfully, he cannot be saved.]

Between these two clauses in the Body of the Creed, comes in this, viz.
[Whoever will be saved must think THUS of the Trinity.]

Who then can consider how often this Minatory Sentence is inserted in the
Creed even in the beginning, the Body and close of it, and not think it a Part?
Especially considering that in the Rubric, the Title of Athanasius's Creed is
given to the whole Qui conque vult; thereby making these clauses and branches a
Part of it, to which we subscribe by our Subscription to this Article; and it
cannot be denied, that these clauses exclude from Salvation, not only those?
who reject the whole, but all that do reject any one clause that is about the
Trinity, whoever thinks not of it as there expressed cannot be saved, and we by
Subscription to this Article approve of this Damning clause; which
consideration should (methinks) move Vox Clexi to desire ease in this matter;
for Page 32. He openly declares that he thinks it not necessary to Salvation
that every Man should believe, that Article of the Procession of the Holy
Ghost, which yet is in this Creed; and by another Article near it, Whoever will
be saved must believe the Procession, and every other particular of this Creed
concerning the Trinity, whereby I am afraid our severity will light not only on
the Greek Church, but on Thousands of our own Communion, who, though they are
not Antitrinitarians, for they believe in God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost, do not understand the controversy about the Procession, nor
some other passages in Athanasius his explications.

Whatever is the Latitude of some, the perplexities occasioned by this Article
unto others of our Church, who have merited greatly of Her, cannot but move a
compassionate Convocation to offer somewhat for their Relief.

Article 18. Of Obtaining Salvation only by the Name of Christ. They also are
to be had ACCURSED, that presume to say, that every Man shall be saved by the
Law, or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame his Life
according to that Law, and the Light of Nature. For Holy Scripture does set out
unto us, only the NAME of Jesus Christ, whereby Men must be saved. As to this
Article it is most certain, that amongst the English Gentry, who have had their
Education in our Church, and are Men of great Learning, good sense and
Sobriety, there are many worthy Persons, who cannot entertain too restrained
thoughts of Gods Merciful Nature, but are of Opinion, that such as Live without
the Law, shall be Judged without the Law, that every one Fearing God, and
working Righteousness in what Nation soever shall be accepted of God; that the
Efficacious Virtue of Christ's Death is of larger extent than the knowledge of
his Name, and that more are saved by him, than explicitly believe in him:
Besides there are some great Divines in the Reformed Churches abroad as well as
of our own Communion, whose Charity cannot be comprehended within the narrow
Limits of Calvinistic Rigor. These think charitably of some Heathens, of a
Socrates, an Antonine, a Cicero, etc. whose Morals infinitely exceed those of
some Censorious and Debauched Christians, whom at their Funerals we pronounce
Blessed.

But by a strict subscription we must not only curse the Heathen, but all our
Gentry, and Foreign as well as our own Divines, who hope well of the Heathen.

There has been an Intimation of this given by a very worthy Person, Page 13,
14.
a Minister in the Country in his Letter to a Member of the Convocation, and it
is done with much Wariness and Caution, and it is hoped 'twill meet with a
fairer entertainment than Vox Cleri has given it, but lest through the
Distempers of some Men, it should fail of the desired success, it is thought
necessary to send this Humble Supplicant after it.

I know it is a very tender Point, and we living in a very Querulous Age, the
Reason for a more Gentle Handling it, is the stronger. However, seeing our
greatest danger in this particular was likely to arise from the Clamours of our
Dissenting Brethren, who now are as deeply Plunged into Perplexities of this
Nature as the most scrupulous subscriber of our own Communion, the chief, if
not only Reason against our appearing for Relief in this matter, is over.

Our Dissenting Brethren have been very severe upon us, charging us as though
our subscriptions had been unconscionably Rash, because they were to Articles,
which we could not take into our Creed, and subscribed unto them only as unto
Articles of Peace and Concord: To this distinction their most Learned Defender
has given many an angry Answer, and very lately in his English Nonconformity
thus writes of it: Some Brains will p. 47.
be cheated with a mere Noise of Words, as Birds with a Whistle: We deny not
but Peace is one of the ends of the Impositions: But the Question is, what are
the means, or whether they will take it for Conformity to Promise [I will live
Peaceably] or [I Assent I should live in Peace]. Are you not bound in Order to
Peace to Assent, and Consent to all things in the Books? Say [I Assent that
some things are True and Good, and some things False and Bad, which yet for
Peace I will use] and Try how it will be taken.

To whom I Answer. 1. That according to your own Doctrine, if the Church, that
continues the Imposition, allows of our Distinction it is good, and though the
whole strength of your great Book turn on this Hinge, it immediately dwindles
into nothing. And seeing the Church has not been unacquainted with the Opinion
of Chillingworth, Usher, and Bramhall, and that their Opinion is closed with by
many great Divines amongst our Clergy; may we not Presume that the Churches
Silence in the matter is an Allowance. I am persuaded that there are many
Honest and Worthy Persons, some of your own Friends especially, who scruple the
Ceremonies more than any other thing, who take thus much for granted.

If you say they are mistaken, though I will not be positive, I am afraid so too;.
and therefore press for some Redress. However, when you pass Censure on them,
you must remember that it is not for an Equivocal Subscription, but their
mistaking the Churches Sense. But 2. you, and your Party, Dear, Brother, of all
Men in the World, since your own Subscription should not complain of ours. Your
Case and ours is now the same. Though we have run farther than you by our
Subscription, yet you have followed us in the same Path, and have fallen on
some of the same Rocks, and have got a great way within the same Labyrinth and
need as much the help of the Convocation and Parliament to extricate your
selves as any of our Communion do.

I will endeavor to clear thus much by making some Reflections R. B's Sense of
the Subscribed Articles of Religion. p. 3.
on two or three of your Subscribed Articles. Art. 3. HE WENT DOWN INTO HELL]
that is, into Hades, the State of separated Souls: Of which See Archbishop
Ushers Answer to the Jesuits.

This Article you cannot Subscribe without an Exposition, and your Exposition
such as makes your sense more doubtful. For though by Hell you understand
Hades, by which you mean, the State of separated Souls; yet it is as delivered
by Archbishop Usher, who gives such different accounts of the signification of
Hades, that we cannot tell but by Hell you may intend Heaven; for Hades as it
imports the State of separate Souls is by some in Usher used to signify Heaven.

In the Ecclesiastical Use of the Word, Hell (says Usher) Answer to the
Jesuits Challenge of Limbus Patrum, p. 316.
is extended to express the Greek Hades, and the Latin Inferi, and whatsoever
is contained under them, and so signifies the place of all the Dead in common,
and not of the Wicked only. -- Now as the common condition of the Dead is
considerable three manner of ways, either in respect of the Body separated from
the Soul, or of the Soul separated from the Body; or of the WHOLE MAN
indefinitely considered in this State of separation: So do we find the word
Hades to be applied by the Ancient Greek interpreters of the Old Testament to
the common state and place of the Body severed from the Soul: By the Heathen
Greeks, to the common state and place of the Soul severed from the Body, and by
both of them to the common state of the Dead.

But you in your Exposition terminating your sense to the state of separate
Souls as explicated by p. 360.
the Archbishop; we will see what it is that he says of it; and it is thus,
With Foreign Authors the word Hades signifies ordinarily the Common Lodge of
Souls separated from their Bodies, whether the particular Place assigned unto
each of them be conceived to be an Habitation of BLISS, or of MISERY. -- To
heap up many Testimonies out of p. 364.
of Heathen Authors to prove that in their understanding, All Souls went to
Hades, and received there either PUNISHMENT, or REWARD, according to the Life
they lived in this World; would be but a needless work. -- If any Man desire to
inform himself herein, he may repair to Plutarchs Consolatory Discourse written
to Apollonius, where he shall find the Testimonies of Pindarus, and many
others, alleged touching the State of the Godly in HADES.

Thus the word Hell imports as much as Hades, and Hades is the place of
separate Souls; whether in Bliss, or Misery, but whether you mean by Hell the
place of Misery, or Bliss, is not clear. It Is probable, that as some Papists by
Paradise, which is the third Heaven, understand Hell, so by Hell (as Doctor
Bishop falsely charge the generality of Protestants,) you really intend
Heaven.

Master Broughton (as the Archbishop intimates) has been too forward in owning
this Opinion, which yet he might Defend, as what the words will bear, for
Heaven it self may be comprised within the Notion of Hades, and (...), which is
rendered Descend, though Ten times used in the Acts of the Apostles, yet in none
of all these places signifies any Descending from a Higher place unto a Lower,
but removing simply from one place to another. -- I omit the Phrases of
Descending in Praelium, in Forum, in Campum, in Amicitiam, in Causam, etc. So
far the Archbishop.

But though the Greek in the Apostles Creed will bear this sense yet the
Article being in English, unless by [Descending] we may understand [Ascending]
and by [Hell] we may understand [Heaven,] 'twill not be easy for you to fasten
this sense on the words; or to come more close to your own way of speaking, we
may return your own Argument upon you. If by [went down] you mean [not went
down] and if by [Hell] you mean [not Hell] we must better know what you mean
before we subscribe in your sense, else you may make it lawful to subscribe to
any thing in the World, and say you mean better than you speak.

That I take you right appears thus: When you speak by way of Explication, that
by Hell you mean the State of separate Souls, all know that those Souls thus
separated, must be Lodged somewhere, they must be either in Heaven, or in Hell,
or in Limbo, or in Purgatory; and seeing 'twould be the greatest abuse to
Insinuate, that you hold any other Place after this Life than Heaven, and Hell,
you must believe that as soon as Christ's Soul was separated from His Body it
went somewhere, it must be to one of these places.

If you had been of Opinion that it went to Hell, there had been no need of any
Exposition; your Naked subscription, as unto an Article of Faith, would import
so much: The words are plain, [going down into Hell; Descended into Hell, all
know what [going down] means, and all take [Hell] to signify the place of
the Damned. Thus it signified in Edward the Sixth his Days, as appears by the
additional Clause, [For his Body lay in the Grave till the Resurrection, but
his Soul being separate from his Body remained with the Spirits, which were
detained in Prison; that is to say, in Hell, and there Preached unto them, as
witnesses that Place of PETER,] so that the Words of our Article in Edward the
Sixth's time were expressive of the Descent of Christ's Soul into Hell, which,
being retained by us still, must be supposed to be in the In the Synod in the
days of Q. Elizabeth, the Articles, which continue still in Force, deliver the
Same Descent, but without any the least Explication, or Reference to any
particular Place of Scripture. Bishop Peirsons Expos. of the Creed, Ed. 4. p.
226.
Same sense. The leaving out this Clause, only shows, that we are not bound
to believe that Christ went into Hell to Preach: But as Of the Church. lib. 5.
cap. 19.
Doctor Field, as thorough a Protestant, as any Dissenter in England tells us:
The end of Christ's going down into the Hell of the Damned was only to fasten
Condemnation to the Devils, and his Angels to Another Opinion has obtained,
especially in our Church, that the end for which Christ Descended into Hell,
was to Triumph over Satan, and all the Powers below within their own Dominions.
Bishop Peirson ubi sup. p. 247. See B. Bills. p. 294.
Triumph over the Principalities of Darkness, to secure us from being surprised
by them, and to prevent our going thither, not to fetch back any that were
there already.

But that Christ Descended into the Hell of the Damned was generally received
by Protestants, is asserted by this Doctor: And that others of our Church are
of another Opinion I grant; but then it does the more strongly infer the
necessity our Church lies under of Declaring her sense of it; and that until
thus much be done, the safest way of Subscription is as Chillingworth, Usher,
and Bramhall, affirm it to be. However, let the Subscription be after what
manner soever, it is manifest, that this Reverend Nonconforming Brother can
never Subscribe this one Article in his expounded sense more honestly than we
subscribe all the rest. And that notwithstanding his severity against us for
subscribing the 4 Controverted Articles, the Liturgy, etc. it is not over
difficult to run him and his Brethren to the same straits for subscribing 36,
which he thinks he has driven us unto, by reason of our larger subscription:
We find as many Perplexities in those Articles they subscribe, as they can show
us in any they refuse; and even in this one Article I doubt not but the more
Learned and thoughtful amongst that Party, will see enough to Perplex them: The
Learned Archbishop was of Opinion that it Usher ubi sup. p. 417.
was too Perplexing; To speak the Truth (says he) it is a matter above the
reach of the common People to enter into the Discussion of the full meaning of
this Point of the Descension into Hell; -- He therefore leaves it to be
considered by the Learned, whether any such Controverted matter, may fitly be
brought in, to expound the Rule of Faith by, which being common both to the
Great and Small Ones in the Church, must contain such verities only as are
generally agreed upon by the common consent of all True Christians.

Artic. 4. Christ took again his Body with Flesh and Bones, and all things
appertaining to the Perfection of Man's Nature, wherewith He Ascended into
Heaven and there sits, etc.

The words of this Article are Plain, and easy enough to be understood, for
what can [Flesh, Bones, and all things Appertaining to the Perfection of Man's
Nature] import less than what, (to use the School term) we call formally Flesh,
and Bones, and it is as clear that [herewith Christ Ascended into Heaven and
there he sits,] so that there is no need of an Exposition of this Article;
where the Sense is so evident we may immediately declare our Assent, or
Dissent: And this Reverend Brother instead of Explicating it, writes a
confutation of it.

In your Preface you tell us, that you Subscribe them, and that you may not be
Unconscionably Rash in subscribing, you here tell all whom it may concern, how
you understand the words which you Subscribe: And under this Article, which
speaks of formal Flesh, and Bones you assure us, that the Body of Christ now in
Heaven is not the same thing which we call formally Flesh, and Bones, your
subscription therefore must be in this sense by [Flesh] you mean [not Flesh] by
[Bones] you mean [not Bones] and so Subscribe to this Part of the Article that
Flesh, and Bones are in Heaven: Whether any of our Church ever did, or can
Subscribe in a larger sense, let the World Judge.

Artic. 6. In the name of the Holy Scriptures, we understand those Canonical
Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose Authority was NEVER any doubt in
the Church.

These words are as Exclusive as the wit of Man can Invent: What Books
soever-therefore, of whose Authority there has been any doubt in the Church,
are by this Article shut out from the Number of Canonical Scriptures; and yet
to this Article this Reverend Brother does thus subscribe.

Expos. Not excluding the Epistle to the Hebrews; James, 2 Peter, Jude, 2 and 3
John, Revelation, which diverse Churches long doubted of. This Article excludes
from the Canon all those Books, of whose Authority there have been any doubt in
the Church; and you subscribe in a sense, which excludes not every such Book,
so that by [Never] you mean [not Never] and in this sense subscribe.

If it be said that all our Clergy do the same, I answer, we do not by
subscription Assent to every Article, we only Promise not to contradict them,
waiting for the time in which the Church will Establish our sense, or some
other way give ease to the subscriber: But this worthy Person, does expose our
distinction and subscribes himself very strictly by putting this loose and
contradictious sense on the Article.

I could give many other instances of this Nature, but these are enough, and
yet I cannot forbear adding one more, because this great Man has said so much
against it, and yet unawares subscribed unto it without an Exposition.

The sixth Point of our Nonconformity (says he) is a New The English
Nonconformity. c. 9.
Article of Faith in these words, in the Rubric which we must profess Assent
and Consent unto [it is certain by the Word of God, that Children, which are
Baptized, and Dying before they Commit actual Sin, are undoubtedly Saved: This
is a New Article, never made for us before 1662.

But wherein does the New Article differ from this Assertion [That Infants
being Baptized and Dying in their Infancy are by Christ's Sacrifice washed from
their Sins, brought to Gods Favor, and made his Children, and Inheritors of
his Kingdom of Heaven.]

Both these Articles speak of Infants Baptized, and that Indefinitely, and of
their Dying in their Infancy, or which is the same, before actual Sin is
committed, and being washed from their Sins by Christ's Blood, brought to Gods
Favor, made his Children, and Inheritors of his Kingdom of Heaven, signify so
much as that they shall be undoubtedly saved; these several expressions are a
full Description of Salvation; I can see then no difference de re between these
two Articles, and how New soever the former may be the latter is as Old as the
Homilies of our Church, which our Clergy have subscribed above an Hundred
Years. And if we consider in what Homily this Article is, and for what reason
it is there inserted, I am inclined to think, that on an enquiry this Reverend
Person, and the Dissenting Ministers will be found to have really subscribed it.

It is in the Homily of Justification, and it is there inserted as a special
ground of the Comfortableness of that wholesome Doctrine; we will therefore
consult the 11th Article, which refers to this Homily, and see how far those,
who subscribe to this Article do thereby Assent unto the matter of this Homily.

Artic. 11. We are accounted Righteous before God, only for the Merit of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own works; or
deservings. Wherefore, that we are justified by Faith only, is a most WHOLESOME
Doctrine, and VERY FULL OF COMFORT, as more LARGELY is EXPRESSED in the Homily
of Justification.

This Doctrine is a most wholesome Doctrine, and VERY FULL OF COMFORT. But in
what respects so comfortable, what are the grounds thereof?

That we may know in what respects, and on what grounds, we are by the Article
directed to the Homily, where it is thus more largely expressed: For the more
full understanding the same it is our part to remember how that all the World
being wrapped in sin by breakin of the Law, God sent his only Son, our Savior
Jesus Christ into this World, to FULFILL THE LAW FOR US, and by shedding of his
most Precious Blood, to make a Sacrifice and satisfaction; or, (as it may be
called) amends to his Father for our sins, to assuage his Wrath and
Indignation, conceived against us for the same: Insomuch, that Infants being
Baptized, and Dying in their Infancy, are by this Sacrifice washed from their
Sins, brought to Gods Favor, and made his Children, and Inheritors of his
Kingdom of Heaven.

Here then is the Article, and a part of the Homily; the Article holds, that
the Doctrine of Justification is very full of comfort, as expressed more
largely in the Homily: The Homily tells us, that for the more full
understanding hereof we must remember how Christ has fulfilled the Law for us,
made himself a Sacrifice, insomuch that Baptized Infants Dying in their
Infancy, shall by Christ's Blood be washed from their Sins and saved. Now this
is a very great ground of joy, and hereby the Doctrine of Justification is
become the more abundantly comfortable; and by subscribing to this Article thus
worded, we also subscribe unto this Homily, that is to say, as the Article is
an Epitome of the Homily, and the Homily an Explanation of the Homily, and the
Homily an Explanation of the Article in subscribing to the former, we subscribe
to the Doctrine contained in the latter. In subscribing to the Article we
subscribe to every Doctrine in this Homily, that sets forth the comfortableness
of Justification through Jesus Christ's Merits by Faith alone; and herein does
the Homily show the comfortableness of this Doctrine by assuring us that all
our Children that have been Baptized, Dying in their Infancy, are saved: So
that this Reverend N. Conforming Brother subscribing to this part of the 11th.
Article, closes with the very Doctrine for which he so much condemns our Clergy.

I have insisted thus long on the subscriptions of our Dissenting Brethren,
that whilst we present our humble supplications to the Convocation for Redress,
they may see that there is no reason for their Reproaching us with our
subscriptions.

That our Clergy, notwithstanding their Unanimous subscribing the same
Articles, have different thoughts about them, is not denied by any of us.

That this may be without falling under the Odious Guilt of Equivocation and
Mental Reserves is cleared by the distinction there is between Articles of
Peace, and Articles of Faith. By subscribing we think we are not obliged
tobelieve them, but only not to contradict, or oppose them.

That this our sense is not allowed by the Church is more than we dare be
positive in. There are three great Worthies of our Communion who doubt it not;
and we have often in Publick-Prints declared our sense without Rebuke or
Control; and if notwithstanding, the Church is against our Sense, we cannot be
Censured for Equivocation, the utmost can be said against us is, that we have
mistaken the Churches sense, which is not so great a Crime as the declaring
Assent to an Article when really we do not believe it to be true.

However, that there are difficulties attending our Way is yielded, and the
Arguments against it so strong, that on a Review, from a fear that our
Subscription signifies our Assent to every subscribed Article, many
Perplexities arise in our Minds: For which Reason, we do most Humbly beseech
both Houses of Convocation to take this Case into their Consideration, that
what in their Great Wisdom they think meet for the Peace and Quiet of the Minds
of many Godly and Learned Divines, True and Obedient Sons of the Church may in
this matter be done.

FINIS.

