THE Old Batchelour, A COMEDY. As it is ACTED at the Theater Royal, BY Their
MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by Mr. Congreve.

Quem tulit ad Scenam ventoso gloria Curru,
Exanimat lentus Spectator; sedulus inflat.
Sic leve, sic parvum est, animum quod laudis avarum
Subruit, aut resicit --
Horat. Epist. I. Lib. II. LONDON, Printed for Peter Buck, at the Sign of the
Temple near the Temple-gate in Fleet Street, 1693.

To the Right Honorable, Charles Lord Clifford of Lanesborough, etc.
My Lord,
IT is with a great deal of Pleasure, that I lay hold on this first Occasion,
which, the Accidents of my Life have given me of writing to your Lordship: For
since at the same time I write to all the World, it will be a means of
publishing, (what I would have every Body know) the Respect and Duty which I
owe and pay to you. I have so much Inclination to be yours, that I need no
other Engagement: But the particular Ties, by which I am bound to your Lordship
and Family, have put it out of my power to make you any Complement; since all
Offers of my self, will amount to no more than an honest Acknowledgment, and
only show a willingness in me to be grateful.

I am very near wishing, That it were not so much my Interest to be your
Lordships Servant, that it might be more my Merit; not that I would avoid being
obliged to you, but I would have my own Choice to run me into the Debt; that I
might have it to boast, I had distinguished a Man, to whom I would be glad to
be obliged, even without the hopes of having it in my Power, ever to make him a
return.

It is impossible for me to come near your Lordship, in any kind, and not to
receive some Favor; and while in appearance I am only making an Acknowledgment
(with the usual underhand dealing of the World) I am at the same time,
insinuating my own Interest. I cannot give your Lordship your due, without
tacking a Bill of my own Privileges. It Is true, if a Man never committed a
Folly, he would never stand in need of a Protection: But then Power would have
nothing to do, and good Nature no occasion to show it self; and where those
Virtues are, it is pity they should want Objects to shine upon. I must confess
this is no reason, why a Man should do an idle thing, nor indeed any good
Excuse for it, when done; yet it reconciles the uses of such Authority and
Goodness, to the necessities of our Follies; and is a sort of Poetical Logic,
which, at this time I would make use of, to argue your Lordship into a
Protection of this Play. It is the first Offense I have committed in this kind,
or indeed, in any kind of Poetry, though not the first made public; and,
therefore, I hope will the more easily be pardoned: But had it been Acted, when
it was first written, more might have been said in its behalf; Ignorance of the
Town and Stage, would then, have been Excuses in a young Writer, which now,
almost four Years experience, will scarce allow of. Yet I must declare my self
sensible of the good Nature of the Town, in receiving this Play so kindly, with
all its Faults, which I must own were, for the most part, very industriously
covered by the care of the Players; for, I think, scarce a Character but
received all the Advantage it would admit of, from the justness of Action.

As for the Critics, my Lord, I have nothing to say, to, or against any of
them of any kind; from those who make just Exceptions, to those who find fault
in the wrong place. I will only make this general Answer in behalf of my Play
(an Answer, which Epictetus advises every Man to make for himself, to his
Censurers) viz. That if they who find some Faults in it were as intimate with
it as I am, they would find a great many more. This is a Confession, which I
need not to have made; but however, I can draw this use from it, to my own
Advantage, that I think there are no Faults in it, but what I do know; which,
as I take it, is the first step to an amendment.

Thus I may live in hopes (sometime or other) of making the Town amends; but
you, my Lord, I never can, though I am ever

Your Lordships most obedient and most humble Servant, Will. Congreve.

To Mr. CONGREVE.
WHEN Virtue in pursuit of Fame appears,
And forward shoots the growth beyond the Years:
We timely court the rising Hero's Cause;
And on his side, the Poet wisely draws;
Bespeaking him hereafter, by Applause.
The days will come, when we shall all receive,
Returning Interest from what now we give:
Instructed, and supported by that Praise,
And Reputation, which we strive to raise.
Nature so coy, so hardly to be Wooed
Flies, like a Mistress, but to be pursued.
O CONGREVE! boldly follow on the Chase;
She looks behind, and wants thy strong Embrace:
She yields, she yields, surrenders all her Charms,
Do you but force her gently to your Arms:
Such Nerves, such Graces, in your Lines appear,
As you were made to be her Ravisher.
DRYDEN has long extended his Command,
By Right divine, quite through the Muses Land,
Absolute Lord; and holding now from none,
But great Apollo, his undoubted Crown:
(That Empire settled, and grown old in Power)
Can wish for nothing, but a Successor:
Not to enlarge his Limits, but maintain
Those Provinces, which he alone could gain.
His eldest Wicherly, in wise Retreat,
Thought it not worth his quiet to be great.
Loose, wandering, Etherege, in wild Pleasures lost,
And foreign Interests, to his hopes long lost:
Poor Lee and Otway dead! CONGREVE appears,
The Darling, and last Comfort of his Years:
May thou live long in thy great Masters smiles,
And growing under him, adorn these Isles:
But when -- when part of him (be that but late)
His Body yielding must submit to Fate,
Leaving his deathless Works, and thee behind,
(The natural Successor of his Mind)
Then may thou finish what he has begun:
Heir to his Merit, be in Fame his Son.
What thou have done, shows all is in thy Power;
And to Write better, only must Write more.
It Is something to be willing to commend;
But my best Praise, is, that I am your Friend.
THO. SOUTHERN.
To Mr. CONGREVE.
THe Danger's great in these censorious days,
When Critics are so rife, to venture Praise:
When the infectious and ill-natured Brood
Behold, and damn the Work, because it is good;
And with a proud, ungenerous Spite would try
To pass an Ostrocism on Poetry.
But you, my Friend, your Worth does safely bear
Above their Spleen; you have no cause for fear;
Like a well-metled Hawk, you took your flight
Quite out of reach, and almost out of sight.
As the strong Sun, in a fair Summers day,
You rise, and drive the Mists and Clouds away,
The Owls and Bats, and all the Birds of Prey.
Each Line of yours, like polisht Steel's so hard,
In Beauty safe, it wants no other guard.
Nature her self's beholden to your Dress,
Which though still like, much fairer you express.
Some vainly striving Honor to obtain,
Leave to their Heirs the Traffic of their Brain;
Like China under Ground, the ripening Ware,
In a long time, perhaps grows worth our Care:
But you now reap the Fame, so well you have sown;
The Planter tastes his Fruit to ripeness grown.
As a fair Orange-tree at once is seen,
Big with what is ripe, yet springing still with Green:
So at one time, my worthy Friend appears,
With all the sap of Youth, and weight of Years.
Accept my pious Love, as forward Zeal,
Which though it ruins me I cannot conceal:
Exposed to Censure for my weak Applause,
I Am pleased to suffer in so just a Cause:
And though my Offering may unworthy prove,
Take as a Friend the Wishes of my Love.
J. W. MARSH.
To Mr. CONGREVE, on his PLAY, called, The OLD BACHELOR.
WIT, like true Gold, refined from all Allay,
Immortal is, and never can decay:
It Is in all Times and Languages the same;
Nor can an ill Translation quench the Flame:
For, though the Form and Fashion don't remain,
The intrinsic value still it will retain.
Then let each studied Scene be writ with Art;
And Judgment sweat to form the labored Part:
Each Character be just, and Nature seem;
Without the Ingredient, Wit, it is all but Phlegm:
For that is the Soul, which all the Mass must move,
And wake our Passions into Grief, or Love.
But you, too Bounteous, sow your Wit so thick,
We are surpised, and know not where to pick:
And while our Clapping does you Justice do,
Our selves we injure, and lose something new.
What may not we then, great Youth, of thee presage,
Whose Art and Wit so much transcend thy Age?
How will thou shine at thy Meridian height?
Who, at thy rising, give so vast a Light.
When DRYDEN dying, shall the World deceive,
Whom we Immortal, as his Works, believe;
Thou shall succeed, the Glory of the Stage,
Adorn and entertain the coming Age.
BEVIL HIGGINS.
PROLOGVE intended for the old Btcahelour, sent to the Author, by an unknown
Hand.
MOST Authors on the Stage at first appear
Like Widows-Bridegrooms, full of doubt and fear:
They judge from the experience of the Dame,
How hard a Task it is to quench her Flame:
And who falls short of furnishing a course,
Up to his brawny Predecessors force;
With utmost rage from her Embraces thrown,
Remains convicted, as an empty Drone.
Thus often, to his Shame, a pert Beginner
Proves in the end, a miserable Sinner.
As for our Youngster, I am apt to doubt him,
With all the vigor of his Youth about him:
But he, more Sanguine, trusts in one and twenty,
And impudently hopes he shall content you:
For though his Batchelour be worn and cold:
He thinks the Young may club to help the Old:
And what alone can be achieved by neither,
Is often brought about by both together.
The briskest of you all have felt Allarms,
Finding the fair One prostitute her Charms
With broken Sighs, in her old Fumblers Arms.
But for our Spark, he Swears he will never be jealous
Of any Rivals, but young lusty Fellows.
Faith let him try his Chance, and if the Slave,
After his bragging, prove a washy Knave;
May he be banished to some lonely Den,
And never more have leave to dip his Pen:
But if he be the Champion he pretends,
Both Sexes sure will join to be his Friends;
For all agree, where all can have their ends.
And you must own him for a Man of Might,
If he holds out to please you the third Night.
PROLOGUE
Spoken by Mrs. Bracegirdle. HOW this vile World is changed! In former days,
Prologues, were serious Speeches, before Plays;
Grave solemn Things, as Graces are to Feasts;
Where, Poets begged a Blessing, from their Guests.
But now, no more like Suppliants, we come;
A Play makes War, and Prologue is the Drum:
Armed with keen Satyr, and with pointed Wit,
We threaten you who do for Judges sit,
To save our Plays, or else we'll damn your Pit.
But for your Comfort, it falls out to day,
We Have a young Author and his first born Play;
So, standing only on his good Behavior,
He Is very civil, and entreats your Favor.
Not but the Man has Malice, would he show it,
But on my Conscience he is a bashful Poet;
You think that strange -- no matter, he will out grow it.
Well, I Am his Advocate -- by me he prays you,
(I don't know whether I shall speak to please you)
He prays -- O bless me! what shall I do now!
Hang me if I know what he prays, or how!
And 'twas the prettiest Prologue, as he wrote it!
Well, the Deuce take me, if I hau'e forgot it.
O Lord, for Heavens sake excuse the Play,
Because, you know, if it be damned to day,
I shall be hanged for wanting what to say.
How my sake then -- but I Am in such Confusion,
I cannot stay to hear your Resolution.
Runs off.

Personae Dramatis.
Men, By Heartwell, a furly old Batchelour, pretending to slight Women;
secretly in Love with Silvia, Mr. Betterton. Bellmour, in Love with Belinda,
Mr. Powel. Vainlove, capricious in his Love; in Love with Araminta, Mr.
Williams. Sharper, Mr. Alexander. Sir Joseph Wittol, Mr. Bowen. Capt. Bluffe,
Mr. Hains. Fondlewife, a Banker, Mr. Dogget. Setter, a Pimp, Mr. Underhill.
Servant to Fondlewife. Women, Araminta, in Love with Vainlove, Mrs.
Bracegirdle. Belinda, her Cousin and affected Lady, in Love with Bellmour, Mrs.
Mountfort. Laetitia, Wife to Fondlewife, Mrs. Barry. Silvia, Vainlove's
forsaken Mistress, Mrs. Bowman. Lucy, her Maid, Mrs. Leigh. Betty.
Footmen.

The Scene, LONDON.

THE Old Batchelour.
ACT I.
SCENE I. The Street.
Bellmour and Vainlove Meeting. Bell. VAinlove, and abroad so early! good
Morrow; I thought a Contemplative Lover could no more have parted with his Bed
in a Morning, than a' could' have slept in it.


Vain. Bellmour, good Morrow -- Why truth on it is, these early Sallies are not
usual to me; but Bussiness as you see Sir -- Showing Letters. And Business must
be followed, or be lost.


Bell. Pox of Business -- And so must Time, my Friend, be close pursued, or
lost. Business is the rub of Life, perverts our Aim, casts off the Blas, and
leaves us wide and short of the intended Mark:


Vain. Pleasure, I guess you mean.


Bell. Ay, what else has meaning?


Vain. Oh the Wise will tell you --


Bell. More than they believe -- Or understand.


Vain. How how, Ned, a wise Man say more than he understands?


Bell. Ay ay, pox Wisdom's nothing but a pretending to know and believe more
than really we do. You read of but one wise Man, and all that he knew was, that
he knew nothing. Come come, leave Business to Idlets, and Wisdom to Fools; they
have need of 'em: Wit, be my Faculty; and Pleasure, my Occupation; and let
Father Time shake his Glass. Let low and earthy Souls grovel till they have
worked themselves six foot deep into a Grave -- Business is not my Element -- I
roll in a higher Orb and dwell --.


Vain. In Castles in the Air of thy own building: That Is thy Element Ned -- Well
as high as a Flyer as you are, I have a Lure may make you stoop. Flings a
Letter.


Bell. I marry Sir, I have a Hawks Eye at a Woman's hand -- There Is more
Elegancy in the false Spelling of this Superscription Takes up the Letter. than
in all Cicero -- Let me see -- How now! Dear persidious Vainlove. Reads.


Vain. Hold hold, 'slife that is the wrong.


Bell. Nay let us see the Name ( Silvia!) how can thou be ungrateful to 'that
Creature? She Is extremely pretty and loves thee entirely -- I have heard her
breath such Raptures about thee --


Vain. Ay, or any Body that she is about --


Bell. No faith Frank you wrong her; she has been just to you.


Vain. That Is pleasant, by my troth from thee, who have enjoyed her.


Bell. Never -- Her Affections, it is true by Heaven, she owned it to my Face;
and blushing like the Virgin Morn when it disclosed the Cheat, which, that
trusty Bawd of Nature, Night, had hid, confessed her Soul was true to you; though
I by treachery had stoll'n the Bliss --


Vain. So was true as Turtle -- An imagination Ned, ha? Preach this Doctrine to
Husbands, and the married Women will adore thee.


Bell. Why faith I think it will do well enough -- If the Husband be out of the
way, for the Wife to show her Fondness and Impatience of his Absence, by
choosing a Lover as like him as she can, and what is unlike she may help out
with her own Fancy.


Vain. But is it not an Abuse to the Lover to be made a Blind of? For she only
stalks under him to take aim at her Husband.


Bell. As you say the Abuse is to the Lover, not the Husband: For it is an
Argument of her great Zeal toward him, that she will enjoy him in Essigie.


Vain. It must be a very superstitious Country, where such Zeal passes for true
Devotion. I doubt it will be damned by all our Protestant Husbands for slat
Idolatry -- But if you can make Alderman Fondlewife of your Persuasion, this
Letter will be needless.


Bell. What, the old Banker with the handsome Wife?


Vain. Ay.


Bell. Let me see, Laetitia! Oh it is a delicious Morsel. Dear Frank thou art
the truest Friend in the World.


Vain. Ay, am I not? To be continually starting of Hares for you to Course. We
were certainly cut out for one another; for my Temper quits an Amor, just
where thine takes it up -- But read that, it is an Appointment for me, this
Evening; when Fondlewife will be gone out of Town, to meet the Master of a Ship
about the return of a Venture which he is in danger of losing. Read, read.


Bell. Reads. Hum, Hum -- Out of Town this Evening, and talks of sending for
Mr. Spintext to keep me Company; but I Will take care, he shall not be at home.
Good! Spintext! Oh the Fanatic one-ey'd Parson!


Vain. Ay.


Bell. Reads. Hum, Hum -- That your Conversation will be much more agreeable,
if you can counterfeit his Habit to blind the Servants. Very good! Then I must
be disguished -- With all my Heart -- It adds a Gusto to an Amor; gives it the
greater resemblance of Theft; and among us lewd Mortals, the deeper the Sin the
sweeter. Frank I Am amazed at thy good Nature --


Vain. Faith I hate Love when it is sorced upon a Man; as I do Wine -- And this
Business is none of my seeking; I only happened to be once or twice, where,
Laetitia was the handsomest Woman in Company, so consequently applied my self
to her -- And it seems she has taken me at my word -- Had you been there or any
Body 'thad been the same.


Bell. I wish I may succeed as the same.


Vain. Never doubt it; for if the Spirit of Cuckoldom be once raised up in a
Woman, the Devil cannot lay it, till she has don't.


Bell. Prithee, what sort of Fellow is Fondlewife?


Vain. A kind of Mungril Zealot, sometimes very precise and peevish: But I have
seen him pleasant enough in his way; much addicted to Jealousy, but more to
Fondness: So that as he is often Jealous without a Cause, he is as often
satisfied without Reason.


Bell. A very even Temper and sit for my purpose. I must get your Man Setter to
provide my Disguise.


Vain. Ay, you may take him for good and-all if you will, for you have made him
sit for no Body else -- Well --


Bell. Your'e going to visit in return of Silvia's Letter -- Poor Rogue. Any
hour of the day or night will serve her -- But do you know nothing of a new
Rival there?


Vain. Yes, Heartwell, that furly, old, pretended Woman-hater thinks her
Virtuous; that is one reason why I fail her: I would have her fret her self out
of conceit with me, that she may entertain some Thoughts of him. I know he
visits her every day.


Bell. Yet rails on still, and thinks his Love unknown to us; a little time
will swell him so, he must be forced to give it birth, and the discovery must
needs be very pleasant from himself, to see what pains he will take, and how he
will strein to be delivered of a Secret, when he has miscarried on it already.


Vain. Well good Morrow, let us dine together, I Will meet at the old place.


Bell. With all my Heart, it lies convenient for us, to pay our Afternoon
Service to our Mistresses; I find I am damnably in Love; I Am so uneasy for not
seeing Belinda yesterday.


Vain. But I saw my Araminta, yet am as impatient. Exit.


Bell. Why what a Cormorant in Love am I! who not contented with the slavery of
honorable Love in one place, and the pleasure of enjoying some half a score
Mistresses of my own acquiring; must yet take Vainlove's Business upon my
hands, because it lay too heavy upon his: So am not only forced to lie with
other Men's Wives for 'em, but must also undertake the harder Task, of obliging
their Mistresses -- I must take up, or I shall never hold out; Flesh and Blood
cannot bear it always.


Enter Sharper. Sharp. I Am sorry to see this, Ned: Once a Man comes to his
Soliloques I give him for gone.


Bell. Sharper, I Am glad to see thee.


Sharp. What, is Belinda cruel, that you are so thoughtful?


Bell. No faith, not for that -- But there is a Business of Consequence fallen
out to day that requires some Consideration.


Sharp. Prithee what mighty Business of Consequence can thou have?


Bell. Why you must know, it is a piece of Work toward the finishing of an
Alderman; it seems I must put the last hand to it, and dub him Cuckold, that he
may be of equal Dignity with the rest of his Brethren. So I must beg Belinda's
Pardon --


Sharp. Faith even give her over for good-and-all; you can have no hopes of
getting her for a Mistress, and she is too Proud, too Inconstant, too Affected
and too Witty, and too handsome for a Wise.


Bell. But she cannot have too much Money -- There Is twelve thousand Pound Tom --
It Is true she is excessively foppish and affected, but in my Conscience I
believe the Baggage loves me, for she never speaks well of me her self, nor
suffers any Body else to rail at me. Then as I told you there is twelve thousand
Pound -- Hum -- Why faith upon second Thoughts, she does not appear to be so
very affected neither -- Give her her due, I think the Woman's a Woman, and
that is all. As such I Am sure I shall like her; for the Devil take me if I don't
love all the Sex.


Sharp. And here comes one who Swears as heartily he hates all the Sex.


Enter Heartwell. Bell. Who Heartwell! Ay, but he knows better things -- How
now George, where have thou been snarling odious Truths, and entertaining
company like a Physician, with discourse of their diseases and infirmities?
What fine Lady have thou been putting out of conceit with her self, and
persuading that the Face she had been making all the morning wos none of her
own? for I know thou art as unmannerly and as unwelcome to a Woman, as a
Looking-glass after the Smallpox.


Heart. I confess I have not been sneering fulsome Lies and nauseous Flattery,
fawning upon a little tawdry Whore, that will fawn upon me again, and entertain
any Puppy that comes; like a Tumbler with the same tricks over and over. For
such I guess may have been your late employment.


Bell. Would thou had come a little sooner, Vainlove would have wrought thy
Conversion and been a Champion for the Cause.


Heart. What, has he been here? that is one of Loves April-fools, is always upon
some errand that is to no purpose, ever embarking in Adventures, yet never comes
to harbor.


Sharp. Tha's because he always sets out in foul Weather, loves to buffet with
the Winds, meet the Tide and sail in the Teeth of opposition.


Heart. What has he not dropped Anchor at Araminta?


Bell. Truth on it is she sits his temper best, is a kind of floating Island;
sometimes seems in reach, then vanishes and keeps him busied in the search.


Sharp. She had need have a good share of sense, to manage so Capricious a
Lover.


Bell. Faith I don't know, he is of a temper the most easy to himself in the
World; he takes as much always of an Amor as he cares for, and quits it when
it grows stale, or unpleasant.


Sharp. An argument of very little Passion, very good Understanding, and very
ill Nature.


Heart. And proves that Vainlove plays the Pool with Discretion.


Sharp. You Bellmour are bound in gratitude to stickle for him; you with
pleasure reap that fruit, which he takes pains to sow: he does the drudgery in
the Mine, and you stamp your image on the Gold.


Bell. He Is of another opinion, and says I do the drudgery in the Mine; well,
we have each our share of sport, and each that which he likes best; it is his
diversion to Set, it is mine to Cover the Partridge.


Heart. And it should be mine to let 'em go again.


Sharp. Not till you had Mouthed a little George, I think that is all thou art
fit for now.


Heart. Good Mr. Young-fellow, your mistaken; as able as your self and as
nimble too, though I may not have so much Mercury in my Limbs; it is true indeed,
I don't force Appetite, but wait the natural call of my Lust, and think it time
enough! to be lewd, after I have had the temptation.


Bell. Time enough, ay too soon, I should rather have expected, from a person
of your gravity.


Heart. Yet it is oftentimes too late with some of you young, termagant flashy
sinners -- you have all the guilt of the intention, and none of the pleasure of
the practice -- it is true you are so eager in pursuit of the temptation, that
you save the Devil the trouble of leading you into it: Nor is it out of
discretion, that you don't swallow that very Hook your selves have baited, but
you are cloyed with the preparative, and what you mean for a Whet, turns the
edge of your puny Stomachs. Your love is like your courage, which you show for
the first year or two upon all occasions; till in a little time, being disabled
or disarmed, you abate of your vigor; and that daring Blade which was so often
drawn, is bound to the Peace for ever after.


Bell. Thou art an old Fornicator of a singular good principle indeed! and art
for encouraging Youth, that they may be as wicked as thou art at thy years.


Heart. I am for having every body be what they pretend to be; a Whoremaster be
a Whoremaster; and not like Vainlove, kiss a Lap-Dog with passion, when it
would disgust him from the Ladies own Lips.


Bell. That only happens sometimes, where the Dog has the sweeter Breath, for
the more cleanly conveyance. But George, you must not quarrel with little
Gallantries of this nature; Women are often won by 'em: who would refuse to
kiss a Lap-Dog, if it were preliminary to the Lips of his Lady?


Sharp. Or omit playing with her Fan; and cooling her if she were hot, when it
might entitle him to the office of warming her when she should be cold?


Bell. What is it to read a Play in a rainy day, when it may be the means of
getting into a fair Ladies Books? Though you should be now and then interrupted
in a witty Scene, and she perhaps preserve her Laughter, till the jest were
over; even this may be born with, considering the reward in prospect.


Heart. I confess you that are Women's Asses bear greater burdens, are forced to
undergo Dressing, Dancing, Singing, Sighing, Whining, Rhyming, Flattering,
Lying, Grinning, Cringing, and the drudgery of loving to boot.


Bell. O Brute, the drudgery of loving!


Heart. Ay, why to come to Love through all these in cumbrances is like coming
to an Estate overcharged with Debts, which by the time you have paid, yields
no further profit than what the bare tillage and manuring of the Land will
produce at the expense of your own Sweat.


Bell. Prithee how do thou love?


Sharp. He! he hates the Sex.


Heart. So I hate Physic too -- yet I may love to take it for my health.


Bell. Well come off George, if at any time you should be taken straying.


Sharp. He has need of such an excuse, considering the present state of his
Body.


Heart. How do you mean?


Sharp. Why if whoring be purging (as you call it) then I may say Marriage is
entering into a Course of Physic.


Bell. How George, does the Wind blow there?


Heart. It will as soon blow North and by South -- marry quotha! I hope in
Heaven I have a greater portion of Grace, and I think I have baited too many of
those Traps, to be caught in one my self.


Bell. Who the Devil would have thee? unless 'twere an Oyster-woman, to
propagate young Fry for Bilingsgate -- thy Talent will never recommend thee to
any thing of better quallity.


Heart. My Tallent is chiefly that of speaking truth, which I don't expect
should ever recommend me to People of Quality -- I thank Heaven, I have very
honestly purchased the hatred of all the great Families in Town.


Sharp. And you in return of Spleen hate them: But could you hope to be
received into the Alliance of a noble Family --


Heart. No, I hope I shall never merit that affliction -- to be punished with a
Wife of Birth -- be a Stag of the first Head and bear my Horns aloft, like one
of the supporters of my Wives Coat. God's Death I would not be a Cuckold to ere an
illustrious Whore in England.


Bell. What not to make your santily Man! and provide for your Children!


Sharp. For her Children you mean.


Heart. Ay there you have nick't it -- there is the Devil upon Devil -- Oh the
Pride and Joy of Heart 'twould be to me, to have my Son and heir resemble such
a Duke -- to have a sleering Coxcomb scoff and cry, Mr* your Son's mighty like
his Grace, has just his smile and air of's Face. Then replies another -- me
think he has more of the Marquess of such a place, about his Nose and Eyes;
though a' has my Lord what d'ee-cals Mouth too a Title -- Then I to put it off
as unconcerned, come chuck the Infant under the chin, force a smile and cry,
ay, the Boy takes after his. Mothers relations -- when the Devil and she knows,
it is a little Compound of the whole Body of Nobility.


Bell. Ha, ha, ha.


Sharp. Ha, ha, ha.


Bell. Well but George I have one Question to ask you --


Heart. Pox I have pratled away my time -- I hope you are in no have: for an
Answer -- for I shall not stay now. Looking on his Watch.


Bell. Nay prithee George --


Heart. No, besides my Business, I see a Fool coming this way. Adieu.


Exit. Bell. What does he mean? Oh here he comes, stand close let 'em pass.


Sir Joseph Wittall and Capt. Bluffe, cross the Stage. Sharp. What in the name
of wonder is it?


Bell. Why a Fool.


Sharp. It Is a tawdry Outside.


Bell. And a very beggarly Lining -- yet he may be worth your acquaintance -- a
little of thy Chemistry Tom, may extract Gold from that Dirt.


Sharp. Say you so? faith I am as poor as a Chemist and would be as
industrious. But what was he that followed him? is not he a Draggon that
watches those Golden Pippins?


Bell. Hang him, no, he a Draggon! if he be it is a very peaceful one, I can
ensure his Anger dormant; or should he seem to rouse, it is but well lashing
him, and he will sleep like a Top.


Sharp. Ay, Is he of that kidney?


Bell. Yet is adored by that Biggot Sr. Joseph Wittoll, as the image of of
Valor: He calls him his Back, and indeed they are never asunder -- yet last
night, I know not by what mischance, the Knight was alone, and had fallen into
the hands of some Nightwalkers, who I suppose would have pillaged him: But I
chanced to come by and rescued him, though I believe he was heartily frightened,
for as soon as ever he was loose, he ran away, without staying to see who
helped him.


Sharp. Is that Bully of his in the Army?


Bell. No, But is a pretender, and wears the habit of a Soldier, which now
a'days as often cloaks Cowardice, as a Black Gown does Atheism -- You moust
know he has been abroad -- went purely to run away from a Campaign; enriched
himself with the plunder of a few Oaths; -- and here vents 'em against the
General, who slighting Men of Merit, and preferring only those of interest, has
made him quit the Service.


Sharp. Wherein no doubt he magnifies his own performance.


Bell. Speaks Miracles, is the Drum to him own praise -- the only implement of
a Soldier he resembles, like that, being full of blustering noise and emptiness
--


Sharp. And like that, of no use but to be beaten.


Bell. Right, but then the comparison breaks, for he will take a drubbing with
as little noise as a Pulpit Cushion.


Sharp. His name, and I have done.


Bell. Why that, to pass it current too, he has gilded with a Title; he is
called, Capt. Bluffe.


Sharp. Well, He endeavor his acquaintance -- you steer another Course, are
bound,

For Love's I stand: I, for the Golden Coast.
May each succeed in what he wishes most.
Exeunt.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Sir Joseph Wittoll, Sharper following. Sharp. SUre that is he and alone.


Sir Io. Um -- Ay this, this is the very damned place; the inhumane Cannibals,
the bloody-minded Villains would have Butchered me last night: No doubt, they
would have slead me alive, have fold ray Skin, and devoured my Members.


Sharp. How Is this!


Sir Io. An it had not been for a civil Gentleman as came by and frightn'd 'em
away -- but agad I durst not stay to give him thanks.


Sharp. This must be Belmour he means -- ha! I have a thought --


Sir Io. Zooks, would the Captain would come; the very remembrance makes me
quake; agad I shall never be reconciled to this place heartily.


Sharp. It Is but trying, and being where I am at worst, now luck! -- cursed
fortune! this must be the place, this damned unlucky place --


Sir Io. Agad and so it is -- why here has been more mischief done I perceive.


Sharp. No, it is gone, it is lost -- ten thousand Devils on that chance which
drew me hither; ay here, just here, this spot to me is Hell; nothing to be
found, but the despair of what i have cost.


Looking about as in search Sir Io. Poor Gentleman -- by the Lord Harry i will
stay no longer, for I have sound too --


Sharp. Ha! who is that has found? what have you found? restore it quickly, or
by --


Sir Io. Not I Sir, not I, as I Have a Soul to be saved, I have found nothing but
what has been to my loss, as I may say, and as you were saying Sir.


Sharp. O your Servant Sir. you are safe then it seems; it is an ill Wind that
blows no body good: well, you may rejoice over my ill fortune, since it paid
the price of your ransom.


Sir Io. I rejoice! agad not I Sir; I Am sorry for your loss, with all my
Heart, Blood and Guts Sir; and if you did but know me, you would nere say I were so
ill natured.


Sharp. Know you! why can you be so ungrateful, to forget me!


Sir Jo. O Lord forget him! No no Sir, I don't forget you -- because I never
saw your face before, agad. Ha, ha, ha.


Sharper. How! Angrily.


Sir Io. Stay, slay Sir, let me recollect -- he is a damned angry Fellow -- I
believe I had* better remember him, till I can get out of his light; but out of
sight out of mind agad Aside.


Sharp. Methought the service I did you last night Sir, in preserving you from
those Russians, might have taken better root in your shallow memory.


Sir Io. Gads-Daggers-Belts-Blades-and Scabbards, this is the very Gentleman!
how shall I make him a return suitable to the greatness of his merit -- I had a
pretty thing to that Purpose, if he has not frighted it out of my memory. Hem!
hem! Sir, I must submissively implore your pardon for my transgression of
ingratitude and omission; having my entire dependence Sir, upon the supersinity
of your goodness, which, like an innundation will I hope totally immerge the
recollection of my error, and leave me floating in your sight, upon the full,
blown, Bladders of repentance -- by the help of which, I shall once more hope
to swim into your favor Bows.


Sharp. So -- h, O Sir I am easily pacified, the acknowledgment of a Gentleman
--


Sir Io. Acknowledgment! Sir I am all over acknowledgment, and will not stick
to show it in the greatest extremity, by night, or by day, in sickness, or in
health, Winter, or Summer, all Seasons and occasions shall testify the reality
and gratitude of you superabundant humble Servant Sir Joseph Wittoll Knight.
Hem! hem!


Sharp. Sir Joseph Wittoll!


Sir Io. The same Sir, of Wittoll-hall in Comitatu Bucks.


Sharp. Is it possible! Then I am happy to have obliged the Mirror of
Knighthood and Pink of Courtesy in the Age, let me embrace you.


Sir Io. O Lord Sir!


Sharp. My loss, I esteem as a trifle repaid with interest, since it has
purchased me the friendship and acquaintance of the person in the World, whose
Character I admire.


Sir Io. You are only pleased to say so Sir -- But pray if I may be so bold,
what is that loss you mention?


Sharp. O term it no longer so Sir. In the Scuffle last Night I only dropped a
Bill of a hundred Pound, which I confess, I came half despairing to recover;
but thanks to my better Fortune --


Sir Io. You have found it Sir then it seems; I profess I Am heartily glad --


Sharp. Sir your humble Servant -- I don't question but you are; that you have
so cheap an opportunity of expressing your gratitude and generosity. Since the
refunding so trivial a Sum, will wholly acquit you and doubly engage me.


Sir Io. What a dickens does he mean by a trival Sum aside But have not you found
it Sir!


Sharp. No otherwise I vow to Gad but in my hopes in you Sir.


Sir Io. Humph.


Sharp. But that is sufficient -- 'Twere injustice to doubt the honor of Sir
Io. Wittoll.


Sir Io. O Lord Sir.


Sharp. You are above (I Am sure) a thought so low, to suffer me to lose what
was ventured in your service; Nay 'twas in a manner -- Paid down for your
deliverance; 'twas so much lent you -- And you scorn, 'Ile say that for you --


Sir Io. Nay 'Ile say that for my self (with your leave Sir) I do scorn a dirty
thing. But agad 'Ime a little out of pocket at present,


Sharp. Pshaw you cannot want a hundred Pound. Your Word is sufficient any
where* It Is but borrowing so much Dirt, you have large Acres and can soon repay
it -- Money is but Dirt Sir Joseph -- Mere Dirt.


Sir Io. But I profess, it is a Dirt I have washed my Hands of at present; I
have laid it all out upon my Back.


Sharp. Are you so extravagant in Clothes Sir Joseph?


Sir Io. Ha, ha, ha, a very good Jest I profess, ha, ha, ha, a very good Jest,
and I did not know that I had said it, and that is a better Jest than the other.
It Is a sign you and I have not been long acquainted; you have lost a good Jest
for want of knowing me -- I only mean a Friend of mine whom I call my Back; he
sticks as close to me, and follows me through all dangers -- he is indeed Back,
Breast and Headpiece as it were to me -- agad he is a brave Fellow -- Pauh, I am
quite another thing, when I am with him: I don't fear the Devil (God bless us)
almost if he be by. Ah -- had he been with me last night --


Sharp. If he had Sir, what then? he could have done no more, nor perhaps have
suffered so much -- had he a hundred Pound to lose Angrily.


Sir Io. O lord Sir by no means (but I might have saved a hundred Pound) I
meant innocently as I hope to be saved Sir (a damned hot Fellow) only as I was
saying, I let him have all my ready Money to redeem his great Sword from Limbo
-- But Sir I have a Letter of Credit to Alderman Fondlewife, as far as two
hundred Pound, and this Afternoon you shall see I am a Person, such a one as
you would wish to have met with.


Sharp. That you are I Will be sworn aside Why that is great and like your self.


Enter Bluffe. Sir Jo. Oh here ^^ comes (...) of Troy, welcome my Bully, my
Back, ^gad (...)


Bluff. How how, my young Knight? Not for fear I hope, he that knows me must be
a stranger to fear.


Sir Jo. Nay agad I hate fear ever since I had like to have died of a fright.
But --


Bluff. But? Look you here Boy, here is your antidote, here is your Jesuits
Powder for a shaking fit -- But who have thou got with thee, is he of mettle?
Laying his Hand upon his Sword.


Sir Jo. Ay Bully, a Devilish smart Fellow, 'a will sight like a Cock.


Bluff. Say you so? then I honor him -- But has he been abroad? for every Cock
will sight upon his own Dunghill.


Sir Jo. I don't know, but I Will present you --


Bluff. I Will recommend my self -- Sir I honor you; I understand you love
Fighting, I reverence a Man that loves Fighting, Sir I Kiss your Hilts.


Sharp. Sir your Servant, but you are misinformed, for unless it be to serve my
particular Friend, as Sir Joseph here, my Country, or my Religion, or in some
very Justifiable Cause, I Am not for it.


Bluff. O Lord I beg your pardon Sir, I find you are not of my Pallat, you
cannot relish a Dish of Fighting without Sweet Sauce. Now I think -- Fighting,
for Fighting sake's sufficient Cause; Fighting, to me's Religion and the Laws.


Sir Jo. Ah, well said my Hero; was not that great Sir? by the Lord- Harry he
says true; Fighting, is Meat, Drink and Cloth to him. But Back, this Gentleman
is one of the best Friends I have in the World and saved my Life last Night --
You know I told you.


Bluff. Ay! Then I honor him again -- Sir may I crave your name?


Sharp. Ay Sir, my name's Sharper.


Sir Jo. Pray Mr. Sharper Embrace my Back -- very well -- By the Lord Harry Mr.
Sharper he is as brave a Fellow as Cannibal, are not you Bully -- Back?


Sharp. Hannibal I believe you mean Sir Joseph.


Bluff. Undoubtedly he did Sir; faith Hannibal was a very pretty Fellow -- but
Sir Joseph, comparisons are odious -- Hannibal was a very pretty Fellow in
those Days, it must be granted -- But Alas Sir! were he alive now, he would be
nothing, Nothing in the Earth.


Sharp. How Sir! I make a doubt, if there be at this Day a greater General
Breathing.


Bluff. Oh excuse me Sir; have you served a broad Sir?


Sharp. Not I really Sir.


Bluff. Oh I thought so -- Why then you can know nothing Sir: I Am afraid you
scarce know the History of the Late War in Flanders, with all its particulars.


Sharp. Not I, Sir, no more than public Letters, or Gazett's tell us.


Bluff. Gazette! Why there again now -- Why, Sir, there are not three words of
Truth, the Year round, put into the Gazette -- I Will tell you a strange thing
now as to that -- You must know, Sir, I was resident in Flanders the last
Campagn, had a small Post there; but no matter for that -- Perhaps, Sir, there
was a scarce any thing of moment done but an humble Servant of yours, that
shall be nameless, was an Eyewitness of -- I will not say had the greatest share
in it. Though I might say that too, since I am no Body you know -- Well, Mr.
Sharper, would you think it? In all this time -- as I hope for a Truncheon --
this rascally Gazette-writer never so much as once mentioned me -- Not once by
the Wars -- Took no more notice, than as if Nol. Bluffe had not been in the
Land of the Living.


Sharp. Strange!


Sir Io. Yet by the Lord Harry it is true Mr. Sharper, for I went every day to
Coffee-houses to read the Gazette my self.


Bluff. Ay, ay, no matter -- You see Mr. Sharper after all I am content to
retire -- Live a private Person -- Scipio and others have done it.


Sharp. Impudent Rogue. Aside.


Sir Io. Ay, this damned Modesty of yours -- Agad if he would put in for it he
might be made General himself yet.


Bluff. Oh fie no Sir Joseph -- You know I hate this.


Sir Io. Let me but tell Mr. Sharper a little, how you let fire once out of the
mouth of a Canon -- agad he did; those impenetrable Whiskers of his have
confronted Flames --


Bluff. Death, what do you mean Sir Joseph?


Sir Io. Look you now, I tell you he is so modest he will own nothing.


Bluff. Pish you have put me out, I have forgot what I was about. Pray hold
your Tongue, and give me leave. Angrily.


Sir Io. I am dumb.


Bluff. This Sword I think I was telling you of Mr. Sharper -- This Sword I Will
maintain to be the best Divine, Anatomist, Lawyer or Casuist in Europe; it
shall decide a Controversy or split a Cause --


Sir Io. Nay, now I must speak; it will split a Hair by the Lord Harry, I have
seen it.


Bluff. Zoons Sir, it is a Lie, you have not seen it, nor shant see it; Sir I
say you cannot see; what de'e say to that now?


Sir Io. I am blind.


Bluff. Death, had any other Man interrupted me --


Sir Io. Good Mr. Sharper speak to him; I dare not look that way.


Sharp. Captain, Sir Ioseph's penitent.


Bluff. O I am calm Sir, calm as a discharged Culverin -- But 'twas indiscreet,
when you know what will provoke me -- Nay come Sir Joseph, you know my Heat's
soon over.


Sir Io. Well I am a Fool sometimes -- But I Am sorry.


Bluff. Enough.


Sir Io. Come we'll go take a Glass to drown Animosities. Mr. Sharper will you
partake?


Sharp. I wait on you Sir; nay pray Captain -- You are Sir Ioseph's Back.
Exeunt.


SCENE Changes to Lodgings.
Enter Araminta, Belinda. Belin. Ay! nay Dear -- prithee good, dear sweet
Cousin no more. Oh Gad, I swear you would make one sick to hear you.


Aram. Bless me! what have I said to move you thus?


Belin. Oh you have raved, talked idly, and all in Commendation of that filthy,
awkard, two-leg'd Creature, Man -- you don't know what you said, your Fever has
transported you.


Aram. If Love be the Feeer which you mean; kind Heaven avert the cure: Let me
have Oil to feed that Flame and never let it be extinct, till I my self am
Ashes.


Belin. There was a Whine -- O Gad I hate your horrid Fancy -- This Love is the
Devil, and sure to be in Love is to be possessed -- It Is in the Head, the Heart,
the Blood, the -- All over -- O Gad you are quite spoiled -- I shall loath the
sight of Mankind for your sake.


Aram. Fie, this is gross Affectation -- A little of Bellmour's Company would
change the Scene.


Belin. Filthy Fellow! I wonder Cousin --


Aram. I wonder Cousin you should imagine, I don't perceive you love him.


Belin. O I love your hideous Fancy! Ha, ha, ha, love a Man!


Aram. Love a Man! yes, you would not love a Beast.


Belin. Of all Beasts not an Ass -- Which is so like your Vainlove -- Lard I
have seen an Ass look so Chagrin, Ha, ha, ha, (you must pardon me I cannot help
Laughing) that an absolute Lover would have concluded the poor Creature to have
had Darts, and Flames, and Altars, and all that in his Breast. Araminta, come
I Will talk seriously to you now; could you but see with my Eyes, the buffoonry
of one Scene of Address, a Lover, set out with all his Equipage and
Appurtenances; O Gad! sure you would -- But you play the Game, and consequently
cannot see the Miscarriages obvious to every Stander by.


Aram. Yes, yes, I can see something near it when you and Bellmour meet. You
don't know that you dreamt of Bellmour last Night, and called him aloud in your
sleep.


Belin. Pish, I cannot help dreaming of the Devil sometimes; would you from
thence infer I love him?


Aram. But that is not all; you caught me in your Arms when you* named him, and
pressed me to your Bosom -- Sure if I had not pinched you till you waked, you
had stisled me with Kisses.


Belin. O barbarous Aspersion!


Aram. No Aspersion, Cousin, we are alone -- Nay, I can tell you more.


Belin. I deny it all.


Aram. What, before you hear it?


Belin. My Denial is premeditated like your Malice -- Lard, Cousin, you talk
odly -- What ever the Matter is, O my Sol, I Am afraid you will follow evil Courses.


Aram. Ha, ha, ha, this is pleasant.


Belin. You may laugh, but --


Aram. Ha, ha, ha.


Belin. You think the malicious Grinn becomes you -- The Devil take Bellmour --
Why do you tell me of him?


Aram. Oh is it come out -- Now you are angry, I am sure you love him. I tell
no Body else Cousin -- I have not betrayed you yet.


Belin. Prithee tell it all the World, it is false. Betty. Calls.


Aram. Come then, Kiss and Friends.


Belin. Pish.


Aram. Prithee don't be so Peevish.


Belin. Prithee don't be so Impertinent.


Aram. Ha, ha, ha.


Enter Betty. Betty. Did your Ladyship, call Madam?


Belin. Get my Hoods and Tippet, and bid the Footman call a Chair.


Exit Betty. Aram. I hope you are not going out in dudgeon, Cousin.


Enter Footman. Foot. Madam, there are --


Belin. Is there a Chair?


Foot. No, Madam, there are Mr. Bellmour and Mr. Vainlove to wait upon your
Ladyship.


Aram. Are they below?


Foot. No, Madam, they sent before, to know if you were at home.


Belin. The Visit's to you, Cousin, I suppose I am at my liberty.


Aram. Be ready to show 'em up. Exit Footman. I cannot tell, Cousin, I believe
we are equally concerned: But if you continue your Humor, it will not be very
entertaining -- (I know she would fain be persuaded to stay. Aside. Belin.


Belin. I shall oblige you, in leaving you to the full and free enjoyment of
that Conversation you admire.


Enter Betty, with Hoods and Looking-glass. Belin. Let me see; hold the Glass
-- Lard I look wretchedly to day.


Aram. Betty, why don't you help my Cousin? Putting on her Hoods.


Belin. Hold off your Fists, and see that he gets a Chair with a high Roof, or
a very low Seat -- Stay, Come back here you Mrs. Fidget -- You are so ready to
go to the Footman -- Here, take 'em all again, my Mind's changed, I will not go.
Exit Betty with the Things.


Aram. So, this I expected -- You will not oblige me then, Cousin, and let me have
all the Company to my self?


Belin. No; upon deliberation, I have too much Charity to trust you to your
self. The Devil watches all opportunities; and in this favorable disposition
of your Mind, Heaven knows how far you may be tempted: I am tender of your
Reputation.


Aram. I am obliged to you -- But who is malicious now, Belinda?


Belin. Not I; witness my Heart I stay out of pure Affection.


Aram. In my Conscience I believe you.


Enter Bellmour, Vainlove. Bell. So Fortune be praised! To find you both
within, Ladies, is --


Aram. No Miracle, I hope.


Bell. Not of your side, Madam, I confess -- But my Tyrant there and I, are two
Buckets that can never come together.


Belin. Nor are ever like -- Yet we often meet and clash.


Bell. How never like! marry Hymen forbid. But this it is to run so
extravagantly in Debt; I have laid out such a world of Love in your Service,
that you think you can never be able to pay me all: So shun me for the same
reason that you would have done.


Belin. Ay, on my Conscience, and the most impertinent and troublesome of Duns
-- A Dun for Money will be quiet, when he sees his Debtor has not wherewithal --
But a Dun for Love is an eternal Torment that never rests --


Bell. Till he has created Love where there was none, and then gets it for his
pains. For importunity in Love, like importunity at Court; first creates its
own Interest, and then pursues it for the Favor.


Aram. Favors that are got by Impudence and Importunity, are like Discoveries
from the Rack, when the afflicted Person, for his ease, sometimes confesses
Secrets his Heart knows nothing of.


Vain. I should rather think Favors, so gained, to be due Rewards to
indefatigable Devotion -- For as Love is a Deity, he must be served by Prayer.


Belin. O Gad, would you would all pray to Love then, and let us alone.


Vain. You are the Temples of Love, and it is through you, our Devotion must be
conveyed.


Aram. Rather poor silly Idols of your own making, which, upon the least
displeasure you forsake, and set up new -- Every Man, now, changes his Mistress
and his Religion, as his Humor varies or his Interest.


Vain. O Madam --


Aram. Nay come, I find we are growing serious, and then we are in great danger
of being dull -- If my Music master be not gone, I Will entertain you with a
new Song, which comes pretty near my own Opinion of Love and your Sex -- Who Is
there? Calls.


Enter Footman. Is Mr. Gavot gone?

Foot. Only to the next door, Madam; I Will call him. Exit.


Bell. Why, you wont hear me with Patience.


Aram. What Is the Matter, Cousin.


Bell. Nothing, Madam, only --


Belin. Prithee hold thy Tongue -- Lard, he has so pestered me with Flames and
Stuff -- I think I shall not endure the sight of a Fire this Twelvemonth.


Bell. Yet all cannot melt that cruel frozen Heart.


Belin. O Gad I hate your hideous Fancy -- You said that once before -- If you
must talk impertinently, for Heavens sake let it be with variety; don't come
always, like the Devil, wrapped in Flames -- I Will not hear a Sentence more, that
begins with an, I burn -- Or an, I beseech you, Madam.


Bell. But tell me how you would be Adored -- I am very tractable.


Belin. Then know, I would be Adored in Silence.


Bell. Humph, I thought so, that you might have all the Talk to your self --
You had better let me speak, for if my Thoughts fly to any pitch, I shall make
villainous Signs.


Belin. What will you get by that? To make such Signs as I will not understand.


Bell. Ay, but if I Am Tongue-ty'd, I must have all my Actions free to --
Quicken your Apprehension -- And I-gad let me tell you, my standing Argument is
depressed in dumb show.


Enter Music master. Aram. O I am glad we shall have a Song to divert the
Discourse -- Pray oblige us with the last new Song.


SONG.
I.
Thus, to a ripe, consenting Maid,
Poor, old, repenting Delia said,
Would you long preserve your Lover?
Would you still his Goddess reign?
Never let him all discover,
Never let him much obtain.
II.
Men will admire, adore and die,
While wishing at your Feet they lie:
But admitting their Embraces,
Wakes 'em from the golden Dream;
Nothing's new besides our Faces,
Every Woman is the same.
Aram. So, how de'e like the Song, Gentlemen?


Bell. O very well performed -- But I don't much admire the Words.


Aram. I expected it -- there is too much Truth in 'em: If Mr. Gavot will walk
with us in the Garden, we'll have it once again -- You may like it better at
second hearing. You Will bring my Cousin.


Bell. Faith, Madam, I dare not speak to her, but I Will make Signs.


Adresses Belinda in dumb show. Belin. O fogh, your dumb Rhetoric is more
ridiculous, than your talking Impertinence; as an Ape is a much more
troublesome Animal than a Parrot.


Aram. Ay, Cousin, and it is a sign the Creatures mimick Nature well, for there
are few Men, but do more silly things, than they say.


Bell. Well, I find my Apishness has paid the Ransom for my Speech, and set it
at liberty -- Though, I confess, I could be well enough pleased to drive on a
Love-bargain, in that silent manner -- 'Twould save a Man a World of Lying and
Swearing at the Years end. Besides, I have had a little Experience, that brings
to my mind -- When Wit and Reason, both, have failed to move;
Kind Looks and Actions (from Success) do prove,
Even Silence may be Eloquent in Love.


Exeunt Omnes.
ACT III.
SCENE I. The Street.
Silvia and Lucy. Silvia. WILL a' not come then?


Lucy, Yes Yes, come, I warrant him, if you will go in and be ready to receive
him.


Silv. Why did you not tell me? -- Whom mean you?


Lucy. Whom you should mean, Heartwell.


Silv. Senseless Creature, I meant my Vainlove.


Lucy. You may as soon hope, to recover your own Maidenhead, as his Love.
Therefore e'n set your Heart at rest, and in the name of opportunity mind your
own Business. Strike, Heartwell home, before the Bait's worn off the Hook, Age
will come; he nibbled fairly yesterday, and no doubt will be eager enough to
day, to swallow the Temptation.


Silv. Well, since there is no remedy -- Yet tell me -- For I would know, though
to the anguish of my Soul; how did he refuse? Tell me -- how did he receive my
Letter, in Anger or in Scorn?


Lucy. Neither; but what was ten times worse, with damned, senseless
indifference. By this Light I could have spit in his Face -- Receive it! why he
received it, as I would one of your Lovers that should come emptyhanded; as a
Court Lord does his Mercers Bill, or a begging Dedication; -- a' received it,
as if 'thad been a Letter from his Wife.


Silv. What did he not read it?


Lcuy. Hum'd it over, gave you his Respects, and said, he would take time to
peruse it -- But then he was in haste.


Silv. Respects, and peruse it! He Is gone, and Araminta has bewitched him from
me -- Oh, how the name of Rival fires my Blood -- I could curse 'em both;
eternal Jealousy attend her Love; and Disappointment, meet his Lust. Oh that I
could revenge the Torment he has caused -- Methinks I feel the Woman strong
within me, and Vengeance itches in the room of Love.


Lucy. I have that in my Head may make Mischief.


Silv. How, dear Lucy.


Lucy. You know Aramintas dissembled Coyness has won, and keeps him hers --


Silv. Could we persuade him, that she Loves another --


Lucy. No, you're out; could we persuade him, that she doats on him, himself --
Contrive a kind Letter as from her, 'twould disgust his nicely, and take away
his Stomach.


Silv. Impossible, 'twill never take.


Lucy. Trouble not your Head. Let me alone -- I will inform my self of what
past between 'em to Day, and about it straight -- Hold, I Am mistaken, or
that is Heartwell, who stands talking at the Corner -- it is he -- Go get you in
Madam, receive him pleasantly, dress up your Face in Innocence and Smiles; and
dissemble the very want of Dissimulation -- You know what will take him.


Salv. It Is as hard to Counterfeit Love, as it is to conceal it: but I Will do my
weak endeavor, though I fear I have not Art.


Lucy. Hang Art, Madam, and trust to Nature for Dissembling.

Man, was by Nature Woman's Cully made:
We, never are but by our selves betrayed.
Exeunt.
Enter Heartwell, Vainlove and Bellmour following. Bell. Hist hist, is not that
Heartwell going to Silvia?


Vain. He Is talking to himself, I think; Prithee lets try if we can hear him


Heart. Why whither in the Devils name am I going now? Hum -- Let me think --
Is not this Silvia's House, the Cave of that Enchantress and which consequently
I ought to shun as I would infection? To enter here, is to put on the envenomed
Shirt, to run into the Embraces of a Faver, and in some raving fit, be led to
plunge my self into that more Consuming Fire, a Woman's Arms. Ha! well
recollected, I will recover my reason and be gone.


Bell. Now Venus forbid!


Vain. Hust --


Heart. Well, Why do you not move? Feet do your Office -- Not one Inch; no,
Foregod I Am caught -- There stands my North, and thither my Needle points --
Now could I curse my self, yet cannot repent. O thou Delicious, Damned, Dear,
destructive Woman! God's Death how the young Fellows will hoot me! I shall be the
Jest of the Town: Nay in two Days, I expect to be Chronicled in Ditty, and sung
in woeful Ballad, to the Tune of the Superanuated Maidens Comfort, or the
Batchelors Fall; and upon the third, I shall be hanged in Effigy, pasted up
for the exemplary Ornament of necessary Houses and Cobblers S'talls -- Death, I
cannot think out -- He run into the danger to loose the apprehension. Goes in.


Bell. A very certain remedy, probatum est -- Ha, ha, ha, poor George, thou art
in the right, thou have sold thy self to Laughter; the ill-natured Town will find
the Jest just where thou have lost it. Ha, ha, how a' strugled, like an Old
Lawyer, between two Fees.


Vain. Or a young Wench, betwixt pleasure and reputation.


Bell. Or as you did to day, when half afraid you snatched a kiss from Araminta.


Vain. She has made a quarrel on it.


Bell. Pauh, Women are only angry at such offenses, to have the pleasure of
forgiving 'em.


Vain. And I love to have the pleasure of making my peace -- I should not
esteem a Pardon if too easy won.


Bell. Thou do not know what thou would be at; whether thou would have
her angry or pleased. Could thou be content to marry Araminta?


Vain. Could you be content to go to Heaven?


Bell. Hum, not immediately, in my conscience not heartily? I Would do a little
more good in my generation first, in order to deserve it.


Vain. Nor I to marry Araminta till I merit her.


Bell. But how the Devil do thou expect to get her if she never yield?


Vain. That Is true; but I would --


Bell. Marry her without her Consent; thour't a Riddle beyond Woman. --


Enter Setter. Trusty Setter what tidings? How goes the project?

Setter. As a lewd projects do Sir, where the Devil prevents our endeavors
with success.


Bell. A good hearing, Setter.


Vain. Well, I Will leave you with your Engineer. Exit.


Bell. And have thou provided necessaries?


Setter. All, all Sir; the large sanctified Hat, and the little precise Band,
with a swinging long Spiritual Cloak, to Cover Carnal Knavery -- not forgetting
the Black Patch, which Tribulation Spintext wears as I Am informed, upon one
Eye, as a penal Mourning for the ogling Offenses of his Youth; and some say,
with that Eye, he first discovered the frailty of his Wife.


Bell. Well in this Fanatic Fathers habit, will I confess Latitia.


Setter. Rather pepare her for Confession, Sir by helping her to Sin.


Bell. Be at your Masters Lodging in the Evening -- I shall use the Robes.


Exit. Bell. Setter. I shall Sir -- I wonder to which of these two Gentlemen I
do most properly appertain -- The one uses me as his Attendant; the other
(being the better acquainted with my parts) employs me as a Pimp: why that is
much the more honorable employment -- by all means -- I follow one as my
Master, but the the other follows me as his Conductor.


Enter Lucy. Lucy. There Is the Hang-Dog his Man -- I had a power over him in the
Reign of my Mistress; but he is too true a Valet-de-chambre not to affect his
Masters faults; and consequently is revolted from his Allegiance.


Setter. Undoubtedly it is impossible to be a Pimp and not a Man of parts. That
is without being politic, diligent, secret, wary and soforth -- And to all
this valiant as Hercules -- That is, passively valiant and actively obedient.
Ah! Setter what a treasure is here lost for want of being known.


Lucy. Here Is some Villainy a Foot lies so thoughtful; may be I, may discover
something in my Masque -- Worthy Sir, a word with you.


Puts on her Masque. Setter. Why if I were known, I might come to be a great
Man. --


Lucy. Not to intempt your meditation. --


Setter. And I should not be the first that has procured his greatness by
Pimping.


Lucy. Now Poverty and the Pox light upon thee, for a Contemplative Pimp.


Setter. Ha! what art, who thus maliciously have awakned me, from my Dream of
Glory? speak thou vile Disturber --


Lucy. Of thy most vile Cogitations -- Thou poor, Conceited Wretch, how, were
thou valuing thy self, upon thy Masters employment. For he is the head Pimp to
Mr. Bellmour.


Setter. Good Words, Damsel, or I shall -- But how do thou know my Master or
me?


Lucy. Yes, I know both Master and Man to be. --


Setter. To be Men perhaps; nay faith like enough; I often march in the rear of
my Master, and enter the Breaches which he was made.


Lucy. Ay, the Breach of Faith, which he has begun: Thou Traitor to thy lawful
Princess.


Setter. Why how now! prithee who art? lay by that Worldly Face and produce
your natural Vizor.


Lucy. No Sirrah, I Will keep it on to abuse thee and leave thee without hopes of
revenge.


Setter. Oh! I begin to smoke ye, thou art some forsaken Abigail, we have
dallied with heretofore -- And art come to tickle thy Imagaination with
remembrance of inicuity past.


Lucy. No thou pitiful Flatterer of thy Masters imperfections; thou Maukin made
up of the Shreds and Pairings of his superfluous Fopperies.


Setter. Thou art thy Mistresses foul self, Composed of her fully'd iniquities
and Clothing.


Lucy. Hang thee -- Beggars Curr -- Thy Master is but a Mumper in Love, lies
Canting at the gate; but never dare presume to enter the House.


Setter. Thou art the Wicket to thy Mistresses Gate; to be opened for all
Comers. In Fine thou art the high Road to thy Mistress, as a Clap is to the Pox.


Lucy. Beast, filthy Toad, I can hold no longer, look and tremble. Vmasques.


Setter. How, Mrs. Lucy!


Lucy. I wonder thou have the impudence to look me in the Face.


Setter. Adsbud who is in fault, Mistress Mine? who slung the first Stone? who
undervalued my Function? and who the Devil could know you by instinct?


Lucy. You could know my Office by instinct, an behang'd, which you have
slandered most abominably. It vexes me not what you said of my Person; but that
my innocent Calling should be exposed and scandalized -- I cannot bear it.
Cries.


Setter. Nay faith Lucy I Am sorry, I Will own my self to blame, though we were
both in fault as to our Offices -- Come I Will make you any reparation.


Lucy. Swear.


Setter. I do swear to the utmost of my power.


Lucy. To be brief then; what is the reason your Master did not appear to Day
according to the Summons I brought him?


Set. To answer you as briefly -- He has a cause to be tried in another Court.


Lucy. Come tell me in plain Terms, how forward he is with Araminta.


Setter. Too forward to be turned back -- Though he is a little in disgrace at
present about a Kiss which he forced. You and I can Kiss Lucy without all that.


Lucy. Stand off -- He Is a precious Jewel.


Setter. And therefore you would have him to set in your Ladies Locket.


Lucy. Where is he now?


Setter. He Will be in the Piaza presently.


Lucy. Remember to Days behavior -- Let me see you with a penitent Face.


Setter. What no Token of amity Lucy? you and I don't use to part with dry Lips.


Lucy. No no, avaunt -- I Will not be slabber'd and kissed now -- I Am not 'ith
humor. Exit.


Setter. I Will not quit you so -- I Will Follow and put you into the humor.


Exit after her. Enter Sr. Joseph Wittell, Bluffe. Bluff. And so out of your
unwonted Generosity. --


Sr. Jo. And good Nature, Back; I am good Natured and I cannot help it.


Bluff. You have given him a note upon Fumblewife for a hundred Pound.


Sr. Jo. Ay ay, poor, Fellow, he ventured fair fort.


Bluff. You have disobliged me in it -- for I have occasion for the Money, and
if you would look me in the Face again and live, go, and force him, to
redeliver you the Note -- go -- and bring it me hither. I Will stay here for you.


Sir Jo. You may stay till the day of Judgment then, by the Lord Harry. I know
better things than to be run through the Guts for a hundred Pound -- Why I gave
that hundred Pound for being saved, and d'^e think, an there were no danger,
I Will be so ungrateful to take it from the Gentleman again?


Bluff. Well, go to him from me -- Tell him, I say, he must refund -- or
Bilbo's the Word, and Slaughter will ensue -- If he refuse, tell him -- But
whisper that -- Tell him -- I Will pink his Soul -- but whisper that softly to
him.


Sir Io. So softly, that he shall never hear on it I warrant you -- Why what a
Devil's the Matter, Bully, are you mad? Or de'e think I Am mad? Agad for my
part, I don't love to be the Messenger of ill News; it is an ungrateful Office
-- So tell him your self.


Bluff. By these Hilts I believe he frightened you into this Composition; I
believe you gave it him out of fear, pure paultry fear -- confess.


Sir Io. No, no, hanged I was not afraid neither -- Though I confess he did in a
manner snap me up -- Yet I cannot say that it was altogether out of fear, but
partly to prevent mischief -- For he was a devilish choleric Fellow: And if my
Choler had been up too, agad there would have been mischief done, that is flat.
And yet I believe if you had been by, I would as soon have let him a' had a
hundred of my Teeth. Adheart if he should come just now when I Am angry, I Would
tell him -- Mum.


Enter Sharper, Bellmour. Bell. You Are a lucky Rogue; there is your Benefactor,
you ought to return him Thanks now you have received the Favor.


Sharp. Sir Joseph -- Your Note was accepted, and the Money paid at sight: I Am
come to return my Thanks --


Sir Io. They will not be accepted, so readily as the Bill, Sir.


Bell. I doubt the Knight repents, Tom -- He looks like the Knight of the
sorrowful Face.


Sharp. This is a double Generosity -- Do me a Kindness and refuse my Thanks --
But I hope you are not offended that I offered 'em.


Sir Io. May be I am Sir, may be I am not Sir, may be I am both Sir; what then?
I hope I may be offended, without any offense to you Sir.


Sharp. Hey day! Captain, what is the matter? You can tell.


Bluff. Mr. Sharper, the matter is plain -- Sir Joseph has found out your
Trick, and does not care to be put upon; being a Man of Honor.


Sharp. Trick, Sir.


Sir Io. Ay Trick, Sir, and will not be put upon Sir, being a Man of Honor Sir,
and so Sir --


Sharp. Hearkee, Sir Joseph, a word with ye -- In consideration of some favors
lately received; I would not have you draw your self into a Praemunire, by
trusting to that sign of a Man there -- That Pot gun charged with Wind.


Sir Io. O Lord, O Lord, Captain, come justify your self -- I Will give him the
Lie if you will stand to it.


Sharp. Nay then I Will be beforehand with you, take that -- Oafe. Cuffs him.
Bluff.


Sir Io. Captain, will you see this? Will Not you pink his Soul?


Bluff. Hushed, it is not so convenient now -- I shall find a time.


Sharp. What do you mutter about a time, Rascal -- You were the Incendiary --
There Is to put you in mind of your time -- A Memorandum. Kicks him.


Bluff. O this is your time Sir, you had best make use on it.


Sharp. I Gad and so I will: There Is again for you. Kicks him.


Bluff. You are obliging Sir, but this is too public a Place to thank you in:
But in your Ear, you are to be seen again.


Sharp. Ay thou inimitable Coward and to be felt -- As for Example.


Kicks him. Bell. Ha, ha, ha, prithee come away, it is scandalous to kick this
Puppy without a Man were cold, and had no other way to get himself a heat.


Exit Bell. Sharp. Bluff. Yery well -- Very fine -- But it is no matter -- Is
not this fine, sir Joseph?


Sir Io. Indifferent, agad in my opinion very indifferent -- I Would rather go
plain all my Life, than wear such Finery.


Bluff. Death and Hell to be affronted thus! I Will die before I Will suffer it.
draws.


Sir Io. O Lord his Anger was not raised before -- Nay, dear Captain, don't be
in Passion now, he is gone -- Put up, put up, dear Back, it is your Sir Joseph
begs, come let me kiss thee, so so, put up, put up.


Bluff. By Heaven it is not to be put up.


Sir. Io. What, Bully? Bluff. The Affront.


Sir Io. No agad no more, it is for that is put up already; thy Sword I mean.


Bluff. Well, Sir Joseph, at your entreaty -- But were not you my Friend;
Abused and Cuff'd and Kicked. Putting up his Sword.


Sir Io. Ay, ay, so were you too; no matter, it is past.


Bluff. By the immortal Thunder of great Guns, it is false -- He sucks not vital
Air who dares affirm it to this Face. Looks big.


Sir Io. To that Face I grant you Captain -- No, no, I grant you -- Not to that
Face by the Lord Harry -- If you had put on your fighting Face before, you had
done his Business -- He durst as soon have kissed you, as kicked you to your
Face -- But a Man can no more help what is done behind his Back, than what is
said -- Come we will think no more of what is past.


Bluff. I Will call a Council of War within to consider of my Revenge to come.
Exeunt.


SCENE Changes to Silvia's Lodgings.
Enter Heartwell, Silvia. SONG.
I.
As Amoret and Thyrsis, lay
Melting the Hours, in gentle Play;
Ioining Faces, mingling Kisses,
And exchanging harmless Blisses:
He trembling, cried, with eager haste,
O let me feed as well as taste,
I die, if I Am not wholly blessed.
II.
The fearful Nymph replied -- Forbear;
I cannot, dare not, must not hear:
Dearest Thyrsis, do not move me,
Do not -- do not -- if you Love me
O let me -- still the Shepherd said;
But while she fond Resistance made,
The hasty Joy, in struggling sled.
III.
Vexed at the Pleasure she had missed,
She frowned and blushed, then sighed and kissed,
And seemed to moan, in sullen Cooing,
The sad miscarriage of their Wooing:
But vain alas! were all her Charms;
For Thyrsis deaf to Loves allarms,
Bassled and senseless, tired her Arms.
After the Song, a Dance of Anticks. Silv. Indeed it is very fine -- I could
look upon 'em all day.


Heart. Well, has this prevailed for me, and will you look upon me?


Silv. If you could Sing and Dance so, I should love to look upon you too.


Heart. Why 'twas I Sung and Danced; I gave Music to the Voice, and Lise to
their Measures -- Look you here Silvia, here are Songs and Dances, Poetry and
Music -- hark! how Pulling out a Purse and chinking it. sweetly one Guinea
rhymes to another -- And how they dance to the Music of their own Chink. This
buys all the 'tother -- And this thou shall have; this, and all that I am worth
for the purchase of thy Love -- Say, is it mine then, ha? Speak Siren -- Oons
why do I look on her! Yet I must -- Speak dear Angel, Devil, Saint, Witch; do
not rack me in suspense.


Silv. Nay don't stare at me so -- You make me blush -- I cannot look.


Heart. Oh Manhood, where art thou! What am I come to? A Woman's Toy; at these
years! Death, a bearded Baby for a Girl to dandle. O dotage, dotage! That ever
that noble passion, Lust, should ebb to this degree -- No reslux of vigorous
Blood: But milky Love, supplies the empty Channels; and prompts me to the
softness of a Child -- A mere Infant and would suck. Can you love me Silvia?
speak.


Silv. I dare not speak till I believe you, and indeed I Am afraid to believe
you yet.


Heart. Pox, how her Innocence torments and pleases me! Lying, Child, is indeed
the Art of Love; and Men are generally Masters in it: But I Am so newly entered,
you cannot distruit me of any skill in the treacherous Mystery -- Now by my
Soul, I cannot lie, though it were to serve a Friend or gain a Mistress.


Silv. Must you lie then, if you say you Love me?


Heart. No, no, dear Ignorance, thou beauteous Changel'ng -- I tell thee I do
love thee, and tell it for a Truth, a naked Truth, which I Am ashamed to
discover.


Silv. But Love, they say, is a tender thing, that will smooth Frowns, and make
calm an angry Face; will soften a rugged Temper, and make ill-humoured People
good: You look ready to fright one, and talk as if your Passion were not Love,
but Anger.


Heart. It Is both; for I am angry with my self, when I am pleased with you --
And a Pox upon me for loving thee so swell -- Yet I must on -- It Is a bearded
Arrow, and will more easily be thrust forward than drawn back.


Silv. Indeed if I were well assured you loved; but how can I be well assured?


Heart. Take the Symptoms -- And ask all the Tyrants of thy Sex, if their Fools
are not known by this Party-colored Livery -- I am Melancholy when thou art
absent; look like an Ass when thou art present; Wake for you, when I should
Sleep, and even Dream of you, when I am Awake; Sigh much, Drink little, Eat
less, court Solitude, am grown very entertaining to my self, and (as I am
informed) very troublesome to everybody else. If this be not Love, it is
Madness, and then it is pardonable -- Nay yet a more certain Sign than all
this; I give thee my Money.


Silv. Ay, but that is no Sign, for they say, Gentlemen will give Money to any
naughty Woman to come to Bed to them -- O Gemini, I hope you don't mean so --
For I will not be a Whore.


Heart. The more is the pity. Aside.


Silv. Nay if you would Marry me, you should not come to Bed to me -- You have
such a Beard and would so prickle one. But do you intend to Marry me?


Heart. That a Fool should ask such a malicious Question! Death, I shall be
drawn in, before I know where I am -- However, I find I am pretty sure of her
consent, if I am put to it. Aside. Marry you? no, no, I Will love you.


Silv. Nay, but if you love me, you must Marry me; what don't I know my Father
loved my Mother, and was married to her?


Heart. Ay, ay, in old days People married where they loved; but that fashion
is changed, Child.


Silv. Never tell me that, I know it is not changed by my self; for I love you,
and would Marry you.


Heart. I Will have my Beard shaved, it shall not hurt thee, and we will go to Bed --


Silv. No, no, I Am not such a Fool neither bat I can keep my self -- honest --
Here, I will not keep any thing that is yours, I hate you now, Throws the Purse.
and I Will never see you again, 'cause you would have me be naught. Going.


Heart. Damn her let her go, and a good riddance -- Yet so much Tenderness and
Beauty -- and Honesty together is a Jewel -- Stay Silvia -- But then to Marry
-- Why every Man plays the Fool once in his Life: But to Marry, is playing the
Fool all ones Life long.


Silv. What did you call me for?


Heart. I Will give thee all I have: And thou shall live with me in every thing,
so like my Wife, the World shall believe it: Nay, thou shall think so thy self
-- Only let me not think so.


Silv. No, I Will die before Ill be your Whore -- as well as I love you.


Heart. Aside. A Woman, and Ignorant, may be honest, when it is out of Obstinacy
and Contradiction -- But God's Death it is but a may be, and upon scurvy Terms --
Well, farewell then -- if I can get out of her sight I may get the better of my
self.


Silv. Well -- good buy. Turns and Weeps.


Heart. Ha! Nay come, we'll kiss at parting kisses her by Heaven she kisses
sweeter than Liberty -- I will Marry thee -- There thou have don't, all my
Resolve melted in that Kiss -- one more.


Silv. But when?


Heart. I Am impatient till it be done; I will not give my self liberty to
think, left I should cool -- I will about a License straight -- in the Evening
expect me -- One Kiss more to confirm me mad; so. Exit.


Silv. Ha, ha, ha, an old Fox trapt -- Enter Lucy. Bless me! you frighted me, I
thought he had been come again, and had heard me.


Lucy. Lord, Madam, I met your Lover in as much haste, as if he had been going
for a Midwife.


Silo. He Is going for a Parson, Girl, the forerunner of a Midwife, some nine
Months hence -- Well, I find dissembling, to our Sex is as natural as swimming
to a Negro; we may depend upon our skill to save us at a plunge, though till
then we never make the experiment -- But how have thou succeeded?


Lucy. As you would wish -- Since there is no reclaiming Vainlove, I have found
out a picque she has taken at him; and have framed a Letter, that makes her sue
for Reconciliation sust. I know that will do -- walk in and I Will show it you.
Come Madam, your like to have a happy time on it, both your Love and Anger
satisfied! -- All that can charm our Sex conspire to please you.

That Woman sure enjoys a blessed Night,
Whom Love and Vengeance do at once delight.
Exeunt.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. The Street.
Enter Bellmour in Fanatic habit, Setter.. Bell It Is pretty near the Hour --
Looking on his Watch. Well and how Setter hae, does my Hypocrisy sit me hae?
Does it sit easy on me?


Setter. O most religiously well Sir.


Bell. I wonder why all our young Fellows should glory in an opinion of
Atheism; when they may be so much more conveniently lewd, under the Coverlet
of Religion.


Setter. S'bud Sir, away quickly, there is Fondlewife just turned the Corner,
and's coming this way.


Bell. Gads so there he is, he must not see me. Exeunt


Enter Fondlewife and Barnaby. Fond. I say I will tarry at home.


Bar. But Sir.


Fond. Good lack! I profess the Spirit of contradiction has possessed the Lad
-- I say I will tarry at home -- Valet.


Bar. I have done Sir, then farewell 500 Pound.


Fond. Ha, how is that? Stay stay, did you leave word say you with his Wife?
With Comfort her self.


Bar. I did; and Comfort will send Tribulation hither as soon as ever he comes
home -- I could have brought young Mr. Prig, to have kept my Mistress Company
in the mean time: but you say.


Fond. How how, say Varlet! I say let him not come near my Doors. I say, he is
a wanton young Levite and pampereth himself up with Dainties, that he may look
lovely in the Eyes of Women -- Sincerely I am afraid he has already defiled
the Tabernacle of our Sister Comfort; while her good Husband is deluded by his
Godly appearance -- I say, that even Lust does sparkle in his Eyes, and glow
upon his Cheeks, and that I would as soon trust my Wife, with a Lords high-fed
Chaplain.


Bar. Sir, the Howr draus nigh -- And nothing will be done there till you come.


Fond. And nothing can be done here till I go -- So that I Will tarry, do you see.


Bar. And run the hazard to lose your affair so!


Fond. Good lack, good lack -- I profess it is a very sufficient vexation, for
a Man to have a handsome Wife.


Bar. Never Sir, but when the Man is an insufficient Husband. It Is then indeed,
like the vanity of taking a fine House, and yet be forced to let Lodgings, to
help pay the Rent.


Fond. I profess a very apt Comparison, Varlet. Go in and bid my Cocky come out
to me, I will give her some instructions, I will reason with her before I go.
Exit Barnaby. And in the mean time, I will reason with my self -- Tell me
Isaac, why art the Jealous? Why art thee distrustful of the Wife of thy Bosom?
-- Because she is young and vigorous, and I am Old and impotent -- Then why
did thee marry Isaac? -- Because she was beautiful and temping, and because I
was obstinate and doting; so that my inclination was (and is still) greater
than my power -- And will not that which tempted thee, also tempt others, who
will tempt her Isaac? -- I fear it much -- But does not thy Wife love thee, nay
dote upon thee? -- Yes -- Why then! -- Ay, but to say truth, She Is fonder of
me, than she has reason to be; and in the way of Trade, we still suspect the
smoothest Dealers of the deepest designs -- And that she has some designs
deeper than thou can reach, the have experimented Isaac -- But Mum.


Enter Laetitia. Laet. I hope my dearest Jewel, is not going to leave me. Are
you Nykin?


Fond. Wife -- Have you thoroughly considered how detestable, how halnous, and
how Crying a Sin, the Sin of Adultery is? have you weighed it I say? For it is
a very weighty Sin; and although it may lie heavy upon thee, yet thy Husband
must also bear his part: For thy iniquity will fall upon his Head.


Laet. Bless me, what means my Dear!


Fond. Aside I profess she has an alluring Eye; I am doubtful, whether I shall
trust her, even with Tribulation himself -- Speak I say, have you considered,
what it is to Cuckold your Husband?


Laet. Aside I Am; amazed sure he has discovered nothing -- Who has wronged me
to my Dearest? I hope my Jewel does not think, that ever I had any such thing
in my Head, or ever will have.


Fond. No no, I tell you I shall have it in my Head -- You will have it some
where else.


Laet. Aside I know not what to think. But i am resolved to find the meaning of
it -- Unkind Dear! Was if for this, you sent to call me? is it not affliction
enough that you are to leave me, but you must study to increase it by unjust
suspicions? Crying. Well -- Well -- You know my Fondness, and you love to
Tyrannize -- Go on cruel Man, do, Tritumph over my poor Heart, while it holds;
which cannot be long, with this usage of yours -- But that is what you want --
Well -- You will have your ends soon -- You will -- You will -- Yes it will
break to oblige you. Sighs.


Fond. Verily I fear I have carried the Jest, too far -- Nay look you now if
she does not weep -- it is the fondest Fool -- Nay Cocky Cocky, nay dear Cocky,
don't cry, I was but in Jest, I was not ifeck.


Laet. Aside Oh then alls safe, I was terrible frighted -- My affliction is
always your Jest, barbarous Man! Oh that I should love to this degree! yet. --


Fond. Nay Cocky.


Laet. No no, you are weary of me, that is it -- That Is all, you would get
another Wife -- Another fond Fool, to break her Heart -- Well, be as cruel as
you can to me, I Will pray for you; and when I am dead with grief, may you have
one that will love you as well as I have done: I shall be contented to lie at
peace in my cold Grave -- Since it will please you. Sighs.


Fond. Good lack, good lack, she would melt a Heart of Oak -- I profess I can
hold no longer -- Nay dear Cocky -- Ifeck you will break my Heart -- Ifeck you
will -- See you have made me weep -- made poor Nykin weep -- Nay come Kiss,
buss poor Nykin -- And I wont leave thee -- I Will lose all first.


Laet. Aside How! Heaven forbid! that will be carrying the Jest too far indeed.


Fond. Wont you Kiss Nykin?


Laet. Go naughty Nykin, you don't love me.


Fond. Kiss kiss, ifeck I do.


Laet. No you don't. She Kisses him


Fond. What not love Cocky!


Laet. No -- h Sighs.


Fond. I profess I do love thee better, than 500 Pound -- And so thou shall
say, for I Will leave it to stay with thee.


Laet. No you shall not neglect your business for me -- No indeed you sane. Nykin
-- if you don't go, I Will think you been dealons of me still.


Fond. He, he, he, will thou poor Fool? Then I will go, I wont be dealous --
Poor Cocky, Kiss Nykin, Kiss Nykin, ee, ee, ee, -- Here will be the good Man
anon, to talk to Cocky and teach her how a Wife ought to behave her self.


Laet. Aside I hope to have one that will show me how a Husband ought to behave
himself -- I shall be glad to learn, to please my Jewel. Kiss.


Fond. That Is my good Dear -- Come Kiss Nykin once, more and then get you in --
So -- Get you in, get you in, By, by.


Laet. By Nykin.


Fond. By Cocky.


Laet. By Nykin. She goes in.


Fond. By Cocky, by, by. Exit.


Enter Vainlove, Sharper. Sharp. How! Araminta lost!


Vain. To confirm what I have said read this Gives a letter.


Sharp. Reads Hum hum -- And what then appeared a fault, upon restection, seems
only an effect of a too powerful passion. I Am afraid I give too grant a Proof
of my own at this time -- I am in disorder for what I have written. But
something, I know not what, forced me. I only beg a favorable Censure of this
and your, (Araminta.


Sharp. Lost! Pray Heaven thou have not lost thy Wits. Here, here, she is thy
own Man, signed and sealed too -- To her Man -- A delicious Mellon pure and
consenting ripe, and only waits thy Cutting up -- She has been breeding Love to
thee all this while, and just now she is delivered of it.


Vain. It Is an untimely Fruit, and she has miscarried of her Love.


Sharp. Never leave this damned illnatur'd whimsey Frank? Thou have a sickly
peevish Appetite; only chew Love and cannot digest it.


Vain. Yes, when I feed my self -- But I hate to be crammed -- By Heaven there is
not a Woman, will give a Man the pleasure of a chase: My sport is always balkt
or cut short -- I stumble ore the Game I would pursue. -- It Is dull and
unnatural to have a Hare run full in the Hounds Mouth; and would distaste the
keenest Hunter -- I would have overtaken, not have met my Game.


Sharp. However I hope you don't mean to forsake it, that will be but a kind of
a Mungril Curs trick. Well, are you for the Mall?


Vain. No, she will be there this evening -- Yes I will go too -- And she shall
see her error in --


Sharp. In her choice I gad -- But thou can not be so great a Brute as to
slight her.


Vain. I should disappoint her if I did not -- By her management I should think
she expects it.

All Naturally fly what does pursue:
It Is sit Men should be coy, when Women woo.
Exeunt.
SCENE changes to a Chamber in Fondle-wife' s House.
A Servant introducing Bellmour in Fanatic Habit, with a Patch upon one Eye,
and a Book in his Hand. Serve. Here Is a Chair, Sir if you please to repose your
self. I Will call my Mistress. Exit Servant.


Bell. Secure in my Disguise, I have out-fac'd Suspicion, and even dared
Discovery. -- This Cloak my Sanctity, and trusty Scarron's Novels my
PrayerBook. -- Methinks I am the very Picture of Montufar in the Hypocrites. --
Oh! she comes.


Enter Laetitia. So breaks Aurora through the Veil of Night;
Thus fly the Clouds, divided by her Light,
And every Eye receives a newborn Sight.
Throwing off his Cloak, Patch, etc. Laet. Thus strewn with Blushes, like --
Ah! Heaven defend me! Who Is this? Discovering him, starts.


Bell. Your Lover.


Laet. Vain-love's Friend! I know his Face, and he has betrayed me to him.
Aside.


Bell. You are surprised. Did you not expect a Lover, Madam? Those Eyes shone
kindly on my first Appearance, though now they are o'er-cast.


Laet. I may well be surpised at your Person and Impudence; they are both new
to me. -- You are not what your first Appearance promised: The Piety of your
Habit was welcome, but not the Hypocrisy.


Bell. Rather the Hypocrisy was welcome, but not the Hypocrite. Aside.


Laet. Who are you, Sir? You have mistaken the House sure.


Bell. I have Directions in my Pocket, which agree with every thing but your
Unkindness. Pulls out the Letter.


Laet. My Letter! Base Vain-love! Then it is too late to dissemble. Aside. It Is
plain then you have mistaken the Person. Going.


Bell. If we part so I Am mistaken. -- Hold, hold, Madam; -- I confess I have
run into an Error: -- I beg your Pardon a thousand times. -- What an eternal
Block-head am I! Can you forgive me the Disorder I have put you into; -- But it
is a Mistake which any Body might have made.


Laet. What can this mean! It Is impossible he should be mistaken after all
this. -- A handsome Fellow if he had not surpised me: Methinks, now I look on
him again, I would not have him mistaken. Aside. We are all liable to Mistakes,
Sir: If you own it to be so, there needs no farther Apology.


Bell. Nay, 'Faith, Madam, it is a pleasant one, and worth your hearing.
Expecting a Friend, last Night, at his Lodgings, till 'twas late; my Intimacy
with him gave me the Freedom of his Bed: He not coming home all Night, a Letter
was delivered to me by a Servant, in the Morning: Upon the Perusal I found the
Contents so charming, that you would think of nothing all Day but putting 'em in
practice. -- 'till just now, (the first time I ever looked upon the
Superscription,) I am the most surpised in the World to find it directed to
Mr. Vain-love. Gad, Madam, I ask you a Million of Pardons, and will make you
any Satisfaction.


Laet. I am discovered: -- And either Vain-love is not guilty, or he has
handsomely excused him. Aside.


Bell. You appear concerned, Madam.


Laet. I hope you are a Gentleman; -- and since you are privy to a weak Woman's
Failing, will not turn it to the prejudice of her Reputation. -- You look as if
you had more Honor. --


Bell. And more Love; or my Face is a False-Witness, and deserves to be
pillory'd. -- No, By Heaven, I swear --


Laet. Nay, don't swear if you would have me believe you; but promise. --


Bell. Well, I promise. -- A Promise is so cold: -- Give me leave to swear --
by those Eyes, those killing Eyes; by those healing Lips. -- Oh! press the soft
Charm close to mine, -- and seal 'em up for ever.


Laet. Upon that Condition. He kisses her.


Bell. Eternity was in that Moment. -- One more, upon any Condition.


Laet. Nay, now. -- I never saw any thing so agreeably Impudent. Aside. Will Not
you censure me for this, now; -- but it is to buy your Silence. Kiss. Oh, but
what am I doing!


Bell. Doing! No Tongue can express it, -- not thy own; nor any thing, but thy
Lips. I am faint with the Excess of Bliss: -- Oh, for Love-sake, lead me any
whither, where I may lie down; -- quickly, for I Am afraid I shall have a Fit.


Laet. Bless me! What Fit?


Bell. Oh, a Convulsion. -- I feel the Symptoms.


Laet. Does it hold you long? I Am afraid to carry you into my Chamber.


Bell. Oh, No: Let me lie down upon the Bed; -- the Fit will be soon over.
Exeunt.


SCENE changes to St. James's Park.
Araminta and Belinda meeting. Belin. Lard, my Dear! I am glad I have met you:
-- I have been at the Exchange since, and am so tired --


Aram. Why, What Is the matter?


Belin. Oh the most inhumane, barbarous Hackney-Coach! I am jolted to a Jelly.
-- Am I not horridly touz'd? Pulls out a Pocket-Glass.


Aram. Your Head's a little out of Order.


Belin. A little! O frightful! What a furious Fiz I have! O most rueful! Ha,
ha, ha: O Gad, I hope nobody will come this Way, till I put my self a little
in Repair. -- Ah! my Dear, -- I have seen such unknown Creatures since, -- Ha,
ha, ha, I cannot for my Soul help thinking that I look just like one of 'em: --
Good Dear, pin this, and I Will tell you. -- Very well. -- So, thank you my Dear.
-- But as I was telling you -- Pish, this is the untoward'st Lock -- So, as I
was telling you -- How do you like me now? Hideous, ha? Frightful still? Or how?


Aram. No, no; you're very well as can be.


Belin. And so -- But where did I leave off, my Dear? I was telling you --


Aram. You were about to tell me something, Child, -- but you left off before
you began.


Belin. Oh; a most Comical Sight: A Country-Squire, with the Equipage of a Wife
and two Daughters, came to Mrs. Snipwel's Shop while I was there. -- But, Oh
Gad! Two such unlick'd Cubs! --


Aram. I warrant, plump, Cherry-cheek'd Country-Girls.


Belin. Ay, O my Conscience; fat as Barn-door-Fowl: But so bedecked, you will not
have taken 'em for Friezland-Hens, with their Feathers growing the wrong way.
-- O such Outlandish Creatures! Such Tramontanae, and Foreigners to the
Fashion, or any thing in practice! I had not patience to behold. -- I undertook
the modelling of one of their Fronts, the more modern Structure. --


Aram. Bless me, Cousin! Why would you affront any body so? They might be
Gentlewomen of a very good Family. --


Belin. Of a very ancient one, I dare swear, by their Dress. -- Affront! Plhaw,
how you're mistaken! The poor Creature, I warrant, was as full of Courtesies,
as if I had been her Godmother: The Truth on it is, I did endeavor to make her
look like a Christian, -- and she was sensible of it; for she thanked me, and
gave me two Apples, piping hot, out of her UnderPetticoat-Pocket, -- Ha, ha,
ha: And the other did so stare and gape, -- I fansied her like the Front of her
Father's Hall; her Eyes were the two JutWindows, and her Mouth the great Door,
most hospitably kept open, for the Entertainment of traveling Flies.


Aram. So then; you have been diverted. What did they buy?


Belin. Why, the Father bought a Powder-Horn, and an Almanac, and a Comb-Case;
the Mother, a great Fruz-Towr, and a Fat-Amber-Necklace; the Daughters only
tore two Pair of Kid-Gloves, with trying 'em on. -- Oh Gad, here comes the Fool
that dined at my Lady Free-love's the other Day.


Enter Sir Joseph and Bluffe. Aram. May be he may not know us again.


Belin. We'll put on our Masks to secure his Ignorance. They put on their Masks.


Sir Ios. Nay, gad, I Will pick up; I Am resolved to make a Night on it. -- I Will go
to Alderman Fondle-wise by-and, by, and get 50 Pieces more from him.
Adslidikins, Bully, we'll wallow in Wine and Women. Why, this same Madera. Wine
has made me as light as a Grasshopper. -- Hist, hist, Bally, do thou see those
Tearers? Sings. Look you what here is, -- Look you what here is: -- Toll --
loll -- dera -- toll -- loll. -- A-Gad, the other Glass of Madera, and I durst
have attacked em in my own proper Person, without your help.


Bluffe. Come on then, Knight. -- But do you know what to say to 'em?


Sir Ios. Say: Pooh, Pox, I Have enough to say, -- never fear it; -- that is, if
I can but think on it: Truth is, I have but a treacherous Memory.


Belin. O frightful! Cousin, What shall we do? These things come toward us.


Aram. No matter, -- I see Vain-love coming this way, -- and, to confess my
Failing, I am willing to give him an Opportunity of making his Peace with me;
-- and to rid me of these Coxcombs, when I seem oppressed with 'em, will be a
fair one.


Bluffe. Ladies, by these Hilts you are well met.


Aram. We are afraid not.


Bluffe. What says my pretty little Knapsack-Carrier? To Belinda.


Belin. O monstrous filthy Fellow! Good slovenly Captain Huffe, Bluffe, (What Is
your hideous Name?) be gone: You stink of Brandy and Tobacco, most
Soldier-like. Foh. Spits.


Sir Ios. Now am I slap-dash down in the Mouth, and have not one Word to say.
Aside.


Aram. I hope my Fool has not Confidence enough to be troublesome. Aside.


Sir Ios. Hem! Pray Madam, Which Way's the Wind?


Aram. A pithy Question -- Have you sent your Wits for a Venture, Sir, that you
enquire?


Sir Ios. Nay, now I Am in -- I can prattle like a Magpye. Aside.


Enter Sharper and Vain-love, at a Distance. Belin. Dear Araminta, I Am tired.


Aram. It Is but pulling off our Masks, and obliging Vain-love to know us,
I Will be rid of my Fool by fair means -- Well, Sir Joseph, you shall see my
Face. -- But, be gone immediately. -- I see one that will be Jealous, to find
me in discourse with you. -- Be discreet. -- No reply; but away. Vnmasques.


Sir Ios. The great Fortune, that dined at my Lady Free-loves! Sir Joseph, thou
art a Madman. Agad, I Am in Love, up to the Ears. But I Will be discreet, and
hushed. Aside.


Bluffe. Nay, by the World, I Will see your face.


Belin. You shall. Vnmasques.


Sharp. Ladies, your humble Servant. -- We were afraid, you would not have
given us leave to know you.


Aram. We thought to have been private. -- But we find fools, have the same
advantage, over a Face in a Masque; that a Coward has, while the Sword is in
the Scabbard. -- So were forced to draw, in our own defense.


Bluffe. My Blood rises at that Fellow: I cannot stay where he is; and I must
not draw in the Park. To Sir Jos.


Sir Ios. I wish I durst stay to let her know my Lodging. --


Exeunt Sir Jos. and Bluffe. Sharp. There is in true Beauty, as in Courage,
somewhat, which narrow Souls cannot dare to admire. -- And see, the Owls are
sled, as at the break of Day.


Belin. Very courtly. -- I believe, Mr. Vain-love has not rubbed his Eyes,
since break of Day neither, he looks as if he durst not approach. -- Nay, come
Cousin, be friends with him. -- I swear, he looks so very simply, ha, ha, ha.
-- Well, a Lover in the state of separation from his Mistress, is like a Body
without a Soul. Mr. Vain-love, shall I be bound for your good Behavior for the
future?


Vain. Now must I pretend ignorance equal to hers, of what she knows as well as
I. Aside. Men are apt to offend ('it is true) where they find most Goodness to
forgive. -- But, Madam, I hope I shall prove of a Temper, not to abuse Mercy,
by committing new Offenses.


Aram. So cold! Aside.


Belin. I have broke the ice for you, Mr. Vain-love, and so I leave you. Come,
Mr. Sharper, you and I will take a turn, and laugh at the Vulgar. -- Both the
great Vulgar and the small. -- Oh Gad! I have a great Passion. for Cowley. --
Don't you admire him?


Sharp. Oh Madam! He was our English Horace.


Belin. Ah so fine! So extremely fine! So every thing in the World that I like.
-- Oh Lord, walk this way. -- I see a couple, I Will give you their History. Ex.
Bell. and Sharp.


Vain. I find, Madam, the Formality of the Law must be observed, though the
Penalty of it be dispensed with; and an Offender must Plead to his Arraignment,
though he have his Pardon in his pocket.


Aram. I Am amazed! This Insolence exceeds the the other; -- whoever has
encouraged you to this assurance -- presuming upon the easiness of my Temper,
has much deceived you, and so you shall find.


Vain. Hey day! Which way now? Here Is fine doubling. Aside.


Aram. Base Man! Was it not enough to affront me with your saucy Passion?


Vain. You have given that Passion a much kinder Epithet than Saucy, in another
place.


Aram. Another place! Some villainous Design to blast my Honor. -- But though
thou had all the Treachery and Malice of thy Sex, thou can not lay a
Blemish on my Fame. -- No, I have not erred in one favorable Thought of
Mankind. -- How time might have deceived me in you; I know not; my Opinion was
but young, and your early baseness has prevented its growing to a wrong Belief.
-- Unworthy, and ungrateful! Be gone, and never see me more.


Vain. Did I dream? Or do I dream? Shall I believe my Eyes, or Ears? The Vision
is here still. -- Your Passion, Madam, will admit of no farther reasoning. --
But here is a silent Witness of your acquaintance. --


Takes out the Letter, and offers it: She snatches it, and throws it away.
Aram. There Is poison in every thing you touch. -- Blisters will follow --


Vain. That Tongue, which denies what the Hands have done.


Aram. Still mystically, senceless and impudent. -- I find I must leave the
place.


Vain. No, Madam, I Am gone. -- She knows her Name's to it, which she will be
unwilling to expose to the Censure of the first finder. Exit.


Aram. Woman's Obstinacy made me blind to what Woman's Curiosity now tempts me
to see. Takes up the Letter, and Exit.


Enter Belinda, Sharper. Belin. Nay, we have spared Nobody, I swear Mr. (...)
pure Man; Where did you get this excellent Talent of Railing*


Sharp. Faith, Madam, the Talent was born with me: -- I confess, (...) taken
care to improve it; to qualify me for the society of Ladies.


Belin. Nay, sure Railing is the best qualification in a Woman's Mat^^


Sharp. The second-best; -- indeed I think. Enter Footman


Belin. How now, Pace? Where Is my Cousin?


Foot. She Is not very well, Madam, and has sent to know, if your Ladyship would
have the Coach come again for you?


Belin. O Lord, No, I Will go along with her. Come, Mr. Sharper.


Exeunt. SCENE changes to a Chamber in Fondle-wife's House.
Enter Laetitia and Bellmour, his Cloak, Hat, etc. lying loose about the
Chamber. Bell. Here Is no body, nor no noise; -- 'twas nothing but your fears.


Laet. I durst have sworn, I had heard my Monster's Voice. -- I swear, I was
heartily frightened. -- Feel how my heart beats.


Bell. It Is an alarm to Love. -- Come in again, and let us --


Fondl. without. Cocky, Cocky, Where are you, Cocky? I Am come home.

Laet. Ah! There he is. Make haste, gather up your things.


Fondl. Cocky, Cocky, open the door.


Bell. Fox choke him, would his Horns were in his Throat. My Patch, my Patch.
Looking about, and gathering up his things.


Laet. My Jewel, Art thou there? No matter for your Patch. -- You s'an't tum
in, Nykin. -- Run into my Chamber, quickly, quickly. You s'an't tum in. Bell.
goes in.


Fondl. Nay, prithee, Dear, Iseck I Am in haste.


Laet. Then, I Will let you in. Opens the Door.


Enter Fondle-wife, and Sir Joseph. Fond. Kiss, Dear, -- I met the Master of
the Ship by the way, -- and I must have my Papers of Accounts out of your
Cabinet.


Laet. Oh, I Am undone! Aside.


Sir Ios. Pray, first let me have 50 Pounds, good Alderman, for I Am in huste.


Fond. A Hundred has already been paid, by your Order. Fifty? I have the Sum
ready in Gold, in my Closet. Goes into his Close.


Sir Ios. Agad, it is a curious, fine, pretty Rogue; I Will speak to her, -- Pray,
Madam, what News do you hear?


Laet. Sir, I seldom stir abroad. Walks about in disorder.


Sir Ios. I wonder at that, Madam, for it is most curious fine Weather.


Laet. Methinks, 't has been very ill Weather.


Sir Ios. As you say, Madam, it is pretty bad Weather, and has been so a great
while.


Enter Fondle-wife. Fond. Here are fifty Pieces in this Purse, Sir Joseph -- If
you will tarry a Moment, till I fetch my Papers, I Will wait upon you down stairs.


Laet. Ruined, past redemption! What shall I do? -- Ha! This fool may be of
use. Aside. Stand off, rude Russian. Help me, my Dear, -- O bless me! Why will
you leave me alone with such a Satyr? As Fondl. is going into the Chamber, she
runs to Sir Jos. almost pushes him down, and Cries out.


Fond. Bless us! What Is the matter? What Is the matter?


Laet. Your back was no sooner turned, but like a Lion, he came open mouthed
upon me, and would have ravished a kiss from me by main force.


Sir Ios. O Lord! Oh terrible! Ha, ha, ha, Is your Wife mad, Alderman?


Laet. Oh! I am sick with the fright; will not you take him out of my sight?


Fond. Oh Traitor! I Am astonished. Oh bloody-minded Traitor!


Sir Ios. Hey-day! Traitor your self. -- By the Lord- Harry, I was in most
danger of being ravished, if you go to that.


Fond. Oh, how the blasphemous Wretch swears! Out of my house, thou Son of the
Whore of Babylon; Offspring of Bell and the Dragon. -- Bless us! Ravish my
Wife! My Dinah! Oh Schechemite! Begone, I say.


Sir Ios. Why, the Devil's in the People, I think. Exit.


Laet. Oh! Will Not you follow, and see him out of Doors, my Dear?


Fond. I Will shut this door, to secure him from coming back. -- Give me the Key
of your Cabinet, Cocky. -- Ravish my Wife before my face! I warrant he is a
Papist in his heart, at least, if not a Frenchman.


Laet. What can I do now! Aside. Oh! my Dear, I have been in such a fright,
that I forgot to tell you, poor Mr. Spin-text, has asad Fit of the Cholick, and
is forced to lie down upon our bed. -- You Will disturb him; I can tread softlier.


Fond. Alack poor Man. -- No, no, -- you don't know the Papers. -- I will not
disturb him; Give me the Key.


She gives him the Key, goes to the Chamber Door, and speaks aloud. Laet. It Is
no body but Mr. Fondlewife, Mr. Spin-text, lie still on your Stomach; lying on
your Stomach, will ease you of the Cholick.


Fond. Ay, ay, lie still, lie still; don't let me disturb you. Goes in.


Laet. Sure, when he does not see his face, he will not discover him. Dear
Fortune, help me but this once, and I Will never run in thy debt again. -- But
this Opportunity is the Devil.


Fondle-wife returns with Papers. Fond. Good lack! Good lack! -- I profess, the
poor Man is in great torment, he lies as flat -- Dear, you should heat a
Trencher, or a Napkin. -- Where Is Deborah? Let her clap a warm thing to his
Stomach, or chafe it with a warm-hand, rather than fail. What Book's this?


Sees the Book that Bellmour forgot. Laet. Mr. Spintext's Prayer Book, Dear. --
Pray Heaven it be a Prayer Book. Aside.


Fond. Good Man! I warrant he dropped it on purpose, that you might take it up,
and read some of the pious Ejaculations. Taking up the Book. O bless me! O
monstrous! A Prayer Book? Ay, this is the Devil's Paternoster. Hold, letme
see; The Innocent Adultery.


Laet. Misfortune! Now all is ruined again. Aside.


Bell. Peeping. Damned Chance! If I had gone a-Whoring with the Practice of
Piety in my Pocket, I had never been discovered.


Fond. Adultery, and innocent! O Lord! Here Is Doctrine! Ay, here is Discipline!


Laet. Dear Husband, I Am amazed: -- Sure it is a good Book, and only tends to
the Speculation of Sin.


Fond. Speculation! No, no; something went farther than Speculation when I was
not to be let in. -- Where is this Apocryphal Elder? I Will ferret him.


Laet. I Am so distracted, I cannot think of a Lie. Aside


Fondle-wife halling out Bellmour. Fond. Come out here, thou Ananias incarnate.
-- Who, how now! Who have we here?


Laet. Ha! Shrieks, as surpised.


Fond. Oh, thou salacious Woman! Am I then brutified? Ay, I feel it here; I
sprout, I bud, I blossom, I am ripe-horn-mad. But who, in the Devil's name, are
you? Mercy on me for swearing. But --


Laet. Oh, Goodness keep us! Who Is this? Who are you? What are you?


Bell. Soh.


Laet. In the Name of the -- Oh! Good, my Dear, don't come near it I Am afraid
it is the Devil; indeed it has hoofs, Dear.


Fond. Indeed, and I have Horns, Dear. The Devil, no, I Am afraid, it is the
Flesh, thou Harlot. Dear, with the Pox. Come Siren, speak, confess, who is
this reverend, brawny Pastor?


Laet. Indeed, and indeed, now my dear Nyken -- I never saw this wicked Man
before.


Fondl. Oh, it is a Man then, it seems.


Laet. Rather, sure it is a Wolf in the clothing of a Sheep.


Fondl. Thou art a Devil in his proper Clothing, Womans-flesh. What, you know
nothing of him, but his Fleece here! -- You don't love Mutton? -- you Magdalen
unconverted.


Bell. Well, now I know my Cue. -- That is very honorably, to excuse her, and
very impudently accuse my self. Aside.


Laet. Why then, I wish I may never enter into the Heaven of your Embraces
again, my Dear, if ever I saw his face before.


Fond. O Lord! O strange! I am in admiration of your impudence. Look at him a
little better; he is more modest, I warrant you, than to deny it. Come, Were
you two never face to face before? Speak.


Bell. Since all Artisice is vain -- and I think my self obliged to speak the
truth in justice to your Wife. -- No.


Fond. Humph.


Laet. No, indeed Dear.


Fond. Nay, I find you are both in a Story; that, I must confess. But, what --
not to be cured of the Cholick? Don't you know your Patient, Mrs. Quack? Oh,
lie upon your Stomach; lying upon your Stomach will cure you of the Cholick.
Ah! I wish he has lain upon no-bodies stomach but his own. Answer me that,
Jezabel?


Laet. Let the wicked Man answer for himself; does he think that I have nothing
to do but excuse him; it is enough, if I can clear my own innocence to my own
Dear.


Bell. By my troth, and so it is. -- I have been a little too backward, that is
the truth on it. Aside.


Fond. Come, Sir, Who are you, in the first place? And what are you?


Bell. A Whore-master.


Fond. Very Concise.


Laet. O beastly, impudent Creature.


Fondl. Well Sir, And what came you hither for?


Bell. To lie with your Wife.


Fondl. Good again -- A very civil Person this, and, I believe speaks truth.


Laet. Oh, insupportable Impudence!


Fondl. Well, Sir, -- Pray be covered -- and you have -- Heh! You have finished
the matter, Heh? And I am, as I should be, a sort of a civil Perquisite to a
Whore-master, called a Cuckold, Heh. Is it not so? Come, I Am inclining to
believe every word you say.


Bell. Why, Faith I must confess, so I designed you. -- But, you were a little
unlucky in coming so soon, and hindered the making of your own Fortune.


Fond. Humph. Nay, if you mince the matter once, and go back of your word; you
are not the Person I took you for. Come, come, go on boldly -- What, don't be
ashamed of your Profession. -- Confess, confess, I shall love thee the better
for it. -- I shall, Ifeck -- What, do think I don't know how to behave my self
in the Employment of a Cuckold, and have been 3 Years Apprentice to Matrimony?
Come, come, plain-dealing is a Jewel.


Bell. Well, since I see thou art a good honest Fellow, I Will confess the whole
matter to thee.


Fond. Oh, I am a very honest Fellow -- You never lay with an honester Man's
Wise in your life.


Laet. How my heart aches! All my comfort lies in his impudence, and Heaven be
praised, he has a considerable Portion. Aside.


Bell. In short then, I was informed of the opportunity of your absence, by my
Spy, (for Faith, honest Isaac, I have a long time designed thee this favor) I
knew Spin-text was to come by your direction -- But I laid a trap for him, and
procured his Habit; in which, I pais'd upon your Servants, and was conducted
hither. I pretended a Fit of the Cholick, to excuse my lying down upon your
Bed, hoping that when she heard of it, her good Nature would bring her to
administer Remedies for my Distemper. -- You know what might have followed. --
But like an uncivil Person, you knocked at the Door, before your Wife was come
to me.


Fond. Ha! This is Apocryphal; I may choose whether I will believe it or no.


Bell. That you may, Faith, and I hope you would believe a word on it. -- But I
cannot help telling the truth, for my life.


Fond. How! Would not you have me believe you, say you?


Bell. No, for then you must of consequence part with your Wife, and there will
be some hopes of having her upon the Public; then the encouragement of a
separate maintenance. --


Fond. No, no, for that matter -- when she and I part, she will carry her
separate-maintenance about her.


Laet. Ah cruel Dear, how can you be so barbarous? You Will break my heart, if
you talk of parting. Cries.


Fond. Ah, dissembling Vermin!


Bell. How can thou be so cruel, Isaac? Thou have the Heart of a
Mountain-Tyger. By the faith of a sincere Sinner, she is innocent, for me. Go to
him, Madam, fling your snowy Arms about his stubborn Neck; bathe his relentless
face in your salt trickling Tears. -- So, a few soft Words, and a Kiss; and the
good Man melts. See, how kind Nature works, and boils over in him. She goes and
hangs upon his neck, and kisses him. Bell, kisses her hand, behind Fondle-wife'
s back.


Laet. Indeed, my Dear, I was but just coming down stair, when you knocked at
the door; and the Maid told me, Mr. Spin-text was ill of the Cholick, upon our
bed. And will not you speak to me, cruel Nykin? Indeed, I Will die, if you don't.


Fond. Ah! No, no, I cannot speak; my heart's so full -- I have been a tender
Husband, a tender Yoke Fellow; you know I have -- But thou have been a
faithless Dallilah, and the Philistines have been upon thee. Heh! Art thou not
vile and unclean, Heh? Speak. Weeping.


Laet. No-h. Sighing.


Fond. Oh, that I could believe thee!


Laet. Oh, my heart will break! Seeming to faint.


Fond. Heh, How? No, stay, stay, I will believe thee, I will. -- Pray, bend her
forward, Sir.


Laet. Oh! Oh! Where is my ^^ar.


Fond. Here, here, I do believe thee. -- I will not believe my own Eyes.


Bell. For my part, I am so charmed with the Love of your Turtle to you, that
I Will go and solicit Matrimony with all my might and main.


Fond. Well, well, Sir, as long as I believe'st, it is well enough. No thanks to
you Sir, for her Virtue. -- But, I Will show you the way out of my house, if you
please. Come, my Dear. Nay, I will believe thee, I do, Ifeck.


Bell. See the great Blessing of an easy Faith; Opinion cannot err.

No Husband, by his Wife, can be deceived:
See still is Virtuous, if she is so believed.
Exeunt.
ACT V.
SCENE I. The Street.
Enter Bellmour in Fanatic Habit, and Setter. Bell. SEtter! Well encountered.


Setter. Joy of your Return, Sir. Have you made a good Voyage? Or have you
brought your own Lading back?


Bell. No, I have brought nothing but Ballast back, -- made a delicious Voyage,
Setter; and might have rode at Anchor in the Port till this time, but the Enemy
surpised us. -- I would unrig.


Setter. I attend you, Sir.


Heart-well and Lucy appear at Sylvia 's Door. Bell. Ha! Is not that Heartwell
at Sylvia's Door; be gone quickly, I Will follow you: -- I would not be known.
Exit Setter. Pox take 'em, they stand just in my Way.


Heart. I Am impatient till it be done.


Lucy. That may be, without troubling your self to go again for your Brother's
Chaplain. Don't you see that stalking Form of Godliness?


Heart. O Pox; He Is a Fanatic.


Lucy. An Executioner qualified to do your Business. He has been lawfully
ordained.


Heart. I Will pay him well, if you will break the Matter to him.


Lucy. I warrant you. -- Do you go and prepare your Bride. Ex. Heartw.


Bell. Humph, Sits the Wind there? -- What a lucky Rogue am I! Oh, what Sport
will be here, if I can persuade this Wench to Secrecy!


Lucy. Sir: Reverend Sir.


Bell. Madam.


Discovers himself. Lucy. Now, Goodness have Mercy upon me! Mr. Bellmour! Is it
you?


Bell. Even -- What do think?


Lucy. Think: That I should not believe my Eyes, and that you are not what you
seem to be.


Bell. True. But to convince thee who I am, thou know my old Token. Kisses
her.


Lucy. Nay, Mr. Bellmour: O Lard! I believe you are a Parson in good earnest,
you kiss so devoutly.


Bell. Well, Your Business with me, Lucy?


Lucy. I had none, but through Mistake.


Bell. Which Mistake you must go thorough with, Lucy. -- Come, I know the
Intrigue between Heartwell and your Mistress; and you mistook me for
Tribulation- Spin-text, to marry 'em. -- Ha? Are not Matters in this posture?
-- Confess. -- Come, I Will be faithful: I will I-faith. -- What Diffide in me,
Lucy?


Lucy. Alas-a-day! You and Mr. Vain-love, between you, have ruined my poor
Mistress: You have made a Gap in her Reputation; And can you blame her if she
stop it up with a Husband?


Bell. Well, It is as I say?


Lucy. Well, It is then: But you will be secret?


Bell. Phuh, Secret, ay. -- And to be out of thy Debt, I Will trust thee with
another Secret. Your Mistress must not marry Heartwell, Lucy.


Lucy. How! O Lord! --


Bell. Nay, don't be in Passion, Lucy: -- I Will provide a fitter Husband for
her. -- Come, Here Is Earnest of my good Intentions for thee too: Let this
mollisie. -- Gives her Money. Look you, Heartwell is my Friend; and though he be
blind, I must not see him fall into the Snare, and unwittingly marry a Whore.


Lucy. Whore! I Would have you know, my Mistress scorns --


Bell. Nay, nay: Look you, Lucy; there are Whores of as good Quality. -- But to
the purpose, if you will give me Leave to acquaint you with it. -- Do you carry
on the Mistake of me: I Will marry 'em. -- Nay, don't pause: -- If you do, I Will
spoil all. -- I have some private Reasons for what I do, which I Will tell you
within. -- In the mean time, I promise, -- and rely upon me, -- to help your
Mistress to a Husband: -- Nay, and thee too, Lucy, -- Here Is my Hand, I will;
with a fresh Assurance. Gives her more Money.


Lucy. Ah, the Devil is not so cunning. -- You know my easy Nature. -- Well,
For once I Will venture to serve you; but if you do deceive me, the Curse of all
kind, tenderhearted Women light upon you.


Bell. That Is as much as to say, The Pox take me. -- Well lead on. Exeunt.


Enter Vain-love, Sharper and Setter. Sharp. Just now, say you, gone in with
Lucy?


Setter. I saw him, Sir; and stood at the Corner where you found me, and
overheard all they said. Mr. Bellmour is to marry 'em.


Sharp. Ha, ha; 'Twill be a pleasant Cheat. -- I Will plague Heart-well when I
see him. Prithee, Frank, let us teaze him; make him fret till he foam at the
Mouth, and disgorge his Matrimonial Oath with Interest. -- Come, you are so
musty. --


Setter. To Sharper. Sir, A Word with you. Whispers him.


Vain. Sharper swears, she has forsworn the Letter. -- I Am sure he tells me
Truth; -- but I am not sure she told him Truth: -- Yet she was unaffectedly
concerned, he says; and often blushed with Anger and Surprise: -- And so I
remember in the Park. -- She had reason, if I wrong her. -- I begin to doubt.


Sharp. Say thou so!


Setter. This Afternoon, Sir, about an Hour before my Master received the
Letter.


Sharp. In my Conscience, like enough.


Setter. Ay, I know her, Sir: At least, I Am sure I can fish it out of her.
She Is the very Sluice to her Lady's Secrets: -- It Is but setting her Mill
agoing, and I can drein, her of 'em all.


Sharp. Here, Frank; your Blood-Hound has made out the Fault: This Letter, that
so sticks in thy Maw, is Counterfeit; only a Trick of Sylvia in Revenge;
contrived by Lucy.


Vain. Ha! It has a Color. -- But how do you know it, Sirrah?


Setter. I do suspect as much; -- because why, Sir: -- She was pumping me about
how your Worship's Affairs stood toward Madam Araminta. As, When you had seen
her last; When you were to see her next; And, Where you were to he found at
that time: And such like.


Vain. And where did you tell her?


Setter. In the Piazza.


Vain. There I received the Letter. -- It must be so. -- And why did you not
find me out, to tell me this before, Sot?


Setter. Sir, I was Pimping for Mr. Bellmour.


Sharp. You were well employed. -- I think there is no Objection to the Excuse.


Vain. Pox of my saucy Credulity. -- If I have lost her, I deserve it. But if
Confession and Repentance be of force, I Will win her, or weary her into a
Forgiveness. Exit.


Sharp. Methinks I long to see Bellmour come forth.


Enter Bellmour. Setter. Talk of the Devil -- See where he comes.


Sharp. Hugging himself in his prosperous Mischief. -- No real Fanatic can
look better pleased after a successful Sermon of Sedition.


Bell. Sharper! Fortify thy Spleen: Such a Jest! Speak when thou art ready.


Sharp. Now, were I ill-natured, would I utterly disappoint thy Mirth: Hear
thee tell thy mighty Jest, with as much Gravity as a Bishop hears Venereal
Causes in the Spiritual Court: Not so much as wrinkle my Face with one Smile;
but let thee look simply, and laugh by thy self.


Bell. Pshaw, No: I have a better Opinion of thy Wit. -- Gad, I desie thee. --


Sharp. Were it not Loss of Time, you should make the Experiment. But honest
Setter, here, overheard you with Lucy, and has told me all.


Bell. Nay, then I thank thee for not putting me out of Countenance. But, to
tell you something you don't know. -- I got an Opportunity (after I had married
'em) of discovering the Cheat to Sylvia. She took it at first, as another Woman
would the like Disappointment; but my Promise to make her Amends quickly with
another Husband, somewhat pacified her.


Sharp. But how the Devil do you think to acquit your self of your Promise?
Will you marry her your self?


Bell. I have no such Intentions at present. -- Prithee, will thou think a
little for me? I am sure the ingenious Mr. Setter will assist --


Setter. O Lord, Sir!


Bell. I Will leave him with you, and go shift my Habit. Exit.


Enter Sir Joseph and Bluffe. Sharp. Heh! Sure, Fortune has sent this Fool
hither on purpose. Setter, stand close; seem not to observe 'em; and, Hark-ye.
Whispers.


Bluffe. Fear him not, -- I am prepared for him now; and he shall find he might
have safer roused a sleeping Lion.


Sir Ios. Hush, hush: Don't you see him?


Bluffe. Show him to me. Where is he?


Sir Ios. Nay, Don't speak so loud. -- I don't jest, as I did a little while
ago. -- Look yonder. -- A-gad, if he should hear the Lion roar, he would cudgel him
into an Asa, and his primitive Braying. Don't you remember the Story' in
AEsop's Fables, Bully? A-Gad there are good Morals to be picked out of AEsop's
Fables, let me tell you that; and Reynard the Fox too.


Bluffe. Damn your Morals.


Sir Ios. Prithee, don't speak so loud.


Bluffe. Damn your Morals: I must revenge the Affront done to my Honor. In a
low Voice.


Sir Ios. Ay; Do, do, Captain, if you think fit. -- You may dispose of your own
Flesh as you think sitting, do you see: -- But, by the Lord Harry, I Will leave
you. Stealing away upon his Tip-toes.


Bluffe. Prodigious! What, will you forsake your Friend in his extremity! You
cannot, in honor, refuse to carry him a Challenge.


Almost whispering, and treading softly after him. Sir Ios. Prithee, What do
you see in my face, that looks as if I would carry a Challenge? Honor, is your
Province Captain: Take it -- All the World know me to be a Knight, and a Man of
Worship.


Setter. I warrant you, Sir, I Am instructed.


Sharp. Impossible! Araminta take a liking to a Fool! Aloud.


Setter. Her head runs on nothing else, nor she can talk of nothing else.


Sharp. I know, she commended him all the while we were in the Park; but I
thought it had been only to make Vain-love jealous. --


Sir Ios. How Is this! Good Bully, hold your breath, and let us hearken. A-gad,
this must be I --


Sharp. Death, it cannot be -- An Oaf, an Idiot, a Wittal.


Sir Ios. Ay, now it is out; it is I, my own individual Person.


Sharp. A Wretch, that has flown for shelter to the lowest shrub of Mankind,
and seeks Protection from a blasted Coward.


Sir Ios. That Is you, Bully. Back. Bluffe frowns upon Sir Ios!


Sharp. She has given Vain-love her Promise, to marry him before to Morrow
Morning. -- Has she not?


To Setter Setter. She has, Sir; -- And I have it in Charge to attend her all
this Evening, in order to conduct her to the Place appointed.


Sharp. Well, I Will go and inform your Master; and do you press her to make all
the haste imaginable. Exit.


Setter. Were I a Rogue now, what a noble Prize could I dispose of! A goodly
Pinnace, richly laden, and to launch forth under my Auspicious Convoy. Twelve
Tousand Pounds, and all her Rigging; besides what lies concealed under Hatches.
-- Ha! All this committed to my Care! -- Avaunt Temptation. -- Setter, show thy
self a Person of Worth; be true to thy Trust, and be reputed honest. Reputed
honest! Hum: Is that all? Ay: For, to be honest is nothing; the Reputation of
it is all. Reputation! What have such poor Rogues as I to do with Reputation?
-- It Is above us: -- And, for Men of Quality, they are above it. So that
Reputation is even as foolish as Honesty. -- And, for my part, if I meet Sir
Joseph with a Purse of Gold in his Hand, I Will dispose of mine to the best
Advantage.


Sir Ios. Heh, heh, heh: Here it is for you, In Faith, Mr. Setter. Nay, I Will take
you at your Word. Chinking a Purse.


Setter. Sir Joseph and the Captain too! undone, undone! I Am undone, my
Master's undone, my Lady's undone, and all the Business is undone.


Sir Ios. No, no, Never fear, Man, the Lady's business shall be done. What --
Come, Mr. Setter, I have overheard all, and to speak, is but loss of time; but
if there be occasion, let these worthy Gentlemen intercede for me. Gives him
Gold.


Setter. O Lord, Sir, What do you mean? Corrupt my honesty. -- They have indeed,
very persuading faces. But --


Sir Ios. It Is too little, there is more, Man. There, take all -- Now --


Setter. Well, Sir Joseph, you have such a winning way with you. --


Sir Ios. And how, and how, good Setter, did the little Rogue look, when she
talked of Sir Joseph? Did not her Eyes twinkle, and her Mouth water? Did not
she pull up her little Bubbies? And -- A-gad, I Am so overjoyed -- And stroke
down her Belly; and then step aside to tie her Garter, when she was thinking of
her Love. Heh, Setter.


Setter. Oh, Yes, Sir.


Sir Ios. How now, Bully? What, melancholy because I Am in the Ladies favors?
-- No matter, I Will make your peace. -- I know, they were a little smart upon
you -- But, I warrant, I Will bring you into the Ladies good Graces.


Bluffe. Pshaw, I have Petitions to show, from other-guess-toys than she. Look
here: These were sent me this Morning -- There, read. Shows Letters. That --
That Is a Scrawl of Quality. Here, here is from a Countess too. Hum -- No hold --
That Is from a Knight's Wife, she sent it me by her Husband -- But here, both
these are from Persons of great Quality.


Sir Ios. They are either from Persons of great Quality, or no Quality at all,
it is such a Damned ugly Hand. While Sir Joseph reads, Bluffe whispers Setter.


Setter. Captain, I would do any thing to serve you; but this is so difficult.
--


Bluffe. Not at all. Don't I know him?


Setter. You Will remember the Conditions? --


Bluffe. I Will give't you under my Hand. -- In the mean time, here is Earnest.
Gives him Money. Come, Knight; -- I Am capitulating with Mr. Setter for you.


Sir Ios. Ah, honest Setter. -- Sirrah, I Will give thee any thing but a Night's
Lodging. Exeunt.


Enter Sharper, tugging in Heartwell. Sharp. Nay, Prithee, leave Railing, and
come along with me: May be she may not be within. It Is but to yond' Corner-house.


Heart. Whither? Whither? Which Corner-House?


Sharp. Why, there: The Two white Posts.


Heart. And who would you visit there, say you? (O'ons, How my Heart aches.)


Sharp. Pshaw; You Are so troublesome and inquisitive. -- Why, I Will tell you:
It Is a young Creature that Vain-love debauched, and has forsaken. Did you never
hear Bellmour chide him about Sylvia.


Heart. Death, and Hell, and Marriage! My Wife! Aside.


Sharp. Why, thou art as musty as a New-married Man, that had found his Wife
Knowing the first Night.


Heart. Hell, and the Devil! Does he know it? But, hold: -- If he should not, I
were a Fool to discover it. -- I Will dissemble, and try him. Aside. -- Ha, ha,
ha. Why, Tom; Is that such an Occasion of Melancholy? Is it such an uncommon
Mischief?


Sharp. No, Faith; I believe not. -- Few Women, but have their Year of
Probation, before they are cloistered in the narrow Joys of Wedlock. But
prithee come along with me, or I Will go and have the Lady to my self. B'w'y'
George. Going.


Heart. O Torture! How he racks and tears me! -- Death! Shall I own my Shame,
or wittingly let him go and whore my Wife? No, That Is insupportable. -- Oh,
Sharper.


Sharp. How now?


Heart. Oh, I am-married.


Sharp. (Now hold Spleen.) Married!


Heart. Certainly, irrecoverably married.


Sharp. Heaven forbid, Man. How long?


Heart. Oh, an Age, an Age: I have been married these two Hours.


Sharp. My old Bachelor married! That were a Jest. Ha, ha, ha.


Heart. Death: Do You mock me? Heark-ye: If either you esteem my Friendship, or
your own Safety, -- come not near that House, -- that Corner-house, -- that hot
Brothel. Ask no Questions. Exit.


Sharp. Mad, by this Light.

Thus Grief still treads upon the Heels of Pleasure:
Married in haste, we may repent at leisure.
Setter Entering.
Setter. Some by Exprience find those Words misplaced: At leisure married, they
repent in haste. As I suppose my Master Heartwell.


Sharp. Here again, my Mercury!


Setter. Sublimate, if you please, Sir! I think my Atchievments do deserve the
Epithet. -- Mercury was a Pimp too; but, though I blush to own it at this time, I
must confess I am somewhat fallen from the Dignity of my Function; and do
condescend to be scandalously employed in the Promotion of Vulgar Matrimony.


Sharp. As how, dear dexterous Pimp?


Setter. Why, to be brief, for I have weighty Affairs depending: -- Our
Stratagem succeeding as you intended, -- Bluffe turns errand Traitor; bribes me
to make a private Conveyance of the Lady to him, and put a Shain-Settlement
upon Sir Joseph.


Sharp. O Rogue! Well, but I hope --


Setter. No, no; never fear me, Sir. -- I privately informed the Knight of the
Treachery; who has agreed, seemingly to be cheated, that the Captain may be so
in reality.


Sharp. Where Is the Bride?


Setter. Shifting Clothes for the purpose at a Friend's House of mine. Here Is
Company coming, if you will walk this way, Sir, I Will tell you. Exeunt.


Enter Bellmour, Belinda, Araminta and Vain-love. Vain. Oh, 'twas Frenzy all:
Cannot you forgive it? -- Men in Madness have a Title to your Pity. To Araminta.


Aram. -- Which they forfeit when they are restored to their Senses.


Vain. I am not presuming beyond a Pardon.


Aram. You who could reproach me with one Counterfeit, how insolent would a
real Pardon make you? But there is no need to forgive what is not worth my Anger.


Belin. O my Conscience, I could find in my Heart to marry thee, purely to be
rid of thee. -- At least, Thou art so troublesome a Lover, there is Hopes
thou wilt make a more than ordinary quiet Husband. To Bellmour.


Bell. Say you so? -- Is that a Maxim among ye?


Belin. Yes: You flattering Men of the Mode have made Marriage a mere French
Dish.


Bell. I hope there is no French Sauce. Aside.


Belin. You are so curious in the Preparation, that is, your Courtship, one
would think you meant a noble Entertainment: -- But when we come to feed, it is
all Froth, and poor, but in show. Nay, often, only Remains, which have been I
know not how many times warmed for other Company, and at last served up cold to
the Wife.


Bell. That were a miserable Wretch indeed, who could not afford one warm Dish
for the Wife of his Bosom. -- But you timorous Virgins, form a dreadful
Chimaera of a Husband, as of a Creature contrary to that soft, humble, pliant,
easy thing, a Lover, so guess at Plagues in Matrimony, in Opposition to the
Pleasures of Courtship. Alas! Courtship to Marriage, is but as the Music in
the Playhouse, till the Curtain's drawn; but that once up, then opens the
Scene of Pleasure.


Belin. Oh, foh, -- no: Rather, Courtship to Marriage, as a very witty Prologue
to a very dull Play.


Enter Sharper. Sharp. Hist, -- Bellmour: If you will bring the Ladies, make
haste to Silvia's Lodgings, before Heartwell has fretted himself out of breath.
-- I Am in haste now, but I Will come in at the Catastrophe. Exit.


Bell. You have an Opportunity now, Madam, to revenge your self upon Heartwell,
for affronting your Squirrel. To Belinda.


Belin. O the filthy rude Beast!


Aram. It Is a lasting Quarrel: I think he has never been at our House since.


Bell. But give your selves the trouble to walk to that CornerHouse, and I Will
tell you by the way what may divert and surprise you. Exeunt.


SCENE changes to Silvia' s Lodgings.
Enter Heartwell and Boy. Heart. Gone forth, say you, with her Maid!


Boy. There was a Man too that fetched 'em out: -- Setter, I think they called
him.


Heart. So-h, -- That precious Pimp too -- Damned, damned Strumpet! Could she
not contain her self on her Wedding Day! Not hold out till Night! Leave me.
Exit Boy. O cursed State! How wide we err, when apprehensive of the Load of
Life!

-- We hope to find
That Help which Nature meant in Womankind,
To Man that Supplemental-Self designed;
But proves a burning Caustic when applied.
And Adam, sure, could with more Ease abide
The Bone when broken, than when made a Bride.

Enter Bellmour, Belinda, Vain-love, Araminta. Bell. Now George, What Rhyming!
I thought the Chimes of Verse were past, when once the doleful Marriage-knell
was rung.


Heart. Shame and Confusion. I am exposed.


Vain-love and Araminta talk apart. Belin. Joy, Joy Mr. Bridegroom; I give
you Joy, Sir.


Heart. It Is not in thy Nature to give me Joy. -- A Woman can as soon give
Immortality.


Belin. Ha, ha, ha, O Gad, Men grow such Clowns when they are married.


Bell. That they are fit for no Company but their Wives.


Belin. Nor for them neither, in a little time --. I swear, at the Month's End,
you shall hardly find a Married-man, that will do a civil thing to his Wife, or
say a civil thing to any body else. Jesus! how he looks already. Ha, ha, ha.


Bell. Ha, ha, ha.


Heart. Death, Am I made your Laughing Stock? For you, Sir, I shall find a
time, but take off your Wasp here, or the Clown may grow boistrous, I have a
Fly-flap.


Belin. You have occasion for it, your Wife has been blown upon.


Bell. That Is home.


Heart. Not Fiends or Furies could have added to my vexation, or any thing, but
another Woman. -- You Have wracked my patience; begone, or By --


Bell. Hold, hold. What the Devil, thou will not draw upon a Woman?


Vain. What Is the matter?


Aram. Bless me! What have you done to him?


Belin. Only touched a gall'd-beast till he winch'd.


Vain. Bellmour, Give it over; you vex him too much; it is all serious to him.


Belin. Nay, I swear, I begin to pity him, my self.


Heart. Damn your pity. -- But let me be calm a little. -- How have I deserved
this of you? Any of ye? Sir, have I impaired the Honor of your House, promised
your Sister Marriage, and whor'd her? Wherein have I injured you? Did I bring a
Physician to your Father when he lay expiring, and endeavor to prolong his
life, and you One-and-twenty? Madam, have I had an Opportunity with you and
bauk'd it? Did you ever offer me the Favor that I refused it? Or --


Belin. Oh foh! What does the filthy-fellow mean? Lard, let me begone.


Aram. Hang me, if I pity you; you are right enough served.


Bell. This is a little scurrilous though.


Vain. Nay, it is a Sore of your own scratching. -- Well George, --


Heart. You are the principal Cause of all my present Ills. If Sylvia had not
been your Whore, my Wife might have been honest.


Vain. And if Sylvia had not been your Wife, my Whore might have been just. --
There, we are even. -- But have a good heart, I heard of your Misfortune, and
come to your relief.


Heart. When Execution's over, you offer a Reprieve.


Vain. What would you give?


Heart. Oh! Any thing, every thing, a Leg or two, or an Arm; nay, I would be
divorced from my Virility, to be divorced from my Wife.


Enter Sharper. Vain. Faith, that is a sure way. -- But here is one can sell you
freedom better cheap.


Sharp. Vain-love, I have been a kind of a Godfather to you, yonder. I have
promised and vowed some things in your Name, which I think you are bound to
perform.


Vain. No signing to a Blank, friend.


Sharp. No, I Will deal fairly with you. -- It Is a full and free Discharge to:
Sir Joseph, Wittal and Captain Bluffe; for all Injuries whatsoever, done unto
you by them; until the present Date hereof. -- How say you?


Vain. Agreed.


Sharp. Then, let me beg these Ladies to wear their Masks, a Moment.


Exit. Heart. What the Devil's all this to me.


Vain. Patience.

Re-enter Sharper, with Sir Joseph, Bluffe, Sylvia, Lucy, Setter.


Bluffe. All Injuries whatsoever, Mr. Sharper.


Sir Ios. Ay, ay, whatsoever, Captain, stick to that, whatsoever.


Sharp. It Is done, those Gentlemen are witnesses to the general Release.


Vain. Ay, ay, to this instant Moment. -- I have past an Act of Oblivion.


Bluffe. It Is very generous, Sir, since I needs must own --


Sir Ios. No, no, Captain, you need not own, Heh, heh, heh. It Is I must own --


Bluffe. -- That you are over-reached too, ha, ha, ha, only a little Art
military, used -- only undermined, or so, as shall appear by the fair Araminta,
my Wive's permission. Oh, the Devil, cheated at last! Lucy unmasques.


Sir Ios. Only a little Art-military Trick, Captain, only countermin'd, or so
-- Mr. Vain-love, I suppose you know whom I have got -- now, but all is forgiven.


Vain. I know whom you have not got; pray Ladies convince him.


Aram. and Belin. unmasque. Sir Ios. Ah! O Lord, my heart aches. -- Ah! Setter,
a Rogue of all sides.


Sharp. Sir Joseph, you had better have pre-engag'd this Gentleman's Pardon:
For though Vain-love be so generous to forgive the loss of his Mistress. -- I
know not how Heart-well may take the loss of his Wife.


Sylvia unmasques. Heart. My Wife! By this Light it is she, the very Cockatrice
-- Oh Sharper! Let me embrace thee. -- But art thou sure she is really married
to him?


Setter. Really and lawfully married, I am witness.


Sharp. Bellmour will unriddle to you. Heart-well goes to Bellmour.


Sir Ios. Pray, Madam, Who are you? For I find, you and I are like to be bitter
acquainted.


Sylv. The worst of me, is, that I am your Wife --


Sharp. Come, Sir Joseph, your Fortune is not so bad as you fear. -- A fine
Lady, and a Lady of very good Quality.


Sir Ios. Thanks to my Knighthood, she is a Lady --


Vain. -- That deserves a Fool with a better Title. -- Pray use her as my
Relation, or you shall hear on it.


Bluffe. What, Are you a Woman of Quality too, Spouse?


Setter. And my Relation; pray let her be respected accordingly. -- Well,
honest Lucy, Fare-thee-well. -- I think, you and I have been Play-fellows
off-and-on, any time this Seven Years.


Lucy. Hold your prating. -- I Am thinking what Vocation I shall follow, while
my Spouse is planting Laurels in the Wars.


Bluffe. No more Wars, Spouse, no more Wars. -- While I plant Laurels for my
Head abroad, I may find the Branches sprout at home.


Heart. Bellmour, I approve thy mirth, and thank thee. -- And I cannot in
gratitude (for I see which way thou art going) see thee fall into the same
snare, out of which thou have delivered me.


Bell. I thank thee, George, for thy good intention. -- But there is a fatality
in Marriage. -- For I find I Am resolute.


Heart. Then good Council will be thrown away upon you. -- For my part, I have
once escaped -- And when I wed again, may she be -- Ugly, as an old Bawd. --.


Vain. -- Ill-natured, as an old Maid. --


Bell. Wanton, as a Young-widow. --


Sharp. And jealous as a barren Wife.


Heart. Agreed.


Bell. Well; 'Midst of these dreadful Denunciations, and notwithstanding the
Warning and Example before me, I commit my self to lasting Durance.


Belin. Prisoner, make much of your Fetters: Giving her Hand.


Bell. Frank, Will you keep us in Countenance.


Vain. May I presume to hope so great a Blessing? To Araminta.


Aram. We had better take the Advantage of a little of our Friends Experience
first.


Bell. O my Conscience she dares not consent, for fear he should recant. Aside.
Well, we shall have your Company to Church in the Morning? -- May be it may get
you an Appetite to see us fall to before ye. Setter, Did not you tell me? --


Setter. They Are at the Door: I Will call 'em in.


A Dance. Bell. Now set we forward on a Journey for Life: -- Come, take your
Fellow-Travellers. Old George, I Am sorry to see thee still plod on alone.


Heart. With gaudy Plumes and gingling Bells made proud,
The youthful Beast sets forth, and neighs aloud.
A Morning-Sun his Tinsell'd Harness gilds,
And the first Stage a Down-hill Green-sword yields.
But, Oh, --
What rugged Ways attend the Noon of Life!
(Our Sun declines,) and with what anxious Strife,
What Pain we tug that galling Load, a Wife.
All Coursers the first Heat with Vigor run;
But it is with Whip and Spur the Race is won. Exeunt Omnes.

EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs. Barry. AS a rash Girl, who will all Hazards run,
And be enjoyed, though sure to be undone;
Soon as her Curiosity is over,
Would give the World she could her Toy recover:
So fares it with our Poet; and I Am sent
To tell you, he already does repent:
Would you were all as forward, to keep Lent.
Now the Deed's done, the Giddy-thing has leisure
'^o think oth' Sting, that is in the tail of Pleasure.
Methinks I hear him in Consideration!
What will the World say? Where Is my Reputation?
Now that is at stakes -- No fool, it is out o'fashion.
If loss of that should follow want of Wit,
How many Undone Men were in the Pit!
Why that is some Comfort, to an Author's fears,
If he is an Ass, he will be Tried by's Peers.
But hold -- I am exceeding my Commission;
My Business here, was humbly to petition:
But we are so used to Rail on these Occasions,
I could not help one trial of your Patience:
For it is our way (you know) for fear of the worst,
To be beforehand still, and cry Fool first.
How say you, Sparks? How do you stand affected?
I swear, young Bays within, is so dejected.
I would grieve your hearts to see him; shall I call him?
But then you cruel Critics would so maul him!
Yet, may be, you will encourage a beginner;
But how? -- Just as the Devil does a Sinner.
Women and Wits, are used even much at one;
You gain your Ends, and damn 'em when you have done.
FINIS.

