A PINDARIQUE ODE, Humbly Offered to the KING On His Taking NAMURE.

By Mr. CONGREVE.

Praesenti tibi Maturos largimur Honores:
Nil oriturum alias, nil ortum tale fatentes.
Hor. ad Augustum. LONDON: Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Iudge's-Head near
the Inner-Temple-Gate in Fleetstret, MDCXCV.

A PINDARIQUE ODE.
1.
OF Arms and War my Muse aspires to Sing,
And my Bold Hand dares touch an untried String.
New Fire informs my Soul, unfelt before;
And, on new Wings, to Heights unknown I soar.
O Power unseen! by whose Resistless Force
Compelled, I take this Flight, direct my Course;
For Fancy, wild and pathless Ways will choose,
Which Judgment, rarely, or with Pain, pursues.
Say, Sacred Nymph, whence this great Change proceeds;
Why scorns the lowly Swain his Oaten Reeds,
Daring aloud to strike the Sounding Lyre,
And sing Heroic Deeds;
Neglecting Flames of Love, for Martial Fire?
2.
WILLIAM alone, my Feeble Voice can raise;
What Voice so weak, that cannot sing his Praise!
The listening World each Whisper will befriend
That breaths his Name, and every Ear attend.
The hovering Winds on downy Wings shall wait around,
And catch, and wast to Foreign Lands, the flying Sound
Even I will in his Praise be heard;
For by his Name my Verse shall be preferred.
Born like a Lark, upon this Eagles Wing,
High as the Spheres, I will his Triumph sing;
High as the Head of Fame; Fame, whose exalted Size,
Virg. Aen. 4.
From the deep Vale, extends, up to the Vaulted Skies:
A thousand talking Tongues the Monster bears,
A thousand waking Eyes, and ever open Ears;
Hourly she stalks, with Huge Gigantick Pace,
Measu'ring the Globe, like Time, with constant Race:
Yet shall she stay, and bend to WILLIAM's Praise;
Of Him, her thousand Ears shall hear triumphant Lays,
Of Him, her Tongues shall talk, on Him her Eyes shall gaze.
3.
But lo, a Change astonishing my Eyes!
And all around, behold new Objects rise!
What Forms are these I see? and whence?
Beings substantial? or does Air condense,
To cloth in visionary Shape, my various Thought?
Are these by Fancy wrought!
Can strong Idea's, strike so deep the Sense!
O sacred Poesy! O boundless Power!
What wonders do thou trace, what hidden Worlds explore!
Through Seas, Earth, Air, and the wide circling Sky,
What is not sought and seen, by thy all-searching Eye!
4.
'Twas now, when flowery Lawns the Prospect made,
And flowing Brooks beneath a Forests shade;
A Lowing Heifer, Loveliest of the Herd,
Stood feeding by; while two fierce Bulls prepared
Their Armed Heads for Fight; by Fate of War, to prove
The Victor worthy of the Fair Ones Love.
Unthought Presage, of what met next my view!
For soon the shady Scene withdrew.
And now, for Woods, and Fields, and springing Flowers;
Behold a Town arise, Bulwark'd with Walls, and lofty Towers!
Two Rival Armies, all the Plain o're-spread,
In Gallant Order Ranged, and Shining Arms Arrayed:
With Eager Eyes, beholding both from far,
NAMURE, the Prize and Mistress of the War.
5.
Now, Thirst of Conquest, and Immortal Fame,
Does every Chief and Soldier's Heart Inflame.
Defensive Arms, the Gallick Forces bear;
While Hardy Britons for the Storm prepare:
For Fortune had with partial Hand, before
Resigned the Rule to Gallia's Haughty Power.
High on a Rock, the Mighty Fortress stands,
Founded by Fate; and wrought by Nature's Hands.
A wondrous Task it is the Ascent to gain,
Through craggy Cliffs, that strike the Sight with pain,
And Nod impending Terrors over the Plain.
To this, what Dangers Men can add, by Force, or Skill,
(And great is Humane Force and Wit, in Ill)
Are joined; on every side, wide gaping Engines wait,
Teeming with Fire, and big with certain Fate;
Ready to hurl Destruction from above,
In dreadful Roar, mocking the Wrath of Jove.
Thus fearful, does the Face of adverse Power appear;
But British Forces are unused to fear:
Tho thus Opposed, they might, if NASSAW were not there,
6.
But hark, the Voice of War! Behold the Storm begin!
The Trumpets Clangor, speaks in loud Allarms,
Mingling shrill Notes, with dreadful Din
Of Cannons burst, and rattling clash of Arms.
Clamours, from Earth to Heaven, from Heaven to Earth rebound,
Distinction, in promiscuous Noise is drowned,
And Echo lost in one continued Sound.
Torrents of Fire, from Brazen Mouths are sent,
Followed by Peals, as either Pole were rent;
As the Tartarean Gulf did Flames disgorge,
Or Vaulted Aetna roar from Vulcans Forge:
Such, were the Peals from thence, such, the vast Blaze that broke,
Redning with horrid Gloom, the dusky Smoke;
When the huge Cyclops did with molding Thunder sweat,
And Massy Bolts on repercussive Anvils beat.
7.
Amidst this Rage, behold, where NASSAW stands;
Undaunted, Undismayed!
With Face Serene, dispensing dread Commands;
Which heard with Awe, are with Delight Obeyed.
A thousand fiery Deaths, around him fly;
And burning Balls with rapid hiss, pass harmless by:
For every Fire, his Sacred Head must spare,
Nor durst the Lightning singe the Laurels there.
8.
Now many a wounded Briton, feels the scorching rage
Of Missive Fires, that fester in each Limb;
Which dire Revenge alone, has Power to assawage;
Revenge, makes Danger dreadless seem.
And now, with desperate Force, and fresh Attack,
Through obvious Deaths, resistless way they make;
Raising high Piles of Earth, and heap on heap they lay,
And then ascend; resembling thus (as far
As race of Men inferior, may)
The famed Gigantick War.
When those tall Sons of Earth, did Heaven aspire;
(A Brave, but Impious Fire!)
Uprooting Hills, with most stupendous Hale,
To form the High and Dreadful Scale.
The Gods, with Horror and Amaze, looked down,
Beholding Rocks from their firm Basis rent;
Mountain on Mountain thrown!
With threatening hurl! that shook the Ethereal Firmament.
The Attempt, did Fear in Heaven create;
Even Jove desponding fate,
Till Mars with all his Force Collected, stood,
And Poured whole War, on the Rebellious Brood;
Who tumbling headlong from the Empyreal Skys,
Orewhelm'd those Hills, by which they thought to rise.
Mars, on the Gods did then his Aid bestow,
And now in Godlike WILLIAM storms, with equal Fire below.
9.
Still they proceed, with firm unshaken Pace,
And hardy Breasts opposed to Dangers Face.
Cat'aracts of Fires Precipitate, are driven
On their Adventrous Heads, as Ruin rained from Heaven.
With daring Feet, on Springing Mines they tread
Of secret Sulphur, in dire Ambush laid,
Echos each scalding step resound,
And horrid Flames bellowing to be unbound,
Rumble with hollow rage in Cavern'd Ground.
10.
Still they Proceed; tho all beneath the Laboring Earth
Trembles to give the dread Irruptions Birth.
Through this, and more, through oppositions self they go,
Mounting at last amidst the vanquished Foe.
See, how they Climb, and Scale the Steepy Walls!
See, how the Britons rise! see the retiring Gauls!
Now, from the Fort, behold the yielding Flag is spread,
And NASSAW'S Conquering Banner on the Breach displayed.
11.
Hark, the Triumphant Shouts, from every voice!
The Skys with Acclamations Ring!
Hark, how around, the Hills rejoice,
And Rocks, reflected Io's Sing!
Hautboy's and Fifes and Trumpets joined,
Heroic Harmony prepare,
And charm to silence every wind,
And glad the late Tormented Air.
Far, is the sound of Martial Music spread,
Ech'oing through all the Gallick Host,
Whose Numerous Troops the dreadful Storm surveyed.
But they with wonder, or with awe, dismayed,
Unmoved beheld the Fortress lost.
NASSAW, their numerous Troops with terror filled,
Such wondrous charms, can Godlike Valor show!
Not the winged Perseus, with Petrifick shield
Of Gorgon's head, to more amazement charmed his Foe.
Nor, when on soaring Horse he flew, to aid
And save from Monsters rage, the Beauteous Maid;
Or more Heroic was the deed;
Or she to surer Chains decreed,
Then was NAMVRE; till now by NASSAW's valor freed.
12
Descend my Muse, from thy too daring height,
Descend to Earth, and ease thy wide stretched Wing;
For weary art thou grown, of this unwonted Flight,
And do with Pain of Triumphs Sing.
More fit for thee, resume thy rural reeds;
For War, let more Harmonious Harps be Strung:
Sing thou of Love; and Leave Great NASSAW's deeds
To Him who Sung the BOYNE; or Him to whom he Sung.
FINIS.
Books Printed for Jacob Tonson.
THe Mourning Muse of Alexis. A Pastoral Lamenting the Death of our Late
Gracious Queen Mary of ever Blessed Memory. By Mr. Congreve. The Third Edition.

A Funeral Elegy upon the Death of the Queen, Addressed to the Marquess of
Normanby. By Mr. Walsh. The Second Edition.

A Poem dedicated to the Blessed Memory of her Late Gracious Majesty Queen
Mary. By Mr. Stepney.

A Poem most humbly offered to the Memory of her Late Sacred Majesty. By Mr. R.
Gould. The Second Edition.

A Poem dedicated to the Immortal Memory of her Late Majesty; the most
incomparable Q. Mary. By Mr. Hume.

Instructions to a Painter, upon the Death and Funeral of her Late Majesty
Queen Mary of Blessed Memory. By I. Talbot.

An Ode in Imitation of the Second Ode of the Third Book of Horace. By Mr.
Prior.

To the King, an Ode on his Majesty's arrival in Holland. By Mr. Prior.

An English Ballad: in Answer to Mr. Despreaux's Pindarick Ode on the taking of
Namure.

The Poetical Works of Mr. John Milton, containing Paradise Lost, Paradise
Regaind, Sampson, Agonistes; and his Poems on several Occasions, together with
Explanatory Notes on each Book of the Paradise Lost, and a Table never before
Printed.

The works of Mr. Abraham Cowly, consisting of those which were formerly
Printed, and those which he designed for the Press; now Published out of the
Authors Original Copies. To this Edition are added the Cutter of Coalman
Street, and several Commendatory Copies of Verses on the Author. By Persons of
Honor. The Eighth Edition.

The Satyrs of Decimus Iunius Iuvenalis, Translated into English Verse. By Mr.
Dryden, and several other Eminent Hands, together with the Satyrs of Aulus
Perseus Flaccus, made English by Mr. Dryden, with Explanatory Notes at the end
of each Satyr: To which is Prefixed a Discourse concerning the Original and
Progress of Satyr, Dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Dorset,
etc. By Mr. Dryden.

Quarto.
The works of Mr. John Dryden, in Four Volumes. The Plays being put in the
order they were written.

Octavo.
Miscellany Pomes in two Parts, containing new Translations out of Virgil,
Ovid, Lucretius, Horace, Theocritus and other Authors. With several Original
Poems. By the most Eminent Hands. Published by Mr. Dryden. The Second Edition.

Silvae, or the Second Part of the Poetical Miscellany. The Second Edition.

Examen Poeticum, being the Third Part of the Miscellany Poems containing
variety of New Translations of the Ancient Poets, together with many Original
Copies by the most Eminent Hands.

The Annual Miscellany, for the Year 1694. Being the Fourth Part of Miscellany
Poems, containing great variety of New Translations by the most Eminent Hands.

Ovid's Epistles Translated by several Hands, the Fifth Edition, with the
Addition of three Epistles of Aulus Sabinus, in answer to as many of Ovid's
adorned with Cuts.

Poems, etc. written upon several occasions, and to several Persons. By Edmond
Waller Esquire With the Maids Tragedy Alterd. The Sixth Edition, with several
Additions never before Printed.

Epistolary Poems on several Occasions, with several of the choicest Stories of
Ovids Metamorphosis and Tibullus's Elegies. Translated into English Verse, by
Mr. Charles Hopkins.

The History of Love, a Poem in a Letter to a Lady. By Mr Charles Hopkins.


