THE Way of the World, A COMEDY.

THE Way of the World, A COMEDY.

As it is ACTED AT THE Theater in Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, BY His Majesty's
Servants.

Written by Mr. CONGREVE.

Audire est Operae pretium, procedere recte
Qui maechis non vultis --
-- Metuat doti deprensa. --
Hor. Sat. 2. l. 1. Ibid. LONDON: Printed for Jacob Tonson, within
Gray's-Inn-Gate next Gray's-Inn-Lane. 1700.

To the Right Honorable RALPH Earl of MOUNTAGUE, etc.
My LORD,

WHether the World will arraign me of Vanity, or not, that I have presumed to
Dedicate this Comedy to your Lordship, I am yet in doubt: Though it may be it is
some degree of Vanity even to doubt of it. One who has at any time had the
Honor of your Lordship's Conversation, cannot be supposed to think very meanly
of that which he would prefer to your Perusal: Yet it were to incur the
Imputation of too much Sufficiency, to pretend to such a Merit as might abide
the Test of your Lordship's Censure.

Whatever Value may be wanting to this Play while yet it is mine, will be
sufficiently made up to it, when it is once become your Lordship's; and it is
my Security, that I cannot have overrated it more by my Dedication, than your
Lordship will dignifie it by your Patronage.

That it succeeded on the Stage, was almost beyond my Expectation; for but
little of it was prepared for that general Taste which seems now to be
predominant in the Pallats of our Audience.

Those Characters which are meant to be ridiculous in most of our Comedies, are
of Fools so gross, that in my humble Opinion, they should rather disturb than
divert the well-natur'd and reflecting part of an Audience; they are rather
Objects of Charity than Contempt; and instead of moving our Mirth, they ought
very often to excite our Compassion.

This Reflection moved me to design some Characters, which should appear
ridiculous not so much through a natural Folly (which is incorrigible, and
therefore not proper for the Stage) as through an affected Wit; a Wit, which at
the same time that it is affected, is also false. As there is some Difficulty
in the formation of a Character of this Nature, so there is some Hazard which
attends the progress of its Success, upon the Stage: For many come to a Play,
so over-charg'd with Criticism, that they very often let fly their Censure,
when through their rashness they have mistaken their Aim. This I had occasion
lately to observe: For this Play had been Acted two or three Days, before some
of these hasty Judges could find the leisure to distinguish betwixt the
Character of a Witwoud and a Truewit.

I must beg your Lordship's Pardon for this Digression from the true Course of
this Epistle; but that it may not seem altogether impertinent, I beg, that I
may plead the occasion of it, in part of that Excuse of which I stand in need,
for recommending this Comedy to your Protection. It is only by the Countenance
of your Lordship, and the Few so qualified, that such who write with Care and
Pains can hope to be distinguished: For the Prostituted Name of Poet
promiscuously levels all that bear it.

Terence, the most correct Writer in the World, had a Scipio and a Lelius if
not to assist him, at least to support him in his Reputation: And
notwithstanding his extraordinary Merit, it may be, their Countenance was not
more than necessary.

The Purity of his Style, the Delicacy of his Turns, and the Justness of his
Characters, were all of them Beauties, which the greater part of his Audience
were incapable of Tasting: Some of the coursest Strokes of Plautus, so severely
censured by Horace, were more likely to affect the Multitude; such, who come
with expectation to Laugh out the last Act of a Play, and are better
entertained with two or three unseasonable Jests, than with the artful Solution
of the Fable.

As Terence excelled in his Performances, so had he great Advantages to
encourage his Undertakings; for he built most on the Foundations of Menander:
His Plots were generally modeled, and his Characters ready drawn to his Hand.
He, copied Menander; and Menander had no less Light in the Formation of his
Characters, from the Observations of Theophrastus, of whom he was a Disciple;
and Theopbrastus it is known was not only the Disciple, but the immediate
Successor of Aristotle, the first and greatest Judge of Poetry. These were
great Models to design by; and the further Advantage which Terence possessed,
toward giving his Plays the due Ornaments of Purity of Style, and Justness of
Manners, was not less considerable, from the freedom of Conversation, which was
permitted him with Lelius and Scipio, two of the greatest and most polite Men
of his Age. And indeed, the Privilege of such a Conversation, is the only
certain Means of attaining to the Perfection of Dialogue.

If it has happened in any part of this Comedy, that I have gained a Turn of
Style, or Expression more Correct, or at least more Corrigible than in those
which I have formerly written, I must, with equal Pride and Gratitude, ascribe
it to the Honor of your Lordship's admitting me into your Conversation, and
that of a Society where everybody else was so well worthy of you, in your
Retirement last Summer from the Town: For it was immediately after, that this
Comedy was written. If I have failed in my Performance, it is only to be
regretted, where there were so many, not inferior either to a Scipio or a
Lelius, that there should be one wanting equal to the Capacity of a Terence.

If I am not mistaken, Poetry is almost the only Art, which has not yet laid
claim to your Lordship's Patronage. Architecture, and Painting, to the great
Honor of our Country, have flourished under your Influence and Protection. In
the mean time, Poetry, the eldest Sister of all Arts, and Parent of most, seems
to have resigned her Birthright, by having neglected to pay her Duty to your
Lordship; and by permitting others of a later Extraction, to prepossess that
Place in your Esteem, to which none can pretend a better Title. Poetry, in its
Nature, is sacred to the Good and Great; the relation between them is
reciprocal, and they are ever propitious to it. It is the Privilege of Poetry
to address to them, and it is their Prerogative alone to give it Protection.

This received Maxim, is a general Apology for all Writers who Confecrate their
Labors to great Men: But I could wish at this time, that this Address were
exempted from the common pretense of all Dedications; and that as I can
distinguish your Lordship even among the most Deserving, so this Offering might
become remarkable by some particular Instance of Respect, which should assure
your Lordship, that I am, with all due Sense of your extreme Worthiness and
Humanity,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient and most obliged humble Servant Will.
Congreve.

PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. Betterton.

OF those few Fools, who with ill Stars are cursed,
Sure scribbling Fools, called Poets, fare the worst.
For they are a sort of Fools which Fortune makes,
And after she has made 'em Fools, forsakes.
With Nature's Oafs it is quite a different Case,
For Fortune favors all her Idiot-Race:
In her own Nest the Cuckow-Eggs we find,
Over which she broods to hatch the Changling-Kind.
No Portion for her own she has to spare,
So much she doats on her adopted Care.
Poets are Bubbles, by the Town drawn in,
Suffered at first some tristing Stakes to win:
But what unequal Hazards do they run!
Each time they write, they venture all they have won:
The 'Squire that is buttered still, is sure to be undone.
This Author, heretofore, has found your Favor,
But pleads no Merit from his past Behavior.
To build on that might prove a vain Presumption,
Should Grants to Poets made, admit Resumption:
And in Parnassus he must lose his Seat,
If that be found a forfeited Estate.
He owns, with Toil, he wrought the following Scenes,
But if they are naught never spare him for his Pains:
Damn him the more; have no Commiseration
For Dullness on mature Deliberation.
He swears he will not resent one hiss'd-off Scene,
Nor, like those peevish Wits, his Play maintain,
Who, to assert their Sense, your Taste arraign.
Some Plot we think he has, and some new Thought;
Some Humor too, no Farce; but that is a Fault.
Satire, he thinks, you ought not to expect,
For so Reformed a Town, who dares Correct?
To please, this time, has been his sole Pretense,
He Will not instruct least it should give Offense.
Should he by chance a Knave or Fool expose,
That hurts none here, sure here are none of those.
In short, our Play, shall (with your leave to show it)
Give you one Instance of a Passive Poet.
Who to your Judgments yields all Resignation;
So Save or Damn, after your own Discretion.
Personae Dramatis.
MEN. BY Fainall, In Love with Mrs. Marwood. Mr. Betterton. Mirabell, In Love
with Mrs. Millamant. Mr. Verbrugen. Witwoud, Petulant, Followers of Mrs.
Millamant. Mr. Bowen. Mr. Bowman. Sir Wilful Witwoud, Half Brother to
Witwoud, and Nephew to Lady Wishfort. Mr. Underhill. Waitwell, Servant to
Mirabell. Mr. Bright. WOMEN. Lady Wishfort, Enemy to Mirabell, for having
falsely pretended Love to her. Mrs. Leigh. Mrs. Millamant, A fine Lady, Niece
to Lady Wishfort, and loves Mirabell. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Mrs. Marwood, Friend to
Mr. Fainall, and likes Mirabell. Mrs. Barry. Mrs. Fainall, Daughter to Lady
Wishfort, and Wife to Fainall, formerly Friend to Mirabell. Mrs. Bowman.
Foible, Woman to Lady Wishfort. Mrs. Willis. Minting, Woman to Mrs. Millamant.
Mrs. Prince.

Dancers, Footmen, and Attendants.

SCENE LONDON.

The Time equal to that of the Presentation.

THE Way of the World A COMEDY.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A Chocolate-house. Mirabell and Fainall [ Rising from Cards] Betty waiting.
Mira. YOU are a fortunate Man, Mr. Fainall.

Fain. Have we done?

Mira. What you please. I Will play on to entertain you.


Fain. No, I Will give you your Revenge another time, when you are not so
indifferent; you are thinking of something else now, and play too negligently;
the Coldness of a losing Gamester lessens the Pleasure of the Winner: I Would no
more play with a Man that slighted his ill Fortune, than I Would make Love to a
Woman who undervalu'd the Loss of her Reputation.


Mira. You have a Taste extremely delicate, and are for refining on your
Pleasures.


Fain. Prithee, why so reserved? Something has put you out of Humor.


Mira. Not at all: I happen to be grave to day; and you are gay; that is all.


Fain. Confess, Millamant and you quarreled last Night, after I left you; my
fair Cousin has some Humors, that would tempt the patience of a Stoic. What,
some Coxcomb came in, and was well received by her, while you were by.


Mira. Witwoud and Petulant; and what was worse, her Aunt, your Wife's Mother,
my evil Genius; or to sum up all in her own Name, my old Lady Wishfort came in.
--


Fain. O there it is then -- She has a lasting Passion for you, and with
Reason. -- What, then my Wife was there?


Mira. Yes, and Mrs. Marwood and three or four more, whom I never saw before;
seeing me, they all put on their grave Faces, whispered one another; then
complained aloud of the Vapors, and after fell into a profound Silence.


Fain. They had a mind to be rid of you.

Mira. For which Reason I resolved not to stir. At last the good old Lady broke
through her painful Taciturnity, with an Invective against long Visits. I would
not have understood her, but Millamant joining in the Argument, I rose and with
a constrained Smile told her, I thought nothing was so easy as to know when a
Visit began to be troublesome; she redned and I withdrew, without expecting her
Reply.


Fain. You were to blame to resent what she spoke only in Gompliance with her
Aunt.


Mira. She is more Mistress of her self, than to be under the necessity of such
a resignation.


Fain. What? though half her Fortune depends upon her marrying with my Lady's
Approbation?


Mira. I was then in such a Humor, that I should have been better pleased if
she had been less discreet.


Fain. Now I remember, I wonder not they were weary of you; last Night was one
of their Cabal-nights; they have 'em three times a Week, and meet by turns, at
one another's Apartments, where they come together like the Coroner's Inquest,
to sit upon the murdered Reputations of the Week. You and I are excluded; and
it was once proposed that all the Male Sex should be excepted; but somebody
moved that to avoid Scandal there might be one Man of the Community; upon which
Motion Witwoud and Petulant were enrolled Members.


Mira. And who may have been the Foundress of this Sect? My Lady Wishfort, I
warrant, who publishes her Detestation of Mankind; and full of the Vigor of
Fifty five, declares for a Friend and Ratafia; and let Posterity shift for it
self, she will breed no more.


Fain. The discovery of your sham Addresses to her, to conceal your Love to her
Niece, has provoked this Separation: Had you dissembled better, Things might
have continued in the state of Nature.


Mira. I did as much as Man could, with any reasonable Conscience; I proceeded
to the very last Act of Flattery with her, and was guilty of a Song in her
Commendation: Nay, I got a Friend to put her into a Lampoon, and complement her
with the Imputation of an Affair with a young Fellow, which I carried so far,
that I told her the malicious Town took notice that she was grown fat of a
sudden; and when she lay in of a Dropsy, persuaded her she was reported to be
in Labor. The Devil's in it, if an old Woman is to be flattered further, unless
a Man should endeavor downright personally to debauch her; and that my Virtue
forbad me. But for the discovery of that Amor, I am Indebted to your Friend,
or your Wife's Friend Mrs. Marwood.


Fain. What should provoke her to be your Enemy, without she has made you
Advances, which you have slighted? Women do not easily forgive Omissions of
that Nature.


Mira. She was always civil to me, till of late; I confess I am not one of
those Coxcombs who are apt to interpret a Woman's good Manners to her
Prejudice; and think that she who does not refuse 'em every thing, can refuse
'em nothing.


Fain. You are a gallant Man, Mirabell; and though you may have Cruelty enough,
not to satisfy a Lady's longing; you have too much Generosity, not to be
tender of her Honor. Yet you speak with an Indifference which seems to be
affected; and confesses you are conscious of a Negligence.


Mira. You pursue the Argument with a distrust that seems to be unaffected, and
confesses you are conscious of a Concern for which the Lady is more indebted to
you, than your Wife.


Fain. Fie, fie Friend, if you grow Censorious I must leave you; -- I Will look
upon the Gamesters in the next Room.


Mira. Who are they?

Fain. Petulant and Witwoud. -- Bring me some Chocolate.


[Exit. Mira. Betty, what says your Clock?

Betty. Turned of the last Canonical Hour, Sir.

[Exit: Mira. How pertinently the Jade answers me! Ha? almost One a Clock! [
Looking on his Watch] O, you are come --

Enter a Servant. Well; is the grand Affair over? You have been something
tedious.


Serve. Sir, there is such Coupling at Pancras, that they stand behind one
another, as 'twere in a Country Dance. Ours was the last Couple to lead up; and
no hopes appearing of dispatch, Besides, the Parson growing hoarse, we were
afraid his Lungs would have failed before it came to our turn; so we drove
round to Duke's Place; and there they were riveted in a trice.


Mira. So, so, you are sure they are Married.

Serve. Married and Bedded, Sir: I am Witness.

Mira. Have you the Certificate?

Serve. Here it is, Sir.

Mira. Has the Tailor brought Waitwell's Clothes home, and the new Liveries?


Serve. Yes, Sir.

Mira. That Is well. Do you go home again, do you hear, and adjourn the
Consummation till farther Order; bid Waitwell shake his Ears, and Dame Partlet
rustle up her Feathers, and meet me at One a Clock by Rosamond's Pond. That I
may see her before she returns to her Lady; and as you tender your Ears be
secret.


[Exit Servant. Re-Enter Fainall. Fain. Joy of your Success, Mirabell; you look
pleased.

Mira. Ay; I have been engaged in a Matter of some sort of Mirth, which is not
yet ripe for discovery. I am glad this is not a Cabal-night. I wonder, Fainall,
that you who are Married, and of Consequence should be discreet, will suffer
your Wife to be of such a Party.


Fain. Faith, I am not Jealous. Besides, most who are engaged are Women and
Relations; and for the Men, they are of a Kind too Contemptible to give Scandal.


Mira. I am of another Opinion. The greater the Coxcomb, always the more the
Scandal: For a Woman who is not a Fool, can have but one Reason for associating
with a Man that is.


Fain. Are you Jealous as often as you see Witwoud entertained by Millamant?


Mira. Of her Understanding I am, if not of her Person.

Fain. You do her wrong; for to give her her Due, she has Wit.


Mira. She has Beauty enough to make any Man think so; and Complaisance enough
not to contradict him who shall tell her so.


Fain. For a passionate Lover, methinks you are a Man somewhat too discerning
in the Failings of your Mistress.


Mira. And for a discerning Man, somewhat too passionate a Lover; for I like
her with all her Faults; nay, like her for her Faults. Her Follies are so
natural, or so artful, that they become her; and those Affectations which in
another Woman would be odious, serve but to make her more agreeable. I Will tell
thee, Fainall, she once used me with that Insolence, that in Revenge I took her
to pieces; sisted her and separated her Failings; I studied 'em, and got 'em by
rote. The Catalogue was so large, that I was not without hopes, one Day or
other to hate her heartily: To which end I so used my self to think of 'em,
that at length, contrary to my Design and Expectation, they gave me every Hour
less and less disturbance; 'till in a few Days it became habitual to me, to
remember 'em without being displeased. They are now grown as familiar to me as
my own Frailties; and in all probability in a little time longer I shall like
'em as well.


Fain. Marry her, marry her; be half as well acquainted with her Charms, as you
are with her Defects, and my Life on it, you are your own Man again.


Mira. Say you so?

Fain. I, I, I have Experience: I have a Wife, and so forth.


Enter Messenger. Mess. Is one Squire Witwoud here?

Betty. Yes; what is your Business?

Mess. I have a Letter for him, from his Brother Sir Wilful, which I am
charged to deliver into his own Hands.


Betty. He Is in the next Room, Friend -- That way.

[Exit. Mess. Mira. What, is the Chief of that noble Family in Town,
Sir Wilful Witwoud?

Fain. He is expected to Day. Do you know him?

Mira. I have seen him, he promises to be an extraordinary Person; I think you
have the Honor to be related to him.


Fain. Yes; he is half Brother to this Witwoud by a former Wife, who was Sister
to my Lady Wishfort, my Wife's Mother. If you marry Millamant you must call
Cousins too.


Mira. I had rather be his Relation than his Acquaintance.

Fain. He comes to Town in order to Equip himself for
Travel.

Mira. For Travel! Why the Man that I mean is above
Forty.

Fain. No matter for that; it is for the Honor of England, that all Europe
should know we have Blockheads of all Ages.


Mira. I wonder there is not an Act of Parliament to save the Credit of the
Nation, and prohibit the Exportation of Fools.


Fain. By no means, it is better as it is; it is better to Trade with a little
Loss, than to be quite eaten up, with being overstock'd.


Mira. Pray, are the Follies of this Knight Errant, and those of the Squire his
Brother, any thing related?


Fain. Not at all; Witwoud grows by the Knight, like a Medlar grafted on a
Crab. One will melt in your Mouth, and the other set your Teeth on edge; one is
all Pulp, and the other all Core.


Mira. So one will be rotten before he be ripe, and the other will be rotten
without ever being ripe at all.


Fain. Sir Wilful is an odd mixture of Bashfulness and Obstinacy. -- But when
he is drunk, he is as loving as the Monster in the Tempest; and much after the
same manner. To give the the other his due; he has something of good Nature, and
does not always want Wit.


Mira. Not always; but as often as his Memory fails him, and his common place
of Comparisons. He is a Fool with a good Memory, and some few Scraps of other
Folks Wit. He is one whose Conversation can never be approved, yet it is now
and then to be endured. He has indeed one good Quality, he is not Exceptious;
for he so passionately affects the Reputation of understanding Raillery; that
he will construe an Affront into a Jest; and call downright Rudeness and ill
Language, Satyr and Fire.


Fain. If you have a mind to finish his Picture; you have an opportunity to do
it at full length. Behold the Original.


Enter Witwoud. Wit. Afford me your Compassion, my Dears; pity me,
Fainall, Mirabell, pity me.

Mira. I do from my Soul.

Fain. Why, what is the Matter?

Wit. No Letters for me, Betty?

Betty. Did not the Messenger bring you one, but now
Sir?

Wit. Ay, but no other?

Betty. No, Sir.

Wit. That Is hard, that is very hard; -- A Messenger, a Mule, a Beast of Burden,
he has brought me a Letter from the Fool my Brother, as heavy as a Panegyric
in a Funeral Sermon, or a Copy of Commendatory Verses from one Poet to another.
And what is worse, it is as sure a forerunner of the Author, as an Epistle
Dedicatory.


Mira. A Fool, and your Brother Witwoud!

Wit. Ay, ay, my half Brother. My half Brother he is, no nearer upon Honor.


Mira. Then it is possible he may be but half a Fool.

Wit. Good, good Mirabell, le Drole! Good, good, hang him, don't let us talk of
him; -- Fainall, how does your Lady? Gad, I say any thing in the World to get
this Fellow out of my Head. I beg Pardon that I should ask a Man of Pleasure,
and the Town, a Question at once so Foreign and Domestic. But I Talk like an
old Maid at a Marriage, I don't know what I say: But she is the best Woman in
the World.


Fain. It Is well you don't know what you say, or else your Commendation would
go near to make me either Vain or Jealous.


Wit. No Man in Town lives well with a Wife but
Fainall: Your Judgment Mirabell.

Mira. You had better step and ask his Wife; if you would be credibly informed.


Wit. Mirabell.

Mira. Ay.

Wit. My Dear, I ask ten thousand Pardons; -- Gad I have forgot what I was
going to say to you.


Mira. I thank you heartily, heartily.

Wit. No, but prithee excuse me, -- my Memory is such a Memory.


Mira. Have a care of such Apologies, Witwoud; -- for I never knew a Fool but
he affected to complain, either of the Spleen or his Memory.


Fain. What have you done with Petulant?

Wit. He Is reckoning his Money, -- my Money it was; --
I have no Luck to Day.

Fain. You may allow him to win of you at Play; -- for you are sure to be too
hard for him at Repartee: since you monopolize the Wit that is between you, the
Fortune must be his of Course.


Mira. I don't find that Petulant confesses the Superiority of Wit to be your
Talent, Witwoud.


Wit. Come, come, you are malicious now, and would breed Debates. -- Petulant's
my Friend, and a very honest Fellow, and a very pretty Fellow, and has a
smattering -- Faith and Troth a pretty deal of an odd sort of a small Wit: Nay,
I Will do him Justice. I Am his Friend, I will not wrong him neither -- And if he had
but any Judgment in the World, -- he would not be altogether contemptible. Come
come, don't detract from the Merits of my Friend.


Fain. You don't take your Friend to be overnicely bred.


Wit. No, no, hang him, the Rogue has no Manners at all, that I must own -- No
more breeding than a Bum-baily, that I grant you, -- It Is Pity faith; the
Fellow has Fire and Life.


Mira. What, Courage?

Wit. Hum, faith I don't know as to that, -- I cannot say as to that. -- Yes,
Faith, in a Controversy he will contradict any Body.


Mira. Though 'twere a Man whom he feared, or a Woman whom he loved.


Wit. Well, well, he does not always think before he speaks; -- We have all our
Failings; you're too hard upon him, you are Faith. Let me excuse him, -- I can
defend most of his Faults, except one or two; one he has, that is the Truth
on it, if he were my Brother, I could not acquit him -- That indeed I could wish
were otherwise.


Mira. Ay marry, what is that, Witwoud?

Wit. O pardon me -- Expose the Infirmities of my
Friend. -- No, my Dear, excuse me there.

Fain. What I warrant he is unsincere, or it is some such
Trifle.

Wit. No, no, what if he be? It Is no matter for that, his Wit will excuse that:
A Wit should no more be sincere, than a Woman constant; one argues a decay of
Parts, as the other of Beauty.


Mira. May be you think him too positive?

Wit. No, no, his being positive is an Incentive to Argument, and keeps up
Conversation.


Fain. Too Illiterate.

Wit. That! that is his Happiness -- His want of Learning, gives him the more
opportunities to show his natural Parts.


Mira. He wants Words.

Wit. Ay; but I like him for that now; for his want of Words gives me the
pleasure very often to explain his meaning.


Fain. He Is Impudent.

Wit. No; that is not it.

Mira. Vain.

Wit. No.

Mira. What, he speaks unseasonable Truths sometimes, because he has not Wit
enough to invent an Evasion.


Wit. Truths! Ha, ha, ha! No, no, since you will have it, -- I mean he never
speaks Truth at all, -- that is all. He will lie like a Chambermaid, or a Woman
of Quality's Porter. Now that is a Fault.


Enter Coachman. Coach. Is Master Petulant here, Mistress?

Betty. Yes.

Coach. Three Gentlewomen in the Coach would speak with him.


Fain. O brave Petulant, three!

Betty. I Will tell him.

Coach. You must bring two Dishes of Chocolate and a
Glass of Cinnamon Water.

[Exit. Wit. That should be for two fasting Strumpets, and a Bawd troubled with
Wind. Now you may know what the three are.


Mira. You are very free with your Friends Acquaintance.

Wit. Ay, ay, Friendship without Freedom is as dull as Love without Enjoyment,
or Wine without Toasting; but to tell you a Secret, these are Trulls that he
allows Coachhire, and something more by the Week, to call on him once a Day at
public Places.


Mira. How!

Wit. You shall see he will not go to 'em because there is no more Company here to
take notice of him -- Why this is nothing to what he used to do; -- Before he
found out this way, I have known him call for himself --


Fain. Call for himself? What do thou mean?

Wit. Mean, why he would slip you out of this Chocolate-house, just when you
had been talking to him -- As soon as your Back was turned -- Whip he was gone;
-- Then trip to his Lodging, clap on a Hood and Scarf, and Mask, slap into a
Hackney-Coach, and drive hither to the Door again in a trice; where he would
send in for himself, that I mean, call for himself, wait for himself, nay and
what is more, not finding himself, sometimes leave a Letter for himself.


Mira. I confess this is something extraordinary -- I believe he waits for
himself now, he is so long a coming; O I ask his Pardon.


Enter Petulant. Betty, Sir, the Coach stays.

Pet. Well, well; I come -- Sbud, a Man had as good be a professed Midwise as a
professed Whoremaster, at this rate; to be knocked up and raised at all Hours,
and in all Places. Pox on 'em I will not come. -- Dee hear, tell 'em I will not come.
-- Let 'em snivel and cry their Hearts out.


Fain. You are very cruel, Petulant.

Pet. All Is one, let it pass -- I have a Humor to be cruel.


Mira. I hope they are not Persons of Condition that you use at this rate.


Pet. Condition, Condition's a dried Fig, if I am not in Humor -- By this
Hand, if they were your -- a -- a -- your What-dee call-'ems themselves, they
must wait or rub off, if I want Appetite.


Mira. What-dee-call-'ems! What are they, Witwoud?

Wit. Empresses, my Dear -- By your What-dee-call'ems he means Sultana Queens.


Pet. Ay, Roxolana's.

Mira. Cry you Mercy.

Fain. Witwoud says they are --

Pet. What does he say the are?

Wit. I; fine Ladies I say.

Pet. Pass on, Witwoud -- Hearkee, by this Light his Relations -- Two
Coheiresses his Cousins, and an old Aunt, that loves Catterwauling better than
a Conventicle.


Wit. Ha, ha, ha; I had a Mind to see how the Rogue would come off -- Ha, ha,
ha; Gad I cannot be angry with him; if he said they were my Mother and my
Sisters.


Mira. No!

Wit. No; the Rogue's Wit and Readiness of Invention charm me, dear Petulant.


Betty. They are gone Sir, in great Anger.

Pet. Enough, let 'em trundle. Anger helps Complexion, saves Paint.


Fain. This Continence is all dissembled; this is in order to have something to
brag of the next time he makes Court to Millamant, and swear he has abandoned
the whole Sex for her Sake.


Mira. Have you not left off your impudent Pretensions there yet? I shall cut
your Throat, sometime or other Petulant, about that Business.


Pet. Ay, ay, let that pass -- There are other Throats to be cut --


Mira. Meaning mine, Sir?

Pet. Not I -- I mean no Body -- I know nothing. -- But there are Uncles and
Nephews in the World -- And they may be Rivals -- What then? All Is one for that
--


Mira. How! hearkee Petulant, come hither -- Explain, or I shall call your
Interpreter.


Pet. Explain, I know nothing -- Why you have an Uncle, have you not, lately
come to Town, and lodges by my Lady Wishfort's?


Mira. True.

Pet. Why that is enough -- You and he are not Friends; and if he should marry
and have a Child, you may be disinherited, ha?


Mira. Where have thou stumbled upon all this Truth?

Pet. All Is one for that; why then say I know something.


Mira. Come, thou art an honest Fellow Petulant, and shall make Love to my
Mistress, thou shall, Faith. What have thou heard of my Uncle?


Pet. I, nothing I. If Throats are to be cut, let Swords clash; snugs the Word,
I shrug and am silent.


Mira. O Raillery, Raillery. Come, I know thou art in the Women's Secrets --
What you're a Cabalist, I know you staid at Millamant's last Night, after I
went. Was there any mention made of my Uncle, or me? Tell me; if thou had but
good Nature equal to thy Wit Petulant, Tony Witwoud, who is now thy Competitor
in Fame, would show as dim by thee as a dead Whiting's Eye, by a Pearl of
Orient; he would no more be seen by thee, then Mercury is by the Sun: Come, I Am
sure thou wo't tell me.


Pet. If I do, will you grant me common Sense then, for the future?


Mira. Faith I Will do what I can for thee; and I Will pray that
Heaven may grant it thee in the mean time.

Pet. Well, hearkee.

Fain. Petulant and you both will find Mirabell as warm a
Rival as a Lover.

Wit. Pshaw, pshaw, that she laughs at Petulant is plain. And for my part --
But that it is almost a Fashion to admire her, I should -- Hearkee -- To tell
you a Secret, but let it go no further -- Between Friends, I shall never break
my Heart for her.


Fain. How!

Wit. She Is handsome; but she is a sort of an uncertain
Woman.

Fain. I thought you had died for her.

Wit. Umh -- No --

Fain. She has Wit.

Wit. It Is what she will hardly allow any Body else; -- Now, Demme, I should
hate that, if she were as handsome as Cleopatra. Mirabell is not so sure of her
as he thinks for.


Fain. Why do you think so?

Wit. We staid pretty late there last Night; and heard something of an Uncle to
Mirabell, who is lately come to Town, -- and is between him and the best part
of his Estate; Mirabell and he are at some distance, as my Lady Wishfort has
been told; and you know she hates Mirabell, worse than a Quaker hates a Parrot:
Or then a Fishmonger hates a hard Frost. Whether this Uncle has seen Mrs.
Millamant or not, I cannot say; but there were Items of such a Treaty being in
Embrio; and if it should come to Life; poor Mirabell would be in some sort
unfortunately fobb'd in faith.


Fain. It Is impossible Millamant should hearken to it.

Wit. Faith, my Dear, I cannot tell; she is a Woman and a kind of a Humorist.


Mira. And this is the Sum of what you could collect last
Night.

Pet. The Quintessence. May be Witwoud knows more, he stayed longer -- Besides
they never mind him; they say any thing before him.


Mira. I thought you had been the greatest Favorite.

Pet. Ay test a test; But not in public, because I make
Remarks.

Mira. Do you.

Pet. Ay, ay, pox I Am malicious, Man. Now he is soft you know, they are not in
awe of him -- The Fellow's well bred, he is what you call a --
What-dee-call-'em. A fine Gentleman, but he is silly withal.


Mira. I thank you, I know as much as my Curiosity requires. Fainall, are you
for the Mall?


Fain. Ay, I Will take a turn before Dinner.

Wit. Ay, we'll all walk in the Park, the Ladies talked of being there.


Mira. I thought you were obliged to watch for your Brother Sir Wilfull's
arrival.


Wit. No, no, he comes to his Aunts, my Lady Wishfort; pox on him, I shall be
troubled with him too; what shall I do with the Fool?


Pet. Beg him for his Estate; that I may beg you afterward; and so have but
one Trouble with you both.


Wit. O rare Petulant; thou art as quick as a Fire in a frosty Morning; thou
shall to the Mall with us; and we'll be very severe.


Pet. Enough, I Am in a Humor to be severe.

Mira. Are you? Pray then walk by your selves, -- Let not us be accessory to
your putting the Ladies out of Countenance, with your senseless Ribaldry; which
you roar out aloud as often as they pass by you; and when you have made a
handsome Woman blush, then you think you have been severe.


Pet. What, what? Then let 'em either show their Innocence by not understanding
what they hear, or else show their Discretion by not hearing what they would
not be thought to understand.


Mira. But have not thou then Sense enough to know that thou ought to be
most ashamed thy Self, when thou have put another out of Countenance.


Pet. Not I, by this Hand -- I always take blushing either for a Sign of Guilt,
or ill Breeding.


Mira. I confess you ought to think so. You are in the right, that you may
plead the error of your Judgment in defense of your Practice.

Where Modesty's ill Manners, it is but fit
That Impudence and Malice, pass for Wit.

[Exeunt. ACT II. SCENE I.
St. James's Park. Enter Mrs. Fainall and Mrs. Marwood. M. Fain. AY, ay, dear
Marwood, if we will be happy, we must find the means in our selves, and among
our selves. Men are ever in Extremes; either doting or averse. While they are
Lovers, if they have Fire and Sense, their Jealousies are insupportable: And
when they cease to Love, (we ought to think at least) they loath; they look
upon us with Horror and Distaste; they meet us like the Ghosts of what we were,
and as such fly from us.


Mrs. Mar. True, it is an unhappy Circumstance of Life, that Love should ever
die before us; and that the Man so often should outlive the Lover. But say
what you will, it is better to be left, than never to have been loved. To pass
our Youth in dull Indifference, to refuse the Sweets of Life because they once
must leave us; is as preposterous, as to wish to have been born Old, because we
one Day must be Old. For my part, my Youth may wear and waste, but it shall
never rust in my Possession.


Mrs. Fain. Then it seems you dissemble an Aversion to
Mankind, only in compliance with my Mothers Humor.

Mrs. Mar. Certainly. To be free; I have no Taste of those insipid dry
Discourses, with which our Sex of force must entertain themselves, apart from
Men. We may affect Endearments to each other, profess eternal Friendships, and
seem to dote like Lovers; but it is not in our Natures long to persevere. Love
will resume his Empire in our Breasts, and every Heart, or soon or late,
receive and readmit him as its lawful Tyrant.


Mrs. Fain. Bless me, how have I been deceived! Why you profess a Libertine.


Mrs. Mar. You see my Friendship by my Freedom. Come, be as sincere,
acknowledge that your Sentiments agree with mine.


Mrs. Fain. Never.

Mrs. Mar. You hate Mankind.

Mrs. Fain. Heartily, Inveterately.

Mrs. Mar. Your Husband.

Mrs. Fain. Most transcendantly; ay, though I say it, meritoriously.


Mrs. Mar. Give me your Hand upon it.

Mrs. Fain. There.

Mrs. Mar. I join with you; what I have said, has been to try you.


Mrs. Fain. Is it possible? Do thou hate those Vipers
Men?

Mrs. Mar. I have done hating 'em; and am now come to despise 'em; the next
thing I have to do, is eternally to forget 'em.


Mrs. Fain. There spoke the Spirit of an Amazon, a Penthesilea.


Mrs. Mar. And yet I am thinking sometimes, to carry my Aversion further.


Mrs. Fain. How?

Mrs. Mar. Faith by Marrying; if I could but find one that loved me very well,
and would be thoroughly sensible of ill usage; I think I should do my self the
violence of undergoing the Ceremony.


Mrs. Fain. You would not make him a Cuckold?

Mrs. Mar. No; but I Would make him believe I did, and that is as bad.


Mrs. Fain. Why, had not you as good do it?

Mrs. Mar. O if he should ever discover it, he would then know the worst; and
be out of his Pain; but I would have him ever to continue upon the Rack of Fear
and Jealousy.


Mrs. Fain. Ingenious Mischief! Would thou were married to Mirabell.


Mrs. Mar. Would I were.

Mrs. Fain. You change Color.

Mrs. Mar. Because I hate him.

Mrs. Fain. So do I; but I can hear him named. But what
Reason have you to hate him in particular?

Mrs. Mar. I never loved him; he is, and always was insufferably proud.


Mrs. Fain. By the Reason you give for your Aversion, one would think it
dissembled; for you have laid a Fault to his Charge, of which his Enemies must
acquit him.


Mrs. Mar. O then it seems you are one of his favorable Enemies. Methinks you
look a little pale, and now you slush again.


Mrs. Fain. Do I? I think I am a little sick of the sudden.

Mrs. Mar. What ails you?

Mrs. Fain. My Husband. Don't you see him? He turned short upon me unawares,
and has almost overcome me.


Enter Fainall and Mirabell. Mrs. Mar. Ha, ha, ha; he comes opportunely for you.

Mrs. Fain. For you, for he has brought Mirabell with him.

Fain. My Dear.

Mrs. Fain. My Soul.

Fain. You don't look well to Day, Child.

Mrs. Fain. Dee think so?

Mira. He is the only Man that does, Madam.

Mrs. Fain. The only Man that would tell me so at least; and the only Man from
whom I could hear it without Mortification.


Fain. O my Dear I am satisfied of your Tenderness; I know you cannot resent
any thing from me; especially what is an effect of my Concern.


Mrs. Fain. Mr. Mirabell; my Mother interrupted you in a pleasant Relation last
Night: I would fain hear it out.


Mira. The Persons concerned in that Affair, have yet a tolerable Reputation
-- I am afraid Mr. Fainall will be Censorious.


Mrs. Fain. He has a Humor more prevailing than his Curiosity, and will
willingly dispense with the hearing of one scandalous Story, to avoid giving an
occasion to make another by being seen to walk with his Wife. This way Mr.
Mirabell, and I dare promise you will oblige us both.


[Exeunt Mrs. Fainall and Mirabell. Fain. Excellent Creature! Well sure if I
should live to be rid of my Wife, I should be a miserable Man.


Mrs. Mar. Ay!

Fain. For having only that one Hope, the accomplishment of it, of Consequence
must put an end to all my hopes; and what a Wretch is he who must survive his
hopes! Nothing remains when that Day comes, but to sit down and weep like
Alexander, when he wanted other Worlds to conquer.


Mrs. Mar. Will you not follow 'em?

Fain. Faith, I think not.

Mrs. Mar. Pray let us; I have a Reason.

Fain. You are not Jealous?

Mrs. Mar. Of whom?

Fain. Of Mirabell.

Mrs. Mar. If I am, is it inconsistent with my Love to you that I am tender of
your Honor?


Fain. You would intimate then, as if there were a fellowfeeling between my
Wife and Him.


Mrs. Mar. I think she does not hate him to that degree she would be thought.


Fain. But he, I fear, is too Insensible.

Mrs. Mar. It may be you are deceived.

Fain. It may be so. I do now begin to apprehend it.

Mrs. Mar. What?

Fain. That I have been deceived Madam, and you are false.

Mrs. Mar. That I am false! What mean you?

Fain. To let you know I see through all your little Arts -- Come, you both
love him; and both have equally dissembled your Aversion. Your mutual
Jealousies of one another, have made you clash till you have both struck Fire.
I have seen the warm Confession red'ning on your Cheeks, and sparkling from
your Eyes.


Mrs. Mar. You do me wrong.

Fain. I do not -- 'Twas for my case to oversee and wilfully neglect the gross
advances made him by my Wife; that by permitting her to be engaged, I might
continue unsuspected in my Pleasures; and take you oftener to my Arms in full
Security. But could you think because the nodding Husband would not wake, that
ever the watchful Lover slept!


Mrs. Mar. And wherewithal can you reproach me?

Fain. With Infidelity, with loving of another, with love of Mirabell.


Mrs. Mar. It Is false. I challenge you to show an Instance that can confirm
your groundless Accusation. I hate him.


Fain. And wherefore do you hate him? He is Insensible, and your Resentment
follows his Neglect. An Instance? The Injuries you have done him are a proof:
Your interposing in his Love. What cause had you to make Discoveries of his
pretended Passion? To undeceive the credulous Aunt, and be the officious
Obstacle of his Match with Millamant?


Mrs. Mar. My Obligations to my Lady urged me: I had professed a Friendship to
her; and could not see her easy Nature so abused by that Dissembler.


Fain. What, was it Conscience then! prosess'd a Friendship! O the pious
Friendships of the Female Sex!


Mrs. Mar. More tender, more sincere, and more enduring, than all the vain and
empty Vows of Men, whether professing Love to us, or mutual Faith to one
another.


Fain. Ha, ha, ha; you are my Wife's Friend too.

Mrs. Mar. Shame and Ingratitude! Do you reproach me? You, you upbraid me! Have
I been false to her, through strict Fidelity to you, and sacrificed my Friendship
to keep my Love inviolate? And have you the baseness to charge me with the
Guilt, unmindful of the Merit! To you it should be meritorious, that I have
been vicious. And do you reflect that Guilt upon me, which should lic buried in
your Bosom?


Fain. You misinterpret my Reproof. I meant but to remind you of the slight
Account you once could make of strictest Ties, when set in Competion with your
Love to me.


Mrs. Mar. It Is false, you urged it with deliberate Malice --
'Twas spoke in scorn, and I never will forgive it.

Fain. Your Guilt, not your Resentment, begets your Rage. If yet you loved, you
could forgive a Jealousy: But you are stung to find you are discovered.


Mrs. Mar. It shall be all discovered. You too shall be discovered; be sure you
shall. I can but be exposed -- If I do it my self I shall prevent your Baseness.


Fain. Why, what will you do?

Mrs. Mar. Disclose it to your Wife; own what has past between us.


Fain. Frenzy!

Mrs. Mar. By all my Wrongs I Will do it -- I Will publish to the World the Injuries
you have done me, both in my Fame and Fortune: With both I trusted you, you
Bankrupt in Honor, as indigent of Wealth.


Fain. Your Fame I have preserved. Your Fortune has been bestowed as the
prodigality of your Love would have it, in Pleasures which we both have shared.
Yet had not you been false, I had ever this repaid it -- It Is true -- Had you
permitted Mirabell with Millamant to have stoll'n their Marriage, my Lady had
been incensed beyond all means of reconcilement: Millamant had forseited the
Moiety of her Fortune; which then would have descended to my Wife; -- And
wherefore did I marry, but to make lawful Prize of a rich Widow's Wealth, and
squander it on Love and you?


Mrs. Mar. Deceit and frivolous Pretense.

Fain. Death, am I not married? what is pretense? Am I not Imprisoned, Fettered?
Have I not a Wife? Nay a Wife that was a Widow, a young Widow, a handsome
Widow; and would be again a Widow, but that I have a Heart of Proof, and
something of a Constitution to bustle through the ways of Wedlock and this World.
Will you yet be reconciled to Truth and me?


Mrs. Mar. Impossible. Truth and you are inconsistent --
I hate you, and shall for ever.

Fain. For loving you?

Mrs. Mar. I loath the name of Love after such usage; and next to the Guilt
with which you would asperse me, I scorn you most. Farewell.


Fain. Nay, we must not part thus.

Mrs. Mar. Let me go.

Fain. Come, I Am sorry.

Mrs. Mar. I care not -- Let me go -- Break my Hands, do -- I Would leave 'em to
get loose.


Fain. I would not hurt you for the World. Have I no other Hold to keep you
here?


Mrs. Mar. Well, I have deserved it all.

Fain. You know I love you.

Mrs. Mar. Poor dissembling! -- O that -- Well, it is not yet --


Fain. What? what is it not? What is it not yet? It is not yet too late --


Mrs. Mar. No, it is not yet too late -- I have that Comfort.

Fain. It is to love another.

Mrs. Mar. But not to loath, detest, abhor Mankind, my self and the whole
treacherous World.


Fain. Nay, this is Extravagance -- Come I ask your Pardon -- No Tears -- I was
to blame, I could not love you and be easy in my Doubts -- Pray forbear -- I
believe you; I Am convinced I Have done you wrong; and any way, every way will
make amends; -- I Will hate my Wife yet more, Dam her, I Will part with her, rob
her of all she is worth, and will retire somewhere, any where to another World,
I Will marry thee -- Be pacified -- 'Sdeath they come, hide your Face, your Tears
-- You have a Mask, wear it a Moment. This way, this way, be persuaded.


[Exeunt. Enter Mirabell and Mrs. Fainall. Mrs. Fain. They are here yet.

Mira. They are turning into the other Walk.

Mrs. Fain. While I only hated my Husband, I could bear to see him; but since I
have despised him, he is too offensive.


Mira. O you should Hate with Prudence.

Mrs. Fain. Yes, for I have Loved with Indiscretion.

Mira. You should have just so much disgust for your
Husband, as may be sufficient to make you relish your
Lover.

Mrs. Fain. You have been the cause that I have loved without Bounds, and would
you set Limits to that Aversion, of which you have been the occasion? Why did
you make me marry this Man?


Mira. Why do we daily commit disagreeable and dangerous Actions? To save that
Idol Reputation. If the familiarities of our Loves had produced that
Consequence, of which you were aprehensive, Where could you have fixed a
Father's Name with Credit, but on a Husband? I knew Fainall to be a Man lavish
of his Morals, an interested and professing Friend, a false and a designing
Lover; yet one whose Wit and outward fair Behavior, have gained a Reputation
with the Town, enough to make that Woman stand excused, who has suffered
herself to be won by his Addresses. A better Man ought not to have been
sacrificed to the Occasion; a worse had not answered to the Purpose. When you
are weary of him, you know your Remedy.


Mrs. Fain. I ought to stand in some degree of Credit with you, Mirabell.


Mira. In Justice to you, I have made you privy to my whole Design, and put it
in your Power to ruin or advance my Fortune.


Mrs. Fain. Whom have you instructed to represent your pretended Uncle?


Mira. Waitwell, my Servant.

Mrs. Fain. He is an humble Servant to Foible my Mothers
Woman; and may win her to your Interest.

Mira. Care is taken for that -- She is won and worn by this time. They were
married this morning.


Mrs. Fain. Who?

Mira. Waitwell and Foible. I would not tempt my Servant to betray me by
trusting him too far. If your Mother, in hopes to ruin me, should consent to
marry my pretended Uncle, he might like Mosca in the Fox, stand upon Terms; so
I made him sure beforehand.


Mrs. Fain. So, if my poor Mother is caught in a Contract, you will discover
^^e Imposture betimes; and release her by producing a ^^^tificate of her
Gallants former Marriage.


Mira. Yes, upon Condition she consent to my Marriage with her Niece, and
surrender the Moiety of her Fortune in her Possession.


Mrs. Fain. She talked last Night of endeavoring at a
Match between Millamant and your Uncle.

Mira. That was by Foible's Direction, and my Instruction, that she might seem
to carry it more privately.


Mrs. Fain. Well, I have an Opinion of your Success; for I believe my Lady will
do any thing to get a Husband; and when she has this, which you have provided
for her, I suppose she will submit to any thing to get rid of him.


Mira. Yes, I think the good Lady would marry any Thing that resembl'd a Man,
though 'twere no more than what a Butler could pinch out of a Napkin.


Mrs. Fain. Female Frailty! We must all come to it, if we live to be Old and
feel the craving of a false Appetite when the true is decayed.


Mira. An old Woman's Appetite is depraved like that of a Girl -- It Is the
Green Sickness of a second Childhood; and like the faint Offer of a latter
Spring, serves but to usher in the Fall; and withers in an affected Bloom.


Mrs. Fain. Here Is your Mistress.

Enter Mrs. Millamant, Witwoud, and Mincing. Mira. Here she comes In Faith full
sail, with her Fan spread and her Streamers out, and a shoal of Fools for
Tenders -- Ha, no, I cry her Mercy.


Mrs. Fain. I see but one poor empty Sculler; and he tows her Woman after him.


Mira. You seem to be unattended, Madam -- You used to have the Beau-mond
Throng after you; and a Flock of gay fine Perrukes hovering round you.


Wit. Like Moths about a Candle -- I had like to have lost my Comparison for
want of Breath.


Milla. O I have denied my self Airs to Day. I have walked as fast through the
Crow --


Wit. As a Favorite in disgrace; and with as few Followers.

Milla. Dear Mr. Witwoud, truce with your Similitudes:
For I am as sick of 'em --

Wit. As a Phisician of a good Air -- I cannot help it
Madam, though it is against my self.

Milla. Yet again! Mincing, stand between me and his
Wit.

Wit. Do Mrs. Mincing, like a Skreen before a great Fire.
I confess I do blaze to Day, I am too bright.

Mrs. Fain. But dear Millamant, why were you so long?

Milla. Long! Lord, have I not made violent haste? I have asked every living
Thing I met for you; I have inquired after you, as after a new Fashion.


Wit. Madam, truce with your Similitudes -- No, you met her Husband and did not
ask him for her.


Mira. By your leave Witwoud, that were like enquiring after an old Fashion, to
ask a Husband for his Wise.


Wit. Hum, a hit, a hit, a palpable hit, I confess it.

Mrs. Fain. You were dressed before I came abroad.

Milla. Ay, that is true -- O but then I had -- Mincing what had I? Why was I so
long?


Minc. O Mem, your Laship staid to peruse a Pecquet of
Letters.

Milla. Oay, Letters -- I had Letters -- I am persecuted with Letters -- I hate
Letters -- No Body knows how to write Letters; and yet one has 'em, one does
not know why -- They serve one to pin up one's Hair.


Wit. Is that the way? Pray Madam, do you pin up your
Hair with all your Letters? I find I must keep Copies.

Milla. Only with those in Verse, Mr. Witwoud. I never pin up my Hair with
Prose. I fancy ones Hair would not curl if it were pinned up with Prose. I
think I tried once Mincing.


Minc. O Mem, I shall never forget it.

Milla. Ay, poor Mincing tift and tift all the morning.

Minc. 'Till I had the Cremp in my Fingers I Will vow Mem. And all to no purpose.
But when your Laship pins it up with Poetry, it sits so pleasant the next Day
as any Thing, and is so pure and so crips.


Wit. Indeed, so crips?

Minc. You're such a Critic, Mr. Wtiwoud.

Milla. Mirabell, Did not you take Exceptions last Night? Oay, and went away --
Now I think on it I Am angry -- No, now I think on it I Am pleased -- For I believe
I gave you some Pain.


Mira. Does that please you?

Milla. Infinitely; I love to give Pain.

Mira. You would affect a Cruelty which is not in your

Nature; your true Vanity is in the power of pleasing.

Milla. O I ask your Pardon for that -- One's Cruelty is one's Power, and when
one parts with one's Cruelty, one parts with one's Power; and when one has
parted with that, I fancy one's Old and Ugly.


Mira. Ay, ay, suffer your Cruelty to ruin the object of your Power, to destroy
your Lover -- And then how vain how lost a Thing you will be! Nay, it is true: You
are no longer handsome when you have lost your Lover; your Beauty dies upon the
Instant: For Beauty is the Lovers Gift; it is he bestows your Charms -- Your
Glass is all a Cheat. The Ugly and the Old, whom the Looking-glass mortifies,
yet after Commendation can be flattered by it, and discover Beauties in it: For
that reflects our Praises, rather than your Face.


Milla. O the Vanity of these Men! Fainall, dee hear him? If they did not
commend us, we were not handsome! Now you must know they could not commend one,
if one was not handsome. Beauty the Lover's Gift -- Lord, what is a Lover, that
it can give? Why one makes Lovers as fast as one pleases, and they live as long
as one pleases, and they die as soon as one pleases: And then if one pleases,
one makes more.


Wit. Very pretty. Why you make no more of making of Lovers, Madam, than of
making so many Card-matches.


Milla. One no more owes one's Beauty to a Lover, than ones Wit to an Echo:
They can but reflect what we look and say; vain empty Things if we are silent
or unseen, and want a being.


Mira. Yet to those two vain empty Things, you owe two the greatest Pleasures
of your Life.


Milla. How so?

Mira. To your Lover you owe the pleasure of hearing your selves praised; and
to an Echo the pleasure of hearing your selves talk.


Wit. But I know a Lady that loves talking so incessantly, she will not give an
Echo fair play; she has that everlasting Rotation of Tongue, that an Echo
must wait till she dies, before it can catch her last Words.


Milla. O Fiction; Fainall, let us leave these Men.

Mira. Draw off Witwoud.

[Aside to Mrs. Fainall. Mrs. Fain. Immediately; I have a Word or two for
Mr. Witwoud.

Mira. I would beg a little private Audience too --

[Exit Witwoud and Mrs. Fainall. You had the Tyranny to deny me last Night;
though you knew I came to impart a Secret to you, that concerned my Love.


Milla. You saw I was engaged.

Mira. Unkind. You had the leisure to entertain a Herd of Fools; Things who
visit you from their excessive Idleness; bestowing on your easiness that time,
which is the encumbrance of their Lives. How can you find delight in such
Society? It is impossible they should admire you, they are not capable: Or if
they were, it should be to you as a Mortification; for sure to please a Fool is
some degree of Folly.


Milla. I please my self -- Besides sometimes to converse with Fools, is for my
Health.


Mira. Your Health! Is there a worse Disease then the
Conversation of Fools?

Milla. Yes, the Vapors; Fools are Physic for it, next to Assa-fatida.


Mira. You are not in a Course of Fools?

Milla. Mirabell, If you persist in this offensive Freedom -- You Will displease
me -- I think I must resolve after all, not to have you -- We shall not agree.


Mira. Not in our Physic it may be.

Milla. And yet our Distemper in all likelihood will be the same; for we shall
be sick of one another. I shall not endure to be reprimanded, nor instructed; it is
so dull to act always by Advice, and so tedious to be told of ones Faults -- I
cannot bear it. Well, I will not have you Mirabell -- I Am resolved -- I think --
You may go -- Ha, ha, ha. What would you give, that you could help loving me?


Mira. I would give something that you did not know, I could not help it.


Milla. Come, don't look grave then. Well, what do you say to me?


Mira. I say that a Man may as soon make a Friend by his Wit, or a Fortune by
his Honesty, as win a Woman with plain Dealing and Sincerity.


Milla. Sententious Mirabell! Prithee don't look with that violent and
inflexible wise Face, like Solomon at the dividing of the Child in an old
Tapestry-hanging.


Mira. You are merry, Madam, but I would persuade you for one Moment to be
serious.


Milla. What, with that Face? No, if you keep your Countenance, it is impossible
I should hold mine. Well, after all, there is something very moving in a
lovesick Face. Ha, ha, ha -- Well I will not laugh, don't be peevish -- Heigho!
Now I Will be melancholy, as melancholy as a Watch-light. Well Mirabell, If
ever you will win me woe me now -- Nay, if you are sotedious, fare you well; --
I see they are walking away.


Mira. Can you not find in the variety of your Disposition one Moment --


Milla. To hear you tell me that Foible's married, and your
Plot like to speed -- No.

Mira. But how you came to know it --

Milla. Unless by the help of the Devil you cannot imagine; unless she should
tell me her self. Which of the two it may have been, I will leave you to
consider; and when you have done thinking of that; think of me.


[Exit. Mira. I have something more -- Gone -- Think of you! To think of a
Whirlwind, though 'twere in a Whirlwind, were a Case of more steady
Contemplation; a very tranquillity of Mind and Mansion. A Fellow that lives in a
Windmill, has not a more whimsical Dwelling than the Heart of a Man that is
lodged in a Woman. There is no Point of the Compass to which they cannot turn,
and by which they are not turned; and by one as well as another; for Motion not
Method is their Occupation. To know this, and yet continue to be in Love, is to
be made wise from the Dictates of Reason, and yet persevere to play the Fool by
the force of Instinct -- O here come my pair of Turtles -- What, billing so
sweetly! Is not Valentine's Day over with you yet?

Enter Waitwell and Foible. Sirrah, Waitwell, why sure you think you were
married for your own Recreation, and not for my Convenience.


Wait. Your Pardon, Sir. With Submission, we have indeed been solacing in
lawful Delights; but still with an Eye to Business, Sir. I have instructed her
as well as I could. If she can take your Directions as readily as my
Instructions, Sir, your Affairs are in a prosperous way.


Mira. Give you Joy, Mrs. Foible.

Foib. O las Sir, I Am so ashamed -- I Am afraid my Lady has been in a thousand
Inquietudes for me. But I protest, Sir, I made as much haste as I could.


Wait. That she did indeed, Sir. It was my Fault that she did not make more.


Mira. That I believe.

Foib. But I told my Lady as you instructed me, Sir. That I had a prospect of
seeing Sir Rowland your Uncle; and that I would put her Ladyship's Picture in
my Pocket to show him; which I Will be sure to say has made him so enamored of
her Beauty, that he burns with Impatience to lie at her Ladyship's Feet and
worship the Original.


Mira. Excellent Foible! Matrimony has made you eloquent in Love.


Wait. I think she has profited, Sir. I think so.

Foib. You have seen Madam Millamant, Sir?

Mira. Yes.

Foib. I told her Sir, because I did not know that you might find an
Opportunity; she had so much Company last Night.


Mira. Your Diligence will merit more -- In the mean time --


[Gives Money. Foib. O dear Sir, your humble Servant.

Wait. Spouse.

Mira. Stand off Sir, not a Penny -- Go on and prosper, Foible -- The Lease
shall be made good and the Farm stocked, if we succeed.


Foib. I don't question your Generosity, Sir: And you need not doubt of
Success. If you have no more Commands Sir, I Will be gone; I Am sure my Lady is at
her Toilet, and cannot dress till I come -- O Dear, I Am sure that [ Looking out,
was Mrs. Marwood that went by in a Mask; if she has seen me with you I Am sure
she will tell my Lady. I Will make haste home and prevent her. Your Servant Sir.
B'w'y Waitwell.


[ Exit Foible. Wait. Sir Rowland if you please. The Jade's so pert upon her
Preserment she forgets her self.


Mira. Come Sir, will you endeavor to forget your self -- And transform into
Sir Rowland.


Wait. Why Sir; it will be impossible I should remember my self -- Married,
Knighted and attended all in one Day! It Is enough to make any Man forget
himself. The Difficulty will be how to recover my Acquaintance and Familiarity
with my former self; and fall from my Transformation to a Reformation into
Waitwell. Nay, I shall not be quite the same Waitwell neither -- For now I
remember me, I am married, and cannot be my own Man again.

Ay there is the Grief; that is the sad change of Life;
To lose my Title, and yet keep my Wife.
[Exeunt;
ACT III. SCENE I.
A Room in Lady Wishfort's House. Lady Wishfort at her Toilet, Peg waiting.
Lady. MErciful, no News of Foible yet?

Peg. No, Madam.

Lady. I have no more patience -- If I have not fretted my self till I am pale
again, there is no Veracity in me. Fetch me the Red -- The Red, do you hear,
Sweetheart? An errant Ash color, as I Am a Person. Look you how this Wench
stirs! Why do thou not fetch me a little Red? Did thou not hear me, Mopus?


Peg. The red Ratifia does your Ladyship mean, or the
Cherry Brandy?

Lady. Ratifia, Fool. No Fool. Not the Ratifia Fool -- Grant me patience! I
mean the Spanish Paper Idiot, Complexion Darling. Paint, Paint, Paint, do
thou understand that, Changeling, dangling thy Hands like Bobbins before thee.
Why do thou not stir Puppet? thou wooden Thing upon Wires.


Peg. Lord, Madam, your Ladyship is so impatient -- I cannot come at the Paint,
Madam; Mrs. Foible has locked it up, and carried the Key with her.


Lady. A Pox take you both -- Fetch me the Chery-Brandy then -- [ Exit Peg.]
I Am as pale and as faint, I look like Mrs. Qualmsick the Curate's Wife, that is
always breeding -- Wench, come, come, Wench, what art thou doing, Sipping?
Tasting? Save thee, do thou not know the Bottle?


Enter Peg with a Bottle and China-cup. Peg. Madam, I was looking for a Cup.

Lady. A Cup, save thee, and what a Cup have thou brought! Do thou take me
for a Fairy, to drink out of an Acorn? Why did thou not bring thy Thimble?
Have thou never a Brass-Thimble clinking in thy Pocket with a bit of Nutmeg? I
warrant thee. Come, fill, fill. -- So -- again. See who that is -- [ One
knocks] Set down the Bottle first. Here, here, under the Table -- What would
thou go with the Bottle in thy Hand like a Tapster. As I Am a Person, this Wench
has lived in an Inn upon the Road, before she came to me, like Maritorne's the
Asturian in Don Quixote. No Foible yet?


Peg. No Madam, Mrs. Marwood.

Lady. O Marwood, let her come in. Come in good Marwood.


Enter Mrs. Marwood. Mrs. Mar. I Am surpised to find your Ladyship in
dishabilie at this time of day.


Lady. Foible's a lost Thing; has been abroad since Morning, and never heard of
since.


Mrs. Mar. I saw her but now, as I came masked through the Park, in Conference
with Mirabell.


Lady. With Mirabell! You call my Blood into my Face, with mentioning that
Traitor. She durst not have the Confidence. I sent her to Negotiate an Affair,
in which if I Am detected I Am undone. If that wheadling Villain has wrought upon
Foible to detect me, I Am ruined. Oh my dear Friend, I Am a Wretch of Wretches if
I Am detected.


Mrs. Mar. O Madam, you cannot suspect Mrs. Foible's
Integrity.

Lady. O, he carries Poison in his Tongue that would corrupt Integrity it self.
If she has given him an Opportunity, she has as good as put her Integrity into
his Hands. Ah dear Marwood, what is Integrity to an Opportunity? -- Hark! I hear
her -- Go you Thing and send her in. [ Ex. Peg. Dear Friend retire into my
Closet, that I may examine her with more freedom -- You Will pardon me dear
Friend, I can make bold with you -- There are Books over the Chimney. --
Quarles and Pryn, and the Short View of the Stage, with Bunyan's Works to
entertain you.

[ Exit Marwood. Enter Foible. O Foible, where have thou been? What have thou
been doing?

Foib. Madam, I have seen the Party.

Lady. But what have thou done?

Foib. Nay, it is your Lady ship has done, and are to do; I have only promised.
But a Man so enamored -- So transported! Well, here it is, all that is left;
all that is not kissed away -- Well, if worshipping of Pictures be a Sin --
Poor Sir Rowland, I say.


Lady. The Miniature has been counted like -- But have thou not betrayed me,
Foible? Have thou not detected me to that faithless Mirabell? -- What had
thou to do with him in the Park? Answer me, has he got nothing out of thee?


Foib. So, the Devil has been before hand with me, what shall I say? -- Alas,
Madam, could I help it, if I met that confident Thing? Was I in Fault? If you
had heard how he used me, and all upon your Ladyship's Account, I Am sure you
would not suspect my Fidelity. Nay, if that had been the worst I could have
born: But he had a Fling at your Lady ship too; and then I could not hold; But
I faith I gave him his own.


Lady. Me? What did the filthy Fellow say?

Foib. O Madam; it is a shame to say what he said -- With his Taunts and his
Fleers, tossing up his Nose. Humh (says he) what you are a hatching some Plot
(says he) you are so early abroad, or Catering (says he) ferreting for some
disbanded Officer I warrant -- Half Pay is but thin Subsistence (says he) --
Well, what Pension does your Lady propose? Let me see (says he) what she must
come down pretty deep now, she is super-annuated (says he) and --


Lady. Ods my Life, I Will have him, I Will have him murdered.
I Will have him poisoned. Where does he eat? I Will marry a
Drawer to have him poisoned in his Wine. I Will send for
Robin from Lockets -- Immediately.

Foib. Poison him? Poysoning's too good for him. Starve him Madam, starve him,
marry Sir Rowland and get him disinherited. O you would bless your self, to
hear what he said.


Lady. A Villain, superanuated!

Foib. Humh (says he) I hear you are laying Designs against me too (says he),
and Mrs. Millamant is to marry my Uncle; (he does not suspect a Word of your
Ladyship;) but (says he) I Will fit you for that, I warrant you (says he) I Will
hamper you for that (says he) you and your old Frippery too (says he) I Will
handle you --


Lady. Audacious Villain! handle me, would he durst -- Frippery? old Frippery!
Was there ever such a foul-mouthed Fellow? I Will be married to Morrow, I Will be
contracted to Night.


Foib. The sooner the better, Madam.

Lady. Will Sir Rowland be here, say thou? when Foible?

Foib. Incontinently, Madam. No new Sheriff's Wife expects the return of her
Husband after Knighthood, with that Impatience in which Sir Rowland burns for
the dear hour of kissing your Ladyship's Hands after Dinner.


Lady. Frippery? Superannuated Frippery! I Will Frippery the Villain; I Will reduce
him to Frippery and Rags. A Tatterdemallion -- I hope to see him hung with
Tatters, like a long Lane Pent-house, or a Gibbet-thief. A slander mouthed
Railer: I warrant the Spendthrift Prodigal's in Debt as much as the Million
Lottery, or the whole Court upon a Birth day. I Will spoil his Credit with his
Tailor. Yes, he shall have my Niece with her Fortune, he shall.


Foib. He! I hope to see him lodge in Ludgate first, and
Angle into Black Friars for Brass Farthings, with an old
Mitten.

Lady. Ay dear Foible; thank thee for that dear Foible. He has put me out of
all patience. I shall never recompose my Features, to receive Sir Rowland with
any Economy of Face. This Wretch has fretted me that I am absolutely decayed.
Look Foible.


Foib. Your Ladyship has frowned a little too rashly, indeed Madam. There are
some Cracks discernable in the white Vernish.


Lady. Let me see the Glass -- Cracks, say thou? Why I am arrantly flayed --
I look like an old peeled Wall. Thou must repair me Foible, before Sir Rowland
comes; or I shall never keep up to my Picture.


Foib. I warrant you, Madam; a little Art once made your Picture like you; and
now a little of the same Art, must make you like your Picture. Your Picture
must fit for you, Madam.


Lady. But art thou sure Sir Rowland will not fail to come? Or will a not fail
when he does come? Will he be Importunate Foible, and push? For if he should
not be Importunate -- I shall never break Decorums -- I shall die with
Confusion, if I am forced to advance -- Oh no, I can never advance -- I shall
swoon if he should expect advances. No, I hope Sir Rowland is better bred, than
to put a Lady to the necessity of breaking her Forms. I will not be too coy
neither. -- I will not give him despair -- But a little Disdain is not amiss; a
little Scorn is alluring.


Foib. A little Scorn becomes your Ladyship.

Lady. Yes, but Tenderness becomes me best -- A sort of a dyingness -- You see
that Picture has a sort of a -- Ha Foible? A swimminess in the Eyes -- Yes,
I Will look so -- My Niece affects it; but she wants Features. Is Sir Rowland
handsome? Let my Toilet be removed -- I Will dress above. I Will receive Sir
Rowland here. Is he handsome? Don't answer me. I will not know: I Will be surpised.
I Will be taken by Surprise.


Foib. By Storm, Madam. Sir Rowland's a brisk Man.

Lady. Is he! O then he will Importune, if he is a brisk Man. I shall save
Decorums if Sir Rowland importunes. I have a mortal Terror at the apprehension
of offending against Decorums. Nothing but Importunity can surmount Decorums. O
I Am glad he is a brisk Man. Let my Things be removed, good Foible.


[Exit. Enter Mrs. Fainall. Mrs. Fain. O Foible, I have been in a Fright, least
I should come too late. That Devil Marwood saw you in the Park with Mirabell,
and I Am afraid will discover it to my Lady.


Foib. Discover what, Madam?

Mrs. Fain. Nay, nay, put not on that strange Face. I am privy to the whole
Design, and know that Waitwell, to whom thou were this morning Married, is to
personate Mirabell's Uncle, and as such winning my Lady, to involve her in
those Difficulties, from which Mirabell only must release her, by his making
his Conditions to have my Cousin and her Fortune left to her own disposal.


Foib. O dear Madam, I beg your Pardon. It was not my Confidence in your
Ladyship that was deficient; but I thought the former good Correspondence
between your Ladyship and Mr. Mirabell, might have hindered his communicating
this Secret.


Mrs. Fain. Dear Foible forget that.

Foib. O dear Madam, Mr. Mirabell is such a sweet winning Gentleman -- But your
Ladyship is the Pattern of Generosity. -- Sweet Lady, to be so good! Mr.
Mirabell cannot choose but be grateful. I find your Ladyship has his Heart
still. Now, Madam, I can safely tell your Ladyship our success, Mrs. Marwood
had told my Lady; but I warrant I managed my self. I turned it all for the
better. I told my Lady that Mr. Mirabell railed at her. I laid horrid Things to
his charge, I Will vow; and my Lady is so incensed, that she will be contracted to
Sir Rowland to Night, she says; -- I warrant I worked her up, that he may have
her for asking for, as they say of a Welsh Maidenhead.


Mrs. Fain. O rare Foible!

Foib. Madam, I beg your Ladyship to acquaint Mr. Mirabell of his success. I
would be seen as little as possible to speak to him, -- besides, I believe
Madam Marwood watches me. -- She has a Month's mind; but I know Mr. Mirabell
cannot abide her. -- [ Enter Footman.] John -- remove my Lady's Toilet. Madam
your Servant. My Lady is so impatient, I fear she will come for me, if I stay.


Mrs. Fain. I Will go with you up the back Stairs, lest I should meet her.


[Exeunt. Enter Mrs. Marwood. Mrs. Mar. Indeed Mrs. Engine, is it thus with
you? Are you become a go-between of this Importance? Yes, I shall watch you.
Why this Wench is the Pass-par-tout, a very Master-Key to every Bodies strong
Box. My Friend Fainall, have you carried it so swimmingly? I thought there was
something in it; but it seems it is over with you. Your loathing is not from a
want of Appetite then, but from a Surfeit. Else you could never be so cool to
fall from a Principal to be an Assistant; to procure for him! A Pattern of
Generosity, that I confess. Well, Mr. Fainall, you have met with your Match. --
O Man, Man! Woman, Woman! The Devil's an Ass: If I were a Painter, I would draw
him like an Idiot, a Driveler, with a Bib and Bells. Man should have his Head
and Horns, and Woman the rest of him. Poor simple Fiend! Madam Marwood has a
Months Mind, but he cannot abide her -- 'Twere better for him you had not been
his Confessor in that Affair; without you could have kept his Counsel closer. I
shall not prove another Pattern of Generosity; and stalk for him, till he takes
his Stand to aim at a Fortune, he has not obliged me to that, with those
Excesses of himself; and now I Will have none of him. Here comes the good Lady,
panting ripe; with a Heart full of Hope, and a Head full of Care, like any
Chemist upon the Day of Projection.


Enter Lady Wishfort. Lady. O dear Marwood what shall I say, for this rude
forgetfulness -- But my dear Friend is all Goodness.


Mrs. Mar. No Apologies, dear Madam. I have been very well entertained.


Lady. As I Am a Person I am in a very Chaos to think I should so forget my self
-- But I have such an Olio of Affairs really I know not what to do -- [ Calls]
-- Foible -- I expect my Nephew Sir Wilful every moment too -- Why Foible --
He means to Travel for Improvement.


Mrs. Mar. Methinks Sir Wilful should rather think of Marrying than Traveling
at his Years. I hear he is turned of Forty.


Lady. O he is in less Danger of being spoiled by his Travels -- I am against my
Nephews marrying too young. It will be time enough when he comes back, and has
acquired Discretion to choose for himself.


Mrs. Mar. Methinks Mrs. Millamant and he would make a very fit Match. He may
Travel afterward. It Is a Thing very usual with young Gentlemen.


Lady. I promise you I have thought on it -- And since it is your Judgment, I Will
think on it again. I assure you I will, I value your Judgment extremely. On my
Word I Will propose it.

Enter Foible. Come, come Foible -- I had forgot my Nephew will be here before
Dinner -- I must make haste.


Foib. Mr. Witwoud and Mr. Petulant, are come to Dine with your Ladyship.


Lady. O Dear, I cannot appear till I Am dressld. Dear Marwood shall I be free
with you again, and beg you to entertain 'em. I Will make all imaginable haste.
Dear Friend excuse me.


[Exit Lady and Foible. Enter Mrs. Millamant and Mincing. Milla. Sure never any
thing was so Unbred as that odious
Man -- Marwood, your Servant.

Mrs. Mar. You have a Color, what is the matter?

Milla. That horrid Fellow Petulant, has provoked me into into a Flame -- I
have broke my Fan -- Mincing, lend me yours; -- Is not all the Powder out of my
Hair?


Mrs. Mar. No. What has he done?

Milla. Nay, he has done nothing; he has only talked -- Nay, he has said
nothing neither; but he has contradicted every Thing that has been said. For my
part, I thought Witwood and he would have quarreled.


Minc. I vow Mem, I thought once they would have fit.

Milla. Well, it is a lamentable thing I Will swear, that one has not the liberty
of choosing one's Acquaintance, as one does one's Clothes.


Mrs. Mar. If we had the liberty, we should be as weary of one Set of
Acquaintance, though never so good, as we are of one Suit, though never fo fine. A
Fool and a Doily Stuff would now and then find Days of Grace, and be worn for
variety.


Milla. I could consent to wear 'em, if they would wear alike; but Fools never
wear out -- they are such Drap-duberry Things! without one could give 'em to
one's Chambermaid after a day or two.


Mrs. Mar. 'Twere better so indeed. Or what think you of the Playhouse? A fine
gay glossy Fool, should be given there, like a new masking Habit, after the
Masquerade is over, and we have done with the Disguise. For a Fool's Visit is
always a Difguise; and never admitted by a Woman of Wit, but to blind her
Affair with a Lover of Sense. If you would but appear bare faced now, and own
Mirabell; you might as easily put off Petulant and Witwoud, as your Hood and
Scarf. And indeed it is time, for the Town has found it: The Secret is grown too
big for the Pretense: It Is like Mrs. Primly's great Belly; she may lace it down
before, but it burnishes on her Hips. Indeed, Millamant, you can no more
conceal it, then my Lady Strammel can her Face, that goodly Face, which in
defiance of her Rhenish-wine Tea, will not be comprehended in a Mask.


Milla. I Will take my Death, Marwood, you are more Censorious, than a decayed
Beauty, or a discarded Tossed; Mincing, tell the Men they may come up. My Aunt is
not dressing; their Folly is less provoking than your Malice; the Town has
found it. [ Exit. Mincing.] What has it found? That Mirabell loves me is no
more a Secret, than it is a Secret that you discovered it to my Aunt, or than
the Reason why you discovered it is a Secret.


Mrs. Mar. You are nettl'd.

Milla. You Are mistaken. Ridiculous!

Mrs. Mar. Indeed my Dear, you will tear another Fan, if you don't mitigate those
violent Airs.


Milla. O silly! Ha, ha, ha. I could laugh immoderately. Poor Mirabell! his
Constancy to me has quite destroyed his Complaisance for all the World beside.
I swear, I never enjoined it him, to be so coy -- If I had the Vanity to think
he would obey me; I would command him to show more Gallantry -- It Is hardly
well bred to be so particular on one Hand, and so insensible on the other. But
I despair to prevail, and so let him follow his own way. Ha, ha, ha. Pardon me,
dear Creature, I must laugh, Ha, ha, ha; though I grant you it is a little
barbarous, Ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. Mar. What pity it is, so much fine Raillery, and delivered with so
significant Gesrure, should be so unhappily directed to miscarry.


Milla. Hae? Dear Creature I ask your Pardon -- I swear
I did not mind you.

Mrs. Mar. Mr. Mirabell and you both, may think it a
Thing impossible, when I shall tell him, by telling you --

Milla. O Dear, what? for it is the same thing, if I hear it -- Ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. Mar. That I detest him, hate him, Madam.

Milla. O Madam, why so do I -- And yet the Creature loves me, Ha, ha, ha. How
can one forbear laughing to think of it -- I am a Sybil if I am not amazed to
think what he can see in me. I Will take my Death, I think you are handsomer --
And within a Year or two as young. -- If you could but stay for me, I should
overtake you -- But that cannot be -- Well, that Thought makes me Melancholy
-- Now I Will be sad.


Mrs. Mar. Your merry Note may be changed sooner than you think.


Milla. Dee say so? Then I Am resolved I Will have a Song to keep up my Spirits.


Enter Mincing. Minc. The Gentlemen stay but to Comb, Madam; and will wait on
you.


Milla. Desire Mrs. -- that is in the next Room to sing the Song, I would have
learnt Yesterday. You shall hear it Madam -- Not that there is any great matter
in it -- But it is agreeable to my Humor.


Set by Mr. John Eccles, and Sung by Mrs. Hodgson. SONG.
I.
LOVE's but the frailty of the Mind,
When it is not with Ambition joined;
A sickly Flame, which if not fed expires;
And feeding, wastes in Self-consuming Fires.
II.
It Is not to wound a wanton Boy
Or amorous Youth, that gives the Joy;
But it is the Glory to have pierced a Swain,
For whom inferior Beauties sighed in vain.
III.
Then I alone the Conquest prize
When I insult a Rival's Eyes:
If there is Delight in Love, it is when I see
That Heart which others bleed for, bleed for me.
Enter Petulant and Witwoud. Milla. Is your Animosity composed, Gentlemen?

Wit. Raillery, Raillery, Madam, we have have no Animosity -- We hit off a
little Wit now and then, but no Animosity -- The falling out of Wits is like
the falling out of Lovers -- We agree in the main, like Treble and Base. Ha,
Petulant!


Pet. Ay in the main -- But when I have a Humor to contradict.


Wit. Ay, when he has a Humor to contradict, then I contradict too. What, I
know my Cue. Then we contradict one another like two Battle-dores: For
Contradictions beget one another like Jews.


Pet. If he says Black's Black -- If I have a Humor to say it is Blue -- Let
that pass -- All Is one for that. If I have a Humor to prove it, it must be
granted.


Wit. Not positively must -- But it may -- It may.

Pet. Yes, it positively must, upon Proof positive.

Wit. Ay, upon Proof positive it must; but upon Proof presumptive it only may.
That Is a Logical Distinction now, Madam.


Mrs. Mar. I perceive your Debates are of Importance and very learnedly handled.


Pet. Importance is one Thing, and Learning's another; but a Debate's a Debate,
that I assert.


Wit. Petulant's an Enemy to Learning; he relies altogether on his Parts.


Pet. No, I Am no Enemy to Learning; it hurts not me.

Mrs. Mar. That Is a Sign indeed its no Enemy to you.

Pet. No, no, it is no Enemy to any Body, but them that have it.


Milla. Well, an illiterate Man's my Aversion. I wonder at the Impudence of any
Illiterate Man, to offer to make Love.


Wit. That I confess I wonder at too.

Milla. Ah! to marry an Ignorant! that can hardly Read or Write.


Pet. Why should a Man be ever the further from being married though he cannot
Read, any more than he is from being Hanged. The Ordinary's paid for setting
the Psalm, and the Parish Priest for reading the Ceremony. And for the rest
which is to follow in both Cases, a Man may do it without Book -- So all is one
for that.


Milla. Dee hear the Creature? Lord, here is Company, I Will be gone.


[Exeunt Millamant and Mincing. Wit. In the Name of Bartlemew and his Fair,
what have we here?


Mrs. Mar. It Is your Brother, I fancy. Don't you know him?


Wit. Not I -- Yes, I think it is he -- I Have almost forgot him; I have not seen
him since the Revolution.


Enter Sir Wilful Witwoud in a Country Riding Habit, and Servant to Lady
Wishfort. Serve. Sir, my Lady's dressing. Here Is Company; if you please to walk
in, in the mean time.


Sir Will. Dressing! What it is but Morning here I warrant with you in London;
we should count it toward Afternoon in our Parts, down in Shropshire -- Why
then belike my Aunt han't dined yet -- Ha, Friend?


Serve. Your Aunt, Sir?

Sir Will. My Aunt Sir, yes my Aunt Sir, and your Lady Sir; your Lady is my
Aunt, Sir -- Why, what do thou not know me, Friend? Why then send Somebody
here that does. How long have thou lived with thy Lady, Fellow, ha!


Serve. A Week, Sir; longer than any Body in the House, except my Lady's Woman.


Sir Will. Why then belike thou do not know thy Lady, if thou see her, ha
Friend?


Serve. Why truly Sir; I cannot safely swear to her Face in a Morning, before
she is dressed. It Is like I may give a shrewd guess at her by this time.


Sir. Will. Well prithee try what thou can do; if thou can not guess,
enquire her out, do hear Fellow? And tell her, her Nephew Sir Wilful
Witwoud is in the House.


Serve. I shall, Sir.

Sir Will. Hold ye, hear me Friend; a Word with you in your Ear, prithee who
are these Gallants?


Serve. Really Sir, I cannot tell; here come so many here, it is hard to know 'em
all.


[Exit Servant. Sir Will. Oons this Fellow knows less than a Starling; I don't
think a' knows his own Name.


Mrs. Mar. Mr. Witwoud, your Brother is not behind Hand in forgetfulness -- I
fancy he has forgot you too.


Wit. I hope so -- The Devil take him that remembers first, I say.


Sir Will. Save you Gentlemen and Lady.

Mrs. Mar. For shame Mr. Witwoud; why will not you speak to him? -- And you, Sir.


Wit. Petulant speak.

Pet. And you, Sir.

Sir Will. No Offense, I hope.

[Salutes Marwood. Mrs. Mar. No sure, Sir.

Wit. This is a vile Dog, I see that already. No Offense!
Ha, ha, ha, to him; to him Petulant, smoke him.

Pet. It seems as if you had come a Journey, Sir; hem, hem.


[Surveying him round. Sir Will. Very likely, Sir, that it may seem so.

Pet. No Offense, I hope, Sir,

Wit. Smoke the Boots, the Boots; Petulant, the Boots;
Ha, ha, ha.

Sir Will. May be not, Sir; thereafter as it is meant, Sir.

Pet. Sir, I presume upon the Information of your Boots.

Sir Will. Why, it is like you may, Sir: If you are not satisfied with the
Information of my Boots, Sir, if you will step to the Stable, you may enquire
further os my Horse, Sir.


Pet. Your Horse, Sir! Your Horse is an Ass, Sir!

Sir Will. Do you speak by way of Offense, Sir?

Mrs. Mar. The Gentleman's merry, that is all, Sir -- S'life, we shall have a
Quarrel betwixt an Horse and an Ass, before they find one another out. You must
not take any Thing amiss from your Friends, Sir. You are among your Friends
here, though it may be you don't know it -- If I am not mistaken, you are Sir
Wilful Witwoud.


Sir Will. Right Lady; I am Sir Wilful Witwoud, so I write my self; no
offense to any Body, I hope; and Nephew to the Lady Wishfort, of this Mansion.


Mrs. Mar. Don't you know this Gentleman, Sir?

Sir Will. Hum! What sure it is not -- Yea by'r Lady, but it is -- 'Sheart I know
not whether it is or no -- Yea but it is, by the Rekin. Brother Anthony! What
Tony I says! What do thou not know me? By'r Lady nor I thee, thou art so
Becravated, and Beperriwig'd -- 'Sheart why do not speak? Art thou
o'er-joy'd?


Wit. Odso Brother, is it you? Your Servant Brother.

Sir Will. Your Servant! Why yours, Sir. Your Servant again -- 'Sheart, and
your Friend and Servant to that -- And a -- (puff) and a flap Dragon for your
Service, Sir: And a Hare's Foot, and a Hare's Scut for your Service, Sir; an
you be so cold and so courtly!


Wit. No offense, I hope, Brother.

Sir Will. 'Sheart, Sir, but there is, and much offense. -- A pox, is this your
Inns o'Court breeding, not to know your Friends and your Relations, your
Elders, and your Betters?


Wit. Why Brother Wilful of Salop, you may be as short as a Shrewsbury Cake,
if you please. But I tell you, it is not modish to know Relations in Town. You
think you're in the Country, where great lubberly Brothers slabber and kiss one
another when they meet, like a Call of Sergeants -- It Is not the fashion here;
it is not indeed, dear Brother.


Sir Will. The Fashion's a Fool; and you're a Fop, dear Brother. 'Sheart, I Have
suspected this -- By'r Lady I conjeetur'd you were a Fop, since you began to
change the Style of your Letters, and write in a scrap of Paper gilt round the
Edges, no broader than a Subpoena. I might expect this, when you left off
Honored Brother; and hoping you are in good Health, and so forth -- To begin
with a Rat me, Knight, I Am so sick of a last Nights debauch -- O'ds heart, and
then tell a familiar Tale of a Cock and a Bull, and a Whore and a Bottle, and
so conclude -- You could write News before you were out of your Time, when you
lived with honest Pumple Nose the Attorney of Furnival's Inn -- You could
entreat to be remembered then to your Friends round the Rekin. We could have
Gazetts then, and Dawks's Letter, and the weekly Bill, 'till of late Days.


Pet. S'life, Witwoud, were you ever an Attorney's Clerk?
Of the Family of the Furnivals. Ha, ha, ha!

Wit. Ay, ay, but that was for a while. Not long, not long; pshaw, I was not in
my own Power then. An Orphan, and this Fellow was my Guardian; ay, ay, I was
glad to consent to that Man to come to London. He had the disposal of me then.
If I had not agreed to that, I might have been bound Prentice to a Felt maker
in Shrewsbury; this Fellow would have bound me to a Maker of Felts.


Sir Will. 'Sheart, and better than to be bound to a Maker of Fops; where, I
suppose, you have served your Time; and now you may set up for your self.


Mrs. Mar. You intend to Travel, Sir, as I Am informed.

Sir Will. Belike I may Madam. I may chance to sail upon the salt Seas, if my
Mind hold.


Pet. And the Wind serve.

Sir Will. Serve or not ferve, I shant ask License of you, Sir; nor the
Weathercock your Companion. I direct my Discourse to the Lady, Sir: It Is like
my Aunt may have told you, Madam -- Yes, I have settled my Concerns, I may say
now, and am minded to see Foreign Parts. If an how that the Peace holds,
whereby that is, Taxes abate.


Mrs. Mar. I thought you had designed for France at all Adventures.


Sir Will. I cannot tell that; it is like I may, and it is like I may not. I am
somewhat dainty in making a Resolution, -- because when I make it I keep it. I
don't stand shill I, shall I, then; if I say it, I Will do it: But I have Thoughts
to tarry a small matter in Town, to learn somewhat of your Lingo first, before
I cross the Seas. I Would gladly have a spice of your French as they say, whereby
to hold discourse in Foreign Countries.


Mrs. Mar. Here is an Academy in Town for that use.

Sir Will. There is? It Is like there may.

Mrs. Mar. No doubt you will return very much improved.

Wit. Yes, refined, like a Dutch Skipper from a Whalefishing.


Enter Lady Wishfort and Fainall. Lady. Nephew, you are welcome.

Sir Will. Aunt, your Servant.

Fain. Sir Wilful, your most faithful Servant.

Sir Will. Cousin Fainall, give me your Hand.

Lady. Cousin Witwoud, your Servant; Mr. Petulant, your Servant. -- Nephew, you
are welcome again. Will you drink any Thing after your Journey, Nephew, before
you eat? Dinner's almost ready.


Sir Will. I Am very well I thank you Aunt -- However, I thank you for your
courteous Offer. 'Sheart, I was afraid you would have been in the fashion too,
and have remembered to have forgot your Relations. Here Is your Cousin Tony,
belike, I may not call him Brother for fear of offense.


Lady. O he is a Rallier, Nephew -- My Cousin's a Wit.
And your great Wits always rally their best Friends to choose.
When you have been abroad, Nephew, you will understand
Raillery better.

[Fain. and Mrs. Marwood talk apart. Sir Will. Why then let him hold his
Tongue in the mean time; and rail when that day comes.


Enter Mincing. Minc. Mem, I come to acquaint your Laship that Dinner is
impatient.


Sir Will. Impatient? Why then belike it will not stay, 'till I pull off my Boots.
Sweetheart, can you help me to a pair of Slippers? -- My Man's with his
Horses, I warrant.


Lady. Fie, fie, Nephew, you would not pull off your Boots here -- Go down into
the Hall -- Dinner shall stay for you -- My Nephew's a little unbred, you will
pardon him, Madam -- Gentlemen will you walk. Marwood --


Mrs. Mar. I Will follow you, Madam -- Before Sir Wilful is ready.


[ Manent Mrs. Marwood and Fainall. Fain. Why then Foible's a Bawd, an Errant,
Rank, Matchmaking Bawd. And I it seems am a Husband, a Rank-Husband; and my
Wife a very Errant, Rank-Wife, -- all in the Way of the World. 'S death to be
an Anticipated Cuckold, a Cuckold in Embrio? Sure I was born with budding
Antlers like a young Satyr, or a Citizens Child. 'S death to be Outwitted, to
be Out-Jilted -- Out-Matrimony'd, -- If I had kept my speed like a Stag, 'twere
somewhat, -- but to crawl after, with my Horns like a Snail, and out-strip'd by
my Wife -- it is Scurvy Wedlock.


Mrs. Mar. Then shake it off, You have often wished for an opportunity to part;
-- and now you have it. But first prevent their Plot, -- the half of
Millamant's Fortune is too Considerable to be parted with, to a Foe, to
Mirabell.


Fain. Dam him, that had been mine -- had you not made that fond discovery --
that had been forfeited, had they been Married. My Wife had added Luster to my
Horns, by that Increase of fortune, -- I could have worn 'em tipped with Gold,
though my forehead had been furnished like a Deputy-Lieutenant's Hall.


Mrs. Mar. They may prove a Cap of Maintenance to you still, if you can away
with your Wife. And she is no worse than when you had her -- I dare swear she
had given up her Game, before she was Married.


Fain. Hum! That may be -- She might throw up her
Cards; but I Will be hanged if she did not put Pam in her
Pocket.

Mrs. Mar. You Married her to keep you; and if you can contrive to have her
keep you better than you expected; why should you not keep her longer than you
intended?


Fain. The means, the means.

Mrs. Mar. Discover to my Lady your Wife's conduct; threat en to part with her
-- My Lady loves her, and will come to any Composition to save her reputation,
take the opportunity of breaking it, just upon the discovery of this imposture.
My Lady will be enraged beyond bounds, and Sacrifice Neice, and Fortune, and
all at that Conjuncture. And let me alone to keep her warm, if she should Flag
in her part, I will not fail to prompt her.


Fain. Faith this has an appearance.

Mrs. Mar. I Am sorry I hinted to my Lady to endeavor a match between Millamant
and Sir Wilful, that may be an Obstacle.


Fain. O, for that matter leave me to manage him; I Will disable him for that, he
will drink like a Dane: after dinner, I Will set his hand in.


Mrs. Mar. Well, how do you stand affected toward your Lady?


Fain. Why faith I Am thinking of it. -- Let me see -- I am married already; so
that is over, -- my Wife has played the Jade with me -- Well, that is over too --
I never loved her, or if I had, why that would have been over too by this time
-- Jealous of her I cannot be, for I am certain; so there is an end of
Jealousy. Weary of her, I am, and shall be -- No, there is no end of that; No,
no, that were too much to hope. Thus far concerning my repose. Now for my
Reputation, -- As to my own, I married not for it; so that is out of the
Question, -- And as to my part in my Wife's -- Why she had parted with hers
before; so bringing none to me, she can take none from me, it is against all
rule of Play, that I should lose to one, who has not wherewithal to stake.


Mrs. Mar. Besides you forget, Marriage is honorable.

Fain. Hum! Faith and that is well thought on; Marriage is honorable as you
say; and if so, Wherefore should Cuckoldom be a discredit, being derived from
so honorable a root?


Mrs. Mar. Nay I know not; if the root be Honorable, why not the Branches?


Fain. So, so, why this point's clear, -- Well how do we proceed?


Mrs. Mar. I will contrive a Letter which shall be delivered to my Lady at the
time when that Rascal who is to act Sir Rowland is with her. It shall come as
from an unknown hand -- for the less I appear to know of the truth -- the
better I can play the Incendiary. Besides I would not have Foible provoked if I
could help it, -- because you know she knows some passages -- Nay I expect all
will come out -- But let the Mine be sprung first, and then I care not if I Am
discovered.


Fain. If the worst come to the worst, -- I Will turn my Wife to Grass -- I have
already a deed of Settlement of the best part of her Estate; which I wheadl'd
out of her; And that you shall partake at least.


Mrs. Mar. I hope you are convinced that I hate Mirabell. now you will be no more
Jealous.


Fain. Jealous no, -- by this Kiss -- let Husbands be Jealous; But let the
Lover still believe. Or if he doubt, let it be only to endear his pleasure, and
prepare the Joy that follows, when he proves his Mistress true; but let
Husbands doubts Convert to endless Jealousy; or if they have belief, let it
Corrupt to Superstition, and blind Credulity. I am single; and will herd no
more with 'em. True, I wear the badge; but I Will disown the Order. And since I
take my leave of 'em, I care not if I leave 'em a common Motto, to their common
Crest.

All Husbands must, or pain, or shame, endure;
The Wise too Jealous are, Fools too secure:

[Exeunt. ACT IV. SCENE I.
[Scene Continues.] Enter Lady Wishfort and Foible. Lady. IS Sir Rowland coming
say thou, Foible? and are things in Order?


Foib. Yes, Madam. I have put Wax-Lights in the Sconces; and placed the
Footmen in a Row in the Hall, in their best Liveries, with the Coachman and
Postilion to fill up the Equipage.


Lady. Have you pullvill'd the Coachman and Postilion, that they may not stink
of the Stable, when Sir Rowland comes by?


Foib. Yes, Madam:

Lady. And are the Dancers and the Music ready, that he may be entertained in
all points with Correspondence to his Passion?


Foib. All is ready, Madam.

Lady. And -- well -- and how do I look, Foible?

Foib. Most killing well, Madam.

Lady. Well, and how shall I receive him? In what figure shall I give his Heart
the first Impression? There is a great deal in the first Impression. Shall I
sit? -- No I will not sit -- I Will walk -- aye I Will walk from the door upon his
entrance; and then turn full upon him -- No, that will be too sudden. I Will lie
-- aye, I Will lie down -- I Will receive him in my little dressing Room, there is a
Couch -- Yes, yes, I Will give the first Impression on a Couch -- I wont lie
neither but loll and lean upon one Elbow; with one Foot a little dangling off,
Jogging in a thoughtful way -- Yes -- and then as soon as he appears, start,
ay, start and be surpised, and rise to meet him in a pretty disorder -- Yes --
O, nothing is more alluring than a Levee from a Couch in some Confusion. -- It
shows the Foot to advantage, and furnishes with Blushes, and re-composing Airs
beyond Comparison. Hark! There Is a Coach.


Foib. It Is he, Madam.

Lady. O dear, has my Nephew made his Addresses to Millamant? I ordered him.


Foib. Sir Wilful is set into Drinking, Madam, in the Parlour.

Lad. Ods my life, I Will send him to her. Call her down, Foible; bring her
hither. I Will send him as I go -- When they are together, then come to me
Foible, that I may not be too long alone with Sir Rowland.


[Exit. Enter Mrs. Millamant, and Mrs. Fainall. Foib. Madam, I stayed here, to
tell your Ladyship that Mr. Mirabell has waited this half hour for an
Opportunity to talk with you. Though my Lady's Orders were to leave you and Sir
Wilful together. Shall I tell Mr. Mirabell that you are at leisure?


Mill. No -- What would the Dear man have? I am thoughtfull and would amuse my
self, -- bid him come another time.

There never yet was Woman made,
Nor shall but to be cursed.
Repeating and Walking about. That Is hard!

Fain. You are very fond of Sir John Suckling to day, Millamant, and the Poets.


Mill. He? Ay, and filthy Verses -- So I am.

Foib. Sir Wilful is coming, Madam. Shall I send Mr. Mirabell away?


Mill. Ay, if you please Foible, send him away, -- Or. send him hither, -- just
as you will Dear Foible. -- I think I Will see him -- Shall I? Ay, let the Wretch
come.

[Repeating.] Thyrsis a Youth of the Inspired train -- Dear Fainall, Entertain
Sir Wilfall -- Thou have Philosophy to undergo a Fool, thou art Married and
have Patience -- I would confer with my own Thoughts.


Fain. I am obliged to you, that you would make me your
Proxy in this Affair; but I have business of my own.
Enter Sir Wilful. O Sir Wilful; you are come at the Critical Instant.
There Is your Mistress up to the Ears in Love and Contemplation, pursue your
Point, now or never.


Sir. Will. Yes; my Aunt would have it so, -- I would gladly have been
encouraged with a Bottle or two, because I Am somewhat wary at first, before I
am acquainted; -- But I hope after a time, I shall break my mind -- that is
upon further acquaintance, -- So for the present Cosen, I Will take my leave --
If so be you will be so kind to make my Excuse, I Will return to my Company --

This while Mill. walks about Repeating to her self.
Fain. O fie Sir Wilful! What, you must not be Daunted.

Sir Will. Daunted, No, that is not it, it is not so much for that -- for if so
be that I set on it, I Will do it. But only for the present, it is sufficient till
further acquaintance, that is all -- your Servant.


Fain. Nay, I Will swear you shall never lose so favorable an opportunity, if I
can help it. I Will leave you together and lock the Door.


[Exit. Sir. Will. Nay, nay Cozen, -- I have forgot my Gloves, -- What dee do?
'Shart a'has locked the Door indeed I think -- Nay Cozen Fainall, open the Door
-- Pshaw, What a Vixon trick is this? -- Nay, now a'has seen me too -- Cozen, I
made bold to pass through as it were, -- I think this Door's Enchanted --.


Mill. [Repeating.] I prithee spare me gentle Boy,
Press me no more for that slight Toy.

Sir. Will. Anan? Cozen, your Servant.

Mill. -- That foolish tristle of a heart -- Sir Wilful!

Sir Will. Yes, -- your Servant. No offense I hope, Cozen.

Mill. [Repeating.] I swear it will not do its part,
Though thou do thine, employ'st thy Power and Art.
Natural, easy Suokling!

Sir. Will. Anan? Suckling? No such Suckling neither,
Cozen, nor Stripling: I thank Heaven, I Am no Minor.

Mill. Ah Rustic! ruder than Gothic.

Sir Will. Well, Well, I shall understand your Lingo one of these days, Cozen,
in the mean while, I must answer in plain English.


Mill. Have you any business with me, Sir Wilful?

Sir Will. Not at present Cozen, -- Yes, I made bold to see, to come and know if
that how you were disposed to fetch a walk this Evening, if so be that I might
not be troublesome, I would have fought a walk with you.


Mill. A walk? What then?

Sir. Will. Nay nothing -- Only for the walks sake, that is all --


Mill. I Nauseate walking; it is a Country diversion, I loath the Country and
every thing that relates to it.


Sir Will. Indeed! Hah! Look ye, look ye, you do? Nay, it is like you may -- Here
are choice of Pastimes here in Town, as Plays and the like that must be
confessed indeed. --


Mill. Ah l' etourdie! I hate the Town too.

Sir Will. Dear Heart, that is much -- Hah! that you should hate 'em both! Hah!
it is like you may; there are some cannot relish the Town, and others cannot away
with the Country, -- it is like you may be one of those, Cozen.


Mill. Ha, ha, ha. Yes, it is like I may. -- You have nothing further to say to
me?


Sir. Will. Not at present, Cozen. -- it is like when I have an Opportunity to be
more private, -- I may break my mind in some measure, -- I conjecture you
partly guess -- However that is as time shall try, -- But spare to speak and
spare to speed, as they say.


Mill. If it is of no great Importance, Sir Wilful, you will oblige me to
leave me: I have just now a little business. --


Sir Will. Enough, enough, Cozen, Yes, yes, all a case -- When you're disposed,
when you're disposed. Now Is as well as another time; and another time as well
as now. All Is one for that, -- yes, yes, if your Concerns call you, there is no
have; it will keep cold as they say, -- Cosen, your Servant,

I think this door's locked.

Mill. You may go this way Sir.

Sir. Will. Your Servant, then with your leave I Will return to my Company.


[Exit. Mill. Ay, ay, ha, ha, ha.

Like Phoebus sung the no less amorous Boy. Enter Mirabell. Mir. -- Like Daphne
she as lovely and as Coy.
Do you lock your self up from me, to make my search more Curious? Or is this
pretty Artifice Contrived, to Signify that here the Chase must end, and my
pursuit be Crowned, for you can fly no further. --


Mill. Vanity! No -- I Will fly and be followed to the last moment, though I am
upon the very Verge of Matrimony, I expect you should solicit me as much as if
I were wavering at the grate of a Monastery, with one foot over the threshold.
I Will be solicited to the very last, nay and afterward.


Mir. What, after the last?

Mill. O, I should think I was poor and had nothing to bestow, If I were
reduced to an Inglorious case; and freed from the Agreeable fatigues of
solicitation.


Mir. But do not you know, that when favors are conferred upon Instant and
tedious Solicitation, that they diminsh in their value, and that both the
giver loses the grace, and the receiver lessens his Pleasure?


Mill. It may be in things of common Application; but never sure in Love. O, I
hate a Lover, that can dare to think, he draws a moments air, Independent on
the Bounty of his Mistress. There is not so Impudent a thing in Nature, as the
saucy look of an assured man, Confident of Success. The Pedantick arrogance of
a very Husband, has not so Pragmatical an Air. Ah! I Will never marry, unless I
am first made sure of my will and pleasure.


Mira. Would you have 'em both before Marriage? Or will you be contented with
the first now, and stay for the other till after grace?


Mill. Ah don't be Impertinent -- My dear Liberty, shall I leave thee? My
faithful Solitude, my darling Contemplation must I bid you then Adieu? ay-h
adieu. -- my morning thoughts, agreeable wakings, indolent slumbers, all ye
douceurs, ye Someils du Matin adieu -- I cannot do it, 'cis more than Impossible
-- positively Mirabel, I Will lie a Bed in a morning as long as I please.


Mira. Then I Will get up in a morning as early as I please.

Mill. Ah! Idle Creature, get up when you will -- and dee hear, I will not be
called names after I Am Married; positively I will not be called Names.


Mira. Names!

Mill. Ay as Wife, Spouse, My dear, Joy, Jewel, Love, Sweet heart and the rest
of that Nauseous Cant, in which Men and their Wives are so fulsomely familiar,
-- I shall never bear that, -- Good Mirabell don't let us be familiar or fond,
nor kiss before folks, like my Lady Fadler and Sr. Francis: Nor go to
Hide-Park together the first Sunday in a New Chariot, to provoke Eyes and
Whispers; And then never to be seen there together again; as if we were proud
of one another the first Week, and ashamed of one another for ever After. Let
us never Visit together, nor go to a Play together, But let us be very strange
and well bred: let us be as strange as if we had been married a great while;
and as well bred as if we were not married at all.


Mir. Have you any more Conditions to offer? Hitherto your demands are pretty
reasonable.


Mill. Trifles, -- As liberty to pay and receive visits to and from whom I
please, to write and receive Letters, without Interrogatories or wry Faces on
your part. To wear what I please; and choose Conversation with regard only to
my own taste; to have no obligation upon me to converse with Wits that I don't
like, because they are your acquaintance; or to be intimate with Fools, because
they may be your Relations. Come to Dinner when I please, dine in my dressing
room when I Am out of humor without giving a reason. To have my Closet
Inviolate; to be sole Empress of my Tea-table, which you must never presume to
approach without first asking leave. And lastly, where ever I am, you shall
always knock at the door before you come in. These Articles subscribed, If I
continue to endure you a little longer, I may by degrees dwindle into a Wife.


Mir. Your bill of fare is something advanced in this latter account. Well,
have I Liberty to offer Conditions -- that when you are dwindl'd into a Wife, I
may not be beyond Measure enlarged into a Husband?


Mill. You have free leave; propose your utmost, speak and spare not.


Mir. I thank you. Inprimis then, I Covenant that your acquaintance be General;
that you admit no sworn Confident, or Intimate of your own Sex; No she friend
to skreen her affairs under your Countenance and tempt you to make trial of a
Mutual Secrecy. No Decoy-Duck to wheedle you a fop -- scrambling to the Play
in a Mask -- then bring you home in a pretended fright, when you think you
shall be found out. -- And rail at me for missing the Play, and disappointing
the Frolic which you had to pick me up and prove my Constancy.


Mill. Detestable Inprimis! I go to the Play in a Mask!

Mir. Item, I Article, that you continue to like your own Face, as long as I
shall. And while it passes Current with me, that you endeavor not to new Coin
it. To which end, together with all Vizards for the day, I prohibit all Masks
for the Night, made of oil'd-skins and I know not what -- Hog's-bones,
Hare's-gall, Pig-water, and the marrow of a roasted Cat. In short, I forbid all
Commerce with the Gentlewoman in what-call-all-it-Court. Item, I shut my doors
against all Bauds with Baskets, and Penny-worths of Muslin, China, Fans,
Atlases, etc. -- Item when you shall be Breeding. --


Mill. Ah! Name it not.

Mir. Which may be presumed, with a blessing on our endeavors --


Mill. Odious endeavors!

Mir. I denounce against all strait-Laceing, Squeezing for a Shape, till you
mold my boy's head like a Sugar Loaf; and instead of a Man-child, make me the
Father to a Crookedbillet. Lastly to the Dominion of the Tea-Table, I submit.
-- But with proviso, that you exceed not in your province; but restrain your
self to Native and Simple Tea-Table drinks, as Tea, Chocolate and Coffee. As
likewise to Genuine and, Authorized Tea-Table talk, -- such as mending of
Fashions spoiling Reputations, railing at absent Friends, and so forth -- but
that on no account you encroach upon the men's prerogative, and presume to drink
healths, or toste fellows; for prevention of which; I banish all Foreign
Forces, all Auxiliaries to the Tea-Table, as Orange-Brandy, all Anniseed,
Cinnamon, Citron and Barbado's-Waters, together with Ratifia and the most noble
Spirit of Clary, -- but for Couslip-Wine, Poppy-Water and all Dormitives, those
I allow, -- these proviso's admitted, in other things I may prove a tractable
and complying Husband.


Mill. O horrid proviso's! filthy strong Waters! I toste fellows, Odious Men! I
hate your Odious proviso's.


Mir. Then wee're agreed. Shall I kiss your hand upon the Contract? and here
comes one to be a witness to the Sealing of the Deed.


Enter Mrs. Fainall. Mill. Fainall, what shall I do? shall I have him? I think
I must have him.

Mrs. Fain. Ay, ay, take him, take him, what should you do?


Mill. Well then -- I Will take my death I Am in a horrid fright -- Fainall, I
shall never say it -- well -- I think -- I Will endure you.


Mrs. Fain. Fie, fie, have him, have him, and tell him so in plain terms: For I
am sure you have a mind to him.


Mill. Are you? I think I have -- and the horrid Man looks as if he thought so
too -- Well, you ridiculous thing you, I Will have you, -- I will not be kissed, nor
I will not be thanked -- here kiss my hand though -- so hold your tongue now, and
don't say a word.


Mrs. Fain. Mirabell, there is a Necessity for your obedience; -- You have
neither time to talk nor stay. My Mother is coming; and in my Conscience if she
should see you, would fall into fits, and maybe not recover time enough to
return to Sir Rowland, who as Foible tells me is in a fair way to succeed.
Therefore spare your Extacies for another occasion, and slip down the
back-stairs, where Foible waits to consult you.


Mill. Ay, go, go. In the mean time I suppose you have said something to please
me.


Mir. I am all Obedience.

[ Exit Mirab. Mrs. Fain. Yonder Sir Wilfull's Drunk; and so noisy that my
Mother has been forced to leave Sir Rowland to appease him; But he answers her
only with Singing and Drinking -- what they have done by this time I know not.
But Petulant and he were upon quarrelling as I came by.


Mill. Well, If Mirabell should not make a good Husband,
I am a lost thing; -- for I find I love him violently.

Mrs. Fain. So it seems, when you mind not what is said to you, -- If you doubt
him, you had best take up with Sir Wilful.


Mill. How can you name that super-annuated Lubber,
^oh!

Enter Witwou'd from drinking. Mrs. Fain. So, Is the fray made up, that you
have left 'em?


Wit. Left 'em? I could stay no longer -- I have laughed like ten Christnings
-- I am tipsy with laughing -- If I had staid any longer I should have burst,
-- I must have been let out and piec'd in the sides like an unsiz'd Camlet, --
Yes, yes the fray is composed; my Lady came in like a Noli prosequi and stopped
their proceedings.


Mill. What was the dispute?

Wit. That Is the Jest, there was no dispute, they could neither of 'em speak
for rage; And so fell a sputt'ring at one another like two roasting Apples.

Enter Petulant Drunk. Now Petulant, all is over, all is well; Gad my head begins
to whim it about -- Why do thou not speak? thou art both as drunk and as mute
as a Fish.


Pet. Look you Mrs. Millamant, -- If you can love me dear Nymph -- say it --
and that is the Conclusion -- pass on, or pass off, -- that is all.


Wit. Thou have uttered Volumes, Folio's, in less than Decimo Sexto, my Dear
Lacedemonian, Sirrah Petulant, thou art an Epitomizer of words.


Pet. Witwou'd -- You are an anihilator of sense.

Wit. Thou art a retailer of Phrases; and do deal in Remnants of Remnants,
like a maker of Pincushions -- thou art in truth (Metaphorically speaking) A
speaker of shorthand.


Pet. Thou art (without a figure) Just one half of an Ass; and Baldwin yonder,
thy half Brother is the rest -- A gemini of Asses split, would make just four
of you.


Wit. Thou dodst bite my dear Mustard Seed; kiss me for that.


Pet. Stand off -- I Will kiss no more Males, -- I have kissed your twin yonder
in a humor of reconciliation, till he ( hiccup) rises upon my stomach like a
Radish.


Mill. Eh! filthy creature -- what was the quarrel?

Pet. There was no quarrel -- there might have been a quarrel.


Wit. If there had been words enough between 'em to have expressed provocation;
they had gone together by the Ears like a pair of Castanets.


Pet. You were the Quarrel.

Mill. Me!

Pet. If I have a humor to Quarrel, I can make less matters conclude Premises,
-- If you are not handsome, what then? If I have a humor to prove it. -- If I
shall have my Reward, say so; if not, fight for your Face the next time your
self -- I Will go sleep.


Wit. Do, rap thy self up like a Wood-louse and dream Revenge -- and hear me,
if thou can learn to write by to morrow Morning, Pen me a Challenge -- I Will
carry it for thee.


Pet. Carry your Mistresses Monkey a Spider, -- go flea
Dogs, and read Romances -- I Will go to bed to my Maid.

[Exit. Mrs. Fain. He Is horridly drunk -- how came you all in this pickle? --


Wit. A plot, a plot, to get rid of the Knight, -- your Husband's advice; but
he sneaked off.


Enter Lady and Sir Wilful drunk. Lady. Out upon it, out upon it, at years of
Discretion, and Comport your self at this Rantipole rate.


Sir Will. No Offense Aunt.

Lady. Offense? As I Am a Person, I Am ashamed of you, -- Fogh! how you stink of
Wine! Dee think my Neice will ever endure such a Borachio! you are an absolute
Borachio.


Sir Will. Borachio!

Lady. At a time when you should commence an Amor and put your best foot
foremost --


Sir Will. Sheart, an you grutch me your Liquor, make a
Bill -- Give me more drink and take my Purse.
Sings, Prithee fill me the Glass
Till it laugh in my Face,
With Ale that is Potent and Mellow;
He that Whines for a Lass,
Is an Ignorant Ass,
For a Bumper has not its Fellow.
But if you would have me Marry my Cosen, -- say the Word, and I Will do it --
Wilful will do it, that is the Word -- Wilful will do it, that is my Crest -- my
Motto I have forgot.


Lady. My Nephew's a little overtaken Cosen -- but it is with drinking your
Health -- OF my Word you are obliged to him.


Sir Will. In vino veritas Aunt, -- If I drunk your Health to day Cosen -- I am
a Borachio. But if you have a mind to be Married, say the Word, and send for
the Piper, Wilful will do it. If not, dust it away, and let us have the other round
-- Tony, Ods heart where is Tony -- Tony's an honest fellow, but he spits after
a Bumper, and that is a Fault.

Sings, We'll drink and we'll never ha'done Boys
Put the glass then aroundwith the Sun Boys
Let Apollo's Example invite us;
For he is drunk every Night,
And that makes him so bright,
That he is able next Morning to light us.
the Sun's a good Pimple, an honest Soaker, he has a Cellar at your Antipodes.
If I travel Aunt, I touch at your Antipodes -- your Antipodes are a good
rascally sort of topsy turvy Fellows -- If I had a Bumper I Would stand upon my
Head and drink a Health to 'em -- A Match or no Match, Cosen, with the hard
Name, -- Aunt, Wilful will do it, If she has her Maidenhead let her look to it,
-- if she has not, let her keep her own Counsel in the mean time, and cry out
at the nine Months end.


Mill. Your Pardon Madam, I can stay no longer -- Sir Wilful grows very
powerful, Egh! how he smells! I shall be overcome if I stay.

Come, Cosen.

[ Ex. Mill. and Mrs. Fain. Lady. Smells! he would poison a Tallow-Chandler and
his Family. Beastly Creature, I know not what to do with him -- Travel quoth a;
Ay travel, travel, get thee gone, get thee but far enough, to the Saracens or
the Tartars, or the Turks -- for thou are not fit to live in a Christian
Commonwealth, thou beastly Pagan.


Sir Will. Turks, no; no Turks, Aunt: Your Turks are Infidels, and believe not
in the Grape. Your Mohammedan, your Mussulman is a dry Stinkard -- No Offense,
Aunt. My Map says that your Turk is not so honest a Man as your Christian -- I
cannot find by the Map that your Mufti is Orthodox -- Whereby it is a plain
Case, that Orthodox is a hard Word, Aunt, and ( hiccup) Greek for Claret.

Sings. To drink is a Christian Diversion,
Unknown to the Turk and the Persian:
Let Mohammedan Fools
Live by Heathenish Rules,
And be damned over Tea-Cups and Coffee.
But let British Lads sing,
Crown a Health to the King,
And a Fig for your Sultan and Sophy.
Ah Tony!


Enter Foible, and whispers Lady. Lady. Sir Rowland impatient? Good lack! what
shall I do with this beastly Tumbril? -- Go lie down and sleep, you Sot -- Or
as I Am a person, I Will have you bastinado'd with Broom-sticks. Call up the
Wenches.


[ Ex. Foib. Sir Will. Ahey! Wenches, where are the Wenches?

Lady. Dear Cosen Witwou'd, get him away, and you will bind me to you
inviolably. I have an Affair of moment that invades me with some precipitation
-- You will oblige me to all Futurity.


Wit. Come Knight -- Pox on him. I don't know what to say to him -- will you go
to a Cock-match?


Sir. Will. With a Wench, Tony? Is she a shake-bag Sirrah? let me bite your
Cheek for that.


Wit. Horrible! He has a breath like a Bagpipe -- ay, ay, come will you March
my Salopian?


Sir Will. Lead on little Tony -- I Will follow thee my Anthony, My Tantony,
Sirrah thou shall be my Tantony; and I Will be thy Pig.

-- And a fig for your Sultan and Sophy.

[ Exit Singing with Witwou'd. Lady. This will never do. It will never make a
Match.
-- At least before he has been abroad.
Enter Waitwell, disguised as for Sir Rowland. Dear Sir Rowland, I am
Confounded with Confusion at the Retrospection of my own rudeness, -- I have
more pardons to ask than the Pope distributes in the Year of Jubilee. But I
hope where there is likely to be so near an alliance, -- We may unbend the
severity of Decorum -- and dispense with a little Ceremony.


Wait. My Impatience Madam, is the effect of my transport; -- and till I have
the possession of your adoreable Person, I am tantaliz'd on a rack; And do but
hang Madam, on the tenter of Expectation.


Lady, You have Excess of gallantry Sir Rowland; and press things to a
Conclusion, with a most prevailing Vehemence. -- But a day or two for decency
of Marriage --


Wait. For decency of Funeral, Madam. The delay will break my heart -- or if
that should fail. I shall be Poisoned. My Nephew will get an inkling of my
Designs and Poison me, -- and I would willingly starve him before I die -- I
would gladly go out of the World with that Satisfaction. -- That would be some
Comfort to me, If I could but live so long as to be revenged on that Unnatural
Viper.


Lady, Is he so Unnatural say you? truly I would Contribute much both to the
saving of your Life; and the accomplishment of your revenge -- Not that I
respect my self; though he has been a perfidious wretch to me.


Wait. Perfidious to you!

Lady. O Sir Rowland, the hours that he has died away at my Feet, the Tears
that he has shed, the Oaths that he has sworn, the Palpitations that he has
felt, the Trances, and the Tremblings, the Ardors and the Ecstacies, the
Kneelings and the Riseings, the Heart-heavings, and the hand-Gripings, the
Pangs and the Pathetick Regards of his protesting Eyes! Oh no memory can
Register.


Wait. What, my Rival! is the Rebel my Rival? a'dies.


Lady, No, don't kill him at once Sir Rowland, starve him gradually inch by
inch.


Wait. I Will do it. In three weeks he shall be barefoot; in a month out at knees
with begging an Alms, -- he shall starve upward and upward, till he has nothing
living but his head, and then go out in a stink like a Candle's end upon a
Save-all.


Lady, WellSir Rowland, you have the way, -- You are no Novice in the Labyrinth
of Love -- You have the Clue. -- But as I am a person, Sir Rowland, You must
not attribute my yielding to any sinister appetite, or Indigestion of
Widdow-hood; Nor Impute my Complacency, to any Lethargy of Continence -- I hope
you do not think me prone to any iteration of Nuptials. --


Wait. Far be it from me --

Lady. If you do, I protest I must recede -- or think that I have made a
prostitution of decorums, but in the Vehemence of Compassion, and to save the
life of a Person of so much Importance --


Wait. I esteem it so --

Lady. Or else you wrong my Condescension --

Wait. I do not, I do not --

Lady. Indeed you do.

Wait. I do not, fair shrine of Virtue.

Lady. If you think the least scruple of Carnality was an
Ingredient --

Wait. Dear Madam, no. You are all Camphire and Frankincense, all Chastity and
Odor.


Lady. Or that --

Enter Foible. Foib. Madam, the Dancers are ready, and there is one with a
Letter, who must deliver it into your own hands.


Lady. Sir Rowland, will you give me leave? think favorably, Judge Heartily
and conclude you have found a Person who would suffer racks in honor's cause,
dear Sir Rowland, and will wait on you Incessantly.


[Exit. Wait. Fie, fie! -- What a Slavery have I undergone;
Spouse, have thou any Cordial -- I want Spirits.

Foib. What a washy Rogue art thou, to pant thus for a quarter of an hours
lying and swearing to a fine Lady?


Wait. O, she is the Antidote to desire. Spouse, thou will it fare the worse
for it -- I shall have no appetite to interation of Nuptials -- this eight and
forty Hours -- by this hand I Would rather be a Chairman in the Dog Days -- than
Act Sir Rowland, till this time to morrow.


Enter Lady with a Letter. Lady. Call in the Dancers; -- Sir Rowland, we'll sit
if you please, and see the Entertainment.

Dance. Now with your permission Sir Rowland I will peruse my Letter -- I would
open it in your presence, because I would not make you Uneasy. If it should
make you Uneasy I would burn it -- speak if it does -- but you may see by the
Superscription it is like a Woman's hand.


Foib. By Heaven! Mrs. Marwood's, I know it, -- my heart aches -- get it from
her --


[to him,] Wait. A Woman's hand? No Madam, that is no Woman's hand I see that
already. That Is some body whose throat must be cut.


Lady. Nay Sir Rowland, since you give me a proof of your Passion by your
Jealousy, I promise you I Will make you a return, by a frank Communication --
You shall see it -- we will open it together -- look you here.

Reads -- Madam, though unknown to you [Look you there it is from no body that I
know] -- I have that honor for your Character, that I think my self obliged to
let you know you are abused. He who pretends to be Sir Rowland is a cheat and a
Rascal. -- Oh Heavens! what is this?

Foib. Unfortunate, all is ruined.

Wait. How, how, Let me see, let me see -- reading A
Rascal and disguised and subborn'd for that imposture, -- O villainy
O villainy! -- by the Contrivance of --

Lady. I shall faint, I shall die, I shall die, oh!

Foib. Say it is your Nephew's hand. -- quickly, his plot, swear, fwear it. --


[to him. Wait. Here Is a Villain! Madam, don't you perceive it, don't you see
it?


Lady. Too well, too well. I have seen too much.

Wait. I told you at first I knew the hand -- A Woman's hand? the Rascal writes
a sort of a large hand; your Roman hand -- I saw there was a throat to be cut
presently. If he were my Son as he is my Nephew I Would Pistol him --


Foib. O Treachery! But are you sure Sir Rowland, it is his writing?


Wait. Sure? am I here? do I live? do I love this Pearl of India? I have twenty
Letters in my Pocket from him, in the same Character.


Lady. How!

Foib. O what luck it is Sir Rowland, that you were present at this Juncture!
this was the business that brought Mr. Mirabell disguised to Madam Millamant
this Afternoon. I thought something was contriving, when he stole by me and
would have hid his face.


Lady. How, how! -- I heard the Villain was in the house indeed, and now I
remember, my Niece went away abruptly, when Sir Wilful was to have made his
addresses.


Foib. Then, then Madam, Mr. Mirabell waited for her in her Chamber, but I
would not tell your Lady-ship to discompose you when you were to receive Sir
Rowland.


Wait. Enough, his date is short.

Foib. No, good Sir Rowland, don't incurr the Law.

Wait. Law? I care not for Law. I can but die, and it is in a good cause -- my
Lady shall be satisfied of my Truth and Innocence, though it cost me my life.


Lady. No, dear Sir Rowland, don't sight, if you should be killed I must never
show my face or hanged, -- O Consider my Reputation Sir Rowland -- No you
shall not fight, -- I Will go in and Examine my Niece; I Will make her Confess. I
conjure you Sir Rowland by all your love not to fight.


Wait. I am Charmed Madam, I obey. But some proof you must let me give you; --
I Will go for a black box, which Contains the Writings of my whole Estate, and
deliver that into your hands.


Lady. Ay dear Siv Rowland, that will be some Comfort; bring the Black-box.


Wait. And may I presume to bring a Contract to be signed this Night? May I
hope so far?


Lady. Bring what you will; but come alive, pray come alive. O this is a happy
discovery.


Wait. Dead or Alive I Will come -- and married we will be in spite of
treachery; Ay and get an Heir that shall defeat the last remaining glimpse of
hope in my abandoned Nephew. Come my Buxom Widow.

Ere long you shall Substantial proof receive
That I Am an Arrant Knight --

Foib. Or arrant Knave.

[Exeunt ACT V. SCENEI.
[Scene Continues.] Lady Wishfort and Foible. LAdy. Out of my house, out of my
house, thou Viper, thou Serpent, that I have fostered, thou bosom traytress,
that I raised from nothing -- begone, begone, begone, go, go, -- that I took from
Washing of old Gause and Weaving of dead Hair, with a bleak blew Nose, over a
Chafeingdish of starved Embers and Dining behind a Traver's Rag, in a shop no
bigger than a Bird-cage, -- go, go, starve again, do, do.


Foib. Dear Madam, I Will beg pardon on my knees.

Lady. Away, out, out, go set up for your self again -- do, drive a Trade, do,
with your three penny worth of small Ware, flaunting upon a Packthread, under a
Brandy-sellers Bulk, or against a dead Wall by a Ballad-monger. Go hang out an
old Frisoneer-gorget, with a yard of Yellow Colberteen again; do; an old gnawed
Mask, two rows of Pins and a Child's Fiddle; A Glass Necklace with the Beads
broken, and a Quilted Nightcap with one Ear. Go, go, drive a trade, -- these
were your Commodities you treacherous Trull, this was your Merchandise you
dealt in, when I took you into my house, placed you next my self And made you
Governante of my whole Family. You have forgot this, have you? Now you have
feathered you^ Nest.


Foib. No, no, dear Madam. Do but hear me, have but a Moment's patience -- I Will
Confess all. Mr. Mirabell seduced me; I am not the first that he has wheadl'd
with his dissembling Tongue; Your Lady-ship's own Wisdom has been deluded by
him, then how should I a poor Ignorant, defend my self? O Madam, If you knew
but what he promised me; and how he assured me your Ladyship should come to no
damage -- Or else the Wealth of the Indies should not have bribed me to
conspire against so Good, so Sweet, so kind a Lady as you have been to me.


Lady. No damage? What to Betray me, to Marry me to a Cast-serving-man; to make
me a receptacle, an Hospital for a decayed Pimp? No damage? O thou frontless
Impudence, more than a big-Belly'd Actress.


Foib. Pray do but here me Madam, he could not marry your Lady-ship, Madam --
No indeed his Marriage was to have been void in Law; for he was married to me
first, to secure your Lady-ship. He could not have bedded your Lady-ship: for
if he had Consummated with your Ladyship; he must have run the risque of the
Law, and been put upon his Clergy -- Yes indeed, I inquired of the Law in that
case before I would meddle or make.


Lady. What, then I have been your Property, have I? I have been convenient to
you it seems, -- while you were Catering for Mirabell; I have been broaker for
you? What, have you made a passive Bawd of me? -- this Exceeds all precedent; I
am brought to fine uses, to become a botcher of second hand Marriages, between
Abigails and Andrews! I Will couple you, Yes, I Will baste you together, you and
your Philander. I Will Dukes-Place you, as I Am a Person. Your Turtle is in
Custody already; You shall Coo in the same Cage, if there be Constable or
warrant in the Parish.


[Exit Foib. O that ever I was Born, O that I was ever Married, -- a Bride, ay
I shall be a Bridewell-Bride. Oh!


Enter Mrs. Fainall. Mrs. Fain. Poor Foible, what is the matter?

Foib. O Madam, my Lady's gone for a Constable; I shall be had to a Justice,
and put to Bridewell to beat Hemp, poor Waitwell's gone to prison already.


Mrs. Fain. Have a good heart Foible, Mirabell's gone to give security for him,
this is all Marwood's and my Husband's doing.


Foib. Yes, yes; I know it Madam; she was in my Lady's Closet, and overheard
all that you said to me before Dinner. She sent the Letter to my Lady, and that
missing Effect, Mr. Fainall laid this Plot to arrest Waitwell, when he
pretended to go for the Papers; and in the mean time Mrs. Marwood declared all
to my Lady.


Mrs. Fain. Was there no mention made of me in the Letter? -- My Mother does
not suspect my being in the Confederacy? I fancy Marwood has not told her, though
she has told my husband.


Foib. Yes Madam; but my Lady did not see that part; We stifled the Letter
before she read so far. Has that mischeivous Devil told Mr. Fainall of your
Ladyship then?


Mrs. Fain. Ay, all is out, My affair with Mirabell, every thing discovered.
This is the last day of our liveing together, that is my Comfort.


Foib. Indeed Madam, and so it is a Comfort if you knew all, -- he has been even
with your Ladyship; which I could have told you long enough since, but I love
to keep Peace and Quietness by my good will: I had rather bring friends
together, than set 'em at distance. But Mrs. Marwood and He are nearer related
than ever their Parents thought for.


Mrs. Fain. Say thou so Foible? Can thou prove this?


Foib. I can take my Oath of it Madam, so can Mrs. Mincing; we have had many a
fair word from Madam Marwood, to conceal something that passed in our Chamber
one Eve^ning when you were at Hide-Park; -- And we were thought to have gone a
Walking: But we went up unawares,-though we were sworn to secrecy too; Madam
Marwood took a Book and swore us upon it: But it was but a Book of Verses and
Poems, -- So as long as it was not a Bible-Oath, we may break it with a safe
Conscience.


Mrs. Fain. This discovery is the most opportune thing
I could wish. Now Mincing?

Enter Mincing. Minc. My Lady would speak with Mrs. Foible, Mem. Mr. Mirabell
is with her, he has set your Spouse at liberty Mrs. Foible; and would have you
hide your self in my Lady's Closet, till my old Lady's anger is abated. O, my
old Lady is in a perilous passion, at something Mr. Fainall has said, He
swears, and my old Lady cry's. There Is a fearful Hurricane I vow. He says Mem;
how that holl have my Lady's Fortune made over to him, or he will be divorced.


Mrs. Fain. Does your Lady and Mirabell know that?

Minc. Yes Mem, they have sent me to see if Sir Wilful be sober, and to bring
him to them. My Lady is resolved to have him I think, rather than loose such a
vast Sum as six thousand Pound. O, come Mrs. Foible, I hear my old Lady.


Mrs. Fain. Foible, you must tell Mincing, that she must prepare to vouch when
I call her.


Foib. Yes, yes Madam.

Minc. O yes Mem, I Will vouch any thing for your Ladyship's service, be what it
will.


[ Exeunt Minc. and Foib. Enter Lady and Marwood. Lady. O my dear Friend, how
can I Enumerate the benefits that I have received from your goodness? To you I
owe the timely discovery of the fall vows of Mirabell; To you the Detection of
the Impostor Sir Rowland. And now you are become an Intercessor with my Son
in-Law, to save the Honor of my House, and Compound for the frailty's of my
Daughter. Well Friend, You are enough to reconcile me to the bad World, or else
I would retire to Deserts and Solitudes; and feed harmless Sheep by Groves and
Purling Streams. Dear Marwood, let us leave the World, and retire by our selves
and be Sheperdresses.


Mrs. Mar. Let us first dispatch the affair in hand Madam, we shall have
leisure to think of Retirement afterward. Here is one who is concerned in the
treaty.


Lady. O Daughter, Daughter, Is it possible thou shoud'st be my Child, Bone of
my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh, and as I may say, another Me, and yet
transgress the most minute Particle of severe Virtue? Is it possible you should
lean aside to Iniquity who have been Cast in the direct Mold of Virtue? I have
not only been a Mold but a Pattern for you, and a Model for you, after you were
brought into the World.


Mrs. Fain. I don't understand your Ladyship.

Lady. Not understand? Why have you not been Naught? Have you not been
Sophisticated? Not understand? Here I am ruined to Compound for your Caprices
and your Cuckoldomes. I must pawn my Plate, and my Jewels and ruin my Neice,
and all little enough --


Mrs. Fain. I am wronged and abused, and so are you. It Is a false accusation,
as false as Hell, as false as your Friend there, ay or your Friend's Friend, my
false Husband.


Mrs. Mar. My Friend, Mrs. Fainal? Your Husband my
Friend, what do you mean?

Mrs. Fain. I know what I mean Madam, and so do you; and so shall the World at
a time Convenient.


Mrs. Mar. I am sorry to see you so passionate, Madam. More Temper would look
more like Innocence. But I have done. I am sorry my Zeal to serve your Ladyship
and Family, should admit of Misconstruction, or make me liable to affronts. You
will pardon me, Madam, If I meddle no more with an affair, in which I am not
Personally concerned.


Lady. O dear Friend; I am so ashamed that you should meet with such returns;
-- you ought to ask Pardon on your Knees, Ungrateful Creature; she deserves
more from you, than all your life can accomplish -- O don't leave me destitute
in this Perplexity; -- No, stick to me my good Genius.


Mrs. Fain. I tell you Madam you're abused -- stick to you? ay, like a Leach,
to suck your best Blood -- she will drop off when she is full. Madam you shall not
pawn a Bodkin, nor part with a Brass Counter in Composition for me. I defy 'em
all. Let 'em prove their aspersions; I know my own Innocence, and dare stand by
a trial.


[Exit. Lady. Why, If she should be Innocent, If she should be wronged after
all, ha? I don't know what to think, -- and I promise you, her Education has
been unexceptionable -- I may say it; for I chiefly made it my own Care to
Initiate her very Infancy in the Rudiments of Virtue, and to Impress upon her
tender Years, a Young Odium and Aversion to the very sight of Men, -- ay
Friend, she would have shrieked, If she had but seen a Man, till she was in her
Teens. As I Am a Person it is true -- She was never suffered to play with a
Male-Child, though but in Coats; Nay her very Babies were of the Feminine Gender;
-- O, she never looked a Man in the Face but her own Father, or the Chaplain,
and him we made a shift to put upon her for a Woman, by the help of his long
Garments, and his Sleek-face; till she was going in her fifteen.


Mrs. Mar. It Was much she should be deceived so long.


Lady. I warrant you, or she would never have born to have been Catechis'd by
him; and have heard his long lectures, against Singing and Dancing, and such
Debaucheries; and going to filthy Plays; and Profane Musick-meetings, where the
Lewd Trebles squeek nothing but Bawdy, and the Bases roar Blasphemy. O, she
would have swooned at the sight or name of an obscene Play-Book -- and can I
think after all this, that my Daughter can be Naught? What, a Whore? And
thought it excommunication to set her foot within the door of a Playhouse. O
my dear friend, I cannot believe it, No, no; as she says, let him prove it, let
him prove it.


Mrs. Mar. Prove it Madam? What, and have your name prostituted in a public
Court; Yours and your Daughters reputation worried at the Bar by a pack of
Bawling Lawyers? To be usherd in with an O Yez of Scandal; and have your Case
opened by an old fumbling Leacher in a Quoif like a Man Midwife to bring your
Daughter's Infamy to light, to be a Theme for legal Punsters, and Quiblers by
the Statute; and become a Jest, against a Rule of Court, where there is no
precedent for a Jest in any record; not even in Dooms-day-Book: to discompose
the gravity of the Bench, and provoke Naughty Interrogatories, in more Naughty
Law Latin, while the good Judge tickled with the proceeding, Simpers under a
Gray beard, and fidges off and on his Cushion as if he had swallowed
Cantharides, or sat upon Cow-Itch.


Lady. O, it is very hard!

Mrs. Mar. And then to have my Young Revellers of the Temple, take Notes like
Prentices at a Conventicle; and after, talk it all over again in Commons, or
before Drawers in an Eating-house.


Lady. Worse and Worse.

Mrs. Mar. Nay this is nothing; if it would end here, 'twere well. But it must
after this be consigned by the Shorthand Writers to the public Press; and
from thence be transferred to the hands, nay into the Throats and Lungs of
Hawkers, with Voices more Licentious than the loud Flounder-man's or the Woman
that cries Grey-pease; and this you must hear till you are stunned; Nay you must
hear nothing else for some days.


Lady. O, it is Insupportable. No, no, dear Friend make it up, make it up; ay,
ay, I Will Compound. I Will give up all, my self and my all, my Neice and her all,
-- any thing, every thing for Composition.


Mrs. Mar. Nay Madam, I advise nothing, I only lay before you as a Friend the
Inconveniences which perhaps you have Overseen. Here comes Mr. Fainall. If he
will be satisfied to huddle up all in Silence, I shall be glad. You must think
I would rather Congratulate, then Condole with you.


Enter Fainall. Lady. Ay, ay, I do not doubt it, dear Marwood: No, no, I do not
doubt it.


Fain. Well Madam; I have suffered my self to be overcome by the Importunity of
this Lady your Friend; and am content you shall enjoy your own proper Estate
during Life; on condition you oblige your self never to Marry, under such
penalty as I think convenient.


Lady. Never to Marry?

Fain. No more Sir Rowlands, -- the next Imposture may not be so timely
detected.


Mrs. Mar, That condition I dare answer, my Lady will consent to, without
difficulty; she has already, but too much experienced the perfidiousness of
Men. Besides Madam, when we retire to our pastoral Solitude we shall bid adieu
to all other Thoughts.


Lady. Aye that is true; but in Case of Necessity; as of
Health, or some such Emergency --

Fain. O, if you are prescribed Marriage, you shall be considered; I will only
reserve to my self the Power to choose for you. If your Physic be wholesome, it
matters not who is your Apothecary. Next, my Wife shall settle on me the
remainder of her Fortune, not made over already; And for her Maintenance depend
entirely on my Discretion.


Lady. This is most inhumanly Savage; exceeding the Barbarity of a Muscovite
Husband.


Fain. I learned it from his Czarish Majesty's Retinue, in a Winter Evenings
Conference over Brandy and Pepper, amongst other secrets of Matrimony and
Policy, as they are at present Practiced in the Northern Hemisphere. But this
must be agreed unto, and that positively. Lastly, I will be endowed in right of
my Wife, with that six thousand Pound, which is the Moiety of Mrs. Millamant's
Fortune in your Possession: And which she has forfeited (as will appear by the
last Will and Testament of your deceased Husband Sir Jonathan Wishfort) by her
disobedience in Contracting her self against your Consent or Knowledge; and by
refusing the offered Match with Sir Willful Witwou'd, which you like a careful
Aunt had provided for her.


Lady. My Nephew was non Compos; and could not make his Addresses.


Fain. I come to make demands, -- I Will hear no objections.

Lady. You will grant me time to Consider.

Fain, Yes, while the Instrument is drawing, to which you must set your Hand
till more sufficient Deeds can be perfected, which I will take care shall be
done with all possible speed. In the mean while, I will go for the said
Instrument, and till my return, you may Balance this Matter in your own
Discretion.


[ Exit. Fain. Lady. This Insolence is beyond all Precedent, all Parallel, must
I be subject to this merciless Villain?


Mrs. Mar. It Is severe indeed Madam, that you should smart for your Daughters
wantonness.


Lady. 'Twas against my Consent that she Married this Barbarian, But she would
have him, though her Year was not out. -- Ah! her first Husband my Son Languish,
would not have carried it thus. Well, that was my Choice, this is here is; she is
matched now with a Witness -- I shall be mad, Dear Friend, is there no Comfort
for me? Must I live to be confiscated at this Rebel-rate? -- Here come two more
of my Egyptian Plagues too.


Enter Millamant and Sir. Wilful. Sir. Will. Aunt, your Servant.

Lady. Out Caterpillar, Call not me Aunt, I know thee not.


Sir. Will. I confess I have been a little in disguise as they say, -- S'heart!
and I Am sorry for it. What would you have? I hope I committed no Offense Aunt --
and if I did I am willing to make satisfaction; and what can a man say fairer?
If I have broke any thing, I Will pay for it, an it cost a Pound. And so let that
content for what is past, and make no more words. For what is to come to pleasure
you I Am willing to marry my Cosen. So pray lets all be Friends, she and I are
agreed upon the matter, before a Witness.


Lady. How Is this dear Niece? Have I any comfort? Can this be true?

Mill. I am content to be a Sacrifice to your repose Madam; and to Convince you
that I had no hand in the Plot, as you were misinformed; I have laid my
commands on Mirabell to come in Person, and be a Witness that I give my hand to
this flower of Knighthood; and for the Contract that past between Mirabell and
me, I have obliged him to make a Resignation of it, in your Lady-ship's
presence; -- He is without and waits your leave for admittance.


Lady. Well, I Will swear I am something revived at this Testimony of your
Obedience; but I cannot admit that Traitor, -- I fear I cannot fortific my self
to support his appearance. He is as terrible to me as a Gorgon; if I see him, I
fear I shall turn to Stone, petrifie Incessantly.


Mill. If you disoblige him he may resent your refusal and insist upon the
contract still. Then it is the last time he will be offensive to you.


Lady. Are you sure it will be the last time? -- if I were sure of that --
shall I never see him again?


Mill. Sir Willful, you and he are to Travel together, are you not?


Sir Will. 'Sheart the Gentleman's a civil Gentleman, Aunt, let him come in;
why we are sworn Brothers and fellow Travelers. -- We are to be Pylades and
Orestes, he and I -- He is to be my Interpreter in foreign Parts. He has been
Over-sea's once already; and with proviso that I Marry my Cosen, will cross 'em
once again, only to bear me Company, -- 'Sheart, I Will call him in, -- an I set
on it once, he shall come in; and see who will hinder him.


[Exit. Mrs. Mar. This is precious Fooling, if it would pass, but
I Will know the bottom of it.

Lady. O dear Marwood, you are not going?

Mar. Not far Madam; I Will return immediately.

[Exit. Re-enter Sir Willful and Mirabell. Sir Will. Look up Man, I Will stand by
you, 'sbud an she do frown, she cannot kill you; -- besides -- Hearkee she dare
not frown desperately, because her face is none of her own; 'Sheart an she
should her forehead would wrinkle like the Coat of a Cream-cheese, but mum for
that, fellow Traveller.


Mir. If a deep sense of the many Injuries I have offered to so good a Lady,
with a sincere remorse, and a hearty Contrition, can but obtain the least
glance of Compassion I am too Happy, -- Ah Madam, there was a time -- but let
it be forgotten -- I confess I have deservedly forfeited the high Place I once
held, of sighing at your Feet; nay kill me not, by turning from me in disdain,
-- I come not to plead for favor; -- Nay not for Pardon, I am a Suppliant only
for your pity -- I am going where I never shall behold you more --


Sir. Will. How, fellow Traveller! -- You shall go by your self then.


Mir. Let me be pitied first; and afterward forgotten, -- I ask no more.


Sir. Will. By'r Lady a very reasonable request; and will cost you nothing, Aunt
-- Come, come, Forgive and Forget Aunt, why you must an you are a Christian.


Mir. Consider Madam, in reality; You could not receive much prejudice; it was
an Innocent device; though I confess it had a Face of guiltiness, -- it was at
most an Artifice which Love Contrived -- and errors which Love produces have
ever been accounted Venial. At least think it is Punishment enough, that I have
lost what in my heart I hold most dear, that to your cruel Indignation, I have
offered up this Beauty, and with her my Peace and Quiet; Nay all my hopes of
future Comfort.


Sir. Will. An he does not move me, would I might never be OF the Quorum -- an
it were not as good a deed as to drink, to give her to him again, -- I would I
might never take Shipping -- Aunt, if you don't forgive quickly; I shall melt,
I can tell you that. My contract went no further than a little Mouth-Glew, and
that is hardly dry; -- One doleful Sigh more from my fellow Traveller and it is
dissolved.


Lady. Well Nephew, upon your account -- ah, he has a false Insinuating Tongue
-- Well Sir, I will stifle my just resentment at my Nephew's request. -- I will
endeavor what I can to forget, -- but on proviso that you resign the Contract
with my Neice Immediately.


Mir. It is in Writing and with Papers of Concern; but I have sent my Servant
for it, and will deliver it to you, with all acknowledgments for your
transcendent goodness.


Lady. Oh, he has Witchcraft in his Eyes and Tongue; -- When I did not see him
I could have bribed a Villain to his Assassination; but his appearance rakes
the Embers which have so long layn smothered in my Breast. --


[apart. Enter Fainall and Mrs. Marwood. Fain. Your date of deliberation Madam,
is expired. Here is the Instrument, are you prepared to sign?


Lady. If I were prepared; I am not Empowered. My Neice exerts a lawful claim,
having Matched her self by my direction to Sir Wilful.


Fain. That sham is too gross to pass on me, -- tho it is
Imposed on you, Madam.

Mill. Sir, I have given my consent.

Mir. And Sir, I have resigned my pretensions.

Sir. Will. And Sir, I assert my right; and will maintain it in defiance of you
Sir, and of your Instrument. S'heart an you talk of an Instrument Sir, I have
an old Fox by my Thigh shall hack your Instrument of Ram Vellam to shreds, Sir.
It shall not be sufficient for a Mittimus or a Taylor's measure; therefore
withdraw your Instrument Sir, or by'r Lady I shall draw mine.


Lady. Hold Nephew, hold.

Mill. Good Sir, Wilful respite your valor.

Fain. Indeed? are you provided of a Guard, with your single Beef-eater there?
but I Am prepared for you; and Insist upon my first proposal. You shall submit
your own Estate to my management, And absolutely make over my Wife's to my sole
use; As pursuant to the Purport and Tenor of this other Covenant, -- I suppose
Madam, your Consent is not requisite in this Case; nor Mr. Mirabell, your
resignation; nor Sir, Wilful, your right -- You may draw your Fox if you
please Sir, and make a Bear-Garden flourish somewhere else; For here it will
not avail. This my Lady Wishfor't must be subscribed, or your Darling
Daughter's turned a drift, like a Leaky hulk to Sink or Swim, as she and the
Current of this Lewd Town can agree.


Lady. Is there no means, no Remedy, to stop my ruin? Ungrateful Wretch! do
thou not owe thy being, thy subsistence to my Daughter's Fortune?


Fain. I Will answer you when I have the rest of it in my possession.


Mir. But that you would not accept of a Remedy from my hands -- I own I have
not deserved you should owe any Obligation to me; or else perhaps I could
advise. --


Lady. O what? what? to save me and my Child from Ruin, from Want, I Will
forgive all that is past; Nay I Will consent to any thing to come, to be delivered
from this Tyranny.


Mir. Ay Madam; but that is too late, my reward is intercepted. You have
disposed of her, who only could have made me a Compensation for all my
Services; -- But be it as it may. I am resolved I Will serve you, you shall not
be wronged in this Savage manner.


Lady. How! dear Mr. Mirabell, can you be so generous at last! But it is not
possible. Hearkee. I Will break my Nephews Match, you shall have my Niece yet,
and all her fortune; if you can but save me from this imminent danger.


Mir. Will you? I take you at you word. I ask no more.
I must have leave for two Criminals to appear.

Lady. Ay, ay, any Body, any body.

Mir. Foible is one and a Penitent.

Enter Mrs. Fainall, Foible, and Mincing. Mrs. Mar. Mirab and Lady go to Mrs.
Fain. and Foib. O my shame! These Corrupt things are bought and brought hither
to expose me --


[to Fain.] Fain. If it must all come out, why let 'em know it, it is but the
way of the World. That shall not urge me to relinquish or abate one tittle of
my Terms, no, I will insist the more.


Foib. Yes indeed Madam; I Will take my Bible-oath of it.


Mins. And so will I, Mem.

Lady. O Marwood, Marwood art thou false? my friend deceive me? have thou been
a wicked accomplice with that profligate man?


Mrs. Mar. Have you so much Ingratitude and Injustice, to give credit against
your Friend, to the Aspersions of two such Mercenary Truls?


Minc. Mercenary, Mem? I scorn your words. It Is true we found you and Mr.
Fainall in the Blew garret, by the same token, you swore us to Secrecy upon
Messalinas's Poems, Mercenary? No, if we would have been Mercenary, we should
have held our Tongues; You would have bribed us sufficiently.


Fain. Go, you are an Insignificant thing, -- Well, what are you the better for
this? Is this Mr. Mirabell's Expedient? I Will be put off no longer -- You thing
that was a Wife, shall smart for this. I will not leave thee wherewithal to
hide thy Shame; Your Body shall be Naked as your Reputation.


Mrs. Fain. I despise you and defy your Malice -- You have aspersed me
wrongfully -- I have proved your falsehood -- Go you and your treacherous -- I
will not name it, but starve together -- perish.


Fain. Not while you are worth a Groat, indeed my dear.
Madam, I Will be fooled no longer.

Lady. Ah Mr. Mirabell, this is small comfort, the detection of this affair.


Mir. O in good time -- Your leave for the other Offender and Penitent to
appear, Madam.


Enter Waitwell with a Box of Writings. Lady. O Sir Rowland -- well Rascal.

Wait. What your Ladyship pleases. -- I have brought the Black box at last,
Madam.


Mir. Give it me. Madam, you remember your promise.

Lady. I, dear Sir!

Mir. Where are the Gentlemen?

Watt. At hand Sir, rubbing their Eyes, -- Just risen from Sleep.


Fain. God's Death what is this to me? I Will not wait your private concerns.


Enter Petulant and Witwoud. Pet. How now? what is the matter? who is hand's out?


Wit. Hey day! what are you all got together like Players at the end of the
last Act?


Mir. You may remember Gentlemen, I once requested your hands as Witnesses to a
certain Parchment.


Wit. Ay I do, my hand I remember -- Petulant set his
Mark.

Mir. You wrong him, his name is fairly written as shall appear -- you do not
remember Gentlemen, any thing of what that Parchment contained --


[undoing the Box.] Wit. No.

Pet. Not I. I writ. I read nothing.

Mir. Very well, now you shall know -- Madam, your promise.


Lady. Ay, ay, Sir, upon my honor.

Mir. Mr. Fainall, it is now time that you should know, that your Lady while
she was at her own disposal, and before you had by your Insinuations wheadl'd
her out of a pretended Settlement of the greatest part of her fortune --


Fain, Sir! pretended!

Mir. Yes Sir. I say that this Lady while a Widow, having it seems received
some Cautions respecting your Inconstancy and Tyranny of temper, which from her
own partial Opinion and fondness of you, she could never have suspected -- she
did I say by the wholesome advice of Friends and of Sages learned in the Laws
of this Land, deliver this same as her Act and Deed to me in trust, and to the
uses within mentioned. You may read if you please -- [ holding out the
Parchment.]tho perhaps what is inscribed on the back may serve your occasions.


Fain. Very likely Sir, What Is here? Damnation!
[Reads] A deed of Conveyance of the whole Estate real of Arabella Languish
Widow in trust to Edward Mirabell. Confusion!

Mir. Even so Sir, it is the way of the World, Sir: of the
Widows of the World. I suppose this Deed may bear an
Elder Date than what you have obtained from your Lady.

Fain. Perfidious Fiend! then thus I Will be revenged.

[offers to run at Mrs Fain.] Sir. Will. Hold Sir, now you may make your
Bear-Garden flourish somewhere else Sir.


Fain. Mirabell, You shall hear of this Sir, be sure you shall, let me pass
Oafe.


[Exit. Mrs. Fain. Madam, you seem to stifle your Resentment:
You had better give it Vent.

Mrs. Mar. Yes it shall have Vent -- and to your Confusion, or I Will perish in
the attempt.


[Exit. Lady. O Daughter, Daughter, it is plain thou have inherited thy Mother's
prudence.


Mrs. Fain. Thank Mr. Mirabell, a Cautious Friend, to whose advice all is owing.


Lady. Well Mr. Mirabell, you have kept your promise, -- and I must perform
mine. -- First I pardon for your sake, Sir Rowland there and Foible, -- The
next thing is to break the Matter to my Nephew -- and how to do that --


Mir. For that Madam, give your self no trouble -- let me have your Consent --
Sir Wilful is my Friend; he has had compassion upon Lovers and generously
engaged a Volunteer in this Action, for our Service, and now designs to
prosecute his Travells.



