THE Fortune-Hunters: OR, Two Fools well met. A COMEDY, As it is ACTED by His
Majesty's Servants.

Written By JAMES CARLISLE, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1689.

Drammatis Personae.
Sir William Wealthy, an Old Country Gentleman, Guardian to Maria, and in Love
with her. Mr. Leigh. Tom Wealthy, his Eldest Son, in Love with Sophia, and
brought to Town to Marry her. Mr. Kynaston. Young Wealthy his Brother, a
Gentleman of the Town, kept by the Widow Sly. Mr. Mountfort. Mr. Spruce, an
Exchange-man. Mr. Nokes. Mr. Shamtown, a Beau, in Love with Sophia. Mr. Baker.
Mr. Littlegad, his Brother Beau, in Love with Maria. Mr. Bowman. The Lady Sly,
a Widow, a formal Hypocritical Lady, and in Love with young Wealthy. Mrs.
Leigh. Sophia, a Lady, under the care of Sir William Wealthy, and to be Married
to his Eldest Son. Mrs. Butler. Maria, her Cousin, in Love with Young Wealthy.
Mrs. Mountfort. Mrs. Spruce, the Exchange-man's Wife. Mrs. Knight. Footmen,
Waiting-women, Constables, Watch, etc.
SCENE COVENT GARDEN.

Prologue.
AS Cowards would the Name of Cowards shun,
With Blustering Words, all said, and nothing done,
So Bully Poet I have known to escape
Such a hard Censure, would a Hero Ape,
And Paint Almanzor in a Monsters Shape.
Our Poet too, by such a Trick drawn in,
Too late repents the Self-deceiving sin:
For he forsooth,
In this ripe Age, where every Man's a Wit:
Lest he should be the only Blot was hit,
To save his Credit, as he thought, has writ,
Supposing that malicious Men might say,
Pox on it, he is Dull -- he Dull -- and writ a Play;
Why, I writ one, you know, but the other day.
But, since the Folly did so far deceive him,
Faith, he is ashamed to ask you to forgive him:
For here he swears, if you look out for Wit,
You may as reasonably expect to meet
Wit or good Manners in a dull Lampoon,
Or Christian Quarter from a French Dragoon.
Humility in Prelates, Truth in Priests,
Or in an Irish Coffee-house good Jests.
(Where, with our fancied Ruins, they make merry,
And from Mouths charged with smoke, Bomb Londonderry.)
No, Faith, our Author Imitates Ragoo,
For as without a shirt he was a Beau;
So without Wit he sets up for a Poet,
And thinks himself no more obliged to show it.
For if like Bays, all Poets should take pains
In letting Blood, and Physicking their Brains,
The Doctors Bill would sweep the third days gains.
Sure then, 'twas more Judicious Bays designed,
Than Purging of his Body; ay, 'twas his mind,
To temper it to bear with every Wind.
Thus to the change of Times, he changes Rhimes,
Whilst to the face of things his fancy Chimes,
And moulds his Soul and Body with the Times.
THE FORTUNE-HUNTERS: OR, Two Fools well met.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter at two several Doors, two Wealthys, Brothers. Elder Brother. WHat Frank
alive! mad Frank alive!


Young. Brother. Even so, sober Tom, and glad to see you here in Town, which
cannot have been long: Pray when?


Elder. Not yet a full week: But Frank, I should chide thee; for tho you are a
Rakehelly Non-resident fellow to any particular place, our Father old Sir
William's House stands where it did; and a slight direction would have secured
a Letter to your Loving Brother. Tho the old man has forsaken thee, I never did
Frank.


Young. Brother, I never write, it is my aversion: A man that writes must think
and be serious, which I never was, nor never will be. Talk as much as you will,
but Writing's my Abomination.


Elder. Why Frank, it is the only way of Conversation with absent Friends.


Young. Ay, but there is great charge in Paper, and one Letter begets another;
besides the expense of saying fine things. And then end with a damned
Hypocritical Conclusion, of your Faithful Friend and Servant, to a Rogue it may
be you wish hanged.


Elder. Well, I find thou keep'st thy humor still, never to constrain thy self
to please thy friends. But why have you not asked how my Father does? What
brought us to Town, or where you might see us?


Young. Why first, I supposed he was well, or dead or alive, there is nothing to
be got by him. Next, I suppose you came to Town for the same reason I stay in
Town, to Whore and Drink. Lastly, I thought I might meet you in a Bawdy House.


Elder. Well judged, dear Frank, but I Will inform you better; my Father is well,
and we came to Town upon the Condition of a match between the Beautiful
Daughter of my Lord Lovewit deceased, and your then happy Brother Tom Wealthy.


Young. Joy, Sir.


Elder. Abate a little, Sir; for tho the Lady's Consent and Inclination entitle
me the man, even since we came to Town, in that short time, a brace of Fops at
Covent Garden Church, have so far insinuated themselves, upon a slight
acquaintance with my Father, that every hour almost in every day they are
paying their Devoirs. I Will not disturb my Soul so far to think I am wronged,
but one, and to my face, she so far favors, as would provoke a man of a less
Jealous temper than my self: If this be the effects of going to Church, they
Church it by themselves for her or Tom.


Young. Nay, nay, Tom, rail not against the Church, but down on thy knees, and
thank Heaven thou brought her safe off: Why man, they are the very
Heart-hunters in Christendom: if thy Lady be not proof against Eye-shot and
Ear-shot, you are undone: Such nice surprises, at so sweet a Face, such amorous
glances of half Zeal half Love, such cocking of Cravat-strings and of Noses,
with Perriwiggs so exquisitely set, that happy is the Woman looks and lives.


Elder. This is terrible News for a poor Country Gentleman: but I Will dispatch
my Marriage instantly, or cut the Throat of him that hinders it. And Frank, she
has a Cousin worth 10000 l. And faith, you are a young fellow Worthy, would
thou but leave these Courses --


Young. Thus speaks the Elder Brother. Leave these Courses! Pox Course you;
what would thou have me do? You have the Estate, and yet I wear as good
Clothes as you do; Eat and Drink as well as you do; keep as good Company as you
do; and you will allow I Am the better Gentleman, by being the Younger Brother.
Well, prithee tell me where you lodge, for I Am resolved to make a visit to my
Father, not forgetting this 10000 l. you speak of.


Elder. Why, at this very House.


Young. What, the Widow Sly's?


Elder. The same.


Young. 'Sdeath, my Widow! I had a Note from her but just now, which was not
unwelcome; for I had damned ill luck at the Groom-Porters last night. Well, my
Duty to my Father, and tell him I must pay him a visit; I have some small
acquaintance with the Widow, and I shall gain Admittance.


Elder. By the way, Frank, I doubt you have a Rival of the old Gentleman: But
more of that when I see you next; I Will find that out. You are in haste, and I a
truant to my Mistress. Adieu: Don't fail Frank, for she is so much of thy
temper, I dare almost promise thee success. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Lady Sophia and Maria. Mar. Well Cousin, this London's a delicate place;
oh foh upon Sir William's old nasty House in the Country: If e're you catch me
there again! I did penance enough in my Dads days: I Will no more of your Baing,
Cackling and Crowing in a morning; if I must be waked out of my sleep, it shall
be with the dear Rattling of Coaches, that, if I look out, I may see some gay
thing fit to divert my eyes; without that eternal prospect of Beasts, and bare
Fields.


Soph. Thou art a mad Girl, and this mad fancy will soon be cloyed; but if you
are resolved to stay after our return to the Country, with what Reputation will
you live here, a single young Woman exposed to the malice of this Rascally Town.


Mar. Not so fast good Cousin: A single young Woman may be otherwise if she
please; and I am under no Vows that I know, unless this now; That the first
young Gentleman that I like, (if he has good manners enough to like me) shall
have the spending of this ten thousand pounds of mine, rather than I Will dye of
the Pip, to leave it to you and your Heirs.


Soph. Well then, if you are upon choice, what think you of the two fine
dressed Gentlemen we came acquainted with at Church. There Is danger indeed in
looking on them.


Mar. Oh foh! filthy old Effeminate Fools. Danger in them? none on my
Conscience, I dare swear it, if they were to be tried; though indeed, my dear
Cosen, I observed you a little over civil to Mr. Shamtown, who received it
with all the good manners in the World.


Soph. Well Girl, since you are resolved to Marry, I Will give you some advice;
this Gentleman, this Mr. Wealthy, is the man on Earth, bait but his sin of
Jealousy I Would choose, which I am resolved to cure (if possible) e're I resign
my self to what I wish: For after that Maria, the Salique Law's in force
against us all, and then adieu to Government for ever: Our frowns no more can
kill, nor smiles revive: The humblest Lover makes a Lordlike Husband.


Mar. I apprehend you, then you mean to write the folly of his Jealousy so
plain, in the two faces of these Amorous fools, that he may Read it there.


Soph. Right Girl, but you must join in this great Plot; for sure you must
discern what Love and Languishment my Lovers friend expressed to you.


Mar. To me! upon my life he hardly ever spoke, and then so softly, I could
hardly hear; he looked indeed and sight, and set his Cravat-string, and sight
again, and Combed his Perriwig: sight a third time, and then took snuff, I guess
to show the whiteness of his Hand. And all the speech he made to all this
Action, was, Renounce me, Madam, but you are very handsome; expecting, I
suppose, the same return.


Soph. Well, this is making Love, the very newest way of making Love, and yet
that Wealthy can so slightly weigh my Judgment, or my Love; to think me fond of
such a nauseous Fop; but I Will Revenge my self this very way; I Will point my
whole discourse to him, like every thing he does, praise him to Wealthy's face,
and ask his Judgment of him; and as I find the ill-natured Fit work in him,
I Will treat my new acquaintance.


Mar. And I must sigh, I judge too with my Lover: Well, I do hate a sneaking,
whining, crying, lying, dying Fellow, of all things in Nature: Give me the
airy, sprightly free Gallant, such a one as they report young Wealthy to be. I
long to see him, but this old Sir William will not suffer him, they say, to
come into the House; yet as ill-natured as he is to his own flesh, he has a
great inclination for mine, for he can hardly ever keep his hands from my
bosom. And what way should he take to make love to me, but by railing at
youth, especially his Son Frank, who shall starve he says, e're he get a Groat
from him.


Soph. And you may believe him, for he is the gripingst old Jew living: Frank
too made bold with five hundred pounds of his, which he can never forgive. But
see here comes my Lord and Master. Ah Tom, would thou but quit that Jealous
humor, tho it is bred of Love, it is nursed by Folly; Love, Honor and Obey,
should be my Song for ever.


Enter Eldest Wealthy. Weal. Ladies, good day to you; what, not for Church this
morning, Ladies? Methinks, tho your Zeal may be somewhat allayed, so much good
Company as meet there might invite you to Prayers.


Soph. O, goes it there? teaze him Cosen.


Mar. Well, Mr. Wealthy, I Will swear you are in the Right, there is the finest
Company, the finest Ladies, and the finest Gentlemen! 'twou'd do a bodies heart
good to look upon them. Upon my life they spoiled all my Devotion; 'twas well
for you, my Cosen made her choice before she saw these fine things, had you
been in Love with me you had been undone.


Soph. You speak but your own Opinion on that Maria, though truly Mr. Shamtown,
and Mr. Littlegad, are the civilest, best bred men I ever saw; especially Mr.
Shamtown, he is the pleasantest Creature, so good humored, and so Witty, he is
three in Company at any time.


Weal. Nay, Madam, I will allow him a fine Person, and a pleasant Creature, and
three in Company; but for Wit, indeed Madam, it is much more your goodness than
his desert.


Mar. Well, I will not answer for Mr. Shamtown, but I Will swear Mr. Littlegad has
Wit, and more than that he is in Love with me.


Weal. I doubt not that Madam; but has he told you so?


Mar. No, but he has sigh't, and that is all one; besides he set his Perriwig
and Cravat-string, for fear I should not like them. Pho, I know he is in Love
with me, and for ought I know, I am in Love with him too.


Weal. Very fortunate fellows these, a poor Country Lover shall ride you twenty
miles a day, only to play a Game at Lantrelew, and go every Night home in the
dirt and the dark, and shall hardly be believed to be in Love, though he break
a Limb by the way; whilst one of these pleasant Creatures, by a new fancied
Dress, or nice tied Knot, shall conquer a young Lady in a trice.


Soph. But then you must consider Invention is the labor of the brain, and
exceeds that of the body.


Mar. And what signifies your Country Fools twenty mile a day to please his
Mistress, when one of these shall sit you twenty hours together, almost
distracting his dear Head, to find new fashions out, to delight us Ladies.


Soph. And should not we be grateful, Mr. Wealthy, to these, who as if they
were of a Religious Order, abandoning and renouncing all your lewd Debaucheries
of Wine, wholly devote themselves to us, and our diversion.


Enter Old Sir William. Sir Will. Present his Duty to me, wait upon me, he is a
Bastard, no Son of mine, and if he comes here I Will send him to Newgate, a Rogue!


Mar. Nay, good Sir William, who has offended you?


Soph. What makes you so angry, good Sir William?


Weal. Pray be pacified, Sir.


Sir Will. No, Sir, I Will not be pacified, Sir, with you, nor your Brother Rogue
neither; he will visit me to rob me again, ha! What have you seen him, and advised
him to it, ha? The other five hundred pounds. I Will lay him close an I catch
him, a Thief.


Weal. Nay, good Sir, consider, he is my Brother, and your Son.


Old Sir. Sirrah, you lie.


Weal. I have done, e're long you will say the same by me.


Old Sir. No, no, Tom, never; thou art my Son, my eldest Son, my best Son, I
have no Son but thee, Tom.


Weal. Nay, Sir, you must pardon me, my Mother was Virtuous. You must forgive
poor Frank, he is your Son.


Old Sir. Sirrah.


Soph. Your own flesh and blood, Sir William.


Old Sir. My flesh and blood, no Madam, but he robbed me of my flesh and blood,
my money.


Mar. Egad, and I am glad on it with all my heart.


Old Sir. Fie, fie, you little Thief you, glad that a Son should rob his
Father. But I Will tell you that you may judge the grief of a Parent, against you
have Children, Tom or you, you little Rogue, for you will have Children; I'gad,
I could get you with Child my self. But as I was saying, I bred him at School,
and it was a forward dirty Boy; from thence I sent him to the University; from
the University to the Inns of Court, where in two years time, from a sober,
grave, discreet youth, he grew the Debauch of the Town; roaring, drinking,
whoring, fighting, were his daily Diversions: and because I would not supply
the Rogue with Moneys to maintain his Villainies, he comes down with a formal
Recantation to me in the Country, where like a Rogue, a Cutthroat Thief in the
Night, he robbed me of five hundred pounds, and now he sends me word, he will
make such an other Visit.


Mar. Why, Sir William, methinks he has not wronged you in the least, you have
saved Money by him, for sure 500 l. is but a small portion for a young
Gentleman, and your Son.


Weal. And would still deserve the name, would my Father but forgive him as a
Son.


Old Sir. Sirrah, Son me no Sons, he was my Son, but is not, nor any that plead
for him.


Mar. Come, come, Sir William, you were young once, and no doubt had your
frollicks, and your share of that whoring, roaring and fighting you speak of, I
warrant you.


Old Sir. Fie, fie, or if I had, I never robbed my Father of five hundred
pounds at a time, Girl, Girl: Consider the sum of five hundred pounds, before
you plead for such a Rogue.


Soph. Good Cosen leave off, for the thoughts of five hundred pounds will put
him so out of humor, we shall have no peace with him.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, Mr. Puzlecause the Lawyer is without, and desires
to speak with you.


Old Sir. Cods so, I, Tom, Tom, you must go with me, it is about drawing them
Writings, about your Ladies Jointure. Well, God bless you both, and give you
happiness.


Weal. The man she likes needs not mistrust the blessing.


Soph. The man she likes must not mistrust at all.


Mar. I cannot imagine what I have to do among all these sober, busy people;
would I could find this mad young Wealthy, I fancy he and I should be better
Company than all these. Well, if this Town of London will not afford me one
young Fellow, after my own heart, it is very hard. (aside.)

Sir William, when must the Wedding be, you keep me in expectation, I long to
see the manner, though my Cosen by her gravity, I see, does not wish for it at
all.


Old Sir. O very suddenly, you little wagg you; what think you now of your own
Wedding; what think you of an old fellow of sixty now; hold, hold, I mean
fifty: a good hearty old fellow with abundance of Love and Money?


Mar. What think I of him! I had rather Marry your roaring, whoring Son with
never a farthing, tho I never saw him yet.


Old Sir. O fie, fie Child; why there is no safety with such lewd young fellows,
you must think better; but come Tom, come Tom, Mr. Puzlecause will think it
long. Good morrow Children, good morrow.


Weal. Adieu, dear Madam. Exeunt.


Mar. Come Cousin, shall we visit the Widow this morning? and engage her to
the Exchange this afternoon. We'll have all our Fancies in your dress. Bless
us, you deserve a Husband indeed, to be married within these two days, and not
a Ribbond bought.


Soph. Upon my life Maria, I begin to be afraid: The beginning, and your
Courtship indeed is diverting enough, but this Marriage i will swear when it
draws so nigh is a terrible thing. I pretend not to that ridiculous
over-affected Modesty of being afraid of a man-bedfellow I like, but seriously
it shocks me, when I consider I stake upon one cast, my good or my ill fortune
for my life.


Mar. Well Cousin, there is a hazard you know in all Games, and since we must
be playing, faith I had as lieve lose at this as any Game.


Mar. But to the Widow, she will instruct you how
To steer your course under your Marriage Vow.
Tell you how far it must your Conscience bind,
And how far not, if Spouse should prove unkind.
And as you pay your duty, how to know
When he fails in some matters due to you.
With these Instructions, never talk of fear,
The Widow will make all things plain and clear.
And Faith Sophia, I dare swear for each,
We are as fit to learn, as she to teach. Exeunt.

SCENE III.
The Widow dressing herself. Betty. I just received a message by Mr. Wealthy's
man, Madam, that he will answer the Contents of your Letter, for he has earnest
business with your Ladyship, and begs you not to fail at three exactly, at Mr.
Spruce's Shop in the Exchange.


Widd. I don't approve of his so often being there, though certainly had he any
Intrigue with her, he would not have the Impudence to appoint to meet me there.
Well, it is a barbarous case that a Lady cannot secure one man to her self,
though she pay a very good price for him, and maintain him as her own Goods and
Chattels; which is a great misfortune to us Widows. For upon my life, your
young fellows now a days, are scare-crow'd with the name of a Widow, that we
must either marry old musty Batchelours, or secure some younger Brother by the
magnetic Virtue of our Money. Betty, are the young Ladies up, think you?


Betty. Yes Madam, and I believe I hear 'em coming to visit you this morning.


Widd. Run, run, and wait 'em up stairs: Upon my life I had forgot my
Complexion this morning; but they are Country Ladies, and may not miss it.
Enter Sophia and Maria.

O dear, Ladies, I designed this kindness to you, as soon as I could possibly
have dressed my self.


Soph. Madam, your humble Servant; we made bold to wait on you; I hope we have
not hindered your Devotions.


Widd. O good Madam, I have been up these five hours. Betty, some Chairs;
Ladies, pray sit down.


Mar. Madam, we came to desire your good Company to the Exchange this
afternoon, to buy two or three suits of Ribbond for my Cousins Wedding. Your
good Fancy will much improve her dress. Alas, we Country Ladies that so seldom
come to Town, are the awkward'st Creatures: Dear Madam, you must assist us.


Widd. Alas Madam, since my unfortunate Widdowhood, dress has been the least of
my thoughts: Nor could I indeed ever boast of more than being clean, in the
height of my prosperity; for the gaudy part of Dressing was still my Aversion:
And I hope Ladies you will pardon me, if I must deny my self the satisfaction
of waiting on you to a place that will so ill become my Condition to appear in,
as the Exchange. Where I must meet my Wealthy, and with them 'twill be
impossible. [aside.


Mar. aside. Learn Sister, learn to Cant against you are a Widow. If this
be'nt a Hypocrite i will be hanged.


Soph. Madam, you are Mistress of your self and time; but I thought the
Exchange had been one of the innocent diversions of the Town, and might as well
help out an afternoon, as the Playhouse, or the Park, without incurring the
danger of Censure in the least.


Widd. Ah Madam! it is a base malicious Town, and whoever will live with
Reputation in it, must as nigh as possible avoid all those places.


Mar. If all these are to be avoided, what difference is there between the Town
and a Nunnery? Or what diversion does your Ladyship propose in Living.


Widd. In Visits, Madam. It Is the grand affair of all Ladies of Quality, to be
exact in their days of giving and receiving Visits; high days of State; your
Ladies Collar days as 'twere. -- Betty, bring my Table Book, where you shall
see how exact we are in our method, Madam, which is a mighty satisfaction to
know every Ladies particular day of giving or receiving; so that consulting
your Tables, you can never err. Let me see, Thursday last was my day of State;
I think I had a great Court, Betty.


Betty. Twenty at least, Madam.


Mar. O Ridiculous! But certainly, Madam, so much Company should rather be
uneasy than diverting.


Widd. O Madam, the Grandeur of the thing takes off all sort of uneasiness, tho
you hated every one in the Company; nor are you obliged to talk to every one,
no more than your rising acknowledgments at first. Now Madam, as thus,
Alphabetically: Madam Attall on Monday; Madam Bareman on Tuesday; and so in the
round, Madam Willdrink, Madam Wilful, Madam Wouldhaveit, Madam Wellenough,
and my Lady Worstofall.


Mar. Your method, Madam, is extraordinary fine, but for my part, I Would sooner
choose to walk by my self in the Fields, than be troubled with all this Company
in their finest Apartments.


Widd. Is your Ladyship for one in the Garden this morning?


Soph. We'll wait upon you, Madam.


Widd. No, pray Madam, indeed the Morning is inviting. [Exeunt.


Enter Mr. Spruce, and young Wealthy. Spruce. Ah, Mr. Wealthy!


Weal. Well met, my dear Cuckold, and particular Friend.


Spr. Good Mr. Wealthy, if I may be so bold, whether intend you?


Weal. Why, faith, to the Ordinary to Dinner.


Spr. Shall I prevent you, and perhaps to your satisfaction. If you will Dine
with me and my Wife at home, I will entertain you with the Oddest and Idlest
Resentment of a Brother Shopkeeper of mine, about his Wise, that can be.


Weal. With all my heart.

(Aside.) This fellow is the happiest Cuckold living, so satisfied with
himself, that he cannot believe there lives that Woman would condescend to
touch an other man, after the taste of his dear person. Aside.)

Well, I am contented to Dine with you, Mr. Spruce, but if you design not to
take off the edge of my Appetite by suspense, let me know the business
immediately.


Spr. You know, Mr. Topknot, in the same row with me, you must know the
blockhead, ha, ha, ha. When Mr. Horner was the other day at his Shop, he heard
him talk of a Journey he designed on Sunday to Epsom, upon this Mr. Horner, as
you or any man might do in my absence to my Wife, appointed a Visit to his
Wife; as you, I say, might do to mine, a Gentleman and Customer to the Shop, to
comfort her. I cannot tell you the occasion well, but this Blockhead coming
home late a Sunday night, goes up directly to his Wives Chamber, where finding
Mr. Horner laughing and playing with his Wife, no matter how, takes a
ridiculous freak of Jealousy in his Noddle, falls into the violentest passion
that could be, calling his Wife Whore; and Heaven knows what. The Gentleman
seeing this, thought the fellow mad, and putting out the Candle, made his
escape down Stairs, leaving the Blockhead railing and cursing, ha, ha, ha.


Weal. But pray, Mr. Spruce, how has he dealt by his Wife?


Spr. How! By my Conscience and Soul, Sir, he has turned her out of doors, like
a Jealous Coxcomb as he is.


Weal. O Barbarous!


Spr. Now, Mr. Wealthy, this is amazement to me, I cannot but believe these
fellows have some Imperfection they are sensible of in themselves; Lord, if I
were such a Coxcomb, how often must you and I have fallen out; though really,
when I met my Wife and you, the other day, in a Coach alone, it did at first
surprise me.


Weal. Faith, and so did you us; but I satisfied you that was an accident.


Spr. No more words, dear Mr. VVealthy, I don't mistrust my Wives Virtue, or my
own Merit; but we are just at the door: Nan, is my Wife come home from the
Change?


Enter Nanny. Nan. Yes, Sir, she expects you at Dinner, but not so good Company
with you.


Weal. Pretty Mrs. Nanny.


Spr. Sir, shall I lead you in? [Exeunt.


Scene changes to a Parlour. Mrs. Spr. Your Servant Spruce. I have waited for
you this half Hour: Mr. Wealthy, your humble Servant; you are a Stranger indeed.


Spr. Child, entertain Mr. Wealthy, till I go wash my Hands, and send up
Dinner. [Exit.


Mrs. Spr. Must we attribute this Visit to Chance, or good Nature? I doubt, if
to good Nature, it is my Husbands.


Weal. Faith, my Dear, you are in the right; but I designed to have pleased my
self at least with seeing you at three a Clock this Afternoon in the Change.


Mrs. Spr. If Mr. Spruce were as jealous as Mr. Topknot, indeed you might avoid
seeing me any where, but there; But Heaven be praised he is of another Mould,
and much more fit for my use.


Weal. O he told me that Story. Shall I see you then to Night at home?


Mrs. Spr. With all my heart; but you will fail, this is his Club Night, and ten
to one but he is fuddl'd, but how open soever his Eyes are, I cast a Mist before
'em as easily as his understanding. At Nine the Garden gate shall be open, but
don't fail; let me believe you think on me sometimes, by your not forgetting
this.


Weal. By this, and this, I will not. [Kisses Enter Spruce.


Spr. Ha, ha, ha, My Friend Topknot would have been at the Top of the House
with half this. Jealous Coxcomb. Come, my Dear, will you come to Dinner.
Another Fool would have been Jealous of this now, I warrant; a civil Salute,
ha, ha, ha.


Weal. Ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. Spr. Ha, ha, ha.


Spr. But what makes you laugh so, Prithee tell me?


Weal. Why, this was your Wife's own Contrivance to try to make you Jealous;
you railed so at Mr. Topknot: We have been Kissing ever since you went out,
for fear we should not be Kissing as you came in.


Spr. Have you so? ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. Spr. It Is true Spouse, faith.


Spr. Well, do if you can; but the Dinner cools: Mr. Wealthy --


Weal. Lead on, Sir.
May all thy Follies on thy Tribe attend,
And every VVhoremaster have such a Friend. [Exeunt.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter the Lady Sly, Sophia, and Maria. Soph. It Is vain, I fear, to urge you
further for your good Compapany to the Exchange, Madam, since your Reasons as
well as Inclinations seem so averse to it.


Widd. Alas, Madam, I hope you will excuse my incivility in not waiting on you;
since really, Madam, I am so terrified at any thing may touch my Reputation,
and the gravity of my Habit, I dare not appear there, tho in so very good
Company.


Mar. Well, Heaven forgive me, I cannot think Charitably of thee. Cousin, since
we must venture by our selves into this bugbear place among Men, Monsters, and
Scandals: If we must suffer, Heaven have Mercy on our better part, I hope we
shall have your Ladyship's Prayers; and for Mr. Wealthy, I declare, if we are
Ravished he deserves no better: a Lover, and go about Business with an old
doting fellow of a Father, rather than wait upon his Mistress. Were he to be
mine, I would not Marry him this Fortnight, though I gnawed my Sheets to pieces.


Widd. Indeed, Madam, I doubt you would relent, for Mr. Wealthy is really a
very fine Gentleman, and the better he settles his Affairs now, though he robs
himself of the Satisfaction of his Ladies Conversation, the more Enjoyment he
proposes to himself afterward; as all wise men do in so grand an Affair as
Marriage.


Mar, Indeed Madam, I am not come to those years of Discretion to like a wise
man; for on the contrary, he is naturally my Aversion: and I dare avow for
young Mr. VVealthy, whom I never yet saw, has more Wit in one of his Mad
Frollicks, than his Brother's Spanish Gravity can be capable of.


Soph. Heaven send you may meet, for if what be true I have heard of him, by
what I know of you, you might be excellent Company, and very fit for each
others humors. Pray have you never heard of him, Madam.


Widd. Yes, Madam, and seen him at a distance; a handsome young Gentleman
indeed he is, but very Debauched, or very much wronged.


Enter a Servant. Boy. Madam, the Coach is at the Door.


Soph. Madam, your humble Servant, we'll try our Fancies by your Judgment, when
we come back.


Widd. Ladies, your Servant.


Mar. Your Ladyships humble Servant; no farther, adieu Madam. [Exeunt.


Widd. Betty, make haste, and lay me out the Mantua and Petticoat I wore the
other day, and take care to get a Hackney Coach to the Door when the Ladies are
gone.


Betty. Yes, Madam.


Widd. Certainly if I should meet them in the Change; they can never know me,
my greatest fear is lest young Wealthy, who is fond of every new face, should
meet them, and then I am undone, for 'twill be hard to lure him from so
tempting a quarry, to a game I fear he is already cloyed with: yet he knows the
sign, and in good manners must obey it, tho against his Inclination.


SCENE II. The Exchange.
Discovers Mrs. Spruce in her Shop. Enter Young Wealthy. Jun. Weal. I doubt I
have over-stay'd my time; it is past Three, and the Widow is not here, or else
gone, which would be a cursed misfortune at this time: For to morrow I must make
a visit to the old Gentleman, whatever comes of it: And his house of late has
always been to me like a Tavern or a Baudy-house, bring but Ready Money, and
you shall be well looked after: Besides, the 10000 l. runs strangely in my head.
There sits this nights diversion; a Cordial of the Widows will make it much
more agreeable. Ha! she is here. I think, by this light a brace of handsome
Women. Enter Sophia and Maria.


Mrs. Spr. Ribbonds or Gloves, Madam; Gloves or Ribbonds.


Jun. Weal. Ha! they go to Mrs. Spruce's? have among you I faith Ladies: If the
Widow catch me, these are Cousins, nigh Relations.


Mar. Show us some of your newest fashion Ribbonds.


Jan. Weal. Mrs. Spruce your Servant; are the things I bespoke done Madam.


Mrs. Spr. What things does he mean? O the Devil fetch him! [Aside. No Sir, not
yet, but if you will send your man in the morning, or to night, to my house, he
shall have 'em. Here Ladies, do you like this Ribbond, or this?


Soph. Cousin what say you? you don't mind 'em.


Mar. Cousin, what is the matter with my heart? Certainly the Devil's in that
young fellow, or in me.


Soph. Ha, ha, ha, have you met with your man think you?


Jun. Weal. I have a strange Romantic thought in my head; what if I should
fall in love with this young Creature at first sight, a pretty account I should
give of my self to my Friends: I must find some opportunity to speak to her.


Mar. O fie, these are too grave for our occasion, they must be for a young
Ladies Wedding favors, the gayest thing you have.


Jun. Weal. If a stranger may so far presume, not for your own I hope, Madam.


Mar. Why Sir, would you forbid the Banes?


Jun. Weal. Had I the same Interest as Inclination to it, Madam, you would be
in danger of it indeed.


Mar. O Lord, Sir, why are you in Love with me already?


Jun. Weal. Quick as her eyes I'gad: Why look you, Madam, plain Dealing's a
Jewel: Let me first know what hopes my heart may have to build upon; whether
you are a Predestined Wife or not; and accordingly expect an answer from your
humble Servant.


Mar. No, no, no; Demonstration's no direct answer to any thing. I am resolved
to be a Riddle to all my Lovers. They that can find the meaning of me take me.
I must talk with this young fellow: Cousin take your own Fancy, as you have
done already: I like none of 'em.


Jun. Weal. As you have done already, O then she is the Bride, your Servant for
that; it is kind and cunningly told, ha! I'gad these may be the two Ladies my
Brother spoke of; I Will try. Well, Madam, to show you that I have an art that
goes beyond unriddling any thing, I do positively know by the Stars, those
Propitious Stars to me, that you are not Married nor engaged: That you have not
been in Town above six days: That the Gentleman's Name, your Cousin is to
Marry, begins with a W. and that you lodge now --


Mar. Tell me that, and you're a Conjurer.


Jun. Weal. That you lodge now -- Let me fee -- At the Lady Sly's in Covent
Garden; ha! do you start, I'gad I am right.


Mar. And pray Sir, how came you to know this?


Jun. Weal. Art, Black Art, Madam, therefore at your own Proposals I claim you;
or at least, the honor of being further acquainted.


Mar. Why Sir, if you are Master of your Art, 'twill be in vain to deny you
that, after having seen me, when you were so well acquainted with me, before I
saw you.


Jun. Weal. That Is true, indeed Madam, but granted favors are much sweeter
than stolen Fruits. Besides, Madam, there is really a necessity I should see
you again, for should I at the first sight tell you a Romantic Tale of Flames
and Darts, (tho you may well suspect your eyes,) yet you would not be apt to
believe me.


Mar. You are in the right, indeed Sir; ha, ha, ha.


Jun. Weal. Therefore Madam, since you are prejudiced against my first Essay,
you ought in honor to allow a second, unless you mistrust the Justice of my
Cause may prevail upon you.


Mar. Nay, if you grow serious upon business, adieu.


Jun. Weal. And dare you venture to leave me thus, after avowing this passion,
then I declare open War against you, and all those little dancing Cupids in
your eyes. Assisted by the Spirits I command, those that informed me where you
live, when you came, shall dance eternally Attendance; and wheresoever among
the numerous train of Fops your fancy settles, him they shall Plague. By one of
these the nice shaped youth that dances with you at Balls, shall have his Legs
broke. The Sonniteer that chants his Amorous Notes, shall have his pretty mouth
drawn to his Ears, whilst every Fop that levels dressing at you, shall
certainly be tumbled in the Mire.


Mar. Till at the last, for want of better choice, I must take up with you.
Bless us! a Conjurer! certainly I am a most unfortunate Creature, tho London I
was told was a lewd place, to light upon the Devil at the first dash.


Jun. Weal. Therefore keep friends with him whilst you may.

Enter the Widow, spys him, and pulls out her Handkerchief. 'Sdeath the
Widow. I know the sign, that cursed Handkerchief; a plague on the Flag of
Truce. When I was just giving Battle to the dear little Creature. Ay, ay, shake
on; I cannot see it yet.


Soph. Cousin will you go? I have bought what I design.


Mar. I wait you. Sir, your Servant.


Jun. Weal. The honor, Madam, to wait you to your Coach.

The Widow crosses'em, and drops her Handkerchief, Wealthy takes it up. Madam,
your Handkerchief.


Widd. Not to trouble you Sir.


Soph. Jack, here take these things, and put 'em in the Coach.


Mar. Upon my life this is an Appointment; she is jealous by her answer: O that
I were alone with her, I might disappoint her. Sir, the Lady's going.


Jun. Weal. Not whilst you are here Madam, or till I see you in the Coach.


Soph. 'Twill be a trouble Sir, and our Coach is just at the Door.


Jun. Weal. You shall be obeyed; when I see you next, I may challenge the
honor of your acquaintance on other terms. Till then, fair one, Cross your
self every Night, or my Spirits will play tricks with you.


Mar. None that can fright me, I Will watrant you. Exeunt.


Jun. Weal. Now for my Widow, by that time I have appeased her, it will be
time to meet Mrs. Spruce, and by that time I have appeared Mrs. Spruce, it will
be time to take a Bottle, and by that time I have that in my head, I shall
think I have managed my time very well. For tho on my Conscience I could
forsake Whoring to gain that dear little Creature, it is not like a wise man to
leave off one Trade, without a certainty of living better on another. Your
Servant Mrs. Spruce. Exit.


SCENE III.
Mr. Shamtown is discovered sitting by his Bed in his Nightgown. Sham. Jack,
has it Rung at Convent-Garden yet?


Jack. Sir, it is past five.


Sham. Pox on this Drinking! it is no matter tho, for I look so filthily
puddled, I durst not have gone out. Lord, I am extravagantly hot; Jack, step
where you know, tell 'em I keep my Chamber this afternoon, and should be glad
to see 'em.


Jack. This is one of my masters high Intreagues; if Don Quixot's Dulcinea did
not come of a better Family, I Will be hanged.


Sham. I should be very loath the Town should know half what I am forced to
trust this Rascal with: I have been now these 25 years (a damned long time to
own) the chief Intreaguer of the Town, made such a figure, raised such
emulation, I have been still the peak of every Poet, down from Sir Foplin to
Sir Nice the Beau: There Is not one Beauty famed in all the Town, to whom I have
not paid some Gallantry; and thus much I must own, I never made address in all
my life, where I was yet refused, to make the address indeed, but that was all.
The speculative part has still been mine, and my misfortunes have been gaily
dressed; Celia indeed no sooner broke her Vow, but Cloe entertained me as her
own, and married with my Rival in a month. Yet still I kept my Reputation up,
and wheresoever I came, fresh Billett Deux on Billet Deux received; sent by my
self, Heaven knows, unto my self, on my own Charges: yet now my Fate gives me a
fairer prospect, and beautiful Sophia will be kind. I have been well received,
and will go on: And tho I fight for once, once and no more, I Will venture Mr.
Wealthy's surly temper. But would my man would come, for this is all but
Speculative too, and I must Practice. Enter a Boy.


Boy. Sir, Mr. Littlegad's below, and bid me tell you he is come to wait on
your Coushee.


Sham. 'Sdeath, my Brother Beau, and in the Intrigue with me, I must speak with
him, tho he must not stay to see my Paramour. Wait on him up, I must maintain
my Character with him.


Enter Mr. Littlegad. Littl. Sir, your Servant; good Night to you, were now the
properest. What, reading of a Secret?


Sham. No, a Trifle; you may read it if you please, I just received it from a
teazing poor Romantic Girl I promised Marriage to. I pity her, she writes a
pretty style.


Littleg. Reads. Dear faithless man, Poor fool! For still you must be dear,
dear to my Eyes, dear to my longing Heart; ah, why would you betray me into
Love? Why would you promise me a Heaven in you, and take that Heaven away?
Curse of her Eyes who have estranged your Heart! but O in vain, in vain I Curse
the happiest Woman living. Pardon this trouble, Sir, it is the last. Boast you
have broke a fond young Woman's heart, that loved too well to live, and live
without you. Adieu. A very sad story. What no Superscription, no Direction?


Sham. 'Sdeath, I had forgot to write it.

Aside. No, it came enclosed; I am pestered strangely with these idle things.
I Am glad you're come, for tho I must beg your leave to receive a visit from a
Lady of Quality that will be here presently, I must acquaint you with my
design: I can prevail easily with the Widow (who loves Dancing) to have a Ball
at her House to morrow: 'Twill give us fresh opportunity to talk with the
Ladies; and no small occasion to please them in our Dancing. You Will pardon, if
I beg your leave a while: at night I Will meet at Wills, and order all. I Am much
ashamed of this, but --


Littleg. O Sir, the reason's Irresistible, no Complement, at Will's.


Sham. At eight.


Enter Jack. Jack. Sir, she --


Sham. Rascal --


Jack. Sir, she says it is Washing day, and she cannot come.


Sham. Damn her, go down.


Mr. Littl. What, disappointed?


Sham. She begs my pardon, it is her day of receiving Visits. A Pox of all
Quality, 'sdeath I Will Marry and oblige no more, Sophia shall engross my heart
for ever; and now we have time, Mr. Littlegad, tell me your mind, our time is
short, our Reception has been extraordinary. Will you resolve at this Ball to
slip Notes into their hands, that shall declare our honorable intentions.


Mr. Littl. I would do much for beautiful Maria, but Love has so much awe upon
my Soul; besides, if they refuse we are undone, if they betray us worse, a
Quarrel follows.


Sham. Sir, you're my friend, I Will trust you with my temper. By others want of
manners in the Town, I have suffered in my Reputation, and therefore would
prevail upon my self to venture once: The Cause I Am sure deserves it, and Mr.
Wealthy, I have often discerned, forces his temper to be Civil to me.


Mr. Littl. Well Sir, you have been open with your friend: show me the Note you
write, I Will show you mine.

For why should she ashamed or angry be,
To be beloved by me. [Exeunt.

SCENE the Back-Garden.
Enter young Wealthy. Jun. Weal. My matters go swimmingly faith, I have
appeased my Widow, made my self half drunk, and filled my Pockets with money.
To morrow will I rise with the Sun, and outshine the Sun, wait on my Father
like a Son; and if I can but set like the Sun in that dear little Thetis's lap,
I should make a very good day on it. However, since I am resolved to make
honorable Love, I Will take my leave of Whoring to Night. This is Mrs. Spruce's
backdoor, and the fatal hour draws on, in which I must graft a fresh Branch on
my friends Forehead. Ha! the Door shut! It used always to be open upon such
occasions: I Will venture three gentle taps however, there may be a Scout nigh.


Enter Mrs. Nanny. Nanny. Who Is that, Mr. Wealthy?


Jun. Weal. Dear Mrs. Nanny: A Maidenhead I'gad; a pox of her mistress.


Nanny. My mistress has expected you this half hour; she is alone in the Parlour.


Jun. Weal. With all my heart: But have you waited all this while in the Cold.


Nanny. Indeed I thought it long before you came.


Jun. Weal. But you would have thought it longer, had you staid for one you Love.


Nanny. Yes, if they came on purpose to see me.


Jun. Weal. Pretty little Rogue. The Child comes rarely on.


Nanny. O fie Sir, what do you mean? Nay, pray Sir.


Jun. Weal. What do I mean? To kiss those pretty little lips.


Nanny. O dear Sir, my mistress. Enter Mrs. Spruce.


Jun. Weal. O Madam, now I hope you will own I am as good as my word.


Mrs. Spruce. Somewhat better methinks. Nanny go in. So Termagant, Mr. Wealthy,
that you could not have patience to walk in; I suppose my Maid told you I
expected you in the Parlour.


Jun. Weal. Yes, yes, you will cool my Courage: Fie, Madam, I was only Coaxing her
for fear when you vexed her at any time, she should tell your Husband.


Mrs. Sp. You know, Mr. Wealthy, my Husband is not so easily persuaded; but
however, you boast of being as good as your word, I find, without a Bottle, you
durst not have ventured.


Jun. Weal. Durst not; that word was never spoke to Spaniard yet, but forfeited
a kiss that gave him it. Now Madam, since our time is short, and consequently
very precious, pray let me have the honor to lead you into your own House.


Mrs. Spr. No, I Will swear you will be Rude.


Jun. Weal. No, I Will Swear I wont, but I Will be very Civil; when do you expect
your Husband?


Mrs. Spr. Not these two hours. O Lord, indeed I am afraid I shall catch cold,
the Night's very raw.


Jun. Weal. I'gad you're in the right. Come along my dear. [Exeunt.


Enter Old Sir William and his Son. Sir Will. Whereabouts are we Tom? it is
somewhat dark.


Eld. Weal. Very nigh Covent Garden, Sir; we shall be at home presently.


Sir Will. This Lawyer is a smart fellow, Tom, he has drawn up these Writings
concisely, and full. Ah, that Rogue Frank, he might have done this, if he had
followed his Studies, an idle Rogue, and saved me this Charge: But he must be
fine, he must be a Wit, a Beau, Pox on him.


Eld. Weal. Sir, I believe it is yet in your power to reclaim him; he has seen
the Vices of the Town, and no doubt is sick of them: Could he but get a
Competence to live.


Sir Will. Well Sir, and you will have me settle an Estate upon him; I Will settle
him in Newgate first, a Vagabond.


Eld. Weal. Nay, pray Sir, hear me.


Sir Will. No, Sir, thank God I Have taken care of you. I Have settled you, I Will
part with no more money.


Eld. Weal. Sir, you shall not part with a Groat.


Sir Will. How Is that?


Eld. Weal. Upon my word you shant, and yet make him happy.


Sir Will. He has been a Rebellious Boy, but the tenderness of a Father --
Well, tell me how, for I would do him all the kindness I could without Charges.


Eld. Weal. Sir, give him the liberty of your House, Countenance him as your
Son, and let him address himself to young Maria.


Sir Will. Here Is a Snake in my bosom; what, throw away my little pretty Maria
with 10000 l. too. No, thank you Sir, I Will find a better match; what, betray my
trust: Marry her to a Ranting, Roaring Bully. What, give her the Pox? Ah,
Sirrah! What if I have a mind to marry her my self?


Eld. Weal. Sir, you will pardon me if I say, methinks you are too old to think
of marriage.


Sir Will. No, Sirrah, not so old as the young debauched Rascals of the Town,
rotten before they are ripe. Sirrah, provoke me any more, speak of this match
any more, I Will Marry, get a Child, and disinherit you both; and so come along.


Eld. Weal. Sir, I Will follow you, and shall watch you too, for should he
marry, a Child may be got without his help.


Sir Will. What Sirrah, do you mutter?


Eld. Weal. Mutter, no Sir.


Sir Will. No Sir, come along. [Exeunt.


The Scene draws, and discovers the Garden-door. Enter young Wealthy and Mrs.
Spruce. Jun. Weal. Adieu, dear Mrs. Spruce, you will send that Linen I bespoke,
to morrow early.


Mrs. Spr. Yes, but not by my Maid. [Enter Mr. Spruce Drunk.

My Husband, if ever he is Jealous it is in his Drink. Dear Mr. Wealthy adieu,
how will you escape him?


Jun. Weal. How the Devil do I know: 'Sdeath, I Will stand against this Pump.


Mr. Spr. Whereabouts am I? Is not this my back door? I am somewhat Drunk; it is
a beastly thing above once a month, and that is my stint; but I Will please her
with the Song I learnt: Tell me no more of Glory or Story. She loves a soft
Song. Tell me no more of Glory. No Canary, pox of that slip; I have all dirted
my face.


Jun. Weal. 'Sdeath I think I had best run for it now. Pox of his Agility, he is
up already: if he comes to the Pump, i am undone.


Mr. Spr. Let me see, here is a Pump hereabouts.


Jun. Weal. Would it were in your Guts.


Mr. Spr. I must clean my self, that I may not disgust my Wife, and make her
think indifferently of my Person. Pox on it, they have taken away the handle: O
here it is.


Gropes up and down, and takes hold of Mr. Wealthy's hand instead of the Pump.
Jun. Weal. If he discovers me i will knock him down, and then I shall pass for a
Thief. The Dog will pull my Arm off.


Mr. Spr. Zounds the Pump's dry.


Jun. Weal. 'Sdeath I have a Bottle of Orange Flower Water his Wife presented
me. Spirts the Orange Flower Water in his face.


Mr. Spr. O does it come; delicate Water faith: So now for my Wife: Let me see,
where is the Key. Tell me no more of Glory, too to Court -- Exit.


Jun. Weal. A senseless drunken Dog, not know a man from a Pump; this was a good
escape, I should have been loath to have Convinced him that he was a Cuckold. Let
him dote on, it is late; shall I go home so sober, I shall Dream of the Devil
all Night? no, the other Bottle.

Good Wine does all our Satisfaction bring.
But the other Bottle is a Glorious thing. [Exit.

ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Maria alone in the Garden. Mar. WHat would I give to know whether I am
really in Love with that young fellow or not; let me examine my self. I am very
angry with that Woman that came to meet him; methinks I could beat her, yet I
could not beat him. I long to see him again too; and I am afraid I should be
loath to part with him. Mercy upon me, these are very ill Signs.


Enter Sophia. Sop. What Musing Maria? Good morning to your serious
Meditations: Pray your Thought?


Mar. If you will promise not to laugh at me.


Sop. What, the pretty young fellow reigns still in your fancy: What, four and
twenty hours together? On my Conscience you are constant; ha! ha!


Mar. Laugh on, laugh on! Who was caught first?


Sop. But fie upon you, I thought you would have reserved your heart for young
Mr. Wealthy; and this Gentleman you saw was engaged.


Mar. Would I knew where, I Would plague her however; but if he should be in Love
with her I Am undone.


Sop. To clear that doubt Girl, I Will tell thee News shall make thee bless me
for it: That Lady your Rival, Madam, is our Individual, Grave, Formal,
Hippocritical Widow.


Mar. Impossible, or how should you know it?


Sop. Walking last Night in the Balcony-room, somewhat impatient of Mr.
Wealthys return, I heard a Hackney-Coach stop, whence bolted out the very
Figure we saw in the Change, and my Curiosity found afterward to be the Widow.


Mar. O this Ephesian Dame, shall she devour my Soldier; no, I Will vex every
vein of her Heart. I Will Dog her every day, that when she meets him next, I Will
meet him too, and turn her to her proper use, Procuring; I Will trace the old Fox
till I find out her Young ones.


Sop. Poor Girl, she is sar gone.


Mar. A Witch: Pardon me Ladies, if I dare not go to a place that so ill
becomes the Gravity of my Habit. [Musick within the Garden.

What Serenading Fools are these?


Sop. You're strangely out of humor, what if it should be a morning Serenade
from our two Churchmen, in order to the Ball we are to have this Evening? You
remember the Part you are to Act.


Mar. Iudeed you must pardon me, I shall be out.


Sop. I grow sick of mine too; but hark, a Song. [Song after it.


Enter Eldest VVealthy. Sophia. Mr. Wealthy do we owe our thanks to you.


Eld. Weal. This Madam, as the gentlest way I could, I chose to let you know
my bold request; Music and Beauty seem so nigh a kin; such equal charmers sure
what one desires, the other cannot deny; to morrow be the day; join to that
natural goodness of your Soul; your kind endearing Promises and Vows, put on
the Deity you are to me, descend and perfect all my hopes to morrow.


Soph. Sir, I confess it is a fault to blush, in answering what I have so often
promised; but you must pardon both, since I must confess, so soon you have
surpised me, I own you Conqueror over all my heart, but beg as yet you would
not use your power; allow my Virgin fears some time to fly, I shall in honor
yield without surprise.


Eld. Weal. Allow for all my Wracks of Passion; for all my broken hours and
nights of rest. Allow for the Impatience of my Love, that counts all hours Ages
till to morrow, and put this in the balance with your fears: If it be yet too
light, I Will kneel to beg a blessing great as this.


[Kneels. Enter Sir William Wealthy. Sop. Sir --


Sir Will. What a Pox, is the fellow going to Prayers, or to say Grace to to
morrows Feast? Child, Child, time is short, all things settled, and London's a
Wicked Place, therefore prepare to look the Parson boldly in the face, and in
grace of peace, i will see you married, and then --


Soph. But Sir William.


Sir Will. Stop her mouth Boy, she will cry it is too soon, or some mischief or
other: Where Is my little Maggot this morning? she would put off such a business I
warrant you; uh it is a parlous Queen.


Mar. Well, I will plague the Widow and this old fellow. Good morning to you
Sir William, you see they are got together with a villainous design to make you a
Grandfather, and then you will look so old, Sir William, it is a pity; for now you
look brisk enough for the youngest Maid in Town; methinks I could fall in Love
with you my self.


Sir Will. Think you so, my little Maggot, not so old but I can play at creep
Mouse yet; creep Mouse, creep, catch her, catch her.


Mar. Nay, nay, nay, Sir William.


Sir Will. Why, you little Eyes, you little Nose, you little Mouth, you little
-- No, no, you're for young Rogues; we old wholesome fellows, with good Hearts,
sound Lungs, hum, hum: no, no, we cannot pass now a days. Tom, I heard Music
here just now, was it yours Tom? Prithee, let us have a Song there; gad, I Am
very merry this morning. Adsbodkins, I Will sing thee a Song my self, Girl. Now
you shall hear, now Huswife, an old fellow; adslid, hum, hum.


After several ridiculous Grimaces, Sir William Sings. Mar. O brave, Sir
William.


Sir Will. Ah, you little Rogue! Creep Mouse creep, catch her.


Mar. Fie, fie, Sir William, you will make me angry.


Sir Will. Why then be pleased again, you little baggage, ah.


Mar. Come, Sir William, let us see if you're as good at Dancing as you are at
Singing; come Sir, I Will Dance with you.


Sir Will. Art thou for a Hoy tite Rogue? Come, strike up then.


Mar. Margery Crey.


Sir Will. Oh, fie, fie.


Mar. Come, come. [They Dance.


Sop. O this unmerciful Jade.


Eld. Weal. No matter, Madam, he likes it.


Mar. About, about, Sir William.


Sir Will. Hold, hold, Merry and Wise; Wise Child, Merry and Wise Puh.


Sop. Sir William, you grow young again; you trip it like any Fairy.


Mar. Oh fie upon him, he has put me so out of breath, I shant be able to Dance
this Evening.


Sir Will. And yet I am old, I warrant you, ha? You had rather marry my Wicked
Debauched Son Frank, you little Eyes, you little Nose, creep Mouse creep.


Mar. No, I yield Sir William now, but I Will try your Courage at the Ball.


Sir Will. But what the Devils the meaning of these Balls? What a Pox do these
fellows do here? Here they tell me a Story of the Honor of my former
acquaintance, when I never saw them but once, when I was last in Town, at a
Coffee-house, and now at Church.


Eld. Weal. And think you not that enough, Sir, to take hold of, when it will
introduce them into so good Company as these fair Ladies?


Sop. Still there Tom? -- Cousin.


Mar. Good Sir William, and you Mr. Wealthy, do not quarrel at our good Fortune
what e're you think; if I were sure of meeting such good Company, I Would go to
Church every hour in the day; besides they are the Widows acquaintance; we are
obliged to her as well as you for their Company and the Ball we are to have;
where, for all this, you must Dance to night.


Sir Will. Dance! you little Eyes you; ay, and Dance forty such Limberhamm'd
fellows as these dead still: What, because this great fellow here makes me look
a little old, and the Cares of the World makes me look somewhat gray before my
time, do you think I Will be laid aside; adsbodikins if you will Dance, Dance me
a good round Country frisk: Pox o your Minutes and Bore's (what do you call'em)
Dances only invented for your smooth paced pocky French fellows: Ounds, a good
round Country Jigg would shake em all to pieces.


Eld. Weal. True Sir; but as brittle ware as they are, they crack many a Ladies
reputation, without ever hazzarding their own; and ought no more to be suffered
in Families than Eunuchs, who, however unmann'd, can both divert and disgrace
their Ladies if they please.


Soph. Nay, sure Mr. Wealthy now you're too severe.


Sir Will. Not a bit, faith Tom, I hate these young old fellows mortally.


Mar. On my Conscience it is Scandalum Magnatum, were I a man so wronged, I Would
Cuckold you to disprove you; but here comes the Widow, I Will swear I Will tell.

Enter Widow. Oh Madam, would you believe it? This Mr. VVealthy is the vilest
man, he says he believes Mr. Shamtown and Mr. Littlegad are Eunuchs, as if that
your Ladyship, that has known what a real man is, would keep such Company, or
suffer them to come into your House.


Sir Will. Ha, ha, why you little eyes you, what spare no body? She Is a Wag
Madam, she is a Wag.


VVidd. I like her humor the better; but Mr. VVealthy, indeed you must give me
leave to take the part of this young Lady, in behalf of the young Gentlemen who
are men of extraordinary Parts, upon my word.


Eld. Weal. I doubt it not Madam, since your Ladyship is so well acquainted
with them and their Parts.


Sir Will. Nay, nay, the men may pass; but what a Pox is that young old
fellow, that peeps out of his Perriwig like an Owl out of a Bush.


Eld. Weal. O Damn him, an Antiquated Beau, aiming to be, but never in the
fashion; saucy enough to Ape the Noblest man, but wrongs him as much as a
damned Country sign did King Charles the Second; would make you believe he is a
Linguist, but really picked up the bits of Languages, by begging his way home
when he was abroad. In short, to be Pawn Broker to a Basset Table, is the Top
of his Pretensions.


VVidd. Upon my word, Mr. VVealthy, it is malice, for I received just now a very
pretty Epistle from them, and am in Love with the design of changing our Ball,
among our selves, into a harmless Masquerade, where every one may please their
fancy in expressing either their humors or desires, by their dress; and so,
though we know our full Company, be puzzled to find out each other.


Mar. Troth, that is pretty indeed.


Sop. 'Twill help the merriment, no doubt; I like the humor.


Eld. Weal. This is a Trick by Heaven! I beg your Pardon, Madam; I confess,
since we are so few, and we know all the Company, I cant find out the Jest of
Masquerading; to drive on an Intrigue or so, I grant you.


Sop. Or to express our humors, by our dress, is full as well.


Eld. Weal. Nay, Madam, I have done.


Mar. Sir William, what say you?


Sir Will. With all my heart, in faith, I Will Masquerade you; and if I find you
out, you little eyes you, I will so creep mouse you. But what a Pox, we an't
enough, we shall want Company.


VVidd. If you are all agreed, I Will send them word; and by the way, desire Mr.
Spruce and his fair Lady's Company, and so please you.


Sir Will. Agreed, agreed; come, be brisk Tom, let us be merry to Night, and
please Heaven, to morrow I Will settle the best part of my Estate upon thee, and
thee upon her, in faith Tom; and the rest my little eyes shall have if she will,
and there is my care over.


Sop. Indeed Sir William, I must --


Sir Will. I know it my dear Child, I know it, all Women must; take her aside
Tom, and walk with her in the Garden, and tell her some fine things. Tell her
she must, and where she must, and when she must, and how she must; go, go Tom,
tell her all. What are you running away, you little eyes you? What, you must
too, ha?


Mar. So must you too, Sir William, when you can; I must go to my Chamber and
study my dress for the Masquerade, and some mischief against that black Devil,
for I hate the sight of her. [Exit.


Sir Will. Get you gone you little Maggot, you little; um I could. The Devil's
in her I think, I never come nigh her but I fancy, my self twenty again.


Widd. I have observed this old fellow is in Love with her; I Will try him, and
help too if I can, for if young Wealthy should as he has threatened, their
humors will so hit, I shall certainly lose him. Sir William, if you will pardon
me, I Will tell you something I have observed; and I believe I may serve you in
it with that young Lady.


Sir Will. What says my Widow, with that young Lady, ha?


VVidd. What think you Sir? would she not be a comfort to your Age? would not a
Bedfellow so sweet, so free, so gay, so witty, lovely, and so young, renew your
life, and give you a fresh Lease? What think you Sir, be ye open?


Sir Will. Think Widow? Gad, I know not what to think, what her little Eyes
mine, her little Nose mine, her little Mouth mine, nay, her little all mine.
Ah, Widow, I Will give thee five hundred pound let me live to see that day, I Will
Article immediately Widow; there, there is my hand on it; by the Lord Harry --
but the Money's returnable if not.


Widd. Agreed, and I accept your Generosity. But then, unless you follow my
advice, you ruin all my measures. In the first place, you must resolve to stay
in Town; in the next, your youngest Son, whom every body Loves, they say that
sees him, must be banished, if e're he pays his Duty as he threatened. --


Sir Will. Banished! Ounds, I Will hang him Widow, a Rogue. I have enough to
hang him when e're I please: Why, he robbed me of five hundred pounds, Widow.


Widd. What then, you would not hang your Son.


Sir Will. Let him keep off then, let him keep off then, a Dog; but my dear
Widow, at her, my dear Widow, tell her fine things, my dear Widow. What a
fine thing it is to have a great Estate, my dear Widow, and to reign Mistress
of a House and Family, my dear Widow: Tickle her my dear Widow, and I Will
tickle her, my dear Widow; hum. Methinks I have got her already; but Widow,
Widow, rail damnably at all young fellows.


Widd. I Will warrant you Sir; how his old bones dance. Well, Sir William, I Will
sound her presently, she is gone to her Chamber, and I Will to her instantly, and
after Dinner I Will tell you more.


Sir Will. Go, go, go, five hundred pound Widow go; go Widow, rail at all
young Rogues. [Exit Widd.]

Pox on them rotten Rogues, that can neither Drink nor Whore, and yet set up
for both, with weak Hams, slackned Nerves, shaking Hands, and flannel Shirts,
before they are five and twenty. I Will show them what an old fellow can do. [Exit.


SCENE II.
Maria in her Chamber Writing. Mar. So, this Letter will I show or drop before
the Widow: No, I Will show it her, make her my Confident, as if it came from the
Gentleman I met in the Exchange. There needs no Name; and though she knows his
Hand, if she be Jealous, she will believe that Counterseit for fear of her. It
begs I Would meet him there: I Will ask her Counsel, and observe her looks; if she
be moved, my Cousin's in the right. Then if she goes to meet him in my stead,
I Will Masque my self, and dog her to the place, and let him Judge whatever he
thinks fit. I Will tell him that I came to vex them both.

Enter Betty.
Betty. Madam, the Widow.


Mar. Wait upon her up, she leaps into my Net; I Will plague her very Heart.

Enter Widow.
VVidd. Your Servant, Madam, still thinking on your Dress? I see you will
surprise us all with your fancy.


Mar. No Madam, I was otherwise employed; for being a perfect stranger to this
Town, I was something troubled in my self to know whether I have met with a
Civility or an Affront.


VVidd. Explain your self, good Madam; not from me I hope, nor any of my
Servants.


Mar. Not in the least; so far from that, dear Madam, you are the only person
in the World I Will trust, or ask advice of.


VVidd. You make me wonder.


Mar. You know how earnestly my Cousin and I entreated your good Company last
night, till you convinced us how unfit it was for one so much afflicted, to be
seen in naughty places, like the New Exchange.


VVidd. What means she? aside.

Well Madam.


Mar. However after begging of your Prayers, and saying of our own, with aching
hearts, you know we went; nay, and are come off alive.


Widd. Good Madam on.


Mar. Indeed there was much Company and fine, and had your Ladyship been there,
I Am sure you would say the same.


Widd. I doubt it not Madam. The Devil, what does she mean?


Mar. But grief you know Madam, however it may lull it self at home with Balls,
or harmless Music to divert, ought not to appear in public, but in tears;
that robbed us of your company, dear Madam.


VVidd. And is it that disturbs her? -- It Is that I fear's the incivility which
you suspect.


Mar. No, on my Life; swear to be secret and I Will tell you all.


VVidd. I vow: I would she would begin.


Mar. There was a young and really handsome Gentleman.


VVidd. Ha, goes it there?


Mar. What says your Ladyship?


VVidd. Nothing Madam, a handsome Gentleman you said.


Mar. Nay, Madam, you would have said so had you seen him.


VVidd. Very likely; but what of him?


Mar. Waiting, as afterward, I found too plain, for better company, to pass
the time, began to talk with me.


Widd. Not rudely, I hope -- This Devil could not know me.


Mar. She Is stirred -- so far from that, even at first sight, nay, the first
words he spoke, were Raptures, Flames and Darts; I know not what, but mixed with
much Civility and Wit.


Widd. These are the common Gallantries you meet; the young and beautiful must
bear with this.


Mar. More Madam, he told me where I lodged, when I came hither, my Cousins
Marriage, and the first letter of her Husbands Name.


Widd. And not his own.


Mar. No, but he would wait on me he said, and I believe him, for I just received
this Letter by his Servant to my Maid, which I can construe nothing but
affront; for sure he thinks me such another Prize as the Lewd Minx he met.


Widd. Impossible; pray let me see it. By Heavens, this is none of his Hand!
But that was Jealousy of me, a trick I scorn him for.


Mar. She srets: Nay, Madam, let not your Zeal for me disorder you so much, it
is not worth your Anger, nor my Notice.


Widd. But Madam, such a Villain, at the first sight, without the least
acquaintance, to offer to request a second meeting of a young Lady in that open
place, is so much impudence, such an affront, it shocks a modest Woman but to
think it.


Mar. And then so basely too, to rail at her; I know he came tomeet, and curse
her too. If you read on Madam, you will find he curses; curses her, the occasion
of our parting, and rails at her impertinence and love.


VVidd. Oh base, base, Madam, monstrous base. This they are all, but he the
basest living.


Mar. Nay, dear Madam.


Widd. Indeed I am too blame to wonder at it; I Will curb the just resentments of
my heart, and strike at this to speak for old Sir William.


Mar. Hang her, I Am vexed to see her fret so much, for I shall love him more now
out of spite; but if I never should see him -- oh that is sad, would he would
write indeed.


VVidd. Madam, you asked advice, if you will accept it, judge but of this; you
are young, and in a place so pestered with Intrigues, may unawares your
inclination, fix on one may seem deserving in your eye: But, believe me Madam,
among the vain young flatterers of the Age

The Monsters, we fond Women Lovers call,
There Is not one grain of truth.

Maria. Among them all.


Widd. She mocks me certainly, but I Will observe her. No, for their Folly,
Vanity and Pride, exceed the most ridioulous of us; and for their Vows, their
Conscience, or their Honor, a man on this side forty, is marked a fool, that
ever meant a true word to a Woman.


Mar. Indeed.


Widd. By Sympathy the young affect the young, and she is the happy Woman whose
kind Lot directs her where those Vanities are past, and Marries with the
Anoient and Discreet. Were I to choose, I beg your Cousins pardon, I should
prefer Sir William before the Son.

Enter Betty.
Betty. Madam, I sent your Letters, and had answer they will be here.


Widd. I come, Madam, you will be ready immediately.


Mar. I Will wait on you, you have the Letter.


VVidd. Yes, Madam, at your Service.


Mar. No, pray, keep it Madam; I fear I shall be troubled still with more; if
it be so, i will beg your Ladyship so far as in a Mask, to venture with me, and
find out who it is, you cannot deny me.


VVidd. You shall command me Madam, to my wish. I Will ruin this and him. Your
Servant Madam.


Mar. So, 'twas her he met, her folly and her jealousy betrayed it; by her
grave counsel and railing at young men surely Sir William taught her, I Will find
that out: Would I as easily could find a way to meet with him; he talked of
visiting, which with a formal show as to the Widow, if he has good nature, may
be meant to me; I Would thank him for it: However, since I am resolved to see him,
I Will trace and haunt the Widow every hour, bribe every Maid she has, know all
she does, read all her Notes, if Gold will break the Seals.

Not slip the least of any likely hint,
And then if all should fail, the Devil's in it.

SCENE a Chamber.
Discovers Mr. Shamtown Dressing. Enter Mr. Littlegad. Littl. How, Mr. Shamtown
not yet equipt? Impossible your fancy should be palled: I never yet in my whole
half years travel, met an Italian could for humor match you. What can it mean,
the Product must be wonderful.


Sham. A trifle Sir to yours, Judge when you see it; it is odd indeed, but
strikes upon a string, that will declare my Love and Sufferings. You're for the
Camp, methinks it is very fine, and I believe will take Maria's humor.


Littleg. Do you sincerely think 'twill please the Ladies? Sir, it is the
composition of my Travels, more than three Kingdoms claim a right to it: My
Perriwig I bought in Paris, my Cravat at Venice, my other Linen in Flanders,
my Gloves at Rome, my Wastcoat at Naples, and my Sword is a Milanese.


Sham. You give a good account, Sir, of your Travels.


Littleg. If you will believe me Sir, I went on purpose, that being at each
place, what was their Pride, I might compare with the most nicely dressed.


Enter Boy. Boy. Sir, the Tailor is come with your Habit.


Sham. Bid him wait without.


Littleg. What, shant I see you dressed; how shall I know you at the Ball?


Sham. O never fear, by the description I gave you will know me. We must not go
together; pray for our Success; I Will meet you there immediately.


Littleg. Adieu. Exit.


Sham. Upon my life I go with an aching heart, for should I be embarass'd with a
confounded accident as I was at the last Ball, concerning that damned China
Jar, I do not believe I should be able to sustain it. Pox on it, I Have renounced
back Capers ever since. [Exit.


SCENE Covent Garden.
Enter Young Wealthy finely dressed. Jun. Weal. So, now for my Mistress and my
Father, methinks I am a very pretty fellow; certainly this old fellow wont have
the heart to turn me out of doors, and disgrace a Gentleman in his new Clothes.
But plague of his Country breeding, he will swear I stole them, or at least come
to steal money of him to pay for them, and then sans ceremony out goes the
Reprobate Son, if not tossed in a Blanket; and egad if he does, I have often
promised the Widow, I Will marry her, make the House my own, and turn him out in
the dead of a damned thundering Rainy Night, and nothing but Lightning to guide
him to another Lodging; or deliver him to the Watch for a House-breaker; and
there is trick for tricks. What a Pox is it to him. Ha, what is here Fiddles?
[Flourish Music.

Gad, I believe they are married to day; that is well, the Devils in him if he
be'nt civil at such a time. Well, since I must have a pluck at the Golden
Fruit, I must venture waking the Old Dragon. [Knocks, enter a Boy.

Is Sir William Wealthy within Sir?


Boy. Yes Sir, but there is a great deal of Company, I believe he is not to be
spoke with.


Jun. Weal. What means the Music I heard, is his Son married?


Boy. No, Sir, it is a Ball.


Jun. Weal. Well Sir, I know them all, if you please to show me up --


Boy. Sir, they are all in Masquerade.


Jun. Weal. So much the better; can thou lend me a Masque, here is a Crown for
thee good Lad.


Boy. Yes Sir, please to walk in, I believe I can. [Exeunt.


SCENE a Hall.
Discovers the Masquers, Wealthy, Shamtown, Littlegad, Maria, Sophia, Spruce,
Mrs. Spruce. Mr. Spr. Methinks faith, this is a pretty Frollick, my Wise came
in one Coach and I in another, and egad, among all this good Company, I know
not which is she. Ah, there is many a Jealous fool in our Change, would be
hanged before he would trust his Wife thus, for fear of being a Cuckold, forsooth:
However, I Will look out for her, sure this is she, pray Madam, What is your
inclination by your Dress.


Mrs. Spr. This must be my Husband, by that ingenious fancy; he would be an
Alderman I find; if he were Knighted 'twould be well enough, for I would be a
Lady, ride in an Aldermans great Iron-workt rattling guilt Coach, and laugh at
every body on foot.


Sham. Which of these three's Sophia? I cannot guess but that in the Nuns Habit,
by her Stature, must be Maria; on and prosper, my dress may plead for me. Oh my
sad heart.


Eld. Weal. Which of the Coxcombs is this? a pretty way to tell his Passion,
and I must witness to it. Pox of all their Masking to this dumb piece of
Courtship, and may be to my Mistress. I shall make that heart bleed afresh, if
it aim there; and he goes right, for that I Am sure is she.


Sop. Was ever so ridiculous a sight? this must be my Lover, and sure that
Jealous Spaniard must be Tom. Good Sir, how many hearts have you left whole, if
a young Country Virgin should unfortunately Love you? Or is your Mistress
Cruel, you look so pale on it?


Sham. Ah! Fair one! Let this Emblem of grief speak what I dare but think.


Eld. Weal. Madam, the man's in Love, can you not guess.


Sop. Good, churlish Sir, who are you? And why in this Spanish Habit.


Eld. Weal. It suits my temper best, Madam; I hate ridiculous Fops that change
their fashions, to Court their Mistress, in variety: I am still the same,
constant and ever loving; but if provoked, as Jealous as Usurpers. I Would stab
more hearts than Cupid has of his, and lay them bleeding at my Mistress Feet.
Nor is it unjust, to think the man that Loves like me beyond a man, should, if
once wronged, do things beyond his reason. This Madam, whosoever you are's my
Character, and yet there lives not such a Slave as I am.


Sop. It Is a good one, less Jealousy though were better, for I would choose a
life wholly retired from all the World, but that dear man I loved, where there
were left no room for Jealousy, or groundless fears to interrupt our Love, but
live long and happy days, and dye together.


Sham. Ah, Fair one! Would the Goddess I adore
Speak but such words, my Wounds would bleed no more.

Eld. Weal. Good bloody Bones keep off.


Sop. Fie, Spaniard, do not over Act your Part.


Sham. This must be VVealthy, i will take a fitter time.


Littleg. Cruel Devotress, will you rob the World of the but one sweet Angel
they have left, to add to those vast Millions are above? Let me prevail, throw
off this Garb of sorrow; shine out the Glorious Princess of the Earth; in every
Princes Court i will sing your Praise, and with my Sword immortalize your Name:
The stubborn'st Knight alive shall own your Beauty, Transcendent over the
Mistress of his heart.


Mar. Oh Vanity! Be gone, you Court that Honor which your Sword must win, more
than the Mistress you pretend to fight for; and I have bid adieu to all the
World.


VVidd. That Nun must be Maria, and she, i will swear, belys her inclinations;
that Villain VVealthy knows it. That Fantastic thing must be Mr. Shamtown,
but which of them is VVealthy, which Mr. Littlegad, I cannot guess; that must
be Spruce, but where is Old Sir William?


Enter Sir William like a Huntsman. Sir Will. Ye, la, ho, ho, hey, Jouler, oux
there, oux hey, Ranter hey.


Mar. Sir William, Sir William.


All. Ha ha ha.


Sir Will. Who are you? what my little eyes, little Nose, little mouth. What a
Pox a Nun, is that thy Choice then, i will build Churches.


Sham. How came it your Dogs are not in Masquerade too?


Sir Will. What a Pox is here with all these bloody hearts? Oux, oux, there, ye
la ho.


Littleg. I wonder a man of your years should Hunt in Ladies Chambers.


Sir Will. Ye la ho oux, there oux too.


Mar. He may follow the scent, but can never keep up with his Game.


Sir Will. What, all upon me, nay then, take off your Dogs.


Enter Young Wealthy Masqu'd. Jun. Weal. What the Devil's the meaning of this,
are they all mad, Nuns, Aldermen, Huntsmen, Heroes, Milk-maids, Ladies? And
what a Pox, the man in the Almanac? I Will mix in the Crowd, and look out for my
little one.


Eld. Weal. Ladies, if you will be pleased to seat your selves, here is one will
entertain you with a Song.


Sop. Mar. Widd. With all our Hearts.


SONG. Every now and then Sir William hollows and Interrupts them. Eld. Weal.
Nay, Sir, Sir, you spoil the Song.


Sir Will. Pox of the Song, there is more Music in this; let us Dance.


Widd. Agreed, agreed; but what Dance?


Sir Will. Why, the Friar upon the Nun: Where Is my little Nun? Who are you Sir?


Jun. Weal. Your Servant Sir.


Sir Will. My Servant, Sir?


Mar. Bless me, who is it? -- I never saw him before. Let us reckon our number,
how many should we be?


VVidd. Mind.


Sir Will. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. -- The Devil,
the Devil; this fellow will run away with half the House. Ounds, Sir, who are
you? If you are the Devil tell us so, that we may open the Doors and Windows,
and give you free passage; it must needs be the Devil, I have heard of such a
business. Ay, ay, it is the Devil.


Jun. Weal. No Sir, I am no Devil, but your Son.


Sir Will. You lie you Dog, you're worse than the Devil. Thieves, Murder,
Rogues, I am undone, Lock up my Doors, call a Constable, I am undone.


Eld Weal. Nay, nay, Father, for shame; before all this Company.


Widd. Sir William, fie, consider.


Sir Will. A Rogue, he is come to rob me; what the Devil does he here else?


Jun. Weal. With your leave you do me wrong, I am neither come to beg, borrow,
nor steal, as you may see; for your five hundred pounds I Am able to pay you,
and then I owe you nothing but your begetting me, and may be I repent that as
much as you; and so Sir good b'y. I came to have asked your blessing had you
pleased. -- Now will he call me back.


Sir Will. Who Is that, my Son Frank?


Jun. Weal. Yes, yes, this is your Son Frank.


Sir Will. Frank, why come hither you Rascal you.


Jun. Weal. O the blessing of a kind Father. -- Your blessing Sir.


Sir Will. Ah, thou have been a Rogue Frank, but I forgive thee.


Jun. Weal. Then the Debt's paid.


Sir Will. What say you?


Jun. Weal. I thank you Sir.


Sir Weal. But where did thou get this money Frank, is it all Current? Let Us
see Frank.


Jun. Weal. Brother, I am heartily glad to see you, I hear you are to be
married. Pray which of all these fair Ladies will honor me with the Name of
Brother?


Eld. Weal. This; and she does indeed.


Jun. Weal. Joy to you both.


Eld. Weal. This is her Cousin Brother.


Jun. Weal. All lovely kindred, faith, with your leave, sweet one.


Mar. Cousin.


Soph. Nay, I pity you.


Jun. Weal. Madam, I hope you will pardon this Intrusion.


VVidd. On any account but this.


Jun. Weal. Your Servant Mrs. Spruce.


Spr. Ah smack her Mr. VVealthy.


Sir Will. Ay, ay, smack; he will smack her; ah it is a Dog, a handsome Dog, and a
strong Dog. But he is a Rogue, a damned Rogue, I must look to him, he will rob me
again else when his money's gone.


Jun. Weal. An extraordinary fancy this of yours Sir.


Sham. To Divert the Ladies Sir.


Jun. Weal. A Hero too. Mr. Littlegad you have wondrous fancy; Ladies, you were
talking of a Dance, let me not hinder you. -- By your leave Mr. Hero, if I beg
this Lady as a Relation for my Partner.


Littleg. Damn him, I shall miss my opportunity.


Sir Will. Why Sirrah, Sirrah, robbing me already, ha.


Mar. No, no, Sir William, I danced with you in the morning.


Sir Will. Gad a mercy Nuns flesh, i will creep mouse you for this; and for that
i will send my Rogue Frank packing, well I Will sit by and see you. Tom, Tom, to
the Widow: Strike up there, who leads?


All. Mr. Spruce, sure none but Mr. Spruce.


Mr. Spr. Your Servant Ladies.


Dance: All the Dance Sir William sits upon the ground, and every time Maria
comes by him, catches at her Petticoat. Sham. This must be the time.

Offers to slip a Note into Sophia's hand, she strikes it down, Sir William
snatches it up and looks on it.
Sop. What Insolence is this.


Sham. Death and Hell.


Sir Will. Treason Tom, Treason! Ounds, a Plot upon your Mistress; a Plague of
these bleeding Hearts.


[Dance breaks off, Eldest Wealthy takes the Note. Eld. Weal. Do you own this?
[To Shamtown.


Sham. What if I did Sir?


Eld. Weal. I Would pay the Postage. [Strikes him.


Sir Will. God a mercy Tom: Sir, you are a Son of a Whore; well said Tom. [All
shriek and run out but the Widow.


Widd. For Heavens sake, Gentlemen, consider where you are; you have frighted
all the Ladies.


Sham. Monsieur.


Eld. Weal. Damn you, speak English.


Jun. Weal. Monsieur.


Eld. Weal. What said he Frank, [Frank whispers him.

Very well. Madam, I beg your pardon if I have gone beyond the Rules of
Civility, impute it to the ill manners of your friends.


Sir Will. Yes faith, Widow, I beg your Pardon, but that fellow is a Son of a
Whore, that is certain. But where is my little Nun? 'sbud, they have not run away
with her too?


Widd. They are within Sir William, but half dead with the fright.


Sir Will. I Will go comfort her, but that fellow, Widow, is a Son of a Whore.
Let us in, let us in, a damned Son of a Whore. [Exeunt Widow and Sir William.


Eld. Weal. Behind Southampton-house you say, at six exactly.


Jun. Weal. So their fury tells us if it hold.


Eld. Weal. Brother, you must not be engaged in this, but of that more anon.
I Will not stay here to Night, we shall be prevented. Boy, call a Coach to the
back door; make haste and fetch my Cloak and other Clothes immediately. This
business gives me double satisfaction. Pardon me, dear Sophia, for the mean
mistrust I had of thee, and if this insolence go unrewarded, debar me of the
blessing of thy Love; come Frank.


Jun. Weal. Gad a mercy Tom; now if this surly Country fellow should give this
Beau a cursed uncouth thrust in the Guts, 'twill disgrace his Shape most
damnably. [Exeunt.


Enter Sir William, speaking as he comes. Sir Will. Gads me, Tom, Tom, your
Mistress is in a swound there. Tom, Tom, what a Pox is he gone? the Devil,
where is he gone? Horse, Horse there, Ounds, Murder, where is he gone? [shriek
within, all the women run in.


All. What Is the matter Sir William, the matter?


Sir Will. Nothing at all Child; but where are they all gone?


Boy. Sir, they took Coach, and drove away as fast as the Horses could lay Legs
to ground.


Sop. So! [Swounds.


Widd. Look to the Lady, carry her in. [Exeunt women.


Mrs. Spr. Ah me; and poor Mr. Spruce too gone?


Spr. No, my dear, I am safe enough, but damnably frighted.


[Creeps from under the Table. Sir Will. What, under the Table? The Devil
haunt you; come out here, and run along with me to the Constable, and to my
Lord Chief Justices, and the Kings Guards. Oh Lord, I shall have my Son Tom
killed; kill my Son Frank no great matter, but my Son Tom killed would break my
heart. Come along, you Cowardly, Sneaking. -- Oh my Son Tom. [Exeunt.


ACT IV.
SCENE the Fields.
Enter Eldest VVealthy, and young Wealthy. E. Weal. BRother, your
extraordinary Generosity has drawn you into a business, in which, of all
Mankind you ought to have been the last I should have chosen; if I would have
followed the barbarous custom of our Country, in making use of a Second, and
under that abused phrase bring in a Friend, as if that were sit business to
employ a real friend in: Therefore, Frank, however high your blood may work
you, unless I am unequally opposed, draw not your Sword, but let me right my
self.


Jun. Weal. Faith Tom, I shall not much uphold that custom, but as you are a
Brother and a Friend, a Stranger too, in all these Noble Feats, I must exchange
a Thrust or two to back you: besides, I sancy I am a Principal; for when these
nice-chap't Greyhounds hunt in couples, it is no single Booty that they aim at:
My pretty one was marked for Slaughter too. And Faith Sir, he shall win her
e're he wear her, with your good leave.


E. Weal. Make that appear, curse him that bars your hand: A Mistress is a
glorious Cause to fight for. Pray Heavens the Villain be but brave enough to
meet, and Rival me with equal fury, and not disgrace the beauty of my Cause.


Jun. Weal. Faith if he does he is strangely altered Sir: For I have heard of
him in several Quarrels, where he would trust his Honor with a man that never
yet gave him a good account often: But such a Cause may work a Miracle. And mine
I judge just such a noble person.


Eld. Weal. I Am sorry for it: But certainly they will come. And Brother, since
you will be your own Master, I beg you be not rash, think what you do.


Jun Weal. Faith Tom, and that is well thought on; so I will. Let me consider,
I am going now to sight for my Mistress: That is, She must be my Mistress: Poor
Soul, she knows nothing of the matter yet. And I am to Fight with a Gentleman,
that for ought I know, knows nothing of the matter neither. Now I know I love
her with all my heart, and perhaps against her will. And I Would fight for her with
all my heart, but should she love me, that is against her will too: Then I Would
marry her with all my Soul too. But pox on it, if she don't love me, that is
against her will again; so the Lords will be done. I venture my Carcass upon an
ill lay, there is an end on it. Brother, I have settled my Conscience; would they
would come.


Eld. Weal. However Fate designs you Frank, your Treasure must not be exhausted
upon this account; there is Fifty Guineas, put them up safely, they will prove
good Friends, however the matter goes.


Jun. Weal. What, Smart-money, Tom! Well, if I light upon a Surgeon that has
any grace, a man may get a small Clap cured into the bargain.


Eld. Weal. You Will find if I should fall a hundred more in this Right Fob.
Don't let those Rascals plunder me: For should they lay my Money out in
Perriwigs and Cravat-strings 'twould grieve my Ghost worse than my Death. I
have ordered Horses for us not far off. Damn 'um, the morning wastes, what mean
these Loyterers; prithee look out.


Jun. Weal. Stand to your Arms Tom, your Enemy draws on.


Enter Mr. Shamtown and Mr. Littlegad. Eld. Weal. Sir, you're something late in
doing your self Justice; unless you're sensible you deserved the blow I gave
you. But this is no place for Parley. Draw.


Jun. Weal. By your leave, but it is Dear Tom; a moments Temper. Sir, since
these Gentlemen know what they fight for, 'twere something fit that you and I
did too; for I suppose, if you dare own it, Sir, that you were charged with a
damned white-powder'd Bullet-Deux, to have shot the other Lady, without any
Report.


Littleg. I scorn to disavow a passion, Sir, for beautiful Maria: But --


Jun. Weal. But your Servant Sir. Draw: Draw, both Traitors: Tom, fall on.
They Fight.

Thrust lower Tom, my Gentleman Dances. They fall, the two Brothers upon them.
St. George In Faith Tom. Your Sword, Sir.

Eld. Weal Your Life.


Sham. I own it.


Jun. Weal. Your Sword Sir.


Littleg. Take it. [Rises.


Eld. Weal. Then take it as my gift. Whene're I see you where this Quarrel
arose, I Will take the forfeiture.


Jun. Weal. Art thou hurt Tom.


Eld. Weal. No Frank, nor in danger of it.


Jun. Weal. There Sir, your Sword again. The Lady's mine. Your Servant
Gentlemen. You know on what conditions you live. Farewell. Exeunt.


Sham. Come let us be dressed. Pox on the Ladies: We have done enough to talk of
in the Coffee-house this month, and there is some comfort still. I Am glad it is
over.


Enter Sir William, Mr. Spruce, Guards, Constable and VVatch. Mr. Spruce. Ha,
who is here! it is they: One of them bleed.


Sir Will. Bloody too: Son Toms blood: Zounds Son Toms blood: Draw Dog, draw;
where is my Son Tom, you Son of a Whore. Fall on, fall on.


Sham. For Heavens sake, Gentlemen, he is just there; just yonder unhurt: just
gave us both our lives.


Sir Will. Say you so: Hold them fast tho. Runs to the side of the Stage. So
ho Tomme, Son Tomme. They move further.

My Dear Tomme. There Is Frank: Was Frank hurt at all.


Littleg. No Sir.


Sir Will. No, Pox on him, he fights every day.

Re-enter both the Wealthy's. Ah, my dear Son Tom: [Runs and falls upon his
Neck.

Here they come, here they come: Oh my dear Son Tommy. Ah my poor Tommy.


Eld. Weal. Good Sir, how came you hither with all this Rabble and Guards about
you.


Jun. Weal. 'Sdeath Brother, the Old fellow has seized upon the Gentlemen.


Eld. Weal. Gentlemen, you may go, we are sorry for this mistake.


Sir Will. Ay, ay, you may go, and the Devil go with you.


Eld. Weal. But good Sir, how came you hither?


Sir Will. O Pox Tom, I could not sleep a wink -- I have been at all the
Slaughtering Fields I could name about the Town, at Barn-Elms, and at
Putney-Common, and Chelsey-Fields, and Red-Lyon-Fields; at all the Golgatha's
about the Town. And Mr. Spruce, I thank him, went along with me before it was
quite Day; he is a damned Coward, but he is a very Honest Man.


Mr. Spr. Indeed, Mr. Wealthy, my heart ak'd for you. And if my young Mr.
Wealthy had been killed, 'twou'd have broke my Molly's Heart, she has such a
tenderness for him.


Sir Will. Faith, he speaks true, I dare swear his heart ak'd, for he started
at every Bush he came nigh; but I am glad to see thee my dear Tom and Frank;
Frank's a good Boy too.


Eld. Weal. Sir, I thank you for your Tenderness, but would not for a thousand
Worlds you had prevented us. Frank! Sir, this is your Son, my Brother and my
Friend. I beg you would entertain him in your Heart.


Sir Will. Who, Frank? Frank's one' I always loved till he played the Rogue and
Robbed me. Frank, Frank, that was a filthy business: But no matter, I Am so
o're-joy'd, I will give thee -- let me see, what shall I give thee?


Jun. Weal. Ay, would I could see it.


Sir Will. I will give thee now, I will give thee. I will forgive thee now
Frank; and there is a Gift for thee.


Jun. Weal. That all: I thank you Sir, I thought to have paid you now.


Sir Will. What say thou Boy?


Jun. Weal. I thank you Sir.


Sir Will. O Tom, my joy to see thee has been so great, I forget to tell thee
sad News; your Mistress Tom.


Eld. Weal. What of her Sir?


Sir Will. O she is blind by this time.


Eld. Weal. What mean you Sir?


Sir Will. She has cried her Eyes out Man. The little naughty Girl too, that
never cried but just when she was born, has been shuffling ever since.


Jun. Weal. Now if that were for me, agad I Would cry too. No, no, it must be for
me.


Eld. Weal. I Will fly to comfort her, my dear Sophia.


Sir Will. Fly? Yes Tom you may fly; fly your Country if you please. Ounds, she
swears she will never see you more: You have betrayed her Honor, lost her
Reputation, undone her quite, and fixed her in the Rank of loose-tail'd Ladies,
whose good Name must be fought for, or be lost.


Eld. Weal. Could she say this?


Sir Will. More, more man; she will go into the Country too night, but if you
were killed, she swore she would not outlive you.


Eld. Weal. There Is love and life in that: Curse on my Temper, what wrong could
such a Dog have done to me? What Honor too to fight so poor a Creature? Did
she not slight and scorn him to my face? O my Sophia, Pardon this last
ill-natured Tempest here: Receive me with the Arms of Tenderness, and there
becalm my Soul and thine for ever. Come, Sir Brother.


Jun. Weal. I wait on you.


Sir Will. There, there is Money for you; thank you Friends, thank you. My dear
Tomme.


Servants. Thank you Sir. Exeunt all but Mr. Spruce and Jun. Weal.


Spruce. Well, I Will tell her what a kindness you have for her: And I Will assure
you, Mr. Wealthy, there is no Love lost; I have heard her speak as kind things
of you as of any body except me, and me you know --


Jun. Weal. O it is impossible she should love, that is love so far as to lie
with any body but you.


Spruce. Indeed Mr. Wealthy, I must say I believe I have been no small
satisfaction to her since I married her: she knows when she is well: I warrant
you she would not change me for any man. I will not keep you, Sir, I Will tell her
how you love her.


Jun. Weal. So do, Mr. Spruce: You need not fear Rivals.


Spruce. Adieu.


Jun. Weal. Now for my Prize, I think I won her fairly. Exit.


Spruce. Rival! ha, ha. No faith, I have not sold Perfumes, Ribbonds, Gloves,
White-washes, and other sorts so long, but I know how to make my self agreeable
as well as any of my Customers: Nor have I followed Tunbridge and Epsom, and
sometimes Islington Wells so long, but that I know how to gain more hearts, as
well as secure a perfect inclination, even I believe to the loathing of any
other person. Therefore, when I am persuaded, like my Friend Topknot, into that
ridiculous Opinion of being a Cuckold; the Lord have mercy upon my Head, my
Wits are far gone indeed. [Exit.


SCENE II.
Enter Widow. Widd. We have a sad distracted House: All our Servants are run
after Sir William; all the Maids are crying over their Mistress. -- I pity poor
Sophia, but that young Devil, however she seems moved with her Cousins grief,
mourns her feared loss of my perfidious Wretch. They must be gone to fight,
would he were killed. -- I had rather see him dead than see him hers. She knows
I love him, I Am sure she must; and by that Letter tried me unprovided; knows
that I met him there, but I Will watch her, and try her to the quick: Betty.


Betty. Madam.


Widd. I charge you when Sir William returns, call me immediately; let me first
see him on your life; take heed be not from the way. I know the Old fool loves
her, he told me so himself, and asked my judgment, as being a Grave Person fit
to advise. I Will tell him how she dotes upon his Son, and if he is suffered here
he must not hope. And to convince him more, however the business goes, he shall
report him dead, to try her, and if she stands that test, she does out-wit me.
At least, Sir William's Jealousy I know will soon forbid the Rebrobate his
House. And it is some pleasure to remove the Scene, and not be Nosed by a Girl
in my own House.


Betty. O Madam, Madam, Sir William.


Widd. What ails my Woman's Heart, sure I cannot pity him. Well, what News?


Betty. Sir William and his two Sons are below: I am sure by Sir VVilliam's
talk, they have been fighting, but neither of them seem hurt.


VVidd. Away, I Will meet with him. [Exit.


SCENE III.
Discovers Mrs. Sophia and Mrs. Maria in Tears, their Maids waiting on them;
one comes in. Soph. No Answer yet? No News?


Maid. None Madam.


Soph. Is not Sir William come neither, 'sure it is almost Noon. They must have
fought, and the dear rash Man's killed. O Grief, O Insupportable Misfortune.
Is It not enough my Reputation's stained, my Honor questioned, my Fame, that
stood as fair as Day disputed, but must my Love dye in so ill a Cause? Was It
not enough I swore to quit him ever, punish his Faults with everlasting
absence, but must he dye, dye, upon my Account? Dye in my Quarrel?


Maria. Patience, dear Cousin, Patience, we shall hear better News than Death;
I hope they are both together wheresoever they are; Brothers, and Valiant both,
never doubt their safety, those fellows dare not look them in the Face.


Soph. Is It not still worse, engage a Family at once? Nay, I Have wronged thee
Maria, for though his Brother has been counted loose, he looks a Noble
Gentleman; and now perhaps I have robbed thee of thy choice.


Maria. Indeed, I should be loath to hear his Death, though he is a perfect
Stranger yet to me; but would I had never seen him, I know not what I feel;
fear of the Widow, fear of losing him, has made me love too soon, before I
know whether he has the least good thought of me.


Maid. Madam, I hear some body:


Soph. Run to the Door immediately; see who it is.


Maid. Sir William Madam, and the Widow.


Mar. She weeps; oh speak, Sir William speak, where is your Sons?


Sir Will. Sons? Son Tom's very well, but there has been the Devil to do; I
have been forty mile about to find them, though Tom, he will be with you
presently.


Mar. But where is that other Son, Sir William? My heart aches.


Sir Will. Who, Frank?


Soph. Yes, Sir.


Sir Will. Who Pop he was always Disobedient; there never comes better of
Disobedience.


Mar. He Is Dead, and I could tear her Eyes out for crying; I Will weep it all my
self.


Soph. What mean you Sir, he is not killed?


Widd. So Sir William told me; Mark, Mark, Sir William, a fresh Flood.


Soph. Then as I hope ever to dye in Peace, I Will never see or Wed to Mr.
Wealthy.


Sir Will. So, so, Widow, there is fine work -- How shall we get off this
business?


Widd. Have Patience, time enough.


Sir Will. Not see him Child, he is just at the Door almost, how could he help
it, he loves thee Child, and is sorry he has angered you. [Exit Soph.


Sir Will. Whether is she going? Zounds, here will be more mischief. But how
now little Eyes, what makes you cry? Look up.


Mar. Look up and Curse such a remorsless Father. [Exit.


Widd. Now Sir be judge, is it fit that he stay here? if he goes, you yet might
hope to win upon her.


Sir Will. No, no, stay, Pox on him, I Will send him packing: But here comes
Tom. [Enter Tom.


Eld. Weal. What News Sir? How does my angry Love? Have you informed her all?
Will she forgive?


Sir Will. Yes: I told her thou were well. But on her Knees, she vowed she would
never see you; have but a little patience she will forget it.


Eld. Weal. Which way went she?


Sir Will. She Is locked her self into that Room within; but where is your
Brother?


Eld. Weal. I left him in the Garden; he is a coming.


Widd. 'Sdeath, he will meet Maria; I Will go watch them.


Sir Will. Run, run, he follows you. [Exit. Manet, Eld. Weal. and Sir Will.


Sir Will. Take Heart Tom, take Heart, I warrant we bring matters about again,
have but patience. Pox on this young Dog, he is met her and spoiled all the
Plot. To her Tom, to her; beg her Pardon, and all will be well. [Exit.


Eld. Weal. Yes, on my knees. Nay, and she must forgive me.
For though the humblest way my Love will choose,
And all the Arts to tempt good Nature use,
Should she at last my Penitence refuse.
I know my stubborn Temper will return,
And then too late she will her anger Mourn;
When I have seized the Rascal Author of my Pain,
Killed, Stabbed, Destroyed, and ruined all again.

SCENE discovers Maria on a Bank, in Tears.
Enter young Wealthy. Jun. Well. A Pretty Garden this; ha, whose that, the
purchase of my Sword? My Love in Tears? Mistrust of my Sickness! I Will Court her
in Heroicks. So, when the God of War sets out for Fights and Ranges through the
Fields in Blood and Dust, the sweet-ey'd Venus takes a lonely flight, and in
some soft Retirement of Heaven, bemoans the vast Fatigues the Hero bears. So,
so, this will do in Tears. My Goddess.


Mar. Bless me!


Jun. Weal. 'Sdeath, I have not washed my face to Day, and she takes me for
Vulcan. Mars, by the Gods, come flusht with Honor from the Bloody Field, ready
to lay them all beneath your seet.


Mar. Alive!


Jun. Well. Yes, live to tell you how I fought; to tell you how I Would dye for my
Delight, so that you would let me taste this lovely Fruit, and make live again.
[Kiss.


Mar. By Heaven no Ghost; true solid Flesh and Blood.


Jun. Weal. Such as it is Madam; it is blood that flutters now about my Heart,
and Dances to the Music of your Eyes. Oh, Fair one, since I saw you Fate has
been abroad, and angry Rivals threatened in the Fields, yet naught could take
that Object from my mind.

I kept your lovely form still in my view,
And as I fought, I looked, and fought for you.

Mar. 'Twas frankly fought; and Sir, I give welcome from your Wars, but grieve
I cannot recompense your Valor.

A Heart's a trifle to so great a Hero,
And that is all we Virgins can bestow.

Jun. Weal. That and a little more is all I ask, and Virgins have them both.


Mar. But sure you would not rob me of my All, my most Uncourteous Knight?


Jun. Weal. No, I Would be thy All, thy All in All; thy All in every part. And you
shall have all me with all my heart. And know now I Have begun, I Will fight
Mankind to keep thee to my self.


Mar. Whether I give encouragement or no?


Jun. Weal. I Will win you as a Hero should his Mistress, kill Monsters, Dragons,
do Herculean Labors; I hate a snivling, tedious, seven years Courtship, losing
our Youth and time: Put me to Action, let me convince you early of my Love,
that I may neither lose my time nor you.


Mar. For a small Trial; answer me quick; tell me. Know I the Lady which you
went to meet in the Exchange. Do you boggle? Good b'y Sir.


Jun. Weal. It Is a Rascally Trick; but in short, it was my Lady Sly, and
there is quirk for your quirk. Now, Madam, will you stand me a question?


Mar. With all my heart.


Jun. Weal. What made your Ladyship in Tears just now?


Mar. I Will give you leave to guess it was for you.


Jun. Weal. And give me leave thus then to pay my thanks, since I have owned
this early kindness for you; you must expect i will be convinced of yours.

Therefore prepare, and as I find
You constant, I Will be kind.

Enter Sir William. Sir Will. Rogue, Dog, Traitor; I Will fight with him my self.


Jun. Weal. I shall be turned out of Doors, and lose my opportunities with my
dear one; gad, I Have a Trick left for that still.


Sir Will. Draw Rival draw, I --


Jun. Weal. Good Dad put up, O Se Defendendo's a Damned business.


Sir Will. Why look you now! The Rogue would murder me; I Will swear the Peace
against him.


Mar. Are you mad Sir William? Nay then fight it out.


Jun. Weal. Sir William, hear me.


Sir Will. Hear you? No you Dog, but I Will hang you.


Jun. Weal. Then Sir I resign my self to you, will you yet hear me?


Enter Eldest Wealthy. Eld. Weal. What Is the matter, Madam?


Mar. Only Sir William is bewitched. I Will watch him if he turns him out of
Doors, I have a Game to play, for I must plague him; and if I find he loves me,
let him take me. [Aside.


Eld. Weal. Good Sir, what is it that disorders you?


Sir Will. What Is that to you Sir; and now I think on it, you advised me to it;
you were the Match-maker.


Jan. Weal. Sir you mistake, why wont you hear me?


Eld. Weal. 'Sdeath, you undo my Brother; he has no thoughts of Maria.


Sir Will. What made him with her then?


Eld. Weal. Mere accident; he is promised to the Widow, Sir, to my knowledge,
though she will not own it.


Sir Will. How! she is Rich; she is a Miserable Woman then: The Dog will undo
her. Come hither Sirrah, do you make love to the Widow here?


Jun. Weal. Sir, here are Letters under her Hand, that would have convinced you
as much, would you have been patient; yet should she ever know I owned it Sir,
'twou'd break the Match, and ruin my Designs.


Sir Will. This may be true, the Widdow's Jealous of him with Maria; so much
the better, 'twill make her earnester in my Affair. Well Sir, if she be fool
enough, go on, I Will keep your Counsel. [Exit Sir William.


Jun. Weal. Faith Tom, thou came in a lucky hour, we were just a going to
take a fair Tilt, the old Gentleman's Jealousy was up; how fairs your Mistress?
When is your happy day?


Eld. Weal. She utterly at first denied me seeing her, and so Resents the
Rashness of my Quarrel, such an Affront done to her Reputation, by Heaven, I
feared she would never pardon it. But so far I have prosper'd, only pardoned.


Jun. Weal. That Is all the effect of love; a day or two will soften her again,
write to her first; Maria will attend and plead thy cause.


Eld. Weal. How goes the Cause with her?


Jun. Weal. It thrives; she gives me a free Stage, and if I can convince her of
my Love, which must be done, she gives me reasonable hopes of hers, but swears
she will try me first.


Eld. Weal. Success to you in all: My task is hard, but I Will about it.


Jun. Weal. Never fear Tom; she is born to be thy Wife: And as sure

As after Marriage they must all be Ruled,
So Tom, before it they may all be Fooled. Exeunt severally.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
Discovers Young Wealthy in Prison. Jun. Weal. A Comfortable Being this!
Snapp'd last Night like a Dog by a parcel of Rascally Bailiffs, and Mewed up
here for 500 l. Lost my Mistress, lost my Liberty, lost my Widow too, I fear,
for I can get no answer of my Letter. The Devil! This must be malice: I owe 500
l. but to no one, and how the Devil they should all agree to confound me, I
cannot tell. Enter Eld. Wealthy.

Tom, this is kind indeed, to visit a Brother in affliction.


Eld. Weal. Dear Frank, I come to beg thou wilt let me know which is the best and
readiest way to serve you? What Is the Action?


Jun. Weal. Five hundred Pound. I owe the Town indeed 500 l. and I believe the
whole Town is the Plaintiff: Therefore the readiest way, dear Tom, will be to
search the Offices, that I may know at whose suit I am here; my Father knows of
it, I guess he is strangely troubled.


Eld. Weal. Strangely indeed, for he would let thee starve; but I Will away and
search the Offices. -- Be not dejected Frank, for shortly I shall have command
of Money, and if no way but paying of the Debt will give you freedom, I Will lay
down the Money, and thou shall laugh at the Old Man's ill Nature.


Jun. Weal. Does Maria know it?


Eld. Weal. Yes, and pitties you extremely, rails at my Father for his Cruelty,
and speaks most tenderly of your Misfortune.


Jun. Weal. There Is some comfort still; if I can get out no other way, tell her
I Will break through the Stone Walls to thank her.


Eld. Weal. Never fear, I Will bring you News immediately. [Exit.


Jun. Weal. I wonder how this Old Rogue my Father, could get two such honest
fellows for his Sons; this is a Brother. But would my Widow would come, she is
Rich, and I Am engaged to her already, an't 'twou'd be even a pain to be obliged
so much by one who is to me a stranger, though my Brother. How like a
Counter-Rat I look. -- I Will lay me down to sleep, and dream of Liberty.

Enter Widow. A Letter. My dear Widow! This is kind indeed.


VVidd. Good Sir, why did you send for me?


Jun. Weal. For the same Reason which I hope you came. Why all this Coldness?
What have you learnt this lesson of my Father, and come to preach, or practice
it upon me? My Constancy and Love's but ill repaid, if this must be the time
you choose for parting.


Widd. Constancy! Thou Devil!


Jun. Weal. In Hell, Madam, you might have said, but no Devil.


Widd. Yes Devil, to wrong the woman, that never yet wronged you, but sacrificed
my Fortunes and my Honor to make you easy, and maintain your Pride.


Jun. Weal. Did I e're yet disown it, Madam?


Widd. Most basely in your Actions, though your Words (that natural deceit in
all your Sex) flattered me still to keep me still your Fool; but I Am convinced;
and now it is all the pleasure I have left, that I came here in scorn, to let
you know I Have seen your baseness punished. So farewell. Offers to go.


Jun. Weal. Madam, though I can meet your scorn with scorn, and Perish as
indifferently as you wish it, you shall in Justice let me know what grounds for
this; or is it a Pretense? Own it true Woman, own it, find out a Lustier Fellow
for your use, you have nicked your time; laugh at your Quondam Servant, and be
Damned.


Widd. This wo'not do, your Pride will not carry't off, or make me think of you in
any terms, but as the most ungrateful of Mankind.


Jun. Weal. For what? 'Sdeath, how? Be plain.


Widd. You cannot guess: O Impudence!


Jun. Weal. You Scold well, indeed Madam; but I remember a bit of a Song very
proper; I Will Sing it if you please, Madam.


Widd. Sing! The Devil choke him.

He Sings. Love and true Merit do seldom prevail.
For always you hold a wet Eel by the Tail.

Widd. Good Mr. True Merit; thou Monster, look upon this Letter, you don't know
it, though the hand be Counterfeit; a shallow Cheat.


Jun. Weal. Then Witness for me all you Powers Divine,
If this be any Word, or Hand of mine.

Widd. O Impudence!


Jun. Weal. Perdition seize me if I ever saw it.


VVidd. Monstrous!


Jun. Weal. If I did Madam, may I never be blessed with the Light of the Sun.


VVidd. Cursed Lie.


Jun. Weal. But be shut up in Eternal Darkness in this Dungeon.


VVidd. Unparellell'd Villainy!


Jun. Weal. May I be Rooted here a Spectacle to your Ladyship.


VVidd. Would thou go to the Devil directly?


Jun. Weal. Nor be ever more in your good Grace.


VVidd. Be Hanged.


Jun. Weal. If I know one word of the matter; therefore, good Madam, tell me
how you came by this.


VVidd. You did not write this to Mrs. Maria?


Jun. Weal. Why, did she give it you?


VVidd. What Is that to you: By Heaven! I never thought of this: Upon my Soul it
was a Trick; but by his haste to know I find his Thoughts, yet he is better
than I thought of him, and I must use him better.


Jun. Weal. 'Twas my pretty little Rogues Letter; dull Dog, she is Jealous of
me. Ah, would I were out.


VVidd. Shall I believe you did not write this Letter?


Jun. Weal. Shall I curse any more?


VVidd. No.


Jun. Weal. How came you by it?


VVidd. 'Twas sent me as a Copy stole from you of one you, writ.


Jun. Weal. A likely Story; and you soon believed it, to shake me off, just
now starving in Goal; I thank you Madam.


VVidd. No, my dear VVealthy, never, would you love me.


Jun. Weal. Could I have spoke such barbarous things to you?


VVidd. No, but you would do worse should you ever leave me.


Jun. Weal. Leave you, Child! I can neither leave you, nor be with you while I
am here.


VVidd. What is your Debt?


Jun. Weal. Only five hundred Pound.


Widd. A good round Sum! By times he will certainly have all I have; I Will break
a right Widows Rule for once, and Marry him, he has osten proffered at it. Mr.
Wealthy, the Summ's no Trifle to the best Estate; you have often proposed, take
me and all I have, i will give you Liberty to Night.


Jun. Weal. I must lie to get out; agreed -- but in the mean time, my dear,
it is no Novelty to you and I, we'll Seal this business in the other Room.


Widd. Fie, Mr. Wealthy, not till I Am all your own.


Jun. Weal. She Is been all my own these two years. Nay, Childish, why so
unwilling?


Widd. Lord! What do you mean? Fie, in a Prison?


Jun. Weal. In a Palace Child, with good Company; the place indeed is homely,
but the Entertainment shall be the heartier. Nay, come.


Widd. Lord, I Will swear there is no dealing with you. [Exeunt.


Enter Maria in Boys Clothes, and the Jailer. Mar. How bears the Gentleman his
Confinement Jailer?


Goal. Very well.


Mar. You know by the Bailiffs on what account he is here, they told you, I
suppose; there is Money for you, when I release him ask him for no Fees, he must
go with me. There Is no Company with him, is there?


Goal. Yes, a Lady.


Mar. What, in the inner Room? Run, run, run in immediately, tell him a
Gentleman would speak with him: No, stay, here he comes -- how like a Rogue he
looks.


Re-enter young Wealthy and the Widow. Jun. Weal. Madam, your Servant,
you will not forget; adieu. [Exit. Widow.

I have seen this Youth somewhere; Sir, would you speak with me?


Mar. Yes Sir, I come from the Gentleman my Brother, you fought with the other
day, upon a Ladies account.


Jun. Weal. Well, Sir.


Mar. I am to tell you it is in his Power, and only his, to take this Action
off, and give you Enlargement.


Jun. Weal. In his?


Mar. Wonder not Sir; you are Rivals, and he took this way, this surer than his
Sword, to Ruin you. He had a Catalogue of all your Debts, and from each
Creditor, whom he has paid, full force to lay his Action, which he will take off
upon no other Terms than a perfect Resignation of your Mistress.


Jun. Weal. Child, you may go, I Will bring my Answers back my self, and tell him
next time I have his Sword, I Will spoil his neat Proposals. Go, Lad, go.


Mar. But Sir, she loves him.


Jun. Weal. Therefore I Will cut his Throat.


Mar. She Will hate and curse you for it.


Jun. Weal. Not when he is dead Child, she may like me then.


Mar. But how will you get out Sir?


Jun. Weal. What Is that to thee Impertinence; prithee go tell thy Brother, I Would
Perish if I were within his Power, rather than yield him up a thought of her.


Mar. But why are you so stubborn, when to my Face I see you were engaged to
cross his just desires?


Jun. Weal. Why, how now Child, though that pretty face does plead for thee, be
gone, or I shall use the scurvily.


Mar. You Will not Resign her then?


Jun. Weal. I Will rip his heart, thine and my own too, up first: therefore be
gone.


Mar. Then Sir, to show he does as much deserve her as your self, I have Orders
here to give you Liberty; if you dare meet him behind Southampton-House, within
this half hour alone, where he declares no Quarter must be given, but one of
you must dye upon the Spot.

[Takes his Sword from the Jailer, gives him his Sword.
Jun. Weal. Sir, this obligation's great, and i will return it to your Brothers
heart.


Mar. Guard your own Sir -- If you please -- [Points to the door.


Jun. Weal. Sans Ceremony, faith Sir; from a Prison. [Exeunt.


Enter Mr. Shamtown, with a black Scarf at one Door, and Mr. Littlegad at the
other. Sham. Mr. Littlegad, my Friend and Champion, how do you?


Littleg. Wholly Devoted still to Mr. Shamtown, and if there be no dangerous
Deaths Wound lies beneath that Noble Escutheon of your Honor, I wish you Joy
of such a Manly mark; and by my faith, I could have wished the like to have
signalized my self. You are for the Coffee-house no doubt, I Am sorry I am
engaged: The first surprises, the many questions, how, when, and with whom,
where; at Southampton-house.


Sham. With this short Sword.


Littleg. And how bravely the other fought you too; be sure mark that, that adds
to you, you know; then you disarmed him.


Sham. Accident in fight, where the brave draw their Swords, the Combat's
doubtful.


Littleg. If they ask who were Seconds?


Sham. Fester my Wound Sir, if I do you wrong; will you go with me?


Littleg. Damn it, how Love and Honor wrack my mind: Why for a Woman should I
rob my self of all I fought for? Pox of Visiting, and yet I must. Said each,
there is no danger now to second you, and yet there is real Honor to be got. But
early in the morning I Will be there; farewell Sir.

I envy you the Honor you must meet,
But go to lay mine at my Coelia's feet. [Exeunt severally.

SCENE the Fields.
Enter young Wealthy. Jun. Weal. Not come yet? this is the place; surely this
Villain does design to Murder me, or else fought booty with me the last time.
No Seconds to so furious a Challenge; I shall have my Throat Cut here in the
Woods, and be Buried, like the Children in the Ballad, by the Robin Red-breasts.


Enter Maria in Man's Clothes. Mar. Sir, your Servant, you're as good as your
word.


Jun. Weal. That Is more than your Brother dare; why is he not here? And why are
you, Sir?


Mar. Sir, the hurt he received in his Arm, has unexpectedly disabled him, but
he has sent his Sword by me.


Jun. Weal. Give it me Child; indeed I should have took it had he come.


Mar. What mean you Sir? I came to do him Justice, maintain his Merit, is to be
preferred to yours.


Jun. Weal. 'Sdeath, does he take my Mistress for a Prize for Boys to Box for?


Mar. Boys Sir? Draw.


Jun. Weal. Ha, ha.


Mar. Flout not Sir, we'll try who is the strongest.

Enter two like Russians.
Jun. Weal. Ay, this is something, you young White-liver'd Dog.


Mar. Will you resign your Mistress, or dye upon the Spot?


Jun. Weal. Not till I Have ripped thy little Guts up. Fight me but one by one.


The 1st. No, thank you Sir, we can Murder you a better way.


Mar. Speak, or we strike.


Jun. Weal. Hold.


Mar. Stand this, and take me quick.


Jun. Weal. Smooth-face stand off, though you are the very'st Rascal I e're
saw, methinks I Would save thy Life to tell my Story. Thou'st such a lying,
wheedling face, thou can not fail to work upon a Woman, when at this time
methinks I could forgive thee.


Mar. I speak for you.


Jun. Weal. Yes, tell her how I fought, or if I perish, tell her how I fell;
tell her how much beyond my life I loved her, without the least security of
hers. The Name, the Pride, the Honor of my Love, thou shall in softning
Eloquence relate; and though thou art a very Villain, look as thou do speak
as thou would for him, and win her to my Bed, or to my Grave.


Mar. I must try him further yet, though my heart aches with love and
tenderness. Am I so much obliged to Nature, Sir? Look then, despair and dye:
'Twas my own Jealousy that drew me here, the other was a mere Pretension. I
love Maria too above my life, and therefore dare not, at an equal hazard,
expose my life. I followed her to Town, abandoning my Family and Friends: Mad
with my Love, and Resolute to win her. Though for your Generosity, which thus far
in a Rival I can pity, since you believe I could prevail for you, with
looking, speaking, flattering, any thing. You cannot doubt the Conqnest, for my
self, yet still Renounce her and I Will spare thy life.


Jun. Weal. I Will not return that Complement to you, there is no safety if I let
you live; therefore prepare, and if thou have one grain of Honor left, venture
me one fair thrust among the Crowd, and I Will forgive thee yet.


Mar. Hold, for i will Rival you in Honor too. Be gone, there is your Reward.
You Will bate the Murder. I Will thrust my single Arm in such a Cause, and dye or
else deserve her. [The two Ruffians go off.


Jun. Weal. Dye or deserve her; 'Sdeath, thou wilt win her from me. Prithee
contrive some way we may be friends, I would not nip such Honor in the bud;
thou art too young to think of Marrying -- Gad thou shall be her Page: I Will
give thee leave to own thy Passion, Ogle thy Heart out, tell her pretty Tales,
she will listen to the Music of thy Voice, and give thee sigh for sigh. Put up
thy Sword, 'Sdeath thou holds it like a Girl.


Mar. Ha! ha!


Jun. Weal. By Heaven! and look like one -- Where were my Eyes?


Mar. Pox on your Eyes Sir: Damme, will you fight?


Jun. Weal. Yes, Damme, thus, thus, and thus.


Mar. Now where is that cruel Creature upon Earth, that could deny so Generous a
Lover?


Jun. Weal. If there be such, she lives among the Bears, and never came in
Christian Company. She never said her Prayers, sighed, shed a Tear, or played
with Boys, or Babys, in her Life.


Mar. Then I am won.


Jun. Weal. By Heaven, and fairly too.


Mar. What will you do with me now?


Jun. Weal. E'ne Marry thee, my Dear.


Mar. And beat me?


Jun. Weal. No, live and dye with thee, by Jove. Put up thy Sword, and trust
thy Eyes alone.

To those bright Planets, I my Trophies yield;
By them you are always Mistress of the Field.

Enter Mr. Spruce and his Wife. Mrs. Spr. Nay, but you shall my dear, or I Will
swear I wont let you go.


Mr. Spr. Indeed Molly but I wont; I must go Child, there is no body at the Shop
this Morning.


Mrs. Spr. Nay, but consider he is your Friend, a fine young Gentleman, and one
you love:


Mr. Spr. Very well; Madam, and what am I?


Mrs. Spr. Oh, thou art the sweetest Creature Living, but you don't love me.


Mr. Spr. Yes, Molly, but I do, and my self too; and therefore, though I love Mr.
VVealthy as well as you do, I Will be bound for no body.


Mrs. Spr. Then I Am sure you don't love him half so well as I do, for I Would be
bound Body for Body for him. Poor Gentleman, so I would; but you don't love him
because I do.


Mr. Spr. Not if you love him better than me, Molly.


Mrs. Spr. Yes, yes, very likely, as if I did not know when I was well; but you
know how handsome you are, and that makes you as Proud as the Devil. This is
like all the rest, your running to Epsom and Tunbridge; so it is.


Mr. Spr. Poor Rogue, now I have vexed her. Why, my dear, I always take you with
me.


Mrs. Spr. Yes, yes, to show me I don't deserve you, to see a hundred Women
Dancing after you, and pulling you as if they would eat you from me.


Spruce. Poor Fool, nay, I must confess they do reaze me: But how can I help
all this, Molly.


Mrs. Spruce. You might stay at home, like an honest man: Would I had married
the ugliest fellow in England, then I might have had him to my self; or at
least I might have rhelish'd another after him; but to be Married as I am; I
shall be poisoned one of these days, and then you will be rid of me.


Spruce. Nay, prithee Molly.


Mrs. Spruce. Don't I see it; have not we a hundred Ladies for one Gentleman, that
comes to our Shop?


Spruce. Gad, and that is true, and I never minded it.


Mrs. Spruce. Lord Mistress you're the happiest Woman, says one; you must
certainly have delicate Children, says another; pray how long have you been
Married, says a third.


Spruce. Women's talk Child: prithee Molly, I love thee, let 'em say what they
will.


Mrs. Spruce. Yes, I know it is Women's talk: Lord, says another, that can never
be his own Hair: Bless me, he has delicate Teeth; how strangely that French's
Beard becomes some sort of Faces: Nay more, I Will swear, I Have heard them say
they believed you were Painted, you had such a delicate Complexion.


Spruce. Nay, prithee Molly, you make me smile; for the Devil take me, if I have not been told the same a thousand times.


Mrs. Spr. Have you so? Very well, who should I love better than you then? And
but that you have a mind to be cross, I have heard you say a thousand times,
you would do any thing to serve Mr. Wealthy, and yet refuse me to bail him out
of Prison only for five hundred pounds.


Spruce. I tell thee Moll, I forswore it when I was Apprentice, or I vow thou
would tempt me to Ruin my self; his Father and Brother will take care of him.


Mrs. Spruce. But they must not know it; and I Am sure if they do, we shall so
oblige that Family, we shall get thrice as much by it.


Spruce. Gad Molly do not tempt me; I love you so, I shall play the Fool, i will
run away from you.


Mrs. Spr. I Will swear i will follow you to the Change.


Spruce. Wife keep the House, remember your Lord commands you; I must be gone.
[Exit.


Mrs. Spr. And i will be with you, for my dear VVealthy must be freed to Night;
it is a great blessing to know a Husbands blind side; what a good humor he is
run away with for my praising his Beauty. Bless me! how unreasonably we are
accused for Cuckolding our Husbands, when certainly, either by Vanity, Folly,
Pride, or ill Nature, they draw it upon themselves, and yet they have the
impudence to believe we must love all these faults, honor all these faults,
and obey all these faults, that obeys the Devil, and yet without this, we are
the Vipers that defile your Beds, Plant Hieroglyphick Figures on their Heads,
when alas,

No Woman does her Lawful Prince dethrone,
But you're so Proud you will so Rule alone;
We must be Slaves, or Cuckold every one.
If therefore you will not this Crime repent,
And we must still obey your Government,
Exalted be your Horns, by my Consent. Exit.

SOPHIA alone.
Enter Elder Wealthy; she is going off. Eld. Weal. Nay, Madam, stay and hear me
first; why so unjust? Will you not let me plead in such a Cause, where Love and
Life, my Heaven to come, and here, which all is at stake?


Soph. What would you Plead for, Sir? Have I not pardoned you at the first
word? Even in the midst of Tears, believing your offense the effect of Love?
And yet you will not grant me one Request.


Eld. Weal. Not grant it: What Madam?


Soph Me to my self; you grudge me sure my Grief, or else have very little of
your own, that can at this time covet Company.


Eld. Weal. Why, Madam, am I your aversion grown?
So altered in a day! What have I done?
That Tears and Prayers, Pity and Love in you, (which once I did expect) cannot
wipe off*


Soph. Bless me! that you can ask what you have done: Are you as Merciless as
your Father, Sir? Pray give me way, you would make me hate you, to see you Master
of no more Compassion; pray give me way.


Eld. Weal. Not till you're torn from me. Dear Madam, do but hear me speak.


Soph. No, you have already made me break my Oath, which was so strict, never to
have seen you more; I must be gone.


Enter young Wealthy and Maria. Jun. Weal. Dear Tom; what, flying of him, Madam?


Soph. Alive! Blessed be my Eyes, blessed be the day, and be for ever blessed thou
best of Men.


Eld. Weal. What means this Ecstasy?


Soph. Thy Father told me he was killed.; killed in thy Quarrel, upon my
account. Or think you I could e're have parted with you, but Tears of Joy flow
on so fast upon me, I cannot speak the fullness of my Soul.


Eld. Weal. By Heaven, nor I, but thus.


Mar. My dear Cousin, let me but recover the fright you put me in. Dear Cousin
and Sir, I beg your Pardons, for indeed I might have prevented this mistake,
but that my head ran too much upon this Gentleman; for in short, the Report of
it at first, was a Plot of the Old Fool your Father, Sir, and that Exquisite
Hypocrite my Lady Sly: For as I went down into the Garden, as he has the
Impudence since to believe, to lament his loss, I met this living thing there,
who has since, upon some small trials of his Faith, owned his Intrigue with the
Widow, confessed himself a Rogue, and I have forgiven him.


Jun. Weal. Surely, your Ladyship would sum up an Evidence well: But Madam,
should I begin the Story, which shortly you will hear, how like a Rogue she has
used me, how like a Gaol-Bird she has treated me, and all, as she terms it, for
a small trial of my Faith. You would wonder how I could ever forgive her, yet,
like a good natured fool, I have done it, and she has the Grace to thank me
for it.


Eld. Weal. And must we wish you Joy, Frank? You play sure.


Jun. Weal. Faith, Tom, I Am in a Whimsical Dilemma, for I have often forswore the
Marriage-knot, and yet it is some way we must be joined, for we have made an
Oath we'll never part.


Mar. It Is a sad Truth; but yet Mr. Wealthy, who knows, a good Example may
prevail upon the Churl.


Jun Weal. Say you so? Then Tom, I Challenge you; first, to join with us in a
Plot we have laid, for the two Fools, my Father and the Widow; next, you must
meet no Denials. Now, Madam, with your fair Lady in your hand to morrow, at the
dread hour which we call Canonical. Whereas you came into the World before me,
so quit it, Sir; dye to your Lady first, and though my heart aches even to think
upon it, since this young Niggard will be paid her price before she parts with
any of her Goods, let the black fellow thunder in my Ears.

For thee such wounding Words I will endure,
No Surgeon (Child) on Earth can ever cure.

Eld. Weal. I take your silence for consent, my dear; and Frank i will meet you;
as to your Plot, we leave it wholly to you, act as you please, and we'll obey
your Orders; here comes the Widow, Frank.


Jun. Weal. Be gone every one.


Mar. What, must I trust you with her?


Jun. Weal. Go, go, you Fool, I must make love a little to help the Plot; mind
yours too with my Father.


Mar. I Will to Sir William for my part, and be with you in a minute.


Exit all but young Wealthy. Enter to him the Widow. VVidd. My dear VVealthy
at Liberty, and here; what can this mean?


Jun. Weal. Two Miracles, my dear.


VVidd. As how, my Love?


Jun. Weal. My Delivery and my Constancy; i will swear I was delivered by
Miracle; and for my Constancy, you may judge of that, who railed against me so
lately without Reason. But Widow, thy Generosity has so prevailed upon me, and
so much I esteem you my Deliverer:

I come my newborn Freedom to resign,
And make you Matrimonially mine.

Widd. No, Mr. Wealthy, though I own your kindnesses, on second thoughts I dare
not be so rash.


Jun. Weal. Why, how now Widow, what repent your bargain?


Widd. Only for fear you should.


Jun. Weal. Ridiculous!


Widd. Ah Wealthy, you are too much a Libertine to use a Woman well thou have
enjoyed; Maria, that untainted fruit, may please. A Marriage Bed requires a
Maidenhead.


Jun. Weal. Why Widow, do thou think i will be a Cuckold, at least, to any Man
but to my self? Marry a Girl! No, faith Madam, I leave her to Sir William, and
but that thou art an Infidel, I could tell thee such a Story of my Constancy,
such a Trial of my Faith, such a Miraculous Preservation of thy Honor, that
would I were choked if I thought I had been half so honest; you saw that young
Gentleman that came to speak with me just as we parted.


VVidd. Yes, what then?


Jun. Weal. Only he dogged you thither.


VVidd. Me, by whose Orders?


Jun. Weal. He said he was the Brother of my Rival; and that unless I would
resign Maria, I should lie there and rot, but if I would, he had orders to
release me.


Jun. Weal. On this I begged he would show me to the door, Maria might be his Wife
with all my heart; the Lady that he saw was my first choice, and for her sake,
no threatening of his Brother, I did accept my freedom at his hands.


Widd. I own 'twas more than I can e're deserve. But why dog me, did he take me
for her?


Jun. Weal. No Child, but I took her for him.


VVidd. Her sor him! Bless me, Sir, what mean you?


Jun. Weal. Maria, by the Gods, that Devil her self, was sole contriver of
that hellish Plot; in that disguise discovered our intrigues, owned some small
kindness formerly for me, bid me repent my folly, and my loss, swore that to
morrow morning she would be Married, and ruin me for ever with my Father; then
with a Curse she wished me Joy with you, and bid me hug my Monumental Widow.


Widd. A Curse for her again. But my Dear Wealthy:


Jun. Weal. My dear Widow.


VVidd. How can I requite you?


Jun. Weal. We'll be married to Night.


Widd. Impossible!


Jun. Weal. Then with my Brother Tom, in your private little Chapel, at the
end of the Hall, by six in the Morning; by Heaven I Will stay no longer. Here
comes my Father and she with him, i am sure this Match must please him, and i will
scorn her: Besides, I have already laid a Scene of mirth, which you must join
in; Shamtown and Littlegad shall pay the Fiddlers; the Old Fool hates them, and
will join in it. Be gone, i will meet you presently in the Garden, and then inform
you all.


Widd. Adieu, my dear. [Exit Widow.


Enter Sir William and Maria: Jun. Weal. She smiles and winks, it thrives; Gads
so, the Old fellow Dances as he goes: Yes, yes, you shall be married.


Sir Will. Who Is that? Why, Sirrah, who are you? Why, how now Frank, and my Boy
Frank: And a Franky, Franky, Franky, Frank; Sirrah, down on your knees.


Jun. Weal. Sir.


Sir Will. Down on your knees, Sirrah.


Jun. Weal. Yes, Sir.


Sir Will. And a Franky, Franky, etc.


Jun. Weal. What the Devil ails the Old Fellow?


Sir Will. Sirrah, you are to be Married, I hear.


Jun. Weal. Yes, Sir.


Sir Will. To whom, Sir.


Jun. Weal. To the discreet Lady of the House.


Sir Weal. To the discreet Lady of the House; i am glad on it you Dog.


Jun. Weal. Yes Sir, and beg your blessing in it.


Sir Will. Yes, Sirrah, I have blessed you Sirrah; rise up and say i have set you
upon your Legs, Sirrah. I have, given you three hundred a year, Sirrah. Franky,
you Dog, and a Franky, Franky, etc.


Jun. Weal. Sir, I thank you, and am doubly obliged that you are so over joy'd
at my good Fortune.


Sir Will. No, Sirrah, not altogether so neither, I have Joy of my own too, and
Joy for other people, as time shall try, as old as I am: Sirrah, there is your
Mother-in-law.


Jun. Weal. Possible!


Sir Will. Ay, you Dog, it e'nt impossible, is it?


Jun. Weal. No, Sir.


Sir Will. No, Sir? What then, Sir?


Jun. Weal. Nay, Sir, I wish you Joy, I was just going to ask the Lady Blessing.


Sir Will. No, Sir, you shant ask her Blessing, she shall have enough of her own
to ask her Blessing, Sirrah; I will get upon her Body such a parcel of
Gray Headed Cupids, it shall be the Worlds Wonder.


Mar. Nay, faith, Sir William, we'll do our best, for since Mr. Wealthy is
engaged to the Widow, and his Brother to my Cousin, I swear I will not be out
of the Family; and let me alone to make you young again.


Sir Will. Why, Sirrah, why do'nt you rejoice to see your Old Dad so happy.


Jun. Weal. Sir, I do so much rejoice, that if the Lady will be ruled by me,
we'll make this the Merriest pair Royal of Weddings, as e're were heard of.


Mar. As how, dear Mr. VVealthy; if there be any mischief in it, I am for you.


Jun. Weal. I must own, Madam, I have an implacable malice to the two Fools,
that occasioned the mistake between Tom and his Mistress. I have prevailed with
my Sister that shall be, who has writ a Note inviting them hither in a
disguise; Mr. Shamtown, who expects to carry off the Prize, to morrow morning,
no less than to be Married here, even in this House: And Madam, if you would join,
and write to Mr. Littlegad as I told you. --


Sir Will. We'll toss 'em in a Blanket, Fops, Fools.


Mar. Agreed, I write this minute. Exit.


Sir Will. Go, go, you Rogue: I shall so tickle you: Sirrah, am not I a lucky
old Toad: But you don't rejoice, Pox on you don't rejoice at your Fathers
fortune. Pish you an't overjoyed, for my own part Frank, it comes upon me so
of a sudden, I have such a preturbation of Spirit, and such a consternation of
joy, on my conscience, I can hardly tell where I am.


Jun. Weal. Upon my life, if the surprise be so great, you had best let blood.


Sir Will. No, thank you Sirrah, an old fellow to be Married to a a young
Woman and let blood, would I had as much as when I got your Brother Tom, then I
would so rumble her, and so tumble her, and so jumble her, and so fumble her
Frank; and a Frank, etc. But Sirrah, I Will to my Daughter-in-law, and manage her
to the last penny for you: She Is a parlous Slut, and Franky, Frank, etc. Exit.


Jun. Weal. Not so very close, but now our Plot is sure, I Am satisfied our
Letters took the effect;

The Fools bit at it rarely as I hear,
And early shall be welcome to the snare. Exit.

Enter Sir William and Maria with Lights, Young Wealthy meets 'em. Sir Will.
Are they come, are the Fools come?


Jun. Weal. 'Sdeath out with the Lights, they are just got into the little
Chapel, their Ladies wait 'em impatiently; be sure Sir, you do not speak till
you see 'em fast bound, and then --


Sir Will. Ay, and then my little Eyes. The Lights are carried off.


Mar. Hist.


Jun. Weal. Your hand, your hand, I hear the Widow; that is just where I
appointed her. They steal off. Then enter the Widow.


Widd. So, I see the Unfortunate Lovers are come, my dear.


Enter Shamtown like a Chairman, and another. Sir Will. Hist, they are at it:
This is the Hall: This happy darkness doubles my Disguise. Friend, did you see
any of the Family to day?


Chairman. No, Sir, but I saw a Chair go in about half an hour ago.


Shamt. Punctual Creature; for fear I should not bring one. In the Passage,
from the surther corner of the Hall, we shall find that Chair, and in it the
Treasure of my Soul, which we must carry off; such are my kind directions; and
then I think I have conquered you Mr. Wealthy. Follow me close, and now the
coast is clear, be sure you mind the charge. This is the only secret I ever
kept from Littlegad: ah would he were as happy. Exit.


Sir Will. Ha, ha, ha; wish you joy, Gentlemen, wish you joy; you are met with
In Faith; Lights there Lights: Now for me, my Dear, Pox of their hugger mugger
work: we'll be married in state.


Widd. The Devil, is this Sir William! that was just where Wealthy appointed
me. You mistake Sir William.


Sir Will. Widow, where is my little Devil? What ho?


Maria. Coming, coming Sir William (Within.


Sir Will. Gad they have it, Fops, Fools, Cuckolds, Rogues, did thou see 'em?
Enter Maria.


Mar. See 'em! I think I provided well for my Maids.


Sir Will. Come, come, I Will Maid you: Where Is Frank? why Sirrah.


Enter Young Wealthy. Jun. Weal. Here Sir.


Sir Will. Sirrah, to your Wife, you ill-natured Dog, this was your
contrivance. Where Is Tom?


Jun. Weal. Just coming Sir, our turn's next: Where Is this Parson; if he be not
out of breath, he may do our work too.


Sir Will. Pox on him, and his sneaking bit of Wax Candle; I could hardly
discern a Man from a Post; and the two Sluts stood with their backs to us.


Widd. I swear Mr. Wealthy, you're an unmerciful man; I am sorry to see you
have so much ill nature; what have you done with the poor Gentleman?


Jun. Weal. When they have served our mirth a little further, we'll dispatch
em with their Ladies. Pox where is this Parson, we'll fetch him by the Ears.
Exit Sir William and Young Wealthy.


Mar. I suppose, Madam, I need not wish your Ladyship Joy, since you have made
choice of a young man so able to give it as Mr. Wealthy; for my part, I confess
you may wonder at this Match, but upon my word, Madam, I am altogether
satisfied with these poor Remains of Sir William, since he will put me in a way
to return your many obligations upon your dear Mr. Wealthy.


Widd. I understand her, but since Wealthy is mine, can laugh at her. aside.)

Your Ladyship is highly obliging, and though indeed, Madam, I may seem to have
the better of you in this business, yet I cannot tell how wild Mr: Wealthy may
prove; and at least, you may live at quiet with Sir William, an old Gentleman
that is tamed to your hands.


Mar. Now could I fall out with her in earnest, for her impudence, though I am
sure of my Man. aside.)

If I may be so bold, pray Madam, how long was handsome Mr. Wealthy an admirer
of you, before he gained the mighty Conquest over you?


Widd. If Madam, without blushing I might tell you, I think too long. However,
since to Night he must be mine, i will reap that lost years Harvest in this
Night; sure of my bliss, i will seize my Vigorous Swain, free from the Curse of
disappointing Age: Blind with my Love, give loose to my desires, and in
continued Trances cheat the Night.


Mar. Oh, Impudence: By Heaven, she is lying with him to my face, I can hold no
longer. aside.)

And is your Gravity come to this? Sure, Madam, you will not ravish Mr. Wealthy.


Widd. Sure, Madam, but I may, before Sir William can your Ladyship.


Mar. Poor cheated Fool.


Widd. Poor angry Girl.


Mar. Yes, Madam, value your self upon your Age, Wealthy admires it, Madam; an
Old Lady, and a Cast Widow, must be Honorable.


Widd. Ha, ha, ha, have you lost your longing, Madam?


Mar Nay then, take the Reverse of all thy promised Joys, which in malicious
eagerness you dressed. On Wealthy's breast you will find but poor support; upon thy
buried Honor lean thy head; Bath in the tears shed for that satal loss; Curse
my dear VVealthy's Eyes; cry out thy own. Blind with thy miseries, renounce the
Day, and in eternal howlings waste the Night. By Heaven, thou art betrayed,
VVealthy's my Husband; Married just now, before thy cheated Eyes. Poor fool,
thou art a witness to the Match, and hall Contriver of thy own Destruction.


Enter young Wealthy. Jun. Weal. So, so, the Rival Queens have been at it,
in faith.


VVidd. Speak VVealthy, e're my heart breaks with my wrongs: Have you betrayed
me? Are you such a Villain?


Jun. Weal. Faith, Widow, not to keep you in suspense, on second thoughts I
could not be so rash; therefore to save your Reputation still, own you were in
the design, and laugh with us. Here comes the old Man and the Parson; now the
Plot thick'ns, or the Devils in it.


Enter Sir William and the Parson. Sir Will. Come my Girl, answer before this
man of God. Will thou be my Lawful Wife?


Mar. As Lawsul as that Gentleman can make me.


Sir Will. God a mercy: Come, Sir, to work, to work.


Pars. Indeed, and that is not very Lawful, Madam.


Sir Will. What a Pox ails the Fellow? Why, what Sir, it is not against the Law,
for an Old Man to marry a young Woman, is it?


Pars. No, Sir, but sure it is to Marry your Daughter.


Sir Will. He Is mad: My Daughter, Sir.


Pars. Yes, if that Gentleman's your Son.


Jun. Weal. Good faith, Sir, even so.


Sir Will. I Will hang you, i will drown you, i will murder you, i will poison you,
i will blow you up, i will bury you alive; i will Cuckold you, you Dog.


Jun. Weal. I Will hold you a Guinea on it.


Sir Will. Ah, you Devil.


Mar. I should have Cuckolded you, Sir William; it is better as it is, I shall
love now my none dear Daddy.


VVidd. Come, come, be patient, Sir William, you're happy in your Sons match,
though I am cursed; and though I burst must bear it.


Sir Will. My Son, he is a Son of a Whore, i will prove it, and i will fight him.


Jun. Weal. Hark you Sir, if I am not your Son, it follows naturally you're
not my Father: And gad, Sir, if you abuse my Mother, I shall --


Sir Will. Murder me: Very well, i will have you hanged.


Mar. Think better, Sir William: How could you think that I, with that
disparity of years, could ever love you? I do love your Son, and in your Son
love you.


Sir Will. Come, you're a baggage. [Shakes his Head at her.


Mar. I Am your Daughter, Sir William; i will be tender of you.


Jun. Weal. I Am your Son, and Dutiful: i will renounce the follies of the Town;
i have tasted them, and weigh them all at this. We will forsake this hole of Sin
and Sea-coal, and make you merry in a better Air. Come Spouse. Your blessing,
Sir.


Sir Will. Pox take him, he talks as if he had some Grace; he made a long
Speech too without swearing, but I cannot say Amen to it.


VVidd. Indeed Sir William, I think you're Happy, if you knew when.


Sir Will. Zoons, but I Have lost a Wife.


Mar. No, no, Sir William, if we had been married, you would have made no more on it.


Widd. There Is your Obligation of five hundred pound to me, and truly, I think,
Wisely saved.


Sir Will. Five hundred pound on second thoughts is a round sum: Hum! you're a
Rogue; but rise, rise, and take my blessing, since I cannot help it. But pox
on it, where is Tom? Has no body stole his Wife? And where are these fellows,
that I may see if any thing can make me laugh?


Jun. Weal. O Sir, I warrant you.


Sir Will. What a Pox, it was not you and your Brother Tom I saw Married, was
it?


Jun. Weal. Even so, faith Sir; but here comes our Fortune-Hunters:


Enter Mr. Shamtown as a Chairman, bringing in Mr. Littlegad in Women's Habit.
Sir Will. Hey day, what is here? Who Is in this Chair? Another damned Plot.


Jun. Weal. Set down the Chair, friends; who would you speak with, ha?


Sham. We were called Sir, to carry this Lady; she lives in this house.


Jun. Weal. Ha! Should not I know that Face: Mr. Shamtown. Indeed, I always
mistrusted your Shapes, but never yet really knew you were a Chairman. This, I
suppose, is a Plot for my Brothers Lady; pray Heaven it be not her, Sir.


Sir Will. So, so, more Plots here; Tom shall deal with you.


Sham. Gentlemen, I beg you would not Murder me; and Madam, I hope you will stand
to your Note, and own me, and my love.


Littleg. Ay, me, i am undone, and shall be laughed to Death.


Enter Elder Wealthy and Sophia. Sham. 'Sdeath, who is this? Betrayed, oh Hell
and the Devil; where shall I run?


Jun. Weal. Hey day; what, here and there too? Tom, you're obliged to this
Gentleman, he only came to steal your Lady.


Eld. Weal. I shall not be backward in my thanks.


Sham. I shall be kicked to Death.


Jun. Weal. But, who are you? Come, unmask Lady; nay, by Heaven you must,
pretty Mrs. Littlegad.


Omnes. Mr. Littlegad.


Sir Will. Two Fools well met, in faith.


Littleg. Upon my Faith, I meant it purely for your diversion; pray Pardon me.
I would give a hundred Pound for a Whirlwind to remove me.


Eld. Weal. Sir, this is a base return for giving you your life; but here,
call up my Footmen.


Sham. Gentlemen, do not mistake, I am a Gentleman, and since I am betrayed
into your House defenseless, which was cruel of the Ladies, I beg I may be
safe, when next I am in my Primitive Equipments.


Jun. Weal. What, Sir, without a Shirt?


Sham. No, Sir, I Will give your Brother satisfaction.


Jun. Weal. Shut up the Doors: Poor Fool, he Pardons any thing he scorns, and
you shall share the Graces. And Gentlemen, if you loved these Ladies, you
cannot but stay Dinner, and after Dance at their Weddings, I am sure, Mr.
Spruce.

Enter Mr. Spruce and Mrs. Spruce. Name but a Dance, and up starts Mr. Spruce.


Mr. Spr. Mr. VVealthy, I am glad you are enlarged; and faith; Sir, I came only
to have served you.


Jun. Weal. I must thank your Lady for that, I presume.


Mr. Spr. Gad, she loves you dearly.


Mrs. Spr. I cannot deny't, indeed, Mr. VVealthy, though before my Husbands face.


Jun. Weal. I thank you, Madam.


Sir Will. Frank, I begin to love you already. Sirrah, you are a lucky Dog,
make much of her and I forgive you: and God bless you all four.


Soph. Fairly spoken, Sir William.


Jun. Weal. We'll deserve it; but come, I have provided an Entertainment. A
Dance.

Come Gentlemen, you are the only dejected here, but bear up:
And don't too much the Accident Regret,
For two, by two, we are all but Fools well met.

Epilogue.
WHat would our Author give, you would go away
Half so well pleased as you came here to day.
That he meant well is all he has to plead;
Faith then be kind, and let his Play succeed,
And take for once the good Will for the Deed.
He don't presume to justify his Play,
Vouch it for good, or if you liked you may.
A humbler way for your good word he takes;
You're welcome, would 'twere better for your sakes,
Therefore to damn him were very hard;
Two Fools well met's the Play, and in a word,
Forgive him, for he owns himself the third.
SONG.
HOw shall I my Rivals meet?
They are too Mighty, Rich and Great:
How can I my Celia win,
A Shepherd I, and she Divine?
Or how can such a World of Charms
Be Circled in these humble Arms?
Ah Celia, If the Man that Loves thee most
Cannot deserve thee by it, I am lost.
I am lost, I am lost, Ah Celia, etc.
Propose me Wonders for my Task,
To be thy Slave is all I ask, is all I ask, etc.
The Rich may afterward Ropine,
They would have thee; I would be thine:
Nor scorn me that I am not great,
Since then can with a Smile create.
Let not, Oh let not then the Man be lost,
For what a Smile can give, who loves thee most.
Let not, Oh let not then the Man be lost; etc.
SONG.
MY Amarillis scorns the Man
That does her Eyes adore;
Though I immortalized her Name,
And Sainted her with Power:
But now the Goddess to that height is grown,
She Has quite forgot 'twas I that made her One.
She Has quite forgot, etc.
Books Newly Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Congratulatory Poem on His Highness the Prince of Orange's coming into
England. By Tho. Shadwell.

A Congratulatory Poem to the Most Illustrious Queen Mary, upon Her Arrival
into England. By Tho. Shadwell.

The Squire of Alsatia. A Comedy Acted by their Majesty's Servants. Written by
Tho. Shadwell.

The True Widow. A Comedy Acted by their Majesty's Servants. Written by Tho.
Shadwell.

Bury-Fair. A Comedy, Acted by Their Majesty's Servants. Written by Tho.
Shadwell.

The Forced Marriage, or, The Jealous Bridegroom; As it is Acted by His
Majesty's Servants. Written by A. Behn.

The Female Prelate: Being a History of the Life, and Death of Pope Joan, A
Tragedy; As it is Acted at the Theater Royal.

The Wanton Friar, or, The Irish Amor: A Novel in Twelves.

The History of the Inquisition, as it is Exercised at Goa; Written in French
by the Ingenious Monsieur Dellon, who labored five years under those
Severities, with an Account of his Deliverance; Translated into English.
Quarto. Price 1 s.

Some Observations concerning the Regulating of Elections for Parliament, found
among the Earl of Shaftsbury's Papers after his Death, and now recommended to
the Consideration of this Present Parliament. In Quarto, price 3 d.

Quadriennium Jacobi, or the History of the Reign of King James II. from his
first coming to the Crown to his Desertion.

FINIS:

