A CONTINVATION OF THE DIVRNAL OCCVRRENCES And proceedings of the English Army
against the Rebels in IRELAND, From the first of April, to this present. 1642.

Certified by several Letters from Dublin, Duncannon Fort, and Carickfargus
April the 15. andattested by Lieuetenant Haward, a Commander there, and sent
unto a worthy Gentleman in Westminster.

With some joyful news from Ireland, printed by order of the House of
Commons: Hen: Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for I. T. 1642.

News from Ireland.
Worshipful Sir,
ACcording to my promise, and obligation wherein I am for ever bound, I neither
may nor will omit any occasion, to give you notice of such further proceedings
as concerns this his Masters service in Ireland, but more especially in the
forte of Duncannon, I hope you have not only received my Letters, but also
seen my Captain, and that Noble Liefetenant that came from this good old Lo.
Esmond, since which time we have removed the Rebels Camp further from us.

Upon the 26. of March we fetched in a prey consisting of 150. sheep, and
about 20. Hoggs, and received no hurt, we have often times dared them to fight,
but they will not, their guilty consciences has weakened their hearts and
hands.

The 28. of this Month we burnt a Town called Ramsgrange, and took the
Castle, wherein was a company of the Rebels, under the command of one Captain
Thomas Keating, which Captain we took prisoner, and 23 of his soldiers,
only with the loss of one man on our parts, and upon their own Gallows
which they had set up for us, we hanged 16. of them, the rest of them we
restord to the Enemy, man for man in Lieu of prisoners they had of the English;
and for the Captain, the Countess of Ormond begged, who at that time was here
in the fort, and being sent for, by the Earl to Dublin, by one of the Kings
ships, since the hanging of which men, my Lord has received many threaning
Letters from one Colonel Butler, and Colonel Wall, both great Rebels, and
general Lord Mongarre^t threatens much to the fort, but we fear them not: If
God put it into the hearts of the King and Parliament to provide for us, by
adding of such more strength as is desired by this good old warrior the Lord
Esmond, in his Letters, espcially for shipping, one ship of good fort is as
much as a thousand men.

It must be shipping that must recover Waterford and Rosse again or else
never, and good Garrisons put into them when they are recovered, the Mayor of
Waterford is true, and has done many private courtesies for the distressed
Protestants, and cannot help the rebellion of the City, the Sovereign of
Rosse has done the like, and both has privately intimated as much to my Lord,
that if shipping and soldiers do come in time, they will do their endeavors
for the surrendering of both city and town, which should be done with as much
speed as may be, they both being places of great Traffic with Spain and
Dunkirke, and the heat of all the prime of Ireland.

They begin to be in a thousand distractions, for we have stopped going to
relieve them, and taken one Barque laden with Herrings, one laden with corn,
and another with wines and Salt.

This day we have made stay of a ship of London laden with Sackes from Cales,
and some Letters from Priests and Jesuits in Spain, to some Priests and
Friars here, for which we much suspect them, the Letters import matters of
great joy for the alterration of the times, this is all I can inform about
these parts.

We are further certified from Dublin, by true Intelligence that Droghedah is
relieved, the gates opened, and a great Market comes in daily, from Droghedah
the Army there with some 500 foot and 100 horse under the command of that
valiant Sir Henry Tichborne, marched this last week to Ardee eight miles from
thence, and there defeated the Enemy, from then he marched to Dundalke, 16.
miles from Droghedah, and there he defeated the enemy, slew 1100 of them, and
fifteen officers, took four pieces of ordinance from them, and great ster^
of pillage: it is credibly reported they got 20000 in pillage, in both these
walled Towns, we lost not above 20. men, which is the Lords great mercy to us.

Our Army from Dublin have burnt and forraged all along to Droghedah, 20 miles,
and to the hill of Tarah 16 miles, and Naas, 10 miles, but to the ^ (on the
mountains) of us the enemies lies strong and near us.

On friday last an Army of the Rebels came down from the mountains within
four miles of Dublin, our Horse went to meet them on Saturday early in the
morning, and put them all to flight, and pursued 300 of them into the Castle of
Carickmaine 6 miles from Dublin, by 9. in the morning some messengers came to
Dublin for two pieces of Ordinance againstthe castle, 2 days was passed over
in consultation, so that the taking of the Castle cost dearly, the loss but
of a few, not past ten men, but five of them were officers of great note, one
of them the flower of the English Army for valor, dscretion, and Religion, Sir
Simon Harcourt, chief commander that day, and Captain Barrey a brave
Gentleman and wise, who with 1500 men, and two demi Culverings took that
Castle where Sir Simon Harcourt was shot in the left shoulder with a slug of
lead, for it seems the Rebels has not store of moulds to cast bullotts in,
who dyed two days after at Myrian in the Lord Fitz Williams house, 3. miler
from Dublin: A man much lamented for Cagtaine Berrey shot through the shoulder,
his Liefetenant shot dead, but one Leifetenant Huse making choice of some few
brave soldiers with Hatchets and other instruments, broke open the Castle gate,
where they found 60 horses bridled and sadled, then Leiftenant Marett entered
in, where they killed man woman and child.

Collonell Read, and Mr. Mahone, were lately racked at Dublin, who confessed
they was to have Murdered the two Lord Justices, with Man, Woeman, and Child,
of the English. And that READ should have been Lieutenant General of Mead,
And had 600. l. P^ann. Also that the Lord Dunsaney, Sr. John Nettersfeild, and
Dondall the Regester, who was Clerk of the Council to the Rebels, And Mr.
Barnewell of Kilbrue, with others, came in to the Justices, But Barnewell, was
racked four days since, and confessed that the Lord Dunsany was one of the
chief Actors in the Pale, with some others, which yet I cannot Learn.

Sir Philomy Oneale is fled to the Newry, a chief Garrison of the Rebels, it
being the next place Sir Henry Tichburne intends to begin withal, having sent
to Dubline for 500. Men more (which is granted) And goes to him very speedily,
for whose safety and success, is the Subject of our daily Prayers.

We are informed by diverse from Carrickfergus, that there is a General
Complaint of the Country against the Scots, for they plunder them worse then
the Rebels, I doubt not but you have heard of my Lord Blaneys Landing, and that
one Captain Blunt is our Sergeant Major, a Noble Gentleman and a good
Soldier, And for the Forces in Carrickfergus, the Castle is repairing some 8.
Pieces of Ordinance being in it, and one Captain Lowden Commander of it, who
has disbursed much Money in the repair of it, and it is a great deal of
pity that the Scots should take the Command over his head, which the Town
much fears.

The Enemy Attempted Antrim, with some small Forces, but came of with ^ of some
of their men, but they, and Knockfergus look to be charged again every day.

This is all I can inform you for the present, until the next oppertunity,
praying to GOD to Bless you and our Actions, to whose protection I Committ you
and Rest.

Duncannon Fort, April the ninth. 1642. Your true obliged friend, Lazarus
Haward.
The Bearer hereof, Master Bridges and my good friend, can give you a good
testimony of the state of this Kingdom, being one that has been pillaged by
the Rebels.



Very joyful News from Jreland, read in the Honorable House of Commons, and
commanded immediately to be Printed.
Master John Hawkredge;
I Have written by the two last Posts, and now I have gotten a lame hand; but
having good News, it shall trot to impart it unto you. The last Satterday the
Lord Moore, and sir Henry Tichbourne sallyed out of the Town, and fell upon the
enemies, and drove them out of their Trenches, and raisd their siege, slew
about 350 of their men, and took many of their chief Officers, and have
relieved themselves bravely, and took 150 of their Muskets, and a field full
of Pikes, we having lost, as some affirm, no men. Here are three of our
Captains come by Land, so that this news is true. Upon M^nday our Forces went
out, 4000. Foot, and 500. Horse; they are already within 5. Miles of Treaigh,
by the way, Lieutenant Colonel Read came into our men and submitted, if he had
not done it, he could not have fled: he is sent hither, and lodged in the
Castle, I do believe we shall now get good store of Corn out of the Country,
which will keep the price from rising. Our men are not expected home this week,
pray God keep them safe. Sir Phelomy O Neal was in the Battle, But was feign to
fly.

With my true love, I rest: Your affectionate Friend, R. H.

FINIS.

