The Converts; OR THE FOLLY OF PRIESTCRAFT. A Comedy.

By J. S. M. T. Soc.

Simulata Sanctitas Duplex Iniquitas. SCENE, St. JAMES's, or the SAVOY.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
MDCXC.

The PROLOGUE.
WHen first our Poet gave his Mind to write,
He freely owns he had no Muse, but spite
To see his Native Country men oppressed,
By clumsy Priests that seemed to be in jest,
Even then when Nature strove to do her best.
Thence his just Indignation higher rose,
Venting himself in this Satyrick Prose,
As might their Follies and their Crimes ^ppose.
Yet his soft hand designs no mortal Wound,
Nor would he touch on any part that is sound.
The Innocent are from his Darts secure,
And the Infected he designs to cure.
Besides --
He was ambitious to present to view,
Something that might deserve the Name of New.
Fopling he thought so long had trod the Stage,
He seemed to have out lived M^thusalem's Age.
And though in various Dresses he appears,
His various Dresses cannot hide his Years.
His Charms grow old, and can delight no more
The shining Sex, that he obliged before;
The Bawd, the Punk, the Soldier, and the Cit,
The Man of Breeding, and the Man of Wit,
With dull repeated Humors clog the Pit:
The Bully, Cully, and the Country Squire;
The English Vicar, and the Spanish Friar,
Though he, they say, has lately quitted Station,
And publicly has made a Recantation.
All these, by turns, have on the Stage appeared,
And thought it there no scandal to be jear'd.
None but the Plotting Priest did sneak away
Behind the Scenes, and there securely lay,
'Till our bold Poet drew him into light,
And here presents him naked to your sight.
But some will say --
Zounds, the dull Rogu^ has left us in the lurch,
Promised a Play, and brought us to a Church,
To see a Race of mumbling Bald-pate Friars,
And heard (what need not) Jesuits proved Liars:
And 'stead of the gay Humors of the Town,
Presents the Follies of the lazy Gown:
These Sparks he tells, that if they will dispenc^,
For these two Hours, with his noiseless Sense:
Some more than some have Humor, and some Wit:
This sure will do, ex^el but Priest^ the Pit.
But if this will not, when he has done his host,
He Will speak to Captain Tom to do the rest.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Mr. Turnabout, A new Convert, in love with Leucasia. Lord Britain, A
Romanist, and true Englishman. (...) Young Subtleman, A Gentleman, that to
raise his Fortune, give the Fathers hopes of his Conversion. Sir George
Subtleman, Father. Ca^tious, an old Covetous Priest. Bigot, A Zealous Priest.
Mackdonnel, an Irish blundering Priest. Politico, A contriving Intriguing
Priest. Jonathan Si^per, A Punk that serves Ca^tious in Man's Clothes. Four
Priests and Three Casuists from St. Omers. Manual, Secretary to Politico. Four
Footmen, Servants to Leucasia. Constable, Watch, Rabble, etc.
WOMEN.
Leucasia, A Lady of Virtue and Fortune, but a hater of the Priest Betty her
Maid. Mrs. Counterfeit a Procuress. Mrs. Speedwel her Creature. Whores, etc. --
The Folly of Priestcraft, A COMEDY.
Actus Primus,
Scena Prima.
Turnabout. Young Subtleman. Turn. FAith Jack I have had ill luck this Month or
two.


Subt. Prithee, What Is the matter?


Turn. Why I Have parted very friendly with my Religion, and can get nothing for
it.


Subt. Then there is just nothing for nothing. The Rogues you deal with are
cunning, and know how to fit you to an hair: but I have had worse fortune, I
have parted with my Money, and got nothing for it: Now there is Substance for
nothing, which according to my Philosophy is very unnatural.


Turn. Well, I must find some other way of thriving; this changing a Man's
Religion is a mere drug, it is grown too common.


Subt. You cannot find a better, if you take the right Way. (...)


Turn. The right Way, Jack, why no Man could take a better: First, I applied my
self to a Priest, whose Interest I thought to be greatest at Court, and told
him that I was a Gentleman of a good Estate, and once a zealous Protestant;
that I had always led a strict and virtuous Life, but that now I could find no
Satisfaction that way, and now I desired to be admitted a Member of their
Church.


Subt. So, very good.


Turn. Then I frequented all public Masses, the private ones were never any
part of my Religion: I confessed to him none but such Vices, as with other Men
would pass for Virtues, and indeed greater Virtues than ever I was guilty of; I
made him believe that I performed all Penances double, that I had discarded all
my Friends and Kinsmen upon the account of Difference in Opinion, and amongst
them a very dear Relation; that I desired to serve my Country in some public
Employment Military or Civil, not for Gain, but Advancement of the Catholic
Cause, insomuch that --


Subt. Insomuch that he thought thee to be a very zealous and conscientious
Catholic.


Turn. Yes faith, Jack, as good as any in England.


Subt. Why that same is the very reason that he never sought to prefer thee:
The Fathers know that those that are Catholics by Persuasion will do them
Service without the visible Prospect of a Reward, and therefore they are never
eager in preserring them to places of true Profit -- but they know those that
are led to them by Interest, they must continually feed with the same Bait that
brought them on, lest they fly off and scare others from it.


Turn. Think thou so, Boy!


Subt. Think so, Why? it is most certainly true -- Can thou imagine the
Fathers are such ill Husbands as to procure a Reward for those that are such
Fools as to serve their ends without it. If thou think to get any thing
considerable by their Intercession, you must let them plainly understand, that
you are no puny whi^^ng Catholic, troubled with Scruples of Conscience, but
Rogue enough to serve them in all things.


Turn. Well, so much may easily be done.


Subt. I know it may, and by these means thou will have a double Ti^upon them;
First, they will fear to lose thee, unless they supply sufficient Nutriment to
all thy large Stock of Vices: And some of them I know are not soon satisfied.
And in the second place, they will understand that thou art a ^it Instrument to
act a part in any pious Villainy; and if that will not make thee, nothing can.
Then in the next place


Turn. Aye, Prithee, What Is in the next place?


Subt. You must write a Book in their Desence.


Turn. What an unconscionable Dog art thou, thou know I can hardly bare the
damned Fatigue to read one, and --


Subt. Phoo, Pox, you will write the better for that -- There are several old
Pieces wrote by Campian and others, thou may get a Scrivener to transcribe a
dozen or two of Pages in the middle of the Book, invent a Title, and publish it
in thine own Name, and thou shall be as great a Champion as St. George on
Horseback, and then --


Turn. What more Advice s^ill?


Subt. Aye, Faith, and good Advice too. Thou must be s^^e to deal with the
Fathers as some Gallants do with vicious Women that stand upon their
Reputation, thou must pry into all their Secrets, and then they will faithfully
serve thee, as the Indians do the Devil, not out of Love but Fear. Whenever
they cast out a Devil by Compact with the pretended possessed Person, Do thou
be one of the Witnesses, and take care to have an hand in the business.
Whenever they make an Image speak, or a Relick cure one that never was sick; do
thou be one that stands behind the Curtain, or that applies the Remedy, or
subscribes to the truth of the Miracle. Whenever they devise a new way to
destroy Heretics by the gentle methods of Fire and Sword; do thou be one of
their Consederates, and promise to be a principal Acto^ in the Tragedy. If ever
any of the Fathers do tempt or are tempted by a Woman, do --


Turn. Phew, say no more of that -- I know enough of their Secrets that way.


Subt. It Is well, Jack, if thou do, for they are the most profitable Secrets
of any. For when tho^ understand that thou art Rogue enough to change sides,
and discover all whenever it is for thy advantage, they must get thy Mouth
stopped by Money or Preferment for this. In remote Countries they do not much
value their Reputation; yet here where they are bound to their good Behavior
(which some of them like worse than to be bound to a Whipping-Post) they must
dread them that know their, Secrets, lest the Discovery should hinder their
grand Projection.


Turn. Thou speak good Sense, but still I am not satisfied that it is my best
course; for Mr. Bigot, upon whom I chiefly rely, is a Priest that is truly
zealous in his way. He is Master of a good Head, which would be cap^ble of
bearing Learning if it were not applied altogether to the Politics, which I
believe are his only Study, so that now it looks like a good Field, that for
want of Tillage is overrun with Briars and Thistles. He is naturally inclined
to Honesty, and just in all things wherein his Religion is not concerned, but
then he sticks at nothing. He studies nothing but the Advancement of the
Catholic Cause. As for himself, tho he has a sufficient Interest at Court, yet
I believe him to be poor and needy: His Zeal is so hot, that it seems to have
burned up his Eves, and dried up his Brain to the quantity of a N^tn^e^, so
that I think the Man might have been learned, honest, and wise, if his Religion
had not made him a Dunce, a Knave, and a Fool.


Subt. But, my Chapman, Father Caution, is of a quite contrary Temper, he is
resolved to be rich himself, tho the Cause starve to death: He is very
mistrust^ul of a Change and will not be so much a Fool as to expect the total
Conversion of this Nation, tho Bigot does earnestly persuade him to it; nor
does he care whether it be so or no any more than as it does pr^mote his own
private Interest. He makes just so much show of Religion as may serve to make
him capable of now and then selling an uncertain Favor at Court to a Friend
for certain Money: But whatever is beyond that, he looks on as superstuous. In
fine, he is a covetous insatiable Rascal, endued with a large stock of Cunning
and Hypocrisy, that is grown rich by bubbling Candidates for new Offices, and
wants nothing but a leap beyond Sea to make him completely happy.


Turn. A very fine Character!


Subt. Besides, I Will tell thee another Secret. He is a libidinous Beast, and
that Servant, Jonathan Simple, that attends upon him in Man's Clothes, is known
to be a Woman.


Turn. Since thou know him so well, what a Devil made you deal with him!


Subt. I know that he mistrusts that his Reign is not long here, and therefore
may sell good Penny-worths, and since I have Money by me I am willing to improve
it to the best, till the old Man dies, who is a Father indulgent enough in
every thing but his living thus long.


Turn. This damned Hypocrisy is the greatest of all Slaveries, I would never
endure it but for the sake of the beautiful Leucasia, thy incomparable
Kinswoman.


Subt. Leucasia is indeed a Lady of undoubted Wit and Virtue -- One that ties
not up her self to the usual Formalities of her Sex, but takes a freedom to her
self in all virtuous Pleasures. But what a Devil makes thee resort to the
Fathers to gain her, when thou know how mortally she does hate 'em, and
imploys the best of her Wit against them.


Turn. Why, Faith, I Will tell thee the only (...) I found in my Addresses that
she (...) but that she (...), as indeed (...) I have taken this course, in
which I am resolved to continue till I see the Issue.

Enter Bigot and Cautious talking. But here they both come, it is their usual
hour, I don't care to see them, now they will expect I should be in another
place.

Exeunt ambo. Bigot and Cautious advance upon the Stage.
Big. Nay, but, Brother Cautious, that Excuse must not serve your turn: I would
fain know what makes those Heretic Clergymen in black Gowns so crowd about
your Lodging: Don't you know how that Tribe make it their business to maul us
in their Pulpits, to squeeze us as it were to death in Printing-Presses, to
disappoint us in Elections, and a thousand Tricks of the like nature -- And yet
I perceive six or seven of them do wait on you every Morning. I vow I must
complain of you to our Superiors as of a suspicious Person.


Cau. Good Brother Bigot, be not so surious; those black Coats come for
Preferment.


Big. Aye, and so we shall have all Vacancies filled up with Heretics before
the Penal Laws be taken away, to make room for Catholics. I vow, Brother, you
injure our Cause.


Cau. I vow, Brother, you injure your Brain by this intemperate and unnecessary
Zeal. Cannot I get the Rogues turned out again for Simony when the time serves,
and my self be a Witness against them? Besides, do you rightly consider the
Worth and Dignity of their Money -- I say again, Do you rightly consider the
Worth and Dignity of Money?


Big. I must confess, Money is very proper to carry on the Cause, and I am
forced to expend a great deal on those that w^ll not undertake without it; for
the truth is, I find very few, excepting the zealous Mr. Turnabout, of our new
Converts that are willing to act without Money; upon whom I have expended great
S^ms, and I hope you put your Money to that same pious use.


Cau. Can you doubt that? -- But in truth he may doubt it long enough before I
spend my Money upon such improbable Projects. Aside.


Big. I cannot doubt it in a true Catholic Priest; Why: we have more hopes now
of subduing the Heretics than ever --


Cau. What, because of our good Fortune in the late Trial?


Big. Pshaw, Pshaw, t^^^'s a mere Fleabite, a Trick of Law. Would to God there
were no such thing as Law in the Nation. I was always an Enemy to all
Proceedings by Law, they are always destructive to us; but we will have
Commissions without Law, and against Law, and above Law, that shall maul the
Rogues in spite of all their Law-tricks: But we have now such a number of new
Converts in all Parts, and such brave Men!


Cau. I know not, Brother, how many, or how brave they be, but I Am sure my
Trade is sensibly decayed of late, I have not now one half of the Custom I
lately had, and those that do come, give not half the Money they lately did:
For my part I cannot stay here to starve among Heretics.


Big. Phy, Brother Cautious, phy, do not turn thy back upon those Glories that
are just now breaking from behind a Cloud, to dazzle the Eyes and amaze the
Understanding of the British World. Mack-Donnel the famed Irish Priest, is now
arrived at Court with joyful Tidings, with the conversion of a numberless
number of our beloved Countrymen, who spontaneously relinquishing their long
imbibed Errors, have thrown themselves into the chaste embraces of our
Mother Church.


Cau. This Fellow would needs gull me with his fair words, but still I suspect
the strength of our Cause. Aside.

Do you know that Mack-Donnal? Pray, what sort of Man is he?


Big. He is an Irish Priest of much Zeal, though not much Learning, yet he is
much improved since he went to St. Omers. He can now read a great part of the
Mass, by help of a F^scue, and a little conning beforehand. He has been at all
the great Towns in England, and is now returned with a List of the new
Converts. He is at my Lodgings --


Cau. Seeing is believing, I never renounce the testimony of my Senses but in
one thing: Pray, Brother, let your Servant step and fetch him.


Big. to Servant.

Go and tell Father Mack-Donnel, that we desire his Company, and a view of the
List.


Serve. I shall. Exit Servant.


Big. to Cau.

But now I think on it, Brother, one of my Sons that was disinherited by his
Father for turning Romanist, has borrowed all my Money; pray accommodate me
with a little Gold, or the Cause may suffer if I want it.


Cau. Now the Fool has been gulled of his own Money, he would fain borrow mine;
But I shall fail him. Aside.

Sure, Brother, you intend to affront me.


Big. Why so?


Cau. Why, do you think that I keep Money by me now the Cause is in this
Distress? Phy, phy, I send all away Beyond Sea, I do in earnest, [Aside] and am
as poor as a Church Mouse.


Big. Do thou so Man? Embracing him very eagerly.
O how could I hug thee for it thou best of Men! thou art the very Joy of my
Heart, and I love thee better than if thou had given me a Million of Millions.

Re-enter Servant with Mack-Donnel, flourishing his Paper.
Mack. Here ish the Pauper by Shaint Pautrick, here it ish; Ish had made go one
thoshand Miles for thish Pauper, aund so fausht by Shaint Pautrick, that Ish
haud come shooner if Ish had not made stay by the way --


Big. Pray, Brother Mack-Donnel, give my Friend an Account of our prodigious
Success in the Country.


Mack. reads,

Well then -- Firsht of aul in the Shitty of London.


Big. Sir, I say in Country.


Mack. Why, Ish not aul the Country in London? Yesh by Shaint Pautrick, aund
aul Ireland, aund aul Scotland, Ish do hope to she aul Eaunsh, aund aul Italy,
aund aul Spain there too -- and then by Shaint Pautrick, London will be the
finesht Country in the whole World.


Cau. But to pass by these Digressions, pray give us an account of the Progress
you have made in new Converts without Addition.

Looking on his Paper.
Mack. Firsht then, in the Shitty of Norwitch, there be four ferry proper
Shentlemen dad do live in the great House upon the Hill --


Cau. Their Names.


Mack. Tom Cutter, Richard Kill-all, Robert Divewell, William Hector.


Cau. O I have read of them in some printed Papers, they are four notorious
Rascals, that have kept constant Possession of the Jayl there seven Years, as
if it had been their own by right of Inheritance: They were all hanged last
Assizes for Murder and other Felonies.


Mack. Yesh, by St. Pautrick, the Heretic Dogs did make hang upon their shweet
Bodysh, Ish had no time a Reprive for them; but by my Shoule Man, they did die
as good Catholics as thou and Ish art.


Cau. That may be -- But, Pray Brother, what Progress do they make in the
Universities? Those are the Fountains that ought first to be sweetened.

Looking on his Paper.
Mack. O! in the firsht plaush, in the University of Cambridg there ish one of
hish Maj^sties mosht grashous Offishers, by my Shoul and St. Pautrick, that do
dispash mauny of de Heretics in the Year.


Big. His Name?


Mack. William Cuttrope -- He dosh sherve his Majesty's grashes Sheriff --


Cau. O, I know him, he is the Common Hangman, I remember I used to tremble at
the sight of him when I was last in Jail upon Suspicion.


Big. Brother, I vow you make my Zeal rise against you, to treat a new Convert
so rudely, as to call him plain common Hangman -- This shows --


Cau. It shows that you have neither Knowledge or Discretion to reprehend me:
What more honorable Name could I give him than that of an Hangman? and by how
much the more common, so much the better. We may talk of Books and Conferences,
and I know not what, but when all is done, there are thousands in this Nation
that can be converted by nothing but Gibbets and Halters. They are at least our
Journy-men, we cut ou^ the Work which they finish.


Big. Brother, I beg your Pardon, all this is true, but you know immoderate
Zeal may sometimes thrust a Man upon Indecencies.


Cau. Will you say there is the Hangma^ in the first place? and pray who is
there in the second?

Looking on his Paper.
Mack. Why, in the second, in the second, by St. Pautrick, my dear Joy, in the
second plaush there ish no body at aul.


Big. Well, one such is as good as many -- But how many in the other places?


Mack. Then in a little Town hard by there be one thoushand.


Cau. What Catholics or Whores?


Mack. Both together, my dear Joy, the Catholics be the Whores, and the Whores
be Catholics, aund both together do make one thoushand -- or one dozen, by St.
Pautrick, I know not well whether (pores on the Paper)


Big. Well, is that all?


Mack. No Ish have one more -- A Genleman that do wear the long Robe at
Reading. his Name is Henry Shimpleton.


Cau. I know him, he is a Fool, a Natural, kept by the Parish.


Mack. It Is true -- I my self did conver^ him by giving two Nickers and a
Marble.


Big. Pray, Brother, speak not so contemptibly of Fools: I will assure you the
Catholic Cause is very much beholden to Fools It was invented by Fools,
maintained by Fools, and carried on in great part by Fools unto this very day.
Was not St. Francis ^ Fool? St. Ignatius a Fool? and a thousand other Fools I
could mention: Therefore pray, Brother, speak not so contemptibly o^ Fools.


Cau. Why? I said so for that very reason


Mack. Well, by St. Pautrick, Ish vil go and carry my Pauper to the great Man
in plaist at Court, and beg Plaish for it. St. Pautricl bless you. Farewell.

Going out, but returns hastily. O, but stay, I had forgot to make Petishon for
one thing, that Father would make pray to the King's Majesty's Graush for shome
Plaushes for the four Catholic Shentlemen that did live in the great Hou^h ^t
Norwish.


Cau. Why, did not you say they were hanged?


Mack. O, by my Shoul, and St. Pautrick, I had (...) forgot dad, it ish^^^ue,
they be made having already, and can have no Plaush at Court. Adieu. Exit.


Cau. Har^ye, Brother, does not our Friend Mackdonnel talk a little like a Fool?


Big. O fie, no, it is mere Zeal and Transport -- you know not the true force of
Zeal, it will make a Fool, a Knave, or any thing.


Cau. That may be -- But if it make me such a Fool as to part with my Money,
I Will be hanged for it. Aside.


Big. Well, I am hastening to the great Spanish Priest, Father Politico, about
some public Business. He is the rarest Contriver in the World, he has ten
thousand Plots in his Head, the least of which are sufficient to overturn a
better settled Government than this. He has refined the Politics of all the
Courts in Christendom for the use of the English Nation: And tho he be a
Foreigner by Birth, he is so conversant in the Manners of the English, you
would swear he had been born here.


Cau. I grant Father Politico is a Man of a curious Frame and fine Contrivance;
that he has seen most Foreign Courts, and holds Correspondence with 'em; but to
speak plain, there are some things I do not like in him. He seems to be too
great an Admirer of himself, which makes his Conversation nauseous to others by
the continual Commendation of himself, and is prejudicial to his Plots, by
robbing him of the Advice and the Corrections of his Friends. Besides, he is
too bold in making use of Foreign Policies in their Courts, which for the most
part, like Trees transplanted from far distant Soiles, tho the Fruits there
were pleasant, yet here they are harsh and crabbed.


Big. I must confess his noble Friend, my Lord Britain, often tells him so, but
I cannot perceive it is true -- I know indeed some do censure him as too amorous
for the Gravity of a Churchman; and I cannot deny but he is too ^ascivious,
and that if he had not such a discree^ a Procuress as Mrs. Counterfeit, he
might i^car S^andal by his daily Conversation wi^h Wo^^en. But still I must
adore him as a great Prop of the Catholic Cause, and must (...) all the haste
I can to see him immedia^ely. Exit Bigot.


Cau And I must find out young Subtleman for some Private Business of my own,
which is more to the purpose than the Public.

Exeunt different ways.
SCENE II.
Turnabout pursued by Mrs. Counterfeit, and two or three Whores. First Whore.
Come, Mr. Turnabout, don't you think we will be bilk'd so; it is Money we want,
and Money we will have, or we'll detect your Debaucheries.


Mrs. Coun. Come, Mr. Turnabout, I Am acquainted with the very best of the
Fathers, they come very often to my House, no Disparagement to 'em, and I shall
soon make them acquainted what an Hypocrite you are.


Turn. Peace, you bauling Bitch you, Peace. Endeavors to stop their Mouths.
They struggle with him.


Count. Nay, marry come up, Peace me no Peace: if I had been an Heretic you
could not have used me worse than you do. I have want of money, and if you don't
give it me, I shall publish to the World all your Pranks; I says I shall spoil
your new Saintship.


Turn. Do, you damned Whores, do your worst, the Fathers will not believe any
Ill of me.


First Whore. No Ill of thee! First we will tell 'em of thy Bastard Child at
Hogsden.


Turn. Ay, do, it is a brave witty Boy, they will make him Captain of the Savoy
School.


Second Whore. Then we will tell 'em the Story of the naked Woman in the Strand.


Turn. It was a delicate sight, the Fathers will wish they had been there
themselves.


Third Whore. Then of the Purse you nym'd at Hackney.


Turn. That was to purchase Money for Absolution, the Fathers will thank me for
it.


First Whore. Then we will tell 'em of three Whores you picked up the other
Night at the Chapel, and lay with them all Night at the Feathers.


Turn. Ay, do, you damned Whores, you had best tell that I lay with you there
too, you had so, you Jades.


Second Whore. Marry come up indeed, lie with us there, it is the very best
thing that every thou did in thy Life, the only sign that I know of thy
Conversion from the Pocky Twelve-penny Jades of the Town.


Turn. These Whores may spoil my Designs, but I must bare up briskly to them.
Aside. No Money, you Jades you, I say again no Money.


Count. Why, then in plain terms Mr. Turnabout, my Maidens will instantly
repair to Father Bigot, and inform him, that you bragged last Night in your
Cups, that you were no Catholic, but only made the Fathers believe so out of
Interest, that you fooled them all with an Opinion of your Sanctity; and that
when your Turn was served for a Treat of a dozen Bottles of Wine, you would
turn Heretic again.


Turn. This damned Jade has hit the Nail on the head, now I dread her. Aside.

Why, as for that -- Hum -- Why -- Hum --

Whilst Turn. is humming, Bigot walks cross the Stage, and spying Turn. makes
up to him. All the Whores clap on their Masks.
Big. O! here I have found the zealous Mr. Turnabout preaching Confession to a
Company of Heretical Ladies -- O that good Man! I could cry for Joy -- but I
must speak to him.

Goes to Turn. and claps him on the Shoulder^punc^ who, seeing him, starts, and
speaks hastily to the Whores.
Turn. Go, you damned Jades, there is Money for you, be gone in silence.


Mis. Count. Well, so much shall serve for this time. Exeunt.

Manent Turnabout, and Big^t.
Big. Pray, Son, What wast thou doing with those Ladies? What, prea^hing
Conversion to them?


Turn. That is a Task fit sor none but your Reverence, whose Eloquence might
move the very Stones as well as Men -- I was only a distributing a little
Charity to some Catholic Gentlewomen of known Zeal and Virtue -- Now must I
return to the trade of whining Hypocrisy. Aside.


Big. I thought indeed I knew the glimpse of one of their Faces -- well, thou
art always doing good, and I have good News to tell thee --


Turn. What? Does the Holy Cause go on prosperously? Are the Heretics
confounded?


Big. If not yet, they will be shortly -- But as I was saying, an Express is
arrived at Court, that a Place of great Trust and Value is fallen vacant in the
West, and a certain great Statesman, having often heard me speaking of your
great Zeal and Integrity, was pleased to propound you as a Person most fitted
for, and deserving of it.


Turn. This is most ravishing News indeed. How much was Subtleman mistaken.
Aside.


Big. But I seeing the impending Danger, immediately stepped in: My Lord, said
I, (with submission to your Lordship's better Understanding) that you do not
rightly apprehend what a kind of Man Mr. Turnabout is: Alas! said I, he is none
of those selfish Worldlings that expect Places and Preferments for Reward, and
under pretense of ^urthering the Catholic Interest, seek the Promotion of
their own Ends -- No, No; -- your Lordship may find enough of such base
Creatures to allure with Places. But, said I, as for Mr. Turnabout, his
Thoughts a^e fixed upon things of a sublimer Nature: It would be the utmost
degree of Savage Bubarity, to rob him of those precious Minntes which he
employs in far more noble Exercises. Alas! said I, my Lord, Mr. Turnabout aims
at no Honor, but that of being a Saint in the Roman Calendar. He knows no
Arithmetic, but that of telling his Beads: He studies no Complements, but
those that are given to departed Saints in the Missal: He cares for no
Employment, but that of advancing the C^tholick Cause gratis -- Now, my L^^d,
said I, What an inhuman thing would it be (...) thrust a Man of his Seraphick
Temper, into so great a secular Encumbrance, where he must be loaded with
fulsome Titles of Honor, where, instead of telling over his Beads, he must be
counting great Sums of Money, and receive Visits from every Earl and Baron. And
which is yet worst of all, where the Glory of his generosity of serving the
Cause gratis, will be eclipsed, by receiving a visible Reward. This is such a
Cruelty, as ought not to be used toward so good and religious a Man --


Turn. A Pox take this long-winded Paraphrastical Blockhead, he has made Speech
enough to ruin all my hopes. But I must forbear my railing. Aside.

And what then, Sir?


Big. Then, said I, my Lord, there is one Mr. Subtleman that is wavering
between two Opinions; we had best procure it him, it may perhaps fix him on the
right Side -- And accordingly it was done this Morning.


Turn. What cursed Luck's this, I have over-acted the part of an Hypocrite, and
am now sensible of my Error. But I must persist till I can gain my End. Aside.

I must confess my Devotion is chiefly my -- yet I could wish I had an
opportunity to serve the Public in an higher Station.


Big. Yes, I know that, therefore, said I, my Lord, there are some Gentlemen
that have undertaken to serve the Public Gratis, in an. Honorable Employ,
though with great Expense and Charges: Mr. Turnabout, said I, is the fittest
Man in the World to make one of those. It is but expending a brace of thousand
Pounds and you will gain immortal Honor.


Turn. A Pox take this damned Rogue, this is worse and worse, I know not what
to say or do. Aside.


Big. Well, what do you say to this?


Turn. Lord, Sir, I am struck with admiration of your Goodness, and could not
readily find an Answer.


Big. Well then, meet me at Father Politico's Lodgings at Two this Afternoon,
and there you shall know farther, and hear there the finest Plots and
Contrivance, and know our Secrets: In the mean time adieu. Exit.


Turn. I must tack about, and let the Fathers understand, that I am not that
puny whining Fellow that they imagine; but how to do it on a sudden I cannot
tell, unless Fortune does savor -- but I must try. Exit.

Lady Leucasia and Betty.
Leu. And art thou sure that Turnabout has been such a Baby to be spirited away
by these Priests, that ^ake up and down after Fools and Knaves, as if they were
the only precious Commodity of the Nation.


Betty. I should think, Madam, if they thought so, they would do well to
transport some of them to foreign Countries; but instead of that, they daily
import great numbers of 'em -- But I can assure your Ladyship, Mr. Turnabout
has the repute of a very zealous Catholic. The Fathers all adore him, and he
cannot miss shortly of being a very great Man.


Leu. Then I pity the poor Wretch more than ever a Man that sells his Soul to
the Devil in a fair and legal way, where Writings are drawn and sealed, some
valuable Consideration given, and the Forfeiture of the Bond taken, when the
Time is fully expired, does not act much more irrational than he, that for
hopes of Preferment binds himself ever to act an indefinite number of pious
Villainies, according to the Directions of the Fathers, especially at a time
when they have so much Work to do.


Betty. But, pray Madam, how comes your Ladyship to be so much concerned for
him now? When he made his Addresses to you, you received him with all the
Disdain imaginable.


Leu. I begin to love him, because I hate them, and am loath that they should be
the better for my Leavings. Tho there is little fear that any Society should be
the better for him.


Betty. You blame him for his Conversion, and the World blames you, for they
say his only Motive was to gain some Preferment, to render himself worthy of
your Love.


Leu. Therefore I am bound in Honor to make him weary of his Profession till
he renounce it, and be placed where he was at first.


Betty. But if you concern your self so far, the World will conclude for
certain, that you are in love with him.


Leu. The World's an Ass, or it would never be trampled and tamely rod by a
Priest. I care not what the World thinks or does; I go presently to Father
Politico's Lodgings, and there give such a Character o^ Mr. Turnabout, as shall
make them drive (...) from their Society: And then the poo^ ^^etch will be so
humble, and look so (...)


Betty. Pray, Madam, (...) that you do.


Leu. Pray, Hussy (...) ^^t you say, and never give you^ (...) when there is
more need. Get (...) Lodgings here ready in the Savoy, and t^en shall you see
how I will plague these Bald-pated Vermin; Ple make them for ever tremble at
the very Name of Leucasia.


Betty. I Will do it, but I can perceive no End.


Leu. It is End enough to free a Man that has pretended to love me, from
Slavery and Confinement. I am sure Turnabout has that antipathy to all
Religion, that the very Shadow of it (as it is said of a certain Tree) is enough
to kill the Viper. Whether I love or no, I pity him so far, as I do him that
Service: For

Of all the Men by God and Nature cursed,
Surely the fawning Hypocrite is worst.
To his compared, the Player's Life is ease;
He always Acts -- They only when they please.

Exeunt. ACTUS II.
SCENA I.
Mrs. Counterfeit, and Mrs. Speedwel. Speed. NAY but good Mrs. Counterfeit tell
me, Will not the Fathers suspect that such an old Sinner as I, am but a New
Hypocrite.


Count. Hold thy peace, Child, never fear that. If Bigot's Zeal is too blind to
see a Fault in a New Convert of his own making, do but give him the sole Honor
of your Conversion, and you may reap the sole Profit to your self.


Speed. Yes, yes, I will seem extremely averse to Popery, and then he will
think the Honor of my Conversion will be the greater.


Count. Thou art an apt Wench, nothing will inflame him more: But be sure not
to yield too soon.


Speed. Why, Mrs. Counterfeit, what impertinence is this; when did you ever
know me yield too soon?


Count. Nay prithee, Speedwel, be not Choleric, I think you did yield too soon
when Mr. Subtleman took you napping with two Footmen, and withdrew his
Maintenance upon it.


Speed. I grant you indeed that a Woman may yield too soon in solicitatious
Amors, or the like; but when did you know any of them yield in Disputations,
or Religious Discourses -- Pray show me one Precedent for that.


Count. I must confess I cannot; but, good Child, be not so hasty, If I can but
bring thee into favor with Bigot and Politico, they will make Mr. Subtleman
restore, if not increase thy Pension.


Speed. And I protest if it is done by your Means, I will serve you half a Year
gratis.


Count. Then pull down thy Hood, and look as much dejected as if thou were
inclined to a melancholy Madness; they love to deal with mad People.


Speed. I warrant you.

Walks in a melancholy posture. Enter Bigot.
Count. Here he comes, be very sad and demure -- Mr. Bigot, you are welcome.


Big. Mrs. Counterfeit, your Servant. Pray what is the Business?


Count. Reverend Sir, this is the Gentlewoman so much disturbed in Mind; I hope
you will administer some Comfort to her.


Big. Let me alone for that -- Madam, [To Speedwel] Pray let me know the Reason
of your disturbed Affections? and what is it makes you look so sad, like the
Image of Death?


Speed. Bless me! do I look like an Image? all Images are Popish sure: I don't
look as if I were popishly affected --


Big. I am sorry to hear you are so averse to your greatest good, it makes my
Eyes [weeps] over flow with Water in compassion of you.


Speed. Overflow with Water -- Sure, Sir, you don't mean Holy Water, if you do,
I shall immediately fall into a swoon -- I have a greater aversion to it than
the Devil himself has -- fogh -- Spits.


Big. And why so? What provocation have you received that should make you thus
bitter against your Mother Church?


Speed. Heavens bless me! what mean you to talk to me of a Mother Church? I
know no Mother Church, my Father was an Anabaptist, and my Mother never went to
Church in her life. -- Then how should I have a Mother Church?


Big. Your Discourse, Lady, is illogically incoherent. If I am thus
interrupted, how is it possible to make any farther Procession?


Speed. Pray, Sir, forbear to make any further Popish Procession, they are
wicked abominable pieces o^ Superstition: I hate a Procession --


Big. I wish I knew, Lady, how to make my Application to you, to throw of this
burden of distraction from your Mind --


Speed. Alas, Sir, I feel no burden: I am all Light, there is Light within me,
and Light without me; I feel no burden but in the Flesh --


Big. God forbid, [To Mrs. Count.] sure the Lady is not with Child.


Count. No fear of that, she is the chastest Virgin in the World; it is only
her Phanatical way of talking. Pray, Lady, if you have any Doubts, expound
them; if you have met with Crosses --


Speed. O miserable! what more Popery? Why should you think that I have met
with Crosses? I abhor them, they are Popish, and I made my Coachman drive a
Mile about, rather than go by Charing Cross, only for its Popish Name.


Big. Bless me! what blind rage is this? the very Beasts are less savage, whom
Nature has armed with Claws and Horns.


Speed. Aye, I grant you indeed, that the Beast in the Revelation has Claws,
and Horns, and Heads, and Tails, and is a very Monster I dreamt of the other
Night; and it put me into such a fright -- that I shall never forget it --
Bless me, one of the Faces looked as like yours as e're it could stare, only
Horns grew out of the Forehead; and I suppose, Sir, you are not married.


Big. Men of my Order are not so fleshly given as to marry -- But, pray Lady,
be more sedate, and collect the scattered Relicts of your Reason.


Speed. Aye, there you grieve me again: I say, all Relicts are Popish, and I
had rather gather Sinders than collect Relicts. I can bear no longer, I must
leave you. Going out.


Big. Nay, Madam, you must not go away in this Discontent. Do but give me leave
to speak, and I will be your Beadsman if --


Speed. O Heavens desend me! how my Ears are assaulted with a continual noise
of Popery. You be my Beadsman; Heaven knows I hate Beads! they are all Popish:
In fine, they are my aversion, I must be gone.

Going again.
Big. Nay, good Lady --


Speed. I cannot stay -- Oh, oh-Farewel. Ex.


Big. Bless me, Mrs. Counterfeit, have you no more wit than to send for me to
such a ^urious Beldame as this? She has in her the very quintescense of all
Phanaticism.


Count. Is this all the thanks I have for consulting your Honor? To convert
one that is well inclined, is like killing a dead Man; it is soon done, but
there is no Reputation. --


Big. There I confess you are in the right -- But I see not --


Count. Why? first you see she is a little mad --


Big. Aye, that is well.


Count. Then she is foolish --


Big. That gives me more hopes than the other. But how shall I meet with such
another Opportunity?


Count. I will keep her in a dark Room till she recovers part of her Senses:
Believe me, Mr. Bigot, if ever you would work upon a Woman, take her into a
dark Room till she recovers her Senses! then you may draw forth your Use of
Comfort and make close Application; and partly by insinuating Languag^; and
partly by force of Reason, you may compel her to fall down vanquished before
you --


Big. Be pleased, Mrs. Counterfeit, to accept a few Guineas as an
acknowledgment of -- (offers Gold)


Count. I protest I will not receive them; or if I do I will lay them out again
for the Encouragement of new Convert^ --


Big. Nay, then you shall take a few more, (offers more) I profess you shall
take 'em, it is all I have; for if I had the Indies in my Pocket, I could
freely give them to the -- (thrusts 'em into her Pocket.)


Count. I protest you are too bountiful: But I will add six Grains more to them
for the same use.


Big. Nay then, I will give thee a Bill for 20 l. more, nay, I protest I will
-- And thou shall receive 'em presently -- (gives a Bill, pulling out many.


Count. I vow you press too much upon my good Nature, and make me comply merely
out of Complaisance. But will you venture on her again?


Big. Aye, immediately, before her Affections cool.


Count. I Will go and prepare your way. Exit.

Enter Turnabout to Bigot, as he is going out.


Big. Mr. Turnabout, O you have nicked the time! you shall go in and hear me
convert this Phanatick -- discontented Lady.


Turn. Sir, I thank you, but I do not love the sight of a Woman -- They are
dangerous things.


Big. Then thou shall go with me to her in the dark Room --


Turn. The Temptation will be the greater -- Imagination does provoke more than
the real Object -- you say she is handsome --


Big. To Admiration -- but the most averse to our way in the World. She would
not hearken to me.


Turn. Then you had best send a Layman to make the first Impression, and you
may strike in to finish the Conquest --


Big. The truth is she is prejudiced to one of my Order, I think I had best
send you --


Turn. O fie, by no means, I am Master of no Eloquence.


Big. Aye, but thou art Master of Honesty and Integrity, and that is better --


Turn. What a plaguey Rogue is this to scandalize me at this rate -- Aside.


Big. Well, Son, What do thou say to it? Will thou go and try thy Skill upon
her?


Turn. Alas! Sir, all Skill is gotten by Experience, I have no experience in
Women --


Big. Thou art the best of Men, and if possible better than my self -- But be
not thus bashful, thou shall discourse with her in the dark, and there is no
fear of blushing --


Turn. I had rather go into the Cave of a Lioness.


Big. Poor modest Gentleman; that thou should thus be afraid of Women! We
Priests go boldly to their Chambers, to their Closets, to their Beds, to all
their Secrets, and matter nothing of it.


Turn. So, I have heard you do almost persuade me to Virtue.


Big. By all means go -- she will sooner hearken to you --


Turn. I hope she will -- I will give her good Counsel.


Big. Go then, and I Will return immediately -- Success attend you -- Exit.


Turn. Now will I be damned if this be not some She of the Town that pretends
to Phanaticism just as I do to Virtue and Honesty -- I love Leucasia, but the
prospect of enjoying her is at so great distance, that I must bait upon this by
the way. I will first bring her into the Light, and if she be handsome I shall
wish my self condemned to Darkness again. Exit.

Re-enter with Speedwel.
Turn. Nay, good Lady, you must not be angry if I do not suffer you to remain
in Darkness --


Speed. I have Light within me --


Turn. Aye, gad, that thou have, pretty Innocence, and Light without thee too
--


Speed. Thou art a profane young Man, and do mean something that is ill --


Turn. No, faith, I mean nothing but thy two pretty Eyes, those Fountains of
Light, it is true they vomit Fire too much, and inflame a Man's Heart, that is
their fault --


Speed. Thou art very lewd and obscene, I fear thou art fleshly given.


Turn. How she puts me in mind of it. Aside.

You guess right, and since you are all Spirit, and I am all Flesh, we had best
make a Match, it will be like the Union of the Body and Soul, full of Life and
Vigor.


Speed. A pretty Fellow this, my Mouth waters at him, but I must dissemble.
Aside. And do thou think that I will be yoked with one of the Ungodly. How
indecent a thing would it be to see a Saint and a Sinner in the same Bed.


Turn. I grant you, Madam, it is an undecent thing to be seen together, and
therefore we will go into the dark Room where no body can see us. I hate
Matrimony, it makes a Man to be gazed at.


Speed. I must confess, I know no place that forbids going into a dark Room;
and therefore if that were all I can easily consent to it.

Enter Bigot standing behind listening.
Big. Well, I will hear now how my new Convert behaves himself in his Post --


Turn. Why, sure Lady, you don't suspect my Honesty, upon Reputation I will be
very civil; I hope, Lady, will you give me the favor of a Salute. (kisses her.)


Big. Good, very good, he has almost won her Heart already.


Speed. I don't read that kissing is forbidden; but I fear you have some
farther Intention.


Turn. If you dare venture your self with me, I shall convince you of your
Error --


Big. to himself. That Is too much, he ought to leave the finishing Work to me
--


Speed. I have a Light within me, that shows me clear thou have a mind to
debauch me -- and do thou think I will defile the Bed of my late deceased
Husband? --


Big. What Is that? Aside.


Turn. There Is no Bed there, nothing but a Couch and few Chairs, that have made
guilty so often, that it is beyond our Power to make 'em worse.


Big. to himself.

I protest my Son Turnabout is wanton.


Speed. I grant you there is no Command against defiling Couches and Chairs --
I am almost persuaded to venture --


Turn. There is no venture in it; I will certainly give you Content.


Speed. Alas! how can you content me? I have had to do with Men of as great
Parts and Abilities (tho I say it my self) as any are in Europe, and none could
ever content me yet.


Turn. Pshaw, Madam, they were Bunglers or Coxcombs, that think to content
Women by perplexing their Minds; my Method is always to begin with the Body
first -- (Embracing her)


Speed. Out upon thee Villain! thou do begin to be uncivil.


Turn. Faith, Lady, I am very uncivil, to talk so much and perform so little:
Come, let us throw by these Scruples, and retire into a more convenient place;
Virtue, you know, fears nothing.


Speed. Do thy worst, I fear not thee nor thine. Exeunt.


Big. Aside, I set him to convert her, and he is gone to debauch her, I Will rout
'em.

Enter Speedwel in Confusion, Turnabout pushing her.


Turn. For Heaven's sake make haste down Stairs before Bigot sees you! A Priest
is like a Dog in a Manger, when he cannot feast upon a new Convert himself he
will suffer none else. (she runs away in haste.)

Enter Bigot in a Fury.
Big. Mr. Turnabout, I wonder you are not ashamed to be taken in such obscene
undecent Posture with a Woman!


Turn. Heavens defend my Innocence! Was ever Man so mistaken? If a Woman fall
into a Swoon, may I not take her up? if her Breasts beat high with Passion, may
not I innocently lay my hands upon them to keep 'em down? If she is overwhelmed
with Sorrow, may not I give her two or three reviving Kisses, but you must
presently suspect me of Obscenity?


Big. Aye, Sir, but I overheard your Discourse before that.


Turn. What, I warrant, you are zealous because I endeavored to convert her in
an allegorical way, making use of familiar Figures, that look just like
Obscenity. Ah! Ah! that is pretty.


Big. Nay, Son, if that is all I am contented. But pray, Son, what Success had
you?


Turn. Why, I had almost persuaded her, but you interrupted me --


Big. O! thou art the very best of Men -- But how could you gain so easy a
Conquest?


Turn. O, I wrought upon her Affections!


Big. It Is a thousand pitties that I interrupted you -- But I Will give you a
fitter Opportunity. --


Turn. Aye, pray do, and let it be more private.


Big. As private as you please -- I Will never disturb you.


Turn. Why, then you shall see how soon I Will do her business.


Big. I don't question it; but be sure to do it effectually.


Turn. Aye, and perhaps she and I may get two or three.


Big. And so you two may increase and multiply to some purpose --


Turn. Nay, I Am resolved to mind the work of Propagation, and if the sault is
not in her, I don't doubt but I shall answer your Expectation.


Big. But, good Mr. Turnabout, let me come in for some share of the Honor.


Turn. Sir, I shall quit all Pretensions to the Honor of this Enterprise, and
leave it wholly to you: All I propose to my self is the Pleasure and
Satisfaction of doing good to a distressed Lady.


Big. Nay, it is certainly a very delightful Work, I wish we could both join at
the same time --


Turn. That Is impossible, she would be hard enough for one at a time, but two
together will breed Confusion.


Big. Then, prithee, prepare the way for me as soon as may be.


Turn. With all my Heart.

Exeunt several ways. Scene Politico's Lodgings, who is discovered walking in
his Nightgown.
Pol. How few, but pleasant are the Minutes that I snatch from public business
of the State; it is my own, yet scarce can call them so: But now I am engaged I
must proceed. The Land's in sight I need not fear the Sea. Here -- where is this
Manual -- [knocks.

Enter Manual.
Man. Your Pleasure, Sir.


Pol. Bring hither the Intelligence you received by the last Post.


Man. I shall. Exit Manual.


Pol. These Heretics are odd Tools to build up the Catholic Church withal;
and I believe that I am the first that ever found out the way to make 'em
useful in that Building without hewing them to pieces: If the Spies I employ in
the Country give me an exact Character of every particular Man I shall find
Work suitable to their various Genius's, and make them all serve our Ends, and
yet they shall never know it, which is Delicacy in Policy, which is purely my
own, and such as I presume none could ever equal.

Enter Manual with Papers and Pencils.
Man. Here they are, Sir.


Pol. Read the Characters of such Persons as may be thought sit to serve their
Country in the West.


Man. reads.

The first is Mr. Peaceable; he is rich and so great a Dissenter, that he
searce ever saw the inside of a Church in his Life: He is of a calm Temper,
provokes none, nor is to be provoked by any; but holds a fair Correspondence
with Men of all Persuasions: He is much beloved, and has no small Interest in
the Country.


Pol. Dash out his Name: A peaceable Dissenter can do us no Service. Who Is next?


Man. reads.

The next is Mr. Greedy, by Trade a Scrivener, a Man of no mean Sense and
Abiliries; one that professes great Love and Affection to the Established
Church, which he is able to defend with the best of Arguments: He is an acute
Dissenter against Popery, indifferent and covetous to the highest degree of
Rapaciousness on one hand, and Sordility on the other.


Pol. What, did say covetous?


Man. reads again.

To the highest, etc.


Pol. Then mark him down; that one thing makes Recompense for the rest of his
ill Characters -- We shall find some Bait to draw a covetous Man to our side.


Man. reads.

The third is Mr. Zealous, of the Congregational Way, a Man of unquestioned
Parts and Subtilty: He is reckoned amongst the most eminently gifted Brethren,
and not without cause; he is much adored for his Zeal and pathetick
Exclamations against Popery: But those that pretend to know him better, do say,
that at most he is but an Atheist, and his whole Religion is Hypocrisy, and his
most visible Patrimony is the voluntary Contribution of the Women.


Pol. I like that Hypocrisy well enough, it shows that he is able to manage an
Intrigue, mark him down, I shall shape him out a way to serve us.


Man. reads.

Then there is Mr. Whyner, by Trade a Weaver; but not being able to live on
that, he is turned Preacher --.He is a Fellow of a broad Face, and no Brains,
the want of which is supplied by a large stock of Impudence, which enables him
to rail against Popery in Billingsgate Language, without two grains of Sense or
Reason -- He gets a good quantity of Money in the Year, and preaches in a little
Shed at the end of his House.


Pol. Then mark him down, and send an hundred Pounds to make his Shed bigger:
There are more converted to us by hearing bad Sermons against Popery, than by
hearing good ones for it. Who Is next?


Man. reads on.


Mr. Slumber, a Romanist by Education; he is accounted a Man of a good Life and
Conversation, but not much inclined to Vigor and Activity; He is moderately
rich, and well beloved by all Parties.


Pol. Dash out's Name, he can do us no good, unless it be in some inferior
Station, for the Encouragement of others.


Man. reads.

The next is one Ranter of those peaceable People called Quakers -- He --


Pol. If he be of that Persuasion you need give no further Character, for we
are satisfied in them -- the next.


Man. reads.

Mr. Firebrand, a Fifth Monarchy Man, one of an implacable Temper, that in the
late Times was very much prosecuted. He is esteemed very rich, but the most
violent revengful illtempered Man in the whole Country.


Pol. A most excellent Person this, and the first in the whole World to serve
us -- Is there any more of the same Character?


Man. looks,

Yes, five or six.


Pol. If there were five or six thousand we could find Work for them all: Mark
down their Names.

Enter Servant.
Ser. Sir, here is my Lord Britain would know if it be consistent with your
Reverence's Affairs to admit a Visit.


Pol. Desire his Lordship to entertain himself a small time in the
Drawing Room, till I have given some Instructions to some young Gentlemen
lately come from St. Omers, how to behave themselves in their Mission --


Ser. I shall, Sir, (And thus the Lord must wait upon the Priest) -- Exit.


Pol. Go Manual, bring in the St. Omers Men --


Man. Yes, Sir. Exit Man.


Pol. I know this Lord Britain comes only to tell me that I take too violent
Measures, and nothing but the Event can convince him of his Error -- I wonder
so good a Catholic as he can be so stupid --

Enter Man. with four Priests bowing to Pol.
Pol. Gentlemen, I am glad to see your Zeal has brought you hither to the
Conversion of so stubborn and headstrong a Nation -- But because Zeal without
Knowledge may do hurt, I desire you to take some few Instructions from me, and
to commit them to Memory and Books -- For I can assure you they are such as are
not very common.


All. With Gladness, Sir.


Pol. A Table here and Tables and Stools are brought, they all sit round and
draw out their Pocket-Books. Stools: Well Gentlemen, the first thing to be
considered, is the End you were sent for, and that is to convert so many of
this Nation, as shall be able, with some Advantages I will not name on the
other side, to reduce the rest by force -- Now, according to the strictest
Political Observations, I can make the thirtieth part of the Nation -- May do
that work with difficulty, a twentieth without any opposition, and I think that
a Notion in Politics not unworthy your Observation.


All. It Is excellent. [they write]


Pol. Now you may expect that I should enquire into your Learning, and the
Progress you have made therein in Foreign Universities; but as for Learning I
do not much care whether you have it or not; they that have it may do no hurt,
provided they make no use of it; but those that have it not are best of all.


All. That Is well, very well. [they write]


Pol. For look you, Gentlemen, Learning can at best serve but to correct the
great Headpieces of this Nation, the inferior sort are never won by that: Now
we want not the Head but the Hands of the Nation for the finishing our work --
for need we care for Heads provided we have Hands enough to dash their Brains
out.


All. A good Observation. [they write]


Pol. Besides, to speak the plain truth, the Heretics are very much better
versed in Books than our selves; and I think him an Ass of a Politician, that
will challenge an Adversary at his own Weapons.


All. It Is very true, very true. [they write]


Pol. When you come to convert an ignarant Person, whose Minister or other
Friends are learned, then make use of the most impertinent of all your
Arguments: A number of which you may transprose from our cashiered Laureat,
which presently he will propound to his Parish Priest, and he disdaining to
answer them by reason of their Impertinence, his Silence will be imputed to
Inability, and that Inability will be thought to proceed from the badness of
his Cause^punc^ and so your new Convert will be more confirmed than ever.


All. An Excellent contrivance this.

[they write.


Pol. Avoid as much as may be all Disputes and Conferences, unless it be with
one of these three Proviso's. 1. That your Disputes be with those that are most
eminent of the contrary Party; for whatsoever the Success is, it will startle
the common People to see the greatest of their Leaders thus boldly attacked. 2.
Never enter into Dispute but when you are sure that the Person for whose sake
you appoint the Conference will declare in favor of your side: for he that
carries away the Prize right or wrong, will always be thought to obtain the
Victory. And, 3. Above all things, have a care that you tie not up your selves
to the strict Rules of Sense and Reason; for that hinders multiplicity of
words, and is extremely prejudidicial to our Cause -- observe these three
Proviso's, and then dispute as often as you please --


All. We shall carefully observe 'em.

[they write.]


Pol. There are other Directions how to work upon the various Tempers of Men,
but those I have reduced to few Heads, and committed to writing in this Paper,
of which Manual shall give you Copies --

[gives the Paper]

Disperse your selves into various Parts of the Country, and may Prudence,
Success, and the Blessing of Heaven attend you always.


All. We thank your Reverence, and shall carefully observe your Order.

Exeunt four Priests and Manual. Enter Lord Britain.
Ld. Br. Reverend Sir, I could stay no longer from your Reverence; I fear you
have put the Nation into such a flame, that all the holy Water in the World
will not be able to quench it: Your violent Proceedings against the Heretical
Clergy has created a general Discontent -- Heaven knows how it may end!


Pol. I wonder your Lordship can think that any Proceedings against a few
obstinate Black-coats should create any disturbance amongst either the Gentry
or Commons of this Land! Did your Lordship ever perceive that the Gentry were
ever better pleased with a Play, than when the poor Parson was jeered? or the
Clowns ever more rejoice, than when the Vicar was ruined? Alas! my Lord, I
contrived this violent Persecution of the Blackcoats for the general
Satisfaction of the whole Kingdom.


Ld. Brit. I must confess I hate them as much for their Religion, as the
Farmers do for taking their Tithes: But yet I have so much of Generosity, as to
think it hard that Men of Learning should be forced to beg or starve.


Pol. Good, my Lord, take no care for that, I have abundance of Charity for the
Villains, tho they don't deserve it, and have care of them. Some of them have
good Pallates and love their Bellies: We will send for Fr. Men to instruct them
in the Art of Cookery, and then they may keep from starving, by licking their
Fingers. Some of them have good Voices and are very musical, they shall be
licensed to sing Ballads, or cry Fagots, which may be a good Trade if burning
of Heretics come again in fashion. Others have a right habit of cringing,
flattering, fawning, bowing, lying for Court-Preferment, and those will be sure
to live, provided you don't cut out their Tongues, or thrust a Stake into their
back-sides to hinder their Courtesy. Others (as a punning Friend of mine was
pleased to phrase it) in all Changes of Government have been good Trimmers, and
those we will put out to Barbers. And thus your Lordship may see that I am very
charitably given.


Ld. Br. But then the Fathers must have a care how they go to their Shops for
fear they cut their Throats.


Pol. Phoe -- no -- they have so tamed themselves by their Passiveness, that
there is now no danger in them.


Ld. Br. I grant there is a general Inclination in all Heretics to insult over
their Clergy; but this seems to be grounded rather on an uncertain Humor than
solid Reason; and who knows but that their Sufferings may reconcile them to
their Love.


Pol. No, it is impossible -- And herein I think I have outdone the finest
Policies of all the Courts in Europe; for by this I do our own business, and
gratify all sorts of People in the Nation.


Ld. Br. But will not this make the People jealous of their legal Rights and
Privileges -- And if they have been so furious in the Vindication of them,
when the Danger has been only imaginary, What will they do when the Danger is
real?


Pol. Less than if the Danger were only imaginary; for that which is imaginary
is infinite, according to the various rovings of Fancy; that which is real has
Bounds, and such Bounds as are soon comprehended by common Sense. Besides, I
wonder you will talk of the old antiquated Notions of Legal Rights and
Privileges; they are only the Concessions of foolish or weak Kings, which the
wise and strong may resume at pleasure --


Ld. Br. I am altogether of another Opinion -- Sir, I am an Englishman born,
and should be loath to see the Constitution ruined, which I think to be the best
in the World.


Pol. Pshaw, Pshaw, your Lordship has not seen the Policies of Foreign Courts,
as I have done, and therefore I the less wonder at you.


Ld. Br. It is enough for me that I know the Excellency of our own, I only
called in to tell you my Apprehensions, you may use them as you please. Farewell.

Exit Lord Britain. As Pol. is going out, enter to him Servant.
Ser. Sir, there is a Lady masked below that would needs speak with you.


Pol. A Lady! it is unusual -- but conduct her up -- there may be something in
it extraordinary.


Ser. Immediately.


Pol. I wonder who this Woman should he -- sure she is not sent by Mrs.
Counterfeit without my order.

Enter Leucasia.
Leu. Reverend Sir, you may justly wonder that a Woman --


Pol. Good Lady, no Apologies, they are superfluous, as a Preface or promising
Title Page to a good Poem. Nature has done enough to make whatever you say to
be graceful; you disparage her Workmanship by adding more -- [By Heaven a
gallant Woman! Aside.


Leu. But you may wonder that a Woman --


Pol. I wonder at a Woman! they may, can, or ought to do all things; had I
sufficient Authority, I would decree them a Dispensing Power over all Laws and
Customs introduced by Tyranny and Arbitrary Power -- Wherefore, pray Madam, let
me know your business, that you may know my readiness to serve you.


Leu. Notwithstanding your readiness to forgive an Absurdity, I should blush at
it, but that I am conscious that my only design of appearing here, is to do you
Servic^ -- which if I can accomplish --


Pol. You have accomplished it' already, Madam, your Presence brings its Reward
with it -- Pray, Lady, let me learn your business? [A charming Creature by my
Priesthood!

Aside.
Leu. Then, Sir, I thought my self obliged to let you understand, that whereas
you have received lately one Mr. Turnabout (as some say) into the very Merits
of your Order --


Pol. There is indeed such a Person -- We who engage our selves so much in
public Business, cannot know every particular Man that is converted, but I
heard my Brother Bigot commend him for a very seraphical Person.


Leu. Why that is my only business to undeceive you. It grieved me to the very
Heart to see Men of your Parts and Learning, and that have Policy in your
Profession, and pretend to have studied the Arts of all the Courts in Europe;
you that have undertaken to root out Heresy, subvert Kingdoms, and inflame the
World; you that pretend to baffle Usurers of their Money, English Men out of
their Privileges, and all Mankind out of their Senses; you that have so often
outwitted the Devil, and as some say, out-vy'd him too, making him subscribe
to Catholic Verities; you that pretend by your Exorcisms to bring an Ejectment
against Beelzebub, and cast him out of Possession, tho it be nine Points of the
Law: I say, to see you imposed upon by such a Person as Turnabout, a Man of
desperate Fortunes, and more desperate Principles; one that was so well known,
that he could hardly be trusted for a twelve-penny Ordinary, or impose upon the
rawest Squire that ever came to Town, tho, the first time after the Death of
his Father, I say again, to see you hugging him in your Bosom for a converted
Saint, it seemed to me as preposterous as to see the Bear making Love to the
Gentlewoman with the Bears-face, or the Woman in Shakespeare, kissing the
Fellow with the Asses-head -- This forced me by the Principles of common
Humanity to pity you extremely, and I am now come, like a true Romantic Lady,
to free you from the Enchantment of your Error --


Pol. Come, Lady, I perceive you love Mr. Turnabout, and that he has unworthily
forsaken you, for nothing but Love and Revenge could furnish you Matter to so
much Railing, and nothing but so much Wit as yours could make such Railing
pleasant -- Come, Lady, confess, I know it is Revenge --


Leu. I vow, Sir, the Nation reports you to be wiser than Solomon, but herein
you are as much mistaken, as if you had been the elder Brother of the three
wise Men of Goatham. -- If I had studied Revenge I should have rather wished
his continuance in your Service. It would exceed the Revenge of the famed
Italians.


Pol. What is it Lady you would have us do with him? ['Tis a curious Wench, but
her Railery is too sharp. Aside.


Leu. Why, Sir, for your own good I would propound two ways. 1. Either
Excommunicate him publicly by Bell, Book and Candle. Or, 2. Else tell him
plainly that he must expect nothing from you, and then he will of his own
accord forsake you, and your Society will be cased of that heap of Scandal; for
I can assure you he is bloody and revengeful; a Man that will do any thing for
his Interest, and nothing against it; and truly I do think it better that he
should herd amongst Heretics, than remain in the number of your choice new
Converts, that are picked out of the rest of the Nation, just as rotten Plums
are culled from those that are sound in the Basket --


Pol. This would be too sharp if it were not sweetened by her Wit and Beauty.
Aside.


Leu. Besides, if you retain him longer, you? will incur an inevitable danger
of having a greater Proficient in the peculiar Arts of your Order than your
selves, which is a Disgrace hitherto unknown to it --


Pol. I am well satisfied, Madam, that Mr. Turnabout was once yours, and that
you are angry with us for receiving stolen Goods, and perhaps you set a small
value upon him for that very reason, because you would have him return so much
the sooner and cheaper back again -- But as for his Crimes and Blemishes when
an Heretic, they are to be looked upon as the Genuine Fruits of a false
Persuasion. But I presume you have nothing to object against him, since he left
you and came to us. [An^punc^ excellent Woman this, and of a quick and
facetious Invention. Aside.


Leu. Alas, Sir, you are so much mistaken, that I pity you for nursing such a
Viper, that stings you most since you have been kindest to him -- There is
never a Night that he gets six Bottles into his Belly (and there are few Nights
he misses 'em) but he draws your Picture, and makes it as public as that of
the seven Bishops: First, says he, as to the Prudence of your Choice, That you
are like a Company of greazy Scullions, t^nt first put the Nation into a
Ferment, and then take off all the Scum to be kept for your own proper Use and
Advantage. As for your Invention, he says, you contrive more improbable Plots
in the State than ever Poet did on the Stage: And that, like blind Moles, you
undermine a stately Building that will fall upon your own Heads, and crush you
to Atoms -- And as for your Honesty, he says, that if he were sure to be
partaker of your evil Demerits, as you tell him he is of your good ones, he
would have the Rope put about his Neck, the Psalm set, and be fairly turned off
to prevent farther Torments -- This and a great deal more he says of you in all
Companies; for which I am the rather sorry, because I am very well assured it is
true -- But having acted the part of a Friend, I had no more to add, but that I
am your humble Servant. Farewell.

[As she is going out he stops her.
Pol. But stay, good Lady, after all these Affronts, which I look upon as a
little innocent Railery, I hope you will let us taste a little innocent Pleasure.

[Offers to kiss her, she thrusts him by.
Leu. Nay, good Sir, hold there -- If your Gravity is inclined to wax rampant,
I will send Mrs. Counterfeit and her twenty seven Virgins to cool you. In the
mean time adieu.

Struggling to get from him, but cannot. Enter Turnabout and Bigot.
Pol. O, here comes Mr. Turnabout and Mr. Bigot at the expected time. Brother
Bigot, I must desire you to walk into the Closet with me, I have something
private to communicate -- This Lady will entertain Mr. Turnabout, she knows
him. Exit.


Turn. What, my dear Leucasia here, and alone too, with a Priest! sure it is
not she.


Leu. Why sure, Sir, I am not so much changed as you are, you may know me, for
methinks I know you better than ever.


Turn. Nay, good Madam, tho I have loved you to the higest extremity of
Passion, do not twit me in the Teeth with changing; for certainly never any
underwent a greater Change than your self. To see the virtuous modest Leucasia
taken alone in a Priest's Chamber! I vow methinks it is pretty.


Leu. And to see the Whoring, Drinking, Roaring, Hectoring Mr. Turnabout herded
in a Company of bald-pate Friars, mumbling over his Prayers as Witches do their
Charms, and playing with his Beads as Boys do with Nuts on a String, I think is
at least as odd and pretty a sight as the other.


Turn. Nay, faith, Madam, never blush, I am glad of it; for whilst your Honor
was untainted, your Pride was so great, that Mr. Turnabout was rejected as a
wicked prosane Person; and a Man forsooth of Pleasure, but now I hope we may
treat upon more equal terms.


Leu. Why sure, you that are so famed for a new Convert, cannot think the
Conversation of a Priest to be scandalous.


Turn. Phoo -- Pox, I know them too well to trust them with Money, a Secret, or
with a Woman: But the truth is, I dare not tell them so to their Faces; but
from such a Friend as my dear Leucasia I can conceal nothing.


Leu. Tho your Rudeness in suspecting my Virtue, and affronting me to my Face,
might challenge another kind of Return; yet since you are open to me, I will be
as open to you, and tell you plainly that I came hither out of mere Love and
Compassion to you.


Turn. Why I always told you that you would come to that at last, whilst I made
my Addresses to you in the Country, and you know my Fortunes were a little
impaired, who more slighted than Mr. Turnabout? But now you see me coming to
Preferment -- ready to ride in my Coach and six -- and be one of the great
Managers of the Nation -- Now you are a little tempted with the promising
prospect.


Leu. Nay, hold a little, you do not understand the Nature of my Love -- I as
much contemn your old Threadbare Fortunes as I do your new gaudy Religion. They
are both in Extremes that are most odious to me: But I was moved with Pity and
Compassion to see so brisk and aerie a Gentleman bound over to the continual
Drudgery of a whining Hypocrisy, and came hither on purpose to purchase your
Pardon.


Turn. Nay, if that be all, I am satisfied. But pray, good Madam, what is it
you have done?


Leu. Why, I have acquainted Father Politico with your true Character, and that
you know is bad enough -- I have made him sensible, that you came to their
Party only for your own Ends, and then whenever it was, for your own
Advantage you would forsake them -- I have quite spoiled the Character of your
new Saintship, and expect to see thee turned out of the Society and thy
newfound Friends, and look as dejected as a discarded Officer, that has
neither Pay or Arms --


Turn. And are you sure you have done all this effectually?


Leu. As effectually as words can do it.


Turn. Ha! ha! ha! Then thou art the most obliging Creature in the World: I
fancy there is some near relation between thy Genius and mine, thou art so ready
to do me a Kindness when thou think least of it: I have been studying these
two hours to do that for my self which thou have done for me, and could invent
no way so good as this: I was just going to leave my Hopes unfinished, and turn
Protestant, but now I will not take a Million for them. Now the Fathers
understand all my good Qualities, I shall shortly ride in my Coach and Six --
with a very great Equipage, and then I shall not fail in gratitude to make you
most frequent Visits, in hopes of a kinder reception.


Leu. If I have done you any kindness of this nature, it is against my will,
When your Coach and Six are ready, I shall expect your Visits; till then adieu.


Turn. Nay, Madam, I must wait on you to your Coach.


Leu. You may.

This happens ill; but

Fortune sometimes the best Designs may cross:
But Woman's Wit is never at a loss.
Exeunt. Politico and Bigot.
Big. But is it possible Mr. Turnabout should be such a kind of Man!


Pol. I don't think all the Lady said of him was true, but the greatest part is
likely.


Big. Then will I presently go to him and tell him how much he is a Rogue and a
Rascal.


Pol. Nay, hold Brother, you run too fast, and leave behind you all the true
Rules of Policy. It is true indeed, the Lady did throw upon him (as I may say)
a whole Dunghill of Reproaches; but (as the Critics report of Virgil and
Ennius) out of that Dunghill I have extracted a great deal of real Gold, and
spy a greater Treasure than you imagine: She reports him Bloody, Revengeful;
always true to his Interest, never true to his Promises; why these are the Men
we do most want. You know, in process of time, we may stand in need of having a
great Man removed, by Sword, Poison, or an Evidence to destroy a turbulent
Heretic. And who more proper than Mr. Turnabout? who has Wit as well as
Resolution, in which most of the common Ruffians are deficient. Besides, you
have discovered to him many of our Secrets, and therefore you must treat him
with all the kindness imaginable, and oblige him as soon as we can.


Big. I must confess I have told him of some of the violent Courses we did
intend to take -- But if I ever tell him any more --


Pol. Your Zeal blinds your Eyes, and makes you to act imprudently -- If you
have discovered some Secrets, you may with the same, nay greater safety,
discover all -- for the more you discover, the more you oblige to silence -- We
must prefer Turnabout as soon as possible -- But, pray Brother, have a care how
your Zeal makes you mistake Men again.

To them Cautious, Turnabout, Subtleman and Simper.
Cau. Mr. Subtleman, I am glad your Business is done. This is the Gentleman to
whom you are most obliged. [Shows him to Politico.


Subt. The greatness of the Benefit, and the quickness of the Dispatch, do
equally amaze me: I fear you have thrust me into an inevitable necessity of
being ungrateful.


Pol. The Place you had conferred on you this Morning, has been valued at 4000
l. you have it gratis; but remember this, that much is expected from you.


Subt. Not more than I am ready to perform, when occasion offers.


Pol. Mr. Turnabout, I and my Brother Bigot would gladly speak with you a
little more in private.


Trun. Most gladly, Sir. [They retire to the corner of the Stage, whilst
Cautious and Simper come up to Subtleman.


Cau. You see, Mr. Subtleman, how freely this Benefit is conferred upon you,
without Cost or Charges. I vow, some of our Coat are so covetous, they would
expect two or three 1000 Guineas from you: But alas, Covetousness, next to a
Protestant Successor, is to me the most odious thing in the World. One thousand
would be as acceptable to me as an hundred thousand; for what, alas, is Money?


Subt. I do verily believe it will, for (as you well know) some of your Way are
so extremely covetous, they are a disgrace to their Cloth; which you wisely
avoid, by taking nothing for kindnesses of this Nature. You do extremely well,
I can never sufficiently commend you for it.


Cau. [Now if I have not a great care, I shall be baffled out of Money for the
sake of a little dissimulation. Aside.

Sir, you speak well, I hate Covetousness, as you may well see by my demanding
only 1000 l. for that which is worth 4000 l. and who would make two words of so
small a Sum?


Subt. Ounds, a 1000 l. a small Sum for a Man that has a Father living, and a
dozen costly Vices to maintain at his own proper Costs and Charges!


Cau. Then I perceive, Mr. Subtleman, that after all you intend to wrong me;
and you build upon this false Foundation, that your Business is done, and
cannot be revoked. Now, though I don't value the Money, yet I hate Wrong and
Injustice; and therefore you shall find, the same Power that set you up, can
throw you down: and because you are a Man of Expedition, I may be instrumental
in procuring you the happiness of saluting and taking leave of your Office the
same day --


Subt. O my honest Father Calltious, I will deal plainly with you, thou and I
are both alike in one Quality: We love to get and save all we can. Now whereas
you demand 1000 l. for Service done for me: I do answer, That I am well
assured, that thou did never speak one word for me. My whole Business was
done by my Lord Wiseman and Father Politico, who had heard of my Deserts. And
where thou do threaten me to make me quit my New Preferment, I do threaten
thee, That if thou do so, I will make thee quit England, or thy Life. And now
begin as soon as you please --


Cau. Me quit England, or my Li^e -- Did hear that, Jonathan?


Jon. Yes, Sir, he threatened you, to make you quit England, or your Life.


Subt. It Is true, I did so.


Cau. Then, Sir, that implies some Plot against the Government, and I will have
you hanged by Information. First, by an Inuendo, and my Man shall be a Witness
against you.


Subt. Then pray let me know your Man's Name.


Jon. My Name is Jonathan Simper.


Subt. Thou lie, thy Name is Betty Whiner, Thou art no Youth, but a Strumpet,
by Choice and Education. Do not I remember that Face of thine at the Lady
Fancyfull's in the Country, ever since I played at Cards there in the last great
Frost? [Jon. sneaks, and holds down's Head.] You see, Father, I know the whole
Intrigue between you and your Man: And I tell you plainly, that if you offer me
any Injury, by your self or any other, I will post up more Bills of thy Infamy,
than ever Quack did of his Cures; and make thee as loathsome to thy own Party,
as thou art already to the rest of Mankind.


Cau. Ha! ha! ha! I see you are merrily disposed, and would make me believe my
Man is a Woman. Come, we will not quarrel about Trifles -- Alas, I don't value
Money -- [But this Leachery is a plaguey Vice, to cost a Man a 1000 l. at one
clap, it is a most wicked Abomination. Aside.


Subt. Then if you will promise not to invade the Perritories of my Purse, I
will conclude a strict Peace and Amity. But, first, you must swear that you
will not do me any Injury, directly or indirectly.


Cau. Since you will have it so, I do swear, by all that is Sacred, I will never
do it.


Subt. And may I trust you, upon your Verbum Sacerdot is?


Cau. You may -- My Man Jonathan here is Witness.


Subt. Man or Woman it is sufficient.


Cau. Ay to deceive you Aside.

Politico, Bigot, and Turnabout, advance upon the Stage. Politico speaks aloud.
They all join Companies.
Pol. to Turn. Then you say the Lady's Name is Leucasia, and that she lodges
next door to Mrs. Counterfeits, near the Savoy.


Turn. So they told me -- [But what a Devil makes him to enquire Aside.


Pol. It Is well, very well -- Not, I care to enquire after Women, who have the
Grand Affairs of some Nations lying upon my Hands. But because her adventure
hither was a little singular, I had a mind to satisfy my Curiosity.


Turn. And Lust too I fear. Aside.


Pol. Go fetch Mrs. Counterfeit a Back-way with expedition. To his Man. Aside.

Gentlemen, I have one little Contrivance to communicate to you, for which I
desire the Assistance of you all, I mean, as to the executive Part, for the
Invention is purely and solely my own. Our Friend Mackdonnel came to me this
Morning, and told me a lamentable Story, How some of the Heretic Divines did
baffle our Emissaries at a Public Coffee-House. Wherefore I considering with
my self the Casualties of these Spiritual Wars, wherein the Success does not
depend upon the Goodness of the Cause, but the Strength and Management of the
Combatants, have found out a certain way to Victory, unless you are deficient
to your selves.


Big. That we will not I assure you.


Pol. Look you -- thus it must be -- One of you must put on the Habit of an
Heretical Clergyman, and repair to some Coffee-House, at such time as it is
most usually crowded with Company. Then must he insult and brag in so high a
Tone, as may draw the Eyes and Ears of all the Company that way. Then another
must put on the Habit of a Mechanic, and sit there demurely a good while. Then
must the Mechanic enter into Dispute with the Gown and Cassock, the Gown and
Cassock must yield, and formally acknowledge his Error*


Big. I will get the part of the Mechanic, and Mackdonnel that of the
Blockhead in the Gown -- He does it naturally.


Pol. No, he must not do so, if he can Act no other -- Feigned Duncery will do
us good, Natural Duncery will be sure to do us Evil. It is best not to make
Mackdonnel acquainted with it. If Bigot shall put on the Gown and Cassock,
Father Cautious the Carpenter's Rule and Apron, and Subtleman shall be there to
applaud the Victory.


Cau. Aye, but Mr. Subtleman has not yet declared himself to be of our Side.


Subt. I hope none here do question my readiness to serve you.


Pol. to Subt.

Sir, I put you in mind again, That much is expected from you -- We have heard
much of your good Inclinations -- but some farther Declaration would be
seasonable to your self and others.


Subt. How a Devil shall I come off now. If my Invention would but furnish an
Excuse now -- Oh, I have it. Aside.


Big. Indeed, Mr. Subtleman, it is highly reasonable, that you that have been
so largely rewarded, should now declare --


Subt. I am ready to do it -- But there is one Obstacle, I have it; A Father
that is Rich, Old, Peevish, and Decrepit, and he hearing of my good Inclination
to your Side, threatens to cut off the Entail, and settle the best part of his
Estate upon some Lectures against Popery -- Now I would gladly know, whether it
may not be lawful for me to remove him, provided I settle a good part upon
Religious Uses --

[How wretchedly I have belied the Man in this Character. Aside.


Big. A nice Question this.


Subt. What a Rogue is this to make a nice Question of the lawfulness of
killing a Father. Aside.


Pol. I will send you two or three Casuists in the Afternoon to give you
Satisfaction in that -- But pray go with all speed about the other business.


All. You need not question our speed or diligence. adieu. Exeunt omnes praeter
Pol.


Pol. Well, I must enquire after Mrs. Counterfeit: for Leucasia she has Wit and
Beauty, and I must enjoy her, if it can be done with Decency. Exit.

Enter Mrs. Counterfeit and two Whores.
Count. Look you Children, I have chosen out you two for the most profitable
Encounter. Father Politico has sent for me in haste -- and I can easily guess
his business; but because you have traded another way, I will give you three
Directions how to manage a Priest to his Content and Satisfaction. First, You
must pretend Religion, that you relieve their natural Necessities out of pure
and servent Charity, and then you must drop your Beads and mutter your Prayers
before and after Enjoyment, for about as long a space as a Phanatick is saying
Grace before and after Meat, that pleases mightily. Secondly, You must be
secret, no boasting of these Amors -- Thirdly, You must avoid Coiness, they
hate Courtship because they cannot arrive to it, and had rather pay in Money
than in Words -- Observe these Directions, and Success attends you.


Two Whores. We warrant you we'll learn any Lesson.

Enter Politico.
Pol. Mrs. Counterfeit, you are welcome; but how come these Gentlewomen hither.


Count. I thought your Reverence might stand in need of their innocent
Conversation.


Pol. Phy, phy, Mrs. Counterfeit, you exceed your Order -- Pray let them retire
-- I have business of Secrecy with you.


Count. Then pray Daughters be gone.


Two Whores. Yes -- But it is a damned bauk this -- Exeunt.


Pol. I hear you know Leucasia, and you may know if you please that I love her
-- I have found by deep Political Observations, that she has a great store of
Wit, and a great hater of our Religion, and my particular Order -- If ever I
succeed, it must be in Disguise of some Officer discarded for sticking to the
Protestant Interest -- I have drawn up a Model of the Plot -- Follow me in --
And Manual shall deliver it to you.


Count. Sir, I Will wait on you.


Exeunt. ACTUS III.
SCENE I.
The Coffee-House. Gentlemen at several Tables drinking and smoking, Bigot in
a Gown and Cassock at one Table, Cautious in a Carpenter's Apron and Rule at
another. Enter Subtleman and Turnabout and place themselves at the same Table.
First Gentleman THere was a brisk Rencounter they say this Morning.


Second Gent. Aye, and the Priests, they say, sneaked away very shamefully, I
wish I had been here to have heard it.


Big. Hear it, Sir, that is impossible: Alas! at the best you could but have
seen it, for the Fathers have nothing to say for themselves when they meet with
a Man that can distinguish a Pike from a Cannon-bullet.


Subt. Was you then ever so much engaged with them?


Big. O, Sir, extremely -- In the Indies I have converted twenty or thirty in a
Night, who when they went to Mass the next Morning would --


First Gent. Did they go to Mass then after their Conversion?


Big. There I was almost out indeed. Aside.

Aye, they would for once or so, just to take their leave of it, and sometimes
one Vagary ^^ other would change their Minds before Morning: but as I was
saying, they would ^ook so dejectedly and simply after it the ^ext Morning.


Turn. And do you think, Sir, you could gain as easy a Conquest over them here.


Big. aloud.

O easier behalf -- Alas! if any of their Emissaries were here you would see
how easily I could manage them; I would so gag their Mouths they should look
for ever after like a parcel of Turkish Mutes, never dare to converse unless it
were by Signs.


First Gent. This must needs be some ignorant Pretender, or some fly Knave. (
one to another.)

Cautious comes to the same Table with Bigot, and places himself against him.
Cau. Sir, I have heard you speak many opprobrious things against the Fathers
of the Romish Persuasion; and tho I am a poor Mechanic, I hope you will give
me leave to say something in Vindication of those of that way.


Second Gent. Now we shall have Sport.


Big. Pray, Mr. Carpenter don't you pretend to engage with me; thou art some
pitiful Fellow allured to that Religion out of hopes of having a job of
Journey-Work at the building she next Mass-house -- Or thou art in hopes of
earning Money from them by making a few Wooden Gods: O this making Wooden Gods
is a most excellent Trade! I Will maintain a Man may get more by half a dozen
Wooden Gods, than by a dozen Joynt-stooles or Wooden Dishes --


Cau. I delight not in Scurrility, and am an utter stranger to Learning; but if
you will be pleased to hear what I have to say, like a true Carpenter, I will
speak according to Rule, and contract what I have to say into a narrow compass.


Big. Gramercy brave Carpenter, thou shall see how I will hew all thy Arguments
into Chips. Come, begin --


Cau. Then the case is this -- Do you think your self, your small
inconsiderable self, to be wiser than the Council of Lateran, Constance, Trent
-- consisting of so many grave Prelates met together from all parts of the
World? Pray answer that.


Big. Ha! Ha! Ha! -- A very fine Question indeed -- If your Argument were
reduced to Mood and Figure, your minor Proposition would be a Foot and half
longer than your major, which is as absurd a thing as to see a Dagger longer
than a Sword.


Gent. How like a Coxcomb this Fellow talks.


Cau. I understand no Mood nor Figure, but I understand by the Figure of your
Face that you are in an angry Mood, and will not answer my Question; so that
the Victory is on my side.


Big. Why, look you, Sir, your Question divides it self into three parts. 1.
Whether I am wife? 2. Wiser. 3. Wisest of all: And first, to the first it must
needs be acknowledged that I am wise, yea very wise, and as wise as most of my
Profession.


Third Gent. Surely this Coxcomb banters.


Big. But then the second Question is, Whether I am wiser? now wiser being a
degree of Comparison, and we having an old Proverb in England, that Comparisons
are odious, I hope the Company will think me wisest of all, if I leave that
Point of the Question undecided. [Sure this is ridiculous enough. Aside.


All Company. Ha! Ha! Ha! Bigot looks dejected. How he endeavors to avoid an
Answer.


Cau. Come, answer directly, are you or not?


Big. O, wiser than they -- Hum -- wiser, I protest I dare not say it -- I must
not say it -- I cannot, I ought not to do it: I must rather yield my self
conquered.


Third Gent. Did ever Man All the Company laughs. boast so much, and perform so
little?


Big. I protest Gentlemen, you ought not to laugh at a Man for being overcome
with the force of Truth it curries great Power, tho in the Mouth of a mere
Mechanic; I must, dare manus, yield him the Glory of the Conquest -- I am not
able to resist the invincible force of Truth --


First Gent. It Is odd to see one of his Cloth so soon baffled by a pitiful
Mechanic.


Second Gent. I fear it is done by Compact, they are so soon agreed --


Third Gent. No, I begin to suspect the strength of our Cause.

Enter Mack-donnel, and places himself at the Table over against Bigot.
Big. O, Gentlemen, why are you not all converted by my Example! I was just now
boasting in my Heresy, and fondly amorous of my erroneous Opinions: But now a
dazzling and an amazing Light has darted through the dark Concerns of my Heart
by help of Bauls aloud, this ignorant Mechanic -- Why are you not moved more,
Gentlemen? Why don't ye throw your selves into the chaste Embraces of your
loving Mother? Come, pray, Gentlemen, follow me, and enter in apace, the Door
may soon be shut --


First Gent. He talks like a Merry- Andrew at Bartholomew-Fair.


Second Gent. It Is the oddest Change that ever I saw --


Subt. to Turn. If he get into his zealous Rhetorical Strain, he will spoil all
--


Turn. Who, a Pox, cares whether he does or no.


Big. Come, pray Gentlemen be a little more forward, and accept of my strenuous
Bauls aloud. and vocal Invitation -- What none -- None at all declare! None
here for Rome -- Who Is for Rome? --


Subt. to Turn. I told you he would overact his part at last.

Mack-donnel rises up, and takes Bigot by the Hand.
Mack. O my dear Brother Bigot, the Deel tauke me if Ish haud known thee but by
thy Voish -- Why whaut dosh my dear Joy mauke wear of aun Heretic Gown aund
Caussack for -- But by my shoul and Saint Pautrick, I saw thee this Morning in
the Haubite of St. Dominick, and now thou dosht look so odly in that --


Big. Hold your Peace or I am discovered. Aside to Mack.


Mack. No, I will not hold my Peace, I will mauk Speech to the Company, and
tell them what a Rauscal thou art to turn Protestant Heretic this Afternoon,
who were a Catholic Priest in the Morning -- I say again, thou wast a
Catholic Priest this very Morning by Shaint Pautrick, and now thou art turned
Heretic -- Bashe Heretic, Turncoat Heretic --


First Gent. O, this is a piece of Roguery then --


Cau. Nay but Mack-donnel -- dear Mack. do not know me, prithee hold thy
Tongue.


Mack. Know thee -- why thou art Brother Cautious, the famoush Dominican, what
a Deel maukes thee in Carpenter's Clothes -- run away from the Cautholick
Church in Disguise, by Shaint Pautrick I will mauke kill upon you both for your
Roguery, bashe Roguery Villains! Dogs.

Takes a Dish of Coffee and throws in Bigot' s Face, and pulls out Cautious' s
Rule and strikes him on the Pate.
Turn. Nay, good Friend, no Irish Massacre here. Holding Mack.


Subt. to Mack. You cannot see your Friends from Priests -- Prithee be quiet --


Mack. No, I will not, I Breaks lose and kicks them about the Room. cannot be
quiet -- I will maule -- maule these turncoat Priests to death.


First Gent. O now I see the Roguery is come out, they came hither to put a
Cheat upon us.


Second Gent. Come let us leave the Knaves to their Devices, this Sham will not
take --


Third Gent. We shall take care to spread the Fame-of their Roguery about the
City -- And so farewell. Exeunt, etc.


Cau. S^ Brother Mack-donnel, now you done bravely and ruined all.


Big. Thou have marred the most glorious Victory in the World -- All after-Ages
will have cause to curse thee --


Mack. By Shaint Pautrick -- I do not know what hurt I have done -- I did speak
the truth -- and I think I Have served you right enough.


Big. Aye, it is Truth does ruin us -- This is the first time that I ever found
any Mischief in Zeal -- Come in, we will make you sensible of your Error -- Exeunt.

Enter Sir Geo. Subt. followed by a Servant.
Sir Geo. This is the oddest Letter that ever I received. Let me see -- surely
my Senses deceive me. ( Pulls out the Letter and reads.)

For Sir Geo. Subtleman at Kensington, These.
Sir,
YOu may save your Estate and your Life into the bargain, if at three of the
Clock in the Afternoon, on the third Instant at the Savoy Coffee-house, you
will meet

Your unknown Friend. R. C.


I cannot imagine who this R. C. should be, I expect to find him a mad Man, a
Knave, or a Fool; for I have but one Son, and have no reason to suspect him of
any Plot against my Life or Estate -- How comes this Letter?


Ser. By a special Messenger.


Sir Geo. It Is strange! but yet I shall not neglect -- Do thou know where my
Niece Leucasia lodges?


Ser. It Is near this Place -- but where I cannot tell.


Sir Geo. Go, find it out, and tell her I intend to wait on her.


Ser. Yes, Sir.

Enter Cautious, Jonathan his Man.
Cau. Art thou sure, Jonathan, that is old Sir Geo. Subtleman.


Jon. Yes, I am very sure. As Sir George is p^ring on the Letter.


Cau. Then will I discover his Son's Intentions to kill him, and so complete my
Revenge on young Subtleman for cheating me of my Money, and perhaps get no
small Sum from the old Man for this seasonable Information --


Jon. But did you not promise Subtleman, that you would not, directly or
indirectly, do him an Injury.


Cau. Pshaw, pshaw, it is for grave old Men, and not such young Striplings as
your self to understand the Obligation of Promises -- Let me alone for that.

Advancing to Sir George. Sir, though a Stranger, I make bold to ask you if this
Paper be subscribed R. C?


Sir Geo. Yes, Sir, it is so.


Cau. If so, I must acknowledge my self to be the Author of it; and upon good
terms can give you farther information.


Sir Geo. Your Information I shall hear most gladly. But before you begin, I
will tell you my Character, and that perhaps may save you the labor of
proceeding further. I am old, but not infected with the usual Humors of Old
Age. I am not credulous, for I believe none (especially Priests) upon their
bare word. If you bring no further proof than that, you will lose your Cause in
my Court of Justice. I am not timorous, and therefore you may spare all
flourishing Aggravations of Danger, for there is no Danger that I dare not
meet, or that can seem greater to me than it really is. I am neither stupid or
forgetful; therefore if you have sent this Paper, or come your self to impose
upon me, you shall find that I have not forgot the faculty of remembering
Injuries. I am neither immoderately Covetous, nor dotingly Prodigal. I requite
Courtesies moderately in my Lifetime, but shall never (like some old Children)
leave an Estate to them that feed me with Sugar-Plums, or buy me Play-things.
But I have one Imperfection of old Age, I am very peevish when I hear
Impertinencies; which praying you to avoid, I hope you will begin your Story --


Cau. Well then -- Being moved by mere Love and Compassion --


Sir Geo. Nay, then you must give me leave to interrupt you; Do'nt pretend Love
or Compassion to me; For how a De'l should thou love an old Man and a mere
Stranger? -- Besides, if thou art moved to do me good, what a Pox do I care
what moved thee -- It Is all one to me, whether it is mere Friendship, or thine
own Interest.

I hate Flattery, that is another of my Qualities.


Cau. My own Interest! Why all the World knows I am not Covetous -- But --


Sir Geo. Nay, now I must interrupt you again, and tell you plainly, that all
the World does not know that thou art not Covetous; for I my self do believe
thou art, what else should engage thee to turn Informer? And now I must tell
thee of another of my Qualities; I hate lying above all things in the World,
pray avoid that --


Cau. Well -- Seeing that you are not willing that I should clear my self from
the vile Aspersion of Covetousness -- I shall desist --


Sir Geo. From what? Do you not now appear in the Person of an Informer? and
are you ignorant, that the more you are aspersed, the better you are qualified
for that Office?


Cau. I perceive, Sir, you are very well qualified to lose all you have, rather
than receive a little seasonable Information -- And so Adieu. Going out, Sir
Geo. pulls him back.


Sir Geo. Nay, remember, Sir, since I perceive you begin to avoid the
Superfluities and Excressencies of Speech, I must hear what you have to say.


Cau. Then you must give me Money in the first Place, and an Oath of Secrecy
not to discover your Author in the Second.


Sir Geo. This is short, pithy, and to the purpose -- Here is Money in the first
place -- And my Promise not to discover you in the Second.


Cau. Then the Business in short is this: Your Son has proposed a Question to
be resolved by the Fathers; Whether he may not lawfully knock you on the Head,
1. As a useless Person. 2. A peevish and cross-grained, And, 3. an obstinate
Heretic? -- And now I can tell you more -- (Though I hate Covetousness) if you
would give me more Money.


Sir Geo. What, give thee Money for a notorious and impudent Forgery? My Son
knows me to be so far from being useless, that I do all Business for him; and
Eat, Drink, Dance, Wench for my self into the bargain -- I am so far from
being peevish, that I can forbear breaking your Head, notwithstanding this
intolerable Provocation. And as for being an obstinate Heretic, it is most
notoriously false, for I never did trouble my Head so much about Religion as to
be one -- And now, Sir, I shall tell my Son of your Information, for which he
will undoubtedly reward you.


Cau. But did you not promise Secresy?


Sir Geo. Yes, if you spoke Truth, but I cannot conceal a Lie -- for that is
another of my Qualities which I forgot to mention.


Cau. To confute you, follow me, and I will carry you to the very Place, where
you shall hear your Son propose that Question to my self and others -- your
Resolution of it?


Sir Geo. Gramercy, old Father, now thou speak to the purpose: Do that, and
I shall be grateful.


Cau. That is, you will give me a Gratification.


Sir Geo. Yes, and a good One too --


Cau. That Is well -- For though I hate Covetousness, yet I love a Gratification,
it shows Honesty; Come, follow me --


Sir Geo. I will -- Exeunt.


Scene's Leucasia's Lodgings. Leucasia and Betty. Leu. Art sure the Story of
the Coffee-House Encounter is true?


Betty. It Is the whole Discourse and Laughter of the Town. Mr. Turnabout was
one of the Managers.


Leu. Ha! ha! ha! Then I hope the poor Creature will be tired at last with
their Folly, if not with their Wickedness --

Enter Boy.
Boy. Madam -- Mr. Turnabout is upon the Stairs, and is very earnest for
Admittance.


Leu. Let him come up -- He Is no dangerous Man; Besides, I want Diversion.

Exit Boy.
Betty. Now, good Madam, Tease him.

Enter Turnabout.
Turn. Lady, your Servant -- You see now the force of Love and good Nature -- I
am come to visit you, notwithstanding the ill Character you gave of me to
Father Politico.


Leu. I vow, Sir, you ^ondescend too much -- and make your Visits with too
great an Equipage. My Lodgings here are small, and cannot receive your numerous
Train of Pages, Footmen, and other Attendance. The Street I live in is too
narrow, and will be encumbred with your Coach and Six -- so that you must not
in prudence let your Visits be long, for which I Am exceeding sorry.


Turn. Don't let that, Madam, grieve or concern you; I come attended with one
only Page, his Name is Cupid, he keeps close to me Day and Night, and is
extremely watchful -- I hope your Ladyship will not turn him down among the
Servants in the Hall, but admit him a little nearer to your Bosom.


Leu. If you have a Cupid, it is certainly the oddest that ever was known. He is
not only Blind, but Invisible, for let me die if I can see any thing like a
Cupid about you: You have the same Face, the same Eyes, the same Nose (abating
a little alteration) that you ever had, and which I often told you that I never
liked. Nay, on my Conscience, thou have the same Hat, the same Sword, and the
same Breeches. I fancy thou have changed nothing for these three Years but thy
Religion, and a few B^ass Half-Crowns, and cracked Nine-pences.


Turn. My Cupid, Madam, is never the weaker for being Invisible. All
Philosophers agree, that there are occult Qualities in Love, as well as in
Nature, that can attract Hearts of Steel or Iron, by an Invisible Chain. It is
enough for me that I know you love me, by the care you have taken for my
Re-conversion.


Leu. You build a greater Superstructure upon that, than the Foundation is able
to bear. I wonder how you can think a Woman should love a Man the better for
his being altered for the worse. Your Complexion seems to me to be pale and
sickly; I fancy you frequent Coffee-Houses to assist the Fathers in the
laborious propagation of Nonsense. But, let me advise you to forbear Coffee,
'twill destroy much of the Luster that is borrowed from the beneficial
influence of Claret.


Turn. How the Devil came she to hear that? Aside.

Madam, if I am pale, as you say, I am pale with Love; and though you often
upbraid me with changing, yet I am sure you cannot say that ever I changed that.
Pray, Madam, for once, make trial of my Constancy in a Matrimonial way -- So
you shall see how patiently I will wear that Chain, without one thought of
changing.


Leu. The Experiment is too costly for me to make, I am not like those
Vertuoso's that expend ready Money, in hopes of extracting Gold out of
Pewter-Dishes -- Besides, you pretend to me to be in Love; yet I have one
infallible Demonstration that you are not so; for if you were, you could not
choose but obtain your Desires, you that are so intimate with the famous
Politico, that has a thousand Plots and Intrigues in his Head, great and small,
of all sorts and sizes, for Men and for Women, and (as some say) for Children
too. Methinks he might easily teach you a way to circumvent such a weak Woman
as I am: He could instruct you how to put on such Disguises, that you and
Father Bigot, and Father Cautious might gain half the Women in the Nation,
especially if the ingenious Mackdonnel have an hand in the Plot.


Turn. Good Madam, tell me no more of Plotting, I hate Plotting above all
things, and that makes me to frequent Plays: My Business is plain Love -- I
have nothing to do with Plotting.


Leu. And I must tell you, for your further encouragement, that I can never
love a Man of your Persuasion.


Turn. Alas, Madam, if that be all, I am of no Persuasion at all but your
Ladyships, for you persuade me -- to any thing: Cannot a Man frequent Mass, or
cokes the Fathers for a little Money to enable him to keep his Coach and Six --
but presently you must think that he is of their Persuasion -- I vow, Madam,
you are too credulous in all things, but in believing that I love you.


Leu. I shall avoid that Imputation for the future, but never give credit to
any thing you say hereafter: For since you tell me you dissemble in other
Things, how shall I believe you in that.


Turn. O, you may know that by a kind of natural Instinct, and by this general
Rule, That I never dissemble but when it is for my Interest --


Leu. And therefore if it be your Interest to love me, it will be your Interest
to dissemble with me -- But to wave that, I wonder what expectation you can
have from that designing Gang, that make it their Business to deceive you and
all Mankind --


Turn. I must confess at first, whilst they thought me a Man of a good Estate,
and overrun with the simplicity of Superstition, I could get nothing from them
but Exhortations, to settle my Land upon the Church; to turn Mendicant, or
undertake expensive Employments for the good of the Catholic Cause. But after
your Ladyship did give Politico an account of my Designs and Endowments, they
treated me with all the Kindness Imaginable. -- They promise Mountains of Gold,
and tell me, it shall not be long before I ride in my Coach and Six --


Leu. But suppo^^ you should find your Coach and Six -- to be suddenly
transformed to a Cart and four -- by a certain unlucky Spell of Queen B. would
it not amaze you?


Turn. Pshaw, pshaw, never fear that; if I can escape dying by Love, I fear no
other Death.

Enter Boy.
Boy. Madam, here is a Gentlewoman with a Patch on her Nose, and a great
Beadrol in her Hand, that would gladly have admittance.


Leu. I warrant it is that Beast of a Woman, Mrs. Counterfeit, that ambitious
Animal, 'twixt Bawd and Whore: That Spiritual Caterer for the Flesh, that
provides the Necessaries of Nature for the Fathers with great Zeal and
Devotion. It Is a Load of Scandal, I will not see her.


Turn. If you do not, I fancy she manages some private Intrigue with you --
Come, Madam, you must see her, I would fain know her Business.


Leu. Then you must stay here to take off the Scandal of the Company -- She is
the only Person in the World that I know more scandalous than your self.


Turn. I dare not stay, for she lately served me a damned Jade's Trick, and I
fear my Passion should make me transgress the Rules of Decency in a Lady's
Chamber --


Leu. Then retire into the Closet, and there you may over-hear our Discourse,
and be a Witness that I hold no correspondence with you or yours.


Turn. With all my Heart -- But pray place Mrs. Counterfeit's Chair very near
the Closet Door. Exit.


Leu. Well, it shall -- Bid her come up, Boy. Exit Boy.


Betty. Now we shall have an Intrigue --

Enter Mrs. Counterfeit.
Mrs. Count. O Neighbor -- Dear Neighbor -- sweet innocent Neighbor, why art
thou so unkind, as to live so near and never come to see me.


Leu. You have so many Ladies fitter for Conversation in your House, that I
believe one of the other Sex would be more acceptable if it were only for
Variety's sake.


Count. I protest, Madam, you are mistaken; not but that an abundance of the
most religious Ladies in the City do pride themselves in my Acquaintance, but
none to compare with your self for Wit and Beauty. I protest, Dearest, I was in
some Company, that talked so well of thee to day -- But there was one Story did
a little vex me.


Leu. Nay, if you have a Story to tell, you had best sit down. [Chairs there,
one next that Closet-door.]


Betty to Count. Please you to sit there, Madam.


Count. Then I will tell thee, Dearest, they say thou art in love with Mr.
Turnabout, a Man of no Parts, Address or Fortune -- I protest I wonder that a
Lady of your excellent Perfections should think of throwing away your self upon
a Person that is never likely to make any Figure in the World.


Turn. What Is that, Ha! what is that? Turnabout comes out, and stands listening
behind her Chair.


Leu. I thought he had been the most likely of any -- He boasts much of his
Friendship with Politico, Bigot, Cautious, and others -- I thought he might
have been one of the greatest Men in the Nation.


Count. Aye, he may boast as long as he pleases, but I can assure you he has
little reason; I know the Minds of the Fathers better than he does, and I heard
them say this very Morning, that they never intended to do any thing for him.


Turn. How Is that -- how -- damned Whore. Aside.


Leu. What nothing at all?


Count. I beg your Pardon, Madam, something they may do, perhaps get him to be
a Sergeant in a Foot Regiment, which they foresee will shortly be disbanded,
and then you may see him sent home with one Shoe on his Foot, and a piece of
another in his Snapsack -- Or if he had rather choose Civil than Military, they
may make him Alderman of some Corporation where they fetch Straw, and the Mayor
thatches.


Leu. Ha, ha, ha, is that all?

Turnabout takes hold of her Chair and pulls her backwards, and giving her a
box o'th Ear, runs back into the Closet.
Turn. O damned Whore, come hither to spoil my Fortune!


Count. O, Murder! Murder! I am come here to a Friend's House to be murdered!


Leu. No, good Mrs. Counterfeit, I hope there is no hurt yet; here, Betty, help
her up. [Lifts her up.]


Count. Was ever an Indignity of this gross nature put upon a Lady in her
Friend's House?


Betty. You must not, Madam, impute this to my Lady, we have a Servant in the
House, the Fathers have caused to run mad, by puzling his Head with
Controversy, and promising to make him Mayor of a regulated Corporation; and
whenever he hears talk of Mayor or Aldermen, he is always ready to do Mischief
--


Count. Well, I protest, he has disordered -- He ought to be punished severely
for it --


Leu. Mad Men and Fools have Privileges of farther extent than the greatest
Princes: we cannot be angry at them without becoming like unto them; but I hope
you will pass it by since you have not much harm.


Count. Well, since it is so, I must bear it: But as I was saying before, my
dear Neighbor, there is a Person of Quality lately fallen in love with you --
Well, I Will say no more, -- but for Riches, Beauty, Wit, Bravery and every thing
that is charming, perhaps all England has not his Fellow; only he has one one
fault, for which I needs must hate him.


Leu. And perhaps that one fault will outballance all his other Virtues: if you
would recommend a Man to me, let me know his Faults first, and I will soon find
out his Virtues after. Men expose their Excellencies, like rich Furniture, to
the Eyes of all Beholders, when their Defects, like Lumber, is thrown into dark
Corners where it is hard to find them.


Count. O, but this is a fault exposed to the Eyes of the World, and I am
forbid by the Principles of my Religion to intercede for him.


Leu. It must needs then be some Filthiness that ought not to be named; you had
best let it alone and pass to some other Subject.


Count. No, I protest I will not; but I Will tell you plainly what it is. He is
such an obstinate Heretic, and such a Slave to his pretended Honor, that
rather than comply with some reasonable Demands, he has quitted one of the most
considerable Military Employments in the Army.


Leu. That is hard indeed.


Count. And the truth is, he has brought that Mischief upon his own Head by
affronting the famous Politico and Bigot, he was always satirical against them,
but they at length resolved to chastise him -- And does not your Ladyship now
abhor him for this?


Leu. So far from that, that I assure you I honor all those worthy Patriots
that fall by the hands of those insatiable Canibals; and I wish it lay in my
Power to redress any part of his Lordship's Sufferings: I perceive you mistake
me for a Catholic, I am of a contrary Persuasion.


Count. I protest I did not know it -- well then you are the only Person in the
World that can relieve his Melancholy, one glance of yours would turn his Night
into Day: He is in Town Incognito, sighing always for you, and repeating the
sweet Name of Leucasia: O dear Madam, that you would but afford him the
Consolation of a Visit.


Leu. I am always a Friend to the Resolute and Brave as far as it consists with
the Rules of my Honor. Pray what is his Name?


Count. Let his Name be concealed for the present, when you come to know it you
will be amazed.


Leu. That Is strange -- Then I presume he is ashamed of the Amor below him.


Count. Not so, but there are particular Reasons for it; but I protest, Madam,
he is a Man of unbounded Wealth and Generosity; here are some Jewels of his
mere trifles in respect of his Riches, which he desires you to accept of.


Leu. Sure his Lordship thinks me very Mercenary -- I am not used to receive
such Offers. [Angry.]


Betty. Pray, Madam, accept of them, I will give you a good Reason for it by
the by. [Aside to Leu.]


Leu. Thou art very impertinent -- But for once I Will take thy Counsel. [Aside
to Betty.]


Count. Nay dearest, prithee be not angry, he thought them Curiosities your
Ladyship might affect -- Prithee be so kind as to accept of them.


Leu. Tho I am not ignorant that hereby I shall transgress the Rules of
Decency; yet because his Lordship is a Sufferer for the Cause I love, and
persecuted by the Persons I hate, I can deny him nothing -- Pray let me see 'em.


Count. And you will permit him to tell you his Sufferings.


Leu. It Is a thing too small to deny a Person of his worth.

She and Betty looking on the Jewels.
Count. This Plot of Politico's does take to Admiration. (Whispers Leu.) the
hour 5.


Leu. Yes.


Count. Then my dearest Neighbor adieu. [She rises.]

Now I shall move nimbly tho my Bones are sore bruised. Aside.

But pray Neighbor, let me see you sometimes at my House, I have there a Set
of as civil devout Gentlewomen as ever Europe bred -- But pray don't come at
our hours of Prayer -- we have Prayers five times a day -- After that we take
all Liberty imaginable --


Leu. I believe you.


Count. Your Servant sweet Lady. Exit curtesying.

Leucasia calls Turnabout out of the Closet.


Leu. (Laughing.) Here Mr. Turnabout, Sergeant, Mayor, Alderman -- What are
you? why don't you slip out of your Hole for Joy to hear such good News from
Mrs. Counterfeit.

Enter Turnabout.
Turn. And methinks, Madam, you might run into yours for shame, to receive
Gifts from, and promise Assignations to cashiered Lords and Barons.


Leu. Then, I warrant, you pretend to be jealous, and with a design too of
making me believe that you are in Love; but that is too common a Sham to impose
upon one that is not very proud of her own Perfections. Alas! if you should
marry me, you must expect ten times more than this.


Turn. I do believe i^, Madam -- Farewell. [He's going.]


Leu. Nay, stay a little, I have something to say to you.


Turn. After the Spark has been here, I Am ready to hear. Exit.

Leu to Betty.

So, now I see what it is to take the Advice of Chamber-Maids -- You counseled
me to take the Jewels, and now the jealous Mr. Turnabout will make a fine Story
of it about Town.


Betty. Your Fame is so great, and your Innocence greater, that you may well
despise those Censures that are dreadful only to the Guilty -- But, Madam, I
had good Reason for my Advice; for I fancy the great Protestant Commander is no
other than the famous Politico that Intends to make love in that Disguise.


Leu. On my Conscience a shrewd guess! But, prithee, what are thy Reasons for
it?


Betty. Why, first, your Ladyship told me, that he gloated upon you with
lustful Eyes.


Leu. It Is true, I did observe it.


Betty. Then you know that Mrs. Counterfeit does deal for no other kind of
Cattle.


Leu. It Is true, she trades with no other.


Betty. Then whereas she pretends, that he is a great Protestant Commander
lately cashiered, it is impossible -- The public News gives an Account of no
such Person -- it must needs be a Fiction.


Leu. That Is well observed.


Betty. Then she conceals the Name, and yet can give no reason for it.


Leu. All this is true.


Betty. Now if your Ladyship would let me see the Jewels, I could discover more
from them.


Leu. Prithee see them as long as thou will. Shows 'em.


Betty. By heavens the very same! -- A Servant of Politico's showed some of
these very Jewels in a Scrittore of his, by chance left open.


Leu. It Is beyond doubt; and I am as glad of it, as if he had given me half the
Indies. If I catch him in the Trap, I shall serve him as I use to do Vermin,
make him leave a Limb behind him. -- But I will first take a little fresh Air,
to quicken my Invention. Do thou stay at home; my Uncle Sir George desired the
use of my Apartment this afternoon, for the entertainment of some Friends; but
I know not what matter of concernment. Pray see my Servants let them want no
attendance. Exeunt.

Enter Sir George Subtleman, Cautious, Servant to Leucasia, and Jon. Simper.
Sir Geo. to Serve. Is my Niece gone out then?


Serve. Just taken Coach, Sir; and left word, That you and your friends should
be entertained in this Apartment.


Sir George. 'Twas kindly done. -- To^s^rv^] You may retire. You see, Mr.
Cautious, here is a Room for the Consultation, here a Closet for me to
over-hear in. -- You say, It is in your Power to bring them wheresoe'r you
please; if I find your allegations against my Son to be true, I have Writings
ready to convey the best part of my Estate to my Niece, and a Thousand pound
Bond ready to seal to your self: But If false, you may easily guess the
consequence.


Cau. Ay, One dreadful consequence would be, That I should get no money.


Sir Geo. That Is true.


Cau. Well, retire into the Closet; be patient, and give me leave, according to
my custom, to vote with the major part, and I shall convince you.


Sir Geo. I am ready to make trial.

Retires into the Closet, and locks the door.
Cau. Go, Jonathan, tell the Gentlemen walking by the Waterside, that I am
ready to attend them.


Jon. I shall, Sir. Exit Jon.


Cau. Now is not this better, to mind my own private Concerns, and get 1000 l.
than to mind the Public, and get nothing but a rap over the head with a
Carpenter's Rule, or a kick on the breech, as I lately received from
Mackdonnel? This Notion of Public Good is a mere Chimaera, framed by those men
that love to do great things to no purpose. -- For my part, I can perceive
nothing real in it. --

Enter Subtleman, Father Bigot, three Casuists in black, Jonathan Simper.
Cau. Gentlemen, ye are welcome to the Apartment I have chosen as most
convenient. -- A Table here, and Stools.

They are brought, they sit round the Table.
Mr. Subtleman, propound your Case. -- These Gentlemen have studied Casuistical
Divinity at St. Omers, and can soon resolve you.


Subt. Then thus it is: -- A young Gentleman, willing to turn Catholic, is
hindered by a Father that is useless, old, peevish, rich, heretical. -- Quaere,
Whether in this Case it may not be lawful for the young Son to remove by
violent courses the ancient Father?


Sir George within. Oh Rogue! Rascal! Villain!


Big. Gentlemen, I will open the particular Case of young Mr. Subtleman thus:
-- In all moral actions, we must consider the Good and Evil that attend them,
and cautiously consider which does outweigh the other: Let us apply then this
Rule to our present Case, and see what Good and what Evil is likely to ensue
the removal of this ancient Gentleman.


All. A good method.


Big. As for the good, that is great and Visible: For, first, hereupon a young
Gentleman of known Parts and Integrity will immediately, declare for the
Catholic Church; -- which I esteem to be worth to the Public at least 1000 l.
-- Then here is an Estate of 4000 l. per annum placed in the hands of one that
will bestow it upon Religious Uses: -- Valuing which but at twelve years
purchase, amounts to 48000 l. -- Then here are Lectures against Popery
prevented, (for the old Gentleman has threatened to settle part of his Estate
for that use), the avoiding which, I suppose, may be valued at 2000 l. more. --
This amounts in all to 50000 l.


All. An exact computation.


Big. Now let us take a brief view of the Evil or Mischief in this action. --
First, here is a Gentleman removed out of the way, that was likely to enjoy an
Estate of 4000 l. per annum for about three years, and that is worth 12000 l.
But because he is decrepit, and cannot have the free use of Women, Wine, and
other Diversions, the most it can amount to is 1000 l.


Sir Geo. from within. The Rogue belies me, I can use them as well as he.


Big. Then here are some innocent Relations wronged of some trifling Legacies;
-- which we will esteem, tho dearly, at 3000 l. Then there is the Charges of
getting the work done, which in Italy I should value but at Half-a-Crown: but
such Villains being dearer here than in Catholic Countries, it may cost 20 l.
The Penances for expiation of the Crime I value at 100 l. tho there were good
times when such things might be done cheaper. -- So that the whole damage of
such an action amounts but to 5200 l. and what proportion does that bear to
50000 l.?


1 Cas. My Brother speaks well, but not all that may be said on this Subject:
-- For in Murder two things are to be considered; 1. the Act of killing, and
2. the Intention. Now it is plain that the Immorality of Murder does not
consist in mere killing, for then every Executioner or Soldier would be guilty
of Murder: but it is the evil malicious intention of the mind that is all in
all. Now if Mr. Subtleman bear no malice to his Father, but does that Work in a
spirit of Love and Charity for the good of the Catholic Cause, there can be no
evil in it; provided he gives all the Estate that accrues thereby, to the
Church, to show that therein he was not acted by a spirit of Covetousness.


Subt. What an unconscionable Fellow is this! Could not one half serve his turn?

Aside.
2 Cas. My Brother speaks well, but I must add this: -- That as to kill a man
(yea a Parent) with a charitable intention is certainly lawful; so to kill an
Heretic, an inveterate obstinate Heretic, is more than lawful, it is highly
meritorious: They are condemned by the Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, and any
man may be their Executioner.


3 Cas. What my Reverend Brethren have said in this Case, is undoubtedly true;
but, for the Gentleman's satisfaction, I will prove the lawfulness of the Fact
by an infallible Demonstration. -- Suppose it thus: -- Young Mr. Subtleman
takes up an Hammer, and knocks out the Brains of his aged Parent: -- Quaere, If
this Action be in it self unlawful? -- I answer, No; -- For if there be no
unlawfulness in any part of this Action, then there is none in the whole. --
But there is no unlawfulness either in taking up the Hammer, or lifting the
Hammer, or l^tting down the Hammer; Ergo, There is none in knocking out the old
man's Brains.


Subt. This fellow is more Dunce than Villain. Aside.


Big. But what say you to the point, Brother Cautious?


Cau. Why look ye, Brethren, ye have lef^ me little to say, but only this: --
If there be any evil in such a Murder, it consists in the Injury that is done
to the murdered person; and an Injury, is some part of Injustice done to man
against his will, (Volenti non fit injuria); If therefore there could be a way
found to send the Gentleman into another world with his own consent, there
could be no scruple in it.


1 Cas. Then the best way is to knock out's Brains with 100 l. Bag. -- If he be
a truly covetous man, he can never think that money can do him any harm.


2 Cas. Or pour down his Throat a spoonful of melted Gold, when he sleeps with
his mouth open.


3 Cas. Or dispatch him with a good Dose of Quicksilver, he must needs have a
veneration for That; it is the Mother of Gold, and all other Metals.


Subt. What a pleasant Story this will be to tell the old man! Aside.

Enter Sir George from the Closet, with two Papers in his hand; They all start,
and are amazed.
Sir Geo. Gentlemen, I understand that I am a dying man, and therefore I
beseech ye all to be witnesses to my last Will and Testament.


Subt. My Father! what cursed luck brought him hither? If he o'r-heard our
discourse, he will think that I was in earnest. Aside.


Sir Geo. Come, pray Gentlemen be Witnesses to my Will; it is soon done, and
human life is uncertain.


Subt. My honored Father, what good Genius brought you hither!


Sir Geo. O thou best of Sons! I am glad to see thee in so good company.

Goes to salute them, they are sneaking away. Nay pray Gentlemen stay. -- I
have strange presages of my Death, and fear it will be sudden. -- I have given
40 s. to my only Son, -- So much Virtue should not go unrewarded. -- The rest
of my Estate shall be given to my virtuous Niece, Leucasia. -- Pray stay and
seal presently, for I have a great many Money-bags, and do often sleep with my
mouth open.


1 Cas. Sir, we cannot stay.


2 Cas. Sir, you must excuse us, we have business.


3 Cas. Here are witnesses enough beside us. Farewell. Exeunt.

Bigot is going out, but is stopped by Sir Geo.
Sir Geo. Nay, Sir, you shall stay, and be witness with my Son to a Bond. -- A
Candle here.

A Candle brought; the Bond sealed, and given to Cautious.
Subt. But pray Sir hear me.


Sir Geo. Good Son, avoid impertinenci^s. What needst thou speak, when the
thing is done?


Subt. But one word.


Sir Geo. There is never a word in the world that can make to thy purpose. -- I
heard enough.


Subt. But, Sir, you are mistaken in me.


Sir Geo. But, Son, you are mistaken in me -- I know how to keep out of your
Clutches.


Subt. But by all that is good and sacred! --


Sir Geo. That is, by just nothing. -- How can thou think any thing good or
sacred, that could design and contrive the Death of a Parent?


Subt. You cannot think so.


Sir Geo. Yes, Son, I can, must, and will think so.


Big. But pray, Sir, consider his motive was Zeal, pure, flaming Zeal. -- I say
you should excuse it.


Cau. Mr. Subtleman, I am sorry for your misfortune, but cannot relieve you.


Sir Geo. I wish you much joy of living by your Wits. Exeunt all but young
Subt. Cau. drops a Paper.


Subt. Hell! Death! and Confusion! -- What a damned Praemunire have these
Rogues, Priests and Casuists brought me into! -- I am betrayed, else it is
impossible my Father should be in Leucasia's Closet. -- But the Traitor I know
not. -- But stay, here is a Paper, I Will read it. Takes up the Paper, and reads.

The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above-bounden Sir George
Subtleman, Knight and Baronet, do pay, or cause to be paid to Robert Cautious,
etc. the Sum of 1000 l. in consideration of the discovery of his Son's Villainy,
etc. Then this Obligation, etc.

So then it is out -- The revengeful, covetous Dog, Cautious, has done me this
Injury, tho contrary to his Oath: But by heavens I shall make him and his Punk
in man's Clothes pay dearly for it. And yet it is no wonder; for

He that a Secret to a Priest does trust,
Or is so foolish as to ho^e him Just.
May he become Partaker of my Fate,
And see his Error when it is too late. Exit.

ACT. IV.
SCEN. I.
Enter Cautious, Jon. Simper crying, and Servant to Leucasia. Cau. to Serve. IF
your Lady be at leisure, present her with this Paper from her Uncle, Sir George
Subtleman; and tell her, I have a farther message by word of mouth.


Serve. My Lady will wait upon you presently. Exit.


Cau. Nay, it is vain to cry, for part we must. -- Young Subtleman knows your
Sex, and will divulge that secret as confidently as Grubstreet-News, and as
speedily as a false Alarm.


Jon. And can you be so cruel as to thrust me from you, who have been so
faithful? Did you not often tell me, That simple Fornication was no Sin, and
sometimes a Duty? Did not you cite many of your most famous Authors, to prove
that it was an Act of Charity, pure and flaming Charity, to relieve the natural
Necessities of a languishing Brother, excluded from the Joys of Matrimony? Did
you not make me believe all this? else I had been pure and innocent. Cries.


Cau. I cannot deny, but that several of our Casuistical Authors are, as I told
you, of that Opinion; but it has since been condemned as a scandalous Truth,
not fit to be divulged, especially in an heretical Country, where the major
part are of another Opinion.


Jon. How often have you called me your Spi^itual Sister, and told me that that
Relation was stronger than a Matrimonial Obligation? How often have you made me
believe that you had a Papal Dispensation to enjoy me with safety for ever? --
And must I now be turned away, withou money to provide the necessaries of
nature?


Cau. Pray talk not of money, you know that I am poor, and have none.


Jon. What have I done to deserve this usage from you? Have I not been silent,
to gratify your cursed Hypocrisy? Have I not quietly laid down two great
Bellies in the Country, without so much as crying out, even in Labor? Did not
I save the lives of both the Babes, because they were like thee, ungrateful
man! when you and the Catholic Midwife would have had them both dispatched?


Cau. To save the credit of an Order, I presume, some such thing might be done;
tho, I confess, it is better to let it alone, if it can be let alone without so
much charge.


Jon. Have not I been as silent as a Turkish Mute, or as Epicaene in the Silent
Woman, lest my Voice should betray my Sex; and what greater torment can a Woman
suffer than silence? tho sometimes your wanton dalliances with other Women
might provoke even a stone to speak; -- especially one that has loved you as I
always did. Cries.


Cau. But, notwithstanding your silence, your Sex is now known to young
Subtleman; and if he be once enraged, as I fear he will be, he will make my
disgrace intolerable: I have already lost 1000 l. would you have me to lose
all?


Jon. Come, if the truth were known, you have little reason to upbraid me with
losing 1000 l. I have saved you more than that: Other men that keep Misses, are
forced to expend the best part of their Estates in Clothes, Pages, Coaches,
Footmen, and a thousand such devices; but you have kept me in the habit of a
poor Serving-man, and bought my Clothes in Long-lane, as you say, to prevent
suspicion, but as I believe, to save charges. If Mr. Subtleman does know my
Sex, it is no fault of mine; he remembers ever since he played at Lancteraloo at
my Lady Fanciful's; for I had a face then might be remembered, but now --


Cau. Ay now, indeed, it is time to repent, we have enjoyed our pleasure a long
time. She is naturally well inclined, this may work on her. Aside.


Jon. Ay it is time to repent; but I can tell you a great many things you ought
to repent of before this. -- How often have you turned away poor honest
Catholics from employment of Trust and Profit, to make room for Atheists and
Heretics, because they had more money and less honesty!


Cau. Pray be less obstreporous, and remember you are in Leucasia's Lodgings.


Jon. How often have you given promise of the same place to ten several
persons, and employed your Interest at Court for none! -- Do you think I have
forgot these things?


Cau. Nay, now you will never have done. I say, Remember again that you are in
the Lady Leucasia's Lodgings.


Jon. Nay, how should I ever have done, when I remember how often you have made
me forswear my self? As in the case of the Gentleman last night, who promised
you 80 Guinea's for a kindness, and you made me swear it was 100.


Cau. And pray what did you lose by that? did not I give you five Guinea's for
your Reward?


Jon. Ay, but since you talk of repenting, why don't you repent of these
things? Come, come, you may be ashamed to use me thus. If Politico deals no
better with his Ladies, ask Mrs. Count.

Enter Betty.
Betty. Sir You're dogged from your Lodgings hither, and the House is beset by
Sir George Subtleman, his Son, Father Big^t Mackdonnel, with Constables and
Watch. -- They have lost a golden Chalice, and young Mr. Subtleman affirms he
saw something very bulky in your man's bosom, and they are resolved to search
him very narrowly: my Lady gives them full leave, without the least resentment,
and they are now upon the stairs.


Cau. Bid 'em come up if they dare.


Betty. I will. Exit.


Cau. Death and Confusion! This is a Plot of young Subtleman's to procure my
disgrace and ruin: I must prevent him.

Simper stands with a Handkerchief before her face. [Kneeling.]

My dearest Betty, by all that is good and sacred;
By our past Loves, and by our future Hopes;
By those two Pledges of our eager Loves,
That lie so round in native Innocence,
Do not betray me to my deadly Foe,
But step into this Closet.
Here Is the Key, I Will lock the door, and stiffly will maintain you're run away.
-- By heavens don't deny me.


Jon. For once I will not, tho you don't deserve that usage from my hands. --
But I am tender. [She goes into the Closet, he locks her in.


Cau. The work is done, it is words must do the ^est; And those shall not be
wanting.

Enter Sir George, young Subtleman, Leucasia, Betty, Bigot, Mackdonnel,
Constable and Watch.
Subt. I can assure you, I saw Father Cautious's Man come from that place, and
something of a large bulk seemed to be in his bosom, which I believe might be
the golden Chalice you have lost. -- Pray search for it there, and for the
other Ornaments you have lost.


Constable. Well, let me alone to search him. -- I Will find it, tho he pull his skin
over it.


Big. O monstrum horrendum! Pray, Genlemen, give me leave a little to expatiare
upon the Subject; and lest I should be tedious to so worthy an Assembly, I will
contract my whole Discourse into these twenty general Heads, with their
respective Branches --


Sir Geo. Good Father Bigot, omit those twenty general Heads, and let the Fact
be proved first, and then you may take time to prove the heinousness of the
Crimes afterward. -- It is uncertain whether Father Cautious has stolen the
things or no. --


Big. It is uncertain! But what if it be proved, first, That I am a Man, and
that Man is a Christian, and that Christian a Catholic, and that Catholic one
of good Education, and that Education in the house of a Priest, and that Priest
an heavenly devout person: I say, To consider that such a Man should be guilty
of such a Crime, it sills my mind with admiration!


Sir Geo. And it sills your mouth with Nonsense, pure, copious Nonsense. If the
Chalice were mine, and as big as a Mountain, I would rather choose voluntarily
to lose it, than to hear a long Oration in dispraise of Thievery. -- As if
words could make it worse than really it is: If this Fellow has stolen the
Chalice, he is a Rogue and a Thief; if not, we are fools to suspect him. -- Now
that is to the purpose.


Subt. We shall soon be resolved. -- If you find none of the Goods in his
Bosom, pray, to be sure, search his Breeches.


Leu. Use all freedom imaginable in my Lodgings, -- I would not have them a
Sanctuary for any sort of Rogues, either Temporal or Spiritual.


Mack. Ay, but if the Villain has melted down the golden Chalice into silver
Spoons and Thimbles, how a Deel shall we know it again?


Constable. O, well enough, there is a Mark upon it.


Mack. Deel tauk me, I never tought of dat; dear is a Mark upon it, and let him
melt it down as soon as he please, we shall know it by de Mark.


Subt. to Betty. Did not you say that Cautious and his Man were in this Room?


Betty. They were here just now; I saw Mr. Cautious walk into the next Room.
Exeunt omnes praeter Sir Geo.


Subt. to Sir Geo. Sir, I have taken this pains to convince you that that
Father Cautious is as base an Hypocrite as ever canted in a Gown; That you
shall see now, that his pretended Man, that lies with him, is a Woman, a
notorious impudent Woman: and why then should you give such credit to so ill a
man, as upon his Testimony to disinherit your only Son?


Sir Geo. My dear Son, thou art full of Impertinencies; for first you should
endeavor, if you would speak to the purpose, to prove him a Liar; and thou,
instead of that, do endeavor very impertinently to prove him an
Whore-master, as if a little prudent Whoring would hinder him from speaking the
Truth. Then, in the second place, I made my Will not so much for his Testimony,
but because I heard thee with mine own ears contriving my death; so that I
being the Evidence, thou must invalidate my Testimony, by proving me a Rogue,
and a Rascal, and a Thief, or thou can not speak to the purpose.


Subt. Sir, I beg nothing of you, but that you would believe me Innocent of
such a Crime, till you have heard my Defense. What I said or did then, was
purely to divert their importunity in soliciting me to turn presently to their
side; and partly to make trial of their honesty, whether they would counsel me
to do so black a de^d. This Father Cautious discovers to you, tho before he had
solemnly swore, That he would not directly or indirectly do me any injury.


Sir Geo. Say thou so, Boy? now thou speakst to the purpose, and I could
heartily wish my self fool enough to believe thee innocent.

Enter Leucasia, Betty, Father Bigot Mackdonnel, Fa. Cautious Constable and
Watch.
Cau. I protest, Gentlemen and Brethren, I know not what you mean; my Man went
from me last night, and I swear by the honor of my Priesthood, that I have not
seen him since.


Betty. And I Will swear by the honor of my Maidenhead, That I saw him walking
with you in this very Room but just now; -- and methoughts too I saw him crying.


Cau. A likely thing indeed, that a Man should cry! -- I tell you again, that I
have not seen my Man since last night. -- Sure they will believe without
searching. Aside.


Betty to Leu. I protest, Madam, I wonder with what confidence he can affirm
this, when I saw his Man walking with him just now.


Cau. Pray consider, who is most fit to be be believed, one of my Sacred
Character, or an ignorant Chambermaid that knows no better?


Leu. Sir, I have considered of it, and think the ignorant Chambermaid ought to
be believed before the learned Priest: Nature teaches Truth, when Learning
improves a man in all the arts of Falsehood. -- Pray let the Room be searched.
They look up and down.


Cau. What horrid Barbarity is this? Am I Person of so little Credit, and with
my own Brethern too? -- If you please, I Will ^epose upon Oath, that I have not
seen my Man since last Night.


Big. The horror of the Sacrilegious Fact, does so stupify all my Senses, that
I cannot give eat to the reasonable Requests of my Reverend Brother. We must
find out the Author of this notorious Impiety, or become Partakers of his Crime.


Subt. I wonder you will not give greater Credit to this Reverend Priest, when
I can give such an eminent Instance of his Truth and Fidelity. He swore to me,
that he would do me no Injury directly or indirectly, and yet he has done it,
and caused me to lose an Estate of 4000 l. per Annum; look there else. --

Throws down the Paper, Cautious reads it.
Leu. A notorious Breach!


Cau. Nay, good Lady, be not too rash in you^ Censures. -- I did not break my
Promise to this Gentleman, as you do vainly imagine, as it will easily appear,
if you consider the Words of the Promise. For, First, I swore I would do him no
Injury, that is no Injustice; [Injuria est quod fit contrajus] no more I have
not. -- I have only caused him to be justly disinherited for contriving the
Death of his Father.


Sir Geo. That Is well, and to the purpose. --


Cau. So much for the thing. -- Now for the Person acting. I, it is a Person in
the Singular Number, as every Boy knows that has learned his Accidence. -- So
that the promise obliges me not to do him an Injury alone in my own Person, but
it does not hinder me from doing it in the Person of his Father.


Big. My Brother distinguishes well. -- It must needs be so. --


Mack. O! by my Shoul, there is abundance of Learning in that little head of
thine.


Cau. Again let us consider the Person suffering him. -- Man is a compound of
Soul and Body. The estate is but an Appendix to the Person, so that the taking
away that, is not in the strictness and propriety of Speech an Injury to the
Man, but sometimes it is for his greater Advantage. --


Leu. A pretty Evasion this. --


Big. It is most profoundly argued. --


Mack. O, by my Shoul! If ish haud not macke play Trowant, ish might have been
as great a Scholar as thish Maun.


Subt. Is this all you have to say sor your self?


Cau. No: I have something to say that is more material in my own Vindication.
-- I promised that I would not do him an Injury, directly or indirectly: No
more I have not, for I have accomplished my Revenge, partly direct, and partly
indirectly, in a middle way between both, and so am no ways guilty of the
breach of Promise. --


Leu. I vow, this is a very pretty way of performing Promises; the wrong way.
-- You argue very well, and teach us never to believe you, because we never
know how to understand you. Constable do your Office, and break open this
Closet-door: I wonder it should be shut, when I left it open.


Cau. That is a rudeness, Lady, that ought not to be permitted in your House.
It must not be done.


Leu. Then I will have it done for that very reason. I love to do things that I
ought not.

They break open the Door, and pull out Simper.
Constable. Look here the Rogue is, this Priest is a confounded Liar.


Mack. O, by my Shoul! Brother you should not make Lie so much. I am sorry for
it.


Big. Indeed, I must needs say, this looks like a Scandal; -- yet I will still
believe that my Brother speaks the truth, tho no Body can perceive it.


Sir Geo. Pshaw, pshaw, a lie is a lie. -- I say, it is the most impudent
notorious lie that ever was told.


Leu. I beg your Pardon Uncle. -- I no more believe this to be the most
impudent, than I believe it to be first. -- O! this indelible Character is an
excellent thing. -- How simple should one of us look, if taken in so notorious
a falsehood: and how well it becomes him. -- Methinl^s he does it with a great
deal of Grace and Ornament.


C^^. Charge me not with a Crime of that h^^^d Nature. I abhor the very name of
^^^^g.


Sir Geo. And least the thing, do thou not? Is not the case plain?


Subt. Leave this Discourse, and search for the Chalice. They offer to search.


Jon. You Will lose your Pains. -- I do confess my self a wretched, miserable
Woman deluded by that Man, and shut up in the Closet by him, to prevent the
discovery of my Sex. Cries.


Leu. Ha, ha, ha; a rich Discovery.


Subt. Come search no further. -- The Chalice is removed by a plot of mine, to
make this discovery. -- Now, if Father Cautious, you have your Revenge, and I
mine, I think we may now be Friends. -- This Gentleman shall be witness to our
new Agreement.


Jon. To Cautious. No, I will find a place to hide my shame; farewell* And if
you hear of me again, 'twill be in Vengeance.

Exit, hanging down her Head.
Constable. Then we are discharged?


Subt. You are. Exeunt Conste and Watch.


Mack. O, by my Shoul, and Shaint Pautrick! If my Brother Cautious was not a
very good Cautholick, whaut a sad Fellow he would be?


Big. Nay, indeed Brother, this seems very scandalous and prejudicial to the
public Good; and if this Auditory would please to give me leave, I would make
it appear to be so in One hundred and ten Particulars. --


Sir Geo. Good Mr. Bigg^t let your Particulars alone. -- A lie is a lie. -- All
the Rhetoric in the World cannot make it a Windmill, or a Hand Granado --


Cau. Gentlemen, I do wonder you should charge me with a Crime of that horrid
Nature. -- I abhor Lying, as much as Covetousness or Murder. I said, indeed,
That I had not seen my Man since last Night, and there is truth you see in
that, for the Person that you took for my Man, confesses her self a Woman.


All. Ha, ha, ha, ha. --


Cau. Then again, I said, That I had not seen my Man since last Night* that is,
I had not seen him with an Intention to tell you of it; so there is no
(...)hood in these words, only I did not exp^^^ my Mind quite so full as I
might have done. --


Mack. Well, this Cautious is an excellent Scholar. I never should have thought
of this. --


Big. Nay, my Brother is right in that. -- His only fault was, that he did not
express his mind fully.


Cau. Then again, -- pray observe the words of my Affirmation. -- I told you,
that I had not seen my Man since last Night, and pray, how should I? Can I make
a Man? Or can a Man be properly said to be mine? A Servant may be mine, but a
Man cannot. And now, pray, reflect how unjustly ye have charged me with the
Crim^ of Lying, and repent of it.


Leu. Nay, indeed, Sir George, you and your Son are apt to be too Censorious: I
warrant you are apt to think, that this Gentleman kept a She-bed-fellow out of
some ill Design, whereas they only aimed at a Spiritual Society, and are as
Innocent as the Family of Love.


Sir Geo. I do indeed believe it.


Subt. And I will swear it, -- provided Mr. Cautious will teach me a little of
his Art.


Cau. Come, ye are profane Persons. -- There is nothing got by such Company. Is
going away.


Mack. Ay, they be very dull to think Father Cautious would mauke lie.


Big. My Zeal will burst forth into some indecent Expressions. -- Let us
withdraw. Exeunt three.

Manent Sir. Geo. Subt. Leu. Betty.
Leu. I perceive, dear Uncle, you have been kind to me in prejudice of your
Son, whom I beg, now, you would please to restore to your Favor.


Sir Geo. Hold thy Tongue my pretty, witty Neice, or I shall suspect that thy
honesty has qut run thy wit I hate a Felo^de se; to speak against your own
I^terest, is very unnat^ral, and for the most part, extremely impertinent.


Subt. I shall not prompt the Lady to it. -- The motion does proceed altogether
from her spontaneous goodness.


Leu. It does, and shall do so: but it must be upon condition that you do not
only forsake that Gang, but revenge the injury received, u^^^ the whole Society.


Sir. Geo. Gramercy, brave Girl; -- now thou speakst to the purpose, and I am
inclined to hear thee.


Subt. Madam, let me know your Commands; and if I don't execute them, let me
borid by, the Priests all day, and the Hag at night, till I look as simply as
Cautious at the discovery of his Punk.


Sir Geo. I faith, Son, thou art in the right way. -- Revenge the ^^jury to
some purpose; -- and i^ ^ill be one step into my favor?


Leu. Look you here are two Letters; one to Mr^^ (...) another to Mr.
Turnabout. -- Follow me, (...) you shall receive further directions.


Subt. With all my heart.


Sir Geo. And mine too. -- Now I hope to see some mischief. Exeunt omnes,

Scene changes to Politico' s Lodgings. Enter Politico and lord Brittan,
talking earnestly.
Pol. I wonder your Lordship should insist so much upon Numbers, as if there
were any strength in divided and unarmed Numbers: can uncemented Sand grow into
a Wall? or would your Lordship fear your Enemy, when you had his Sword in your
own hand?


L. Brit. Your Reverence mistakes me -- I am as great a stranger to fear as
your self; but still I do not love to extinguish all rational apprehensions of
danger: Divided numbers are not of the strength that united are, where the
quantity is equal; but you do not well conclude from thence, That they are of
no strength at all: There are Mountains of divided Sand, that can re^^st the
stroke of a Cannon, and overwhelm the best disciplined Troop in Europe: And tho
I should not fear a single Enemy, if I had his Sword in my hand; yet I should
think my self in an ill condition, if I were assaulted by two or three hundred
naked men of equal strength and courage with my self. -- This is our case; --
We have 200 to one against us, and that seems to me to out-ballance all other
Advantages --


Pol. That is because your Lordship has not considered the Policy of foreign
Courts, as I have (...) What vast numbers do they keep in (...), grievous
insupportable Slavery, by little or no fo^^e at all! --


L. Britt. That is, because the People love to keep themselves so, which our
Countrymen do not: Whether they are born Slaves by some peculiar Influence of
the Heavens, or whether Custom has made that Yoke to be easy, or whether that
servile disposition is derived from Father to Son, by some unperceivable manner
of Tradition; -- the Cause is uncertain, but the Effect is plain. -- But to
think Englishmen to be easily kept in subjection, because foreigners can, is
as good Logic, as to conclude a Lion dares not fight, because a Sheep is a
timorous Creature.


Pol. I perceive your Lordship is not skilled in the Politics; I can give you
several reasons why there is no danger in the dreaded number of the Heretics:
For first, they want an Head; and what, alas! is Body without an Head? There Is
one for you.


L. Britt. Your Argument is Metaphorical, but not conclusive. -- It is true,
these popular Insurrections that are raised by the Power or Interest of one
particular Man, are soon quelled, when the Head is once removed; for the Cause
taken away, the Effect ceases. But where the cause of discontent is general, an
Head is never wanting, for many hands make light work.


Pol. Then again' -- The Heretics want Council and Conduct: Alas! all their
Great Men are bred in the English Court, and know nothing of the French and
Italian Finesses: There are no men in the world, excepting those of my Order,
that understand the true Methods and Principles of Government. Alas! your
English Lords are troubled with scruples of Conscience, and pretend to
tenderness and good nature, and think themselves always obliged to stick to the
immutable Rules of Honor; and talk of Just and Unjust, and I know not what
whimseys: They don't consider, that it is impossible for a Statesman to
accomplish any great Designs, that boggles at any sort of means that are
conducing to his End, tho never so unjust and cruel. --


L. Britt. I wish you do not find those Lords, which you so much despise, to be
Masters of more Policy than is consistent with the good of the Catholic Cause.


Pol. Pshaw! Pshaw! never fear it. -- When all is done, we have an Army to
defend us.


L. Britt. An Army sympathizes with the major part of the Nation out of which
they are taken; and what raises Jealousies in the One, is sure to raise
Discontents in the Other. -- Heaven send we may never stand in need of that.


Pol. Pshaw! pshaw! your Lordship is too timorous.


L. Britt. angry. No man, but what is defended by a Gown, dares tell me so --
Once more, farewell. And when you see all England in a flame, you^ selves
pursued to the waterside, and offering all your Treasure for a Boat; when
Catholics are driven from their Houses, and made the Object of a public
scorn, remember then I had no hand in this.


Pol. And when you see the Triumphs of our Cause, all bending low unto the Sea
of Rome, the Hereti^ks or forced to comply, or roving up and down the world for
Bread, but finding none: when this you live to see, remember well that mine is
the contrivance; it is I proposed the End, and found the Means; shaped the
Tools, and perfected the Work; and mine is the Honor. --


L. Britt. May it be so. -- I leave the Honor and the Danger unto you. --
Farewell, I Have done my best. Exit.


Pol. Well, this Lord is honest, but Master of extreme wrong Notions in Policy,
as if he had been bred under some Calvinistical Pedant, that never read
Machiavel -- But I must now lay aside thoughts of State Affairs, and mind the
grand Concerns of softer Love. Leucasid's eyes have shot a ^re into my breast,
which nothing but her self can extinguish: If I can enjoy her in the pe^^on of
a discarded Officer, I shall look upon it as my greatest ^^iess. -- For as
there is greater art in making a Chain for a Flea than an Elephant, so there is
something more skill in^subduing the heart of a Woman, than in subverting a
Kingdom.

Enter Mrs. Counterseit. O Mrs. Counterfeit, you're welcome, most heartily
welcome. -- What news?


Count. O, the most obliging News in the World. -- Leucas^a is yours, your
Plots take to admiration. -- I vow you don't act fairly, to outwit a Woman in
her own Profession. -- Read this [Gives him a Letter he reads.

The account you give of tha^ Noble Person, and his suffering in so good a
Cause, will not permit me to be cruel -- I honor such (...); (...) and if it
is his desire to (...) k^^wn to me any part of his grievances, he shall find an
ho^^rable and kind reception from

Yours, Leucasia.


Pol. Why, look you, Mrs. C^unterfeit, did not I tell you that nothing could
resist my Policy? Here Is a Lady that hates our Religion, and in particular my
Order and Person: Now who but my self could extract good out of so much evil,
and make her aversion a step to enjoy her?


Count. If you are as quick in Execution, as fine in Projection, that will soon
be done. Or if you should be put to the trouble to ravish, or so, if
opportunity favors, your disguise is your security.


Pol. There thou hitt'st the Nail on the head: my disguise is ready, you shall
go in and see it fitted.


Count. I wait your Commands; but you must go incognito, without any Equipage.
--


Pol. Pray, Mrs. Counterfeit, leave the contriving part to me, I think I am
Master of that.


Count. And you must be sure to aggravate the Ingratitude of Priests and
Jesuits.


Pol. What still moving beyond your station? must the Spring rise higher than
the Fountainhead? have you not learned all this from me? and do you pretend to
teach?


Count. No, indeed, I have not learned all from you; my Mother, and my good
Grandmother, and my Aunt, and my great Aunt, taught me a great deal, and I have
had 50 years experience; so that you might trust a little to my Judgment.


Pol. Then you will pretend to direct me?


Count. No, an't please your Reverence, I will not pretend to that: You do
excel me and all mankind in the mysterious arts of Love; I must most humbly
acknowledge it to be so


Pol. Then follow me; and remember the contriving part is mine; the executive
we must share between us. Exeunt.

Scene changes to Leucasia' s Lodgings. Enter Leucasia and Turnabout.
Leu. You see how far I have condesoended to cure your capricious humor; tho I
must confess your carriage to me, and your hair-brained Jealousy, does deserve
my scorn, or rather is below it. --


Turn. I confess my error, and am ready to redeem your lost favor with my
Sword. What is it you will command?


Leu. A certain pretended Lord is pleased to think me a very fit person to be
his Whore. Now what would you do in vindication of my Honor?


Turn. Oh very little. -- Perhaps I might only cut his Throat, or whip him
through the Lungs, or some such trifle: -- Neither more nor less --


Leu. No, that is too much. -- But I suppose that if he should refuse to draw,
you would grudge him the pains to kick him, or assist my Servants in tossing
him in a Blanket. --


Turn. No, by heavens I would not. Good Madam, tell me, When, where, and how I
shall serve you, you shall see with what zeal I Will do it.


Leu. You must retire immediately into this Closet, and not stir till the
Signal be given. This is the least Penance I can impose for your Jealousy, and
other high misdemeanors; and I suppose herein I am not so rigid as the Fathers.


Turn. Fie! Fie! Good Madam tell me no more of the Fathers, they are mere Babies
and Children: I care no more for the Fathers, than I do for the Indian
Bramines, or Tu^kish Muf^^, unless it be for my own ends; for tho that Beldame
Counterfeit was pleased to give your Ladyship an account that they in^^nded to
fool me, yet I can assure you I find as great encouragement as any New Convert
of 'em all.


Leu. I will tell thy true Character: Thy Love makes thee greedy of Estate and
Honor, and the greediness of Estate and Honor make thee love so much the more
eagerly; now to cure this vicious circulation of humors, I will first make
thee weary of poaching after the Fathers, by rendering thee odious to them; and
then, as for Love, you know the last remedy for that.


Turn. Phu! phu! Politico is so much my Friend, thou can never render me
odious to him.


Leu. Yes, I will, in the space of half an hour.


Turn. It Is not an Age and a half can do it. Will you venture your Maidenhead
upon that Bett?


Leu. Yes, I would, if you had one to stake against it.


Turn. Prithee what do talk of one, I have had an hundred in my time.


Leu. Ay, but they are now all vanished, and become as invisible as your 20
Manors.


Turn. That Is true indeed. But to be serious; if you have a mind to convert me,
you may find a nearer way; it is but taking me to your self for ever, and then
I will soon bid adieu to all the Gang of pedantical Fathers.


Leu. But my resolution is to make thee weary of that Society, without making
use of that dangerous Matrimonial Remedy. And if I do it not, then say my wit
has failed me.


Turn. And if you do redeem me from that Gang without paying your self for my
Ransom, then say that I am not Master of Wit, Resolution, Common Sense, or
Reason.

Enter Betty.
Betty. Madam, here is a Person of Quality at the door in a Coach.


Leu. That Is the man, bid him come up. -- Now, Mr. Turnabout, if you mean ever
to purchase my Love by using him very scurvily, retire into the next Room, and
stir not unless he offer force, or I give the signal.


Turn. Let me alone for that. Goes into the Closet.


Leu. Now this fool Politico will think that I don't know him in his disguise;
but heaven be praised I am ready for his reception.

Enter Politico in a very rich Commander's Habit.
Pol. Madam, I Am come to throw my self at your feet for pardon. -- I presume
Mrs. Counterfeit has acquainted you with my Person and Character.


Leu. My Lord, if your intentions are not criminal, it is superfluous to ask a
Pardon. Besides, the Character I received of your Person, and the account of
your Sufferings in so good a Cause, place you above all formalities of that
nature. I have rather reason to admire at your Lordship's condescension to one
so much your Inferior in Quality and Honor.


Pol. I must confess, none ever served the Protestant Cause with greater Zeal
and Integrity; and this drew upon me the envy of Politico, Bigot, and others,
which occasioned my removal from Court; but still my very Ruins are above the
pity of the very best of them, and it lies in your Ladyships Power to build up
the highest degree of human felicity.


Leu. My Lord, I can never enough reflect upon the baseness and ingratitude of
those Priests toward your Lordship and other worthy Patriots: but I am filled
with horror and amazement, that a Person of your Worth, Courage, Conduct and
Fidelity, should be undermined by such a raskally Crew of fantastical Priests
as Politico, Bigot, Cautious, and Mackdonnel! a Gang of whimsical, nonsensical
Blockheads, that look as odly in the Court, as a Skull in the Presence Chamber;
whose whole skill lies in Books, and that too no farther than Title-pages; and
perhaps, if some special Roguery does require it, they may proceed to the
Index, and so begin that, as they do all other things, at the wrong end. And --


Pol. Nay, good Lady, proceed no farther; I forgive my Enemies; and you know my
business here is Love, and not Revenge. -- Now must I hear my-self railed at,
and say nothing Aside.


Leu. My Lord, I cannot but admire your Generosity in forgiving your Enemies;
but I will take the liberty to tell you, that They, and especially Politico,
are of all things my aversion.


Pol. But yet, I hope, you will grant that Politico is the very best, the top
and flower of them all.


Leu. I vow, my Lord, I am of a quite contrary Opinion; for first, as to his
person --


Pol. Nay, good Lady, let his Person alone, it will never hurt you.


Leu. I will assure you, the remembrance of his Person does hurt me this very
moment, it was such a filthy spectacle, [Spits.] -- His Mien and Air so
affectedly odd and boyish; his Eyes Lustful, and, if I may say it, Goatish; his
Hands clumsie; his Head lumpish; nothing good but his Voice, which did a little
resemble with your Lordships, and make an atonement for his other Enormities.
-- Sure this will sting him. Aside.


Pol. Come, Madam, be not so Satirical upon the famous Politico, tho my Enemy:
the Habit of an Order does oftentimes disfigure a most excellent Shape and
Mien: but be that what it will, you must needs grant Politico to be the
greatest Statesman in the World, and a man of the finest Contrivance in
Europe. -- All his Enemies confess him to be a wise man.


Leu. I know he esteems himself so, but the world has a different Opinion of
him. Would a wise man throw off such a worthy gallant Gentleman as your self,
that are steady by a Principle of Duty, to make room for mercenary Slaves, that
know, no higher Equity than Interest? Would a wise man encourage Lying,
Dissimulation and Hypocrisy in others, when he knows not how soon they may make
use of the same Arts to his own Destruction? Would a wise Man punish or deride
others for their Constancy, Loyalty, and Fidelity, to secure a Government which
needs must perish without them? Do you think, I say, my Lord, all this to be
the part of a wise Man?


Pol. Good Lady talk no more of Politico, my business is Love.


Leu. And how can I more effectually express my Love to your Person and Merits,
than by railing at those Enemies of yours, that have ^ast such a Cloud upon
them? Good, my Lord, join with me in a few innocent Curses against Father
Politico, and all his Gang, that have done you this insupportable Injury. --


Pol. Pray, Madam, excuse me from Cursing; I came hither for the blessing of
your Love, and must my self be cursed without it.


Leu. No excuses, my Lord, it will lessen the Opinion I have of the greatness
of your Spirit. Come, you shall invent some new Curses with me.


Pol. My mind now is so full of Love, that I can invent nothing that has the
least relish of hatred. Dear Madam, excuse me.


Leu. Then, if you will not invent, you shall leave that to me, and only
conclude with an hearty Amen.


Pol. I wonder that your Ladyship will offer to impose upon me the Office of a
Parish-Clerk. How shall I be able to give a tuneable Accent to Amen?


Leu. Your Lordship is modest. -- I know you have an excellent Base, and cannot
choose but do it very well.


Pol. What an unconscionable Woman is this, to expect that I should curse my
self, and my Brethren. Aside.


Leu. I Will show you the way; a little cursing will make you relish the
sweetness of Love the better. -- May they be always contriving, and never bring
any thing to effect. May they employ none but Knaves and Fools, and may those
at last deceive them; may they heap up vast Treasures, and Porters enjoy them;
may they fall into an immoderate love of themselves, and into hatred of all
Mankind besides; and if ever any of them have a Mistress, may she be Beautiful,
Rich, Virtuous, and Heretical, and that will be plague enough. -- Good my Lord
say, Amen.


Pol. Indeed, Madam, I have a Cold, I cannot do it with a Grace.


Leu. It Is no matter for Grace, do but speak it heartily.


Pol. Amen. Very faintly.


Leu. May all their Plots be too improbable to take effect, and not improbable
enough to please as a Fiction in a Romance or Novel. But may they have the
happiness to partake of that vicious Mediocrity, which is good for just
nothing. -- You must say, Amen.


Pol. Amen. Faintly.


Leu. Well, I perceive your superabounding Goodness, does make you pronounce
Amen very faintly. -- I will therefore desist from Cursing; and I have Ten
thousand more to utter, and none of them undeserved.


Pol. A pox of this Amor, I am weary of it. [Aside.] -- Madam, if you would
curse my Enemies, the best way is to make me happy with your Love. -- It will
burst their hearts with envy.


Leu. If I had any happiness to confer, your requestwould be reasonable, but I
fear you are come out of one misfortune, with intention to fall into a greater.
Matrimony, if that be your design, cures no Distempers of the Mind, but by
inflicting greater. It is a corrosive, that may deaden the Flesh in order to
Amputation, but it seldom effects a Cure that is better than the Disease.


Pol. Tho Matrimony cannot, there is something in your Ladyships power that
can. Madam, I am a Soldier, and you know M^n of our Profession fly more
directly to enjoyment than others do, over all those Forms and Obstacles
invented by Fools and Platonic Lovers.


Leu. Then I perceive at length your Lordships meaning; you came hither instead
of telling your Sufferings, with a design to Whore me. -- Pray, my Lord, speak
plainly, did you come hither with a design to Whore me? Aside.


Pol. Madam, you present the most pleasant thing in the World, in the most
hideous Dress. Give it a softer Name, and the business is half done.


Leu. Whilst I thought you Virtuous, and a Sufferer for your Countries Honor,
I must confess. I had a profound respect for your Person; but now --


Pol. Ay, now you may boast, that you have conquered him whom Sovereign Princes
could not.


Leu. When Lust has turned a Man into a Beast, there can be no great triumph in
such a Conquest. -- Mrs. Counterfeit, is as much mistaken in her little
Policies, as Father Politico in his great ones.


Pol. These strugglings of Modesty, choke all true Pleasure in the Birth: It is
more generous to yield without previous Hypocrisy.


Leu. I am not used to Discourses of this nature; adieu. She Is going.


Pol. Nay, Madam, we must not part so. Steps to the Door, and locks it.


Leu. Then you intend Violence.


Pol. Ay, but the most ravishing, -- that ever was experienced by Woman.


Leu. Sure you will not put me to the trouble to call my Servants to my aid.


Pol. It is in vain; they are as secure as your self.


Leu. Sure you are not so much a Villain!


Pol. If I am not, you need not fear me. The next Room, Madam, is a more
pleasant scene for Love.


Leu. Sure Turnabout will not fail me now, -- if he does I Am undone -- (aside
--) She knocks.


Pol. It Is all in vain. He offers to carry her out.

Enter Turnabout.
Turn. What means this noise? Villain unhand the Lady. Vnhands her.


Pol. What, my Rival Turnabout! -- I Am undone. Aside.


Turn. How dare you offer violence to a Lady in her own Lodgings? Exit Leucasia.


Pol. You call that Violence which was only a little innocent freedom.
[Turnabout draws.


Turn. You seem to be a Man of Quality, and a Soldier, you have begun an Injury
like a Villain, and must defend it like a Man, -- Draw.


Pol. What shall I do now? I know no more how to Fight than a Girl of Fifteen,
that is only skilled in the Innocent use of her Nails. Aside.


Turn. Come, Sir, stand not amazed; Draw, or you're a Dead Man.


Pol. I am not afraid to Draw, nor unable to chastise your saucy intrusion --
But I hope you will not force me to that rude^ess in a Ladies Apartment, whose
Honor you pretend to maintain.


Turn. You were not afraid of a greater rudeness than this, and therefore have
no reason to scruple a less: Sir, I say -- Draw.


Pol. All the words in the World shall not make me transgress the Rules of
Decency and Order. --


Turn. Then shall this do it; (kicks him.) Or this, (again.)


Pol. No, Sir, I have more breeding than to incur an absurdity of so high a
nature, -- But you shall repent of this; Politico is my Friend, -- you know his
Power.


Turn. Damn Politico -- Do you wear a Sword, and shelter your self under the
Protection of a whimsical Gownman? -- Draw, or I have another expedient for you.


Pol. If I Draw, I am certainly killed, and Ten thousand of the best Plots in
the World are most certainly spoiled. -- I must owe protection to
Non-resistance, and Passive-obedience. Aside.

I will not Draw -- for I said I would not.


Turn. Then I Will try another experiment on you: I have an Engine shall toss you
higher than a flying Chariot in Bartholomew-Fair. Knocks.

Enter Footman.
Foot. Your pleasure, Sir?


Turn. Four of you bring in a Blanket with all Expedition.


Pol. Well, Politico will revenge this injury.


Turn. I tell thee again, Politico's an Ass and a Fool; I my self have made him
a Fool this two months.

Enter Footmen with a Blanket.
Turn. Bravely done my Lads -- Let Us carry that Rascal into the Hall, and mount
him. They lay Hands on him.


Pol. to Turn. Do you know who I am? Have a care what you do.


Turn. I know thee to be a Coward: I believe thou ar^ a Villain: and I vi^ely
suspect thou have something in thee of the Fool, and that is enough for my
purpose. (To Foot.) Carry him away.


Pol. You will repent of it -- Oh! Murder, Murder* They carry him off by
Force.

Enter Leucasia, Betty, Sir Geo. Bigot, Cautious and Mackdonnel.
Leu. Gentlemen, I sent for you hither, to make known the shame of the famed
Politico, who came hither in disguise to rob me of my Honor; and I hope I have
given you such ocular demonstration, as has left no room for doubt.


Sir Geo. Thou art a brave Girl, I faith, I love revenge and mischief when it
is to the purpose.


Mack. Yesh by my shoul, and I do love mischief wid all my heart, when dear is
no hearme in in it.


Big. It cannot be that Politico should be guilty of such a crime, who has
labored so abundantly in the propagation of the Catholic Cause; It must be
the delusion of some evil spirit, that has put on the shape and habit of
Politico, to bring this disgrace on our Cause and Order: Let me come near him
with my Exorcisms, and I will make him confess as much. --


Leu. If he should confess himself a Devil, he would confess the truth. --


Sir Geo. Superstition is incurable; and blind Zeal does seldom recover its
sight: -- Has not my Niece showed you the Jewels sent by his own Hand?


Cau. A good Man may sometimes be taken in a fault; but to be so very prodigal,
as to give away Jewels of that value, is a wickedness that I think to be
unpardonable. --


Big. Come Brother, let us go and comfort Politico under this disgrace.


Cau. Ay, that is better than to stay here, to become spectators of our own --
Besides I Have Money to receive.


Big. Farewell, and remember none ever provoked our Order unrevenged.


Cau. And don't think the World will believe this scandal; for we will swear it
is false.


Mack. Yesh, it ish falsh, very falsh.


Leu. What is false?


Mack. What is falsh, -- by my shoul I Have forgot vat^ish dat vas falsh; but I Am
sure it vas someting.


Leu. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Cau. Come let us repair to Politico, it is vain to stay here. Exeunt Three
Priests.

Enter Turnabout.
Turn. Now, Madam, I hope my business is quite done, I Have gained my own ends by
Politico, who seems to be all melted into Love with my charming conversation;
and I Have helped your Ladyship in distress, which gives me some pretensions unto
your favor.


Leu. It is natural for Men to err, and I perceive you are not altogether free
from that human frailty; you build much upon your friendship with Politico,
which is now at an end; you must expect nothing from him but Revenge and
Malice; for he is the very person in disguise, whom you have so plentifully
kicked and tossed in a Blanket.


Turn. A Pox on it, it is impossible!


Sir Geo. Good Mr. Turnabout, speak not impertinently, I do know it is so.


Turn. 'Ounds this is a Trick I never thought on.


Leu. Since you doubt, follow me, and I Will soon convince you


Turn. I Will wait on you -- but I am all amazement. Exeunt


Sir Geo. And I will go and try one Plot, as old as I am. Here Jack, Knock^.

Enter Servant.
Serve. Sir?


Sir Geo. Go immediately to Kensington, and turn my Horse loose with Bridle and
Saddle, raise a report that I am missing, and, as you believe, Mu^thered; and
to be sure, you Dog, be secret: Or --


Serve. Lord, Sir, How shall I tell such a Lie! I never told a Lie in my Life,
an't please your Honor.


Sir Geo. You Dog, you can tell nothing else. Do it, or I Will cut your Throat.


Serve. Since your Honor will have it so, I Will try. Exit.


Sir Geo. By this device I hope to understand how far my Son is infected with
Jesuitical Principles -- For if he is far gone, I shall discard him for ever.

Youth quickly learns the Vices of the Town, Swiftly they come and swiftly pass
away; But crimes infused by the more sober Gown, Are much more black, and make
a longer stay.


Exit. ACT V.
The Scene changes to Politico' s Lodgings. Enter Politico, Bigot, Cautious,
Mackdonnel. Pol. ARe ye sure then Leucasia knew me?


Big. She called us to be spectators of your shame.


Pol. Was ever man thus baffled in Amor, by the sole malignity of Fortune? --
for you must needs grant that the Plot was well laid.


Big. Be not dejected, this Blanketting is a lively representation of Great
men's Fortunes, sometimes up and sometimes down; There is never any great
Exaltation, but there is danger of a sudden Depression; this you knew before to
be true by Speculation, and now receive a confirmation from palpable Experience.


Cau. Ay, but to be kicked up and down like a Football, that was rude.


Big. The Poets and Philosophers compare the Life of Man to a Game at Tennis,
The World is the Tennis-court, and men are the Balls which the Fates toss up
and down with Rackets: But great men, like great Footballs, are kicked up and
down with greater violence. The s^ock was rude, but the emb^em is good and
useful.


Pol. Alas, I don't value a little Blanketing, or Kicking; But to have a Plot
disappointed -- that grieves me.


Mack. By my shoul, my dear Joy, de dishappointment ish not so great; for tho
thou did not get into the Lady's Bed, thou did get possession of the
Blanket, and that is something* Ha, ha. --


Pol. And do you think that Turnabout knew me?


Cau. Not then, -- but now I presume he does.


Pol. Then will I be revenged on him.


Big. But how?


Pol. By giving him good words, raising his hopes, making him spend the
remainder of his small fortune in expectation of great things; and then doing
for him just nothing at all. -- And then for Leucasia. --


Big. Ay, prithee what can contrive against that pestilent Heretic.


Pol. I have one of the finest Plots in the World, if thou will but assist me.


Big. To be revenged on Leucasia, is to do good to the public; and I will
refuse no labor to accomplish that.


Pol. Then this it is, -- You hear the Rabble are in some violent commotions
against the Men of our Persuasion and Order?


Cau. So great, that I have hid all my Trunks in your dark Cellar.


Pol. You, Bigot, shall put on a Porters Frock, and excite them to all manner
of Indignities. --


Big. Against whom?


Pol. Against all Romanists, and especially against my self.


Big. And what then?


Pol. Why, I will repair, under pretense of shelter, to Leucasia's Lodgings --
And there will scatter Books and Pictures that are peculiar to our way; then
you shall bring down the Rabble to search for me, precisely at Nine of the
Clock; I will be gone before that time, and so you with your wonted Eloquence,
shall make the whole storm light upon Leucasia.


Big. Brother, you must excuse me, it is not for the good of the Cause.


Pol. Brother, you are mistaken; I can demonstrate it to be the surest and
securest way to promote it.


Big. You are the Oracle of Policy, I will go about it presently: But let your
Servant help me to a disguise.


Pol. It Is ready for you.


Big. Adieu. Exiturus Manet.

Enter Sir George Subtleman in the Habit of an Hermit, with a Beard down to his
Waste, followed by an Indian Boy.
Mack. Hey day! By my shoul here ish Shaint Pautrick come to she us.


Sir Geo. Salvete fratres venerandi, -- Pray which of you bears the venerable
name of Politico?


Big. Tu quoque salvus sis venerande Pater, This is the Gentleman.


Sir Geo, Is this the famous Politico, whose Fame is spread through all the
habitable part of the World! -- Is this the Wise, the Learned, the Divine
Politico!


Pol. I am that Politico of whom the World is pleased undeservedly to speak
very great things, and far above my merits. A little feigned modesty does well.
Aside.


Sir Geo. Then blessed are these eyes that see the Man. And blessed these ears of
mine that hear him speak. And blessed these Legs and Feet that brought me hither.
-- My Vow is now performed, I Will shave my Beard, and live at rest: But first, I
must have leave to kiss the Hem of your Garment. Kneeling:


Pol. By no means -- That Is too much!


Sir Geo. Hinder me not -- (Kisses his Coat.) Bless me, what Virtue flows into
my Body and mind from hence! Well, now I am happy. Weeps for joy.


Cau. This old fellow is so very condescending, that I fear he comes a begging.


Pol. Pray reverend Father tell us the reason of your transport, and whence you
come.


Sir Geo. These Fourscore years America has been my constant place of Prayers
and Residence; And had been so till now, but that the fame of your great deeds
has drawn me from my so far distant Cell, to see a person that the World adores.


Pol. I perceive by this, that I am very famous in America.


Cau. If you come from America, Father, I presume you bring good store of Gold.


Sir Geo. Gold I despise; I came to learn and see the Wisdom of this Man.


Pol. But how came you to hear so much of my fame in America?


Sir Geo. How should I hear that the Sun shines, or that the Stars bedeck the
Canopy of Heaven? -- You are known as much as they, and equally admired.


Pol. That Is much at so great a distance! --


Sir Geo. What is more swift than Fame? There Is not a Nurse, but prays her
tender offspring may attain the Wisdom of Politico -- Not a Father that gives
his blessing, but uses this, Love -- May thine be great as Politico's.


Pol. It Is wondrous strange!


Sir Geo. They build Churches to your Name, and have an Holyday, that they
honor your Wisdom with, and is called, O Sapientia.


Pol. All this may be true; But yet to prevent all scruples, I desire you to
show some Letters Testimonial from the Provincial of our Order there, or other
persons.


Sir Geo. Am I suspected then?


Big. Be not angry, Reverend Sir, you are not suspected; but his Reverence must
keep close to his Rule, not to admit Strangers without Letters Testimonial.


Sir Geo. How should I have Letters Testimonial, that have lived in an
uninhabitable Island near the Southern Pole, an Hermetical Life these sixty
years.


Pol. But then how did you hear of my fame? There I nicked the Old Gentleman.
Aside.


Sir Geo. We Hermits know all that is done, by Revelation, as well as if we saw
it with our eyes; How else could we endure so many years of tedious solitude.


Big. Nay, Brother, it is certain he might know it by Revelation.


Pol. Not improbable, being so good a Man.


Sir Geo. I have not seen the face of Man or Beast these Fourscore years: --
Yet I can tell some secrets of your Life, -- [Whispers Pol. Is not that true?


Pol. Most certainly true: -- Thou art a Divine Person.


Mack. And when you lived alone so long in America, Good my Dear Joy, tell me
what Company did you use to keep?


Sir Geo. My Dog my Cat, and sometimes for diversions sake, a Monkey.


Mack. And did not you go sometimes to smoke a Pipe at your Neighbors?


Sir Geo. How could I, when I had none there?


Mack. By my shoul, my Dear Joy, I did quite make forget that.


Pol. How long is it since you took this Vow to Visit me?


Sir Geo. About Fifty years.


Pol. That is strange, I am but 40 years old.


Sir Geo. A Pox on his gravity, it made me mistake his Age. (To Pol) O Sir, I
know how Great you would be, long before your Conception.


Big. By special Revelation?


Sir Geo. Yes, by special Revelation.


Cau. I Will be Hang'th i^ this Fellow does not come to Beg, to Cheat, or Steal.
Aside.


Pol. Well, it is joyful news to me, that my poor endeavors do meet with that
encouragement in the remoter parts of the World: for let me die, if some are
not so brutish here, as to censure me for an Hairbrain'd, Imprudent Statesman.
--


Sir Geo. They are more stupid than the meanest Animals in our Parts; for the
very Parrots are taught to say, Wise Pol, Prudent Pol, A Cup of Sack for Pol.


Pol. It is the nature of the English to despise all Political Wisdom, because
it is a Foreign Commodity: But I perceive the Americans have better Judgment.


Sir Geo. Oh! abundantly.


Pol. Have you other business?


Sir Geo. What greater business than to see your Wisdom?


Pol. Since that is your end, I Will make you sensible Fame's no Liar.


Sir Geo. Yes, I have one request more, which I hope to obtain by the
intercession of these worthy Gentlemen.


Big. Give it a Name, and you shall see our readiness.


Sir Geo. The Inhabitants of those Parts, as I partly understand it by
Revelation, and partly was told in the Ship, are troubled with a Giddiness in
the Head, and other Distempers of the Brain, from which they think they can
never be delivered, but by the Application of something taken from your body;
which I therefore humbly beg you would bestow upon me, for it will be extremely
reverenced in those Parts.


Big. A most Pious request; I^ must not be denied.


Cau. aside to Bigot, I told you this Fellow came to beg.


Pol. What is it they would have?


Sir Geo. A Glove, a Nightcap, or a pair of Shoes.


Pol. My Man shall deliver you the best pair I have.


Sir Geo. No: I had rather have a pair your Reverence had worn longest; there
is likely to be most Virtue in them.


Pol. I don't believe it can do them any good; but yet the Vulgar are to be
indulged and gratified in such designs, right or wrong.

Aside. You shall have what ever you will of that nature.


Sir Geo. Then be pleased to Honor your Humble Servant with an old
Handkerchief; for the people of those parts have a great Veneration for all
Effluviums of your Brain.


Mack. By my shoul, my Dear Joy, I have two or three pair of old Shoes, if
they will do thy Countrymen any good, they shall have them with all my heart.


Pol. But first let us know your Name?


Sir Geo. I was born in England of the Family of the Subtlemans; but when I
took upon me the Hermetical Life, I changed my Name to Sancto Hermolto de
Fulgoso, alias, The Simple Hermit.


Big. Why the Simple Hermit?


Sir Geo. I was proud of that Name, because it showed my Humility.


Pol. Then you were proud of being humble.


Sir Geo. Yes, I was very proud of being so very humble. --


Pol. Mr. Bigot, you know your business, I will give Orders for the
entertainment of this Hermit, and then repair to Leucasia's Lodgings.


Big. I know it, and will execute your Orders with all imaginable diligence and
fidelity. Exeunt.


Enter Leucasia and Betty. Leu. What do thou say, Is Sir George Murdered.


Betty. So it is conjectured; and his Man does confidently reports it.


Leu. It cannot be, -- they dare not be such Villains.


Betty. It seems they dare; the thing is done, and thought to be contrived by
Father Politico.


Leu. A Man might as well expect to see a Mine above Ground, as a deep Plot
come from the shallow Head of Politico; If he is Author of this barbarous
Murder, I dare pawn my reputation, I discover it in less than half an hours
Conversation.


Betty. But you hazard your person, in trusting your self in the House with one
who would have used you so ill.


Leu. I hope to find an opportunity to use him worse: Do you observe your cue,
and leave the rest to me.

(They are going out, but met by Turnabout.)


Turn I'gad Madam, you are very happily met; Did you appoint me this place, or
did I appoint you?


Leu. If it had been by your appointment, I should not have been here; but if
it had been by mine, it had been likely to succeed better: If you fancy any
happiness to your self in this Meeting, it must be ascribed to chance, and not
to conduct.


Turn. I am like a good Gamester that throw'd well so often, that the ignorant
think he has a great deal of good luck, when it really is a great deal of good
skill. I am verily persuaded that either you or I did contrive this, tho I
don't know when or where.


Leu. I have one reason to make me think it is yours, because it is to no
purpose.


Turn. If it is to no purpose, it is you, Lady, that make it so: I am ready on
my part to make it effectual to all intents and purposes whatever.


Leu. If I make it so, I will withdraw, and leave you to your self.


Turn. If you withdraw, you spoil all, I can do nothing without your assistance.


Leu. Suppose I should give you my assistance, what then?


Turn. Then I would renounce the Devil and all his works, send for a Parson,
and Marry you immediately.


Leu. That is as much as to say, That if the work were done to your hands, you
would do it with a great deal of ease; -- But I am not for that lazy way, --
you must give me some proof of your diligence


Turn. Diligence before Matrimony, is like a rich Feast before an Appetite, it
may be good, but not seasonable: ^o weary me out with Diligence now, is like
riding an Horse to death before he begins his Journey.


Leu. And how should I know that an Horse can perform his Journey, unless I try
him first?


Turn. Yes, Madam, you may try me first if you please.


Leu. I have tried you, and find you like the rest of your Sex, great in
promises, and little in performance: Did not you promise to complete a revenge
upon Politico?


Turn. Look you, Madam, I love mischief, but I hate to do it gratis; upon
assurance of your love, I will not only sacrifice that ^alf to your incensed
Anger; but Mackdonnel himself, with an whole Hecatomb of Irish bulls and
Blunders.


Leu. I came hither to learn some intelligence of Sir Geoorge Subtleman's
Death; Will you perform that Office for me, and discover the Author of that
Villainy?


Turn. Hang Villainy, Death and Murder, It is your Eyes that have Murth^red me,
and I am glad that I have the opportunity to discover that: What do I care for
the death of an Old Man, that made no conscience of living Eighty years?
propound any other task, and I Will perform it, though difficult enough to puzzle
the Devil.


Leu. Then bring me a Writing subscribed with Politico's own hand, wherein he
shall acknowledge himself to be no Politician, but a Pedant, a Sot, and an Ass;
and in requital, you shall have of me whatever you will please to ask.


Turn. How! make Politico confess that!


Leu. Yes, make Politico confess that, or never see my face more. I find
Politico is lazy. -- I Will to my Coach. Is going.


Turn. Nay, Madam, now you cannot stir from this house; it is beset by an
unruly Rabble; you must endure the fortune of the Siege.


Leu. Heavens defend us! what shall I do?


Turn. I Will conduct you to a private Apartment, where you may remain without
discovery; if danger comes near you, I will lose my Life in your Defense. --
Remain there, and I will bring a Subscription from Politico.


Leu. There is nothing I expect less, or desire more, -- Do that, and be as
happy as I can make you.


Turn. A happy Match! I told you our meeting would be to the purpose. Exeunt.

Enter Politico and Manual.
Pol. 'Sdeath, the Rabble here already! I bid Bigot not bring them hither this
halfhour.


Man. They are now unruly, Bigot can perfuade them to nothing; they threaten to
burn your House down.


Pol. Then I cannot go to Leucasia.


Man. Not without danger of your Life.


Pol. Why, then my whole Plot is spoiled -- To see the Malignity of Fortune!
Where is Mr. Turnabout and Subtleman?


Man. They are both in the House.


Pol. That Is well -- Engage Mr Turnabout as far as you can in the danger, and
leave him in it; Let Mackdonnel command the Servants, and make a vigorous
defense, he is apprehensive of few things, perhaps he will not be apprehensive
of danger. Prepare the Dark Vault for my reception, where, I think it is
impossible for the many-headed Beast, with all its eyes, to find me. -- Send
the old Hermit to me; but let him know nothing of this disappointment, it will
lessen my reputation extremely with the Americans. -- If the Rabble break in,
let them take Father Cautious's Trunk for a Prey, and so I may save my own;
which is good modern, Policy.


Man. I shall punctually observe your Orders. Exit.


Pol. I am not a little fearful of this danger; but Sancto Hermoldo de Fulgoso
must not perceive it.

Enter the Hermit.
Pol. Reverend Father, how fare you? Have you read over the Notes and
Observations?


Sir Geo. Yes, I have read them.


Pol. And do they please you?


Sir Geo. I wonder your Reverence will condescend to ask that question. -- Am I
a competent Judge of those Divine Writings?


Pol. But is not the Contrivance wonderful?


Sir Geo. Beyond expression or imitation. When I come to tell these things to
the Americans, they will think I am a Liar.


Pol. I will assure you, I have thought upon a Thousand things more improbable.


Sir Geo. If your Reverence did not affirm it, I could never believe it.


Pol. Why look you, Sir, my constant method is to compass my ends by such means
as seem most contrary.


Sir Geo. So I perceive, with great admiration.


Pol. To that purpose, I have sent one to excite the Rabble to Insurrection and
Sedition against us, on purpose to further our Cause.


Sir Geo. But how can that be?


Pol. Why thus: In the first place, the English Heretics stand much in
vindication of their own Innocence: but by this means we shall have plenty of
Accusations against them.


Sir Geo. Is that all?


Pol. No; by these means we shall rende^ their Subjection more intolerable: for
the oftener any Body of Men is subdued, so much heavier is the Yoke the
Conqueror impo^ses. -- There Is another. --


Sir Geo. Bless me, sure there can be no more.


Pol. I perceive you want the Politicians Perspective. For in the third place,
we shall have the pleasure to see the Heretics make wry Faces under the
Whipping-posts and Gallows, which to me is as Comical a Sigth, as the
Posture-master, and all his Motions.


Sir Geo. Oh! wonderful! you must give me leave to write this down. Pulls out a
Book, and writes.

Enter Young Subtleman.
Subt. Well, the business is done.


Pol. What business?


Subt. My Father is dispatched.


Pol. Phy! never talk of that.


Subt. It is certainly true.


Pol. Where Is the Estate?


Subt. Secure to my self; the Will made to Leucasia is lost.


Pol. Then you will give it to the Church.


Subt. Why so?


Pol. Because we have done it for you.


Subt. Have you done it then?


Pol. I will not answer directly, but you know what the Casuists said.


Subt. But I would know how, and where you did it.


Pol. Those are Secrets, it is enough that it is done.


Subt. I dare say no more about it; that Old Gentleman will over-hear us.


Pol. He may without danger; he is our dearest Friend and Confident, come from
America to see me.


Subt. Then I may discourse the business before him.


Pol. By all means; I would not for 1000 l. that he should be ignorant of our
Success. [To Sir Geo.] Look you here, Father, is new matters of wonder. A young
Gentlemen was troubled with an Old Peevish Heretical Father, that kept him from
a good Estate, and would not suffer him to turn Catholic; but we have
dispatched him for his Pains, without more noise and trouble.


Sir Geo. Most excellently done.


Subt. I must confess my self obliged to this Gentleman for that kindness. But,
pray let me know by what means you did it?


Pol. Trouble not your head with that; is not the work done?


Subt. Yes, to my great Satisfaction; but still I would know to whom I am most
obliged.


Pol. Is any thing of moment done without me? -- I must take the honor of it
upon my self, tho I know nothing of it. Aside.


Subt. I believe not, but still it is done with that dexterity, that methinks I
would fain learn it.


Pol. That is an height that every Capacity cannot reach.


Sir Geo. And do not you find your heart leap for Joy? Are not you a little
transported now the work is done?


Subt. O! beyond measure! It Is the finest thing in the World to jump into an
Estate, without expecting tho tedious Course of Nature, that seldom gives us
variety of Food, before she has palled the Appetite.


Sir Geo. Well, I perceive now thou art a Villain. Aside.


Pol. But you must remember half that Estate is due to the Church.


Subt. It is all at your Service, if you will but tell me how it was done.


Pol. I must not discover that; -- but if you will follow me in, I will show
you a Scheme how something may be done that is like it. -- Adieu. Exit.


Subt. There is nothing I desire more.


Sir Geo. Well, I am now satisfied, that my Son is a Rogue and Villain.
[aside.] --

[To his Son.] Meet me in the great Hall, a quarter of an hour hence, and I
will discover all.


Subt. Was you then an Actor in it.


Sir. Geo. Yes, a principal one. -- Do not fail.


Subt. By no means. Exit Sir Geo. Subtleman.


Subt. Solus. -- So, now my business is done: I will get a Warrant and Indict
them all of Wilful Murder, spend the Estate merrily, and leave the Fathers in
the lurch to be hanged and damned for me. Exit.

The Scene changes to a great Hall, where Mack. Turn. Man. Cautions, are
discovered sitting round a Table, on which are spread Guns, and Arms of all
sorts.
Turn. Look ye Gentlemen, the business about which we meet, and are to consult
about, is this, whether we are able to resist the Violence of the Rabble; or
whether it be best to come to an honorable Composition?


Cau. I am for Composition, if it can be done without Charges.


Mack. And I by my Shoul, I am for Fighting, if it can be done without danger.


Man. My Master commits his safety to your care. As you discharge that trust,
you may expect his favor.


Turn. If you think of Fighting, we must know our number of Arms, Men, and
Provision.


Man. As for Provisions, we have good store of Alo, Beer, French Wine, Brandy,
and Usquebaugh.


Turn. All this is good; and what Servants?


Mack. We have nine Irish Footmen; but those, my dear Joy, are all run away.


Man. And three French Valets; but one has not combed his Wig; another has not
washed his Face; and a third is puzzled to set his Crevat-string; so that they
cannot be in a Posture of Defense this hour.


Turn. And is that all?


Man. No, we have two High-^^^man Porters, but they have drunk so much to raise
their Courage, that they have thrown their bulky Bodies, and lie wallowing in
the Cellar. We had too an English Groom and Skullion, but they prove
perfidious, and are gone over to the Enemy.


Cau. And where is my man Jonathan?


Man. At the head of the Rabble, exciting them to all manner of Indignities.


Cau. O! miserable Wretch! I am undone then for ever.


Turn. Well, it is no matter for great numbers of Men, what Arms have you? The
Rabble are like Jack-Daws, they make an hideous noise when they spy Carrion,
but will fly at the smell of a little Gunpowder.


Mack. O! by my Shoul! Ish have the very best Guns in the World, b^t I have
forgot to provide one thing.


Turn. Pray, what is that?


Mack. A very small thing, it is not worth mentioning.


Turn. Pray, let us hear it.


Mack. By my Shoul, I have forgot to provide a little Gunpowder.


Turn. Nay, then we must yield. My Opinion, in short, is, that the Place is not
Tenable, we must Surrender upon Discretion.


Man. And leave my Master to have his Brains knocked out.


Turn. Perhaps not. -- Go you, and convey him to his dark Vault; then let every
Man hide himself as conveniently as he can, and leave me, and Mrs. Subtleman,
to manage their F^^^y. The rage of the People is l^ke the current of a River;
let it pass, and it glides away without damage; but stop it, and it overflows
all. -- What say you, Gentlemen, are you agreed?


Cau. I cannot agree, it is the way to lose my Trunk.


Man. We must not all perish for your Trunk.


Cau. Then I will get into one of my empty Chests, and dye, or perish with them


Mack. And ish will creep into an Hogshead, and dye, or perish with it.


Turn. That will be the first thing they will search for.


Mack. Well, I will get under the Bed, and lie in Ambush.


Man. be quick in Execution: I Will go to my Master. Exit.


Mack. Come, Brother Cautious, let us live. Exeunt two.

Enter Subtleman.
Subt. Why, how now Jack, what do thou do alone in the midst of this
Confusion?


Turn. Faith Tom, I am contriving a little Mischief against Father Politico,
and his Gang, and stand in need of thy assistance.


Subt. Thou shall have it with all my heart.


Turn. It is no time for words, follow me to the Street-door, and you shall see
it completed.


Subt. Agreed, Love and Revenge move swiftly to their end.

Enter Manual and Politico.
Pol. Do thou suspect, then, Turnabout's Fidelity.


Man. Yes, because he was so ready to Surrender.


Pol. Ay, but you suspect him against the Rules of Policy. For Turnabout has
dependencies upon me, Expectancies from me; and it is a general Rule, that
scarce one Man is true to another, yet every Man is true to his own Interest.
-- Besides, he has lately disobliged me, therefore will endeavor to regain my
favor.


Man. But what does your Reverence think of Mr. Subtleman?


Pol. I think it is impossible that he should deceive us, wherefore leave them
to manage all. Let Sancto Hermolto de Fulgoso be put into the securest place of
all the House; if he receive any hurt, 'twill lessen my Reputation in America;
let Turnabout and Subtleman keep the Key of the Vault, and none have admittance
to me but them; secure all my Political Notes and Observations, tho the Vulgar
may not perceive they are taken from Play-books; remove H^bbs and Machiavel out
of my Study, they are so thumb'd, it will be a shame to see them; hide the
Pictures of those pretty Ladies Mrs. Counterfeit sent me: The Rabble will
mistake them for Saints, and burn them: As for the Religious Pictures, it is
good to leave them to divert the sway of the Mobile from things of greater
Value.


Man. I shall observe it.


Pol. Turnabout has lately disobliged me, 'tho against his will; and if thou
could contrive it so, as to excite the Rabble to kick, beat, or toss him in a
Blanket, I should applaud and reward the Action.


Man. If I durst appear, I could quickly do it.

Turnabout crosses the Stage without Hat, Crevat, or Sword.
Pol. Mr. Turnabout, your most Faithful, Humble, and Obedient Servant. -- I see
you are taking as much pains for my Preservation, as I take for your
Advancement.


Turn. I have no reason to doubt it.


Pol. But why in this disguise?


Turn. He that will deal with the Rabble, must appear a little like them. --
Good Sir, retire with all speed. -- I am just going to let them in, and cannot
stay to give you a particular Account. Exit in haste.


Pol. Well, thou art a very fool, and so farewell. Exeunt.

Enter Turnabout and John Simper, heading the Rabble.
Turn. You see Gentlemen, ye are admitted without Resistance. -- Pray, what is
your business?


Jon. We came to search for Politico.


Turn. I am sorry he is fled; I got into the House before you on purpose to
surprise him, but he and all his Family are vanished. -- The Lord. --


1 Fellow. Nay, it is probable he did deal with the Devil.


Jon. We came likewise to search for Protestant Bridles, Popish Knives and
Trinkets. Bear back there, and let four only Enter. Thrust 'em back.


Turn. The Bridles are in the Stable, the Knives in the Kitchen, and the
Trinkets are Relics, and packed up in three or four great Trunks, and thrust
into a Vault in the Cellar.


Jon. Let two go and fetch them [Exeunt two Porters to fetch them.] -- The
Treasure is in the two little Boxes, send them to Wapping, and bring up the
other. -- Pray Gentlemen, let us proceed with Moderation, no Filching,
Stealing, Swearing, or Fighting; let us destroy nothing but Popish Trinkets.


1 Fell. Our Captain speaks very discreetly, and we will obey him.


2 Fell. Honorable Captain, there is a Controversy in the Cellar, whether
Clarret or White wine are not Popish Goods, and ought to be destroyed?


Jon. No question of it. You know the Hugonots are all forbid it in France.


1 Fell. I am glad to hear it.


Jon. Clear the House of all Mass-books, and Pictures of Saints.


2 Fell. That Is quickly done, we have burnt St. Herculus already.


Jon. Make diligent search for Politico, or any of his Gang.

Enter two, dragging in Mackdonnel.
1 Fell. Dog, Rogue, creep under the Bed! thou art an Irish Papish, and we will
kill thee.


Mack. By my Shoul, my dear Joy, I am no Irish man, ish was born at Cork.


2 Fell. That Cork shant stop our Mouth. -- Thou art an Irishman, and we will
knock thy Brains out.


3 Fell. If thou wast born at Cork, thou must needs be light of Foot, and for
the Jests sake, I will throw thee out at the Window.

Takes him in's Arms.
1 Fell. Nay, if he was born at Cork, he must needs Swim; we will tie a Stone
about's Neck, and throw him into the River, and that is a better Jest. [Snatches
him away.


Mack. Nay, good my dear Joys, do not tie a Stone about my Neck. -- I am very
tender of my Head, and shall catch Cold immediately.


2 Fell. I tell thee, mine is the best Jest.


1 Fell. I say mine is. [They pull Mackdonnel about, and at last fall a
Fighting.


3 Fell. I say mine is.


Mack. Nay, when the Heretics do Fight amongst themselves, the good Catholic
always make their escape. Exit running.


Jon. Pray Gentlemen leave Fighting, and mind your business. Look, here is an
whole Trunk of Popish Trinkets. -- Enter Porters, and set down the Trunk --
Break it open, it belongs to Father Cautious [They break it open.] so in the
first place here is an old pair of Breeches: -- See with what care they are
preserved, tho there be a thousand Holes in them. -- These did belong to
Mathusalem.


1 Fell. If they did, they shall be burnt for Popish.


Jon. Then here are six Shirts.


2 Fell. They are not Shirts, but Surplices. -- They must be burnt too.


1 Fell. But what is this wrapped up in a P^per.


Jon. Hang me, if this covetous Dog, Cautious, is not transporting the ^arcass
of a Goose to France.


2 Fell. Pray, Noble Captain, what is it?


(...) It is the Body of that famous Constantinopolitan Cock, that was raised
from the dead.


1 Fell. Then it was a Pop^sh Cock, and we will burn it.

Enter Turnabout.
Turn. Gentlemen, I desire you to consult your own safety; The Soldiers are
marching down with Powder and Ball: -- You have seen all in the House you can.


Jon. What say ye, shall we march away?


Rabble, Away, away, away; burn em, burn 'em, away, away. --

Exeunt, carrying with them Father Cautious' s Trunk.
Turn. So, it is well, they are gone, -- Mr. Subtleman come out.

Enter Subtleman. Come, Jack, the Coast is clear; The Rabble are hastening away
with all expedition; and all Politico's Servants lie secure in holes, from
whence they dare not stir till I call 'em.


Subt. Then now is the time to work Politico to your end -- Have you placed
Leucasia's Footmen in a Room next to Politico's.


Turn. Yes, I have given good store of Claret to carrouse; I taught them a Song
that will frighten Politico out of the Vault.


Subt. Then let us make haste and free Leucasia from all apprehension of
danger; She is melancholy in the little Parlour: Besides, I have some business
with Mrs. Betty.


Turn. As quick as thou would have it -- My Love moves so fast, I fancy it
near the center. Exeunt.

The Seen Draws, and discovers Politico lying on a Couch, in a Dark Vault in a
Melancholy Posture.


Pol. Well, this last Plot of raising the Rabble, is likely to prove dangerous,
though it wants nothing but success to render it a Masterpiece for the best
Politician in Europe. [A noise of Singing and Huzzaing behind the Scenes.

But what noise is this! Of My Conscience the Rabble are got into the next Room,
I shall be torn in pieces before succors can come.


A Song behind the Scenes, supposed to be Sung by the Rabble.
COme Brother let us Drink, what ever you think,
Politico's Noddle is empty:
We'll knock out his Brains; in the Skull that remains
We'll drink Sack and Claret in plenty.
His Flesh we will eat, it is excellent Meat,
His Blood shall serve us for Drinking;
His Bones we will pair, till they are so bare,
There shall be no danger of Stinking.
Pol. Bloody Rogues! Villians! they make me tremble, but I shall shortly have
the pleasure to see them all hanged.


Enter Turnabout. Turn. Sir.


Pol. Who Is there?


Turn. It Is I. --


Pol. You are welcome, but speak softly; what News?


Turn. All Is lost.


Pol. It is not. -- I have prudence enough left to recover all.


Turn. I mean all but your Reverence's Prudence.


Pol. But, prithee, what is the matter? -- Speak softly.


Turn. Captain Tom is fully resolved.


Pol. To do what?


Turn. To shut up the Doors, and burn the House down.


Pol. Does he know that I am in it?


Turn. As well as I do.


Pol. Who betrayed me?


Turn. It Is uncertain; he has the best Intelligence in Europe; nothing that is
done can escape his knowl^dg.


Pol. I thought he had been an Ignorant Mechanical Fellow.


Turn. So the World thinks him; but it is certain, (excepting your self) he is
the greatest Statesman in Europe.


Pol. What then would you have me do?


Turn. Resolve to perish nobly in the Flames; your Fame will shine the brighter.


Pol. Burning is no fit Death for a Statesman, they should dye by Poison, or
the Ax, or the Halter. Burning puts me in mind of a (...) Heretic.


Turn. There is no Ax to be got, but if your Reverence is in very urgent
necessity, I have a small quantity of Arsenick in one Pocket, and an Halter in
the other.


Pol. But why so desperate Mr. Turnabout? Can you bring him to no Conditions?


Turn. None but what are worse than Death. You can never endure to hear them.


Pol. I perceive you don't understand the true Rules of Policy. Let the
Conditions be never so bad, we will hearken to them, give Hopes Accommodation,
and interpose Delays till Succor come, and he is taken napping.


Turn. Alas, Sir, that is too vulgar a Policy to impose upon a Man of his
understanding. He will allow you a quarter of an hours time for Deliberation.


Pol. Then, pray, let me hear his Conditions.


Turn. First, he will have an Instrument under your Hand and Seal, wherein you
must Renounce and Disclaim all pretenses to the Name of a Politician, and
acknowledge your self to be a Pedant, an Ass, and a Fool.


Pol. Renounce all Pretenses to the Name of Politician, etc. A pretty humor
this, I will sooner dye than do it.


Turn. I will go and tell him so. [Is going.


Pol. No, stay, Self-preservation is a Fundamental Law of Nature. I will submit
to it; but why should he impose such an unreasonable Task upon me?


Turn. He is a Rival of your Fame, and envious of your Glory, which he would
fain sully, by rendering you Ridiculous in all the Courts in Christendom.


Pol. I believe so, -- and therefore I will sooner dye than lose my Honor. --
Bid him fire the House.


Turn. It shall be done in a moment. Is going.


Pol. But stay, [pauses] necessity has no Law; I must submit, tho I had rather
lose ten of my Toes, and six of my Fingers. But what is his two Articles.


Turn. It is of near Kin to the other -- You must solemnly Promise and Swear,
never to intermeddle with Matters of State, or Haunt the Courts of Princes, or
belie the Favors of Great Men, but spend the remainder of your time in Study
and Devotion.


Pol. It is an impossible Condition, I can never perform it.


Turn. Why so?


Pol. Because it is as natural to me to intermeddle with Affairs of State, as
it is to a Bird to fly, or a Fish to swim. And how should I give up my self to
the Study of Books, or Devotion, who have been disused from both these twenty
years.


Turn. But I say it is not impossible.


Pol. But I say it is: -- Let him burn the House.


Turn. I say it is not; for tho it be impossible to perform, yet it is not
impossible to promise.


Pol. Ay, there you distinguish rightly. It is not impossible for me to promise
it.


Turn. Then I shall tell him that you consent to his Conditions of Peace.


Pol. Yes, do; let him insult at present. I shall soon overreach his Policy,
and bring him to the Gallows, and then I will so disappoint him of his Fame,
that I will not so much as suffer a Ballad to be made in his Commendation.


Turn. That will vex him extremely. -- I Will return presently with a Copy of the
Agreement.


Pol. I Will attend you, but make haste.


Turn. Never fear it. Exit.


Pol. This Turnabout is a very Goose. -- I hate him mortally, and yet he thinks
me his greatest Friend.

Enter Turnabout with four of Leucasia's Footmen.
Turn. Here, you Rogues, lies Politico, fright him to some purpose, but offer
no Violence to his Person. Aside to the Footmen.


1 Foot. Let us alone for that.


2 Foot. Zooks, Jack, I Will be hanged if Politico is not hid in this dark
Cellar. Let Us fetch a Light.


3 Foot. Damn a Light, we will grope him out with our Hands.


Pol. Now Heavens desend me, Turnabout has lest the Door open and I shall fall
into the Hands of the Rabble.


4 Foot. Groping is the best way, but have got a Knife ready?


2 Foot. For what?


4 Foot. To cut out the Dogs Tongue, and keep the tip in our Pockets.


2 Foot. I have a Ropes end, and a Bulls Pizzle.


3 Foot. They are too gentle Instruments. would I have him Broiled on a
Gridiron.


4 Foot. I say, Boil him in a Caldron.


1 Foot. I say, Roast him.


2 Foot. I say, 'Igad, lets eat him, if the Rogue does not Stink for fear; he
will be good fat Meat.


Pol. Bloody Rogues! Villains! What would I give to be free from this danger?


3 Foot. The best way to catch him, is to spread our selves over the Room, --
and if ye hear him stir. --


Pol. Oh! But we Politicians have a trick for that.

They grope up and down the Room. Politico pulls off his Shoes, and still as
they come near him, slips away.
2 Foot. Have found him Tom?


3 Foot. No, but methinks I scent him.


4 Foot. And 'Igad, I have found his Shoes. Takes 'em up.


1 Foot. Then he must be near.


Pol. O me Miserum!


2 Foot. We had best fetch a Light. All, a Light! a Light! a Light! Exeunt.


Pol. I am glad the Villains are gone; but if they return with a Light before
Turnabout brings Articles of Peace, I am undone. -- To save my Life, I will
sign any Condition, but keep none, because they are extorted, Me^^ Mortis.

Enter Turnabout with a dark Lantborn, and Papers in his Hand.
Turn. Sir, where are you?


Pol. Here, sweet Mr. Turnabout; you did ill to leave the Door open, the Rabble
had almost found me: I must now be contented to Seal a Blank.


Turn. No, you shall not do it: The Insolence of Captain Tom is intolerable,
he will have you not only Sign, but make the same acknowledgment before him
blindfold.


Pol. And why blindfold, prithee?


Turn. The ambitious Statesman looks upon that as an acknowledgment, that you
are so much his Inferior, that you are unworthy to look upon him.


Pol. I can never do it. You must bid him fire the House; and yet Life is
sweet. -- Well, proceed.


Turn. And not only so, but he will have you renounce all Pretensions to
Leucasia, and publicly profess, that you believe her to be Mistress of neither
Wit, Beauty, or Virtue.


Pol. And why so?


Turn. It Is Envy, Igad, mere Envy.


Pol. Right Mr. Turnabout, it is Envy. I have always observed, that the
greatest Statesmen have been my greatest Enemies. But how could he know any
thing of Leucasia.


Turn. Did not I tell you, that he knew all things?


Pol. So it seems by this.


Turn. Then in the last place, you must provide him and his Gang a splendid
Supper, where your self must wait upon him in Person, drink a Grace-cup of
Reconcilement, and be Friends for ever. -- Sure you will never submit to this.


Pol. Not submit to it, yes, with all mine heart, Ha, ha, ha, He a Politician,
he an Ass. This one false step shall be his Ruin. -- I faith, Captain Tom, I am
glad I have caught thee in a Trap.


Turn. But how?


Pol. Why, look you Mr. Turnabout, this young Man in his last Demands, is
guilty of two ^otorious Errors. For 1st. He permits his mortal Enemy to fill
him Wine at Supper, not considering how easy a matter 'twere for me to mingle
him a glass of Arsenick.


Turn. Ay, there I protest you catch him.


Pol. Then by staying Supper, he gives me opportunity to send for Guards to
surprise him and his Mermidons; see him fairly hanged, and my self triumphantly
survive him; ha, ha. Come, let us make all imaginable haste to prevent the
return of the Rabble. -- You shall introduce me.


Turn. I attend your Motion. Exeunt.

The Scene changes to a great Hall; Chairs set, Leucasia's Servants attending.
Enter Subtleman, leading in Leucasia.
Subt. Please you Madam, to take your Seat, and we will present you with the
most Comical Sight in the World: Mr. Turnabout will presently be here, and lay
the mighty Politico at your Feet, humbly acknowledging himself to be a Pedant,
an Ass, and a Fool.


Leu. It Is so well known, there is no need of his Testimony to confirm it; but
methinks we should have more Spectators.


Subt. You will see enough presently; I have sent to Sancto Hermolto de
Fulgoso, Bigot, Cautions, and the whole Gang; we shall burst with Laughter. My
Lord Britain will be here too.


Leu. That Lord is truly Noble, his Native Generosity too great to be viciated
by any Speculative Opinion. I would not have him affronted.


Subt. He will not think himself affronted, to see a few turbulent Priests made
Ridiculous. I rather think 'twill give him great Diversion.


Leu. I could be much Merrier, if I were satisfied concerning Sir George's
Absence; and I can assure you a great Blemish does from thence reflect on you.


Subt. Faith, Madam, I must wipe of that as well as I can; but I am resolved to
be Merry this happy minute, whatever happens the next. -- Pray, Madam, take
your Seat.

Leucasia places her self in the great Chair. Enter Sir George, Subtleman.
Sir Geo. Save you Mr. Subtleman, this is an odd Change, to be sent for out of
Danger, to see a Play. -- I am not used to such Diversion in America.


Subt. You will see nothing here, but an innocent Representation of some
Follies of Human Nature, to dispel those Melancholy Fumes that are the small
Relics of stupifying Dangers.


Sir Geo. Nay, you do well to rejoice. You have lost a Father.


Subt. I thank the Fates for it, he departed in a very seasonable time.

[Aside to Sir Geo.] But are these Circumstances true, that you told me in the
Parlour.


Sir Geo. All very true.


Subt. And you, and Politico, Father Cautious, and Bigot, concerned in it.


Sir Geo. All equally concerned; sure you will reward us.


Subt. Most bountifully.


Sir Geo. [Aside.] Well, then I do perceive thou art a very Villain

Sir George takes his Seat. Enter Lord Britain.
Subt. My Lord, your very humble Servant, we have prepared a small Interlude,
we hope will not be altogether displeasing to your Lordship, tho it reflects a
little on the Priests of your Religion.


Lord Brit. Never the more for that; I love their Regular, but hate their
Excentrick motions; nothing to me is more ridiculously Odious.


Subt. Then, pray, take your Seat there. Takes his Seat.

Enter Cautious and Mackdonnel.
Mack. And how my dear Joy, did thou come back from Wapping? Or did thou
stay there locked up in thy Chest till this time?


Cau. You see I am returned, but with an heavy Heart, and a light Purse. The
Rabble carried me thither in one of my own Chests, and I lay very still. I
understood that I was to be clapped on Board for Sweedland. Then fearing the
loss of my natural Treasure, I crept away slily, and am glad to see the Storm
is blown over.


Mack. Yesh, by my Shoul, dear Joy, we shall have a rare show, and laugh at the
Heretical Dogs, till we do make them cry their Eyes out.


Subt. Mr. Cautious, why so Pensive?


Caut. Alas, Sir, I have cause enough, my Money is all lost. I saw it set sail
for Sweedland with a fair Wind, and sent two or three Sighs after it, which
blew it farther from me.


Subt. It is well you are not covetous, if you were, you would hang your self.


Caut. No, I am not Covetous. But I think your Note did make some mention of
Money. Aside to Cautious.


Subt. If you had any hand in the Death of the Old Man, I design 500 l. for
your Reward.


Caut. That is some comfort, I could find in my heart to own it. Aside.


Subt. Well, what say you?


Caut. I say you are greatly beholden to me for it. How, want of Money will
make a Man lie! Aside.


Subt. Then take your Seat. As soon as our Play is done, we'll discourse
further about it.

Places himself. Soft Music. Enter Turnabout leading Politico blinded with an
Handkerchief.
Turn. There sits the Captain, kneel down as soon as I give the Sign, and
repeat your Lesson, Totidem Verbis.


Pol. I warrant you; but what Company is here?


Turn. None but a confused Rabble.


Pol. Lead on, I don't value them.


Herm. Bless me, what is the meaning of that?


Caut. I am struck with Admiration!


Lord Brit. Be silent, and attend the issue.

Turnabout leads Politico just over against Leucasia' s Chair, and then speaks
softly to him.
Turn. Now you are in the right Place, make your Honor.

Politico makes three very low Bows, and then Kneels down.
Pol. Softly to Mr. Turnabout.

Methinks tho, Captain Tom might allow me a Cushion.


Turn. Never stand upon that, speak out.


Pol. Most high and mighty, thrice Illustrious Hero.


Leu. Thrice Illustrious is not Title sufficient. I will be styled six times
Illustrious Hero.


Mack. By my Shoul, my dear Joy, thou art out: Thou must say half a dozen times
Illustrious Hero.


Pol. Most High and Mighty, Six times Illustrious Hero.


Leu. That Is well.


Pol. I do here in the presence of all this Company --


Leu. Company is too mean a word -- I will have egregious Society.


Pol. I do here in the presence of this Egregious Society.


Cau. to Sir Geo. Do you know the meaning of this?


Sir Geo. Not I: Be silent.


Leu. Proceed.


Pol. Profess, own, and declare.


Leu. That is not complete enough; I will have it profess, confess, acknowledge,
own, declare, denounce, manifest, make known and public.


Pol. Softly to Turn. Bless me! this Capt. Tom. is very hard to please -- Pray
intercede for me to his Highness, that there may be some abatement.


Turn. It Is impossible; you must perform all.


Pol. I do profess, confess, acknowledge, own, declare, denounce, manifest, make
known and public.


Leu. That Is tolerably well done.


Pol. To all Christian people, as well Catholics as others.


Leu. What Is that? Speak out.


Mick. He dosh shay, my dear Joy -- To all Christian people, ash well Infidels
ash others.


Leu. I will pass that by; Let him proceed.


Pol. That I Politico am no Statesman, no Wise man, no Scholar; but a Pedant,
an Ass, and a Fool.


Leu. That Is very right, -- I hope, at length you will learn to speak plain
truth.


Pol. Aside to Turn This Captain Tom has a shrill Voice, I fancy he is but an
effeminate Fellow.


Turn. Tush -- Proceed, or you will raise his fury.


Pol. I do also Promise, Vow, and Swear, That I will not for the future meddle
with Affairs of State, or haunt the Courts of Princes, or belie the Favors of
Great men; but bestow the remainder of my time in study of Books and Learning.


Leu. That Is well, speak it out.


Pol. (Repeats the same words aloud.)


Cau. to L. Brit. Is this Politico himself! or one that represents him?


L. Brit. I know not, nor do I care; I like things well enough.


Pol. And lastly, whereas I did pretend admiration of the ^ady Leucasia, I do
now Vow, and Declare, that I did but dissemble, and did never think her
Handsome, Witty, Wise, or Virtuous.


Turn. Ha, ha, The business is done. Sir, your Servant. [Turnabout pulls off
the Handkerchief, The Priests grin, and the rest laugh.


Pol. Bless me! What is the meaning of this! Here is no Rabble, no Captain Tom,
but all Friends, except that pretty Enemy Leucasia. Aside.


Turn. The meaning is, Sir, that you are gulled, grossly and palpably gulled; --
The Rabble has been gone these two hours, -- Nothing but your own Fears and
Follies has betrayed you into this acknowledgment, by the assistance of your
Humble Servant Turnabout.


Leu. I Vow, Sir, you did ill not to stand upon your Guard better; but suffer
your self to be thus surprised by the stratagem of a silly Woman, and one of
your own Pupils.


Pol. To Turn. Rogue -- Villain -- Dog, have thou deceived me?


Turn. It Is in vain to fret your self, you taught me to Deceive; your self
encouraged me to Deceive; And how can you be angry that at last I have deceived
you?


Pol. I will be revenged for this indignity. To my L. Britain.

My Lord, will you suffer one of my Character to be thus abused.


L. Brit. Sir, I am ready to defend you with my Life, as long as you act in
that Sphere which is proper to your station; but when you exceed the bounds of
that, and fall into Calamities and Absurdities, I must leave you.


Leu. Alas, my Lord, He can be left in no calamity the space of half an hour;
-- Let him but take a turn or two about the Room, and he will have Plots enough
to confound us all.


Pol. Art thou mad, Turnabout, to raise up against thy self so powerful an
Enemy?


Turn. Not in the least: You are made ridiculous, and your being ridiculous
does make you impotent: Nor have you any reason to accuse me of falsehood, since
I only put in practice the Arts which you taught me.


Pol. Confusion seize thee -- I will be revenged. Exit.


Subt. Let him go, he will soon be brought again.

Enter Bigot, Speedwell, Counterfeit, and four or five tawdry Whores.
Big. The last enterprise of stirring up the Rabble, did unfortunately miscarry
in my hands: I raised 'em with success, but could no more Govern the Rogues,
than Command a Whirlwind; Instead of hurting Leucasia, they have done infinite
damage to our selves -- But I shall recover my credit, by presenting this
goodly Company with some new Converts of my own making.


Subt. Mr. Bigot, you come too late. But what do you do with all these Women?


Big. These are Virtuous Ladies, whom I have converted by my own industry and
eloquence, from their long-imbib'd Errors.


Leu. I perceive a new Scence of mirth is opening.


Big. Mrs. Speedwell, pray speak for your self; or if you are ashamed, let me
speak for you. [To the Company, This Lady, not full two hours since, was an
inveterate Phanatick, infected with the loathsome Scabs of a Vicious Error.


Leu. What a Spiritual Mountebank this is!


Big. But I, by Application of those Remedies that are proper to Diseases of
this Nature have reduced her to perfect Internal Sanity. Mrs. Speedwell, pray
speak for your self.


Speed. Mr. Subtleman will know me, and then I am disgraced for ever.


Big. Be not ashamed of Truth, it needs no Vizor. [Pulls of her Mask, and shows
her to Mr. Subtleman.


Subt. O! Mrs. Speedwell, Your very humble Servant -- This is a cast Mistress
of mine, so damned unreasonable and perfidious, that like the Wars of our
French Monarch, She was never to be satisfied with Men or Money -- If this be
your new virtuous Convert, I wish you much joy of her.


Big. Do you jeer me?


Subt. If I do, it is your fault; you are so horridly gulled in this, that to
laugh at you is no matter of choice, but of necessity.


Big. I say, again, Mrs. Speedwell, speak for your self, Is this true?


Speed. Why, to speak the truth, a Woman must get her livelihood some way or
other: I lived honestly on my Trade, and paid every one till stirs and
combustion came, and my Trade decayed, and Mr. Subtleman cast me off; and then
I was sent to turn Religious whether I would or no: And, pray, who can blame me
for that?


Leu. A very ingenuous Confession.


Big. Well, though I am mistaken in this one, yet Envy it self can object, I
presume, nothing against the other -- Pray let them declare their most
stupendous Conversion.


Turn. You need not, I know them all -- They are a parcel of Jilting Queans,
picked up from Suburb Bawdy-houses; the leavings of Porters and Footmen -- Pray
Mr. Bigot remove them, they are very offensive.


Big. If I thought so, I would turn them off, they will be a scandal.


1 Whore, Ay, but you promised me a new Gown.


2 -- And me a Place at Court


3 -- And me a Pension.


4 -- And me to be Lady Abbess.


1 -- You told us you would bring us to Court.


2 -- And said we should have Dogs, and Monkeys, and live like Ladies.


3 -- And that we should take place of all the Heretics.


4 -- And that we should ride in Coaches and Chairs -- And now do you think to
put us off so?


Big. But Mr. Turnabout says you are Whores -- And I will have nothing to do
with Whores.


1. -- Then I Will seize your Crevat for default of payment.


2 -- And I your Perruke. 3 -- And I your Hat.


4 -- And I Will have a Pennyworth out of your Eyes -- Do You think an honest Woman
can go to Church for nothing? [They all fall upon him, and tear him about.


Big. Murder, murder, Help me, or I shall be destroyed.


L. Brit. I am sick of these follies, and will retire. Exit.


Cau. and Her. Hold, Hold, -- [They interpose, and take 'em off him.


Leu. I protest, Mr. Bigot, I can but pity you; you had like to have incurred
Acteon's fate, and been devoured by your own Hounds. Enter Constable and Watch,
bringing in Politico.


Constable. Here Mr. Subtleman, This I suppose is the Man.


Subt. The very same; and I charge you to seize this, and this and this --
[Pointing to Cautious, Bigot, and Hermolto.


Cau. What is this part of your Play! [They seize them.


Subt. No, Faith I am in earnest; you must all four go before the Justice,
where I must accuse you of the wilful murder of my Honored Father, Sir George
Subtleman. [Counterfeit and the Wh^res run away.


Pol. How dare you attempt one of my Figure?


Subt. I shall leave that to the Law, the Judge, and the Hangman -- Alas! Sir,
I am but a poor Instrument in the Prosecution.


Her. And will thou bring these Gray Hairs, and this Reverend Beard to the
Gallows?


Subt. Faith, Reverend Father, I must confess there is some difficulty in
Hanging a Man with so long a Beard; but if it be troublesome to you, you may
tie it up under a Cap, or tuck it under your Girdle; -- or use any other method
most agreeable to your discretion.


Pol. Nay, if you be in earnest -- I protest I had no hand in it.


Subt. I can depose on Oath, you confessed to me that you had.


Pol. It was cleverly done, and I thought it was for my Reputation.


Cau. I am Innocent as the Child unborn.


Subt. But you confessed the Fact to me.


Cau. That was to recover the loss of my Trunk.


Big. I never did it; but I wish I had.


Subt. We have witness against you, and you shall be hanged for wishing.
Constable do your Office. [Constable, etc. offer to drag them away.


Her. Nay, now I am in a fine case; if I should come to be hanged for killing
my my self, it were a pretty Jest, if it were not too much in earnest. Aside.


Subt. I say, Constable do your Office.


Herm. Nay, then it is time to discover my self -- [Sir George throws off his
Disguise, and discovers himself.


All. O! Sir George, Sir George, you are welcome from the Dead.


Sir Geo. Yes faith, Gentlemen, I am honest old hearty Sir George Subtleman,
that took this Disguise, and spread abroad the report of my Death, to see how
far my Son was debauched with the Principles of their damned Casuistical
Divinity; and since I find him pretty honest, as the times go, I will give him
all.


Subt. O, my dearest Father, How am I surprised to see you! [They embrace.


Leu. I am transported with joy! The turn is so wonderful, and it had not
spoiled the Hanging of these Sacerdotal Vermin, nothing could have happened more
delightful.


Pol. How damnably am I deceived! I told the whole Court he came from America.


Turn. We are all disposed for mirth but these Gownmen, who have most reason,
as having escaped the greatest danger.


Cau. Since I have lost my Trunk, Hanging could be no great affliction.


Bol. When I have lost my Reputation, what does my Life signify?


Big. I see the Catholic Cause is dying, I wish that I could dye with it.


Turn. to Leu. Madam, I have now performed my Promise, and expect you to give
me my Reward, without fraud or Jesuitical equivocation.


Leu. Here, take my Hand, and Assurance with it, That from this time I shall be
always yours; I did always Love you, though some Courses you took did highly
disoblige me, from which I was resolved to reclaim you. But your last good
service has cancelled all former miscarriages; and since you have given me this
half hour of pleasure, I shall dedicate the remainder of my Life and Fortune to
make you happy.


Turn. And faith, Madam, since you are so bountiful, I shall leave all this
crew of whimsical Pedants, and the damned Vices of this Town, and study only
how to make my self happy by pleasing you.


Sir George. I faith Niece, this is to the purpose, I will be merry at your
Wedding, and Dance, and Jump Sing, and Hollow; and for Mr. Turnabout's
encouragement, will settle 200 l. per Annum on the first Child, and allow my
Son so competent a maintenance, that he shall not need to depend on that Gang
any longer.


Subt. Then all have reason to rejoice; none but the Fathers are dejected.


Turn. I know they are concerned for their loss of Reputation; Politico shall
give us a Supper, as he promised, and Captain Tone and we will con^^al all
those disappointments.


Pol. Agreed, for Peace sake I will do it; but you must be sure to be very
secret, and I will never meddle with business of this nature more.


Turn. Then all is happily ended: For --

When Priests forsake the business of the State,
And on the Duties of their Office wait,
Expect the Issue of a prosperous fate.
But when they steer the Helm, they hurry on
A dismal Night of black confusion.
Nature a wound in every part must feel,
And her whole systeme with disorder reel.

Plaudite. FINIS COMMEDIAE.
ADVERTISEMENT.
TO the two Universities, an Epistle. Together with a Prediction concerning the
French; Translated out of Callimachus: Who is, by St. Paul, said to be a
Prophet, and that his Testimony is true, Titus I. 12, 13.

The Secret History of the Duchess of Portsinouth; Giving an account of the
Intreagues of the Court during her Ministry. And of the Death of K. C. II.

Both Printed for, and Sold by Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick
Lane, 1690.


