Count Taaffe's LETTERS FROM THE Imperial Camp, To his BROTHER the Earl of
Carlingford HERE IN LONDON: Giving an Account of the most Considerable Actions,
both before, and at, the Raising of the Siege at VIENNA, together with several
Remarkable Passages afterward, in the Late Victorious Campaign against the
TURKS in HUNGARY.

With an Addition of two other LETTERS from a Young English Nobleman, a
Voluntier in the IMPERIAL ARMY.

LONDON, Printed for T. B. and are to be sold by William Abbington, near the
Wonder Tavern on Lud-gate-Hill. 1684.

TO THE READER.
THE Siege of Vienna, and the War of Hungary being at present the common
Subject of Discourse, I presume it will not be unpleasing to you, if I give you
a more faithful and distinct Account of those Successes of the Christian Arms
against the Turks, than has yet been published; an Account not collected from
Fame, or Transcribed out of Mercuries and Gazetts, but Original Letters
themselves, which have been already seen and approved off, by his MAJESTY and
his ROYAL HIGHNESS; and those written by a Cavalier of a high Reputation, who
was not only present in the Actions of which he writes, but being a general
Officer in the Imperial Army, bore a considerable Part in them himself. This is
the Lord Taaffe, a Subject of His Majesty's, who to his Elder Brother the Earl
of Carlingford, and to the Marquess of Grana Governor of Flanders, sends these
Letters, in which you may not only discern a vein of Truth, but a certain
Modesty and Nobleness of Nature, since without arrogating any thing to himself,
he does not omit to do Justice to others; By these Qualities, and his prudent
Conduct in a Foreign COURT, he has acquired much Esteem and Trust with the
Emperor, whom he serves, the Affection and Confidence of his Highness, the Duke
of Loranie, and a great Name over all the Empire. So that he does honor not
only to himself, but to his Country, and to his Loyal Family, and Noble
Ancestors of which he is descended. An Example to awake the Virtue of the
English Nation, and make all Gentlemen sensible how much more it would be both
for their Interest and Honor to employ their Swords in this Occasion for the
Defense of Christendom, than to wast their Youth in Gaming-houses and Taverns,
and kill one another as they do in senseless and brutal Quarrels,

Passaw, July 24. 1683:
For the Earl of Carlingford at London.
I Had the Honor to hear from you by my Lord Lansdowne, who had he not been
very full of Courage and Bravery, the Unhappy State of Affairs here had
certainly diverted him from so generous a Design, but since he is resolved to
try his Fortune with us, the Duty I owe to the King, and his Royal Highness' s
Commands, the pleasure I have in obliging so gallant a Gentleman as my Lord
Lansdowne, and the Interest you take therein ingages me to omit nothing for his
Service, as well as to seek an opportunity to acquire a Friend of his merit.

Instead of Seventy thousand Men, which was promised the Duke of Loraine to
carry on this Terrible War, he never mustered yet above Thirty Thousand; and
for these two Months we have lain in Hungary, we have been Idle, attempting
little for fear of lessening our Strength before the Arrival of the Ottoman
Forces, having already, what through Sickness, and necessary Detachments
reduced our Army to Three and Twenty Thousand Men, and that was the utmost of
our Force, when the Grand Vizier on the Seventh Instant, with an Army of at
least, One Hundred and Threescore Thousand Fighting Men, posted himself within
Cannon-shot of us, the small River Raab running between, neither do I speak the
most, but on the contrary all the Prisoners we have taken as well as other
Advices make them above Two hundred Thousand, besides the Tartars and the
Hungarian Rebels. You may easily imagine, my Lord, whether this Appearance did
not surprise us, having always pleased our selves with the hopes, That our
Alliance with Poland might have obliged the Turk to divide his Forces, however
tho we sound the contrary, we yet maintained our Post that day, and repulsed
Twenty Thousand Tartars, who forded the River under our very Noses. The Enemy
thus finding how difficult it was to force his way to us, ordered out a
Detachment of Thirty Thousand Horse to spread themselves all along the River
over against our Right Wing, with a Reserve of Hungarians commanded by the
Count Budiani, a Nobleman of that Country lately revolted, and being informed
at night, that the Turks were come over the River, without any difficulty,
Budiani, with the said Hungarian Rebels joining with them, and declaring for
the Rebel Teckeley, as also considering the disproportion in our Numbers, that
the River was fordable in several Places, the Enemy possessed of all the
advantageous Grounds, and able when they pleased, under protection of their
Canon to force this Passage, and at the same time a great Body of their Horse,
who being already on this side, were in a posture to charge us, either in Flank
or Rear, his Highness judged that Post not safe, quitting it that night, having
first put Six Thousand Men into Raab, which of all Places, seemed most in
danger to be besieged. Our Foot marched toward Presburgh by the Isle of
Schutz, where they were out of the reach of their insulting numbers, and our
Horse through the Plains which extend from Raab to Presburgh.

The Thirteenth Instant, I commanded the Rear Guard of Four hundred Horse, when
I was attacked by Two Thousand Tartars upon the Plains of Peternel, and at the
same time as ill luck would have it, they had Alarmed our Avaunt-Guard, with a
Party falling upon our Baggage, and his Highness fearing least the Enemy might
cut us off from Vienna, where the Emperor with the whole Courtas yet was, made
the Horse march with all possible speed thither, leaving only behind one
Regiment to Mount the Guard; this Regiment seeing the hasty march of the other
Troops, supposing it was occasioned by the Terror of those that fell upon us in
the Rear, under that apprehension in the most shameful manner in the World
fled, without once drawing a Pistol, or offering to stand the least shock of
the Enemy; whereupon those Four hundred Horse of the Rear Guard under my
Command were surrounded, and I cannot tell by what Providence I was delivered,
having for at least half an hour marched pesle mesle amongst the Enemy; there
was at this time so great a dust that those who fled could not as yet discern
the coming of their Succors, and in that confusion disordered several of our
own Squadrons that were wheeling to their Relief. The first that rallyed were
Five Troops of my Regiment, one Squadron being wholely broken by the Regiment
which fled, the other behaved themselves so bravely, that the poor Prince of
Aremberg and Count Millini, Brother to a Cardinal of that Name, and at present
Nuntio in Spain, both Captains in my Regiment, with Prince Aremberg's Cornet,
and Eighty Cavaliers were killed upon the place.

The Duke of Lorrain at length having with much difficulty drawn up the rest of
the Horse hastened himself to us, where finding the foremost Squadrons, yet
under a panick Fear, alighted from his Horse at the Head of his Men to let them
see there was no danger, this Example gave fresh Courage to our Troops, and the
Dust being somewhat abated, we discovered, that all this Disorder was only
occasioned by Six Thousand Turks and Tartars; We made up then to them, his
Highness being in the Head of us, but they would not endure the very sight of
our Troops, and 'twas in vain to follow them with our heavy German Horse, since
our Light Horse was wanting, the Enemy flying with an incredible Swiftness: But
we learned from this, that which we since found, that these Six Thousand Horse
were only to cover the gross of their Army, with the which they thinking it not
so much for their purpose to Attacque Raab, as supposed was first designed,
were marching directly to Vienna. You will perhaps think it very strange that
we should be no better informed of the Design and Marches of the Enemy, but not
so much when you hear that all Hungary was against us, and not so much as a
Peasant but for Teckeley. And as for the Party that we sent out to scout on the
Plains between Raab and Vienna, there could not a Man of them ha've escaped had
they been discovered; such is the Number and Swiftness of the Enemy. To
conclude, my Lord, we are in a very desperate Condition. All Hungary is against
us, the Court removed to Passaw, All Austria round Vienna from Newstat and St.
Hippolitt in flames, and we not able to hinder it, having now only a Body of
Ten Thousand Horse, at most, left with the Duke of Lorrain; Vienna has been
besieged these ten Days, and had not his Highness, out of his great Prudence
and Conduct, clapped in Ten or Eleven Thousand Men into the Town, in that nick of
Time, and the which was all the Foot he had in his Army, by this time the Place
had certainly been lost. Bavaria is sending us Ten Thousand brave, but
unexperienced Soldiers, and we shall be reinforced with Ten Thousand more from
the Emperor. The King of Poland is obliged by our Treaty to march himself in
Person at the Head of his Army to the Relief of Vienna, and the least Delay is
looked upon as most dangerous. Saxony, Franconia and Brandenburgh promise us
their Troops, God grant they may all come in time. If Vienna should be taken, I
cannot see the end of our miseries, but I hope God will not forsake his Cause,
nor the House of Austria that has been ever so devoted to him.

From the Camp at Angrem, Aug. 17. 1683.
For the Earl of Carlinford at London.
I Received yours of the Seventeenth of July from London, and render God a
thousand Thanks for saving our Royal Master the King and the Duke from that
execrable Design of those wicked Assassines; Good God! What Madness is this?
Let us view all Europe, and see, if we can find any Subjects so well treated,
or who do enjoy so blessed a Peace as those of England; Or if there be any
Nations in the World that do not envy the Happiness of ours; I have so great a
Detestation for those Infamous Villains, that I shall henceforth look upon
Turks and Tartars as the most honest Men. You have by this time doubtless
received the Account I sent you of our Campaign from Passaw. The Lord Lansdowne
delivered it to the Spanish Ambassador, who promised to send it in his Packet
to Don Petro de Ronquillio into England. The Duke of Lorrain has since had the
good Fortune with Fourteen Thousand Horse to give a Defeat to Tcckeley's Army,
consisting of Twenty Thousand Hungarians, and Six Thousand Turks near
Presburgh, where he was going to possess himself of the Town, and to be Crowned
King of Hungary: We marched up toward them by a Defile, [i. e. Narrow Passage]
which they had lined with Dragoons, and though the Enemy were drawn up in good
Order, they had not the Courage to make any opposition: Our Avaunt Guard was
scarcely past, when a Panick Fear so seized those Rebels, that they presently
fled, leaving the Turks to shift for themselves, who for a time retreated
orderly, but the Poles seconded by some Regiments of our Curiasiers fell so
furiously upon them that at last they were routed, leaving a Thousand of their
Men dead behind them, with Twelve Hundred Wagons of Baggage, whereof our Men
had the plunder, the Rebels Cavalry saving themselves by the Swiftness of their
Horses; and the few Foot they had in Woods and Mountains, which were
inaccessible to our Horse; this blow was such a Terror to Teckeley that we saw
him no more. Vienna has now been five weeks besieged, and although the Enemy
took their Post the First day at the Foot of the Glassis under protection of
the Suburbs, which we neglected to demolish, they have spent four weeks in only
gaining one Point of the Counterscarp, betwixt the Bastion of the Palace, and
that of Lebell. Five days ago they sprung a Mine under the Point of the Ravelin
betwixt the said two Bastions, where they gave a furious Assault, in hopes to
have made a Lodgment of it, but they were repulsed with great Loss, and we have
it from the Prisoners themselves, as well as Spies we have in their Camp, that
they have already lost above Twelve Thousand Janissaries. The Bavarian Succors
of Nine Thousand Men are already arrived at the Bridge of Crembs, those of
Franconia being Eight Thousand will be here to Morrow. The Elector of Saxony
with Ten Thousand Men more is upon his March, but can hardly be with us before
the end of the Month. The King of Poland is also coming with Three or Four and
Twenty Thousand Men, and we are now about Three and Twenty Thousand
Imperialists, with which Troops we are resolved toward the end of this Month
to succor Vienna, or dye in the Attempt; but if the King of Poland delay
coming, and we find the Town much pressed, we shall endeavor the Relief of it
without him; they assure us that the Emperor intends to be with us in Person,
and I heartily wish it for his greater Glory. We think to pass the Danube at
Crembs, a little Town about Ten Leagues up the River from Vienna, the Country
thereabouts is very Mountainous and Woody, till you come within a little League
of the place. We shall have a Body of Thirty Thousand Foot, if the Enemy come
to meet us they must then forsake some of their Posts, if they do not we shall
have them betwixt us and the Town, and the Situation thereof is such, that
their Horse will be of little use to them, in which consists their greatest
Force. My Lord Lansdowne is in great esteem with his Highness the Duke of
Lorraine, and extremely beloved by all the Officers and best Men of our Army.

From the Camp at Korn, Neigburgh upon the Danube, Aug. 25 th. 1683.
For the Earl of Carlinford at London.
I Have given you in my Letters under Cover of Don Petro de Ronquillio, as well
as in those from the Camp at Maregg, sent in the Governor of Flanders's
Packet, a faithful Account of the State of Affairs here; as also what has
happened most remarkable in this Campaign. The Twenty First instant, the Duke
of Lorrain left the Mark, a little fordable River that divides Austria and
Moravia from Hungary, that he might the better get to the Banks of the Danube,
above Fulme and Crembs, there to pass over for the disposing Matters for the
great Affair, I mean, the relieving of Vienna, hoping that those two blows the
Enemy had already received, as well as the King of Poland's March toward their
Confines, might for a while retard their advancing in the Siege. Yesterday we
encamped at Stockeraw, where we were told, that a considerable Body of Turks
and Tartars had past the Mark, and we were quickly convinced of the Truth of
it, by the Flames of Five or Six Villages; which we saw Burning within a few
Miles of our Camp, it being a barbarous Custom amongst those Infidels to set
all on Fire wheresoever they march: Upon this his Highness, with a Flying Body
of Ten Thousand Horse resolved to march immediately toward them; we found
them, being about Twelve Thousand, drawn in Battalia near the Bridge of Vienna.
His Highness in person charged on the right Wing, where the Turks gave a
furious Onset, disordering some of our Polish Troops, but being presently
seconded by some of our German Horse they were put to flight, with the loss of
Three hundred of their Men, and Five Hundred more that were sent from the Grand
Visier's Camp over the Danube in Boats, thinking by the same means to save
themselves, were so hotly pursued, that they were most of them drowned in the
River, leaving their Horses for a booty behind them. Our right wing extended it
self to a little Wood, the left Wing, where I commanded spreading it self all
along the Plains, which the Enemy seeing encouraged them to bend their chiefest
Force against us, that they might fall upon us both in the Flank and Rear; but
Prince Lewis of Badin ordering some of the Horse on the Right Wing, by easy
Movements to close in with us, and the Enemy finding after several Attempts
that they could not break us, but were always repulsed with Loss, despairing of
Success, they drew off their Squadrons upon a little Hill within Musket Shot of
us, by which they kept us from seeing any Reserve, that might possibly have
lain hid behind them. At the same time that they seemed thus ready to engage
us, a hundred and fifty desperate Turks and Tartars, perceiving the distance
that was betwixt our Squadrons, and the Right Wing, sliping behind the Wood
fell upon us in the Rear, but I ordering two Squadrons of our Second Line to
charge them, they were quickly dispersed, and few of them escaped. We did expect
the Enemy would have made use of this Disorder to attack us with their whole
Body, but it was far otherwise, it serving them only as an opportunity to save
themselves, by a hasty Retreat; We by this time finding that those Squadrons of
theirs drawn up before us upon the said Hill were only to amuse and cover the
Retreat of the rest, and it had been time lost to pursue them with our
Curiasseers, who could not overtake them in a Race Campaign, they never keeping
together, and are very nimble and run with great Swiftness, and impossible to
get them into a Body, unless they please themselves; Our Poles might have
indeed pursued them, but seemed unwilling, and his Highness judging that they
might probably be reinforced by Teckeley, who but few days before was encamped
near the Mark, thought not fit to pursue them any further, but to return to
mind the great Affair, which now drew near: The Enemy lost besides those killed
on the place, several Kettle Drums, and above twenty Colors in their Retreat.
His Highness with singular Courage and Bravery conducted this Engagement with
the Enemy, but too much exposed his Person, as he does too often upon all
occasions. We are here still intent, and at the Eve of our great bussiness, the
Relief of Vienna. His Majesty of Poland with above Twenty Thousand Men will be
with us in seven days. Bavaria, Saxony and Franconia have already sent us Seven
and Twenty Thousand Men, and we are above Twenty Thousand Imperialists. If God
be not against us, I hope in a few days to send you a Relation of a glorious
Victory. My Lord Lansdowne did particularly signalize himself in this Action,
being always in that part of the Fight where it was hottest, and he is
certainly a very gallant young Man.

From the Grand Visier's Camp at Midnight, September. 12th. 1683.
For the Earl of Carlingford at London.
WE have relieved Vienna, but if the Victory be not so complete, as we
promised our selves it should, it proceeded only from the Cowardice of our
Enemies, whom from Morning till Night we drove before us, beating them from
Post to Post, without their having once the Courage to look us in the Face, and
that through several Defiles, [i. e. Narrow Passages] which had they any
reasonable Courage we could never have forced. The Combat held longest where
the King of Poland was, but that only added to his Glory, he having beaten them
with the loss of their Canon, and a great number of their Men; They have left
us their whole Camp in general, with their Tents, Bagg and Baggadg, and time
will tell us more particulars. We intend to follow them to morrow; and it is
impossible but there must be much more than we yet know; If night had not come
on, at our very entering the Suburbs, we had certainly given them a total
overthrow. My Lord Lansdown has done me the Honor to accept the Command of a
Troop of Horse in my Regiment; He is a very brave Youth, and Courts all
Occasions to show his Courage, and to distinguish himself; attracting the
Friendship and Esteem of all our Army. I am just now told we have taken all the
Grand Visier's Treasure, you shall hear more by the next.

From the Grand Visier's Camp at Midnight, September. 12. 1683.
For His Excellency the Marquess of Grana Governor of the Spanish Netherlands,
etc.
INstead of Vienna being relieved, and the Turks utterly defeated, I beg your
pardon, if I tell You, that the Siege is only raised, and the Enemy forced to
fly away, which was not our fault for from Kalemberg as far as Filberg-Bastie
we pursued them from Hill to Hill, and from one Desile [i. e. from one narrow
Pass to another] to another, they never having the Courage to stand before our
Troops. I refer my self for the rest to Monsieur Preudhomme, who is a very good
Man, and deserves a Reward for the News he carries, in the which he bore a very
particular Part, but less than he hoped, through the Cowardice of the Enemy,
and I beg he may receive some Mark of your Favor. I have heretofore told you,
that the King of Poland is le plus honest homme of his Kingdom, and I must now
tell you again, that there are few Kings now in the World who deserve better to
be so than himself; and that his Competitor, our Duke of Loraine, has
performed all the Parts of a great Captain and excellent Soldier, and has
withal so managed Matters, and found the way in this Conjunction of our Troops
to accommodate so many Majesty's and Electoral Highnesses and Sovereign Princes
together, that there has not been the least dispute or difference arisen
amongst them. I take the Freedom to send you some of our Plunder from the
Turks, being a very small present: We have taken all the Enemies Tents in
general, and you will admire the moderation of our Troops, who amidst so great
a booty, pursued the Infidels from Camp to Camp; neither Officer nor Soldier
once offering to touch any thing till they had first made sure of the Victory.
I cannot yet learn the number of the Canon taken, nor how many were killed on
the right Wing, against whom the King of Poland fought in Person, Monsieur
Preudhomme will tell you the rest. 'T was night before we got hither, which
hindered us from pursuing them farther, but to morrow early we shall be at their
heels. I am for ever,

Yours, etc.
From the Camp near Presburg, September. 22. 1683.
For the Earl of Carlingford at London.
I Did my self the Honor, my Lord, to give you a rough Draught of the Action
of Vienna, the very same night that it happened, by an Officer of the Marquess
of Grana's, whom he sent Express from Flanders, to bring him that great News,
and I must add, that never Victory of so great Importance, cost so little
blood. There were no Officers killed on our side but the Brother of the Prince
de Crouy, the Count de Trantmanstorf Major, the Count de Batzi Captain of
Dragoons, and some people of quality amongst the Poles, who stood the shock of
a very rude Encounter, with a Transcendent Bravery. If the Grand Vizier had
been Master of his Trade, we could never have past from the Hills of Kalemberg
to Vienna, without a bloody and desperate Engagement, and upon very
disadvantageous Terms, we having three terrible Defiles to pass from the
Mountains to the City; But God did so infatuate them, that they let our Foot
and Dragoons quietly post themselves in such manner, as to secure our Cavalry,
who passing but one and two at a time posted themselves under their very Noses.
Their Retreat was so hasty that they left us all their Artillery in general,
and the Account being made they are found, what in their Approaches and Camp,
to amount to above One hundred and Twenty Pieces of Canon, with a prodigious
quantity of Provisions both of Ammunition and Victuals, and all their Camp,
without giving themselves so much Time as to take down a Tent. The Field was
covered every where with all sorts of rich booty; Our German Troops marching
through the middle of all this Spoil, and not a Soldier, either Foot or Horse
went one Step out of his Rank to pillage, and we value the glory of this
Continence and Exactness of military Discipline more than all the Booty of the
Poles, which was incredible, All the Grand Visier's Treasure fell to their
share, the King confesses he has gotten great Riches and the Equipage of the
Grand Visier's alone, which fell to his Lot is valued at One Hundred Thousand
Crowns. The Poles have also taken the Great Standard of Mahomett, and the Horse
Tails which the Sultan himself gave the Grand Vizier on this great Expedition.
Some of our Cavalry next day in rummaging their Tents, found betwixt Five and
Six Thousand Ducats in ready Money, and amongst other things the Imperial
Resident, who following the Army, was forgot behind their Camp, who assured us,
that since the beginning of this Siege, their Army was lessened Seventy
Thousand Men, and the Turkish Prisoners avow, that of Forty Thousand Janissaries
which came before the place, there are not gone off Eighteen Thousand. If night
had not come on us, at the very Suburbs of Vienna, we had made it an entire
Victory; having already gained the Defiles, and the Enemy was in an extreme
Confusion, and had we but two hours more of Daylight, we should have driven
them to the little River of Shwechet, where we might have had them at our
Mercy, but they past it in the night, and though the Duke of Loraine would have
next Morning pursued them at Break of Day, yet the King of Poland thought it
not fit, because his Horse had not drank in Eight and Forty hours before: But
those who are given to detract say, that the Polish Troops, with whom the King
is sometimes obliged to comply, had demanded one day more, to make an end of
pillaging the Turkish Camp. We hope before the end of this Campaign to take
some Place on the Frontier. Teckeley applys himself to the King of Poland for
his Mediation. The Grand Vizier enraged at this shameful loss, has since caused
the Heads of the Vizier of Buda, of two Bassa's and Five hundred Officers to be
cut off, this will be a ready way to make an end of his Army, if he kill thus
on one side, and we on the other. Adieu, In fine, it was high time to succor
Vienna, there being two considerable Breaches in both the Bastions, and half of
the Curtain undermined, the Garrison which consisted of Twelve Thousand Men
reduced to Four Thousand, and certainly never any Garrison behaved it self
better. I am endeavoring to get a Draught of the Place, and the Attacks to
present to the King and his Royal Highness, and here is an Engineer upon the
Place has promised to do it very well. My Lord Lansdowne will have the Honor
to see the closing of this Campaign, as thinking it not sufficient to have bore
his Part in the Relief of Vienna and defeating the Turk. It were to be wished
the Elector of Saxe had taken the same consideration along with him, but he
quitted the Army the very day after the Succor of Vienna, finishing his
Campaign with the Glory of Relieving the Town. The Elector of Bavaria with his
Troops as well as those of Franconia march with us still, being resolved to see
the end of this Campaign.

From the Camp near Barrakan over against Gran, October. 10. 1683.
For the Earl of Carlingford at London.
I Sent you a short Account of the Relieving of Vienna, and of the shameful
flight of the Enemy from before it, of which that advantage was not made that
might otherwise have been by reason of the backwardness of the Poles to follow
the pursuit next day. But the Grand Vizier being enraged at this Disgrace,
discharged his Fury upon the Officers of his Army, having strangled the Vizier
of Buda, a Man of Eighty years of Age, (and as he was perhaps the most able
Person of the Ottoman Empire, so would he have proved the more dangerous Enemy
to him) with four other Bassa's, and Four or Five Hundred other Officers, upon
pretense that they did not do their parts, and disobeyed his Orders. The Count
Budiani an Hungarian Lord, who after our Retreat at Raab, revolted with a
considerable Party of his Countrymen to the Rebel Teckeley, to give the
Emperor a convincing Proof of his sincere Repentance, cut in pieces two
thousand Auxiliary Turks that the Grand Vizier had sent to reinforce him, and
tho the advantage we got by his Treason was very great, yet we could not but
abhor the Traitor. On the Fifth instant the Polish Army with our Cavalry past
the Danube at Gomorra, leaving our foot one days march behind; but the Duke of
Loraine having resolved to attack Barrakan, was forced to stay some time for
the Foot, because those of Bavaria were for some unhappy Reasons six days march
from us: The King being told that there were not above Five Thousand Turks in
Barrakan made his Troops hastily advance toward it, without once acquainting
his Highness with the Design, and thinking himself sure, and that his very
Avaunt Guard would have carried it, he did not so much as march his Troops in
Battalia, but his Ambition and the great contempt he had of the Enemy upon the
Success of Vienna cost him dear; instead of the Five Thousand Men which he was
told of, he found in a bottom under the very Cannon of Barrakan a Body of
Twelve Thousand, who instantly attackt the Avaunt Guard of the Poles with such
a Fury, that though they behaved themselves bravely, they were at last forced
into their main Body, and that in such confusion, that the whole Army which had
not then time to draw up into Battle seized with a panick Fear had been
entirely routed, had not the Duke of Loraine (who by this time heard of the
Kings departure) made his Troops hastily follow, and so kept them from farther
disorder. My Brigade had this day the Avaunt Guard, and his Highness ordering
me to make haste, tho we had a Defile to pass about half an hours march from
the Enemy, yet our Troops carried on with a desire to redress the loss, and
repair the affront received by their Allies, past it with all cheerfulness, and
so in a very little time we drew up in a Line of Fifteen Squadrons. The Arrival
thus of our Troops put soon a stop to the Carriere of the TURKS, and gave us an
Opportunity thereby of passing the rest of our Men, and to the Poles of knowing
each other. The Enemy thus contenting themselves with the advantage they had
gotten over the Poles, retired in good order into the bottom where they were
first, and we thought it not then safe to follow them farther with the Poles,
who were, as it were stund with the blow they had received, and under an
apprehension that the Grand Visier's whole Army was there; They thereupon
encamped themselves about an hours distance from Barrakan near the Danube, and
the King was then of opinion to stay for the coming up of the Foot, before they
should attempt any thing farther. There were about One Thousand Poles killed
most of them Dragoons, who having alighted from their Horses in a Plain were
abandoned by the Horse, and so cut in pieces by the Enemy; the King ventured as
far as any Man with his usual undaunted Courage, and had it not been for a
German Cavalier that served him, he had then certainly been either killed or
taken Prisoner, and his Majesty in Requital made him a Colonel. The next day
the Marshall Comte de Staremberg who so bravely defended Vienna came with
Eight Thousand Foot to us. The Poles were so disheartened by their wounds,
which were yet bleeding, and apprehending, that the Grand Vizier with the rest
of his Army might be near at hand, that they did endeavor to divert the King
from any farther vigorous Action at that time, but the Duke of Loraine did so
strongly press the contrary, that they were at last brought to it. We marched
in Battalia the ninth instant toward the Enemy, his Highness giving the Poles
their choice where to post themselves, but instead of the right wing which till
then they always affected, they divided themselves on both the Wings, and on
our Reserve. The Enemy seeing us thus march toward them came out of their
bottom, ranging themselves in Battle, and by the Confession of those
Prisoners that make them the most, the Turks did not exceed Sixteen Thousand
Men, and certainly there never was committed a greater nor worse supported
rashness, but yet they stood us with that boldness at first, that the whole
Grand Visier's Army could not have done more, and not being able to front our
whole Line, they drew up to the Right, and without once attempting to attack
the German Squadrons fell with an incredible Fury on those Poles they found on
our Left, hoping to find as cheap a business often as they had done the day
before: But the Great General of Poland Iablonouski received them so briskly,
that it stopped their Fury, and at the same time we charging them with our first
Line of Curiasseers put them totally into disorder. The Defeat of those was
immediately followed with a general Rout of all their Troops, and the shock of
the first Line of our said Left Wing was so vigorous and succesful, that
neither my Lord Lansdowne, to whom I had given the Command of a Squadron in my
Regiment, nor I my self, who commanded the Second Line of the Wing that was
attacked had either of us occasion to fire a Pistol: His Highness let loose the
first Line of Curiasseers, the Croats, and some Poles to the pursuit of those
that fled, whom we chased with the points of our Swords in their backs to the
very Fort of Barrakan, making a most terrible Slaughter of them, the Crowd of
those that thought to save themselves by the Bridge was so great, that the
Bridge broak under them, and there were abundance of them who threw themselves
into the Danube rather than they would stand the Fury of our Men, and the
Revenge of the Poles. It is most certain that with those who were slain, and
those who were drowned, the better half of their Number perished, and one shall
seldom find in a pitched Battle a greater loss of Men, these were the very
flower of the Turkish Army, commanded by the new Vizier of Buda, Ali Bassa of
Aleppo, and Six other Bassa's, the Vizier of Buda was killed the Bassa's of
Aleppo and Silestria are taken Prisoners, and a third Bassa was drowned. We
have also saved about six hundred Prisoners from the Fury of the Poles, and
there are certainly taken above three thousand Horses and at least as many
drowned. The taking of Barrakan was a consequence of this Victory, our Men
entering it without Opposition, though there were several Janissaries, and many
others retired into it. But the Poles having first sacked and pillaged, seeing
some of their Comrades heads which the Turks had pitched in Parade all along
the Pallizadoes of the Fort, did brutally in Revenge burn that place of
Importance which we would have preserved. Let us however give thanks to God
who has thus so visibly shown himself in his own, and our Cause by delivering
our Enemies into our hands, I shall continue to Give you a Faithful Relation of
what passes here, and do entreat you to communicate it to His Majesty and the
Duke.

A Letter from an English Nobleman, a Voluntier in the Imperial Army, to his
Father at LONDON.
(...) Oct. 5. ^ 1683. My Lord,
THE same day that we delivered Vienna, I sent your Lord Lordship the News, by
an Express that was dispatched to the Marquess of Grana, and have since given
your Lordship a larger Account thereof; since which we have without opposition
advanced in Hungary, and some six days ago with the German and Polish Horse
crossed the Danube at Gomora, leaving our Canon and Infantry behind us,
resolving after one days march, it leading us into a Country of Forage, to stay
for them; but the King of Poland having Advice, that Four Thousand Turks had
passed the River at Gran, by break of day next Morning, without giving any
notice to the Duke of Loraine, marched with his Dragoons and Hussars toward
them, but finding them much stronger than he was informed they were, his
Majesty was beaten, and his Troops in great disorder, and his person in danger,
and pursued by the Enemy till they saw our Horse appear, which by good luck
marched some two hours after the Pelanders, by the Duke of Lorains Command, who
was in the head of them; upon which the Turks ceased their pursuit, and retired
under the Canon of Gran, and we encamped within sight of them till the next day
the Eight instant, that our Infantry came up to us, upon which yesterday we
marched in Battle toward them, and found them posted in the same posture to
receive us; the first Line of our Left Wing a bout'noon charged their Right
with so much vigor and Success, that the Infidels were forced to give way, and
not long afterward their whole Army betook themselves to slight, and were
pursued by ours to the River side, into which they precipitated themselves,
insomuch that very few of them escaped, after this the same night we attacked
Barrakan, a Fort on this side of the Danube at the head of the Bridge of Gran,
and have taken it by Assault; Our Prisoners tell us, they were Sixteen Thousand
Men chosen out of the best of their Troops, and sent thither by the Grand
Vizier to hinder us from ruining that Bridge, by which they had their
Communication with the Rebels, Caramamett Bassa, lately made Vizier of Buda,
who commanded there in chief was killed upon the place; Ali Bassa of Aleppo and
the Bassa of Silestria are taken Prisoners, another Bassa is drowned, and their
loss to speak modestly of it, exceeds the number of Eight Thousand Men. The
frequent occasions of Action we meet with, hinders me from quitting the Army as
yet, although most Volunteers of any Consideration, except our Countrymen, are
already returned, and that the season in this Country is very troublesome, nay
not supportable, were it not for the continual Favors I do daily receive from
my Lord Taaff, and as occasion offers from his Highness, and all the chief
Officers of the Army, some of my Servants being dead, and almost all sick,

I am with utmost respect, My Lord, Your, etc.

Another Letter from the same hand directed as the former.
From Presburg, November. the 7th. 1683. My Lord,
IN My last to your Lordship, I gave an Account of the Battle we gained over
the Turks near Gran, and our taking Barrakan by Assault the same day, since
which we have crossed the River, besieged and taken Gran it self, and that
without any great loss, they having within three days after our Batteries were
finished asked to capitulate and surrender the Place, with their Cannon,
Munition, etc. up to us. After this, there being no prospect of any more Action
this year, upon the first instant I left the Army with the Elector of Bavaria,
and waited on him as far as Gomorra, where I left his Electoral Highness, and
went my self to Raab, not being willing to leave unseen a place, which all over
this part of the World is called Propugnaculum Christianitatis, from whence
yesterday, through a burnt and desolate Country I came hither, where I found my
Brother John and Mr. Alman, whom I was surprised to find at this time of the
year making toward the Army; I must confess I am heartily sorry that my
Brothers Sickness did hinder him from meeting me going to the Army in July,
instead of coming from it in November; for then he might have seen three ranged
Battles sought, besides skirmishes with the Infidels, the famous Siege of
Vienna raised, a Fort stormed, a Town anciently of great Note, the Metropolis
of Hungary, and long in Possession of the Turks, besieged and taken at the
later end of October, and several other Places and Castles of Importance,
rendered to the victorious Arms of the Christians, which is more than has been,
or than probably will be seen in any three Months this hundred years; from
hence I intend to set out tomorrow for Vienna, and from thence to Lintz to wait
upon his Imperial Majsty before my return, from whence I will immediately, in
obedience to your Lordships commands, dispatch Mr. Alman for England: And as
for my Brother whom you are pleased to commit to my care, do assure your
Lordship, that as I have nothing but what I hold from your Goodness; so all
that I have shall be in common between us, and believe me

ever with utmost respect, My Lord, Your, etc.
Lintz Jan. 4. 1684.
For the Earl of Carlingford at London.
ABout two days since I received two of your most welcome Letters, one whereof
had (in seems) first made the Tour of Hungary, I am overjoyed to hear that the
King and his Royal Highness seem satisfied with my Relations, because they are
two Persons whom I Infinitely Love, and Reverence as I ought, and whom I very
well know to be of most discerning Judgments; I confess I am proud to think
that I have some part in their good Opinions. My Lord Lansdowne has been
pleased to set too great a value upon those little Services I have done him, he
is a very brave Cavalier, and the most obliging, best conditioned Man I know,
and as he does me the Honor to love me, so he would procure me the like Favor
with my Lord his Father, whom I most highly honor. The Emperor sends him into
England with the quality of a Count of the Empire, to show the consideration he
has for brave Men, and although it cannot add any thing to the Luster of his
noble Family, yet his Posterity will have no reason to be displeased at his
having gained it upon so glorious an occasion, nevertheless I desire you to
publish nothing of this without the permission of my Lord of Bathe. We have now
by the taking of Gran, otherwise Str^gonium, finifh'd our Campaign,
notwithstanding the opposition of the Poles, who did all that was possible to
divert us from it, in a Season which in truth was not so proper to make War.
The Easiness that the Duke of Loraine found in making a Bridge, convinced him
of the Consternation the Enemy was in, and that he ought to make the best use
of it. His Highness passed the Danube without the Poles, and in spite of the
Rain that fell continually, he push't on the Siege with that Vigor, that at
the end of five days he made himself Master of the Town, it is a place not
strong, save only by its situation, nor considerable, but for passing the
Danube, and commanding a great extent of the Country; It is the Metropolis of
Hungary, and in the last Age cost the Christians as well as Turks a Siege of
several Months. This taking of Gran was soon followed by a Reducement of the
Rebels, who of themselves came in and begged Pardon. The Poles for their
Quarters chose the upper Hungary, promising to reduce C^sha^ and Esperies, but
finding greater opposition then they imagined, they rather chose to leave it,
then run the Riscue of so troublesome a Quarter, but the Imperialists made sure
of theirs by the taking of Dutsch and many other Castles, from whence they
drove the Rebels. There are who suspect an understanding betwixt some of the
Polish Officers and the Rebels, but for my own part I believe nothing of it,
and the reason why I suppose they did not reduce Caschaw, was because they
wanted both Foot and Provisions, thinking that by the sole Reputation of their
Arms, and presence of the King, they might have carried it, and besides that,
besieging of Towns is not their business. My Lord Lansdowne will bear me
Witness that I did all was possible even before your sending to me, to find out
a Couple of fine Turkish Horses for you, but upon my word we could find none
worth the trouble, for all that were better then ordinary were taken by the
Poles, and other of our Generals, who were more eager after plunder than my
self, I have bought a Turkish Tent without seeing it, but they say it is very
fine, with some Turkish Arms, which are also curious in the kind, which I
intend to send by way of Hamburg, and you may make a Present of them to the
King or Duke, if you think it worth their Acceptance, or other wise dispose of
them as you think best. I will send you when you please the Duke of Loraine's
Picture, and I will, if I can, procure that of the King of Polands too. My Lord
Lansdowne's Courrier is just a going, so that I cannot now say any thing of the
business of Newheusell, but will by the first send you an Account of that, as
well as other matters which I purpose to write you.

I am for ever Yours, etc.
Lintz Jan. 5. 1684.
For the Earl of Bathe at London.
My Lord,
I Know not what my Lord Lansdowne can have written to your Lordship in my
Favor, to draw from you such obliging Expressions of Civility and Goodness to
me, as I find all your Letters filled with, the Truth is, it is I, who have a
Thousand Obligations to my Lord, your Son, for making his Campaign with me, and
giving me so distinct a mark of his Friendship, as there is not a gallant Man
of the greatest consideration in all the Army but would think himself honored
with it. He found us in a Condition which would have discouraged any man but
himself; Our Army by reason of the great Garrisons which we were forced to
leave in Raab and Vienna reduced to a flying Body of Seven Thousand Horse, the
Court in Retreat, which might have justified him if he had followed so great an
Example, but he would finish what he had begun, and the truth is we may date
our good Fortune from the time that he came amongst us. He had a part in the
defeat of the Turks at Presburg, Korneigburg, Vienna and Barrakan, and in the
taking of Gran, He has signalized himself every where, and done like the Son
of such a Father, and so illustrious Ancestors; and if he have suffered in this
Campaign, which was one of the r^dest that we have made a long time, he returns
loaded with Glory, and the marks of a particular esteem from His Imperial
Majesty, and leaves a memory of his; Person behind him, which will ever do
honor to his Family and Country; I pray God, my Lord, that you may long enjoy
one another and that I may enjoy you both I will seek all occasions of meriting
by my most humble to that part in the honor of your Favor, which you allow me
beforehand by a mere effect of your Generosity, and that I may have the means
to do it, I (...) you as soon as may be to send us back to our Lord Lansdowne.
The King can employ no Person in this Court who will be more acceptable, (...)
him I am with respect,

My Lord, Your (...) obedient Servant, TAAFFE.


