THE Cony-catching Bride.

Who after she was privately married in a Conventicle or Chamber, according to
the new Fashion of Marriage: She saved her self very handsomely from being
Coney-caught, couzened her old Father, her Bridegroom Mr. TOBY, and caused a
general laughter amongst all the GUESTS thither invited.

This Wedding, or rather Mock-Marriage was kept privately in London, and is now
published to the view of the World for Mirth-sake.

Together with A SERMON, Preached by a pragmaticall Cobbler, at the aforesaid
Wedding, comparing the Duties of Marriage to the Vtensils of his Trade.



Printed at London by T. F. 1643.



THE CONY-CATCHING BRIDE:
NOw in the Spring, when every Bird makes choice of their Mate, and (imitably
to their example) young folks desire to be coupling together, and to place
their affections in a fair proportion of Harmony, even as fancy does direct
them. A young Maid, that had a round Portion, and a Father that loved round
Money; fell in love with a brisk Blade, a lusty Cavaelier; but kept her desires
secret and unknown to her Father; who (for some by respects, as Parents use to
be too often sticklers in their Childrens affections) persuaded her, nay
charged her on his Blessing that she would turn the stream of her affection to
a match of his providing, and consent to marry a Young man, a holy Brother,
hoping thereby to make his Daughter a Zealot, and become inspired with his
spiritual Edification. She was indeed very unwilling to displease her Father,
who had sternly resolved, that if she but made the least sign of refusal to
yoke her self in Matrimony with this prick-eard youth, she should have (for
him) no other Portion but the mere Cipher of Nature, which from the time of
her Birth she constantly bare about her: wherefore to give him content, she made
a fair formal show of obedience and willingness to conform her self to his
deliberate motion, and submit to the embraces of this religious young man,
yielding her Virgin Flower to be cropped by his rude hand. Whereupon (after some
ceremonious complements of wooing, according as the Spirit moved him, he had
won her to a simpering consent of love toward him, to please her Fathers mind;
and (in all passages thereof) counterfeited her part* exceeding well, looked on
him with smiling eyes, framed her self to several fond gestures, and
dissembled her thoughts indeed so cunningly, as made her Father believe and
this Young Toby, that her heart was only his, showing, with bashfulnesse, such
outward expressions of a seeming passion, as willing Maids use to those whom
they they most endearedly affect. So that now the Old man's great joys, and the
Young man's conceited happiness, was grown so high, that without further delay, a
day was designed to link this young Couple together in the true Gordian knot
of Matrimony; not in the Old way of Ceremonious Marriage, but according to the
new Fashion. So diverse friends of both Parties were invited by the Old man's
direction, to see them effectually conjoined; who being assembled together in a
private Chamber, the Old Father (to b^ulk all circumstance) took his Daughter
by the hand, gave her freely to the young holy Brother, saying, Increase and
multiply honest TOBY, I give you here my Daughter and six hundred pound, which
shall be paid you after dinner all in good Angels and other gold, love her as
your yoke fellow, as your zeal shall inform you, and so God give you joy and
felicity many years together. This new fashined Marriage thus consummated, a
pragmaticall Cobbler there present, uttered a Sermon Extempore, concerning the
Duties of Marriage, comparing them to the several utensils of his own
occupation, as follows.

The Cobblers SERMON Extemporie.
Brethren, and beloved Friends here assembled, not to stand nicely upon the
choice of any Text, but according to the occasion of our present meeting, (as
being the conjunction of a young Couple in the bands of Matrimony) I will
declare briefly unto you the Duties of Marriage, by most familiar examples, and
such as the Utensils of mine own occupation presents to my intellect for your
better edification. Now mark beloved (quoth he) Even as I do shape out my
Soales equal one to another; so a Wife is a Soale that must be cut out to a
man's hand and made fit for him; and after she is once married she must take
heed that she tread not her shoo awry, for if she do, I can assure you she
will hardly ever be well underlaid: But what is that must unite and sow
together a Couple in Marriage? Surely it is love, that is the thread that makes
them hold fast in affection, and without love, those that are wrung with the
shoo of Marriage will fall all to pieces. Therefore dear Brother TOBY and
Sister RUTH. pray let your love be made of the strongest thread that it may sow
and conioyne you together upon the last of affection, in the new fashion of
Marriage. Th^s short Lesson being well grounded in you you may now kiss one
another, and do the rest that is to be done at night, after you have dined and
supped well: for now you are man and Wife in the holy New Fashion.

After the Cobbler had ended his Sermon, Dinner was sent in, and a long Grace
said; so they fell to their cheer: but now the Cobblers teeth wa^kt as fast as
his tongue, and all the Guests fed apace; only the Bride being inwardly
discontent, stood like a poor patient Grissell, sorry for what she had
formerly done, and would by no means sit down according to custom, nor have
her Bridegroom wait on her; bu^ earnestly desired her Father that since she was
married after the new Fashion, she might proceed contrary to the Old, and so
make it completely a new fashioned Wedding indeed. This was granted, and so our
young holy Sister wa^ted at the Table on her Bridegroom, wishing he might burn
his lips with eating his Broth too hot* or that some honest bone would stick in
his gullet and choke him; for she loved him not, but doted on the Cavalier, and
wished to be with him though in some disguise but that her Father watched her
so narrowly she knew not how to make escape: Whe^fore (though much against her
will she attended serviceably, till her Bridegroom and all the rest of the
Guests arose.

After Dinner was ended, they past the rest of the time in finging of Psalms,
and expounding Chapters, while the Bridegroom and Bride looked very demurely
each on other, and instead of making their legs walk in Dances to some Music,
they sat talking together to the edification of the simple. The Bride having
now received (in a plentiful measure) sundry Documents of wholesome instruction
from her holy Bride-grome, (being nevertheless half tired with his tedious
Expositions) rose up made a low courtesy, and gave him thanks: but remembering
her self of more material business yet behind, she solicited her Father upon
his promise to her on the Wedding day, that she (according to the new fashion
of Marriage) should receive her own Portion: whereupon the Old man unlocking
his Closet, brought out a long Bag full of old Angels and other Gold, which he
had gotten out of Vinegar and Mustard those two eager Elements; (for he was a
kind of a keen Chandler) the Gold stuck to his fingers like Bird-lime, loath
he was to part with it as with his own soul: but at last demurring, or rather
doting on his Daughters future preferment with his new selected Son in Law, he
began to spread his golden Pieces on the Table, and only told them out, for
they were all weight upon his certain knowledge; so wiping his eyes, and
indeed ready to weep at parting with his Gold, he called his Daughter unto him,
delivered it, and bad her tell out the full sum, which he had been raking
together many years industriously, as by turning the Mustard-mill, serving
halpeny-worths of Cheese, not half so long as his nose, utttring off Hucksters
rank Butter and Eggs half addle, as also by selling musty Vinegar and mangy
Tobacco: All which Hoord being now paid down for his Daughters Portion, he
desired her Husband that his Daughter might have her will on her Wedding day,
and (after the new Fashion of Marriage) receive it into her own custody, for
the use of him and his Heirs. The Bridegroom who was none of Father Wisdoms
Sons, and had his Religion only in his demure Face, and horne-pipe Nose,
through which he spoke snaffl^ngly to this purpose, That his Bride should
finger the Money now, as he intended to do her at night: and so lent her a
white Handkerchiefe to tie up his Father in Laws Gold; she accordingly took the
pains to draw it to her, and told again the golden Story to her self. The
Old man began now to recapitulate to all the Guests present* how he (with
consent of the Bridegroom his new created Son in Law, and according to the new
form of Marriage) had paid in to his Daughter 600. l. pound Portion, and so
his care and promise in that point was ended. The Bride in the mean time was
busied in disposing the Gold; she put it up into a leathern bag and (throwing
her Husband his Hand-kercher to wipe his nose on, for he should never see that
money again) she carried away the Prize, and laid it up close in her Chest:
the Old man applauded his Daughters care saying, she had made all cock-sure;
the Guests gave her likewise great commendation, and the Bridegroom Sir Toby
thought the Gold safe enough for him and his faithful generation. Having thus
debated the matter a while, the Old Man knocked with his Brasill staff, for his
Daughter tarryed long, and was doing something they little suspected, to put a
neat Plot upon them all; yet like an obedient piece of Virginity, she came at
his call, looking very cheerfully; the company were glad to see her so merry,
thinking the conceit of that nights pleasure to come, made her thus pleasant:
so the Old man the Bridegroom, and Guests began all to smile too though they
had small cause fort considering her purpose, which she so cunningly dissembled.

The wished night being come, they went all to Supper, but their bellies were
so full of good cheer, that they could eat but little; but especially the
Bride, who was thought to fast as Virgins use, being afraid at first to go to
bed to her Husband: but the Cobbler eat till he was ready to burst again; for
if a stitch had fallen in his guts, he knew how to sow them together again:
the other Guests also fell hardly toot tooth and nail; but the Old man only
eat but little, for the parting with six hundred pound in Gold had taken away
his stomach. After they had sat a while and talked as formerly, they called for
water to wash, and a demure Grace being said by the Old man, they all arose and
sat like Images of the new Reformation; till at last the Old man made a motion
that all the Guests there present and himself should accompany both the Bride
and Bride groom to their Chamber, and there leave them; to which all agreed,
and the young Couple were brought to their Bridall-Chamber accordingly: Now
whether they had a spiritual Sack-posset or no according to the old Fashion, I
know not; but the Bride earnestly besought her Father and all the Guests
present, that she might make it in all points a new Fashioned Wedding, and
therefore for some special reasons, desired that her Sweetheart and
Bridegroom might go to bed first; it was granted and he plucked off his
clothes and soon got within the sheets; so her Father and the other Guests
wishing them both good rest, took leave and departed, not thinking what would
afterward happen. No sooner was the Company gone out, but the Bride made fast
the door, as if she would presently come to bed to her Bridegroom, and began
to undresse in a slow manner, delaying the time by looking in her glass,
whilst her Bridegroom (grown very eager in his expectation) peeps wishfully
through the Curtains being all this while in a standing Ague and called to her
saying Sweet RUTH if thou love me, make have and come away to bed; verily I
have obeyed thy desire in all things hitherto. The Bride g^ancing back her eye
on him, seemed fribbling awhile about untying her Petticote; now thought young
Toby I believe indeed she will come to bed imediately. But Oh, on a sudden her
Prayer-Booke was missing, and she made an excuse to go down to fetch it: stay
Love says Toby, Prayer-Books are abominable, I will instruct thee how to pray
by the Spirit. But she craved leave to fetch up one more peculier which her
Mother gave her, and so flung out of the Chamber to seek it, locking the door
fast after her. The happy opportunity now suiting to her desire, she went
secretly into another Room, put on a new gown with all accoutremements
necessary and (by the help of her Fathers man whom she had acquainted with her
Project) went forth resolvedly to embrace her new Fortunes. All this while
young Toby lay much amazed that his Bride on her Wedding night too, should be
so slow in her approach to his Bed, being impatient of further delay, rose up
hastily, but finding the door locked fast against him, cried out the second
time, Sweet-beart where are you, what do you mean by this? Come away and
bring your Prayer-Booke with you: what does make you stay so long? At last
having no Answer, he knocked with a Bed ^^^ffe, so loud, that up starts the aged
father, who coming to the Chamber found the door locked, and his Son Toby
raging in his bed for lack of his new Bride; whereat being strong in passion,
he set h^s shoulder to the Wainscot door brake it open, resolving his Son in
law, that surely his Daughter was stolen out of the house but whither he knew
not, only he missed one of his men withal, and thence grew his greatest
suspicion.

The Old man and young Toby being stark mad at this disaster, seach'd all
corners of the house but found nothing but a Letter which discovered at full,
how she had appointed to get her Portion, and marry with the Cavalier. Thus the
Old man lost his Daughter and 600. l. young Toby was made a Gregory in losing
his Bride; and this New-Fashion'd Marriage is and will be talked of round about
the City: For never was the like trick showed by the wit of a Woman on her
Wedding Day.

FINIS.

