A SEASONABLE SPEECH BY Sir Nathaniell Coppinger. SPOKEN IN THE HIGH COURT OF
PARLIAMENT. October 24. 1641.

For the bringing of the Archbishop of Canterbury to his long expected Trial.
And concerning the Expulsion of Papists, in respect of their late dangerous
Plots: and the correcting of Separatists, in regard of their Errors.

Vera floreat Ecclesia.

London, Printed by B. A. for T. Bates, 1641,

C R
SIR Nathaniell Coppinger HIS WORTHY SPEECH In Parliament, spoken October 24.
1641.
Mr. Speaker:
SInce the Contagious time did dissipate us a while, and it has pleased the
mighty and Almighty God to recollect us again, let us unanimously concur in
ratifying, determining, and establishing the weighty affairs of this Kingdom:
for it is not unknown to you all, what Plots, and; formidable Conspiracies
have been invented against our Brethren the Scots, who are blessedly convented
in that Assembly: and God knows, what Stratagems are now plotted against our
selves. Therefore J acknowledge it very expedient, and requisite, that all our
consultations be firmly concatenated, in the indissoluble link of unanimity.

The Papists have been always mortal enemies to our State, and especially to
our Religion, and if they be not prevented with the expedition of Justice, I
fear they will add constructively to their former intentions.

They swarm most confusedly in our streets, daily studying to subvert, and
fully eradicate the true Reformation of Christian Religion.

And their hourly intent is to supplant the Foundation of our pious Laws, and
to diffuse aspersions upon our Church. They expalliate their knaverie, and have
done so a long time, although, thanks be to God, they have now been
discovered, and many of their Stratagems apparently demonstrated, to the
public Spectacle of the world.

You know in what danger our Scottish Brethren were incident unto; Therefore, I
beseech you, lay it to your serious cogitations, and if it be possible, let us
labor to prevent their Treason-growing malice. It has bin oftentimes moved
unto us, to expel them utterly from our Dominions, but as yet we have not
enacted it.

And for my part, I pray God we may confirm that first motion, and what we
have heretofore in action conceived fit, let us now indeed perfect. For I am
confident hereof, that our State, and Commonwealth cannot be secure, until we
exenterate those deadly Exulcerators of our Religion. In the mean while, give
me leave to pause. -- And now J think on it, we have a second crew, and but a
little inferior to the former, I mean the Separatists.

These are the new crept in Caterpillars of our Kingdom, who by their private
malice do as much contaminate the purity of Religion, as the former. Alas! can
we not keep the middle way? can we not walk in the middle, and secure path of
piety, but we must thus variously deviate; either swelling too high in
Papisticall opinions, or else sinking too low in Brownisticall Heresies?

Oh that we had a second Cicero to cry out again, O tempora! O mores! The
Poets feigned that Phaeton, when he neglected the middle way, wherein his
Father did direct him, was incontinently destroyed with a praecipitious ruin.

The Mythologie and Affabulation hereof, may agree with our times; for there
may be a Golden Moral contained in a leaden Fable: And I doubt, if we likewise
neglect the middle, and true ground of Religion, all things will turn into a
sudden confusion; for according to the Poet, Medio tutissimus ibis.

But stay! what should the cause be of these in digested Distractions of
Impurity. I conceive there is some proper, and peculiar Author of ale these
malignities. For according to the Philosophers rule, Nullus effectus datur sine
causa; there can be no effect without a cause naturally: neither can I imagine,
but that our corrupted springs of Piety do flow from one polluted Fountain.

You know my meaning, my mental reservation includes Canterburry, that
incendiary of this Kingdom: therefore let us not defer or procrastinate the
business any longer, but call him to an Answer, with all possible expedition.

He has hanged as Abraham's Ram in the Briars a long time: therefore I think
it high-time now to sacrifice him on his own Altar.

(...) beseech you, take all these precedent premises into your serious; and
grave considerations, and let not this Kingdom, which has a long time
languished in various, and erroneous opinions, be any longer frustrated of the
peaceful expectations of all men.

Once more, I beseech you, let us proceed in our determinations begun; for the
whole Nation depends upon us: therefore I crave your judicious resolutions
herein.

Let the Petition be read, and let us enter upon the work.

FINIS.

