JURA CLERI: OR AN APOLOGY For the Rights of the long-Despised CLERGY, Proving
Out of Ancient, and Modern Records, That the Conferring of Revenues, Honors,
Titles, Privileges, and Jurisdiction upon Ecclesiastics is Consistent with
Scripture, Agreeable to the Purest Primitive Times, and Justified by the
Vsance, and Practice of all Nations.

By PHILO-BASILEUS PHILO-CLERUS.

(...).

Ign. Ep. ad Smyrn. Sacerdotum Splendour, and Existimatio haud dubie ad ipflus
Religionis gloriam redundat, nec fieri potest, quin Religio illa sordeat, cujus
Ministros Populus despicit.

Gabr. Sionita. OXFORD, Printed by A. and L. LICHFIELD Printers to the
University, for THO. ROBINSON, 1661.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY OF CHARLES II, By the Grace of God, and his undoubted
Right, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
Most Dread Sovereign,
AMONGST the numerous Train of Mercies, that attended Your Majesty's Thrice
happy Restoration, Reviving the Hearts of a drooping Clergy may deservedly be
reputed none of the meanest. For if a true, impartial Estimate were taken of
all men's Sufferings, it would be found no Calling whatever drank so deeply of
the bitter Cup in our unnatural Wars as that, all the Rich Rewards of
Learning being withdrawn, Privileges reverst, their Lands exposed to Sale, and
Houses to Dilapidations. But it is an Observation of some, that after the most
bloisterous Storms, when the Ark of the Church has been long floating, and
ready to sink, God usually sends the fairest Calmes. Near 20 years together
has the Dignity, and of late the Office of the Ministry lain bleeding, and it was
drawing to its last Gasp, if a Miracle of Providence had not sent a Sovereign
Balm. And however for the present the wounds are a little bound up, yet has it
contracted so much weakness through ill Usage, that twill ask no small time to
recover its strength, though it meets with never so much tenderness and
Indulgence from its Nursing Father. It Is recorded to the Eternal Renown of the
great Constantine, that amongst all his Imperial Titles he gloried in none
more, then being styled, the Advocate of Gods Church. Pardon then, Great Sir,
an holy Presumption, if so inconsiderable a thing as I address my self to one
of the Potentest Monarchs upon Earth, in behalf of the long oppressed
Ambassadors of Christ. The Bounty and Munificence of your Godly Progenitors,
conferred large Revenues, and Immunities upon them, which the Sacrilegious
hands of some late Innovatours seized upon. Now is there any thing more
becoming the Royal Majesty of Great Britain, the Eldest Son of the Church,
Defender of the Faith, and Heir of such a Father, then to restore God his own.
Tertul. relates that the Heathens upbraided the Christians with their penurious
baseness in matters of Religion, and how much the Papists were scandalized at
our first Reformers for diverting the Churches Patrimony to private Uses, all
the world is too well acquainted. Let this Reproach be rolled away from the
Gospel, and let not Babylon be more liberal to uphold Idolatry, then Zion is to
maintain true Religion. The Eyes of all the Reformed, and Popish world are upon
you, it is the Hope of the former, and Fear of the latter, that under your
Protection our British Church may recover its pristine Glory. But if your
Majesty expects to have the Church furnished with able accomplished persons,
proportionable encouraegme^ts must not be denied, least the most pregnant Wits,
and raised Parts turn aside to the more gainful Professions of Law, and
Physic, which Promise both ampler Rewards, and higher Preferments, and are not
accompanied with so vast a charge as the Study of a Divine does necessarily
require I know the winning of Souls is in it self a sufficient Motive, but all
that are bred up in the Schools of the Prophets, do not presently shake hands
with the world in the heat of their Youth, but must have some other Allurements
suitable to flesh and Blood. Wisdom it self approves this course and uses the
same Attractives, Riches, and Honor are with me Prove. 8. Now since your Sacred
Majesty had no hand in first retrenching their Privileges, and alienating
their Revenues, it is hoped you will not contract the least Guilt by Tolerating
what may be redrest. So will you engage the Prayers of the Church, a stronger
Guard then all your Victorious Armies. So will your Kingdoms prosper; which
otherwise must never look to be happy, whilst the Church is miserable And how
powerful will the United Intercessions of so many Thousands be, daily
imploring the Throne of Grace, that the years most Barbarously cut off from
the Royal Father may be added to the Son, that as the Glory of the second
Temple went beyond that of the first, so may the Holiness, and Splendor of our
Restored Hierarchy exceed that of former Ages, which is the Souls Desire of

Your Majesty's Most Faithfully Devoted and Sworn Subject in all Affectionate
Loyalty Ph. Ph.

A Preface to the Ingenuous Reader.
I Presume there are few in our British Israel unacquainted how deeply the
Reputation of our Clergy has been wounded by the Fiery Darts of Fanatic
Spirits, and scoffing Atheists. And I wish those lately in power could wash
their hands from the guilt of this sin, which they too much adopted, either by
countenancing, or conniving at, and thereby hastened their deserved Ruin. Twere
fond arrogance to hope that my small Mite should much contribute to vindicate
their Honor, and wipe off that black dirt, wherewith they have been besmeared:
yet could I not forbear paying my due Respects to that Sacred Function, and
manifesting my sense of their unparalleled sufferings. Many Months did I wait,
expecting, that some learned Pen would have taken this task in hand, but when I
saw those Eminent Persons (whose Books I am not worthy to carry after them)
either otherwise employed, or forgetful of this grand Concernment: rather then
so good a Cause should be betrayed by silence, I was persuaded to consecrate my
weak Endeavors (the product of some leisure Hours) to the Churches Service. I
know here are sundry Passages that will not relish with many, from whom I must
expect slender thank for my pains, but let the issue be what twill I shall
content my self, with that of an Ancient, Non tanti est unius vita, quanti est
Dignitas omnium Sacerdotum. Nay if the loss of my poor Fortunes, my Hopes, my
Life, could purchase my Dear Mothers Tranquillity, and happiness, I could
gladly sacrifice all, and make it the Birth of my first Action. Many a tear
have the breaches of our English Zion cost me; and all my hearts desire is,
that Sober Persons would lay aside petty Animosities, and for the Churches
Peace, on the one hand, not peevishly scruple innocent Ceremonies, nor on the
other rigorously obtrude unwarrantable, but unite against the Common Enemies,
Papists and Sectaries, whose implacable malice equally threatens ruin to the
Reformed Clergy, the one directly striking at their very Being, the other
designing the same thing, but taking an oblique course by undermining their
comfortable Subsistence, Honors, and Privileges. This only I must disclaim
before all the world, that I have not the least thought in the following
Treatise, to become an Advocate for Luxury, Pride, Idleness, or any thing that
is morally dishonest: the severe Reformation of which I both hope, and wish
those in Authority may vigorously endeavor. Scandalous Loiterers being no
less pernicious then Schismatic Innovatours, and sooner may my hand rott
off, and my Tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, then ever I speak, or write
in defense of such, or against the power of Godliness. My Name I have
studiously suppressed, least the inconsiderableness of it should create
Prejudices, and injure the truth. But if any be so curious as to enquire after
it: Let him know that I am one who can safely Profess, that ever since I was
able to look into Controversies, have always reverenced Grayheaded Antiquity,
and detested factious Novelty. Nor had I held my peace formerly, but that I
despaired my poor Bucket could have done any thing to the quenching of such a
Fire, when the whole Nation was on a light Flame. This farther encouragement I
have to use the more ingenuous Freedom, as not any way partaking in what is
here contended for, nor (as to my particular interest) gaining the least by our
late happy Revolution. And as far as I am acquainted with my own deceitful
heart, I dare no less confidently avow, that I was not induced to put Pen to
Paper, by any ambitious Hopes, a private Retirement (which through mercy I
enjoy) being all I covet: So that my great, my only Aim is, Piety, and Peace,
the flourishing of the Church, and State, which like, Hippocrates Twins, have
long Mourned, and it is hoped will now Rejoice together.

THE CLERGIES REVENUES.
CHAP. I. A Priesthood proved as Ancient as the World, continued in all Ages,
with an Honorable allowance to the Firstborn, and the Levites.
THat God in all Ages has had a select number deputed to attend his Public
Worship, and Minister in Holy things, is a Truth that none can deny, who own
the Scripture. For 2000 years, and upwards after the Creation this was
entrusted to the Firstborn, as is evident out of Philo, Josephus, Maimonides,
and other Jewish Writers, who all unanimously acknowledge that the Priesthood
was ever annexed to the Primogeniture till the Law given by Moses. It being the
confessed duty and privilege of the eldest, to take care of Sacrifices, and
other Rites then in use. Bertram de Rep Jud. c. 2. Grot. in Number. 19.22.
Thus Adam, Seth, who taught his children to call upon the name of the Lord,
Genesis 4. And Enoch those Ante-Diluvian Patriarchs; and (that Heathen Janus) Noah
a Preacher of Righteousness 2. Pet. 2.5. After the Flood, Melchisedeck,
Abraham, Jacob, etc. whilst the Law of nature lasted.

Upon the delivery of the Mosaical Law, we find the Firstborn redeemed and
discharged from their attendance, God himself giving them a Writ of ease, and
designing the Children of Levi for their Successors, Numb. 3.45. In whose hands
the management of Ecclesiastical Affairs continued, near 2000 years more
without any considerable interruption, till in the fullness of time by the
Incarnation of the Son of God, the Priesthood of Aaron being abolished, our
Mediator of a better Covenant, no less faithful in his house then Moses, Heb.
3. left not his Lambs without Shepherds, but appointed Preachers of the Gospel
to take the room of the casheered Levites, and promised his presence with them
to the end of the world, Mat. 28.

Thus we see a Priesthood clearly deduced, and that God never wanted some in a
more immediate manner to attend his Worship from the day the first foundation
of the earth was laid. Our next Quaere is what proportion was allotted for the
maintenance of these three distinct Successive Orders. For the firstborn there
is little controversy; it being granted on all sides, that their Privileges
and Honors were great, being appointed Lords over their Brethren, Chrysostom. de
Sacerd.
a Princely Prerogative, Genesis 49.8. and a double portion assigned them, the
better to support the Dignity of their Degree, and Function. See Grot. upon the
Deuteronomy. 21.17.

We come in the second place to surveigh the Levitical Institution, and enquire
what a liberal allowance God made them. Now the best course to take an estimate
of that is by examining the Proportion this Tribe bare to the rest. You have
all the 12. Tribes, that were able to go forth to war, mustered and polled,
Number. 1.46. compared with the 3.39. where the Levites are numbered from a month
old and upwards: yet see what a vast disproportion, the former amounting to
603550, the latter to barely 22000. none excepted. Let us then but make some
small allowance for those under 20. and above 50. years old, ages excused from
the war, Josephus.
and so not reckoned in the first sum: these we cannot rationally imagine to
be less than a third part more. So that by this computation, the Levites will
not amount to above a fortieth, some say a fiftieth, or 60th part of the
nation. Their numbers being thus cast up, let us descend to the proportions of
their allowance. And here I am persuaded, that some Fanatic Sacrilegious
persons will be ready to blaspheme, with that profane Alphonsus, in a parallel
case; if they had been the Allmighties Counselors, they would have made a more
equitable division, then we find recorded, and would have judged a fortieth
part more than sufficient for such Loiterers. But the most wise God made them
anothergets proportion, allowing them 48 Cities, Cunaeus de Rep. Jud.
some Royal ones, and the fairest in the Nation, with the adjacent Country 2000
Cubits, or a mile about every way; no small matter in that petit tract of Land,
hardly exceeding four of our larger Counties. Hieronym. ad Dardan. Adricom.
Add to this the tenth of all increase of Corn, Cattle, First Fruits,
offerings, Vows, Redemptions, amounting to no less than 24 several dues, as
the Learned Buxtorph Synag. Jud.
collects out of the Rabbis: and which may justly come in as none of the
meanest advantages, all this brought to their Barns, without any farther
trouble, charge or confideration; that Nation ever conscientiously paying their
Tithes, and frequently preventing the demand, being persuaded it was the Hedge
of their riches, according to the Drus. Prove.
Talmudical Canon. Now put all this together, with many other particulars
mentioned in Josephus and the Rabbis, even Seldom himself (none of the best
friends the Church ever had) Rev. Hist. Tith. c. 2.
is forced to grant that this smallest Tribe had near three times the annual
Revenue of the largest among them. If any one desire to be better satisfied
about this, let him but read Philo (...): out of whom I shall set down this one
remarkable observation, that the people were commanded to bring their offerings
first to the Temple, that the Priests might not be upbraided, or blush to take
their provision thence, as not coming from the courtesy of men, but from the
bounty of the Lord of all. And he farther adds, that through the populousness
of the Land, the abundance was such. that the poorest Priest in the 24 Courses,
might justly be reputed a wealthy person; concluding, (...). Ibid.

Now this was the maintenance allotted by the most prudent of Lawgivers,
confirmed by an inviolable Decree, as the Magna Charta of that Nation, and
chalking out to others what method they should use in suitable Cases. Nor do we
find the great Searcher of Hearts, straitning his hand upon any such politic
considerations, as that Riches puff up, and it is best for Religion to keep its
servants in poverty. These covetuous Axioms are of less standing, and cannot
challenge God for their Author.

CHAP. II. Equity, Scripture, and the practice of the primitive times plead for
the Revenues of the Gospel Ministry, with instances of the Heathen bounty
toward their Priests.
WE have seen the Firstborn, and the Leviticall Priesthood liberally provided
for, and can less in reason, in equity, be allotted to the Ministry of the
Gospel, which the great Apostle of the Gentiles proves to be more excellent and
glorious, and in point of honor far beyond it, 2. Cor. 3.7, 8, 9. the one
being employed to kill, and slay beasts, the other being Commissioned
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ. It Is confessedly true then that under the Old
Testament, God had a peculiar right to the tenth part of every man's estate, as
a Tribute due to his Sovereignty: and all Laws assure us, that what was once
legally invested in a person, continues so for ever, unless forfeited or
resigned. Now the former cannot be supposed, and for the latter we find nothing
in the New Testament, wherein God either directly or indirectly has quitted or
renounced his title, or changed it for another rate. At the first express
appointment of Tithes, Numb. 16.21. It Is manifest the principal end was to
maintain Gods public worship, and for the comfortable subsistence of those
that attended it. Admit then there be some alteration as to the manner, yet the
substance still remains. And the Apostle seems totidem verbis to confirm it, 1.
Cor. 9.13.14. They which wait at the Altar are partakers even so -- in the self
same manner as it was under the Old Testament, (mutatis mutandis) shall it be
continued under the New, it is both Equity, and the divine designation, For the
proportion was given to the service, not the men. I know some insist much upon
the prophecy of Ezekiel, c. 45. Villalpandus.
confessedly respecting Gospel times, wherein God commands the Land to be
divided into three parts, reserving one for himself, his Sanctuary and Priests,
appointing a second for the Prince, and the remainder to the house of Israel.
And it is an observation of Origin, Hom. 11. in Number. and of S. Austins in Psalm.
146. that if under the Law the tenth was paid, then more must be paid under the
Gospel, because our righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5.20.

It Is true we have not such clear proofs of the payment of Tithes in the three
first Centuries, necessity of the times, and frequent Perambulations forcing
the Prosessors of the Gospel to neglect their just rights. But to draw an
argument hence against them, is all one, as if a man should dispute against the
necessity of Circumcision, and Sacrifices under the Law, because God dispensed
with them, during the 40 years wandering in the Wilderness, till the children
of Israel came to a setlement. Josh. 5.5. Amos 5.25. Certain it is, the
Primitive Christians did not content themselves with Decimating only, no, their
fervent zeal carried them out farther, many times to sell all their estates,
and lay them at the Apostles feet, Acts 4. which 1000 of devout persons
imitated in after Ages, either in their lives consecrating some part of their
substance, or at their deaths bequeathing it as a Legacy. Tertul. Apologe c. 39.
Nothing more frequent in those early times, then these Deposita Pietatis.
Origin Tract. 31. in S. Mat. mentions some Ecclesiastical Rents and Incomes in
his time. And Cyprian, when he found his hearers somewhat slack, and cold in
their contributions, upbraids them, That they did not give so much as Tithes,
Nunc de Patrimonio nec decimas damus: De Unit. Eccl. parag. 23. Is not this
sufficient? Eusebius speaks of a House belonging to the Church under Aurelius
A. 273. which he commanded Paulus to surrender up. Eccle. Hist. L. 7. c. 30.
Nay we read in Optatus Milevitanus L. 1. that the Church of Carthage had
ornamenta plurima aurea, and argentea. And if scossing Lucian may be credited,
in Tra ans days, he describes one of the Christian (...), or Churches, richly
guilt, and adorned. Dialog. Philopatris. Strange pomp! even whilst the
persecuting fury lasted. It Is granted, the Pagan Emperors did always sequester
such estates as were thus devized. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 9. c. 8. Hence we find
the possessions of Lucina, a rich Roman Lady, demised to religious uses,
escheated by Maxentius, and her self banished. Sabell. Enn. 7. L. 8. And these
Sequestrations lasted till Constantine and Licinius revokt that impious decree,
commanding all Houses, Gardens, or whatever goods belonged to the Church, to be
restored, Eusebius. Eccle. Hist. l. 10. c. 5. which puts it beyond dispute, that
there were Ecclesiastical Revenues before their time, otherwise that Edict had
been in vain. And soon after free leave is given to every man to exercise his
charity of lands or goods, Cod. Theod. L. 16, without danger of a statute of
Mort-main. So that the storm being thus happily blown over, wealth came
tumbling in upon the Church. Constantines great Largess is recorded by
Eusebius, (and with some fabulous additions) in the Life of Silvester, by
Damasus and Anastasius. Cedrenus farther informs us that in the 20 and 26. year
of his Empire, he labored to pull down the Idols with their Temples, and to
convert their demeasnes to the worship of the true God. Many of his religious
Successors trod in the same steps, and the world did as twere with an holy
emulation contend, who should most adorn the Spouse of Christ. Whence it is
almost incredible to what splendour the Church grew in a few years: V. Council.
Berytin. de Eccle. Edess. Agrippin. A. 356. Romans 4. A. 375.
and this prosperity continued till new tempests arise, and those barbarous
Inundations of the Northern fury over whelmed all.

Nor was this proper only to the Servants of the true God, but even Pagan
Idolaters practiced the same. None amongst their numerous Deities (whereof
Varro and Hesiod reckon up a parcel of 30000) wanted his Priest to serve at the
Altar, but their great Gods were not content with a few, Jupiter, Mars, and
Romulus had ever good store, who lived in great state. Strabo recounts a
thousand Hierodoulists belonging to the Priests of Bellona, l. 12. Geogr. Now
the very light of nature did dictate this equitable rule to them that those who
served at the Altar should be maintained by it. Tulli de Divinat. Dionist.
Halyc.
Hence we find Brentius in Levit.
vast allowances made them, with standing demeanes; and Tithes too, not
occasional, and to Hercules alone, but constant, but to all, which custom
many conceive they borrowed form the ancient Patriarchs, Brentius in Levit.
the sons of Noah spreading it among the Nations, the Devil ever Apeing the
true Relligion. I shall not at present enquire after more then the Greeks and
Romans, who successively swaied the world, and for the former of them
Harpocration is witness (...), joined to that of Callimachus (...). -- Then
fot the Romans, Varro, Cato, Plutarch in Lucullo, Livy of Gamillus, l. 5. have
invincibly demonstrated it to be their practice. Not. Hist. L. 12 c. 14. and 19.
If any man desires to search further, he may find Pliny affirming of the
Sabeans, that it was not lawful for the Merchants to dispose of their Spices
and Perfumes until the Priests had set apart the tenths for their God Sabis.

I shall not insist upon that of Festus, Decima quaeque Veteres Diis suis
offerebant, because Scaliger and Seldom except against it, though I think
without any ground; but conclude this Paragraph with that of Junius Paral. l.
3. c. 7 Decimae jure omni post hominum memoriam Deo fuerunt sacrae. Thus the
very Gentiles, who had not the law, were yet by nature directed to do the
things of the law. But I have only glanced at this, it being so copiously
handled in others.

CHAP. III. Church Revenues long untouched, C. Martel the first that invaded
them, but soon seconded by Henry the Eight and others, though most unhappily.
For some 100 of years the Church Demeanes were looked upon as sacred, and
Tithes an Estate entailed upon those that attended the Divine setvice. And how
durst any earthly power attempt the cutting off that which the King of Kings
had settled by a perpetual Act, and never to this day reversed or nulled.
During all the Leviticall Administration, though we meet with many of the
Rulers desperately wicked, yet still they retained so much reverence to
Religion, that none arrived to such an height of Impiety in their greatest
exigences, as with a sacrilegious hand to touch these holy things. Under the
Gospel, C. Martel is branded to be the first that led the dance, and taught
Christian Princes this crying sin. The occasion thus, as it is recorded by Gaguin
l. 3. p. 43. Upon the Inundation of the Goths, Vandals and other barbarous
Nations into Christendom, the bowels of the Clergy yearning toward their
distressed Brethren, they were willing in such a juncture to morgage the best
part of their Revenues to furnish this famous Warrior with an Army to suppress
the Barbarians, upon solemn promise, and oath of restitution (with advantage)
when the danger was over. But Swordmen are not easily held by such weak
obligations: for having once got them into his clutches, and tasted the sweet
of so fat a morsel, being drunk with success, he divided them amongst his
Victorious Legions. Hinc nostrae lacrymae, hence the Church may date the
original of her ruin. For the gap being opened, there wanted not profane
Spoilers enough to follow the steps of this bold leader. Now it is but a short
cut from Callis to Dover; and this example easily wafted over that Straight.
Several attempts were made against the Clergies wealth, but none took till Hen.
8. who had too much occasion to quarrel with the Monks and Friars, in whose
Cells and Cloisters, the blindness and superstition that reigned from the
ninth to the thirteenth Century, had placed all Devotion: though however
Monasteries were then abused, and are now looked upon with prejudice, yet in the
Primitive times they were the Hospinian.
Seminaries of Learning and Religion; and under this notion are so much cried
up by the Ancients. Now the King finding many Tithes converted, and
appropriated to these Houses (which some conceive to be one main cause of their
downfall) being carried away by the error of the times, and transported by
passion and covetousness, never thought of restoring them to their proper
owners, but politickly concluded the best way to secure all was to get the
whole Temporalties and Revenues of Religious Houses, by Act of Parliament
escheated to the Crown, which was soon hudled up. Next that the Laity might be
the more engaged to stand by him, and oppose Rome, he was content they should
partake in the spoils, and so divided them amongst his Nobles, with a prodigal
hand distributing as freely as he received. In this fatal Desolation, some
reckon there were swallowed up no less than 645. Monasteries, 96 Colleges.
110 Hospitals, 2374 Chanteries and Free-Chappels, Harpsfield Hist. Eccles.
to which may be added 3800, and odd impropriate Churches, to this day
maintained by pitiful Arbitrary Pensions, Spelm^^. Tithes.
though his Sacred Majesty, as becomes a true Nursing-Father, has already taken
it into his Religious care, to make better provision for some, and it is hoped
will proceed to perfect so good a work.

The great Oracle of our Law, my Lord Cook, complains much of this alienating
Abby-Lands, and says it was every good man's wish, that their Revenues, and
Impropriate Tithes, had been converted rather for the advancement of the
Church, to a better maintenance of the laboring, and deserving ministry,
Releife of the Poor, and such pious uses, which would still have retained a
Character of their Devotion, that first dedicated them, and prevented the
Scandal, and Obloquy thereby brought upon Religion. All the world being amazed
at such impiety, and the many glorious Projects urged in Parliament, to color
the Action, which we have recorded, Inst. B. 4. p. 44, coming to just nothing,
the burden of the Subject being afterward rather increased, then lessened. I
am none of those that desire to pry into the secrets of the Allmighty, much
less to give sentence with the bold Romanists, but it is somewhat observable
that though Henry the Eight left an hopeful Progeny behind him, One Son, and
Two Daughters, (and if multitude of Wives would have done it, might have had
many more) yet in a few years there remained not one of his seed to sit on the
Throne of England. The righteous God many times visiting the sins of the
Father, upon the Children. And if a curious eye would but run over the List of
those Courtiers and Grandees, enriched by the spoils of the Church, it will
soon be discerned the blessing of the Lord went not with them; many notable
Judgments breaking in upon most of their Persons Families, or Estates. See
Wolseys Life.
The great Ringleader Martels issue lasted not beyond the Third Generation,
and Cardinal Wolsey, who began with the smaller Covents, Oration. Stan
did not hold up his head long after, but soon declined in the Royal Favor,
and came to an unhappy end. Stanislaus Socolovius takes the Turks succesfull
Invasion of Hungary, to be a Judgment upon that Nation, L. 7. de Bell. Sacro.
for their undervaluing the Clergy, and seizing upon their Temporalties. And
Gul. Tyrius imputes the dismal blow given to the Templars fortunes to have
proceeded from their detaining Tithes, and invading the Glebe-Land of the
Church. Whosoever desires to see more of this nature may be furnished at large
in Bredenbachius de Sacrileg. Vindic. and Paen. so true is that of Solomon, It
is a snare to a man to devour that which is holy, Prove. 20.25. Let no man then
imagine that estate will long prosper, which is purchased by robbing of God.
For Calvin himself, styles Tithes, Gods proper Right, a Sacred and Royal
Tribute, which he appointed to be gathered in his own name, to silence
murmurings. Com. in 27 Lev. p. 2. God is the great Landlord of the world, the
Earth is his, Psalm. 24.1. Nine parts he has Farmed out to the Sons of Men, the
Tenth he requires as a Reserved Rent, and Acknowledgment that they hold it of
him, appointing heretofore the Firstborn, then the Levites, and now the
Preachers of the Gospel his Stewards, and Receivers.

I shall not here nicely debate the Tenure of Tithes, many learned persons
plead the Jus Divinum of them, and modesty will allow me to go thus far that
they can show a fairer title to it, then sundry other things that rigidly put
in for it. It Is most clear, our Law is point blanck, Cook L'Evesque de Winch.
Case.
Dismes sont chooses spirituels, and due de Jure Divino.

But let Gospel or Law say what they will, too many to this day, obstinately
detain the Lords Portion as their just Possession, given to, or bought by their
Sacrilegious Ancestors, of such, who many fear, will at last, hardly justify
their Authority in selling, and alienating, or secure the Purchasers. Then
Caveat Emptor, all Laws esteem the detainer of stolen Goods, little better
then the Theif. Nay some plead Prescription, and think that 100 years quiet
Possession, is a sufficient Title, but Nullum Tempus occurrit Regi, The King of
Heaven cannot loose his Right by time, especially when so many of his
Messengers, have often in their Masters name put in Exceptions, Spelm. de non
Tem. Eccl. Sclater, Montagne, etc.
and made Demand. It Is a judged Case, Dominium transfer non potest, qui ipse
Dominus non est. Now when things are once Consecrated to God, the property is
invested in him. And who is so bold as to enter the List with the All-mighty?
can his heart endure, or his hands be strong in the day that God shall plead
with him?

Others comfort themselves with this, that though a private person cannot
revoke his gift, yet the Public Magistrate, and the Body of the Nation may do
much. I must not be too busy in stating this ticklish point; yet, methinks,
Reason seems to suggest, that when once the Supreme Powers, have by their
consent, ratified such a Donation, as in this case it has been done over and
over, it may be judged Tantamount, and they equally engaged; but as I dare not
condemn, so I cannot absolve, unless with the late Earl of Pembroke, I should
ascribe Omnipotency to a Parliament. It Is sufficient to me, that the God of
Heaven has enacted a peremptory Decree, Ezech. 48.14. which all that fear him
will be tender to transgress, that which is once holy, can no more become
alienable, especially since Interpreters generally take this Vision to concern
the days of the Messiah.

I know there have been many conscientious persons, who have trembled to touch
these hollowed things, and have in Amongst others that Eminent Patron of
Learning and Religion, the Lord Scudamore has lately dispriviledged, and made
subject to Tithes, several of his Worthy Copy
tenderness restored the Churches Patrimony, which their daring Progenitors
feased upon. The Lord remember them in the Great Day of Account, and increase
their number, that Church-Robbing may not still be the sin of England; which,
though an Earthly Tribunal may acquit men of, yet there is a Court of
Conscience, another Impartial Bar, that all must appear before, where the Judge
is a Party, You have robbed me, Mal. 4. And let not that known Rule be
forgotten, Non remittitur peccatum, nisi Restituatur ablatum. But enough of
this, if not too much.

Lands at Abbey Door in Hereford shiere. LLantony in Gloucester shiere, etc. a
for others to write after. Nor does there want matter for their Charity. All
the Revenues of the Rebuffus de Decim. Gregor Tholosan.
Templars, Hospitallers, Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, with the whole Order
of Cistercians, etc. being by Papal Dispensation, which still holds, wholly
exempted.

CHAP. IV. Pretenses of Reformation. Objections from Scripture answered, Many
Inconveniences attending the Clergies Poverty.
I Know the great Pretense, and Cloak for Sacrilege has been, and still is, to
reduce Religion to the Primitive Purity; but the event most commonly, if not
ever, has proved it to be no other, then to bring the Clergy to the Primitive
Poverty. Lud. Vives in his Com. upon S. Austin, de Civit. D. tells us, that
Ceres Priests put on a Coat the day of their Initiation, which they never left
off till such time, as it was so ragged, that it would no longer hang to their
backs. And if Spiritual persons were left to some men's allowance, this would be
their Portion, and necessity would constrain them to fast, and pray. Certainly
it is a shameful blot that will never be wiped off from our Reformers, that
instead of redressing grievances, and removing corruptions in Religion, they
have still unhappily fallen to plundering Church Revenues. Thus 'twas in
Germany, Sweden, Denmark, and I wish England could be left out of the
Catalogue. I am ashamed thus to uncover my Mothers nakedness, and that these
things should be published in Askelon; but they are too notorious, acted in the
face of the World. And I scarce have heard or read of any Reformation free,
except that of Wittenberg, who contracted less guilt then their neighbors,
employing most of the demolished Abby-Lands, in other public and Religious
uses. So that I may complain with the Father, Austin Ep. 154.
Non Pietate everterunt Idola, sed avaritia. And if it be lawful to speak it, I
must needs say it has been often my fear, that too many were instrumental in,
and rejoiced at the Extirpation of Popery, for no other reason, then that it
made way for their Sacrilege, and if danger of loosing their ill gotten goods
did not terrify, they would as little be troubled at its return.

But the threadbare excuse for all is, That they were bestowed in dark times,
and to superstitious ends: should I grant the whole, which I shall have more
occasion to speak to in the following Chapter; yet I am half afraid, that the
ignorant Superstition of our bountiful Ancestors, will find more favor in the
great day of reckoning, then the knowing Sacrilege of their Penurious
Posterity. I confess, it is matter of wonder to me, that any envious eye should
repine at the large Revenues of the Church, which the Liberality and
Magnificence of Princes, and other Benefactors have bestowed upon it. Did their
Purses pay for it, there might be some reason for murmuring; but when none are
oppressed, none injured, many thousand Tenants gratified by good Leases, and
the hungry bellies of the poor relieved by the full Tables of Ecclesiastics,
it speaks an unworthy sordid spirit, to deny others Liberty to exercise that
Charity, which their covetuousnesse will not permit. Who will grudg them a
plentiful maintenance, that freely receiving, freely give?

But some insist much upon the poverty of Christ and his Apostles, which they
very zealously commend as a pattern for Preachers of the Gospel, exempting all
other orders of men, and priviledging them from this strictness. Excellent
Doctrine! which allows so fair a liberty to the generality of Professors, as
not concerned to imitate this grand Exemplar, nor observe his rigorous
Injunctions of leaving all, and following him.

But may it not as rationally be concluded, if his life respected no other then
those that immediately attend his Worship, his precepts reach no other, that no
other shall receive benefit by his Death, no other be saved by him. Though this
consequence will hardly be granted, which yet undeniably follows from the
Premises. Indeed we have a Command, Luke 9. that the Disciples should possess
neither gold, nor silver, no money in their Purses, not two coats, neither
shoes. So that if the Letter must be stuck to, why are not all Preachers, by
virtue of this, enjoined to go naked, and barefoot. May we not therefore safely
believe, that many of these Precepts were only Personal, and Temporary; as
that, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, but to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel -- and salute no man -- which all but the Quaking Principles
acknowledge to be no longer binding. If then there be any force in those
Allegations, they equally belong to all that have given up their names to
Christ; and cannot be restrained to the Clergy alone: for if want and poverty
were to be their continued portion, it was madness in St. Paul to require them to
be lovers of Hospitality, Tit. 1.8. which they can exercise only in good wishes.

Again, is there no difference between the Apostles and us, that their practice
is so much urged? They had such immediate assistance, that there was no need of
study for their Preaching, whereby they had leisure enough to fish, and make
Tents for a livelihood: but Ours are forced to pore upon Books, to meditate,
write, and all hardly sufficient to search out the deep mysteries, which cost
them no pains, the Spirit supplying the place of all. Now to make amends for
those Extraordinary Qualifications, and abundant measure of Spiritual Graces,
wherewith they were furnished above us, it has pleased the Lord of the Harvest,
in these later days, to raise up Christian Magistrates, to assist and
encourage his Laborers, and appoint them a more settled plentiful allowance.

Others mutter that Affluence is a great Temptation, and exposes them to Pride
and Luxury. For this let experience judge whether many times Diogenes prove not
more supercilious then Plato, there be not as much insolence under a
Freeze-Jerkin, as a Velvet Jippo, a Geneva Rocket, as an Episcopal Cassock, Nay
there are some Scores will be ready to depose, that within these few years,
they saw as little Humility, and as much Voluptuousness in some ordinary Heads
of Colleges, and Pastors of Congregations, (caeteris paribus) as ever was
charged upon the late Archbishop of Canterbury, or any that enjoyed the fat
See of Winchester. Let not any one mistake me as a Patron of idleness, or an
Advocate for the Luxury of spiritual persons. God, and my Conscience bear me
witness, how much I abominate such a thought; all my fear is, that beggary,
and the sordid competency, which some men talk of and project, is the readiest
way to usher in Atheism and Profaneness. For poverty of Preachers brings them
into contempt; and when once men begin there, the next step is to despise
Spotswood in Congullus.
Religion it self. Insomuch, that it may confidently be affirmed, there is
nothing more dishonorable to the Gospel, or disadvantageous to the happy
progress of it, then the low condition of its publishers. Perfection is not
here to be expected, the holiest men are still flesh and blond, and do we not
every hour see it before our eyes, how much want depresses the spirit, and
cools zeal. A poor Preacher, that has a large Family to maintain, will hardly
take the courage to reprove a bosom vice, in his Lordly Patron, and dissolute
Parishioners; if he lives upon their Trenchers, and must stand to their
allowance, many faults must be winked at, and a fair construction put upon foul
miscarriages. But when able parts, an upright conversation, and suitable
revenues meet, that a Pastor can as well give, as receive courtesies, and not
depend upon the Benevolence of his people; with what authority can such a man
deliver himself: his Doctrine is embraced as an Oracle, for, (as one notes) it is
an error that will never be beaten out of the pates of the Vulgar, who imagine
wisdom always to go hand in hand with Riches and Power; and it is a complaint as
old as Solomon, that the poor wise man, with all his wisdom, is despised, Eccl.
9.15. May it not then justly be feared, that poverty of the Clergy will beget a
dull and stupid irreverence in the minds of ordinary persons? Majesty it self
being apt to be slighted and trampled upon, when destitute of its accustomed
state: and our Judges find, there is nothing does so much purchase them the Cap
and Knee of the trembling multitude, as their Robes, Pomp, and Grandeur. Sure I
am, it is one of the greatest scandals to the Papist, to see the Magnificence and
Splendor of their Prelates, and the meannesse, I had almost said beggary, of
some of ours. And, though the power of Religion does not consist in these
externals, yet something must be allowed to Christian Prudence, which may well
suggest this seasonable advice to our Governors, to restore God his own, who
gave Caesar his. Hieronym. de Cevallos is my Author, that if a true estimate
were made of all the Spanish Territories, 'twould be found the Ecclesiastics
possessed near as much, if not more, then the Seculars. Relat. Vniv. L. 1. p. 4.
Brerewood Enq. Sands Eur. Spec.
Boterus goes a step farther, who has a conceit, That for the Reverence and
Wealth this nation bestowed upon the Clergy, God gave them the Indian Mines.
And their vast Demeasnes in Germany, France, Italy, Poland, etc. almost
surpass belief. For the Eastern Churches, if Hercules may be measured by his
foot, the riches of the ancient Greek Patriarchs, may be conjectured at by one
Cedren. p. 638 Ed. Par.
Theophylact, who kept a stable of 2000 Horses, with all other things
answerable, and by the multitude of their Codin Curopalat. de Official. Eccle.
Constant.
Officials, recorded in unquestionable Historians.

Then for the great plenty and Luster they formerly lived in amongst us, we may
judge by one Metropolitan William Warham A. 1504, when no less a Peer then the
Duke of Buckingham was his steward, and chief Butler riding before the first
Mess with his white staff at the Archi-Episcopal Inthronization. And the many
stately Fabrics of Palaces, Churches, Colleges, Hospitals etc. built by
their purses, stand Eternal Monuments of their Noble Minds, and to upbraid the
Ingratitude of Posterity. For now it is grown the reproach of our Reformed world,
that for the most part they have taken up the Niggardly Opinion of that
Apostate Disciple, who thought all to be waste that was bestowed on Christ in
such a sort, and would make the strict Rule of mere necessity an adequate
proportion for the great Supravisours of souls. As if the bountiful hand of
God which has dealt so liberally with all other Degrees, was only straightned
toward his own Inheritance. Is it not strange in a Christian Kingdom, to see
every half-witted shallow-braind Fellow of an other profession, leap into a
considerable Estate, purchase the lasting Inheritance of some 1000, without the
least envy or censure; and yet the petty Salary of 80, or 100 per An. grudged
the Noblest, and best-furnished Souls the Earth bears. It Was the saying of a
wise Statesman, that Scandalous Maintenance makes Scandalous Ministers, and
what pityfull Sots many grow by reason of short Stipends, becoming obnoxious to
the Scoffs and Derision of Profane ones, experience sadly testifies. Assuredly
then, if a man should make a Covenant with Hell, and Contract with Satan to
supplant the kingdom of Christ, he could not proceed in a more hopeful
method, then to drive his Ministers to Difficulties, and Straights. I can
safely profes my self as little a Friend to Rome, as any person living, yet can
I not but commend this virtue in an Enemy. And I take the Splendor, (I had
almost said) prodigal Maintenance of their Clergy, to be the greatest support
and Pillar of that long tottering Structure. Now is it not a reproach to a
Nation professing the purity of the Cospel, that the Idolatrous Masse-Munger
amongst the Romanists, and the Pagan Sacrificers should receive a more ample
and honorable allowance then the Faithful Servants of the true God. Nor need
any one dread the Clergies growing too rich if the Revenues were as large
again. Since Hospitality and Charity are two Principal Qualifications
required at their hands and due from them; these will keep them low enough, and
prevent their Purchasing. To say nothing of the Dilapidations, and deplorable
ruins in so many late flourishing Cathedrals, and other ancient Piles, which
are sinking, unless supported by their Munificence. Nor to mention their
chargeable Educaion in the Universities, which commonly eats out most of their
Portions, the expenses of Books, Vossit Biblioth. Dr. Wilkins Preacher.
600 Pound being soon consumed in purchasing an indifferent Library of some
choice Authors in each kind, as many have made appear. Nor lastly to take
notice of crazy bodies the Epidemicall Fate of most hard Students, whereby they
are enforced to more then ordinary charge of Physic, and other necessaries.
And if their providence has not laid up against such a storm, (which
considering the premises, and their ingenuous manner of living cannot
rationally be expected) both they and theirs, must look to encounter Hunger,
Nakedness, and such like hardships, or (which goes nearer then all the rest to
a generous heart) turn Professed Mendicants. Moses made better Provision for his
Old Testament Levites, when it descended as an Inheritance to posterity, when
Age was excused, a Dispensation being given after 50 years, the Gray-head
taken care of, Widows supported, and the Children (unless impotent) ever
succeeding the Parents in the same Employment. But under the Gospel, the poor
Pittance allotted dies with the Incumbent, the Function being not confined to
one Tribe or Family, but any Persons duly qualified are gladly admitted,
whereby many times the Progeny of several eminent Worthies in the Church, that
thought their Lives not dear for the Testimony of Jesus, whose Charitable
hearts toward the poor Members of Christ would not suffer them to hoord up,
have been exposed to innumerable difficulties, the Public never regarding
them, one of the Foulest Spots in the Fair Face of our Reformation. And our
shame full neglect herein, does in a Political Sense much justify that
Doctrine of Devils, Forbidding the Clergies Marriage.

CHAP. V. Some harsh expressions concerning the Clergies Revenues, in the
Writings of the Ancients, and Modern Reformers, examined.
It Is confessed, we meet with many bitter Invectives dropping from the Pens of
some of the Primitive Fathers about this Subject. But if their words be well
weighed by an unbiassed Reader, and one place compared with another, it will
appear, their heat was not against the Revenues of the Church, which in cold
blood they ever commend, but the abuse of them, the Pride, Covetuousnesse, and
Luxury of the Clergy, which many times are unhappy Consequents, no necessary
Effects of Plenty, and good Laws may much, if not wholly restrain them. For
that common Sentence, which is almost worn out, being so frequent in the mouth
of every Idiot, Hodie venenum infusum est in Ecclesiam, who knows but it might
be a device of the Old Serpent, to nip the tender buds of growing charity in
those early times, for Satan was never more concerned to put his wits on work
then now, when all things smiled upon the Church, whose flourishing is ever
unwelcome news to him. At best, (if it be not feigned, but a real voice) I take
it to be no more then a Divine admonition, or the Rapture of a Devout soul
breathing out its fears, what might be the issue of so sudden, so great a
change. For as it may prejudice the sight to be brought presently out of a dark
Dungeon, to the bright Rays of the Sun: or after long Famine, to be admitted
to a full Table of delicate Viands may hazard a surfeit; so danger might well
be apprehended, to come immediately out of the depths of persecution, and
misery, to a glorious Liberty, and the height of all earthly Seize. But
whatever miscarriages then ensued, cannot with any color of reason, be pleaded
against the present state of our British Churches.

It Is farther acknowledged, that we find no less harsh expressions in our first
Reformers, the History of the Albigenses, the Remains of our own Wicklif,
Husse, etc. against the Wealth and Grandeur of the Glergy. But if a man with a
discerning eye will peruse the Annals of those times, and consider the
Ignorance, pomp, and sloth of those that engrossed all spiritual Promotions,
Court-Parasites, Popes-Bastards, (or in the more refined Italian Dialect)
Nephews, Foraigners unacquainted with the Language, and so they might have the
Fleece regardlesse what became of the Sheep; when such as these devoured all
the fat of the Land, Mat. Paris passim.
had the fairest Benefices assigned for Pensions in Commendam; who can blame an
Holy zeal, if it provokt them to a just Indignation, who will not pardon their
Passion, if it transported them beyond the just bounds? Thus it is usual to run
from one extreme to another, as we see some of the Fathers, by their
over-vehement disputes against Pelagius, Eutyches, etc. make way for the
contrary errors: there being no other means to get a crooked stick straight,
but by bowing it as much the other way; though I hope no wise man will plead to
have it always kept so. Let not therefore any suffer themselves to be deluded,
and imposed upon by such Quotations, or the practice of some good men in those
impoverisht persecuted ages, which only can justify and excuse their actings;
who so they might but run counter to Rome, and undermine the high-fed Abbots,
and gorbellied Monks, cared not how slavishly they stooped to live beggarly
upon the Alms of their Hearers, especially when they found this a pleasing
Doctrine, plausible with the covetuous multitude, who for the most part are
willing to go the cheapest way to Heaven, and therefore cried it up, as the
true Apostolical manner. This self-denial of theirs, and Compliance with the
present exigences has begot such dangerous opinions in the minds of some, and
by the subtle contrivance of Satan, willing to improve any advantage, brought
such a snare upon their Successors, that many poor innocent persons often urge
their example for a pattern, and would fain reduce all to that model, never
considering what a vast difference our Gracious God, who disposes of Times and
Seasons has put between theirs, and ours, both in respect of Preachers, and
Hearers. But if the people of this Nation (by Providence) should be reduced to
such extremities, I hope their Ministers could be content cheerfully, and
without repining to suffer with them: in the mean while, reason, and gratitude
require they should partake in the common happiness. Now I say, if such
considerations did not prevail with me I should be ready to tax the imprudence
of those eminent Worthies in betraying the Privileges and Revenues of the
Gospel, which Christ himself, by an irrepealeable Charter, has settled upon his
Ministers.

I dare not deny but some holy men have slighted Honors, and that Portion due
to their Calling out of sincere Principles, and a good meaning, who yet have
lived to repent their error, (though not able to redress it) when they have
seen how much the Church has thereby suffered, and religion been damnified.
Luther Ep. p. 13.
Witness Luther who sadly complains, Ego pro meo stipendio Annuo tantum novem
antiquas Sexagenas habeo, praeter has ne obolus quidem aut mihi, aut Fratribus
e Civitate accedit. A brave Reward for such matchless deserts! and if so happy
an Instrument of Europes Reformation, so valiant a Champion, who singly opposed
the United Power of Rome and Hell, found no better usage, what might other
Punies expect, if they were left to the frozen charity of this griping Age.
Certainly they had all need make it part of their daily Letany, to be delivered
from such unmerciful Taskmasters. Nor was this his fate only, but Calvin, Beza,
Musculus, Saravia, etc. oftentimes bitterly bemoane the pitiful allowances of
the Reformed Clergy in most foraign Countries. Though too many may thank
themselves; for if it be lawful to speak my thoughts, I fear superstition in
some few, weakness, and affecting the name of despising the World in most,
have been the principal inducements to relinquish that which their Bountiful
Master bestowed upon them, and Gospel Liberty allowed them to challenge. Are we
not commanded to honor the Lord with our substance, which must be performed in
well Stewarding it, not in a careless contempt of our unque^^ionable
Inheritance. Let no man therefore hope to build any strong arguments upon this
Sandy Foundation, or to justify their Sacrilege by such Writings, and
Practice.

CHAP. VI. Sacrilege condemned in a serious Expostulation, with the Authors of
it.
NOw before I dismiss this, I cannot but a little expostulate matters with our
late Church-Robbers; who, it is feared, did never impartially weigh that of Romans
2.22. when so they might sly from Popish Idolatry, valued not what Sacred
spoils they committed. And I wish any that deny a Relative Holiness in
Things, and Places would explain to us what the Apostle meant by that word
(...), Sacrilege, that so we may correct all the Glossaries yet published,
which I cannot find in the least to smile upon, and countenance their
Proceedings. Methinks these men should never read the 47 of Genesis without
drawing a blush in their cheeks, to see a profane Pharaoh, sparing the Lands
of the Priests, and taking special care to provide for their maintenance,
allowing them a Portion from the Public (the Quantity of Bread, Wine, and
Flesh see at large in Herodot. Euterp.) when all the rest of Egypt was
morgaged, and his other Subjects must either pinch with Famine, or pay dear for
Grain. And from this passage Aquinas Com in 13. c. Ep. ad Romans
collects Sacerdotal Immunity to be agreeable to natural Equity. The Roman
Orator L. 3. de Not. Deo.
has a remarkable story concerning Dionysius, that taking all the Consecrated
wealth out of the Temples of the Gods, he exposed it to sale in the open
Markets, and meeting with good ready money Chapmen raised an incredible sum; but
the Tyrant having better considered of it, soon after by Proclamation, ordered
all to be restored upon severe Penalties, fearing more the guilt of Sacrilege,
then the reproach of Injustice. And well might this be dreaded, if he had known
all. Plato de Leg. Dial. 9. thought none would be so wretched as to attempt
such a thing, especially a Citizen: but if any did, he pronounces him (...)
Incurable, and awards present Death. The Roman 1.2. Tables ranked such amongst
the most Capital offenders, Sacrum, Sacrove commendatum qui clepserit,
rapseritve, Parricida esto. And under the Law there were Attonements appointed
for the greatest sins, Perjury, Uncleanesse, Murder, and Sacrilege through
ignorance, Lev. 5.15. but presumptuous knowing sacrilege seems unpardonable,
there being no expiation ordered for it. You know whose Language it is, Will a
man rob his God? Mal. 3.4. Certainly, the so much condemned Jews will rise in
Judgment against this generation, who (though they filched now and then in
Tithes and Offerings) yet in their greatest pressures never touched the Revenues
of the Priests, nor do any of the Prophets (no mealy-mouthed flatterers) charge
them with this sin: but the Levites portion, the 48. Cities assigned them by
Joshuah, (increased in after ages, as it should seem by the List, 1. Chron. 6.
to above 60.) though of greater emolument, and far more considerable (put all
together) then what our English Clergy ever enjoyed, continued entire, and
without diminution, or disturbance to that Tribe, till the final subversion of
the Jewish State.

Should we grant these Lands had at first been given out of Superstition, it is
not a blemish in the Donours intention that will make void the Act. If so there
would have been color enough to plunder the Treasury of the Temple, because
the proud Pharisees (and many such like) cast in their Offerings, Mar. 12. In
the 16 of Numb. we have the Gensers of Corah, and his accomplices (men of the
Lords anger and indignation) offered in a rebellious sinful manner, yet
commanded to be employed in some holy uses, and not profaned, because they
were once hallowed in being dedicated to the God of Israel. And this Saint
Austin recommends as a pattern to Christian Magistrates to be imitated in
parallel cases. Epist. 54. Should we grant the present Incumbents had never so
much misbehaved themselves, profusely lavishing the Churches Patrimony,
perverting it to profane uses, proud backs, and pampered bellies. Yet how had
Christ offended? what had he done, that you should deprive him of his portion
and Inheritance, those small fragments which former Covetuousnes had spared?
For know Ye sons of Sacrilege, that what you took, Cooks Com. in Magn. Char.
from the Church, you took from him, it being the Tenor of all the old grants
Magna Charta, and others, Concessimus Deo -- For Quod datum est Ecclesiae,
datum est Deo.

It has made me tremble many a time, when I have read in the old Charters the
dreadful execrations denounced against those that should lay hands on those
Devoted Things, recorded in Spelm. Counc. and Monast. Angl. Passim. etc. bure I
am Hehemiah one of the best, and greatest Reformers in the world could not bear
the alienation of one poor Chamber belonging to the Priests c. 13.7, 8. so
far was he from preying upon any thing himself. And yet no Reformation could
content ours but an utter depriving the Ambassadors of Christ of their fairest
encouragements. If our eyes had not beheld, and our ears heard it, could it be
imagined, there should be any in these Gospel-dayes to repine at the wealth
conferred upon the Clergy, and to use Language much like that of Foelix
Treasurer to Julian, Magdeburg. Cent. 4.
see in what plenty these servants of the Son of Mary live. Well I had almost
said that the sin of Sacrilege in taking away the Churches Patrimony cries
louder in the ears of Heaven, then ever did their pride, and luxury in abusing
it. Yet am I none of those that will once open my mouth in defense of
looseness, debauchery, and such Immoralities, which my Soul abhorres equal to
Heresy. But if wealth be so apt to corrupt them, ler all the Laws already
enacted be impartially executed, and if that be not judged sufficient, let as
severe ones be added as the Wisdom of our Senators shall think fit to meet
with growing disorders, and abuses, I believe there is none will decline, Vessii
Hist. Pelag. l. 5. Part 2.
whatever lawful Authority shall impose. Only it is hoped that piece of
Pelagianisme is not now revived, that it is impossible to be great and good, Rich
and Humble. It Is true the poor bladders of man's tainted nature are too prone to
swell with a little wind, but God can keep the heart low, under the highest
honors, sober in the greatest affluence. Have we not Joseph the second person
in Egypt, David a King, Daniel and Nehemiah Courtiers, and yet their hearts
right with God, their Integrity still retained. Nor is it poverty of estate,
but of spirit to which Christ promises the blessing, Mat. 5. There may then be
good use made of this unrighteous Mammon, for as wine is not evil, but
drunkenness, no more are riches evil, but Covetuousnes. Let not any therefore
be cheated by such pitiful Sophismes, countenanced only by some few wrested
Texts of Scripture, and misunderstood passages of Antiquity.

Let me but ask any considerate person, what we have gained by all our 20.
years wanderings? One of the beautifullest Islands, and flourishing Churches in
Europe, has been almost ruined by our Giddiness. Let zealous ignorance now
confess its mistake, and by a dutiful Conformity hereafter redeem its errors.
Have you comfort to look back upon the Desolations you have made, so many
magnificent Churches Levelled to the ground, so many converted into Magazines
of War, Dens of Thieves, and Stables for Horses, which the poor innocent Beasts
have already smarted for. I dare not go about to fathom the Depths of Divine
Judgments, those ways are unsearchable, and those paths past finding out: but
if we will believe some curious Observers, they will tell us, that the Prodigious
Disease, which has of late so much raged amonst Horses, had its Original in the
House of God, beginning at the Guards in St. Paul's. And our eyes have beheld in
these late Revolutions in how eminent a manner the Righteous God has frowned
upon the great Sticklers in Church Lands, declaring in the face of all the
World, how much his soul abhors the covetuous.

Now since God has smiled upon us, to restore our Rulers as at the first, it is
hoped our wise Senators will be careful to wipe away that stain, and blot,
which lies upon our Reformation for alienating Monastic Revenues, and not add
sin to sin, and iniquity to imquity. Most Honored Patriots, you are the great
Representatives of the Nation, whose Repure ought to be dear unto you. Be
pleased then to consider, Will it not be a reproach to a rich, and slourishing
Kingdom, to have a starved indigent Clergy, in a Land of Plenty exposed to
Beggary? An injury and dishonor to the memory of your Religious Ancestors,
and Predecessors, who not out of ignorant zeal, and blind superstition, but
conscience, but honor to the God of their substance, Consecrated some portion
of their Estates to his service, and confirmed the Donations of others, not
only by naked Votes, but repeated oaths? Now to have all these Monuments of
their Devotion at once swallowed up by their Sacrilegious Posterity. Or will
any be so mad for the future, as to become Benefactors, when there is so little
Security in the Public faith of a Nation. Certainly this was one of the
deadliest blows that for many years has been given to Religion; what an
hindrance has it proved to the happy progress, and success of the Gospel,
what an advantage to the Kingdom of Satan, making us stink in the Nostrils of
all the neighboring Countries, alienating the hearts of sundry well-affected,
weakening the hands of Friends, and strengthening Enemies? And if the Romish
Emissaries could but have perfected their Campanell^.
Design, and compassed what they so much tug'd for in our late Troubles, to
ruin the Universities, deprive the Clergy of a settled Maintenance, and bring
them to a sordid Benevolence, they had done their work. How many hopeful
persons intended for Laborers in Christ's Vineyard, have been hereby
discouraged, their worldly Parents diverting them to more gainful employments,
many Congregations left destitute of able Preachers, Blue Aprons, and Buff
Coats stepping up in their rooms, whereby such an Inundation of Errors have
brake in upon us, that it requires skillfull Pilots to keep the Ark of our poor
Church from Sinking.

THE CLERGIES HONORS.
CHAP. I. The Honor of the Sacred Function vindicated by Scripture, Reason,
Equity and Fathers.
THe second Head to be treated of, is the Respect and Honor due to this Sacred
Function, which the Spirit of God is not sparing, or backward in asserting,
knowing the malice of Satan, and the depraved Nature of man prone enough to
vilify it. And therefore that none might plead ignorance, we have repeated
Precepts scattered up and down in sundry places. In the 2. Philip. 29. the
Preachers of the Gospel are commanded to be had in honor; and 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
to be esteemed, and Reverenced (...) exceeding abundantly, the Original being
scarce to be expressed by a Translation. Now the grand design of all this is,
that Christ may be advanced, for the respect shown to the Servant, redounds to
the Master, who will one day own it, inasmuch as ye did it unto one of these
Little Ones, ye did it unto me. The Honor and Preferments you conferred upon
them, I take as done to my self. I wonder what answer our Clergy-Haters will
return to such clear Texts, certainly they must borrow that Gloss of the
Learned Canonist, Statuimus, i. e. Abrogamus: for their practice puts no better
a Comment upon those words of S. Paul, Honor those that are over you, i. e.
despise them, revise them, and take away their maintenance. It has oftentimes
saddened my soul, to see many who pretend to higher Dispensations, a more
eminent degree of Sanctity then their Brethren, to place much of their Religion
in scorning and reviling the Ambassadors of Christ, as if they did him service
when they cast dirt in the face of his Ministers. But he will at last give them
slender thanks for their preposterous zeal.

We have the Great Apostle of the Gentiles for an example, that boasting does
not always misbecome us: and doubtless, if ever it were seasonable, now is
the time, when this Art of Arts the Government of Souls, is so much trampled
upon. Scholiast. Pindar.
Now if the Dignity of a Calling may be judged by the usefulness of it, which
is Pindars Argument for his (...); Where is any that dares stand in competition
with this? Other Professions are variable like the Moon, sometimes dark, and
sometimes shining, at certain fits and seasons serviceable: this never out of
date, never to be dispensed with. A Soldier is loved, or rather feared in War,
but disregarded in Peace; a Physitian's seldom courted but in sickness, and by
crazy distempered bodies; and for Lawyers, they are principally looked after,
when men are disposed to wrangle; but there is no Age, no Season, no State of
Life that does not require, at least need, the assistance of a Divine.

Again, if that Profession which can produce the most Worthy Persons engaged in
it (as Scal. argues) should carry the Bell, the day is surely their own. In our
Corporations here, if a King be but made free of such a Company, the Society
presently vaunt they have gained much credit by it: but how many Emperors,
Princes, and Nobles, may be instanced in, that have not only listed themselves,
but actually exercised the Office of the Ministry. Spelm. Ep. Ded. ant. Con.
Cambd. Brit. p. 98.
Capgrave reckons up at least a Score of our British Kings and Queens, that
left their Scepters, and betook themselves to Religion in those fertile Ages of
Royal Saints. Peruse the holy Records, we have Melchisedock a King, and a
Priest, Heb. 7.1 David a King and a Prophet: and Solomon, the Wisest of
Mortals, glorying more in the name of a Preacher, then all his Royal Titles.
But why stand I upon these, when Jesus Christ the King of Kings, the Eternal
Son of God, thoughtit not below him, telling us expressly, Luke 4.18. that he
was sent into the World, on no other errand, then to preach the Gospel. Here
upon earth, a great Personage, that had but one only Child, would be loath to
employ him in any base unworthy calling: and may we not here safely conclude
this to be an Honorable Profession, which the most Wise God put the Son of his
Bosom to. Let me speak a proud word then (at least some will judge it so) the
Ministry is an Employment, that the Noblest Peer, nay the greatest Prince upon
earth, need not be ashamed of. Nor let any one blush to be of that Profession,
which Adam, Moses, David, Solomon, nay Christ himself has honored.

I shall not take notice of those Rhodomontado Vaunts of the bragging
Canonists, who compare the Clergy to the Sun, and the Laity to the Moon; Though
backed by an eminent Bartol. Confil. 18. si Aliqua Coll. 2.
Civilian, who pronounces the Sacerdotal dignity greater then any Secular. Nor
do many of the ancient Fathers come far behind them, who have very swelling
expressions to this purpose. Hear but Ignatius St. John's Disciple, Ep. ad
Smyrn.
(...); the Priesthood transcends every thing amongst mortals. And Chrysostom
styles the Clergy Christ's Deputies or Vicegerents, presently adding, Hom. 17.
on St. Mat.
(...) etc. As much as the Heaven is more honorable then the Earth, and Souls
then bodies, so much is the Spiritual Function more excellent then the Civil.
But these strains are somewhat Hyperbolical, and must be understood in a
qualified sense, with some grains of allowance.

Come to those that speak modestly and soberly. For the Jews Josephus is my
Author, that Interest in the sacred Function, was an unerring argument, of a
splendid Original, Jos. Vit. juxta init.
(...). Casaubon stops not there, but will have it to be the Exercit. in Bar.
1. N. 5.
only Nobility (when the Line of David was eclipsed) all others though never so
powerful, never so wealthy being looked upon as no better then Plebeians.
Descend to Gospel times, Clericatus est Dignitas, says Panormitan, any
Relation to the Church entitles a man to honor. And he that reads the
Digests, Basilica, or our own Lambard, will find the meanest Clergy man of no
small account amongst the Ancients; the principal part, viz. the Bishops, being
all the Saxon period ranked among the Greater Thanes, and in the Norman days
equal to the Barons, as will in its proper place be farther cleared. For
Reason, and common equity do seem to suggest that their condition is
honorable, who are immediately set apart to the service of the great God. We
see how those are valued that attend upon the Persons of Princes, and what
large Privileges are granted by the Dig. and Cod. Passim.
Imperial Edicts to earthly warriors, and shall those that fight under the
Banner of the King of Heaven, for such a Title is given them, 2 Timothy 2. (...),
the spiritual militia, be trampled upon, and esteemed as the Dross, and
Refuse of the Nation? It Is strange to see how disdainfully many in our Age think
of them, and how unwilling they are to place their sons to this Function, as
if it were a stain to their blood. When yet we read of Esaias of the Royal Line
of Judah, and in our own Nation we find Ethelwolfe (as Rog. Hoveden) Ethulf, as
Monast. Ang. calls him) a professed Clergyman, consecrated Bishop of Winchester,
yet cldest son to K. Egbert, (no petty Prince) and after his Fathers death,
second Monarch of the united Heptarchy A. 837. Come lower we have Henry de
Bloys brother to K Stephen Bishop of the same See: Geoffry Plantagenet Son to
Hen. 2d. Bishop of Lincoln. And that I may not waste time in such instances,
which might without number be produced; Godwin.
Cutbert ^ishop of Durham of the blood-Royall of the Kings of Ireland. Nor did
Michael the proud Emperor of Russia take it to be any disparagement in this
last age, to make his Father Theodore Archbishop of Mosco. Possevin.
Nay the Princely stock of Judah did not look upon it as any imputation, any
slur, or Alloy to them, to mingle the Royal and Sacerdotal blood, for 2 Chronicles.
22.11. It Is recorded, that Jehoiada the Priest Married the Daughter of King
Jehoram, and 2 Kings 23.31. A Kings Mother is said to be the Daughter of a
Priest.

CHAP. II. A large Tribute of Honor and Reverence paid by the very Pagans and
Mahometans to their Priests.
SEarch the Pagan Records, you will find they thought no Honor too high, no
reward too great for those that attended the Worship of their Idols. I am
almost afraid to write what I meet with in approved Authors, and should be
ready to distrust them my self, but that I am satisfied they were no Parties,
nor prompted by Interest. I Will begin with Tacitus, who tells us that amongst the
old Germans De Morib. German.
Sacerdotibus, juxta ac Regibus honor habitus est. Now the Grandeur of the
world consists principally in Apparel, Dyer, and Houses, in all which the
Priests exceeded. We read in Strabo l. 12. that the Priests of Cuma-Pontus
twice in a year wore a Diadem. Orosuss l. 4. c. 6. relates that the Priests of
Hercules Tyrius were ever clad in purple, and walked in public adorned with
Crowns. Go to the barbarous Indians, there Varenius assures us that in Japan
the Priests are clad in Silk down to the Ancles, and the Bonzius, or Chief
Priest regalibus afficitur honoribus. Froius in his Epistles adds that they
all dwell magnificently, and have very large incomes. But of this Vitruvius is
the most proper Judge, who l. 2. c. 8. acquaints us, that the high priest among
the Trallians in habited a Stately Royal Palace. Then for their food Rosinus
Rhodigin. Cicer. Orat. de Arusp. Rest.
Dapes Saliares, Obsonari pollucibibiter, Epulonum Collegium, with their
Pontifical Feasts grew into a proverb for their Prodigality. Indeed so
universally great, and Reverend was the Reputation of the Priesthood, that none
on earth might vy with it, being the highest any Mortal was capable of, the
next and immediate Honor to a Deity. Under the Law of Nature we do not meet
with many Instances of believing Kings, only Melchisedeck King of Salem, in
whose person, both Kingdom, and Priesthood were united, Genesis 4. Unless we
should add Jethro, who is promiscuously styled Prince and Priest of Midian,
Exodus 2. Now this combining together of the two Functions, was afterward
commonly imitated by the Heathens: amongst whom there was ever little
difference between Prince, and Priest; whence some conjecture, that under this
last Notion the former received Tithes, for that they were usually paid him,
may be gathered from 1. Sam. 8.15. Servius upon the 3. Enn. is positive for a
general usance, Majorum haec erat Consuetudo ut Rox esset etiam Sacerdos, vel
Pontifex. Whereupon Diogenes in Stobaeus lays it down amongst the
Qualifications of his Complete King, that he must be (...), a good Soldier, a
Judge, and a Priest. Strabo is express L. 5. that in Aritia the Kingdom was
united to the Priesthood of Diana, in Hirt. Bell. Alexandr.
Cappadocia, to the Temple of Bellona. And Justin, amongst many Fables of the
Jews, has this truth, L. 36. that mos erat apud Judaeos ut eosdem and regis,
and sacerdotes habeant, it was a received custom with them for the same person
to bear both Offices. Dion. Lib. 37. enlarges it to all Syria, that it was their
manner to confound the Titles of King and Priest. The old Ethiopians, and
Marsil. Ficin Praef in Trismegist.
Egyptians chose their Kings out of, at least Plato L. de Regn.
permitted the Election of them to the College of their Priests; who ever
enjoyed the next place of Dignity and power to their Sovereign, Diodor. Sicul.
L. 2.
(...). If these generals will not satisfy, let us come to particulars, and
twill easily be made appear, that the greatest Potentates in the World did not
think the Priesthood below them. Thus Midas, King of Phrygia, was consecrated
to Orpheus, Justin L. 11. The Lacedemonian Kings did always sacrifice in
person, Herodot. in Erat. Zenophon records the like of Cambyses, Curtius of
Alexander, and Halycarnass: L. 2.
speaking of Romulus, says, (...), all that concerned the gods were managed by
himself. In imitation of whom Julius, Augustus, and all the succeeding
Emperors, both Pagan and Christian, till Gratians Zozimus.
days, retained the Title of Pont. Max. as may be seen in their several
Edicts, and Coyns. Heliogabalus was not content with a single one, but to make
his person more Sacred, must be created Priest of the Phaenicians. Hierodian.
l. 5.
Nor must the poor Indians be omitted, for in Malabar their very Kings do not
disdain the Office of the Bracmans Lopez. Hist. Ind. L. 1. c. 14. And if you will
consult the Epistles of Xavier (the late Canonized Indian Apostle) you will find
the Bouzii to be generally the sons of Princes and Nobles; Almeida mentioning
one that in his time was Counselor to the King.

Come to the Mahometans we have the proud Gabriel Sionita
Sultan himself so far honoring the Mufti, that as often as he comes into his
presence, he rises from his seat, and according to their mode, putting his hand
to the breast, bows the head in token of Reverence, an honor which he shows
not to any other Subject, and will hardly vouchsafe the like to the mightiest
Monarch upon earth. Neither do the inferior Degrees want their due esteem: for
after their Mufti, they have their Cadelischers, somewhat resembling the
Christian Patriarchs, next their Cades answerable to our Bishops, then their
Santons and Talismans suitable to our Presbyters and Deacons, the lowest of
whose number is highly respected by the people. Elma^in. Hist. Arab.
Id. Then for the old Saracens it is a matter sufficiently known that with them
for some 100 of years the same Person was both Prince and Caliph.

I might multiply innumerable instances to this purpose, but I shall not weary
my Reader. Now let not any envious Momus imagine, that all this while I drive
on a design to have this revived, and made a pattern for Christians, no, my
only meaning is to put our Clergy-haters to the blush, if they have so much of
virtue left as the Color, when they see how by the common consent of Nations,
which Tully calls the Law of Nature, the highest Honor was ever given to the
Priest. The Prince of Philosophers laying it down for an Axiom, that it was a
work most proper for the worthiest: Aristotle. 7. Polit. c. 9.
(...). No Peasant, no Artisan must defile these Sacred things, quia par est
Optimum ab Optimo coli, and Summum a Summo, there must be some resemblance and
Analogy between the Master and the Servant. And therefore, if we will believe
Trigautius, amongst the wise Chinois, olim Rex, hodie soli litant Magistratus
primarii, Regnique Proceres: No Inferior person must come near the Altar.

CHAP. III. Englands Respect to the Clergy.
FOr their Nobility in our own Nation, Spelman and Lambard, S^pelm. C^^nc. Ep.
ad ^eg.
confessedly the Ablest Pair of our Saxon Antiquaries) do avouch, that the
Saxons ever reputed the Bishops equal, and in some points Superior to their
Greater Thanes, whom Posterity call Barons, and (as may be seen in Archaion.
Lambard) the Laws of Ethelbert, Ina, and Aethelstan do rate them accordingly.
Nay in all the ancient Charters, the first place was ever given to the
Spiritual Lords. In a Donation of Ethelbert A. 605. to the Monastery of S.
Peter in Canterbury, the first witness subscribing is Austin the Bishop, and
after him several Dukes, and Earls. In a Charter of King Ina's A. 725. to the
Monastery of Glassenbury: after the Bishops Beorthwald, and Fordred, we have
Waldhere, Ethelherd, Umming and Winchelin, the greatest Peers in the Nation,
putting their names. Presently after, in a Grant of Offa's to the Abbey of
Worcester, A. 780, Brordran, Berhtand, Eadbald and Eadbald, two Princes, and
two Dukes follow the Bishops. Monast. Angl. and Spelm. Conc^possim.
And at the same Kings Consecration of St. Albans A. 793. no less than ten
Dukes, besides other Nobles, give place to the Prelates. Come down an Age Lower
in the Donation of Edgar to the Covent of Glassenbury, the Bishops lead, and
Elphere, Oslac, Ethelwine, three Dukes bring up the Rear. And to make an end in
a Charter of Edward the Confessors, to the Monastery of Winchester, immediately
after the King subscribed Plegmund, and Frithestan the Bishops, being followed
by Ethelweard the Kings Brother, Aethelstan, and Aelfweard, the Kings two Sons,
Ordluf, Osred, Brorhtulf, Ordgar, and Heethferth Dukes: many more of this
Nature might be produced out of the same Authors, and others, as standing
monuments of the Clergies eminent Reputation, and the Reverence our Religious
Ancestors bare to their Function. And that this may not be thought to proceed
merely from the courtesy of England, as in some other Cases it is familiar: We
have it confirmed by Statute 31. Hen. 8. c. 10. where in all Degrees, and
Offices are placed in Assemblies and Conferences, and there the Archbishop of
Canterbury, as Primus Par Regni, the first Peer of the Kingdom, is ranked
before all the Nobility, seated at the Kings right hand, next and immediately
after the Royal Blood, and the Vicegerent, and the rest of the Bishops follow
him in their due Precedence according to the Dignity and Anciancies of their
Respective Sees. And it is farther observable, that they are ever named before
the Temporal Lords in Magna Charta, Charta de Forest. etc. Nor were they ever
excluded from the greatest employments of Honor and Trust in the Nation. And
to evidence that this is not spoke without book, I shall subjoyn a Catalogue of
Churchmen (collected out of Malmesbury, Harpsfield, Godwin, Spelman, Isaacson,
etc.) that have borne all, at least the most Honorable Offices of State, and
(however bespattered by some) discharged them with much integrity and repute;
England owing more of its happiness to men of this Calling, then any other.
Though it cannot be denied, but some miscarriages may here and there be found,
yet as few as can be expected in such a multitude: and if a man were disposed
to carp, he might without much sweat, produce two for one in critically
examining any other Profession. I shall begin with the Metropolitan, to whom
this Primacy justly appertains, and take the rest in order.

CANTERBVRY.
WE find fewer of this See upon the Civil Stage then any other; most Offices
being looked upon as below the Archi-Episcopal Dignity, and therefore a Nobleman
upbraided Hubert with it, when A. 1199. (according to Spelman, Godwin 93.) he
was made Chancellor of England, Chief Justice, and High Governor of all the
Dominions under King Rich. 1. Afterward King John entrusted the same Prelate
with the Government of the whole Realm at his departure into Normandy. Walter
Reynalds, Chancel. A. 1310. John Stratford Chancel. under Edw. 3. and when the
King invaded France, no person thought so fit in his absence to have the
Government of the Nation entrusted to him, Simon Islip of the Privy Council to
Edw. 3. John Stafford to Hen. 5. John Moorton to Hen. 6. and Edw. 4. But why
stand I upon this, when in truth it has been seldom known, that any of them
have been omitted. Fox Martyr.
Nor was this proper only to the times of Popery: Come to the Reformation, we
find Cranmer of the Privy Council to Hen. 8. and Edw. 6. and very active in
civil matters: yet a man so averse to Rome, so instrumental in planting the
Gospel, so laborious, so holy, that a great Brightman. Com.
Apocalytpical man (and no friend to the Hierarchy) takes him to be that Angel
pointed at by the Spirit of God. Revel. 14. that had power over the fire. Under
the renowned Queen Elizabeth, John Whitgift of the Council, and the Government
of the Principality of Wales given up to him.

YORK.
Walter Gray Chancellor under King John, had the Government of the Realm
entrusted to him under Hen. 3. William de Melton successively Treasurer and
Chancellor of England, A. 1317. William de Zouche, Vicegerent to King Edw. A.
1346. John Kempe A. 1425. twice Chancellor, and Tho. Young Lord Prefident of
the North, A. 1561.

LONDON.
The Epitaph on the Monument of William Bish. of London (sometime since to be
seen in St. Paul's) spoke him one of the Privy Council to the Conqueror.
Mauritius Chancellor under the same King. Eustachius de Fauconbridge one of
Rich. 1. Justices, Chancellor of the Exchequer. Treasurer of England, and
twice Embass. into France. Hen. de Wingham Chancel. under Edw. 3. Ralph Baldoc
under Edw. 1. Rich. Bintworth under Edw. 3. Robert Braibrook under Rich. 2.
Rich. Cox, Dean of Westminster (whom I crave leave to n^me here as belonging to
the Diocese) of the Privy Council to Edw. 6. And Bancroft sent Ambassador to
Embden to treat with the King of Denmarks Commissioners, A. 1600.

DURHAM.
Geoffry Rufus Chancel. of England, A. 1140. Rich. de Marisco A. 1217. Antony
Beak of the Privy Council A. 1294. Rich. de Bury Chancel. A. 1334. and
Treasurer A. 1336. Thom. Langley Chancell. A. 1406. Thomas Ruthal of the
Council to Hen. 8. and as his Monument at Westminster testifies, Secretary to
Hen. 7. Rich. Neyle of the Privy Council A. 1627. And here I must not omit that
known passage of Neubrigensis, who brings in K. Rich. making himself merry with
the Bish, boasting what a feat he had done, e vetusto Episcopo novitium Comitem
mirus ego artifex feci, to make a new Count of an old Bishop, a Privilege,
till the late Interruption, continued to that See.

WINCHESTER.
Swithun Chancellor of Engl. under K. Egbert, A. 860. Will. Giffard Chancel.
under the Conqueror, Rufus, and Hen. 1. Peter de la Roche, Lord chief Justice
under K. John. John Sendal Chancel. A. 1316. Will. Edendon Treasurer under Edw.
3d. Will. of Wickham (Founder of New Coll. in Oxon) Principal Secretary, Vita
Wainflet.
keeper of the Privy Seal, Mr. of the Wards, and Treasurer of the Kings
Revenues in France, A. 1360. Will. Wainflet (Founder of Magdalene Coll. Oxon)
for his great wisdom, and Integrity long Chancel. of Engl. under Hen. 6. Rich.
Fox (Founder of C. C. C. Oxon) one of the Privy Council to Hen. 7th. (as
Prudent a Prince, as this Nation has known) and continually employed either in
matters of Counsel at home, or Embassies abroad.

ELY.
Will. Lang-champ. Chancellor A. 1189, then chief Justice and Protector of the
Realm, when Rich. 1. undertook his voyage to the Holy Land. Eustachius
Chancellor A. 1196. John Hotham Chancellor A. 1326, (as Spelm.) 1317. as
Godwin) Simon Langham A. 1361. first Treasurer, then Chancel. of Eng. John
Barnet Treasurer A. 1366. John Fordham Treasurer A. 1385. Will. Gray Treasurer
A. 1469. John Alcock Chancel. A. 1486. and Tho. Goodric Chancel. under Edw. 6.

LINCOLN.
Robert Bluet Chancel. under the Conqueror A. 1092. Alexander under Hen. 1.
chief Justice of Engl. Galfridus Chancel. A. 1180. Hugh de Wells Chancel. A.
1209. Walt. de Constantiis Chancel. under Hen. 6. And Dr. Williams Dean of
Westminster, and after Bishop of this See, made Lord Keeper by the Learned King
James.

COVENTRY and LICHFIELD.
Roger de Wiseham Keeper of the Great Seal, A. 1245. Walter de Langton
Treasurer, A. 1226. Roger Northbrough Clerk of the Wardrobe, afterward
Treasurer, A. 1322. Geoffry Blyth, Lord Presid. of Wales, A. 1512. Rowland Lee
his Successor the same A. 1535 and Rich Sampson, A. 1537.

SALISBVRY.
Osmond Chancel. of Engl. always of the Privy Council, and seldom spared from
Court, under the Conqueror. Roger Chancel. A. 1107. and under King Stephen A.
1136. John Waltham Master of the Rolls, Keeper of the Privy Seal, and after
Treasurer of Engl. under Richard the Second. Nicholas Bubwith Treasurer A.
1407. William Ayscoth Clerk of the Council A. 1438.

BATH and WELS.
Robert Burnel first Treasurer, then Chancellor of Engl. and always of the
Council under Edward the First. John Drokensford Keeper of the Wardrobe, A.
1309. Robert Stillington first Keeper of the Privy Seal, then Chancel, A. 1465.
Oliver King Principal Secretary, A. 1492. John Clerk Master of the Rolls, A.
1523.

EXETER.
Leofricus, First one of the Privy Council, then Chancel. of Engl. under the
Conqueror, though Spelman reckons him of Bath at that time. Will. Brewster of
the Privy Council, under Hen. 3d. Walter Stapledon (Founder of Exeter Coll.
Oxon) first of the Privy Council then Treasurer under Edw. 2d. John Grandesson
of the Privy Council to Edw. 3d. John Voyseye Lord President of Wales under
Henry 8th. And Gervase Babington Vice President of Wales A. 1597.

NORWICH.
Henry the Second by a a special Commission makes the Bishops of Norwich,
Winchester, and Ely, Lord Chief Justices, in my Authors words
Archi-Justitiarios ( Radulfus de Diceto) And it is added Clergymen were pitched
upon as the likeliest persons, not to oppress the poor, nor respect the face
of the Rich. John Salmon Chancel. A. 1319. Robert Baldoc Chancel. A. 1324. John
Wakering Keeper of the Privy Seal, A. 1416.

HEREFORD.
Thom. Cantilupe Chancel. A. 1275. Thom. Charlton, Treasurer A. 1329. John
Gilbert A. 1386. Thom. Milling of the Privy Council to Edw. 4th. Charles Booth
Chancellor of the Marches of Wales A. 1517.

WORCESTER.
Galfridus Gifford Chancel. A. 1267. Walter Reynald first Treasurer, then
Chancel. under Edw. 2d. John Barnes Treasurer A. 1362. Hen. Wakefield Treasurer
A. 1376. Nicholas Heath Lord Presid. of Wales and Chancel. of Engl. under Q.
Mary.

CHICHESTER.
Ralph Nevil Chancel. A. 1222. ( Spel. 26) who adds that he was appointed by
Parliament. John de Langton Chancel. under Edw. 1. and 2d. John Stratford A.
1360. Adam Molins Clerk of the Council, A. 1451. and that incomparably learned
Prelate, and industrious Preacher Lan. Andrews, Privy Counselor of Engl. and
Scotl. under a Prince that knew the worth of Learning, and advanced it
accordingly.

ROCHESTER.
Walter de Merton (Founder of the College that bears his Name) 2: Chancel. A.
1274. John de Shepey Treasurer, A. 1358.

OXFORD.
Hugh Curwyn Chancel. of Ireland.

St. DAVID'S.
Adam Houghton, Chancel. A. 1376. Linwood the famous Canonist, Keeper of the
Privy Seal, A. 1440. and employed in Embassies to the Kings of Spain, Portugal
etc. I might here subjoyn, several Deanes, and Archdeacons promoted to the
same Dignities, Stow.
and take notice, that till the Dissolution of Abbyes, the Prior of
Christ-Church in London, was ever a Member of the Court of Aldermen: and that
the Dean of Westminster is by his Charter allowed no small Influence upon the
Government of that City. But I shall not nauseate the Reader with any more hard
Names, only observe, that in the Catalogue of Chancellours, recorded in
Spelmans Glossary, amounting to about 170, near 100. of them were Clergy men,
more then all the other Professions put together can make up



These then are the Honors, which (if any humane Testimony can make a thing
certain) an uninterrupted Custom, (equal to Law) which Wise Antiquity gave
them through all the Saxon, Danes, and Norman times without control, or
dispute, till within these 20 years, since which England has groaned under this
sin of despising the Ambassadors of Christ, and it has been no small step to
Preferment to rail upon them, murmr, and decry their advancement, and to rank
the great Trustees of Souls with the vilest Peasants in the Nation. As if there
were no better way to show love to their Redeemer, then by hatred to his
servants, and respect to the Majesty of God must be evidenced by pouring
contempt upon such as Represent his Person. Thus Corah, and his Accomplices
grand grievance, and complaint against Moses and Aaron was, that they were too
high, took too much upon them, Numb. 16. They were advanced, and honored above
the rest, this was the main eye sore; but the revenging hand of God would not
bear it. Nay have we not had more of the same Language, All the Congregation is
holy, and one may preach as well as another. Thus would these sons of confusion
have brought all to a Munster Disorder, by taking away the Distinction of
Callings. The Wise God appointed it otherwise under the Old Testament, when
every one was not admitted to the Priesthood. I cannot but think there were
1000 in Israel that knew how to kill, flay, and dress an Ox, Sheep, or Goat,
as artificially as the sons of Levi, yet none attempted it (in reference to the
Altar) without a rebuke. And was Moses a more prudent steward then Jesus
Christ, the Wisdom of the Father? Would it be suffered in Humane Societies, any
well regulated Corporation, that every man who conceived himself fitter to
discharge an Office, manage a Trade, husband an Estate, should presently
exclude another legally possessed, and invade his Propriety? Grant this, and
farewell Government, welcome Babel.

Let me speak it once for all, it is folly to expect the prosperity of the
Nation, whilst the Clergy are in misery; whilst the Sacred Function is with
black ingratitude reviled, to whose learned Labors we owe the Translation of
our Bibles, and who (under God) were the Principal instruments of freeing us
from that Egyptian Darkness our forefathers sat in. Is not this like the
Dear Plutarch speaks of, who browsed on that Bush in a Clam, that he was glad
to creep under in a s^orm? Certainly they are not to be esteemed worthy the
name of Christians, or Friends unto the Gospel, (whatever pretenses they make)
that despise, and vilify the Ministry, then which nothing bespeaks a more
vile, and reprobate Heart. Ignatius Epist, ad Tral.
deals roundly with such, (...), they are downright Atheists, and make nothing
of Christ, says that holy man; and it is much to be suspected (if they would
speak their thoughts) that too many (with Leo 10.) look upon Religion as no
other then a Fable, and (with Servetus) make our Messiah the third Impostor. We
know that under the Law, presumptuously to rise against the Priest, was
punishable with no less than death, Deuteronomy. 17. For these are the Ambassadors
of the King of Heaven, and how Sacred such persons are by the Law of Nations,
all Histories do abundantly witness, and that small Indignities offered them,
are highly resented the Ammonites are a lasting Testimony 2. Sam. 10. Florus.
and proud Corinth for no other reason burnt to Ashes by the enraged Romans.

CHAP. IV. The Clergies moderate engaging in some Civil Affairs pleaded for,
and justified.
BUt it is feared the former Discourse has given offense to some prejudiced
parties, therefore to remove that stumbling block, and to make way for what
follows, twill be requisite a little to enquire into that perplexed, and
long-debated Point, Whether and how far Spiritual Persons (with a Salvo to
their Function) may intermeddle with Temporal Matters. And that this has bin no
new thing, or peculiar to England (which was never esteemed the Paradise of
Priests, as the report goes of Liege) is manifest to every one that is the
least acquainted with Sacred, or Profane, Ancient or Modern stories. If you
examine the Pagan Records; Amongst the old Gauls and Britains, the Druids upon
the matter managed all affairs: De omnibus fere Controversiis publicis
privatisque constituunt, and siquid admissum Facinus, si caedes facta, si de
haereditate, de Finibus Controversia, iidem decernunt. All Actions Real, and
Personal, all Causes about Life and Death were brought before them as Cas. Com.
^. 6.
one assures us, who had reason to know them. NOr did the policy of the wise
Egyptians vary, for (...), as Aelian Var. Hist. l. 14 c. 34.
witnesses. And that the Persian Magi had the highest Seats of Judicature, were
ever Privy Counselors, and interested in public Transactions Philostratus L.
1. de Vit. Apollon.
informs us. Twere easy to make this good by a particular enumeration of all
other Countries; but I leave the Heathens and proceed to the Mahometans, with
whom what prodigious Power the Ancient Caliphs of Babylon had, and others still
retain, any one that will but take the pains to look into Elmacinus Hist.
Sarac. published by Erpenius may soon receive satisfaction.

If we look amongst Gods own People, before the Priesthood was confined to a
Tribe, some 2500 years, the Firstborn was entrusted both with Religious
Worship, and the Administration of Justice, Moses being Priest as well as
Ruler. And that he appointed the Priests Overseers of all things, Judges of
Controversies, and Punishers of Malefactors: Josephus, who saw the Precept
reduced to Practice, tells us expressly L. 2. contr. App. Then who knows not
that Ely and Samuel, the Lords Priests were at the same time Civil Judges in
Israel. Chytraeus makes three Consistories among the Jews, of all which the
Priests were principal, and essential Members, 1. a Triumvirat in every City,
wherein money matters, and lighter trespasses were decided, Grot. in 5 Ma. 21.
these Grotius styles Pedaneos Judices. 2. The little Synedrium consisting of
23. wherein Capital Causes were determined in the Gates of every City. 3. The
Council of State, or Grand Senate of 70 Elders which some make to consist of 71
taking in Moses, others of 72.6. out of each Tribe, the High Priest being
commomly of the number) with the Elders excelling in wisdom and I earning,
chosen out of the Levites, and Assistants out of all Israel. Now that the
Priests and Levites were elected into this Great Sanedrim as well as the
Princes, if I say before them Exercit. 13. c. 5.
Casaubon will bear me out, who makes it appear out of their best Authors, quod
hujus Concilii ea fuit Institutio ut sifieri possit, e solis Sacerdotibus and
Levitis constaret. The Constitution of this standing Council was such, that as
near as might be, the endeavor was it might consist only of the Priests and
Levites: whence Josephus and Philo oftentimes under the title of Priests
understand the Sanedrim. Philo de vit. Mos.
(...). To which I might add that Political Axiom mentioned by Josephus as
derived from Moses, (...) The King was ever to take the advice of the Priest.
See Schickard de Ju. Reg. Theorem. 2.

Come down to David, whose Government was a Pattern to all his Successors. His
Reign was peaceable and flourishing, nor did he want Statesmen of the most
raised abilities for his employments. Yet did not this Wise, this Holy Prince
think it inconsistent with the Sacred Function (which yet St. Austin tells us
was Operosius Ministerium in some respect then that of the Gospel) to engage
Levites in his weightiest Secular Charges. Thus we find Hathaliah, and his
Brethren appointed Officers on this side Jordan, not only in all businesses of
the Lord, but in the service of the King. And Jerijah another in holy Orders is
made Ruler (Plenipotentiary) over the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half
Tribe of Manasseh for every matter pertaining to God, and it is added the Affairs
of the King likewise, 1. Chron. 26.30.32. Nor was he singular in it, but is
imitated by good Jehosaphat, who made the Levites and the Priests Judges of all
the Controversies in Israel, not excluding matters of blood. 2. Chron. 19.8.10.
Now run over the Catalogue of all the Kings of Israel, there are hardly any to
be paraleld, I am sure none that went beyond these: None whose Government did
more prosper with righteousness, Justice, and Tranquillity. And though under
the rest of the Kings we have no expres mention of the same practice, yet all
things considered, we have more reason to conclude it held then the contrary:
for we find Jehoiada the Priest chief Counselor to Joash, 2. King. 11. Look
into Later times, after the Babylonian Captivity, the Priests command all, and
possess the Scepter for some 100 of years; the Joseph. L. 13. c. 9.
Assamonaean Race being absolute Princes till Pompey's Conquest. I might
farther remark, that many Civil Causes are by name reserved to the Levitical
Cognizance, as Inquisition for Murder, false witness, etc. Deuteronomy. 21. Yet do
not the Preachers of the Gospel pretend the least to these privileges, though,
methinks, making fit allowance to the difference of times and persons, the
model prescribed by God himself may safely be followed in some circumstantials.

But leaving Moses let us come to Christ, and see how Matters stood under the
Gospel. Here though we have no instances in the New Testament of Honors
conferred upon the Apostles, yet have we Prophesies (unfullfild till then) that
the world should be converted, Kings become Nursing-Fathers, and the feet of
such as brought glad tiding be beautiful; which Com. in 49. Esai.
Calvin and others apply to the bounty and Munificence of Princes to the
Church. For the first 300 years, what could rationally be expected from
professed enemies, whilst the Persecutig fury lasted, whilst every Country
flamed Taeda lucebis in illa, qua stantes ardent, qui fixo gutture fuman^ Juven.
with living fires, and dismal sights of burning Christians: in this calamitous
deplorable estate, no other honor could be looked for save that of Martyrdom.
But no sooner was Gentilisme abolished, then we have a new smiling face of
affairs, under the happy Reign of Constantine, the Churches Patron, and the
Glergies Friend. And henceforth the Primitive Piety was not wanting, who
thought no Honors, no powers misplaced upon their spiritual Fathers, for whom
they judged nothing too dear. All Histories ring of Constantines Kindness to
the Clergy; by whom the most weighty affairs of the Empire, in his days were
happily transacted. And most of his Successors wrote after the same Copy.

It were easy to muster a little army of holy Fathers engaged in secular
employments, We read in Zozomen l. 6. c. 32. that Epiphanius Bishop of the
Metropolis of Cyprus a personof singular virtue, Prudence, and Piety (...), was
busied in Political matters. Theodoret l. 2. c. 30. reports the like of one
Jacobus Bishop of Nisibis, or Mygdonian Antioch, Theodor. l. 4. c. 13.
that he was (...), Bishop, Governor and Captain of the same City. Nay the
warlike habit of Eusebius Bishop of Samosata is commended by the same Author,
the Church receiving benefit by it. And Baronius mentions John Patriarch of
Alexandria, A. 610. that twice in a week his manner was to sit and Judge
between those that were at variance, and reconcile them: Once when none came to
him, he departed weeping that all the day he had done no good; but Sophronias
replied that he had more need rejoice, having brought the City to such order
and peace, that they were more like Angels then men, having no differences
left. A rare example to the immortal credit of an Ecclesiastical Judge, Sir
Thomas Moore commanded it to be scored up as a wounder when he had cleared one
Sir Thomas Moors life.
Court, but here is a populous City, (hardly short of any in this nation)
reduced to a perfect Unity.

But I shall pass by such obscure Names, whom twere endless to reckon up, and
select only a few, whose eminent Labors have Eternized them to Posterity. I Will
begin with St. Ambrose, who flourished A. 378. and to his conduct, and prudence
was the entire government of the great City of Milain entrusted. S. Aust.
complaining that he was a long time kept from access to him, Confess l. 6. c 3
secludentibus me ab ejus aure, atque ore Catervis negotiosorum hominum, quorum
infirmitatibus serviebat, whole troops of Suitours about him, to dispatch
their worldly business. The next shall be Cyril Patriarch of Aelxandria, who
besides the oversight of the Clergy, had the Soc. l. 7. c. 7.
management of Temporal affairs in the City. Though it is confessed the
Historian passes some censure upon it, but the Reason is easily discovered,
because his Darling Novatians were a little retrenched by it. The Third shall be
the great African Light St. Austin, who Ep. 147. has this passage. Homines
quidem suas seculares causas apud nos finire cupientes, dum iis necessarii
fuerimus, sic nos Sanctos and Dei servos appellant, ut negotia Terrae suae
peragant, aliquando agamus negotia and salutis ipsorum, non de Auro, non de
Argento, non de fundis and pecoribus, pro quibus rebus quotidie submisso Capite
salutamur, ut Dissentiones hominum terminemus. He was every day solicited to
make up some breaches about Cold, Silver, Land, Cattle etc. Yet where shall we
find a more painful Preacher then this Father, where any more engaged in
contests with Heretics, or any that left a larger Legacy of his learned
Labors to the Church? My last instance shall be Gregory (with whom some close
the good Popes) who makes sad moan, Greg. mag. Ep. 5.
sub color Episcopatus ad saeculum retractus sum, in quo tantis terrae curis
inservio, quantis me in vita Laica nequaquam deservisse reminiscor. He was
never in all his life, so encumbered with worldly business as after he came to
be a Bishop. But afterward she adds, etsi cogamur terrenis negotiis intendere,
men's tamen nostra saeculari varietate non delectetur, sed tota in unum currat,
atque consluat finem. Though he was forced to do this for the good of his
people, yet he took no pleasure in it, and his mind was taken up with better
things. For all agree that these must not be undertaken out of love to them,
but Christian Charity Aust. de Civ. d. l. 19. c. 19. but compassion toward the
Oppressed Greg. de Past. Cur. p. sec. c. 7.

Now these Employments were conferred upon them, not as Bishops, but as
Subjects more eminently Qualified, withal the advantages of humane Literature:
But Three there are in which they did principally engage, and which may seem
most agreeable to their Coat. First, to be in Commission of the Peace, and to
speak impartially, who fitter for such a work then they, whose business, whose
study it is to reconcile those that are at variance. And this was the great
Design of the Ancients, though it began at first in a way of Charity, yet being
found profitable it was upon mature deliberation by the Christian Emperors
confirmed, judging no persons more likely to advance the public service in
this capacity, then here and there some choice Ecclesiastics, whose inspection
would both quicken, and awe the Laity. This being then an approved Maxim, None
so proper to make Peace, as they whose duty it is to Preach Peace. All I wish is,
that the covetuous fears of some interested persons, jealous Least such a
Christian unexpensive ending of differences should keep their Courts, too empty
etc. give not a check to the Reviving so Primitive, so hopeful a custom.

Secondly, To be of the Privy Council, where frequently Cases of Conscience,
relating to State-matters may arise. As suppose there be a consultation about a
War with Foraign Nations, the lawfullness, or unlawfullness whereof must be
judged in Foro Conscientiae, and the thing will not bear so much delay as to
Summon the Prelates together for advice, nor Reason of State allow it to be so
much published. For want of such Religious Counselors, Princes may oftentimes
be rashly entangled in unjust Massacres, and innocent blood be spilt. Now to
prevent this, the Godly Prudent Princes, both of our own, and other Nations,
have ever admitted some Spiritual Persons to their Council Tables, and
Closet-debates. It Is recorded of Constantine, Eusebius. Vit. l. 1. c. 35. l. 4. c.
56
that he would never dispense with the absence of some of his Bishops, not at
meals, making his Court as twere a Church, not in his journeyes, nay that he
took them along with him in his Warlike Expeditions. And Pet. Blesensis in his
84. Ep. to Alexander 3. excusing the Bishops of Winchester, Ely, and Norwich,
proves at large, that it is lawful for Prelates to be in the Courts and Councils
of Princes for sundry important Reasons.

3ly. To be employed in public Treaties and Negotiations of Peace, and this
both the Ancient, and Modern Practice will justify, that none have been more
frequently, or more successefully used in such Messages, then the Ambassadors
of Christ. Solemn Embassies cannot be expected before the Magistrate embraced
the Gospel. But in the very beginning of the fourth Century, we have Maruthas
Bishop of Mesopotamia sent Scrat L. 7. L. 7. c. 8.
Ambassador from the Emperor of Rome, to the King of Persia. Presently after
Theodorick dispatched Eunod. Ticin Vit. Epiphan.
Epiphanius, Bishop of Ticinum, or Pavia, to Gunebald King of the Burgundians,
who at his request released great numbers of poor Christian Captives. Then we
have S. Ambrose sent by Valentinian to Maximus, that commanded the British
Armies, to desire peace, which he happily effected to the great contentment of
his Master, Amb. Ep. 27. L. 5. where he likewise mentions a former Embassy. I
might add Chrysostom employed to treat with Gainas, Baronius: John Bishop of
Rome commissioned by Nicepho.
Theodorick to Justin the Emperor, with multitudes of others. For the Moderns,
the time would fail me to speak of our own and the Neighbor Nations: for this
continued the Universal Practice of Christendom, till Sincerity gave place to
Hypocrysie, and that new Definition of an Ambassador came up, that he was, Vir
bonus peregre missus, ad mentiendum Reip. causa, a Good man sent to Lie abroad
for his Countries service. Then it was high time for these holy men to resign up
these employments to others, that could swallow such Camels.

Thus we have both Ancient and Modern usance on our side, the uninterrupted
practice of the world for above 5000 years before and under the Law, in the
purest times since the Gospel, all Records attesting it both Pagan, Mohammedan,
Jewish, and Christian: and none ever questioning it, but some late Innovators,
though it is hoped, as we have cast off the infallibility of Rome, we shall not
now embrace that of Geneva, or Scotland. We have heard Cyril, Ambrose, Austin,
not the least amongst the Asiatick, Europaean, and African Fathers, with many
other Worthies engaged in Secular Employments: and if it must be censured an
error, Sit Anima mea cum Patribus: I am willing to cast my Lot amongst them;
and though it be miserable to be deceived by Authority, yet it is most miserable
not to be moved by Authority, Aug. de Vtil. Cred, 6.16.

Well then, that this de facto has been the usage is evident, let us in the
next place a little examine the Jus of it. And for any Fanatic to except
against it, is a Self-contradiction, since their avowed Principles allowed
their Teachers to follow any other Calling, either of Camp, Country, or City
without control, or imputation. But it is the rigid Disciplinarian, that takes
most offense at it, and therefore to him I shall address my self. I Will suppose
him to dwell in the little Commonwealth of Geneva, to be the best Headpiece
among them, and shall only put this Dilemma to him. If the Senate, or Syndic
should commission him to decide a difference between his quarrelling
Neighbors, or send to advise with him about a war with their great enemy the
Duke of Savoy, or engage him to solicit aid of the Court of France as a
Public Agent, there being none likely to prevail but himself, and the City
otherwise in danger to be lost. In this case should he be heard in pleading the
inconsistency of his holy Profession with such an employment, and thereupon
return a denial; if so, the Magistrate is in a poor condition, who must be
obeyed in nothing more save what the others Calling enjoins him, whether
commanded or no: and his being in Orders makes the Magistrate loose the service
of a subject. Sure I am, both Calvin formerly, and Henderson of late, did not
scruple greater matters. Nor can necessity be alleged here, for if the thing
be simply unlawful, we must not upon any terms do evil, though the greatest
good may probably ensue. On the other side, if he may not decline it, then
these two are not inconsistent, nor does his Function incapacitate him for such
a work; (...).

But let Matters be made never so clear, it is feared the Vulgar have taken up
such prejudices from the inexcusable business of some Black Coats interesting
the very Pulpits in State matters, during our late Troubles (a practice never
sufficiently to be condemned) that all must be bound to their good Behavior
for a while, for nothing but time will satisfy, and solve that Objection.
Though it is hoped all Learned, and Judicious Persons will be more considerate,
and distinguish between the frantic madness of a few giddy pates, and the
sober actings of eminent Prelates commissioned by lawful Authority, and not
take advantage from former miscarriages, to bring an irreparable injury upon
posterity. But it is a true saying confirmed by the experience of many 100 years,
Profecto Laici semper sunt inimici Clericis. When the World was Pagan, the
Devil taught the multitude to cry out, if any calamity happened, that the fault
was in the Christians, and they must to the Lions: but now the cunning
Sophister has changed the note, and if any thing be amiss either in Church or
State, presently the blame lights on the Clergy, they must be sacrificed to
appease the many-headed Monster, their Lands sequestered, and all Places of
trust, and honor interdicted them.

But let us in the last place a little view the Canonical Qualification of a
Bishop. 1. It Is required that he be vitae probatissimae, of an upright
unblameable Conversation, 2. Nullius criminis reus, guilty of no crime, 3.
aetate gravis, well stricken in years, 4. Doctrina Praestans, excelling in
Learning, with many other of the like nature. Now if these are not kept, they
have the more to answer for, whom it concerns: if they be, will not any one
that reads it conclude, no persons more fit for the weightiest affairs? For all
Politico's make Integrity, Prudence, and Learning the principal Ingredients to
an accomplished Magistrate, a complete Virtuoso; so that if Aptitude be
respected, I may safely affirm there are none better qualified for Counsel than
the Clergy, whose Education has enabled them to look into all the Idea's, and
Models of Government, Search the depths and mysteries of Empires, most of which
are locked up in strange Languages, and it is not every Capacity that can gain
the Key. Then for true Politics ( the late Florentine Reaches let others
learn) there is as much to be found in the Historical part of the Scripture, as
any books in the World; so that Divines may well be good Statists. And is it
not pity their Country should be deprived of such admirable Abilities?
Doubtless those of the contrary persuasion do not weigh the Consequences of
their Opinion, clearly tending to disjoyn the Church from being a part of the
Commonwealth, which for 1300 years and better have been happily united, if
those that are once in Orders must no longer be looked upon as Citizens, but
incontinently forfeit all their Privileges; Of which more hereafter.

CHAP. V. Some Scriptures, and Canons seemingly contradicting the former
Position, explained.
YEt for all this I confess many good men are strongly persuaded, that
Ecclesiastics ought wholly to be excluded from civil matters, an opinion much
pretending to Humility and Selfdenial, and receiving some countenance, and
color from Scripture, the practice of the three first Centuries, and some
Canons of Councils, which must be the subject of our next consideration.

The Text that is most insisted upon is 2. Tim. 2.4. which being mis-translated
by the vulgar Latin, militans Deo, begat greater prejudices in the minds of
many.

First then one might take notice, that the Sentence is general, and belongs to
every one, though in a more peculiar manner it is referred to the Preachers of
the Gospel, yet none can plead exemption: but others are willing to slip their
necks out of the collar, and the Clergy only must be tied to it, whom for the
present we will grant to be principally concerned. The stresse of all lies upon
(...), which Theophylact expounds by (...), the tumults and confusions of this
life. Cor. a Lapide says, (...) are such employments as concern food and
raiment: and instances in these mercatura, agricultura, and arts mechanicae.
Now who does not readily approve of this, and judge it very improper, that a
Preacher should be a Merchant, a Plowman, or a Mechanic, do not both Common
and Canon Law forbid the same? Estius has much to the like purpose, (...) etc.
quae quis exercet ut habeat unde vivat, and quotes to this sense a saying of
Ambrose, Indecorum est homines curare de cibo, qui militant Deo: this rather
flies in the face of them that permit their Preachers to put on blew Aprons,
and make them such sordid allowances, that they must either work with their
hands, or starve. Seeing it is not comely that the Lords Warriors should busy
themselves about inferior matters, that tend to get a livelihood: And so Valla
renders it, not negotiis, but negotiationibus. When Christ employed Fisher men
to preach his Gospel, weak instruments to confound the Powers of the world,
though he furnished them with suitable abilities, that they needed not to study,
yet he made them leave their Nets, and not use them as an ordinary Profession.
Calvin says that by the affairs of this life, the Apostle meant the care of
governing and ordering a family, and such ordinary employments. If then we keep
strict and close to the Letter, I see no remedy, but all must run into
Cloisters, and shake hands with the World: and we know what a conclusion the
Rhemists draw hence, and what they condemn as a special impediment to Church
warfare. So that if from this the Clergy be denied, intermedling in any secular
affairs, the next step must be to forbid their marrying, which unavoidably
brings with it many encumbrances and family-necessities, but this smells so
rank of the Monk and Hermit, that I hope twill not be swallowed by any
Protestant, and I did not believe the Lemane Lake would so easily have mixed
its waters with Tyber.

The Apostle here makes a comparison between profane, and spiritual warfare,
and the better to understand the genuine sense we must consider what Military
Discipline did require. Vegetius L. 2. says, that by the laws of war, he must
not have any private affairs committed to him, nor mind his own gain. Hence we
read the Romans severely proceeding against Posthumous for employing his
soldiers to till his ground. Florus.
Vid. Legem Honorii and Arcadii Tit. Nemo Miles. And Leo the Emperor says
expressly, those that are armed and maintained by the Commonwealth, must only
mind public affairs, and not till the ground, keep Cattle, or traffic, L.
Milites. C. de Re militari L. 12. All avocations were inhibited, and such
Matters as tended to the public good enjoined. And why should not the same
analogy hold here, and such affairs be permitted to the Clergy as tend to the
good of the Church, and the glory of their great Commander.

Next we are urged with the Apostles practice, who were so tender of any
interruption, that they denied to attend upon Tables, and make provision for
the poor, It Is true, in the Infancy of the Church, when the Gospel was to be
published all the world over, the work great, the laborers exceeding few, not
one to every Country, the least diversion at such a time would prove a
considerable hinderance, and distraction to them. But when the Lord of the
Harvest has increased the number, and plentifully furnished his peaceable
settled Church, every Village being now supplied, and if the complaints of some
be true, the nation so overstock'd, that there is hardly employment, much less
maintenance for the multitude: In this case to make no difference of times,
where the merciful Providence of God has made so vast a distinction, seems
little agreeable to reason. But if from this, occasion must be taken presently
to forbid every petty interruption and disturbance, how came St. Paul to
contradict himself, and to follow his Tent-making, laboring with his hands for
a livelihood, which must needs take up a good part of his time, and hinder his
praying, and preaching. Add to this, that the 7 Deacons appointed by the
Apostles to succeed them in the care of the Collections, were according to
Epiphanius of the 70 Disciples, yet for the public benefit their constant
preaching was now and then dispensed with to attend on Tables.

3ly. We are threatened with several Canons roaring against it, but it is supposed
upon search, they will be found falsely charged, and prove only bruta fulmina.
And here I cannot but admire the modesty of the Primitive Church, and the
charity of the people, the earnestness of Princes in commissioning Spiritual
persons to compose all emergent differences, and the forwardness of the
oppressed in flying to their impartial Tribunals for Justice; whereupon the holy
Fathers in process of time thought it wisdom to take off their Clergy from
those affairs, by sundry severe Canons in many Councils. 'Twere easy to
reckon up several prohibitions to this purpose out of Balsamon, Zonaras,
Bininus etc.

It would be an infinite task to give particular answers to each Canon, and
therefore I shall lay down some general Rules, which may much conduce to the
better understanding of them all, and if well applied may help to solve most.

First, It Is clear, the great design was to forbid ambitious seeking after, and
voluntary engaging in secular matters, for sordid ends, and covetuous
principles. And this may probably be collected, because we find a dispensation
given, when imposed by the supreme Magistrate: In the Council of Sardis it is
granted upon the motion of Osius, Si relligiosi Imperatoris literis vel
invitati, vel vocati fuerint, and undertaken in obedience, as causes of Piety
and charity, overseeing Widows and Orphans, provided it extend not to the
notorious neglect of their relligious callings. Thus Justin Martyr, Apol. 2.
calls the Bishop the great Steward of all the Poor, the contributions of the
faithful being laid down at his feet, and by him distributed. And Ignatius to
Polycarp. that he was the great Trustee of the widows.

2. It Is not so much a total prohibition, as a prudent Restraint, least
animosities, and jealousyes should arise in the Laity, by too much enchroaching
upon their Courts, and therefore the wisdom of sundry Councils, confined the
Clergy to such matters as were properly of Ecclesiastical cognizance.

The Third ground and reason of these interdictions, was not the unfitness and
incapacity of Spiritual persons, but out of respect to their eminent callings,
least they should be disparaged by vile and mean employments, and express
mention is made of sordid offices about Princes and Noblemen, as Stewards,
Bailises etc. But when by the favor of Princes, their employments were
honorable, and their temporary diversions, did bring abundant recompense to
the Church; we see those that had the principal hand in enacting these Canons
themselves engaging. Now can it be supposed, if this had been the meaning, they
would have been guilty of so gross a contradiction, and no future Council
reprove it. Cyprian much confirms me in this opinion, who l. de Lapsis, is
persuaded that God sent the great persecution under Decius only to awaken the
Christians, who were grown exceeding corrupt, especially the Clergy, for he
complains that the Bishops themselves abandoned their holy Functions, and
dealt in matters of the world, haunting Marts and Faires for filthy lucre sake.
And much to the same purpose we find in our own Bid, Gildas etc. Now to beat
down these enormities were so many Canons levelled.

But to make peace between quarrelling nations, to compound differences amongst
Christians and such like, tending to the honor of God and the glory of the
Gospel, which may be often practiced without Detriment to their spiritual
charges, I never find these expressly forbidden, or such as engaged in them, as
Cyril, Austin, Chrysostom, Gregory, Bernard etc. condemned. For if St. Paul
became all things to all men to gain a Soul, will not that example bear his
Sucessours out, if they go to the utmost verge of their Christian liberty,
still keeping on this side sin, to preserve Kingdoms, the Churches peace, and
prevent the effusion of Christian blood: Their absence some days from their
private charges will be abundantly recompensed by such happy consequences.

4ly If the utmost rigor must take place, and no dispensation be granted, how
shall we reconcile the severe Edicts of some Councils, whereby the Clergy are
strictly enjoined to take no care of their Families, but only and wholly to be
intent upon reading, praying, and preaching ( Carthagin. 4) with that of St.
Paul, who pronounces such a one worse then an Infidel. All sober men will allow
them to provide, but not so as to neglect their holy Function, and this holds
as well in Civil, as Family affairs.

Thus being out of Canon-shot, we may securely proceed.

THE CLERGIES TITLES.
IT IS the Observation of some that man comes into the world with his Face
downwards, looking from God, and ever since his Nature was tainted by the fall,
there remains in him an indisposition to good, and tendency to evil. Nov
because openly to fall foul upon Religion it self, would be censured as down
right Atheism, therefore the devil has taught many a no less effectual, but
much more secure way to begin with the Preachers of the Gospel, to slight and
vilify them, to deny them any reverend or honorable title: Chrysostom. is
express to this purpose (in Psalm. 13) that Heretics have learned from Satan
not to give any names of honor to the Clergy, and all this under a specious
pretense of keeping them humble, that they may not grow proud. A hopeful
design! and like well to do the work: when we see Servus Servorum Dei, under
the disguise of this lowliness take more upon him, then Majesty it self, making
even Emperors kiss his Toe, and hold his Stirrup. But the spirit of God is
not sparing in asserting their just rights, and he might have done well, to
forbear, if there had been any such danger of puffing them up, they are styled,
the Lords Messengers, Hag. 1.13. Coworkers with God, 1 Cor. 3.6. Ambassadors
of God, 2 Cor. 5.20. Nor is any thing more common, then to entitle them (...) 1 Timothy 5.13. (...) Heb. 13.7.24. appellations of honor given every where to
Secular Dignity, and cannot be rendered into any vulgar language without
borrowing from the Civil.

Nay let me speak it with reverence, never did Court-flattery atribute more
swelling names to the proudest Potentate on earth, then the scripture does to
Preachers of the Gospel, styling them Angels and Stars Rev. 1. Light of the
world, 1 Cor. 11. and higher then which it is impossible to go, Gods, St. John
10.34. And Hierom notes, that when St. Paul terms himself the Apostle of
Jesus Christ, he speaks as loftily, as if he said Praefectus Praetorio August.
Caesar: Lord chief Justice of Augustus, Magister exercitus Tiberii Caes.
General of Tiberius Armies. So that here I can not but complain with the
learned Mede of the Title Minister, as very incommodious, and improper for the
Preachers of the Gospel, begetting an erroneous conceit in the vulgar, as if
they were their servants, who may more truly be called their Masters to teach
them, and this is farther promoted by those, who in their common discourse use
the language of serving such or such a Cure. But is it not a Solecisme to call
the shepherd the Sheep Minister, or servant? To prevent this, he rather
recommends the word Priest, being only the Evangelical Presbyter contracted: or
if the long engrossing of that by the Papists, have made it odious to nice
ears, let Presbyter in the full sound be retained, a word as soon, and as
easily understood as Minister. But it is a difficult task to alter so rooted a
custom, and we may sooner suggest what is expedient to be done, then find out a
way to Reform it. Though it nearly concerns the Clergy in such an Age as this
to be cautious, that they give not the least occasion, which may contribute to
their own debasing.

I am not good at Heraldry, and therefore shall not take upon me to blazon the
several Coats belonging to spiritual Dignities. Only I cannot but remark, that
the Canon Law calls Patriarchs Super-Illustres, Arch-Bish. Illustres, Bishops
Spectabiles, Doctors Clarissimos. Nay Chastanaeus proves out of the
Clementines, that the Title of Serenissimus belongs to the Bishop. But I shall
not follow the wild extravagancies of these men, whose sordid flattery giving
too much to the Clergy, has made others unwilling to give any at all, at least
not their Due.

Let us pass on to those we can better rely upon. Leo Africanus assures us,
that the Moors call many of their Ecclesiastics Scriphs, i. e. Noblemen. The
Hebrews had no higher name then (...) to speak Honor and respect, frequently
applied to God himself, to Kings and Princes both of their own and other
Nations, the Philistine Lords being called by it, Josh. 13. yet you find
Obadiah, Controller of the Kings Family, and one that feared God, accosting the
poor Prophet Elijah in that Language, 1. King. 18.7. and his servant Elisha
saluted with the same appellation, 2. King. 2.

The most Honorable name the Greeks had was (...), and yet how familiar is
this in the New Testament: and if Antiquity may come in to explain it, there
are no expressions more frequent to writers both of the first and middle ages
concerning Bishops, then (...), which if a man should render most holy and
Honored Masters, twould hardly consist with the State attributed to them, even
in those early days, where the Consecration of a Bishop is styled sitting on a
Throne. Now the Modesty of the Ancients did receive these Titles of Honor
without stain of pride, or blemish to their Humility, having Christ for their
pattern, who approves his Disciples calling him Lord and Master. Gospel
meekness may well stand with an Honorable Title, and no wise man will be puffed
up with an aerie sound. It Is the affecting of it then that Christ condemns, when
he forbids any to call his Disciples Master. Mat. 23. otherwise, if the letter
be urged, all of us must turn Quakers, and shake hands with civility. Honor
those that are over you, Phil. 2. and what less honor then in a word.

Now does God command, and shall we scruple to give it, and censure them that
receive it? What Barbarous impiety is it, to set so low a rate upon Learning
and Religion, make them so servile, that no Appellation of Reverence or esteem
must be given the Professors of them? Is it for the honor of England to
grudge a small title to the Pastors of Souls, which all the Governors of our
Bodies, and Estates enjoy without regret, which any common Artizan, that can
but scrape together a little wealth, and is promoted to Office, is saluted
with, and we saw of late was given to Brewers and Cobblers, etc. Is it for the
Honor of England to court and respect the Ambassadors of men, and to slight
those that represent the person of Christ, and rank them with the basest
Peasants? Nor is this due to their persons only; for let them be never so
vicious, their Professions may challenge it. For Jesus Christ says Cyprian. L.
3. Ep. 19. yielded honor unto the Priests of the Jews, though they retained
neither the fear of God, nor knowledge of him, teaching us lawfully and fully
to honor true Priests, by his behavior unto false. And Chrysostom speaks
roundly, Hom. 2. in Ep. 2. ad Tim. This is the cause of all evil, that the
authority of Ecclesiastical Rulers is decayed, and no honor, no reverence, no
fear yielded to them. He that is religiously affected to the Priests, will with
greater piety reverence God: and he that despises the Priest comes by degrees
to this, that he waxes contumelious against God himself.

I know many are scandalized at the Lordlinesse of our Bishops, for no other
reason then that it comes too near the Roman garb. But is it not a piece of
folly, that every thing which carries with it the face of order, and decency
must presently be decried as superstitious and Antichristian: and all that
defend it charged as friends to Rome, Cassandrian, Grotian Papists. I must
profess, it is my persuasion, that the peevishness of many Reformers carried
them farther from Rome, then necessity required, and many profitable
commendable things have been disused by us, because practiced by them: but is
it charitable is it rational to conceive that Church so full of errors, that it
had not one dram of truth remaining, that once pleasant Garden of Christ so
overrun with weeds, that it had not one good flower in it? I remember
Valentinus Gentilis made it a great argument against the Reformed Chuches, for
that they agreed with the Papists in the Doctrine of the Trinity. But we must
not term every thing Superstitious that is believed or practiced by the Church
of Rome, no more then we do every thing Ceremonial, that we read of in use
amongst the Jews, who we know had customs Moral, as well as Levitical. I shall
never therefore rashly condemn any thing as Popish, merely because I find it
amongst them, unless Scripture, Antiquity, or reason induce me. Sure I am,
Peter Martyr, and Jewel, were never suspected adherents to that party; yet see
what Titles the former gives the later in the Preface to his Treatise of
Ubiquity, and every where in his Epistles.

But I shall not waste time and paper in contending for this, since if the
Substance be once recovered (the Revenues, and Jurisdiction) this Shadow will
soon follow.

THE CLERGIES PRIVILEGES.
CHAP. I. The ancient Immunities of the Clergy, with their present State in
other Nations.
THe Prudent Piety of the first Christian Emperors for the better
encouragement of Religion, and Learning, conferred many large Immunities and
Exemptions upon Churchmen, freeing them from Subsidies, Impositions, and
sundry Services wherewith the rest of their Subjects were burdened. Eccle.
Hist. L. 10. c. 7. Z^zom. L. 1. c. 9.
Eusebius and Zozomen record several Privileges granted by Constantine, that
those who minister in holy Religion, be wholly free and exempt from all public
burdens. Nor were the Ancient Franchises of our British Church short either
for number or extent, being all confirmed by Magna Charta without restraint. My
Lord Cook acknowledges that the Clergy had more and greater liberties then
other of the Kings Subjects, which to set down would ask a Volume; some few he
recites, as that they were discharged from Purveyances, Tols, Customs,
Distresses by the Sheriff in the old inheritance of the Church, with others of
the like nature. But most of these are now lost, and their condition reduced
below the meanest Calling in the Nation. It would make a man mourn and weep, as
often as He looks back upon the Charity of our Saxon Ancestors, who in their
greatest Impositions ever excused Ecclesiastics, no part of that insupportable
Tax of Spelm. Glos. V. Daneg.
Danegelt, under which the Kingdom so much groaned, being paid by them, and
till after the Conquest they were ever privileged. For Spelm. Con.
Ethelwolfe in a full Convention of his States at Winchester, A. 855. enacted
that Tithes and Church Lands throughout all his Dominions, should be free from
civil burdens and exactions, as much as Royal Tributes great and small. But how
strangly has the Case been altered of late? How unequal were Contributions and
Quarterings during our Intestine Wars? What heavy burdens did the poor Clergy
bear? no Redress to the bitterest complaints being found from their
Lay-Judges, who only made sport at their misery and oppression, as if nothing
were too bad for Black-Coats. Now those days, through mercy, are over, and
must be forgotten, but still to be wounded by the hand of their friends, and to
receive the same hard measure from pretended well-wishers, that strikes to the
very heart. When no regard is had of all their past sufferings, First Fruits,
Tenths (no small standing Revenue of the Crown, amounting as some compute to
near 40000. per an.) which they joyfully discharge, but they must still be left
to the arbitrary disproportionat Impositions of every domineering insolent
Officer. The Consideration hereof has convinced many (formerly of a different
persuasion) that it is not only useful, but expedient, but necessary to the
Church to have some of its own order in power to protect them, and hear their
just grievances. But what farther concerns our own Privileges, being so
learnedly handled by the immortal Spelman, and the General ones so fully
Collected by De Stud. privileg.
Rebuffus and others, I shall not here insist upon them.

The grand Concern at present which I principally design, is, how far they were
privileged as to public Assemblies, and State Consultations. And that
Constantine, with many other succeeding Emperors made use of their Advice both
at home and abroad, employed them in Embassies, and other Important
Transactions has been already demonstrated. It now remains to see how they
fared in other Places. And first, if such an Argument could hope to sway with
Christians, it should soon be proved, that those, who attended the worship of
the Heathen gods, were admitted into the Pan-Aetolium, and Amphictyonian
Council, amongst the Athenian Areopagites, and Roman Senators, that the old
Gauls divided their States Caes. Com. L. 6
in Druidas (who had omnium Rerum immunitatem) Equites, Plebem, as the Strabo
L. 17.
Egyptians did into Priests, Soldiers, and Artificers. But leaving Gentilisme,
I shall hasten to Christendom. And here once for all premise, that by the
Fundamental Constitutions of most Nations in Europe, Three Estates are
generally settled, whereof the Clergy, or Priesthood is ever one. Now to make
this good, though I might produce variety of Instances, yet I shall content my
self with the single Testimony of Calvin, knowing that it will go farther with
many then a Jury of others. This we find expressly asserted in that Instit. L.
4. c. 20. Sect. 31.
Piece which some cry up next to the Writings of the Apostles, in singulis
Regnis tres sunt Ordines, which how to make up without the Spiritualty is
beyond my skill. In our neighbor Nation of France the practice is notoriously
known, the ancient style of the Royal edicts always running, as it is recorded
of Pepin A. 744. per consilium Sacerdotum, Thuan. passim.
and Optimatum ordinavimus, and per consilium Sacerdotum, and Optimatum
Ordinavit Carolomannus. It might farther be noted, that Six Prelates here are
Peers of the Kingdom, Three of them being styled Dukes and three Counts,
though the whole number of the Pairie exceed not 12. As likewise that the
Bishop of Paris has a peculiar Indulgence of being present in every Court of
that Royal City without exception. Ch^ppinus.
Look into Hungary there Thwroczius informs us, that by the Fundamental Laws
of K. Stephen, the Bishops in Concilio Regis Primi assistunt. Poland comes
behind none in its Reverence to the Clergy, where the Archbishop of Gnesna is
Primas Regni, Stanisl. Krzis. tanowick Descrip. Pol.
and Princeps primus, whose Jurisdiction is not limited to the Spiritualty
alone, but has the chief place in the rank of the Senators assigned him, the
greatest Authority in all Consultations. And when at any time there happens an
Inter-regnum (as it frequently may in those Elective Kingdoms) it belongs to
him to Summon a Diet, to give Audience to Foraign Ambassadors, and to appoint a
time, and place for the choice of the new King. After him follow the rest of
the Ecclesiastics, who in the * Assemblies take place of all the Secular
Nobles. My Author farther enlarges this to have proceeded from the Piety of
the Polish Kings toward the Church, that the Sons of it, should for ever
have the highest Place in all Conventions, with many other Privileges, which
to this day they enjoy in his own words (No Clergyman neither, but a Lawyer)
maximo illius Regni Commodo, Emolumento, Adjumento, addo and Ornamento, Id.
Cromerus adds, that there is ever a Royal standing Council assigned the King,
of which number there are always Two Archbishops and Seven Bishops. Then how
considerable a number in all the German Dyets, the Ecclesiastics are L. de
Comitiis ^mp.
Panvinius is a witness beyond exception, who reckons up 34. Bishops that have
their votes there, besides Abbots, Priors etc. who pass for Religious Persons.
And in the Septemvirate, we find no less then 3 Clergy men, Ments
Arch-Chancellour of Germany, Coln of France, and Triers of Italy. I shall wholly
out of this Catalogue omit Spain and Italy, as being such known Vassals to the
Pope, where the Clergy rule the roast. But one word dashes all this, they are
Papists, which is argument enough to many to condemn a thing, though backed by
never so strong reasons. Let us examine how matters stand with others, who have
no correspondence with Rome. Andreas Bureus, in his description of Sweden,
acknowledges that the Ecclesiastics were heretofore the prime men in the
Senate, till the Covetuousnes of Gustavus the first, despoiled them of their
Revenues. Yet since the Reformation they still to this day retain their
suffrages in all public Dyets of the Kingdom. Burei Descrip. Suec.
And when the new Crowned King makes choice of his Counselors the Archbishop
of Vpsal is still the first; who is allowed a greater proportion of Attendants,
when he comes to the King, then any Nobleman in the Nation, no less then 40.
Horse being permitted him, whereas others Retinue must not exceed 30. And in
the great Assembly, A. 1600 convened at Lincopen, we find mentioned both
Bishops and other Ecclesiastics. For Denmark, Pontanus recites 7 Bishops, as
the Ecclesiastical Nobility, who have Votes in all grand meetings. Jonas ab
Elvervelt distributes the states of Holstein into Three Orders, 1 King, and
Princes, 2 Prelates, 3 the Families of the Nobles, and he makes the Bishops of
Lubec, and Sleswick, the 2 prime Peers in all the Dyets. MS in Arch. Bodl.
entit. the man, of hald. Par. Scot.
In Scotland anciently the Bishops and Prelates were essential members of
Parliament, and had their Seats on the Right Hand of the Prince. And in a
Parliament held at Edinburg A. 1597, a Vote passed for restoring the Clergy to
their Original Privileges, as the 3 Estate of the Kingdom, the Learned King
James condemning that Act of Annexing their Temporalties to the Crown, as
Basil. Dor. l. 2. p. 43.
vile and pernicious. Then for Geneva, who is so much a stranger to the conduct
of that Reformation, as to be ignorant, what a stroke Calvin and others had
upon the Senate or grand Counsel, which gave occasion to the complaint of some,
that they had expelled one Bishop, and admitted many. If remoter Countries be
regarded amongst the Abissines, the Clergy is Paramount, Dresser. Orat.
employed in affairs of all natures, and we read in Damianus a Goes of
Zaga-Zaba an Ethiopian Bishop Viceroy of Bagana, sent Ambassador to the King
of Portugal.

In Muscovy their Supreme Convention, which the Inhabitants call Zabore,
consists of the great Duke, 20 Nobles, and as many Ecclesiastics, the common
People being wholly excluded. Gaguin
And when they are met together to deliberate, the Patriarch, and
Ecclesiastics are first consulted, and deliver their Opinion.

I shall conclude this Paragraph, only reminding that neither Pagans, nor
Mahomatans are so inhuman, so discourteous toward their Priests, as to deny
them this Liberty. For Tully acquaints us, that it was by the appointment of
the gods, Orat. pro Dom. sua.
that the Pontisices should not only take care of Religion, but summae Reip.
praeesse Voluerunt. Nay at this very day the Barbarous Turks never exclude
their Mufti, but allow him free entrance into all their Councills, and Divan.

CHAP. II. The Clergies Ancient Privileges in this Kingdom, and their
Restitution pressed by many Arguments.
It Is Recorded to the Glory of England, that her Bounty and Liberality to the
Church in Stately Fabrics, and Revenues, her Favor and Indulgence in large
Privileges, and Immunities have come short of no Nation in the World. I might
produce many instances to that purpose; but for the present shall single out
one, as more eminent and glorious then the rest, viz. Admitting them to all
public Debates, and Assemblies.

I Will begin with the Saxons who had many solemn meetings, 1. their
Scire-Gemots, which some learned Antiquaries resemble to our County-Courts, or
Sheriffs-Torn, in which all Causes, both Criminal and Civil concerning Church,
or State were handled. The Persons bound to be present, were the Sheriff, the
Bishop, and all the Nobles of the County: till at last upon their Humble
Petition Ecclesiastics were dispensed with by the Statute of Marlborough 52.
Edw. 3. unless urgent necessity required it.

Secondly, Their Folc-mots, a kind of Annual Parliament, commonly held the
beginning of May, in which all the Princes of the Kingdom, Bishops, and
Magistrates assembled, and the Laity took the Oath of Allegiance, and confirmed
their own mutual Union before the Bishops. The Original of this is intimated to
be as high as King L.L. Edv. Conf. c. 35.
Arthur.

Thirdly. Their Wittena-Gemots, or Mycel-Synoth, the Grand Convention of the
Wisemen. These whosoever desires to look farther into, may have recourse to
Spelmans Laborious Glossary, V. Gemot. Now out of none of these were the Clergy
excluded, but ever reckoned an eminent Principal part of each, their Counsel,
Votes, and Approbation demanded before any Laws were constituted.

For proof of this we shall look back above 1000 years, to Ethelbert, who
presently after Austins arrival, A. 605. called a grand Assembly, tam Spelm.
Con. p. 126.
Cleri, quam Populi.. In the Laws of King Ina, which Florentius Wigorn. dates
A. 686. Spelman 692. Lambard 712. we read that they were written by the
persuasion and advice of his Bishops Hedda, and Erkenwald: and though Spelman
excerps no more then concern the Church (as being only proper to his design)
yet Lambard mentions many Civil matters there determined. And when the Great
League and Union between the Britons, Saxons, and Picts was concluded we have
it ratified per commune Consilium, and Assensum Omnium Episcoporum, Procerum,
Comitum, and omnium Sapientum Seniorum and Populorum, Bed. Hist. l. 1.
and per Praeceptum Regis Inae. In the Laws of K. Ethelstan about the year 924.
( Spelm. 922.) there is no mention of any other Counselors for their enacting,
but his Archbishop. Ulfhelm, and the rest of his Bishops, who were at seast
the Prime Persons there, though the Body of the Laws concerns Lamb. p. 45.
secular affairs, Spelman selecting only Ecclesiastical, yet in the Title he
owns others passed. In the Laws of Edmund about A. 946. the King had a full
meeting of Ecclesiastics, and Laics at London, in which were present Odo and
Wulstan the Archbishops, Id. p. 57.
none of the rest being once named. Again A. 948. to a great Convention of the
Estates at London under Edred Writs of Summons are issued out to the
Archbishops and Bishops, and yet there agitur de Negotiis Regni, civil matters
are treated of. Ingulph. p. 87 S. Spel. Con. p. 428.

Come to the Danes, A. 1021. we find a Public Assembly called at Winchester by
Canutus, which an Old MS. styles a Parl. wherein were present Wulstane, and
Adelnode the Archbishops, with other Bishops, Dukes and Earls: and though
there may be a mistake in tearming it a Parl. the name being not known in that
Age, Spel. Conc. p. 534.
yet the substance may be true as to the Members of the Convention. And that
none of these were Hali-Gemots or Chirc-Gemots, (which the Moderns term
Convocations) will appear, because the usual Title of them is Magna Servorum
Dei Frequentia. LL. Inae A. 727. and alibi passim.

Now during these 2. Periods there is no mention of Baronies, but all the Church
Tenure, Pura Elemosyna, Frank Almoign, and the Bishops sat only as Eminent
Prelates by virtue of their Spiritual Dignities. For there being hardly any
Laws but some way or other concerning Religion, and the good of Souls,
therefore in the enacting of them the Counsel, and advice of the Clergy was
ever required by our prudent Ancestors.

Thus much for the Grand Assemblies, styled usually by Spelman Pan-Anglica, LL.
Edg.
and Pan-Britannica; the more private this Statute of Edgar will put beyond all
dispute, injoyning, ex omni Comitatu his quotannis Conventus agitor, cui quidem
illius Diaecesis Episcopus, and Senator intersunto, quorum alter Jura Divina,
Humana alter Populum edoceto. ^ Titl. of Honor. p. 2. c. 5. S. 5.
Nor can Seldom, who ever sits upon the Clergies skirts, if he gets the least
advantage, deny that the Bishop was joined with the Ealderman. This was
afterward confirmed by Canutus the Dane. Spelm. Glos. v. Alderm. Much more
might have been said of this, but that I am prevented by a learned pen, whose
Piece I had not the fortune to see till my Collections were finished, and
finding we jumpt in many things, am now forced to wave them.

Hitherto the Saxon and Danish Government: pass we down to the Normans, and
here we have Will. solemnly with an oath ratifying the Laws of S. Edward, and
this of Remark is added, Siquis sanctae pacem Ecclesiae violenter infregerit,
Episcoporum est justitia Lam. p. 139. parag. 6. And in sundry old Royal
Precedents of writs, we read such clauses as these, Nolumus quod libertas
Ecclesiae per nos, vel ministros nostros quoscunque aliqualiter violetur; and
Jura, and libertates Ecclesiasticas illaesa volentes in omnibus observari.
Registr. in Brev. Orig. passim.

And here we come to that great Change in the State Ecclesiastic, the Bish.
who had been ever reputed, and enjoyed the Privileges of Thani majores among
the Saxons, are now translated to Barons, which gave occasion to that
groundless error of some to Date their first Sitting in Parl. hence, as if the
Conqueror to curry favor with the Clergy, the better to settle his new gotten
Kingdom, conferred this honor upon them. But certainly if there were truth in
this, the Clergy are much too blame and very ungrateful, who returned nothing
but complaints and murmurings for so great a Favor: and all the Writers of
that age must be corrected, for representing him as a professed Enemy of the
Church. To clear up this, I shall give but one instance. In an old Record,
entitled, Liber St. Albani, we read this passage of Frederick the Abbot, that
to obstruct the March of Will. he felled all the trees about him, and laid them
cross the ways; whereat the Conqueror was so enraged, that after wards,
sending for him upon Security, he demanded of the Abbot the meaning of that
cutting down the woods, who resolutely answered, I have done but as becomes me;
and if all the Spiritual Persons throughout the Kingdom had done their
endeavors against thee, as they might, and were in duty bound to have done,
thou would never have been able to enter the Land thus far. The Duke replied,
is the Spiritualty of England of such power? If I live and enjoy that which I
have gotten, I will make their Power less. Add to this that Stratagem of the
Kentishmen in surrounding the King, and forcing him to a composition under the
conduct of Stigand the Arch-Bish. which so netled him, that he never was
heartily reconciled, and proved as good as his word to the Abbot, oppressing
the Clergy all his reign, bringing them under Knights service, and ordering how
many Soldiers each Bish. should maintain for him, and his Successors, the
Church till his days being free from Bondage. Let no man then dream that such
an enemy as Will. did as an Act of Grace, and Favor, erect them into Baronies,
which was ever looked upon as a grievance, and glorious Piece of slavery.

This was a shrewd shaking, yet still they preserved their Votes in all
Assemblies, and upon summoning Parl. Writs are directed Archi-Ep. Ep. etc. All
ancient Charters and Grants subscribed, (after the mode of those times)
testibus Archi-Ep. Ep. In a Treatise entitled, The Form and Manner of keeping
Parl. (Ms in Arch. Bodl:) which Seldom allows to be as long standing as Edw. 3.
but Cook adds near 200 years more, and raises it to the Conquerours time, which
the Title pleads for) we are told that 40 days before Summons are to be issued
out to the Arch-B. P. and other great Clerks, that held by County or Barony.
Nay the Clergy in each Shiere had two Proctors representing them which had more
authority then the Bish. in things to be granted or denied in Parl. We are
farther informed, that the King may hold a Parl. for the Commonalty of the
Realm without Bishops, Earls, or Barons, so they had Summons, although they
come not. But on the contrary, if the Commonalty of the Clergy, and Temporalty
being warned, either do not or will not come: in this case, what ever the King
does with his Lishops, Earls and Barons, is of none effect. For to all Acts of
necessity the Commonalty of Parl. must consent, i. e. the Proctors of the
Clergy, Knights of the Shiere, Citizens and Burgesses, for their Persons
represent the Commonalty of England, and the States do represent but their own
persons. Id. I have seen another ancient Mss. (in Bibl. Cotto.) confirming the
same, with this title, Modus tenendi Parl.) and citing other large Privileges
of the Clergy.

But why stand I upon this, when Mr. Prin himself, whose testimony I the rather
mention, he being known a professed enemy (though as he has lived to retract his
Anti-Monarchical, so it is hoped he may his Ante-Episcopal Principles) in his
Historical Collections of the Ancient Parl. of England, acknowledges, that
during all the Saxon times from about A. 670, till King John. About 1200. the
great Council of the Nation, or Parl. consisted only of the King, Princes,
Bishops, Dukes, and Nobles, no lower House being then known, which our best
Antiquaries conceive took its original about the time of Hen. 3.

I shall put a Period to this, with the Testimony of our English Papinian, my
Lord Cook, who assures us, that 24 Spiritual Persons ought ex debito Justitiae,
to have a Writ of Summons sent them every Parliament.

This Premised; I shall now speak a bold word, if the proudest Adversary can
produce instances of any Solemn Meetings, Wittina-Gemots, or Parliaments for
1000 years past, whereunto the Clergy were not summoned, any Statutes publicly
enacted during all the Christian Saxon, Danish, and Norman times without their
Assistance, or Advice, by my consent the Cause shall be given up. As for the
Precedent of their Exclusion under Edw. 1. at S. Edmundsbury, which some
triumph in, if there be any truth in the Natrative (as may well be questioned)
we know it was done in a Pet, a transport of the Royal Displeasure for their
obstinat adhering to Rome, and non compliance with his Demands, who yet the
next Parl. about a year after makes an Apology for his extravagancies
(doubtless with an eye to that Act) charging all upon the present exigences of
his Affairs. Walsingh. Vit. Ed. 1.
And why should this be urged more against the Clergy, then that other is
against the Lawyers, who were shut out of the Laymens Parl. under Hen. 4. where
yet we find the Bishops, and among others Tho. Arundel, stoutly resisting, and
preserving the Clergies Temporalties, which those Church-Robbers gaped after;
who, so they might spare their own Purses, were content to spoil their God to
relieve their King. Certainly, if envy it self could have found out the least
color of Law to deny them this Privilege, it had never been reserved for our
unhappy Age. Many times have they been struck at, many great blows received, as
at Clarendon under Hen. 2. where their wings were much clipped, yet still they
are permitted, Interesse Judiciis Cuxiae Regis cum Baronibus quousque
perveniatur ad Diminutionem membrorum, vel mortem; still their Votes are safe.

Do but look into Magna Charta, which all our Kings at their Coronation are
sworn to maintain, we shall find in favor of the Clergy, We have granted to
God, and by this our present Charter confirmed for us and our Heirs for ever,
that the Church of England shall be Free, and have all her whole Rights, and
Liberties Inviolable. All the Nation being content to stand accursed if this
Grant were at any time infringed or diminished, and any thing that should be
done contrary to this was ipso facto declared void. 26 Edw. 1. c. 2.

Now it becomes us to examine, what those Rights were the Church enjoyed at the
ratifyng that Charter and through all succeeding Ages has practiced, until our
late Unnatural Divisions, and let us not put our Princes upon a necessity of
Perjury, which, (some are of Opinion) can hardly be avoided, unless either
that Oath be wholly omitted, which few true English Hearts wish for, or some
Alteration made, which, of how Destructive consequence it may prove in time,
let others judge. What is the Clergies hard Fate to day, may be others to
morrow. And we had a late sad example, the door being once open, how far the
House of Commons went in turning the Temporal Lords after them. I am not
ignorant, that many foul big crimes were objected to them, that it might pass
the curranter, but the plain Truth is, their Grand (I had almost said) their
only Fault was Loyalty to their Prince. The Sons of Faction saw there was no
coming at the Scepter, till they had removed the Crosier, so that through the
sides of Episcopacy no less then Monarchy was struck at. But the better to
disguise the business, some Criticismes of Law were laid to their charge, and
upon this nicety must the first, and one of the main Branches of Magna Charta
be broken, which our Ancestors so Beligiously kept, so often afferted with
their dearest blood: Little imagining that ever Prosterity for so slight a
matter would have made so wide a breach in it, after above 30 solemn
Confirmations in successive Parliaments. For this must the poor Clergy loose
their Birthright, and be eternally disabled from Voting within those Walls, for
which they can plead above 1000. years Prescription; their Title being never
once questioned, till the inconsiderate Zeal of some Malcontents about 19
years since in May 1641. unhappily moved that black Bill: whereunto through the
necessity of the times, full of Tumults, and uproares, the Royali Assent, to
purchase Safety, with an unwilling willingness was yielded, I cannot say given,
to so great a distress was Majesty then reduced. I pass by those
un-Parliamentary irregularities, which some take notice of, the Repulses it
met with, but being to serve the present Interest, by subtle contrivances at
last it was carried. And from this Critical Epoch may we date the rise of our
late Embroilements, and wild Confusions, under which miserable England has so
long grooned, and the whole world stood amazed at. All the wealth which the
Piety of our Forefathers had been so many age^ in heaping up, all the
Privileges which their Prudence had so deliberately con ferred, being in a few
days Passion swallowed up. Well, admit the present Bishops, did unadvisedly
run into a Praemunire, could no Personal Fine, or Punishment expiate their
Delinquency? Must their Innocent Successors still smart for it? Must so many
merits of their worthy Predecessors be buried in the Grave of ungrateful
Oblivion? It were an easy matter to produce a large Catalogue of Eminent
Prelates, who by their prudent Advice have oftentimes prevented Bloodshed,
preserved Peace, saved a sinking Kingdom, and a dying Religion. Many good
works have they done amongst us, many Colleges, and Schools erected, and
endowed, many material Churches by their munificence, and living Temples of the
Holy Ghost built by their ministry, and for which of these must they now be
thus hardly dealt withal? Thus disfranchis'd? That they who heretofore carried
the principal stroke in Cabinet Councils, and public Dyets, are acknowledged
in a Recorded Statute, an 8 Q. Elizab. c. 1. Cooks. Inst. p. 4. c. 74.
High and one of the greatest Estates of the Kingdom, must now for ever be
excluded the two great Assemblies of the Nation, as not concerned in the civil
Peace, and be denied Representatives to enact those Laws, to which they
profess, and yield most cordial Subjection, a Privilege granted to the
meanest Mechanic in a Corporation, the arrantest Bumpkin in a County, that can
but zweare has Vorty Zhillings a year: Every other Profession being admitted,
only Religion and Learning voted out of doors. But if this holds, what a fair
advantage will the Romanists have to upbraid us, with a Parliamentary Religion,
when the profound Mysteries of the Trinity, the knotty Controversies of
Predestination, Free Will, Perseverance etc. must be stated by those, some of
whom many times possibly may be better acquainted with the nature of a Hawke,
or Hound, Buying, or Selling Commodities, then such sublime Speculations.
(Pardon the Expression, which the Iniquity of former times drew from me, and is
not intended to reflect upon any worthy Patriots, whereof this Nation can boast
as large a number as any of its neighbors) I say, let it be seriously
considered, how we shall answer that Cavil, when the most competent Judges of
such matters are clean casheered, no regard being had of their Ripe Abilities,
and exquisite knowledge.

Not to mention the Popish Lords, who are grown so numerous, all of a Judgment,
and watchful to lay hold on every opportunity to merit by promoting the
Catholic Cause, and one Pocket may carry a great many Suffrages, whereby much
danger may ensue, unles timely balanced by the Lawn-Sleeves. The crafty
Jesuit is not ignorant of this, who keeps a Jubilee to see what a wound is
given to the Reformation, how much ground he has got by debasing our English
Clergy, whom of all the world he formerly most dreaded, but if their Plumes be
thus pulled, their Revenues impaired, their Privileges abated, he then hopes to
deal well enough with them. And we must look to see every stone moved, Rome,
Geneva and Munster joining, Cook. 4. Inst.
to compass the continuance of this misery. But let not them despair who have
Caesar on their side. We know that by the Law of the land the King is Guardian
to the poor Orphan Church which is eversaid to be infra aetatem, in its
minority, and in Custodia Domini Regis, and now is the time for Majesty to
appear both for the Churches Honor, and its own Security. For of late years
there has been an unhappy Notion started, and kept up by some (no well-wishers
to the Scepter) that the Three I states of this nation consist of King, Lords,
and Commons., which how far it may countenance former Actings, and endanger
future Disturbances, I humbly submit to the prudence of those that are better
able to determine. But the Consequences of that opinion seem directly to aim
at the Levelling of Sovereignty, and making it accountable to the other Two
(in their esteem) Coordinate Estates. Now Restoring the Spiritualty the only
True Legal 3 Estate, is the hopeful'st expedient to remove that Destructive
Principle out of the minds of the fickle multitude. So may the Crown be safe,
and the Miter no longer trampled upon. And certainly it is high time for men to
relent of their merciless Cruelty toward learned Industry. The old Rule was
Nulli sua Pietas debet esse damnosa: but now that Complaint is again fulfild in
our ears, the Publishers of Salvation whose feet ought to be beautiful, are
reputed as the Filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things; so that
in the bitterness of their souls they may well cry out, if their hopes were
only in this Life they were of all men most miserable. I take no pleasure in
upbraiding an ungrateful Nation: But is, this the Reward of their unwearied
Pains, incessant Studies, early Rising, and late watching, beating their
Brains, wasting their Bodies, and contracting incurable Diseases? Is this the
Thanks for their Charity to the poor, neglecting their Families, Relations,
and Acquaintance for the glory of God, and the good of their Country? must they
only have Discouragements heaped upon them, bread, water and Rags (if some had
their will) thought too good for them, a small Income, a common Privilege
grudged them after so many years Labor, Sweat, and Cost. Is this for the
Honor of our Reformation, and becoming the Gospel? Doubtless the profane world
will be apt to conclude that Christ is a hard master, that suffers his Servants
thus to be trampled upon, and few will believe that Godliness has the promises
of this life, or that Wisdom has kept its word, Riches and Honor are with me
Prove. 8. when other Callings run away with all the Rewards, and the greatest
Deservings, the highest Ingenuity, the most Exemplary Holiness in This, meet
with nothing but Frowns, Contempr, and Debasings.

THE CLERGIES JVRISDICTION.
CHAP. I. The Nature of Jurisdiction explained, and the Regal Supremacy
asserted.
WE come in the last place to Juris diction, which may be defined a coercive
Authority in external judicature relating to the execution of Laws. This we
grant primarily to reside in the civil Magistrate, to whom the Sword is
committed, the establishing of Laws belongs, and whose right it is to appoint
Judges in all causes, Here then is the Fountain of all Jurisdiction, which
branches it self into two streams, Spiritual and Temporal. And that originally
it proceeds hence is manifest, because Appeals are ultimately made hither.
Thus we find S. Paul Act. 25. appealing from the high-Preist, to Caesar, as
from an Inferior Judge, to the Sovereign; the last Appellation ever denoting
supreme Jurisdiction. Thus amongst us, if a man takes himself to be wronged in
one of our Country Courts, he may remove the Action to Westminster Hall, and if
Justice be denied there, in cases of grand import, the last reserve is the
Parliament; as the Highest Court of Judicature in the Nation. The Church of
Rome was not ignorant of this, who strugled more in matters of Appeal, then any
other, as being the fairest flower in her Garden, and this once cropped, you see
how soon her power withered. This might farther be proved from the example of
Joshuah, commanding the People to be circumcised, from Jehoshaphats appointing
the Priests to judge between blood and blood, from whence the Royal Supremacy
and Jurisdiction in their respective Dominions do invincibly follow. Nor did
the Ancients ever question it. For Aser Menevensis styles King Alphred, Lamb.
Archaion.
Omnium Britanniae Jnsulae Christianorum Rectorem, and the Confessor entitles
himself Vicarium Summi Regis.

We do then in all humility, acknowledge the supreme Authority of the
Magistrate, not only in Civil (which the French Pragmatique Sanctions
challenge) but in Church matters, and farther, Tertul. Apol.
that a Magistrate as such, whether Christian, or Pagan it matters not, ought
in all things to be obeyed, that are not contrary to the word of God, and then
passive Obedience becomes the Gospel, Resistance being in no case lawful. We
do look upon the King (...), and with Menander (...). And I ever thought there
was much of truth shadowed out in that Poetical fiction, that Majesty came
down from Heaven, whence the ancients made it the Daughter of Honor and
Reverence. Nor dare I condemn those swelling Titles every where in the Civil
Law given to, and owned by Christian Emperors, as Numen, Oraculum,
Sacratissimus Imperator, which some zealous ears amongst us would account
little less then Blasphemy. But any that have acquaintance with the Jewish
customs, and Language will soon resolve them, that it was an usual thing with
holy writers, to style every thing Divine that did excel and was eminent, v.
Drusius in Genesis and Brisson. de Formul.

And let not any one imagine that this is any derogation from the Honor of
God, or the Pride of Princes hereby heightened, the design only is to mind
them, whose Person they represent, whose Servants they are, and that they ought
to imitate his Justice Mercy, and Bounty. Old Homer calls Kings (...), nourished
in the bosom of Jupiter, and from this divine Original, some derive their
miraculous Virtues, which we see Hereditary to some Royal Families. Thus the
Curing the Kings Evil with our Princes, and if we will believe Car. Tapiam the
Releiving persons Possessed by the King of Spain.

I have dwelt the longer upon this subject, that none may suspect what ensues
to have the least aspect toward Rome: not on the other hand let any fasten
such odious Consequences upon this Doctrine, as some malicious Jesuits have
done, as if we made our Princes Popes, and gave them an unlimited power of
imposing in matters of Religion at pleasure. We never assert that our Kings
have power to make New Forms of worship, New Articles of Faith, but to take
care that all things within their Dominions be ordered according to the
revealed will of God. And as much, Vsser Primord. Eccle. Brit.
as this comes to St. Austin, Eleutherius to Lucius (vicarius Dei estis in
regno vestro) and the Ancients have ever with one voice, attributed to Princes,
and none questioned, but some late Parasites of the Roman Ante-Christ.

This laid down weel fall roundly to work and that some jurisdiction to curb
profane, and erroneous persons, to keep the unworthy from Sacraments, and in
case of obstinacy to forbid the faithful society with them, that such moderate
Power not exceeding the bounds of Excommunication dos by a divine right belong
to Spiritual persons both Christ's commission Mat. 18, and the Apostles practice
1 Cor: 5.4 sufficiently warrant, and none ever questioned but an envious
Seldom, and some Physicians, who wanting other Practice made the Church their
Patient? Set aside these, and the former Position has hardly met with any
adversary.

All the difficulty is, how far Civil Jurisdiction, by the favor of Princes
permitted to them, may with a Salvo to the Sacred Function be exercised. For
it is owned that Temporal power cannot be challenged by Ecclesiastics as their
due, but is a right Imperial, and Royal, yet Princes to whom it properly
belongs both may, and have often delegated the exercise of it, even to their
Clergy. Most of the First Christian Emperors having experienced the integrity
and prudence of the Ecclesiastics left it to the liberty of the Plaintiff, that
entered the Suite, either to make the Bishops Judges, or to have recourse to
the Civil Magistrate, Thus Constantine, Valons, Gratian, Valentinian,
Theodosius, Arcadius, Martian, Leo, Anthemius, and Justinian: As may be seen in
the Imperial Edicts yet extant.

CHAP. II. The Original of Ecclesiastical Courts.
IF we should trace up the Original of Ecclesiastical Courts, we shall find
them grounded upon the counsel of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. where he advises the
Christians, when any contentious Suits arise amongst them (as in all Societies
such must be looked for) that they should not to the dishonor of Religion,
betake themselves to Pagan Tribunals for Justice, but let their brethren decide
matters. But who these were, is a great Quaere, the 4. v. seems to put it upon
those that were least esteemed, which cannot be the Preachers. But Theophylact
carries the sense thus, that it is an answer to a tacit objection, that some
would be apt to say there is not a wise man in the Church, that can Judge.
Well, admit according to that opinion, there be not one prudent person found,
yet rather appoint those that were never so contemptible, and little esteemed
in the Church your Judges, then go to the Heathen Tribunals. But Ambrose on the
place, is more express, that Ministers are appointed Judges. And if the Vote
and practice of Antiquity, which is commonly none of the worst Expositours may
be taken, matters will be yet more clear; Many scattered passages there are in
Igratius, Tertullian, Cyprian, etc. looking this way, but being under the Lash,
they are fain to whisper only, and durst not speak out.

I shall not much stand upon those Canons, that pass under the name of the
Apostles, where we read that the Bishops ought to meet every 2 day of the
week, to judge causes, and a Tribunal is ascribed to them, with power of
deciding all controversies. Nor yet upon that of Clemens Ep. ad Jacob. Fr. Dom.
where it is express, If any of the Brethren have differences among themselves,
let them not go to the Heathens for Justice, but let the Presbyters of the
Church decide it. Now both these, however censured by some as spurious in
respect of the titles they bear, yet cannot be denied to be very ancient. And
in the 2 Ep. of Marcellinus, Quaecunque contentiones inter Christianos ortae
fuerint ad Ecclesiam deferantur, and ab Ecclesiasticis determinentur.

We have indeed but few genuine pieces remaining, of those poor persecuted
times, wherein the distressed Believers were glad to make hard shifts, and
fearful to do any thing that might create jealousy in the minds of those
cruel Tyrants, whereas openly to profess the declining of their Tribunals, had
been crime enough. Yet St. Hierom (a curious searcher into old records) says,
Priests from the beginning were appointed Judges of causes l. de 7 Ordin.
Eccles. And when they could use freedom, then we have them speaking aloud. For
St. Ambrose pleads the Apostolical Commission Ep. 24. secundum sacrae formam
praeceptonis, qua eum Apostolus induebat. S. Austin seconds him, and says this
task was imposed upon Spiritual persons by St. Paul, to decide tumultuosissimas
perplexitates causarum alienarum de negotiis saecularibus, De Opere Monachatus.
c. 29.

I shall conclude this with a testimony of Calvin, whom all know to be no
friend to the Episcopal Hierarchy, yet even he acknowledges 4 Instit. c. 11..
10. That the Primitive Christians, to prevent wrangling suits were wont to
commit their differences to be decided by their Bishops: and this held till the
Magistrate received the Gospel.

But that which carries the greatest weight with me, is the Universal Practice
immediately after the Scepters of the earth stooped to Christ: for I cannot
imagine that so great a novelty would have been embraced without any
contradiction, and not have been reproved by so many Eminent Worthies just
escaped out of the flames of persecution, the School of Holiness. It Is more
than probable then that by virtue of the Apostolical precept, of ending suits
among themselves to prevent scandal (it being the main employment of the
Ministry to make peace between those that are at variance) in the Primitive
times the whole management of differences was entrusted to the Clergy, as being
persons of the greatest sincerity and ability. Now Constantine at his entrance
upon the Government, finding it so, wisely considered how much the Authority,
and Reverence of Religion did conduce to the expediting of Causes, and
discovery of captious actions. For this was not done unadvisedly, sundry
weighty reasons being subjoyned, as will appear, if the Laws be perused. As
first, because it was hoped it would tend much to allay the heat of wrangling,
choke the malicious seeds of contentions, 2ly Because the Judgments of Bishops
were looked upon as true, uncorrupted, and piercing, whereby the Sophistry,
tricks, and shifts of the Law might be prevented, and poor men, entangled in
the tedious lasting snares of vexatious actions, might have a speedy issue put
to their affairs. Now the good Emperor conceived they might well be entrusted
with his own most important Negotiations, and his Subjects estates, to whom God
had committed the care of their precious Souls: therefore upon these prudential
considerations, being satisfied in the usefulness and integrity of Spiritual
persons, he made their Jurisdiction Authentic, giving it the Royal stamp,
allowing no appeal from the sentence of the Bishops, but making it as
conclusive as his own, leaving it free to any (...). Zozom. L. 1. c. 9. Niceph.
L. 7. c. 46. who adds that this privilege lasted to his time under Andronicus
A. 1300. Valens and Valentiman, A. 365. enlarged it, and entrusted them with
the rate of Commodities sold in the Cod. Leg. 1. de Ep. And. Tit. 7.
Markets. But their Jurisdiction has been in several Ages very various,
sometimes increased, sometimes clipped, as the Emperors were more or less
favorable to the Church, who ever kept the Sovereignty in their own hands.
Constantine was then the first that passed the Royal Grant in favor of the
Clergy, permitting the cognizance of all civil matters even between Laymen to
the Episcopal Tribunal, if either Party did require it, though the other denied
his consent, and their appeal was to be obeyed by all the Magistrates, whenever
made, though the action was already commenced in another Court.

Arcadius and Honorius did a little retrench this unlimited power, yet still
allowing it, by the joint consent of both parties, and making the Bishops, as
twere, Referees. L. siquis ex consensu. c. de Audientia Episcopal. and their
decision to be binding and final without any appeal. This was afterward
ratified by Theodosius and Justinian l. Episc. c. eodem. Nay Justinian reposed
so much confidence in them, that he made them Overseers of the Secular Judges,
Novel. Constable. 56. This then has been the avowed Catholic Practice of all ages,
and Nations where the Gospel has gaind footing. For the greatest enemies the
Church had, could never yet deny, but that the Bishops have had their Tribunals
for above these 1300 years erected by Constantine, confirmed by Arcadius and
Honorius, Theodosius, and Valentinian 3, Only some curiously mince the matter,
and allow them power to hear Causes, and to become Referees, and Umpires, by
consent of both Parties; but yet they will not hear talk of any coercive
Jurisdiction, though many Eminent Civilians attribute it to them: and Accursius
interprets Audientia Episcopalis, a term frequent in the Code by Jurisdictio.
Nay it is evident, there was no Case whatsoever, except only Capital (for
Ecclesia sanguinis Iudicium non profert) but might be decided by the Episcopal
Tribunal: and Constantine forbad the Greatest Prince in the Empire to revoke
what once the Bishops had decreed, Eusebius. Vit. Constable. L. 4. c. 27. In process
of time the Magistrate having encroached upon, and almost outed the Clergy,
Charles the Great revives that good old Law of Constantine, confirming the same
Jurisdiction to all Bishops, repeating the Charter word for word Car. Mag. in
Capit. l. 6. c. 28. And here methinks this very name, fills me with hopes, that
Charles's are born for the good of the poor oppressed Church: and that God has
miraculously raised up to us, as true a Nursing Father, as ever bare that name,
or our Island produced. And truly, who can expect less from the Son of such a
Father, who dyed the Church's, Nay the Clergies Martyr: for if he could have
dispensed with his Conscience, and Coronation Oath, to sacrifice them, and
their Revenues to the coveruous fury of a prevailing Adversary, the 30. of Jan.
need not have been noted with such Black Letters in our British Almanacks.

CHAP. III. The Ancient Union of Spiritual and Civil Courts in this Island.
Corruptions no sufficient Argument for their utter Subversion. Replies to
sundry Objections from the example of Christ, the Apostles, and Primitive
Christians.
THe exercise of Jurisdiction by the Clergy in this Nation, may be deduced out
of the best Records extant, from the time the Gospel was publicly owned among
us. There Is nothing more frequent in our English Annals, then Ecclesiastical,
Spiritual, and Christian Courts. I shall not multiply proofs, but content my
self with two, the first out of Brompton, where amongst the old Laws of
Ethelstan we read, Chron. Joh. Brompton. c. 24
Episcopo jure pertinet omnem rectitudinem promovere Dei viz. and saeculi, and
debent Episcopi cum seculi judicibus interesse judiciis. And the ordering of
all measures and weights in each respective Diocese is there made of Episcopal
Cognizance, the Standard being left in the Bishops hands. The next is of
Spelman. Comes praesidebat foro Comitatus non solus sed adjunctus Episcopo, ut
Alter alteri auxilio esset, and consitio, praesertim Episcopus Comiti, nam in
hunc illi animadvertere saepe licuit and errartem cohibere. Gloss. v. Comes. So
much confidence did the Ancients repose in the Clergy, that the guidance and
oversight of most temporal affairs was entrusted to them, and a check upon the
Laity. Thus lovingly with all sweetness, and Candot for 4. or 500. years,
during all the Saxon times, and till that unhappy division by the Conqueror,
who defaced this beautiful, this regular composure, did Church and State
Officers sit together, in the morning determining Ecclesiastical affairs, and
in the afternoon Civil. No jarrs, no clashings of Juriscictions were then heard
of, no Prohibitions issuing out from one Court to obstruct the course of
Justice in another, thereby hampering the poor Client, that he knows not which
way to turn himself. And I am persuaded there is no better expedient to prevent
lasting vexatious Suits, and to relieve the oppressed; Then again to reconcile
these two Jurisdictions, that according to the Primitive usage, as well
Spitual, as Temporal Judges may be appointed in all Courts, that Moses and
Aaron may not quarrel, but walk hand in hand. Though I know this design does
not well relish with many of the Long Robe, and it is feared the attempting some
such thing purchased our late Archbishop no few enemies, and was one special
cause of hastening his ruin. Yet Seldom (a Lawyer too) L. 2. de Synedriis,
proves, that for the first 4000 years and better the civil and Ecclesiastical
Courts continued united, and the first Distinction proceeded from Pope
Nicholas, Grati. Distinc. 96. c. cum ad verum. So that the making
Ecclesiastical Government independent, and separate from the civil is but a
late Popish, and Consistorial Innovation.

It Is true, it cannot be denied but there have been gross Corruptions in these
Ecclesiastical Courts, many personal infirmities in the Judges, for who ever
looked upon them as other then flesh and blood: Though none but Profane Chams
would lay open, and scoff at the nakedness of their spiritual Fathers, and
like flies stick only to gald backs, and sore places, never taking notice of
the many eminent deserts, and service both Church and State have received from
men of that Coat. How different was the great Constantines Temper? who professed
he would put off his Royal Robes to hide a failing in a Bishop. Theodoret. L.
1. c. 11. If some have miscarried let them smart for it, and let not the
Calling suffer. Would it be accounted a piece of Justice, if some Lawyers be
corrupt, presently to rail at, and overthrow the whole Profession, as
incorrigible, pull down their Courts, as not capable of Reformation. But grant
they have erred, let that calling which is innocent throw the first Stone. I
must needs say better reasons must be shown, then ever were yet produced,
before I change my judgment, That there are none fitter to advance designs of
Peace, and public Tranquillity, to administer justice, and hear the cries of
the oppressed, then these men of God. Facilius enim Dei timore sententiam Legis
veram promunt. Ambro. Certainly, if this had been so abominable, so
Antichristian I cannot persuade my self, that the Learning of Jewel, the
Humility of Hooper, and the sweet Innocence of Coverdale, would have used this
Authority and Jurisdiction, which we never find they did in the least Scruple.

But we must not expect to carry it thus, a little Squadron of Difficulties is
yet to be encountered. And first we are urged with Christ's example in refusing
to decide a title of Inheritance between brethren Luke 12. But I see little
reason that this should be binding to his ministers. It Is true we find him ever
careful not to give offense, whereas if he had taken this Jurisdiction upon
him, his vigilant Adversaries that ever waited for an advantage against him
would soon have been upon his back, and charged him with Treason. For what
greater intrenchment upon the royal Prerogative, then in another Dominion
without leave, or Commission to hear and determine causes? Common prudence
therefore which our Redeemer (the wisdom of the Father) ever followed, forbad
him then to intermedle. But where do we find he tied his disciples hands when
times favored them, and the Supreme Powers thought good to employ them. Indeed
to remove all doubts and fears out of the mind of jealous Herod, he tells him,
his Kingdom is not of this world, I come not to trouble or dissolve established
authorities, your State may be secure, and my Gospel Preached, none that belong
to me will raise commotions, or take upon them to rebel against their lawful
Prince, my servants shall not fight for me, nor by tumults, and wars set up my
Kingdom. And all the Apologies of the Ancients manifest how the Christians ever
prayed for, and submitted to the Emperors. Let no man then think this Position
strange, that Church Government should bear some Correspondence and Analogy with
the State. For can it rationally be conceived, that Christ who was so careful
to enjoin his followers, to give to Caesar, the things that were his, would
have his Gospel bring innovations and changes in well established governments,
confusions upon lawful Authority, especially when the Model of civil affairs
does not contradict, but may consist with Religion. And I am here confirmed by
the practice of Moses, who did not cross the Jewish Policy, but sitted the
Sacred Government to the Secular. And what sad Consequences have ensued the
contraryopinion, the late madness of our Fifth-Monarchy-men have abundantly
demonstrated.

Nor is all Jurisdiction forbidden in that 20. Mat. 25. The plain meaning of
that text being no more then this; the Apostles quarrelling about Precedence,
Christ reproves them: it is clear, they dreamt as the Nation of the Jews, foold
by their Rabbis, that the Messiah should have a glorious Temporal
Principality, as was Solomon's; and therefore contended who should be the
greatest Favorites. Now Christ confutes that vulgar error, answers pertinently
to their thoughts, and tells them they must not expect to Lord it over their
Brethren: that proud insulting Tyranny, which others exercised, is not for
them, their Government must be mild, humble, and consist rather in obeying,
then commanding. And to this purpose he proposes himself for their pattern, who
came to Minister unto them: yet I hope twill be granted, there was some
difference between the Master, and the Servant, some Superiority of Christ over
his Disciples. Nor can that levelling Principle be deduced hence, for nihil
magis inaequale, quam aequalitas. It Is farther observable, Christ instances in
the Kings of the Gentiles, whose Empires were stained with cruelty and luxury,
not the Jews, whose Government for the most part was more moderate, having so
many Holy Laws to direct, so many Prophets to instruct them. But with the
Gentiles it was otherwise: the Roman Orator sets out their manner. Regum sunt
haec imperia. Animadverte, and dicto pare, Tully pro. Rabirio.
and illae minae, si te secundo limine offendero, morier. This then seems the
genuine sense, the Kings of the earth Lord it thus proudly, insolently,
unmercifully, you shall not do so, but command in love, in humility, in
moderation, so that he does not strike at the root of all Authority and
Jurisdiction amongst his Disciples, only ye shall not domineer as the Kings of
the Gentiles, but in all lowliness rule as the son of man, Dominatio
interdicitu, indicitur ministerium. Bern.


But the grand Objection that lies against it is, that we never find the
Apostles to have taken this upon them, whose Practice should be a Pattern to
their Successors, This argument I have often heard urged as the Great
Achilles: but I wonder any sober learned men should lay stresse upon it.
Methinks reason and prudence should suggest a distinction of times, and inform
them that many things may be judged unlawful in one age, which in another are
found expedient, and necessary, and so on the contrary. Whereas if the
Apostolical practice were always binding, how comes it to pass that many
things approved by them as Community of goods, extreme unction, abstaining from
blood, etc. are now, in the revolution of time, disused, and condemned. Nay, if
there were any strength in this arguing, the brainsick Anabaptist, and railing
Quaker, would be furnished with an unanswerable Plea against our Churches; for
who knows not what hard shift the poor Primitive Christians were put to, how
glad they were of private Houses, Barns, yea Vaults, and Caves of the Earth to
meet in, and secure themselves from the rage of their watchful Persecutours?
Hence in some ancient Monuments, Churches are called Cryptae, hiding places,
because through the violence and heat of persecutions, the poor Christians,
were forced, with Nicodemus, to go to Christ by night: and we have frequent
mention of their antelucanos hymnos in Pliny Ep. etc.

But no sooner did God restore a little breathing, and send peace, then they
left their dens and holes, building and beautifying Churches, and providing
liberal maintenance for their Preachers. And now there is nothing more common in
Nazianzen and the Greek Writers, then to style them (...) from their Majesty,
being the Palaces of the great King. For in Constantines days, when the World
newly divorced from idolatry, was enamoured with true Religion, they thought
they could never build their Churches-starely and sumptuous enough: but how
strangely now have they left their first love. If a man should read of, or view
the Ancient Piles, the Greek St. Sophia, our English St. Paul's, the Roman St.
Peter's, etc. The stupendous Church at Tire, described by Eusebius, at Antioch
by Hierony. in Chron. at Jerusalem by Cyril in his Catech. which the Piety and
Devotion of our Forefathers erected, and compare them with our Modern whifling
Structures, he would blush at the sordid penuriousnesse of degenerating
posterity. I must needs say it has oftentimes moved both pity and anger in me,
to see an Impropriating Patron flaunting it in a Royal Fabric, when the House
of God adjoining, crouched under it in a tottering ragged condition -- Exclamet
Melicerta perisse frontem de rebus -- David was otherwise minded, 2. Sam. 7.2.
Nor would former ages have born it, who spared no cost, no pains to build, no
care to consecrate these (...) (as the Greek Authors term them) those Sacred
Structures. For this is no novel Invention, the practice we find as ancient as
Hygynus A. 140. whose Decree to that purpose is yet extant. Deeret. de
Consecrat. Did. 1. c. Omnes Basilicae. And come but a little lower, when
Constantine had erected that Magnificent Temple in Mount Calvary: Zozomen
informs us L. 2. c. 25. what an Assembly of Reverend Prelates there met to
Consecrate it. Nor was any thing more usual amongst the Primitive Fathers.
Athanas. Ep. ad Constant. Ambro. L. 1. Ep. 5. St. Aust. Sermon. de Temp. L. 56
Nay it appears by the Titles of several of St. Austins Sermons, that they had
Solemn Anniversary Commemorations upon the Consecration day. But to return.

It Is confessed then, that in the Apostles days, and the Ages immediately
succeeding, the poor Christians were glad with any thing, and reckond the least
toleration a favor: but when the State of the Church was changed by those
great Revolutions in the Roman Empire, order and decency began to be looked
after. And is it not downright madness in any to complain of their happiness,
to desire to return to that condition, which the Fury of Persecutors enforced,
as if they repined at the goodness of a merciful God, who dissolved that
Cloud, and made the Sun of Prosperity to break out upon his weather-beaten
Church, turning a dark morning into a glorious evening. Now if such a wild rate
of reasoning be allowed, a man may as well conclude, that all the Succeeding
Kings of England are bound to lay aside their State, and Imperial Robes,
because time was, when his present Majesty, in his own Kingdom, to escape the
malice of his implacable enemies, contented himself with a homely Cottage, (
Nay a Loyal Oak.)
bestrid a Millers Horse, and had none but Dame Joane to wait upon him. I know
the Courtiers would smile at such Logic, though I must needs say it is little
better, that our learned Sophisters use against the Clergy.. For thus they
reason, the Clergy enjoyed small Revenues, less Honors, few Privileges, no
Jurisdiction under Persecuting Pagans, therefore they are immodest to desire it
should be otherwise under Believing Christians. To speak plainly then once for
all, in point of Doctrine I reverence those early times equal to any man, but
in matters of Discipline, Order, and Decency, to draw Rules from a poor
persecuted Church, that was constrained to use what the necessity of the times
would bear, not the Gospel allow, and to confine posterity, to their hardships,
when the wise providence of God has changed the Series of Affairs, is just as
if a man should be enjoined to wear the same Garments in fair weather, as he
did in foul, and not to change the nasty attire he had on in a boisterous
Storm, though the clearest Calm succeeds it. The time then that we must
principally eye, is that, when God gave Rest and Peace to his long afflicted
Saints, when the Great Monarchs of the earth veiled their Crowns to the Cross;
and if from those days their Civil Jurisdiction cannot be cleared, let an
irrevocable Decree be passed against them. Not that I grant them wholly
excluded in those elder times, many footsteps of their private meddling in
secular matters being every where found, as has already been evidenced. But how
could it rationally be expected, that any Precedents of such Eminent Authority,
and Power conferred either upon the Apostles, or their immediate Successors
should be produced; since the Jus Divinum of Civil Jurisdiction belonging to
the Clergy is utterly disclaimed, and no title pleaded to it, but the Favor of
the Supreme Magistrate: and who is such a stranger in Israel as to be ignorant,
how little the Professors of the Gospel were then set by, when all the Great
Potentates of the World ran madding after Idols, and it was no less then death
to own our Crucified Redeemer. So that if this be strictly stood upon, we shall
at last join issue with the Frantic Euthusiasts, who deny it lawful for a
Christian to be a Magistrate, there being no express command for it in the New
Testament; nay many Texts seemingly against it, not any Example of the
Apostles, hardly of the Professors of the Gospel, (known to be such) in those
early times, that bare an Office. Well then, for the first 300 years the Church
had no Kings for its nursing Fathers, none that gave up their names to Christ
in Sovereign authority, the wise God that disposes of all times, and Estates,
reserving that mercy for these later days, exercising them with great trials,
till the Earth was watered with the blood of Martyrs.

And hithero we have litttle or nothing of outward coercive diction, all was
inward, all was Spiritual, and thus was the faith planted, the gates of Hell
pulled down, and the Pagan World reduced to the obedience of Christ: Providence
purposely so ordering it, that no flesh might boast. Now all this while to say
the truth, there was no need to have recourse to outward Force, the Apostles,
and their immmediate Successors being furnished with such miraculous
extraordinary power, which we see they did sometimes exert to punish the
disobedient, as Anantas and Sapphira with death, Elymas with blindness, etc.
But miracles once ceasing, and the immediate assistance of the Spirit being
withdrawn, to compensate this loss, God turned the heart of the Magistrate:
and Christian prudence told them, that to place Covernours in the Church, and
to deprive them, (thus deserted by the Spirit) of all coercive Jurisdiction,
was to expose their Office, render their Persons ridiculous, and their Commands
insignificant. And has not our late experience sufficiently confirmed this, Sin
being grown bold, and wickedness never more improved; the Schismatic
profane World making but sport with the Ambassadors of Christ, whilst left
naked and destitute of all Civil Jurisdiction. Whereas in those Apostolical
primitive times, there was no fear, no danger of such inconveniences, Love to
Christ being then mo^e ardent, and the cruelty of the merciless advers^ry more
outrageous, the one sweetly alluring the Professors of the Gospel, the other
terrifying them into a dutiful Conformity.

I am none of those that delight (...), to dote upon my own Notions, so that if
any man will take the pains to produce clearer evidences, I shall readily be
his Convert. Till then my judgment is, and I can safely say has been ever
since I was able to look into Antiquity, that the Matter here contended for,
is, neither under the censure of Inexpediency, nor Inconsistency, not the
latter; For seeing it is a duty confessedly belonging to every Christian to beat
down sin, and promote righteousness, and the end of all Jurisdiction, is to
advance justice and restrain iniquity: I would gladly be resolved what there is
so heinous, so unseemly for the Sacred Function in this Act, to chastise the
Disturbers of the Christian Peace with Spiritual: and if that prevail not with
corporal Punishments. Certain it is, the Blessed Angels do not look upon it as
dishonorable to, or derogatory from their Holiness, at the Command of God to
correct the wicked even with death, 2. Cor. 23. and why should it be thought so
abominable, so unlawful for the Angels of the Church. Rev. 2. being
Commissioned by Gods Vicegerent to inflict deserved punishments on the workers
of iniquity. Dav.

Not the former, if due Caution be used, that they keep within bounds, and that
which was designed for their help, prove not their hindrance, too much taking
themoff from the weighty employments of their Spiritual charge. And I think it
may confidently be averred, there are few of the precisest, but spend more
precious time in other petty impertinencies, which might be better placed in
the public service of their Country. However, there is little fear of any excess
in this jealous age, and under so Gracious, so Prudent a Prince, who has reaped
this benefit by his long calamity, as to be the most Accomplished for
Government, of any Monarch in the World.

It Is an Observation of some, that God seldom imploys any in great Affairs, but
he does exercise them with afflictions and tribulations: Pez^ Com. in 29. Genesis
and the large share his Sacred Majesty has had in these, encourages us to
expect no small things from him, especially when we consider in what an
unparaleld manner Providence restored him as a Peacemaker, not to England
only, but to Europe, as a Nursing Father to his Languishing Church, which many
had in hope and thought clean devoured. Now Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is the
Royal Jurisdiction, a Principal, inseparable part of his Royal Crown and
Dignity. Its Original was from his Noble Ancestors, who ever esteemed it their
Honor to support, and increase it. Constantine, a Britain, and the Glory of
Britain, began it, and it is hoped, it shall never be said that any of his
Successors consented to its Funeral, when it was in their power to give it a
Resurrection. The substance of our Common Law is comprehended in these three
things, jus Regium, now happily restored, jus Populi, confirmed, and jus
Ecclesiae, which only has, and does still suffer, by the late imbroylments. Nor
can his Sacred Majesty ever hope to have his Desire accomplished, and the
memory of former passages buried in oblivion, till the Church recover her
ancient Rights, and Privileges as well as the State.

EPILOGVE.
I Shall now end all with a breife Address to the long-despised Clergy. The
Goodness of your God, and Favor of your Prince, have once more restored you
to your Charges, your Patrimonies, and (it is hoped) will ere long to your
Honors, and Privileges, which Sacrilege, and Usurpation for many years, have
detained from you. Now it stands you upon seriously to consider, what Design
the Lord had in thus humbling you: for certainly his wise Providence did not
bring all this to pass for nothing. Be entreated then in the bowels of our
Common-Redeemer, (though by one of the meanest in your number, yet a
passionat-Well-wisher of the Sacred Function) to hear the Divine Commands, the
Royal Declarations, the Prayers, Groans, and Sighs of your Country, which all
with one voice cry aloud to you for Diligence in your Callings, and
Uprightness in your Conversations.

These, these will make our English Zion prosper, and our Jerusalem a Praise
in the Earth. But if through Plenty you forget him, whose Person you represent,
and through Security turn again unto Folly, (give me leave to speak my fears)
my Heart trembles to think what the issue will prove, if the Indignation of the
Allmighty once more break out. Many eyes are fastened upon you, so that the
least blemish will be espied. And as your Virtues bring greater Honor to the
Gospel then those of private Persons, so do your vices more Reproach.
Chrysostom Hom. 27. in St. Mat. is my Author, If a Preacher sin with the
People, he shall not be punished in like manner as they, but far more
grievously: and better would it be for any such that a Millstone were hanged
about his neck, and he cast into the midst of the Sea, then to prove a just
occasion of Scandal to any to speak evil of the ways of God. It has pleased
the Great Disposer of all things, once more to make trial of you. Let your
Moderation be known unto all men, that none may complain of your Jurisdiction
(if re-establisht) which the unquestionable Practice of all Ages, (except when
wars, and persecutions put every thing out of Frame) will abundantly justify.
May your Goodness equal your Greatness, your Humility shine in the midst of
your Honors, the memory of your late Afflictions, and Vows made in your low
estate never dye with you. Let your Conversation be with Covetuousnesse, that
the hungry Bellies of the poor, and needy may find the Benefit of your happy
Restoration, that no envious eye may repine, no foul mouth rail at your large
Incomes, but all may confess it is more for the Glory of God, and the good of
the Nation, that your Charity be entrusted with those Revenues, then the
griping Avarice of your Sacrilegious Adversaries.

READER,
THe importunat Have of the Stationer to dispatch these Papers against the
Session of Parl. occasioned many things to be hudled up, which happily second
thoughts might either have enlarged, or altered, and sundry Errata's have
escaped the Press, which yet a Charitable Eye may wink at, or a favorable Pen
easily correct.

FINIS.

