Signaculum Mundi Pythagoricum
diagram of the Pythagorean cosmos IEHOVA FECIT OMNIA EX NIHILO (...) SECVLA
SECVLORVM AMEN AMEN Bonum Infinitum I ^ MVNDVS ^ ARCHETYPVS ^
Bonum Finitum ^ II ^ ANGELICVS ^ III ^ ETHEREVS ^ IIII ELEMENTARIS
diagram of MAN amidst the four elements, represented as four triangles
contained within a single triangle, but extending beyond the bonum finitum into
the realms of bonum infinitum and malum. HOMO
COELVM 1 Mercurius 4 Stellae 6 Angeli
AQVA 2 Sal 5 Metalla 4 Pisces
TERRA 3 Sulphur 5 Lapides 6 Bestia
AER 6 Meteores 4 Aues 5 Plantae



Malum V ^ IGNIS ^ INFERNALIS





A Philosophical Epitaph in Hierogliphicall Figures with Explanation

A Brief of the golden Calfe the Worlds Idol

Glaubers golden Ass well managed

Jehior the three Principles or Original of all things

Published by WC E^^ with a Catalogue of Chymicall Books

Ardens, et Anima * medio spiritus aut quam.

Sapientia mundi circa 3. versatur, Animam, corpus et spiritum.

Quod aduersus fire pugnat, est {sulphur} quod ipsum sustinet, est.

Natura et anima e coelo Deum deducunt.

Ratio et Experientia Fundamentum operis firm^ stabile^^ ^upaedifi ^at.

Vltima coniunctio ^ 4 Elimentorum Haec dicitur ph^^a 4 drupla ac Spiritualis.

Haec scientia non Enisi de occultis sapientum praeceptoru^ acp^^orum.

Qualis est medicina tale (...).

Corpora praeparate purgate. sol^ite (...).

Magisterium ex una radicepcedit in plures (...)



London Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britam 1673

THE Philosophical Epitaph of W. C. Esquire* For a Memento Mori on his
Tombstone.

With Three Hieroglyphical Scutcheons, and their Philosophical Motto's, and
Explanation; with the Philosophical Mercury, Nature of Seed, and Life, and
Growth of Metalls; And a Discovery of the Immortal Liquor Alchahest. The Salt
of Tartar volatized, and other Elixirs, with their Differences.

ALSO, A Brief of the Golden Calf (the Worlds Idol.) Discovering the rarest
Miracle in Nature, how by the smallest proportion of the Philosophers-Stone a
great piece of common Lead was totally transmuted into the purest transplendent
Gold at the Hague 1666. by Jo. Fr. Helvetius

AND, The GOLDEN ASS well managed, and Midas restored to Reason; Or, A new
Chemical Light, Demonstrating to the blind world that good Gold may be found as
well in Cold as Hot Regions, and be profitably extracted out of Sand, Stones,
Gravel, and Flints, etc. to be wrought by all sorts of People. Written by Jo.
Rod. Glauber.

WITH JEHIOR. [Aurora Sapientiae,] Or, the Daydawning or Light of Wisdom,
containing the Three Principles or Original of all things; whereby are
discovered the Great and many Mysteries in God, Nature, and the Elements,
hitherto hid, now revealed.

All Published by W. C. Esquire.

With a Catalogue of Chemical Books.

London, Printed by T. R. and N. T. for William Cooper, at the Pelican in
Little Britain, Anno Dom. 1673.

THE AUTHORS EPISTLE To the Courteous and Well minded READER.
Reader,
I Thought not of publishing this my Epitaph, or Hyeroglyphical Figured
Scutcheons, further then my Grave Stone, being in a Living Grave, and in
despair of Life, when I made them; but since Almighty God has graciously
extended the Thread of my Life, and providentially put these adjoined Treatises
for my Task before I dyed; and being earnestly entreated by a Friend to publish
and explain them, I thought good to offer my mean Mite to the World, so that
thou may not only see and read an Aenygma in these my Scutcheons and
Epitaph, but have me thy Aedypus to unfold them. Where als^ I have set forth
the Philosophers Stone, and showed the Causes and manner of Multiplication of
Life and Seed, and given thee as an Overplus, a clear relish of the Alchahest,
and Salt of Tartar volatized, with other Elixirs, and Philosophic Medicines,
etc. in 5 small succinct Chapters, to put thee one step forward in this
knowledge, if thou wantst my help, or if beyond me to shame thy backwardness of
employing thy Talent to Usury, and profit of thy neighbor. And I wish all men
would rather study substance and matter with Laconick-Brevity and plainness in
their writings, then prolix Puff-pasted Eloquence, and Ostentation; that so our
Life might be improved in sound Knowledge and virtue; and God receive all
Praise and Honor, to whom it is Eternally due. Now to this my short Epitaph
with Explanation, I have added Pythagoras his Metapaysical Philosophic Figure,
and have adjoined Abbreviated notes of Helvetius his Golden Calf, and Glaubers
new Chemical Light, Treating of the rarest Transmutations and Miracles of
Nature; and likewise of unheard of Extractions of Gold and Silver (and
something better) out of all Sands, and out of the very Stones of the Streets,
for the Relief of all men. Proceeding from a true desire to be

Thy Christian Friend and Servant, W. C. For twice five Hundred.
Jan. 10, 1670.
L' Aurum Amice eligis Rus.
To the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire Eminently Noble and Accomplished.
Honorable Sir,
THe Translation of Helvetius his Golden Calf here annexed, being Licenced and
entered in order to the Prin^ing thereof, in Sept. 1668. Another ^ince took
advantage to Print and Publish ^he same, little different; That without
^rejudice to the Translator we might say ^ith Virgil,

-- Hos ego versiculos, etc,
We beat the Bush, but others caught the Hare,
So Lambs do bear their Fleece, which others share.
So Bees make Honey, and Birds build their Nests,
And Lands yields others Profit plough'd with Beasts.
Nevertheless it has brought advantage to the Reader, for I have since
exceedingly abbreviated my former Translation with the Epistles, etc. not
diminishing sense o^ matter, and have adjoined my own Philosophical Figured
Epitaph, with Alchahest, Elixis, Samech, and their explanations, then also to
be Printed, which I dedicated to my worthy Friend Elias Ashmole, Esquire But I have
now further adde^ Pythagoras Metaphysical Figure, with^^ most excellent, brief,
and rare piece of a^ unknown Author, called, The Dawnin^ of Wisdom, as also the
new Chymic^ Light of Glauber, wherein I have man^ged Mydas his Golden Ass, so
as to ma^^ him serviceable to all this Nation, to bear their burdens, bringing
him with these new Lights and Treasures here before your judicious view, as to
a great Mecaenas and strict examiner of Learning; hoping by the dawning or
clear light of Wisdom, you will judge both this Ass and Calf to be without all
Ignomy and Scandal, having a faculty to speak as well for themselves, and their
Innocence, as Ba-Lambs. Nay, to be Phylosophically learned, and as richly
Laden, as those formerly sent with rich Presents, to Patriarchs or Princes,
being plentifully stored with Gold, and other richer, miraculous, and
inexhaustible Treasures. My Presumption for these Names I hope will be
pardoned, being Philosophical terms; and though such their Lading may be
sufficiently stored in your Treasuries, and might seem boldness to be sent from
so mean an Artist, yet suffer me to present them to the world, (though but as
an Ec^ho or Vibrating Glass) to re-double ^he sound, and reflect the Beams of
your Virtues and Learning abroad, Famous already by your own works and worth. I
confess Honorable Sir, This my Dedication, as a stranger, is especially
grounded on the Fame of your Goodness, and Communicative Charity, the Truest
and Noblest Badges of Honor, which if so, will now pardon me. But I stop here,
taking off the imputation of base self ends, or flattery, by my concealment,
with Diogenes his recess of Privacy, But remain

Your Honors well wishing and humble Servant, W. C. Or twice five Hundred.
April 1. 1671.
L'aurum Amice eligis Rus.
TO HIS Worthy, and much Honored Friend, ELIAS ASHMOLE Esquire One of the Kings
Majesty's Heralds at Arms, and Comptroller of the Excises through all England.
Honored Sir,
HAving but barely, though faithfully Translated this Helvetius, treating of
the most rare and experimental Transmutation of Metals; I thought it not fit to
make any Dedication, but seeing I have adjoined my own Epitaph, with several
Scutcheons, Mottos, and Explanations, with Pythagoras his General Figure,
Blazoning Philosophical Herauldry, and also the Alchahest, Samech' with other
Elixirs, etc. I consulted it was very proper to present the same to your
Judicious view, whose abilities might challenge the same, especially since I
received some civilities from you, of a little like Nature, in the small
intermission of my Long troubles, 1662. Likewise being an Englishman, whose
Patronage in general you seem to avouch by those Worthy Collections of English
Philosophic Chemical Authors, formerly published by you. I know you have
another Coat of Arms for my Paternal Family, in your Heralds Office, which
would suit with the said Epitaph, if it were only as it is also intended for a
plain Sculpture to be upon my Grave Stone: Yet such Scutcheons had not been so
proper for this place, these being chiefly here intended for the Philosophers
Stone, agreeing with my said Epitaph, in the Elements, Principles, and whole
perfection thereof, excellently manifested by our late English Phaenix, or
Elias Artisto Anonymon, in his Book of The open entrance to the shut Palace of
the King. Now some perchance may think it incongruous for any man to publish
his own Epitaph, or annex any such Novel Scutcheons. Yet since they and their
Explanations are Philosophic (and the Philosophers Patrons are Truth and
Reason, which should govern all sorts of men) I was the more confident of
allowance and approbation. And indeed Sir, I may affirm, they were made in a
Living Grave, 1652. From whence I never thought to come forth no more, then
probably Jonas might in the Whales Belly, Daniel in the Lions Den, or the three
Children in the Fiery Furnace, Being grievously oppressed and clowded in my
long Troubles, and since as little regarded. Wherefore I hope these may be
better excused, especially, if it may tend to Gods Glory, as I hope it will by
a continual warning, or (Memento Mori) to the Reader for his souls health,
though he want the Philosophic spectacles to understand the sense more
perfectly. However Sir, give me leave to tender you these small Relics of my
obsequious obsequy, as Burnt Offerings, Reviving and describing Aarons Calf
ground to dust by Moses, with Helvetius his Golden Calf, burnt to a stone or
Powder, by the Teutonic Elias Artista, and I wish you might prove another Elias
(as your name imports) in this Fiery Chariot, or Transfiguration for the
benefit of this our English nation, and of the whole world, to glorify him who
is the giver of all good things. And although (as if dead) I should remain
unknown in the Whales Belly, on Jobs Dunghill, or Diogenes his Tub, Yet
entertain these (as your own worth deserves and requires) with a Noble mind not
regarding the weakness or misfortunes of the giver, which will the more
illustrate your virtues, and oblige,

Worthy Sir, Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant, W. C. Or twice five
Hundred.
July 16. 1668.
Laurum Amice Eligis Rus.
THE PHILOSOPHICAL Epitaph of VV. C. Esquire* FOR A MEMENTO MORI ON THE
Philosophers (Tomb) Stone.

With three Hierogliphical Scutcheons displaying Minervas, and Hermes Birds,
and Apollos Birds of Paradise in Philosophical Mottoes and Sentences, with
their Explication.

With a Perfect Discovery of the Immortal Liquor Alchahest, or Macchabean Fire,
and of the Volatized Salt of Tartar, or Samech, and of other Elixirs, with
their differences and properties.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and N. T. for Will. Cooper, at the Pelican in Little
Britain.

EPITAPHIUM factum per W. C. MInante perICuLo GranDe.
Scutisque affixis patefaciens Avem Minervae, Hermetis, and Apollinis Avem
Paradici.

In hIs HyerogLyphyCIs nVMeranDI FIgVrIs.

Bubo Minervae inter ramos Haederae. Creatio, Chaos, Corrupti^.





Mercurius Sal*



Anser H^rmogenis sive Pullus in sole assatus. Generatio. Mortificatio.
Vivificatio.

Mundo lassatus tandem ^ iveni*
Hunc nidum ad me in terra reficiendu^
Nudus sum n^c tamen sentio srigus
Alo hoc pridem quod me nutrivit,
Quieteque hoc fruor loc^,
Cum Amicis meis, Consanguineis,
Ne Plores igitu^, Fugalo Timorem,
Aut Pulvis lachrymas hic ficce tu^s,
Est Anima in Caelis, in requie, cum Sanctis
Ubi lauds Angeli sine fine cantant
Olida sed mortalitatis haec
Parum hic Fermentant dum perfect
Putrescant, netideque purgentur, and tan* them,
Cum Spiritu and Anima Rediviva Resurgant.
Clangore Buccinae quoe juncta lucebunt,
Eruntque Divina, Spiritualia, and Fixa
Uti Ch^istus, Semp^rque manebunt unum
Quae T^ia sic facta unum Bis V. C. Restat.
Apollinis Avis Paradisi, Phaeni^, Icarus, vel ^quila excelsa

Sulphur.



W. C.

Regeneratio. Redemptio, Glorificatio

Nemo ante Obitum faelix. Est in Mercurio quicquid quaerunt Sapientes,

Si ^ixum solvas faciasque volare solutum,
Et volucrem figas, facient te vivere tutum
Solve Coagula, Fige.
Dum Fixum Figit, Tinctum fusibile Tingit.
Si pariat ventum, valet Auri pondera Centum,
Ventus ubi vult spirat. Capiat qui capere potest.
L'Aurum amice eligis, Rus.
An EPITAPH made by W. C. CLowDeD by Threatening DIsasters.
With Scutcheons annexed displaying Minerva's and Hermes Birds, And Apollo's
Bird of Paradise, In HIerogLIphICk NVMbers anD In FIgVres.

Minerva's Owl in an Ivy Bush. Creation, Chaos, Corruption.





Mercury Salt.



H^rmog^n^s, Goose or Pullet roasted in the Sun. Generation, Mortifications,
Vivifica^ion

Tired of the World, at last ^ found
This Nest to rest me in the Ground;
I Am naked, yet I feel no cold,
Feed that, that had fed me of old,
And quietly enjoy this Place,
With Friends about of my own race
Weep not then here, but banish fears,
Or let this dust dry up your tears
My Soul's in Heaven with Saints in peace
Where Angels sing and never cease.
These grounds of Man's Mortality,
Rests here a while, till perfectly
Putrified, purged, cleans'd, and at last
Revived with Soul and Spirit by bl^ft
Of Trumpet which being joined shall
And be spiritual fixed, Divine,
Like Christ; and One for ever ^e shine, V. C.
Which being thus, is double you see.
Apollo's Bird of Paradise. Phoenix, Icarus or lofty Eagle.

Sulphur.



W. C.

Regeneration, Redemption, Glorification.

No Man's happy before his Death. MerCVry's BIrth's best after's Death,

MerCVrI's LIfe Was pVrg'D by strIfe.

All Is in Mercury that the wise men seek.

If thou dissolv'st the Fixed, and make it fly,
And make the flying fixed, live safe thereby.
Dissolve, Congeal, and Fix, which being fixed will fix,
And so being fusibly Tinged, will Tinge, and Mix.
If Wind be made of Gold, It Is worth a hundred fold.
The Wi^d blow th where it list th Receiv't they that can.
Laurum Amice Eligis, Rus.
Signaculum Mundi Pythagoricum
diagram of the Pythagorean cosmos IEHOVA FECIT OMNIA EX NIHILO (...) SECVLA
SECVLORVM AMEN AMEN Bonum Infinitum I ^ MVNDVS ^ ARCHETYPVS ^
Bonum Finitum ^ II ^ ANGELICVS ^ III ^ ETHEREVS ^ IIII ELEMENTARIS
diagram of MAN amidst the four elements, represented as four triangles
contained within a single triangle, but extending beyond the bonum finitum into
the realms of bonum infinitum and malum. HOMO
COELVM 1 Mercurius 4 Stellae 6 Angeli
AQVA 2 Sal 5 Metalla 4 Pisces
TERRA 3 Sulphur 5 Lapides 6 Bestia
AER 6 Meteores 4 Aues 5 Plantae



Malum V ^ IGNIS ^ INFERNALIS




CHAP. I. A plain and full explanation of the aforesaid Epitaph, Scutcheons and
Motto's of W. C. As well for the Philosophers Stone as his own Tombstone.
THis Epitaph is literally the work of Philosophers, and yet may revive the old
useful Adigy and Motto upon this Authors Tombstone, to remember thy end. For
as this flourishing ^ signifies this Author W C. being a Mercurialist, tired of
all worldly Inquinaments* So it illustrates all the ^lanets and their Mercury,
and the universal Spirit and Mercury of the World, and the specificks of
Nature; and no less, the true Mercury of Philosophers for this work: free from
all filthy corruptions well fitted, and put naked without Garb, or any strange
thing into its Glass, and private Philosophical Nest or Vessel, (as into a
Grave and Coffin) with constant vapourous heat for Putrefaction, and its true
preparation, rectification, and perfection, orderly through its progression of
Colors, till it come to the true Sulphur of Philosophers, which in the
interim, makes good that Philosophic saying,

^st iter ad Coelum, sed me gravis impedit Aer,
Et me perfudit, qui me cito deserit humor.
Huic mihi sunt Lachrymae, sed non est causa doloris, etc.
Englished thus,
It tends to Heaven, but the gross Air hinders,
And moisture fallen quickly turns to Cinders.
Hence comes these Tears, though there is no cause of grief,
For they but nourish, the Earth gave them relief.
And though Worms feed upon my Carcass here,
My Soul's in Heaven with my Savior Dear.
Thus it may appear double you see* or one in two, Male and Female, Superior
and inferior, Gross and Subtle, Celestial and Terrestrial, Sulphur and
Mercury, Water and Earth Corruptible and Incorruptible, or Spiritual. And so
the parts also are three, Body, Soul, and Spirit; Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury;..
and Calx, Ferment and Tincture; and the very Mercury may be termed threefold,
preparing, prepared, and essential, and according to Ripley, and Raimund,
calcining, reviving, and essential. So likewise it may be termed four; for the
Water, and Earth which are two visible Elements, comprehend Fire and Air, which
are the four Elements, which are turned inside outward, whereby they show their
effects and properties. Thus Terra; Stat. unda Lavat, pyr Purgat, Spiritus
intrat. The Earth fastens, Moist washes, Fire purges, and Spirit enters. In
and for which, also there are four Fires used, Natural, against Nature,
Innatural* and Elemental; all which, at the last will make a fifth Essence; and
so by a perfect Ternary Quadrate, and Quintessential Process, from one, two,
three, four, and five. It returns again into one most perfect spiritual sub
^ance, and so is Reunited, and raised to a perfect Circular Center, a fixed
fusible and incorruptible Medicine* to make the true Elixir of Philosophers;
opening and shutting ^t pleasure, giving the ^eys of happiness to all that
shall enjoy it, to enter to a Kingdom of Health, Wealth, and Honor, and
shutting out all ignorant dark Bodies, and Spirits. Thus then at last this
Medicine may obtain the name and number, intimated by W. C. which as it is this
Authors name, who is but one in Person, and in Figures, twice five hundred; so
is the Medicine but one in substance, and in virtue twice five hundred, or a
thousand For this cause the Jews thought Christ to be John Baptist, risen from
the Dead, and therefore did such mighty works. And this we know (says St.
Paul) that such as he is, such like shall we be at the Resurrection, if we have
his Spirit, and follow him in pious Obedience, Patience, and Humility. So that
in this Epitaph, as well as by the said Scutcheons and Motto's, is plainly set
forth the divine and natural Stone of the Wisemen, with their Sulphur and
Mercury; though to be understood with a gr^in of Salt; and likewise the Moral,
Natural, and mortal fate of Man. The whole Art therefore of this Philosophy, is
to begin where Nature ends, and to take what you find most ready and perfect in
Nature* and that which is nearest of kin; and entirely separate the
Heterogeneal gross parts, and congregate the Homogeneal, make them Essential,
and separate the Elements, kill the Quick, and quicken the Dead, and Circulate,
Fix and Ferment all to the highest degree of Exal^ation, and Philosophical
Sublimation and Perfection. As Ripley says, Kill the Quick, and to the Dead
give Life; Make Trinity one without any Strife. Thus opening and shutting by
Ixions Wheel, in heavenly mansion, both in a natural and artificial vessel,
till it come to the greatest perfection and number, if not Infinite. And now
note, though most Philosophers in their Writings, have concealed their true
privy Mercury, Fire* Vessel, Time and Bath. Yet here thou may easily find all
the Secret; If God have ordained thee to be helpful toward the Redemption of
his poor Creatures, groaning under their burdens of Oppressions and Mortality.

Now as this Epitaph does thus set forth the true Elixir of Philosophers, and
man's Mortality; so likewise these Scutcheons or Hyeroglifical Figures you see
do the same in the honorable Pedigree of the Philosophic true Medicine, or
Golden*fleece, as well for the Life and Health of man's Body as Metalls, both in
the Elements and Principles of the said Elixir, and in its Celestial and
Terrestrial parts, proceeding from their Saline Chaos, or first mercurial
matter, and their glorified Sulphur to their Celestial Spears of
Multiplication, Fermentation, and Projection; and so they and their Motto's
agree sincerely, with all the Philosophic sayings and intentions; namely thus,
Some Philosophers would have it one thing, and affirm, that the Salt of Metals
is the Philosophers Stone; Others say, all is in Mercury that the Wisemen seek;
and again, others do teach, that the whole Art depends in and upon the true
preparation of their Sulphur, as being the most perfect of the three
principles, whose Orbs must be thrice turned about, as in my three Figures and
Celestial Wheels: and some would have it one thing, comprising the nature of
two, as a Hermophradite or Embrio; moreover, some would have it absolutely two
things, as Male and Female, Fire and Water, or Water and Earth, Sulphur and
Mercury, or Heaven and Earth. Some likewise would have it consist of three,
Salt Sulphur, and Mercu y.. and. Body, Soul, and Spirit; Others would have it
the four Elements, and say, the Conversion of them is the whole work. And some
again would have it a fifth Essence and Quintessential Spiritual Body; and say
their Mastery and Mystery consists in these five numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. as
in my said Epitaph and Circular Scutcheons appear, thus comprehended, in and by
the Chaos and Products.

The Chaos in the Excentrick Center still,
Has death's Heads Ternary, Crows or owly Bill.
Whose square Face, under Times confused Glass,
Of Fire and Water, six days Angles pass,
Within the Spiny Bush, Expansion till,
A Sabatean Rest makes all stand still.
After each Color framed to the owners praise,
Then all things multiply to the end of days.
The two in number, are but one in kind,
And four in Nature, three in one do bind.
And then the Quintessence wheels thrice in'ts Sphere,
To conquer all the Mortals every where;
Which Waters thus takes name from Icarus, the lofty Eagl^s Son, and Dedalus
Philosophers true Sulphur and Mercury their u^ctuous Tincture; and their water
Dry.

The Owl appears in darkness, Yellowish Red,
And white are seen upon the Gooses Head.
The Bird of Paradise, and Phoenix fly,
Which Starry brightness in the Adeptists Sky;
Through Milkie Paths up to the Moon and Sun,
To multiply till the Adept have done.
Then each that is worthy, come and Feast you here,
With Apollo, Hermes, and ^inervah s Cheer:
For here is Nectar, and Ambrosia still,
Under these Hyerogliphicks take your fill.
All which nevertheles, I acknowledge is really but one only thing, or Essence
in the Root, viz. the Philosophers, although out of two or three particulars,
or more in kind; and one operation of several parts, as in my said Epitaph, and
Circular Figures comprised: Nay indeed may be but one only particular thing,
and one continued simple and single operation, when duly prepared, and
superfluities removed. But if one only thing be taken, then it is divided into
several parts; or if several things be taken, they are brought to one; and so
may it be said of the Operation, which all being but one, the Philosophers
nevertheless are pleased to distinguish it by its several Progressions,
Colors, and Properties, intimated by, and within the said three figured
Circles and their Titles; all agreeing with this old Aenygma of Vitriol, which
being in many of the Metallic kind, is and has but one thing or substance;
and although but one, yet may be opened, divided, and have several parts; and
being done, be brought to one again, in one single and simple operation of
Nature; Thus, V. I. T. R. I. O. L. V. M. Visitabis Interiora Terrae,
Rectificando Invenies, Occultum Lapidem, Veram Medicinam. Visit the interiours
of Earth, Rectifying,
And you shall find the hid Stone, and true Medicine.


And like it, agreeing with this work of Palyugenius, which has two.

Hunc Juvinem Arcadium, Insidum nimiumque fugacem,
Prendite, and immersum stygiis occidite Lymphis;
Post Hiales Gremio impositum Deus excipiat, Quem
^emnia Terra colit sublatumque in Cruce figat.
Tunc sepelite utero in calido and dissolvite putrem,
Cujus stillantes Artus de corpore nostro
Spiritus egrediens penetrabit, and ordine miro,
Paulatim extinctum nig^is revocabit ab umbris.
Aurata indutum Clamyd^n Argentoque nitentem,
Projicite hunc demum in prunas Renovabiter alter,
Vt Phoenix, and quae tangit perfecta relinquit,
Corpora, Naturae leges and faedera vincens,
Mutabit species, paupertatemque fugabit.
Englished thus,

Take this Arcadian slippery ^ad, who is apt to fly,
And in the Glittering Stygian Lake, drowned let him dye;
When Hi^ls juices in his breast, God saves him from loss,
Whom Lemnian Earth does nourish, lift up fix t'a Cross,
Then in a warm Cave buried, dissolve what is Rotten,
From whose Synews, drops of this our Body's gotten.
Spirits will Pi^rce, and orderly from shades bring out,
This Offspring clothed with Gold and Silver round about.
At length project this on live Coals, and you will soon see,
Another (Phoenix like) thereby renew d to be;
Which with its only touch, perfects all Bodies here,
Past the strict bond, and laws of Natures Sphere;
And will change the Species to a higher degree,
Whereby all Grief may cease, and Poverty shall flee.
And yet understand me rightly concerning the said work, and matter of
Philosophers; that Gold for certain is the principle of Gold-making powder, (be
it in what subject or appearance it will) even as Fire is the principle of
Firing: For nothing can give what it has not. In Auro, semina sunt Auri. As
Augurellus and others testify. In Gold, is the seed of Gold. And even the same
may be said of Lune, when it is a Masculine. And their Mercury is the ground of
both, and contains all three; and is the Earth, in which it is sown, and from
whence it takes its original, and is of their own Nature. But this must be
living Gold or Silver, and not the common Gold or Silver, which are Dead; or
the common fowl Quick silver. And indeed these are more universal, cheap,
common, and easy to be had, then most men, even some Philosophers do think:
which caused Ingenious, and Learned Taulodanus to write against the Subject of
that worthy old Philosopher Bracescus, though both true Philosophers, and their
several Subjects true; and this made Claveus in his Chrysopeia, and Argyropeia
to doubt of some of Lullie's Processes; For these Principles are to be found in
one subject, and in diverse having a Golden Nature, as Dunstan, Arnold, Guido,
Ripley, Raimund, Glauber, and others do testi^e; and more ways are to the Wood
then one: For out of every or any particular Metallic or Mineral Species, may
by due Philosophic preparation, be extracted the subject for the Philosophers
Stone; and every Chemical work called particular may by purification, good
preparation and suitable fixation, volatisation, and exaltation, be made a
universal work for Multiplication: Nay out of every Element, and Principle of
and in Nature; and almost every abject thing whatsoever, may be extracted a
Sulphurous, Sol, Lune, or Mercury, enlivened for the Philosophers work. And St.
Devogius affirms, that the said first matter of Philosophers, is easier to be
touched with the hand, then discerned or found by subtilty of Wit or Sophistick
imaginations, and says, he told it and the Process literally to some, who
nevertheless had not confidence therein, for the meanness of the same, and
therefore left it without trial And certainly the Antecedent and Primordial Ens
Auri, is in every Element and Principle; the which are never so simple, but out
of each the other may be extracted; and we may observe a kind of demonstration
hereof by our Mother Earth, who brings forth all things: For take any good and
fit Earth, extract all the Stones, Roots, Salt peter, and whatsoever else is
included, and being then left open to the Air for some time in a convenient
place, it will not only of its self be impregnated again with new salt Peter,
Vegetables, Stones, Metals and Minerals, but also with Animals, and those very
Stones, etc. shall hold a Sulphurous Gold and Mercury, fit for a Philosopher to
work upon, and to make a fit Medicine for any of the three Kingdoms of Nature,
and this being after specificated with a fit Metallic, shall perfect the
impure Metals, to Sol, and Lune; and it is strange that salt Peter, a Mineral
in the Earth, should have its root and Quarry in the Air. And verily every
thing brought to such likeness in perfection of Elements, and the three
Principles, as to be Quintessential and fixed, are in community of substance
with the principles of Metals, and are in a manner universal, and may help to
make the Stone for Transmutation of Metals, as well as for the health of Men,
etc. For the community of matter of all things, is in Sal, Sulphur, and
Mercury, and the purity of the four Elements is in pure Water, and pure Earth,
brought to a Quintessential essence, and so are in community of substance with
Metals, and will be of equal nature with their principles, namely, in Sal,
Sulphur, and Mercury; For the matters and principles of Generation, are in Sal,
Sulphur, and Mercury, and these may as well be had by Art, above the Earth, as
by Nature in the Mines, and so may be brought to a fixed Sulphur of Nature,
which is as good an Earth for the work as may be; for Guido says of the Earth,
it is no matter so it be fixed. and Raimund says, naught is required in this
Art for transmutation, but pure Earth, and pure Water; and Ripley says, Hair
and Blood cannot be the Stone for transmutation, but Elements separated from
them may; and of separated from them, is little good, but if brought to Sulphur
of Nature, it is as good Earth for it as may be; yet still mark, that it be
brought to a community of Nature, and must be fermented with pure real Gold:
yet you are not tied to go to so great a distance; for things nearer of kin are
easier transmuted, and the nearest the best. Wherefore the Artists may begin
where Nature* left off in her simple and single operation. And (like a good
Husbandman with Corn) Sow the pure grain of Gold (not common Gold) in its pure
Mercurial virgin Mother Earth (not common Earth) but a white Crude, Golden
Water or Essence, brought to them by the help of Eagles, or else by the
mediation of the Doves; and the man in his glittering golden Robes, may drink
of his Nectar in a pure silver Cup, three to the Graces, or nine to the Muses
(as Ripley intimates) and according to the old Mystical Law. Ter bibe aut
toties ternos sic mystica Lex est. Drink Three, or thrice Three, which is a
Mystery; And so the Masculine and Feminine, or.. and. being in perfect health,
and in their prime and Sperme, as one thing, willingly embrace, and join to
spiritualize themselves into a Sprout, or living Seed, to grow up to the
highest degree of the power, energy, and virtue of. and Gold, and of the
spiritual Stone of Philosophers, and to do whatsoever else the Philosophers
have need of. Nam Lapis Philosophorum nihil alind est quam Aurum in gradibus
suis multiplicatum stante proportione qua fuit in Auro primo. For the
Philosophers Stone is no other thing, then Gold multiplied in its dedegrees,
standing in the same Temperature or Proportion in which it was at the first:
which must be nourisht with the Mothers pure Milk, till it can feed upon
stronger Meats, and so gets vigor to Multiply. And then the Glorified King
(Triply Crowned) shall vanquish his Enemies, and redeem his Brethren and
Kindred, in all or any Nations from their vile Corruptions: If they can but
touch the hem of his Garment; or entertain him at his approach, as they ought;
for it is alike to him, to raise their Essences, as to separate their Maladies.
Yet you must,

First, Learn the Eagles that foster up the Doves,
And makes Diana taste of Venus's Loves,
Where Cupid conquers Mars his furious Ire,
And makes the Magnet draw the Calib's Fire;
Which seems a Riddle, and's the Gordian Knot,
And Herculean, labor for the Artists Lot.
Without the perfect knowledge of which, thou can never attain thy end.

CHAP. II. Of the Causes and Manner of Multiplication of Life and Seed; And one
way of preparing Mercury for the Philosophers Stone, and others for making of
Universal Medicines, etc.
IN the beginning God gave his blessing to increase and multiply; and commanded
that each Thing from its like, should draw its Form; and so created in Nature a
certain Chain, or subordinate propinquity of Complexions, between Visibles and
Invisibles; by which the Superior Spiritual Essences descend, and converse
here below with the matter. Yet Nature has, nor had but one only Agent
(hidden in the universe) which is Anima Mundi, working by its universal Spirit,
through innumerable distinct, Concreates according to their Specificque Forms
and Seeds, which God the Father, at first Creation by his word and Idea (or Son
and Holy Spirit) did Glance at once into the first matter, and so set Laws and
Bounds in Nature: Of, In, and over all, which he is still president, upholding,
strengthening, and ordering all the said Powers, as his Instruments in every
particular as well as in the general; so that a Sparrow falls not without his
Providence and Power; and so kind by kind, produces kind in all Natures, Three
Kingdoms (Animal, V^gitable, and Mineral) by means of the said Seed; For as
Fernelius says, Nihil est in ulla naturae part, quod non in se generis sui
semen contineat. There is no part of Nature which does not contain within it
self the seed of its own kind. God and Nature still use the same, and as a mean
to unite the Form to its own Matter, and to raise strength and Appetite in the
Patient, and to invite the active Virtue of Form and Life to work freely. Yet
still its motions to tend to its own Specific end as God had ordained; except
it be misplaced or abused (as Sendivogius expresses, or joined to some unfit
matter; which end being attained, the Life then seems Dead, or at a stand; and
so Chained, Hedged, and imprisoned with Corporal ^ences, that it can work no
further upon that subject to its Promotion; but only does Organizare molem,
and sets its Prison or House into the best order it can; Branching into several
Members, that it may have the more room to employ its Faculties, evidently seen
in Animals and Vegitals with various motions: But in Minerals (more oppressed
with matter) less apparent, and seeming slain by congelation, especially taken
out of their Mines, and Mechanically used; and so only preserves its bodily
Being, till Revived with new Ferment, and Matter, whereby the Body is opened
again to manifest its living, essential Moisture hid in the Center, wherein the
seed and spirit of Life is placed as Fire, and then revives and restores new
operations, in the new adjoined nourishment or matter. And thus Nature by help
of Art may transcend, (and as it were) go beyond its self; and so the Seed will
still extend its power and Life, as long and often as it be thus opened and
fitted with new matter and Ferments.

For Form is Light, the Source of central Heat,
Which clothed with Matter, does a Seed beget;
Wherein Life, like Fire seeks it self to increase,
And E^ernize, if Fuel never do cease.
Helmont in Butler, and Sendivogius in his new Light, partly testify the same.
Now this Seed is no sooner produced, but it assaies to change the matter, and
stamps its Character therein, and so presently the Matter lives, and the matter
then Coworks together with the Form, to attain that end, to which the Seed
implanted does intend. For all things live according to their kind,
Their Life is Light, as therein you may find.


Quantum quidque habet Luminis, tantum habet and Numinis, (says one) And thus
much for Form and Seed in general.

Know further now, That Metals in the Mineral Kingdom are thus produced. Their
Sulphur unctuous, Coagulates, and fixes a fluent moisture mineral called
Mercury, the which is a dry humidity that flows, yet wets not hands, its parts
are so Homogeneal, that the very Fire its self does not easily separate them.
It is of waters Progeny, yet far exceeds it in weight, and firm composure,
which properties come not by chance, but by Gods Decree; Providence and Power,
from its Specificque Seed, and its hidden inward Agent, Form, and Life, from
Anima Mundi, which the Water before had not; neither yet has it parts
dissimular (hand or foot* head or eye) as Animals, or otherwise as Vegitables:
but is all homogeneal, and of most firm parts and Root. Now Mercury has most
affinity with Gold, known by their equal weight, purity, firm composure, and
easy mixture; next with Silver, then Jove, Saturn, Venus, and last and least
with Mars, which is a Secret to understand and though Mercury may be mixed and
made amalgame, with all or any, yet it will not enter into any in the Root
without fit preparation and great Art; but drive away one from the other, in
the Fire, which is another secret, now the reason is, for that it and they are
Dead, or their Life hid, imprisoned, and Dormant within their Bodies (as is
said) and the Sulphur fixed, and sealed in the perfect Metals, and earthly Fowl
or Crude in the impersect, which Mercury abhors and rejects, or cannot Cope
with, being its self also in Fetters, bound to his good behavior; and if you
separate the f^ces of the latter, which are imperfect, yet you have but a fluid
Mercury from them like the common; and a Crude Sulphur, too remote to join with
Gold, for Gold having passed its Enchantments and C^udities, scorns to be
defiled therewith any more; wherefore common Crude Sulphur, will easier join
with other imperfect Metals, then with Gold: but pure and fixed Sulphur, sooner
and better with Gold then with the rest; and therefore if you would make use of
the Sulphurs or Mercuries of the imperfect Metals, or the common. They must be
each prepared and fitted with a living power, and so acuate as to become a
fiery quickening Agent, before it can reincrudate, open and enter the body of
Sol, whereby its own Water may appear, and its fiery Seed and Spirit of Life
issue forth, and be made active to work upon, and in the said Female living
Mercury, it being Sols own Essence, Flesh and Bone, and its proper matter,
Earth and Matrix (as is said) wherein Seed will then quickly fructify and
increase: for Sol though pure, perfect, and full of virtue in its self bodily)
must be Reincrudate, Crucified, and die to Nature, that its Virtue and Tincture
locked up, and only single in its self Bodily, might become exalted with its
body and, spiritually living, and fixed together in heavenly mansions, and so
extend and communicate more largely its powerful Virtues, and Tincture to
imperfect Bodies, and Spirits to redeem them from Thraldom, Corruption, and
Fire by embracing one grain of his bounteous pure Spirit, and so be raised at
last to him for Eternity. For so Death and Destruction of outward Form, will be
but as a Backdoor to the Soul and Spirits true Birth, and its Bodies eternal
Life and Union, till it come at last to the highest perfection, by its fullness
of Tincture. Thus is the Philosophical Cornerstone, made a true Medicine,
though rejected and scoffed at by many. And these are the effects hid from the
voluptuous, Covetous, and Worldly-wise-philosophers, and revealed to Solitary,
meek, humble Spirits, who forsake outward pomp and vanities, to embrace the
fruits of Piety and Wisdom.

Now observe further, that every thing that is convertible into Gold, has its
Mercury and Sulphur, which either is, or may be acuate, and made fiery and
living for a Philosophical preparation of and with Sol, and so both the common
and Metallic Mercury may be thus fitted and prepared to wed with Sol. All
which Mercuries (as is said) beforehand in themselves are dead; for Mercuries
preparation is thus, viz. By a mineral with sable silver Veins, which is the
Dragon born in Saturns Den, devouring Cadmus with his Earthly Men.

First then this Dragon double strengh' to Mars,
Must be yet pierced by him being God of Wars.
Then both will Perish and become a Star,
Where the young King is Born, who is Solar.
Then wash equal Venus in's Blood, and let
Them join, till Vulcan take them in a Net,
Which Mercury gently on his Wings must bear,
Till he steals their Wealth, and Sols body tare;
Wherein then Sol will freely shed his Seed,
And this is all whereof we stand in need.
Which ordered right you cannot choose but speed.

If you can prepare your Mercury better,
Do It freely, and care not for this Letter.
For all Sulphurs and Mercuries may serve your turn,
If pure and living joined to Earths will not burn.
CHAP. III. Of the Subject and Marks of the immortal Liquor Alchahest.
HEre Reader make a little pause, and take this short hint for thy true
instruction of the Alchahest and Macchabean Fire, burning in Water, and as a
Serpent (or Latex) lying hid in the Cavernes of the Earth, and in other things
and places; being nevertheless but one Anomolous Balsammick Salt, passing
through the world, which almost every man knows and needs, though he observes
not the marks to be that thing. I say, it is the Primum ens Salium, and has a
mark or cross affixt on it from the Almighty, which (as Helmont says) the
Adept do know, and every curious Philosophic searcher, may find to be a sure
and certain token of its true Alchahestical Virtue, beyond any Demonstration:
And indeed we must not seek, or think to and that in a thing which God and
Nature has not implanted in it. For nothing can give, what it has not. But
the virtue, operation, and power thereof, may be cleared and exalted by art.
This mark then I say is not the mark of Cain, or any Bestial curse, but clean
contrary, and can preserve life; so that none can kill it, though they would
devour it; which mark till you find, you shoot at Rovers; and though the Ass
have such an outward mark with Ignomy, yet Christ was pleased to ride upon it,
and to grace the Cross after by his mighty power of sufferings on it, he having
a Balsamic constant virtue of Patience therein over it. Some light is given of
this mark and token upon it, both by Paracelsus, the glory of Chemists, and by
brave Helmont his great Interpreter, but coucht close up from the Rustic
observation in convenient places; yet their preparations are plainly set down
to be only simple dissolution and coagulation, with easy heat, till it come to
its transmuted form, without any commiscible ferment Heterogeneous to it self;
but this Serpent biting his own Tail, by digestion and Putrefaction becomes
Invenomed, and so by solution mortified into the smallest Attoms possibly in
nature; and then is raised, circulated, and revived for eternity to some higher
Orb or Elixir, and so not possible to mix with any elementary impurity, or
ferment to be transmuted, but seperates and preserves all and every essential
concrete whereto it is joined from corruption, and the causes of death without
any diminution of its or their entire created virtue.

CHAP. IV. Of the Salt of Tartar volatized, or Samec, and other Elixirs.
I May tell thee here nevertheless, That though the proper subject of this
foregoing Liquor, called the Alchahest be but one Anomalous Salt, or first
beginning of Salts, with such a noted mark, and John Baptist like, does such
great or mighty works, yet nevertheless the least Elixirated subject in the
Philosophers Kingdom (though the lowest perfected Salt) will do such
Alchahestical effects, and some beyond, especially being rapt up (like Paul)
from the Quaternary Elements, into the Christalline third Heavens above the
fixed Stars and Planetary Orbs: For Paracelsus his high prepared Samech, and
every Alcalisate Incinerated wine of vegetables being brought to their full
preparation and perfection, are Alchahestical, at least Succedaneous, as a
Circulatum minus; and also all other Balsamic Quintessential things, and
Concretes in the three universal kingdoms of nature. But more especially the
true Mercurial Saline, and Sulphurous Elixirs of Philosophers wrought up and
exalted to the bright Christalline or Angelical Orbs, influences in spiritual
fusible liquid Forms, and appearencies are so universally Alchahestical, that I
say they may do the same things, if not greater, and make better exalted
Balsamic separations and preparations, then the ordinary saline Alchahest. But
the manner of preparation (and modus dispositionis) must be thought on to bring
this to effect: For the degrees of Hierarchy are much conducing to and for the
Glory of Angelical powers and influences: And yet the said Alchahest (as a good
forerunner) may prepare the way or Foundation to this grand Elixir. It Is true,
the Alchalizate parts of Samech, and other Alcalyes, after their sufficient
resolutions and pure soft apparelling for their first addresses to win their
beautiful Caelestial Bride, and her beloved and delightful influences must have
a hot and most pure affection (chased from Adultery, yet Fusibly melting with
heat;) and then each of them with a strong clutch (like a Domestic Thief,
nevertheless gently and at leisure) will take away his beloved out* of her
Chariot at such a time when he ^nds her in her greatest beauty, and most
glorious pure attire, and with a cleanly conveyance, in the cool of the
evening, will carry her away with all her wealth and Jewels from her outward
weak, and inward close attending strong Guardians, who will then by her milder
advice pacify his heat for the present, but being once fully married and in
his possession, her love will be so true and entire, that her tender affection
will snatch and carry him on her winged embraces in her Mantle, up to the
highest Mountains, from hers and his boisterous, pedantical, malicious enemies
where afterward they will live in peace upon heavenly Manna in Paradise, and
dress the Garden of Eden with new Plants, and may delight in all the fruits of
life, having an Angelical Guardian and Gardener with a Flaming Sword, to
prevent and keep out all Rustic and Malevolent followers and pursuers.

And Reader, this greater secret may be here revealed; That some affirm, all
the Concreats and things in natures, ^hree Kingdoms, (Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals) may be reduced to such a quintessential perfection of the four
Elements, and three Principles as to have a community of nature, and will make
the matter for the Philosophers Stone in any kind; but then they must be
Fermented with Gold and Silver for Metals and Minerals, and so may easily
transmute course Metals into Gold or Silver, and perfect baser Minerals and
Stones as well as they may exalt their own Specific kinds.

I might further enlarge with some rare Philosophic particular preparations in
every kind or thing, and of the universal Spirit, and general Phlegmatic
Menstruum or dissolvent, and of some sweet oils and spirits of Balsamic,
Salts, Sulphurs, and Mercuries, etc. both for Menstruums and Medicines; and to
set forth Butlers Magnetic, Mystical, Physical, Anodyne Stone, with other
Sympatheticks, Magneticks, etc. But it were against my intention of brevity,
and I have sufficiently done in the general, for the Philosophers Stone and
Elixirs, (instar omnium) comprehends all.

CHAP. V. An Apologitical Peroration of Man's Mortality, Resurrection, and State
for Eternity.
PErhaps here some may say, it is not easy to find or understand all written
in this short volume, by solitary experiments, or public Print, which I
confess to be true; nor could I, till I had the blessing to converse with some
Philosophic Authors, and had living words to demonstrate it; whereby likewise
I felt and found out Paracelsus and Helmont, in their concealments, which I
have here given thee a Key to open; and if it may be any help unto thee,
acknowledge it from God; if thou dislike it, thy time and charge will not be
much prejudiced by these few lines, and might he spent worse, but take it for
good intentions* or how else thou please, so thou forfeit not thy Christian
name by envy, or speaking evil of what thou know not.

And thus I hope in this short discourse I have sufficiently explained my
Philosophical anygmatical Scutcheons, and Epitaph, with the Alchahest, Samech,
and other Elixirs, as also my adjoining words and Figures, the rest I leave,
(if thou be more curious) to be explained by the aforesaid Authors, and
multitude of others better experienced in this Art; and if thou yet shall blame
me for thy want of apprehension hereof by these writings, or of my Figures and
Epitaph, I am resolved to be dumb and silent like a dead man still; for if I
deserve blame I ought to bear it quietly; if otherwise, I have been used to
scandals and reproaches from Pharaohs Court, to Jobs Dunghill, and can take it
for a Glory to suffer patiently; for I have set down what the Philosophers and
Adeptists have said and confessed, viva voce, and in Print; nor could I or they
give this knowledge in the plainest words, without the peculiar inspiration of
God: Wherefore if thou desire this great blessing, ask it of him who gives
liberally and upbraideth not when it may tend to his glory. But be sure thou
prepare thy self by purity and holiness, with true mortification, as thou
desire thy work should prosper and thrive. And therefore pray affectionately,
That God, in and through Christ's spirit, may enliven thee from dead works, and
separate light from thy dark body and Chaos of sin, that so being truly
baptized into him and his Righteousness, by an Essential and Living Seed of
Faith, thou may improve thy Talent, and mount through and above the
quaternary defiling world into the Trivne power, and at last come to the
quintessential, or Super celestial Central circle of Peace, and Heavenly
Beatitude.

Wherefore now, candid Reader, if thou be not satisfied with this work or
these expressions* leave them for the Author, for the said Epitaph and Figured
Scutcheons will serve me well enough for a Grave Stone (which was so chiefly
intended at the first) where I may lie at rest, with or without any other
Herauldry, or Applause; and wherein thou may plainly nevertheless read thy
mortality, as on other Tombs, To prepare thy self for thy long home of
Eternity, for thy Body, Soul, and Spirit, must be separate, and the four
Elements thus corrupted from the Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury, generate Worms,
etc. which after a full and perfect separation, are again to be re united at
the day of doom, for a quintessential, super celestial, and everlasting being:
The good in Joy and Peace of the Holy Ghost, which had fermented the same by
Righteousness in this life into Christ's Body as Members, and was in all the
Saints and true Catholic Church, the Hope of Glory. But the other that were
Bad, left to their Bestial, Sensual, and Divelish Fermented Affections, to be
tormented eternally, with and by their bad Spirits, and grosser Essences, for
their Idolatry of Fleshly, Divelish, and Worldly vanities, with horror and
everlasting anguish of mind and body, wherewith nevertheless they will be
nourisht and enabled to endure for ever and ever. All which I have declared,
and cannot be easily hid from thee, though thou should want Lynceus eyes, or
the Philosophic Eagles eye, to behold the light of nature exalted to the
highest degree of the Sun by art; which nevertheless I wish thou may find
out by this or some other means; so it may tend to the Praise and Honor of
God, and thine and thy neighbors Eternal welfare, who am thy friend and true
Lover of Art and Nature, and care not what thou say or think of W. C. or
twice five hundred.

Laurum Amice eligis Rus,
A BRIEF OF THE GOLDEN CALF. OR THE Worlds Idol.

DISCOVERING The Rarest Miracle of NATURE.

How in less then a quarter of an hour by the smallest proportion of the
Philosophers Stone, a great piece of Common Lead was totally transmuted into
the purest transplendent Gold.

With other most Rare Experiments and Transmutations.

Written in Latin by Dr. Frederick Helvetius, And Printed at the Hague, 1666.

And now Englished and abbreviated for the ease of the Readers.

By W. C. Esquire.

Laurum Amice Eligis Rus.
THE EPISTLE Of VV. C. TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Have taught Helvetius with his Golden Calf, our English Tongue, to persuade
thee (by these experiments from a true Adeptist) Of the reality of the
Philosophers Stone, and Universal Medicine, and consequently to esteem the
Noble Art of Chemistry by which it is wrought; And I heartily wish the laws
were not so strict, nor the snares so many, against the honest Practisers of
this Art, but to punish the others more severely that abuse the same, then I
question not the further demonstration hereof. But the Golden Calf and Fleece
are sufficiently divulged almost in every language, and many rare English
Philosophers collected by our worthy Countryman Elias Ashmole Esquire in his
Theatrum Britannicum. There is also published a Manuscript of a most rare
Anonymon (probably yet living) who like a miracle of nature, attained the
Elixir at 23 years of Age, 1645. And as a true Elias (or forerunner) has
taught the same, in his Book Entitled, Secrets Revealed, or an open entrance
to the shut Palace of the King. We have likewise the bright Sun of our age,
and lover of mankind, John Rodolph Glauber, Basilius Valentinus, and
Cosmopolite Sendivogius, brave Helmont, Paracelsus, with several other
Translations in English, wherein many rare secrets are revealed for the honor
of this Art, Improvement of our English Nation, and to establish a belief of
the said Stone. This Worthy Helvetius it seems, had formerly a misprision of
this Art, but by these demonstrations mentioned in his book, he was convinced,
and as worthily recanted to prefer the Truth, and Gods Honor before his own
Repute, by which he has gained more repute amongst all virtuous learned men.
Now if these Experiments shall gain the like credit with you (as I doubt not
but they may) you will not any ways detract or scandalize this almost Divine
Art. Nevertheless I do not persuade thee (with the murmuring Idolatrous Jews to
adore this Ass or Golden Calf (the workmanship of men's hands) though termed the
God of this world) Nor with Jason or Hercules to hazard thy self, or any Limb,
for the Fleece, or branch of the Golden Tree; but diligently to read and
consider these and other learned Authors to find a true coherence amongst them,
and how with Moses, or these Elias Artista's to wash the Laeton, and burn the
Golden Calf, and not thy Books; but beware thou fling not away thy money before
thou understandest the Roots of Nature, and the full art to proceed. If thou
intendest the thing herein mentioned, least thou come off with loss and
blaspheme the truth; neither slight these Relics of the Fleece as common dirt
or dust, but rather magnify the great Creator, who has not only given us this
precious Stone for our health and wealth, but withal a most glorious white
Stone, clothed in Scarlet, viz. his Son Christ Jesus for the Example,
Redemption, and Eternal Salvation of all men of that Spirit, in and with whom
are all blessings for Male and Female, Poor and Rich. But methinks these bright
Stars thus eminently appearing, with other manifest Tokens would persuade us
that the time is come, or not far off, when the true Elias is or will be
revealing this and all other Arts and Mysteries more plainly and publicly then
before, though not perchance in or by any single person, but in some public
Administration of Spirit (like a second John Baptist in a Fiery Chariot) to
prepare the way for a higher design, by which men may forsake their vain lusts
and pleasures, to follow this and other laudable Arts. And Exercise more
Justice, Honesty, and Love to their Neighbors, (hitherto very cool and remiss)
till they come to be transformed into the perfect Image of Christ, in, by, and
with whom he will Reign spiritually; or else may find the smart of their vices
by their violent Fiery Furies, and the Stone out of the Rock or Mountain, Dan.
2. 45. cut out without hands, to fall upon them in Judgment, till they and
their Idols, Gold and Vanities be turned to dirt, or of no esteem, and
afterward the truth of Religion in Righteousness to flourish and cover the
earth, as the waters do the Seas, and then God will even delight to dwell in
and amongst the Sons and Daughters of men, as the Members of his beloved Son,
Christ's body, the true Catholic Church and Christ's Kingdom; Though in some
small differing outward forms, and that this his Kingdom may come and hasten,
is the prayer of

Your well wishing friend, W. C. Or twice five hundred.

Laurum amice elegis Rus.
THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY Of Doctor John Frederick Helvetius. To the most
Excellent and Learned, Doctors, Dr. Theodosius Retius, at Amsterdam, Doctor
John Casper Fausius, at Heidlebergh, and Doctor Christianus Mentzelius, at
Brandenburgh, My Honored Friends and Patrons.
MOst Noble and Acute Searchers into the Vulcanick Anatomy: I would not be
wanting to manifest the glory and riches of this ancient Spagyrick Art, which I
have seen and done, by projecting a very little of the Transmuting Powder on a
piece of impure Lead, which in a moment) was thereby changed into the most fixed
pure Gold, enduring the sharpest examination of fire, so that none need doubt,
but certainly know the first material Mercury of Philosophers is to be found,
and is as a fountain overflowing with admirable effects. Yet it is not in my
thoughts to teach any man this Art, of which I my self am yet ignorant, but
only to rehearse the proceedings I have seen. For it is only the part of Bruits
to spend their life in silence* and not to declare that which might propagate
the honor of the most Wise, Omnipotent God our Creator: It being ungrateful
for men, (who ought to participate of the divine nature) not to glorify their
maker. I shall therefore without flourishing, faithfully relate whatever I saw
and heard from Elias Artista, touching this miracle. For truly I was not so
intimate, that he would teach me to prepare the Universal Medicine throughout
the Artificial, Chemical, Physical Method, yet he vouchsafed such a rational
Foundation in the Method of Physic, that I shall never sufficiently extol his
praise. Receive therefore this small present which I officiously Dedicate to
you for admiration. Farewell.

N. E. E. D. V. Your most humble Servant. John Frederick Helvetius*

CHAP. I.
BEfore I describe the Philosophical Pigmy conquering Giants in this Theater of
Secrets, suffer me to transcribe some of Helmonts words, out of his Book of The
Tree of Life, fol. 630.

I am constrained (says he) to believe there is a Stone to make Gold and
Silver, though I know many exquisite Chemists have consumed their own and other
men's goods in search of this Mystery; and to this day (alas) we see these
unwary and simple Laborants cunningly deluded by a Diabolical Crew of Gold and
Silver, sucking Hyes or Leeches. But I know many Stupid men will contradict
this truth. This man will have it to be a work of the Devils, another a
hodge-podge, another to be the soul of gold; so that with one ounce of this
Gold may again be tinged only one ounce of Lead, and no more; but this is
repugnant to Kifflers attestation, and others as I shall show you: Another
perhaps believes it possible, but says, The Sauce is dearer then the meat; Yet
I wonder not at all, for according to the Proverb, Things that we understand
not, we admire;
But things that please our fancy, we desire.


Now what will man do in natural things, who is fallen from the fountain of
light into the bottomless pit of darkness, especially in this Philosophic
natural Study. Nay, i^ they understand a thing, they despise it, not knowing
that more is to be sought then is possessed. Wherefore Seneca said right, in
his book of Manners, Thou art not yet happy if the ruder sort deride thee not.
But whether men believe deride or contradict, there is a certainty of the
transmutation of Metals; for mine eyes have seen it, my hands done it, and
handled this spark of Gods everlasting wisdom, or the true Catholic,
Saturnine, Magnesia of Philosophers (a very Fire sufficient to pierce Rocks) a
treasure equivalent to 20 Tun of Gold. What seek thou more? I believed it
with the eyes of Thomas in my fingers, I have seen I say in nature, That most
secret supernatural Magical Saturn known to none but a Cabalist Christian: And
we judge him the happiest of all Physicians, to whom this Sovereign Potion of
our Medicinal Mercury is known; or of the Medicine of the Sun of our
Aesculapius, against the violence of death, for which else grows no better
Panacea in all the Gardens. But the great God reveals not promiscuously these
his Solomonical gifts; for it seems to most men a wonder, when they see the
creature, by an Occult implanted magnetical virtue of it is like, to be brought
into a real activity,

As for example. The ingenerated magnetical, potential virtue, in Iron from the
Loadstone; in gold from Mercury; in Silver from Copper; and so consequently in
all the Metals, Minerals, Stones, Herbs and Plants, etc.

But here I may deservedly ask, Which of the wisest Philosophers is so acute,
to perceive by what means or obumbration the Imagination in any woman with
Child does tinge venomous or monstrous things* and dispatcheth its work within
a very moment, if it be brought to activity by any external object, I believe
many will say, it is a Morto* Magical divelish work; but such Bablers are
afraid of the Resplendency of the Essential Light of Truth, wherewith their
Owl-like Eyes are lamentably afflicted. But as I may (...) are a cause of this
matter, though thou or I perhaps cannot comprehend their heavenly Influences;
neither are the Plants which the earth affords to be slighted herein, although
I or thou cannot rightly judge from their external Signatures, the effects of
their ingenerated virtues, which they eminently show according to their degrees
of Power, in the healing and preserving of men's bodies. But are all men
defective in their light of understanding, because I or thou are wanting in
knowledge, how the Powers Created to one and the same end may be brought into
activity. Thousands of such things might be instanced; although thou do not
know the splendour in the Angels, the candid brightness in the Heavens, the
Perspicuity in the air, the clear Limpidity in the waters, the variety of
colors in the Flowers, the hardness in Stones and Metals, the Proportion in
living Creatures, the Image of God in regenerated men, Faith in true Believers,
and Reason in the Soul: Yet is there in them such a beauty, which very few
mortals have thoroughly perceived, or plainly known.

Now why should there not be such an admirable virtue in the true Philosophers
Stone, which truly I have seen and known to be so. Yet hereby I endeavor not
to persuade the worthy and unworthy alike, to labor in this work. I rather
dehort busy searchers, from this most perilous secret, like as from some Holy
of Holies; Yea, let every discreet Student be exceeding cautious in reading and
keeping company with Sophisticate false Philosophers. Nevertheless to satisfy
curious Naturalists, I shall communicate faithfully whatsoever was acted
between Elias the Artist, and Me, concerning the nature of the Philosophers
Stone.

It is a thing much brighter then Aurora, or a Carbuncle, more splendid then
the Sun or Gold, and more beautiful then the Moon or Silver; Insomuch that this
most recreating light, can never be blotted out of my mind, though it should
not be believed by Learned Fools, or Illiterate Asses, bubling nothing but the
gloss of haughty proud eloquence. For in this exulcerated old malignant Age,
nothing can be secured from slanderous Carpers; But all such Batts and Bratts
do err from Truth, and in progress of time vanish, miserably ensnared in their
own errors, yet our assertion shall stand till the very end of all generations,
being built upon the eternal foundation of Triumphant Truth. And although this
Art be not yet known to all, the Adept do assert according to experience, That
this natural Mystery is only to be found with the great Jehovah, Saturninely
placed in the Center of the World. In the interim, we account them happy, who
by the help of art, are careful how they may wash this Philosophical Queen, and
circulate the Catholic Virgin Earth, within a Magic, Physical Christalline
Artifice; Nay, as Khunrade says, they aone shall see the Philosophers King
crowned with all the colors of the world, and coming forth of his Bedchamber,
and glassy Sepulcher, more then perfect in his external glorified fiery body,
shining like a bright Carbuncle, or a compact, and Ponderous transparent
Crystal; These shall see the Salamander casting out waters, and washing
therewith, the Leprouse Metals in the fire, as I my self have seen. What shall
I say? These shall see the ^byss of the Spagyrick Art, where this kingly art
did rest and lie hid so many years in the Mineral Kingdom, as in their safest
bosom. Assuredly the true Sons of this Art shall not only manifest such a river
of Numitius; in which long since Aeneas being washed, and absolved from his
mortality, by the command of Venus, was presently transformed like to an
immortal God, but also the whole Lydian River (called Pactolus) transmuted into
gold, as soon as Mygdonian Mydas has washed himself in the some. Also in a
long Series they shall partly see the Bath of naked Diana, and the Fountain of
Narcissus; yea, Scylla walking in the Sea without her clothes, by reason of the
fervent rays of the Sun; and shall gather the blood of Pyramid and Thysbe, by
whose help the white Mulberries were tinged into red. Partly also the blood of
Adonis, transformed by the descending Goddess Venus, into the Anemone Rose:
Partly also the blood of Ajax, out of which did spring the fairest Flower of
Hyacinth or Violet: Partly also the blood of the Giants, struck by Jupiters
Thunderbolt: partly also the tears of Althea, shed when she had divested her
self of her Golden Robes, and laid them down: partly also the drops from
Medea's decocted water, out of which green things did presently sprowt out of
the earth: Partly also Medeas Potion boiled out of many herbs, gathered three
days before the Full Moon, for the healing of her good old Father Jason: Partly
also the Medicine of Aesculapius; Partly also the leaves by whose taste Glaucus
was transformed into Neptune: Partly also the expressed juice of Jason, by
whose benefit he got the Golden Fleece, in the Land of Colchos, after he had
fought generously in the Field of Mars, not without great danger of his Life:
Partly also the Garden of Hesperides,, from whose Trees might be gathered
Apples of Gold: Partly also, Hippomines running a Race with Atalanta, delaying
and conquering her, by throwing down three Golden Apples, given him by Venus:
Partly also the Aurora of Cephalus; Partly also as it were, Romulus transformed
by Jupiter into a God: Partly also the Soul of Julius Caesar, transfigured by
Venus into a Comes, and placed amongst the Stars: partly also Pytho the Serpent
of Juno, springing up after Deucalions deluge out of the putrified Earth,
heated by the rays of the Sun: partly also the Fire, whereby Medea lighted
seven Candles: partly also the Moon inflamed by the great burning of Phaeton;
partly also the dried shrub or branch of the Olive Tree, new greening with
berries as a new and tender tree: partly also Arcadia, wherein Jupiter was used
to walk: partly also the dwelling place of Pluto, at whose entrance the three
headed Cerberus did watch: partly also that Mountain where Hercules burnt all
his Members he had from his Mother upon a Pile of Wood, when the Fathers parts
did remain fi^t and incombustible in the fire, yet was he not one jot impaired
in his life, but at length was changed into the likeness of a God. Further,
these true children of the Philosophers, shall at last enter into the Temple of
the transformed rustic house, whose roof was built out of fine gold. Indeed I
cannot do less then once more proclaim aloud with the Adeptists. O happy, and
thrice happy is this Artist* who by the most gracious blessing of the most high
Jehovah obtains this art to prepare and make this almost divine Salt, by whose
efficacious operation, the metallic body or mineral is broke open, destroyed
and killed, yet its soul is revived to the glorious resurrection of the
Philosophic body: Most happy therefore is he who obtains this Art of Arts, to
the glory of God, by earnest constant prayers: For certainly the knowledge of
this Mystery cannot be obtained, unless drawn and sucked out of the Fountain of
Fountains, which is God. Therefore every serious Lover of this inestimable art
should believe the chief of his business is, That with uncessant desires and
prayers in a living Faith, he implore, and adore the most Sovereign grace of
Gods Holy Spirit in all his works: for it is the solemn custom of God to
communicate his gifts heartily and liberally, only to candid and liberal men,
mediately or immediately: for by this only holy way of the practice of Piety,
all Students of difficult arts find what they desire. But they must exercise
solitary Philosophical and Religious pleadings with Jehovah,, with a pure mouth
and heart: For the heavenly wisdom Sophia embraces our friendship, offering us
her Rivers of gracious goodness and bounty, never to be drawn dry. And most
happy is he to whom the true kingly way shall be showed by an Adept Possessor
of this great Secret. But I foresee this small Preface will not satisfy my
Readers alike; some perchance taxing me for presuming as it were to teach them
an art unknown to my self, when this has been my only purpose to relate a
History: yet I doubt not but this study of divine wisdom, will be sweeter to
some then any Nectar, or Ambrosia. I say no more, but conclude with that of
Julius Caesar Scaliger, That the end of truly wise men is the communicating of
wisdom: According to that of Gregory Nysse^ He that is good, Communicates
willingly his goods to others, for the property of good men is to be profitable
to others.

CHAP. II. The Testimony of diverse illustrious Authors of this Arcanum.
FIrst, Paracelsus in the Signature of Natural things, fol. 358 This is a true
sign of the tincture of Philosophers. That by its transmuting force, all
imperfect metals are changed, viz. (the white) into Silver, and (the red) into
the best Gold, if but the smallest part of it be cast into a Crusible upon
melted metal, etc.

Item, For the invincible Astrum of metalls conquereth all things and changes
them into a nature like to its self, etc. And this Gold and Silver is nobler
and better then that brought out of the Metallic Mines; and out of it may be
prepared better Medicinal Arcana's.

Item, Therefore ever Alchymist who has the Astrum of the Sun, can transmute
all red Metals into Gold, etc.

Item, Cur Tincture of Gold has Astral Stars within it: It is a most fixed
substance and immutable in the Multiplication. It is a powder having the
reddest color, almost like Saffron, yet the whole corporeal substance is
liquid like Rosin, transparent like Crystal, frangible like glass. It is of a
Ruby color and of the greatest weight, etc.

Read more of this in Paracelsus Heaven of Philosophers.

Item, Paracelsus in his seventh book of Transmutation of natural things says,
The Transmutation of Metals is a great natural mystery, not against natures
course, nor against Gods order, as many falsely judge. For the imperfect Metals
are transmuted into Gold, nor into Silver, without the Philosophers Stone.

Item, Paracelsus In his Manual of the Medicinal Stone of Philosophers says,
Our Stone is a heavenly Medicine, and more then perfect, because it cleanses
all filth from the Metals, etc.

Secondly, Henry Khunrade, in his Amphitheater of the eternal wisdom.

I have traveled much and visited those esteemed to know somewhat by
experience, and not in vain, etc. (Amongst whom, I call God to witness) I got
of one the universal Green Lion, and the blood of the Lion: That is Gold, not
vulgar but of the Philosophers. I have seen it, touched it, tasted it, and
smelt it: O how wonderful is God in his works* I say they gave me the prepared
Medicine, which I most fruicfully used toward my poor neighbor in most
desperate cases, and they did sincerely reveal to me the true manner of
preparing their medicine.

Item, This is the wonderful method which God only has given me immediately
and mediately, yet subordinately through Nature, Fire, Art and masters help (as
well living as silent) corporal and spiritua^ watching and sleeping.

Item, Fol. 202. I write not Fables, with thine own hands shall thou handle,
and with thine eyes see the Azoth, viz. the Universal Mercury of the
Philosophers, which alone, with its internal and external fire, is sufficient
for thee to get our Stone; nevertheless with a sympathetick Harmony, being
Magick-physically united with the Olympic fire, by an inevitable necessity,
etc.

Item, Thou shall see the Stone of the Philosophers (our King) go forth of the
bedchamber of his Glassie Sepulcher, in his glorified body, like a Lord of
Lords, from his Throne into this Theater of the world: That is to say,
regenerated and more then perfect; a Shining Carbuncle; a most temperate
splendor, whose most subtle and depurated parts are inseperably united into
one, with a concordial mixture exceedingly equal, Transparent like a Crystal,
Compact and most ponderous, easily fusible in fire, like rosin, or Wax* before
the flight of quick silver: yet flowing without smoke, entering into solid
bodies, and penetrating them like oil through Paper, dissoluble in every
liquor, and comiscible with it, fryable like glass, in a powder like Saffron:
but in the whole Mass shining red like a Rubie (which redness is a sign of a
perfect fixation and fixed perfection) Permanently coloring or tinging; fixed
in all temptations and trials, yea in the examination of the burning Sulphur
its self, and the devouring waters, and in the most vehement persecution of the
fire, always incombustible, and permanent as a Salamander, etc.

Item, The Philosophers Stone being fermented in its parts in the great world,
transforms it self into whatsoever it will by the fire; hence a Son of art may
perceive, why the Philosophers have given their Azoth the name of Mercury,
which adheres to bodies, etc.

And further, in the same place it is fermented with Metals, viz. The Stone
being in its highest whiteness, ^s fermented with pure Silver to the white. But
the Sanguine Stone, with pure Gold to the red. And this is the work of three
days, etc.

Thirdly, Helmont in the Book of Eternal Life, Fol. 590.

I have often seen the Stone and handled it, and have projected the fourth part
of one grain wrapped in paper, upon eight ounces of quink silver boiling in a
crusible, and the quicksilver with a small noise presently stood still from its
Flux, and was congealed like to yellow wax, and after a flux by blast, we found
eight ounces wanting, eleven grains of the purest Gold; Therefore one grain of
this powder would transmute nineteen thousand, one hundred and eighty six parts
^f Quicksilver into the best Gold: so that this powder is found to be of
Similary parts amongst Terrestrials, and does transmute infinite plenty of
impure metal into the best Gold, uniting with it, and so defends it from
Canker, rust, rottenness, and death; and makes it in a manner immortal against
all tortures of fire and art, and transfers it to a Virginean purity of Gold,
requiring only a fervent heat,

Item, In his Tree of Life, fol. 630. I am constrained to believe there is a
Gold and Silver making Stone or powder; for that I have diverse times made
projection of one grain thereof, upon some thousand grains of boiling
quicksilver, to a tickling admiration of a great multitude. And further as
before is rehearsed in the first Chapter. He also says,

He who gave me that powder had so much at least as would transmute two hundred
thousand pounds worth of Gold.

Item, He gave me about half a grain and thence were transmuted nine ounces and
three quarters of quicksilver into gold* and he who gave it me was but of one
evenings acquaintance, etc. Besides,

The most noble expert man in the art of Fire, Doctor Theodor. Retius of
Amsterdam, gave me John Helvetius a large medal with this inscription,
Theo-Divine Metamorphosis, etc. It was of Count Russ his making of Styria, and
Carynthia in Germany, of which one grain transmuted three pound of quicksilver
into pure Gold at all assayes.

Item, It is written that sixty years since Alexander Scotus made such a
projection at Hanaw in high Germany, etc.

I cannot here pass by Dr. Kufler in an extract of his Epistle.

First ^ found (in my Laboratory) an Aqua fortis, and another in the Laboratory
of Charles de Roy; I poured that Aqua Fortis, upon the Calx of gold prepared
after the vulgar manner, and after its third Cohobation, The Tincture of that
gold did rise and sublimed into the neck of the retort, which I mixed with two
ounces of silver precipitated in a common way, and I found that ounce in an
ordinary Flux transmuted an ounce and half of the said Silver into the best
gold, and a third of the remainder into white gold, and the rest was the purest
silver fixed in all examinations of the Fire; but after that time I could never
find more of that Aquafortis. And I Helvetius saw this white gold.

Item, Another rare Experiment done at the Hague.

There lived at the Hague 1664. a Silver Smith, named Grill, well exercised in
Alkymy, but poor according to the custom of Chemists. This Grill got some
Spirit of Salt, not of a vulgar preparation, from one Caspar Knotner a Cloth
Dyer, to use as he said for metals. The which afterward he poured upon one
pound of common Lead in an open glass, dish or platter, usual for confections
or conditures; and after two weeks there appeared a most curious Star of
Silver, swimming upon it, as if it had been delineated with a Pensel and pair
of Compasses by some ingenious Artist. Whereupon the said Grill told us with
joy he had seen the Signat Star of the Philosophers, whereof by chance he had
read in Basilius: I with many others saw the same to our great admiration. The
Lead in the interim remaining in the bottom of an ashy color. After seven or
nine days in July, the Spirit of Salt being exhaled by the heat of the air, the
Star settled on the Lead or Feces in the bottom, and spread it self upon it,
which many people saw. At last the said Grill took a part thereof, and out of
that pound of Lead, he found by computation twelve ounces of cupelled Silver;
and out of that twelve ounces, two ounces of the best Gold; and I Helvetius can
show some part of that spongeous Lead with part of ^he Star upon it, and also
some of the said Silver and Gold. Now whilst this envious Silly Grill,
conceal^ng the use, endeavored to get more of that spirit of Salt from
Knotner, the said Knotner having forgot what sort it was or else not finding it
sudden^y; was shortly after drowned, and Grill with his family dyed of the
Plague; so that none could make further benefit or trial of the said Progress
afterwar^ Indeed it would move admiration, that the Leads i^ ward nature should
appear in such a noble outwar^ form by the simple maturation of the said spir^
of Salt; neither is it less wonderful, that the Phil^sophers Stone should so
suddenly transmute all M^tals to Gold or Silver, having its virtue potenti^ly
implanted within its self, and raised into an ^ctive power; as is manifest in
Iron touched with the Load Stone.

But enough of this.

CHAP. III. The sooner a thing promised is performed, the more grateful.
Wherefor^ I return to my predestined History.
THe twenty seventh of December, 1666. in the afternoon, came a Stranger to my
house at the Hague, in a Plebeick habit, honest Gravity, an^ serious authority;
of a mean Stature, a little lon^ face, with a few small Pock holes, and most
blac^ Hair, not at all curled, a Beardless Chin, abo^ three or four and forty
years of age (as I guessed and born in North Holland. After salutation h^
beseeched me with a great reverence to pardon hi^ rude accesses, being a great
lover of the Pyrot^chnyan Art; adding, he formerly endeavored t^ visit me with
a friend of his, and told me he had read some of my small Treatises; and
particularly, that against the Sympathetick Powder of Sir Kenelm Digby, and
observed my doubtfulness of the Philosophical Mystery, which caused him to take
this opportunity, and asked me if I could not believe such a Medicine was in
nature, which could cure all Diseases, unless the principal parts (as Lungs,
Liver, etc.) were perished, or the predestined time of death were come. To
which I replied, I never met with an Adept, or saw such a Medicine, though I
read much of it, and have wished for it. Then I asked if he were a Physician,
but he preventing my question, said, he was a Founder of Brass, yet from his
youth learnt many rare things in Chemistry, of a friend particularly, the
manner to extract out of Metals many Medicinal Arcana's by force of fire, and
was still a lover of it. After other large discourse of experiments in Metals,
This Elias asked me if I could know the Philosophers Stone when I see it, I
answered not at all, though I had read much of it in Paracelsus, Helmont,
Basilius, and others; yet dare I not say I could know the Philosophers Matter.
In the Interim he took out of his Bosom Pouch or Pocket, a neat Ivory Box, and
out of it took three ponderous pieces or small Lumps of the Stone, each about
the bigness of a small Wallnut transparent, of a paile Brimstone color,
whereunto did stick the internal scales of the Crucible, wherein it appeared
this most noble substance was melted; The value of them might be judged worth
about Twenty Tuns of Gold, which when I had greedily seen and handled almost a
quarter of an hour, and drawn from the owner many rare secrets of its admirable
effects in humane and Metallic bodies, and other Magical properties, I
returned him this Treasure of Treasures; truly with a most sorrowful mind,
after the custom of those who conquer themselves, yet (as was but just) very
thankfully and humbly, I further desired to know why the color was yellow, and
not red, ruby color, or purple, as Philosophers write; he answered, that was
nothing, for the matter was mature and ripe enough. Then I humbly requested him
to bestow a little piece of the Medicine on me, in perpetual memory of him,
though but the quantity of a Coriander or Hemp Seed, He presently answered, Oh
no, no, this is not lawful though thou would give me as many Ducats in Gold
as would fill this room, not for the value of the matter, but for some
particular consequences, nay, if it were possible (said he) that fire could be
burnt of fire, I would rather at this instant cast all this substance into the
fiercest flames. But after he demanding* if I had another private chamber,
whose prospect was from the public Street, I presently conducted him in to the
best furnished room backwards, where he entered without wiping his Shoes (full
of snow and dirt) according to the custom in Holland, then not doubting but he
would bestow part thereof, or some great secret treasure on me, but in vain;
for he asked for a little piece of gold and pulling off his Cloak or Pastoral
habit, opened his Doublet, under which he wore five pieces of Gold hanging in
green silk Ribons, as large as the inward round of a small Pewter Trencher: and
this Gold so far excelled mine, that there was no comparison, for flexibility
and color; and these Figures with the Inscriptions engraven, were the
resemblance of them, which he granted me to write out.

D. 8. Page 16*
1 Amen Holy holy holy is the Lord our God and all things are full of his
hononr Leo. Libra. --

2 The marvelous wisdom of the wonderful Jehovah in the universal Book of
nature I am made the 26.th of August. 1666

3 The wonderful God; Nature and the spagyricall Art make nothing in vain.

4 To the Honor of the Everlasting. Invisible ^ivne only wise most high and
Omnipotent, God of Gods, holy. holy. holy Governor and praiseworthy Preserver
of all

5 Holy art thou O holy spirit, Halloluiah, ffye upon the Devil and never
speak of God without light Amen.



I being herewith affected with great admiration, desired to know where and how
he came by them. Who answered, An outlandish friend who dwelt some days in my
House (giving out he was a Lover of this art, and came to reveal this art to
me) taught me various Arts; First, How out of ordinary Stones and Christalls,
to make Rubies, Chrysolites and Sapphires, etc. much fairer then the ordinary.
And how in a quarter of an hour to make Crocus Martis, of which one dose would
infallibly cure the Pestilential Dissentary (or Bloody Flux) and how to make a
metallic Liquor most certainly to cure all kinds of Dropsies in four days: as
also a limpid clear water sweeter then honey, by which in two hours of it self,
in hot sand, it would extract the Tincture of Granats, Corals, Glasses, and
such like more, which I Helvetius did not observe. My mind being drawn beyond
those bounds, to understand how such a noble juice might be drawn out of the
metals, to transmute Metals; but the shade in the water deceived the dog of the
Morsel of Flesh in his mouth. Moreover he told me his said Master caused him to
bring a glass full of rain water, and fetch some refined Silver laminated in
thin plates, which therein was dissolved within a quarter of an hour, like Ice
when heated: And presently he drank to me the half, and I pledged him the other
half, which had not so much taste as sweet milk; whereby me thought I became
very light hearted. I thereupon asked if this were a Philosophical drink, and
wherefore we drank this Potion? He replied I ought not to be so curious. And
after he told me that by the said Masters directions, he took a piece of a
Leaden Pipe, Gutter or Sistern, and being melted put a little such sulphurious
powder out of his Pocket, and once again put a little more on the point of a
Knife, and after a great blast of Bellows in short time poured it on the red
stones of the Kitchen Chimney, which proved most excellent pure Gold; which he
said brought him into such a trembling amazement, that he could hardly speak:
But his Master thereupon again encouraged him, saying, Cut for thy self the
sixteenth part of this for a memorial, and the rest give away amongst the poor,
which he did. And he distributed so great an Alms as he affirmed (if my memory
fail not) to the Church of Sparrenda: But whether he gave it at several times
or once, or in the Golden Mass, or in Silver Coin, I did not ask. At last said
he *going on with the story of his master, he taught me thoroughly this almost
Divine Art. As soon as this his History was finished, I most humbly begged he
would show me the effect of Transmutation to confirm my faith therein, but he
dismissed me for that time in such a discreet manner, that I had a denial. But
withal promising to come again at three weeks end, and show me some curious
Arts in the Fire, and the manner of projection, provided it were then lawful
without prohibition. And at the three weeks end he came, and invited me abroad
for an hour or two, and in our walks having discourses of diverse of natures
secrets in the fire; but he was very sparing of the great Elixir, gravely
asserting, that was only to magnify the most sweet fame, and name of the most
glorious God; and that few men indeavored to sacrifice to him in good works,
and this he expressed as a Pastor or Minister of a Church; but now and then I
kept his ears open, entreating to show me the Metallic transmutation; desiring
also he would think me so worthy to eat and drink and lodge at my house, which
I did prosecute so eagerly, that scarce any Suitor could plead more to obtain
his Mistress from his Corrival; but he was of so fixed and steadfast a Spirit,
that all my endeavors were frustrate: yet I could not forbear to tell him
further I had a fit laboratory, and things ready and fit for an experiment. and
that a promised favor was a kind of debt; yea, true said he, but I promised to
teach thee at my return with this proviso, if it were not forbidden.

When I perceived all this in vain, I earnestly craved but a most small Crum or
Parcel of his powder or Stone, to transmute four Grains of Lead to Gold; and at
last out of his Philosophical commiseration, he gave me a Crum as big as a Rape
or Turnip seed; saying, receive this small Parcel of the greatest Treasure of
the World, which truly few Kings or Princes have ever known or seen: But I
said, This perhaps will not transmit four Grains of Lead, whereupon he bid me
deliver it him back, which in hopes of a greater Parcel I did; but he cutting
half off with his Nail, flung ^t into the fire, and gave me the rest wraped
neatly up ^n Blew Paper; saying, It is yet sufficient for thee. I answered him
(indeed with a most dejected Coun^enance) Sir, what n eans this; the other
being too ^ittle, you give me now less. He told me, If thou ^anst not manage
this; yet for its great proportion ^or so small a quantity of Lead, then put
into the Cru^ible two Drams, or half an Ounce, or a little more ^f the Lead;
for there ought no more Lead be put in ^he Crucible then the Medicine can work
upon, and ^ransmute: So I gave him great thanks for my dimi^ished Treasure,
concentrated truly in the Superlative ^egree, and put the same charily up into
my little Box; ^ying, I meant to try it the next day; nor would I ^eveal it to
any. Not so, not so; (said he) for ^e ought to divulge all things to the
Children of Art; which may tend to the singular honor of God, that so they may
live in the Theosophical truth, and not at all die Sophistically. After I made
my confession to him, that whilst this Mass of his Medicine was in my hands, I
endeavored to scrape a little of it away with my Nail, and could not forbear;
but scratcht off nothing, or so very little, that it was but as an indivisible
Atome, which being purged from my Nail, and wrapped in a Paper; I projected on
Lead, but found no transmutation; but almost the whole Mass of Lead flew away,
and the remainder turned into a mere glassy Earth; at which unexpected passage,
he smiling, said, thou art more dextrous to commit Theft, then to apply thy
Medicine; for if thou had only wraped up thy stolen prey in Yellow Wax, to
preserve it from the arising fumes of Lead, it would have penitrated to the
bottom of the Lead, and transmuted it to Gold; but having cast it into the
fumes, partly by vi lence of the vaprous fumes, and partly by the Sympathetick
alliance, it carried thy Medicine quite away: For Gold, Silver, Quicksilver,
and the like Metals, are corrupted and turn brittle like to Glass, by the
Vapors of Lead. Whereupon I brought him my Crusible wherein it was done, and
instantly b^ perceived a most beautiful Saffron like Tincture stic^ on the
sides; and promised to come next morning, by nine in the Morning, and then
would show me my error, and that the said Medicine should transmut^ the Lead
into Gold. Nevertheless I earnestly praye^ him in the interim to be pleased to
declare only for m^ present instruction, if the philosophic work co^ much, or
required long time. My friend, my frien^ (said he) thou art too curious to know
all things i^ an instant, yet will I discover so much; that neithe^ the great
charge, or length of time* can discourag^ any; for as for the matter, out of
which our Magistery is made, I would have thee know there is only two Metals
and Minerals, out of which it is prepared; but in regard the Sulphur of
Philosophers is much more plentiful and abundant in the Minerals; therefore it
is made out of the Minerals. Then I asked again, What was the Menstrum, and
whether the operation or working were done in Glasses, or Crusibles? He
answered, the Menstrum was a Heavenly Salt, or of a Heavenly Virtue, by whose
benefit only the wise men dissolve the Earthly Metallic body, and by such a
solution is easily and instantly brought forth the most Noble Elixir of
Philosophers. But in a Crusible is all the operation done and performed, from
the beginning to the very end, in an open fire, and all the whole work is no
longer from the very first to the last then four days, and the whole work no
more charge then three Florens; and further, neither the Mineral, out of which,
nor the Salt, by which it was performed, was of any great price. And when I
replied, the Philosophers affirm in their writings, that seven or nine Months
at the least, are required for this work. He answered, Their writings are only
to be understood ^y the true Adeptists; wherefore concerning time ^hey would
write nothing certain: Nay, without the ^ommunication of a true Adept
Philosopher, not one ^tudent can find the way to prepare this great Magi^tery,
for which cause I warn and charge thee (as a ^riend) not to fling away thy
Money and Goods to ^unt out this Art; for thou shall never find it To which I
replied thy Master, (though unknown) snew^d it thee; So may thou perchance
discover some^hing to me, that having overcome the Rudiments, (...) may find
the rest with little difficulty, according to ^he old saying. It is easier to
add to a foundation, then begin a new. He answered, In this Art it is quite
otherwise; for unless thou know the thing from the head to the heel, from
the Eggs to the Apples; that is, from the very beginning to the very end thou
know nothing, and though I have told thee enough; yet thou know not how
the Philosophers do make, and break open the Glassy Seal of Hermes, in which
the Sun sends forth a great splendor with his marvelous colored Metallic
Rays, and in which looking Glass the Eyes of Narcissus behold the transmutable
Metals* for out of those Rays the true Adept Philosophers gather their fire; by
whose help the Volatile Metals may be fixed into the most permanent Metals,
either Gold or Silver. But enough at present; for (...) intend (God willing)
once more to morrow at the ninth hour (as I said) to meet, and discourse
further on this Philosophical subject, and shall show you the manner of
Projection. And having taken his leave, he left me sorrowfully expecting him;
but the next day he came not, nor ever since: Only he sent an excuse at half
an hour past nine that morning, by reason of his great business, and promised
to come at three in the afternoon, but never came, nor have I heard of him
since; whereupon I began to doubt of the whole matter. Nevertheless late that
night my Wife (who was a most curious Student and enquir^^ after the Art,
whereof that worthy man had discours^* came soliciting and vexing me to make
experiment of that little spark of his bounty in that Art, whereby to be the
more assured of the truth; saying to me, unless this be done, I shall have no
rest nor sleep all th^^ night; but I wished her to have patience till next
morning to expect this Elias; saying, perhaps he will return again to show us
the right manner. In the mea^ time (she being so earnest) I commanded a fire to
be made (thinking alas) now is this man (though so divine in discourse) found
guilty of falsehood. And Secondly attributing the error of my projecting the
grand theft of his powder in the dirt of my Nail to his charge, because it
transmuted not the Lead that time; And lastly, because he gave me too small a
proportion of his said Medicine (as I thought) to work upon so great a quantity
of Lead* as he pretended and appointed for it, Saying further to my self, I
fear, I fear indeed this man has deluded me; Nevertheless my wife wrapped the
said matter in Wax, and I cut half an Ounce, or six Drams of old Lead, and put
into a Crusible in the fire, which being melted, my wife put in the said
Medicine made up into a small Pill or Button, which presently made such a
hissing and bubling in its perfect operation, that within a quarter of an hour
all the mass of Lead was totally transmuted into the best and finest Gold,
which made us all amazed as Planets struck. And indeed (had I lived in Ovids
Age) there could not have been a rarer Metamorphosis then this, by the Art of
Alkemy. Yea, could I have enjoyed Argus's Eyes, with a hundred more, I could
not sufficiently gaze upon this so admirable and almost miraculous a work of
nature; for this melted Lead (after projection) showed us on the fire the
rarest and most beautiful Colors imaginable; yea, and the greenest Color,
which as soon as I poured forth into ^n Ingot, it got the lively fresh Color
of Blood; and being Cold shined as the purest and most refined transplendent
Gold. Truly I, and all standing about me, were exceedingly startled, and did
run with this Aurified lead (being yet hot) unto the Goldsmith, who wondered at
the fineness, and after a short trial of Touch, the judged it most excellent
Gold in the whole world, and offered to give most willingly fifty Florens for
every Ounce of it.

The next day a rumor went about the Hague, and spread abroad; so that many
illustrious Persons and Students gave me their friendly visits for its sake:
Amongst the rest the general Say-master, or Examiner of the Coins of this
Province of Holland, Mr. Porelius, who with others earnestly beseeched me to
pass some part of it through all their Customary trials, which I did, the
rather to gratify my own Curiosity. Thereupon we went to Mr. Brectel a
Silver-Smith, who first tried it per Quartam, viz. he mixed three or four parts
of Silver with one part of the said Gold, and laminated, filed, or gramilated
it, and put a sufficient quantity of Aqua Fort thereto, which presently
dissolved the Silver, and suffered the said Gold to precipitate to the bottom;
which being decauted off, and the Calx or Powder of Gold dulcified with water,
and then reduced and melted into a body, became excellent Gold: And whereas we
feared loss, we found that each Dram of the said first Gold was yet increased,
and had transmuted a Scruple of the said Silver into Gold, by reason of its
great and excellent abounding Tincture.

But now doubting further whether the Silver was sufficiently separated from
the said Gold, we instantly mingled it with seven parts of Antimony, which we
melted and poured into a Cone, and blowed off the Regulus on a Test, where we
missed eight Grains of our Gold; but after we blowed away the rest of the
Antimony, or superfluous Scoria, we found nine Grains of Gold more for our
eight Grains missing, yet this was somewhat pale and Silver-like, which easily
recovered its full Color afterward; So that in the best proof of fire we lost
nothing at all of this Gold; but gained as aforesaid. The which proof again I
repeated thrice, and found it still alike, and the said remaining Silver out of
the Aqua Fortis, was of the very best flexible Silver that could be; So that in
the total, the said Medicine (or Elixir) had transmuted six Drams and two
Scruples of the Lead and Silver, into most pure Gold.

Behold I have now related the full History, from the Philosophical Eggs to the
Golden Apples, (as the Proverb goes) and though I have the Gold, yet where the
Philosopher and Elias is I know not; but wheresoever he is the Almighty God
(protector of all Creatures) shelter him from all danger under hiswings; and
bring him to Eternal bliss and happiness in his heavenly Kingdom, after the end
of his full pilgrimage in this life, for the succor and relief of
Christendom. and the whole world, Amen.

CHAP. IV. I betake me now to the Dialogue between Elias the Artist, and the
Phisician, to express what is past, and all other passages.
Elias GOd save you Helvetius? I have heard of your curious search after
natural things, and read thy Books, particularly against Kenelme Digbys
Sympathetical Powder, where he glories to to heal all wounds at a distance.
Truly I delight incredibly in all such things, which we see in this Lookglass
naturally implanted in the Creatures, whether Sympathetick or Antipathetick:
for the inexhaustible Treasures of the Divine light and Deity (abundantly
granted us) may be perfectly known out of the Creatures under the Sky, or in
the womb of the Earth, or in the Seas brought forth. That with all their gifts
and powers (protentially in them) they might be be beneficial to restore health
and help to mortal man.


Physician. Sir, You are the the welcomest Guest; for a philosophical discourse
of nature is the only refreshing of my Spirit, and Salutiferous nourishment;
come I pray into this Chamber.


Elias. Sir, It seems you have here a whole shop of the fiery Art of Vulcan,
and perhaps all Spagyrical Medicines, most exactly drawn out of the Mineral
Kingdom. But Sir? For what end so many Medicaments? when by a most few we may
much sooner and safelyer restore the health of man, if the distemper be not
deadly, either out of defect of nature, or putrefaction of any noble part, or
the whole consumption of the radical humidity; for in such desperate cases
neither Galenical Cures, nor Paracelsical Tinctures can be helpful; but it is
not thus in ordinary diseases, where nevertheless often men are constrained
before their fatal Term, to travail out of this most sweet light amongst the
dead, for want of speedy and potent remedies.


Phisician. Sir, I apprehend by your discourse you are either a Physician, or
an expert Student in Chemistry* Verily I believe there are more excellent
Medicaments, and an universal Medicine, which might prolong life* until the
determinate end, and also cure and heal all distempers in man's body, but who
can show the way to such a Fountain, whence such a Medicinal Juice may be
obtained, perhaps none amonst men.


Elias. Truly I am only a Founder of Brass, yet almost from my Cradle my Genius
prompted me to search Curiosities in the fiery Art, and I have diligently
searched through the internal nature of Metals, and though now I forbear
assidual labor and accurate Scrutiny, yet such labors and lovers are
delightful to me; and I believe the most high, great and good God, will in this
our Age afford his Spagyrick Sons the Metallic mysteries gratis yet, by
praying, and laboring to attain them.


Physician. I grant God affords his commendable good things gratis, yet he has
seldom given or does easily sell to his Sons this Medicinal Nectar for nothing.

For we know certainly that infinite numbers of Chemists have and do still draw
water through a Sieve, whilst they presume to prepare the universal Stone of
Philosophers, and out of the Books of triumphing Adeptists, none can learn the
manner of preparing it, or know their first matter. And whilst one searches on
the lowest root and foot of the Mountain, he never ascends to the highest top,
where only he can eat and drink the Ambrosia and Nectar of the Macro-Sophists
or Philosophers. In the Interim it is the part of a good Physician, for want of
that universal Elixir, to keep a pure and safe Conscience, and apply to
diseases such restoring remedies in which he certainly finds the effect and
Virtue of Curing them. Therefore in all desprate Diseases I use such most
simple Medicaments, that the Patients either speedily recover, or are brought
into some way of their former better health.

For there are various kinds of Salts generated in the Glandules and Lymphatick
Vessels, after the putrefaction of this or that received nourishment, which
afterward flourish out in various humors, and cause either internal or
external distempers* For experience teaches us, that as many constitutions or
Complexions, so many diversities of Diseases, although it be the very same
Disease in general. As we have experience in them who drink Wine, where diverse
operations presently manifest themselves.

For Peter having drunk Wine, presently begins to be angry and furious on the
contrary: Paul seems to have a Lamblike timidity; but Matthew sings, and Luke
weeps.


Item. From the contagious Scorbutical poison, the Radical Juice of Peter in
his Lymphatick Vessels and Kernels is turned into Acidity, which abstructs the
passages and Organs of all the whole body. From whence springs up under the
skin discolourd Azure or Skie-colour spots; but in the time of the Plague they
bud forth in the likeness of Corns of Pepper.

But the Juice of the same parts in Paul is changed into an opening bitterness
from whence in the skin grow red spots under the Arms and Legs* like unto
fleabites; but in the plague time Carbuncles.

But the Juice or humidity of the same parts in Matthew is turned somewhat sweet
and easy to be putrified, whence bud forth under the skin watery Tumors on his
Arms and Legs, the like almost you may see in Hydropical Patients; but in the
pestilence rises pestilential Tumors.

But of the same parts in Luke, the Juice is changed into a sharp salty
dryness, whence come forth under the skin of his Arms and Legs, precipitations
of the ordinary ferment of the flesh, and such exsiccations as commonly fall
out in the consumtive Atrophia; yea; most often into the true Atrophia: But in
the Plague, come forth most ardent swellings, with distractedness until death.

Behold my friend! No Physician, by one universal Medicine can Cure this only
Disease of the Scorbutickpestilential or Febrile-poyson, but indeed by means of
a particular Vegetable or Mineral granted in nature from God, we may; for I can
succor and handle all Scorbutical patients, with one Scorbutical Herb, as
Scurvy Grass, or Sorrel, or Fumitary, or Baccabungia, called Brooklime or Red
Coleworts; yea, much less can we succor them with one remedy compounded of all
these diverse species; for as much as there is such an Antipathy between
Scurvy Grass and Sorrel, as there is between fire and water, and the same
Antipathy is also observed between the Herb Fumitary, and Baccabungy: Therefore

The Corrector of Peter's Scorbutical, coloring Salty, and sower Poison, is
made with the bitter Volatile Salt of the Herb Scurvy Grass.

The Corrector of Paul's Scorbutic, tinging, salty and bitter poison, is made
with the fixed sour Salt of the Herb Sorel.

And the Corrector of Mathew's Scorbutic salty tinging sweet and moistening
poison, is made with the help of the fixed bitter and drying Sulphur of the Herb
Fumitary.

But the Corrector of Luke's Scorbutical Tingent, Salty, sharp and drying
poison, is made by the help of the sweet moistening Mercury of the Herb
Baccabungy, Brooklime or Red Coleworts: As out of the External signature of
those Herbs is very easy to judge the specific internal remedy, against these
diverse Scorbutical Diseases. Verily my feiend; if this be well observed, a
prudent Physician will doubt of the universal Medicine.


Elias. I shall easily grant all which thou have Argued, yet the fewest of
Physicians observe this Method. In the interim it is not at all impossible that
there is also in the Kingdom of Minerals (being the highest) an universal
Medicine, by whose only benifit we may effect and afford all which are
recounted by thee of many Remedies out of the lowermost Kingdom of Vegetables.
But our most great and good God for some weighty Reasons, has not given this
kind of magnificent Charismal gift or supereminent Science promiscuously to all
Philosophers; but has revealed the same to a few, though all the Adeptists
agree that this Science is true* and that none ought to doubt of the truth
thereof in the least.


Physician, Sir besides the mentioned things, there are yet other observations
strenuously opposing the operation of an universal medicine; Partly in respect
unto men's age and strength; Partly by reason of the Sex, and other
circumstances, whilst there is a plain difference between the tender and
strong: Either by nature or education, and between the male and the female;
young man and maid; and between the beginning, middle, or end of the disease;
And it must be known if the disease be inveterate, or but lately have invaded
the party; and lastly, if the Ferment in this disease be promoted, or in
another be precipitated: For the Effervency of the Ferment is made in the
Stomach, or intestines, and indeed many contradictions are against the
Universal Medicine, and few Physicians have Thomas a Didymus Spectacles at
their fingers ends.


Elias, You have argued very Philosophically; for so many men, so many minds.
And as sweet Music pleases not every Mydas ears, or the same meats and drinks
please every Palate: So the judgments of unskilful persons are very different
concerning this Universal Medicine, both for humane and Metallic Bodies: And
certainly the operation of this differs much from particular Medicines; Some
whereof nevertheless are in a manner universal, or so esteemed, as the Herb
Scurvygrass, curing all sorts of the Scurvy, marked with Azure spots; Sorrel,
every Scurvy with red spots; Beccabungia (red Coleworts or Brooklime) Atrophia,
or the Consumptive kind: and Fumitary Tumors of another kind: Especially with
such Phisicians to whom the abovesaid observations are in high esteem. Besides
there is a vast difference between the universal Medicine of true Philosophers,
which revives all the vital spirits, and the particular Medicament of a slight
cure; where only the venom of humors boiling against nature (in this man
sour; in another bitter, etc. and in one Saline* in another sharp) is
corrected: and if these corruptions be not presently removed by the usual
Emunctories of Mouth, Nostrils, Stool, Urine, or Sweat; then certainly the
Corruption of one, begets another disease; for every spark of Fire having food,
and not quenched, will arise to the greatest conflagration But if there be a
defect in the motions of the Vital Spirits, then this is impossible to be
effected by particulars; wherefore it concerns every conscientious Physician to
learn how he may promote the motion of the vital spirits, to a natural
digestible heat, which is most securely and best performed by our universal
Medicine* by which the sick are notably recreated; for as soon as this more
then perfect Medicine removes the mortifying seeds, Nature is restored, and so
lost health recovered; and that only by a harmonious Sympathy between it and
the vital Spirits; Wherefore the Adept do call it the Myster, of Nature,
defense of old Age, and against all Sicknesses, yea, of the very Plague and
Pestilence; For this being a kind of Salamander, communicates its virtue and
(as a Salamander) makes a man live till his last appointed time against all the
Fiery Epidemical Darts of the angry Heavens or their Malevolent Influences.


Physician, Sir! I understand by your discourse, That this Medicine does
nothing to the correcting of depraved or corrupt humors, but only by
strengthening the Vital Spirits, and our Balsamic Nature; but other practical
Chemists teach how to separate he impure from the pure, and ripen the unripe* o
make the bitter become a little sower or Acid* and the sower sweet, and so to
turn sharp into mild* mild into sharp, sower into sweet, and sweet into sower.
Also I understand you say this universal medicine cannot prolong life beyond
its prefixed time, but only preserves it from all venom and deadly sickness,
which agrees with the vulgar belief, That the Life depends only upon the will
of God. But passing by these things, my question is still, whether a man's
former nature may be converted into another new nature? So that a slothful man,
may be changed into a diligent nimble man and a Melancholy man by nature be
made a merry man; or the like.


Elias, Not at all Sir, for no Medicine has power to transform the nature of
man in such a manner, no more then wine drunk by diverse men changes the
persons nature, but only provokes or deduceth what is in man potentially into
Act; For the universal Medicine works by recreating the vital spirits, and so
restores that health which was suppressed for a time. In the same manner the
heat of the Sun never transmutes the Herbs and Flowers, but stirs up their
potential powers to become active. For a man of melancholy temper is again
raised up to his natural melancholy disposition, and a merry man to become
merry. And so in all desperate diseases, it is a present and most excellent
preservative. Nay if there could be any prolonging of Life. Then Hermes,
Paracelsus, Trevisan, and many others having had the said Medicine would never
have undergone the Tyranny of death, but have prolonged their lives perhaps to
this very day: It were therefore the part of a mad Lunatic to believe that any
Medicine in the world could prolong life longer then God limits.


Physician, Worthy Sir, I agree now cheerfully to all you have said touching
the Universal Medicine, being no less regular then fundamental; Yet till I can
prepare the same my self, it profits me not: Indeed some Illustrious men have
written of it so cautiously in dark Aenygma s, that very few can understand
their progress to the end; and if one could purchase all these Authors, this
short life might be therein consumed, and not attain the thing. It remains
therefore only to pray and labor, Ora* and labora, Deus dat omni horae, Work
and Pray, God gives every day.


Elias, Seldom indeed can this Art of Arts be picked out of Books without
demonstration from some true Adeptist.

But waving this, let us come to Transmutation of Metals, by the most noble
Tincture of which many have written, but it is true, few Disciples attain this
Arcanum.


Physician, Your convincing Arguments, and my fore going Experiments, I believe
all you say; for Dr. Kuffler with the Tincture of one ounce of gold, projected
on two ounces of Silver, transmuted as is said* an ounce and half into the
purest gold, and a third of the remainder into white gold, and the rest was
still the purest Silver imaginable. And Van Helmonts experiment proves the
same, But especially Alexander Scotus, and Count Russes Experiment, well known
at Prague, and as here you may see the inscriptiors done before the Roman
Emperor Caesar Ferdinando the Third; Where with one grain of Tincture were
transmuted three pound of Mercury into the noblest pure gold. Yet I confess I
never saw a true Adeptist, or projection made, and therefore cannot so
absolutely conclude these things to be true.


Elias, My Friend, The art will remain true, whether F. 1. Page 34.
LIKE AS RARE MEN HAVE THIS ART: SO COMES IT VERY RARELY TO LIGHT PRAISE BE
TO GOD FOR EVER; WHO DOES COMMVNICATE A PART OF HIS INFINITE POWER TO US HIS
MOST ABJECT CREATVRES

THE DIVINE METAMORPHOSIS

EX HIBITED AT PRAGVE XV IAN Ac MDCXLVIII IN THE PRESENCE OF HIS SACRED
CAESAREAN Mty. FERDINAND THE THIRD

The Thickness of that piece of gould

^ount Rusz, uppermost Hill master in Steyer and Carinthiae (two Provinces of
high Germany) ^ath with one only grain of Tincture transmuted ^^ree pounds of
Quicksiluer into pure gold fixed ^all assayes and proofs out of which was cast
^his piece of Gould

F. 2. Page 35.
1 Amen Holy holy holy is the Lord our God and all things are full of his
hononr Leo. Libra. --

2 The marvelous wisdom of the wonderful Jehovah in the universal Book of
nature I am made the 26th. of August. 1666

3 The wonderful God; Nature and the spagyricall Art make nothing in vain.

4 To the Honor of the Everlasting, Invisible trivne only wise most high and
Omnipotent, God of Gods, holy. holy. holy Governor and praiseworthy Preferuer
of all

5 Holy art thou O holy spirit, Halleluiah, ffye upon the Devil and never
speak of God without light Amen.

you believe or not: For Example. In the singular exalted sulphurous virtue in
the Loadstone (by its only touch derives a sympathetick virtue into the
sulphurous Iron to become another Magnet or Loadstone by its touch. So does it
happen in the Philosophers Stone, in the which is all that the wisemen seek.
Now in regard their writings are so numerous and dark: it is to be wished one
Laconick short Epitomy were extracted out of all for the said Art to be clearly
manifested in a short time, with little labor and expense; and so a most easy
Transite made to the best Authors. But look here, I will now show you the true
matter of Philosophers to confirm your belief.


Physician, Is this glassy yellow Mass it indeed? I fear you do but jest or
dally with me.


Elias, Yea truly, thou have now in thy hands the most precious thing in the
world, the true Philosophers stone, none ever more real or can be better.
neither shall any have another, and I my self have wrought it from the very
beginning, to the very end. Then stepping into a more private Room he showed me
these five pieces of pure gold, made out of Lead by the Philosophical Tincture,
which says he, I wear in memory of my Master: Now by thy great reading can
thou judge of what matter or substance it is made and composed.


Physician, Sir I cannot judge, but it seems you learnt it not of your self,
but had a master instructed you to make it. Now I beseech you Sir, bestow a
little crum of the same upon me, if it be but as much as a Coriander or Hemp
Seed, only to transmute four grains of Lead into gold.


Elias, I confess an honest good man first showed me the possibility, and then
the art and manner to prepare the Medicine, but to give thee any of this
Medicine is not lawful, though I had for it as many Ducats as would fill this
room; not for my esteem of the matter, which is of no price at all, but for
other private considerations, and to make it so appear, I would now through all
into the fire to be consumed, if it were possible for the fire to destroy fire.
Be not therefore covetous, for thou have seen more then many Kings or Princes
that have sought for it. But I must now depart, and purpose to come again at
three weeks end, and then if not hindered or forbid, I will abundantly satisfy
thy curiosity to see transmutation; in the Interim, I warn you not to tamper
with this dangerous art, least you lose your fame and substance in the ashes.


Physician, Sir, What shall I do, if it be not lawful for you to bestow so
small a part of your tincture, because of your Philosophical Oath, taken at
your drinking the dissolved Silver in the rain water. Yet know I do eagerly
desire to learn this, and I believe Adam (thrown out of Paradise for eating an
Apple) would again desire this golden Fruit out of Atlantas Garden, though to
hazard the destruction you premonish. And though I have not yet seen
transmutation from you, I thank you for your great friendship in forewarning me
of the dangers, and showing me what I have seen, and till your return, I shall
delight my self with what is discovered both of your Medicine and Person. But I
fear Sir, if any King, Prince, or Potentate should know the same (which God
forbid) they would perchance imprison and torture you, till you should reveal
all the art to them.


Elias, I never showed the Stone to any in the world, but to you, except one
aged man, and henceforth shall not to any* but if any King, or other, (which I
hope God will not permit) should Rack me to pieces, or burn me alive, I would
not reveal it to them, neither directly nor indirectly, as many circumferanious
Physicians, Mountebanks, Vagabonds, and others pretend to do.


Physician, Good Sir tell me in the Interim, who are the best Authors, in
regard by experience you are best able to judge.


Elias, Indeed Doctor I have not read many books, but amongst those I have
read, none more curious then Cosmopolite Sendivogius, The Dutch Borger
Derwerel, and Brother Basilins 12 Keys, I can lend thee Sendivogius at my
return, in whose obscure words the Truth lies hidd, even as our Tincture lies
enclosed in the minerals and Metallic bodies.


Physician, Sir, I give you most hearty thanks for your exceeding kindness and
love, Believing that mavelous and efficacious Essences and Tinctures, lies
hid in Metals and Minerals under the external rinds and shells of their bodies;
though I find few so expert in the Fire, to know how to pick out their Kernel
Philosophically, for (as Isaac Holland writes) the outward body of every
Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral, is like to a Terrestrial Province, within which
excellent spiritual essences do retire and dwell, Wherefore it is needful that
the sons of art should know how, by some saline, fit, suitable Ferment (pleasant
and agreeable to the Metallic Nature) to tame and subdue, dissolve, separate,
and concentrate, not only the Metallic, Magnetic virtue, wherewith to Tinge;
but also Philosophically to multiply the same, in their golden or silvery
Homogenity. For we see that the bodies of all creatures are not only easily
destroyed, but as soon as they cease to live, they hurry to their graves in
putrefaction, viz. to their old Chaos and darkness of Orcus* wherein they were
before they were brought to light by Creation in this World. But alas who or
what man can or will show us this Art in the Metallic Kingdom.


Elias* Sir I confess you judge right of the natural destruction of things, and
if it be Gods pleasure, he can (as to me) send one (sooner then thou hopest) to
show thee the manner to destroy Metals and Minerals, in a true Philosophical
manner, and to gather their inward souls. In the mean time implore the blessing
of this great God, who does all things as he pleases. To whom I recommend
thee, whose watchful eyes are always open, over all his regenerated Sons, in
and through Christ Jesus So be sure I am your friend. and once more Farewell.


THus my Friend Elias taking leave, left me three weeks, and to this very day;
nevertheless, (as a Spur) he impressed all these things deep in my mind, and
Paracelsus confirmed them, saying, That in, with, of, and by metals
spiritualized and cleansed, are perfect Metals made, and also the living gold
and Silver of Philosophers, as well for humane as metallic bodies. Wherefore
if this guest my Friend, had taught me the manner of preparing this Spiritual
and Celestial Salt he spoke of, by and with which I might (as it were) within
their own matrix, gather the spiritual Rays of Sun or moon, out of the Corporal
Metallic substances, Then truly from his own light he had so enlightened me,
that I should have known how Magnetically (by a Sympathetick power) in other
imperfect corporeal metals, their internal souls might be Clarified and Tinged,
so that their own similary bodies being of like kind, might be transmuted into
Gold or Silver, according to the nature of red Seed, into a red body; or of the
white Seed into a white and pure body; For Elias told me that Sendivogius his
Calybs was the true Mercurial Metallic humidity, by help of which (without any
Corrosive) an Artist might separate the fixed rays of the Sun or Moon, out from
their own bodies, in a naked Fire, in open Crusible, and so make them Volatile
and Mercurial, fit for a dry Philosophic Tincture (as he partly communicated
and showed me before he went) to transmute the Metals For all learned Chemists
must consent, that Pyrotechny is the mother and Nurse of many noble Sciences
and Arts, and they can easily judge from the Colors of the Chaos of metals in
the fire, what metallic body is therein. And truly, every day, metals and
transparent stones* are yet so procreated in the bowels of the Earth, from
their proper, noble, vapourons seed, with a spiritual Tingent Sulphurous Seed,
in their diverse Salty Matrixes; for the common Sulphur, (or the Sulphur of any
pure or impure metal, whilst yet conjoined with its own body) being mingled
only with Saltpeter in the burning heat of Fire, will be easily changed into
the hardest and most fixed Earth. And this Earth is afterward easily changed
by the air into most clear water, and this water after by a stronger fire,
according to the nature of either pure or impure metallic Sulphur admixed) is
turned into Glass, colored with various and very beautiful colors. Almost so
likewise is a Chicken generated and hatched out of the white of an Egg, by a
gentle natural heat; and thus also from the seminal Bond of Life of any metal,
is made a new and much more noble metal, by a heat convenient to a salty fires
nature, Though few Chemists know perfectly how the internal virtues of metals
(always magnetically moving according to their harmony or disconsonancy) are
distinguished; and why one metal has such a singular Sympathy or Antipathy
with the other metal, as is seen in the Magnet with Iron, in Mercury with Gold,
in Silver with Copper, very remarkably. And so in some are notably found an
Antipathy, as Lead against Tin, Iron against Gold, Antimony against Silver: And
again, Lead against Mercury. There are 600 such Sympathetical and
Antipathetical Annotations in the animal^ and vegetable Kingdom, as Authors
have written

Thus Candid Reader have I here printed what I have seen and done, for with
Seneca I desire to know only that I may teach others: nay if wisdom were given
conditionally to be kept secret, I would reject it. If any shall yet remain
doubtful, let him with a living faith believe in his Christ Crucified, and in
him become a new Creature, through the most strict way of regeneration, and be
fixed therein in hope, and use true love and charity to his neighbor, till his
life be justly, chastely, and holily sinisht, thereby safely to sail through the
wicked and impudent Sea of this world, to the peaceable Haven of Heaven, where
is an everlasting Sabbath with true Christians and Philosophers, in the true
Jerusalem. John Frederick Helvetius, Count Russ in Syria, and Carynthia in
Germany, with one grain of Tincture, transmuted three pound of into pure at all
assayes.

THE GOLDEN ASS Well managed, AND MYDAS Restored to Reason.

Or a new Chemical Light appearing as a day Star of Comfort to all under
Oppression or Calamities, as well Illiterate, as Learned, Male as Female; to
ease their Burdens and provide for their Families.

WHEREIN The Golden Fleece is Demonstrated to the blind world, and that good
Gold may be found as well in Cold as Hot Regions (though better in hot) within
and without through the universal Globe of the Earth, and be profitably
extracted: So that in all places where any Sand, Stones, Gravel, or Flints are,
you cannot so much as place your footing, but you may find both Gold, and the
true matter of the Philosophers Stone. And is a Work of Women and play of
Children.

Written at Amsterdam, 1669. by John Rodolph Glauber, The bright Sun of our
Age, and Lover of Mankind, like a true Elias riding on this Golden Ass, in a
Fiery Chariot.

And Translated out of Latin into English, in briefer Notes, 1670. by W. C.
Esquire. True Lover of Art and Nature, and well wisher to all men, especially to
the poor distressed Household of Faith; The true Catholic Church, and body of
Christ, Dispersed through many Forms of Religions, through the whole World, as
the perfect Israelites.

The Thickness of that piece of gould
LIKE AS RARE MEN HAVE THIS ART SO COMES IT VERY RARELY TO LIGHT PRAISE BE TO
GOD FOR EVER; WHO DOES COMMVNICATE A PART OF HIS INFINITE POWER TO US HIS MOST
ABJECT CREATVRES

THE DIVINE METAMORPHOSIS EXHIBITED AT PRAGVE XV IAN Ac. MDCXLVIII IN THE
PRESENCE OF HIS SACRED CAESAREAN Mty. FERDINAND THE THIRD



Count Rusz uppermost Hill master in Steyer and Carinthioe (two Provinces of
high Germany) has with one only grain of Tincture transmuted three pounds of
Quicksiluer into pure gold fixed in all assayes and proofs out of which was
cast this piece of Gould

THE EPISTLE Of VV. C. TO THE CHRISTIAN AND COURTEOUS READER. Job 28. 6. and 2
Esdras 8. 2.
Reader,
GOd who made Man out of Earth or Clay, and out of Stones could raise up Seed
to Abraham, has here sent thee Manna, and commanded these very Stones to yield
thee Bread, in these Calamitous times, or rather that which may satisfy thy
honest and moderate wishes more for Food and all necessaries (as was intended
in the Fiction of Mydas) For every thing thou touchest by this Art may turn to
Gold, and purchase whatsoever thou need for thy self, Friends and Family,
without borrowing, extortion, or fear of want, or wearing longer Ears then will
become a rational man and a good Christian; And so thou may prove a true
Fortunatus, or Providential Mydas, and procure thee a lighter heart then many
that have a heavier Purse, which* may be exhausted, lost or spent on their
Lusts, and yet not satisfy their fears or covetous desires, though in present
Plenty of Corn and Wine. Yea, if thou have Grace and Wisdom, out of the very
Stones in the Streets, or Jobs Dunghill, thou may raise the Golden Fleece,
though in extract and Jobs small quantity, and may gain the Philosophers
Stone, and withal make gold more plentiful then in Solomon's days, and ride in
Triumph over the World on this Golden Ass, by Glaubers new Chemical Light,
without old Balams property. Quid non Mortalia pectora cogis Auri, sacra fames.
Let this Art therefore breed in thee a holy hunger of God, rather then Gold,
and improve this Talent to Gods Honor that sent it, and to thy honest
Neighbors good; and fear not to be the poorer, though thou light thy
Neighbors candle, by communicating something of this Art, or the Fruicts
thereof liberally, as thou would be done unto; That so all may glorify the
Almighty giver for his great Treasures and bounty, and live together in Peace
and Love, without Griping, Grudging, or Anxiety; whence may spring the true
Golden Age, so long expected and desired, with Halcion days; Neither need
thou be sollicitous for thine or their posterity, least they want bread, if
thou give them but these Stones with the use thereof for a Legacy. I have no
other message at present, but to wish thee herewith to be content, and provide
thee Treasures for Eternity, without taking notice of this mean messenger that
brought it hither to thee, who though invisible or unknown, shall remain

Thy well wishing Friend and Servant, W. C. Or twice five hundred.

L'aurum amice elegis Rus.
POSTSCRIPT.
TO help thee here a little forwarder. Take four ounces (or what quantity of
powder of Emery you please, such as Cutlers use, and is bought at the
Ironmongers, or else good Yellow, Red, or Purple Talcum, or other good Stones
or Minerals, Dissolve it in Spirit of Salt, of Glaubers cheapest making,
Distill or Evaporate the Menstruum gently, or precipitate the Tincture by
Lixiviat Salt, with or or the properest Loadstone, and reduce all by, but be
sure not to be too hasty for a Regulus; But when you think it sufficiently
washed and digested, cast it into a Cone for the first Regulus, Then with
Glaubers Martial Discipline, Mortify the remaining sulphurious matter, and you
have a courser Sol, and after a Lunary Body. Then begin again, and add the last
to the first, and turn Ixions wheel in the Fire as often as you please, till you
find good profit.

JOHN RODOLPH GLAVBER'S EPISTLE TO THE READER,
Reader,
SAtan with his Followers seeks nothing more, then the destruction of Mankind,
and to hinder him from the gifts and favor of God. Wherefore I desire thee not
to slight or judge of these things rashly, which thou know not; but first
prove and try them thoroughly, and although you should fail (as it may easily
happen to the inexpert) yet blame not my writings or good intentions* but your
own unfit Capacity, or inexperience; for I write nothing here, but what I have
often effected, and can perform and prove true every hour. Consult therefore
first with other more experienced searchers, whom I may hope have not all erred
and lost their labor in so easy a work, that even a Boy of ten years old may
understand it possible and Fecible.

Nevertheless believe not that I should set down here the manner of Extracting
Gold in Lumps or great quantities for profuse usage, but I shall rather take
heed and beware of that.

N. B. Now as I said throughout all parts of the World, and in every sort of
Sand, Pebbles, and Stones, is held good Gold, excepting Lime-Stones, which
alone seldom or never have any Gold, else in all Rocks of Greety Sand, Flints
of whatever color; also in Gravel, Scurfe, or Ballast on Mountains, Valleys,
in the Bowels of the Earth, the Sea, Ponds, Pits, Rivers, and Floods, (none at
all excepted) there is Gold to be found but Sand and Stones, hold most in hot
Countries; and although they be white, clear, and shining, without the least
color, yet there is some Gold; Yea, even sometimes in Clay grounds, and in
Artificial baked Tyles and Bricks.

The first kind of Proof
TAke white Sand or Flints, wherein you think there is not the least Gold, to
which join three parts of Minium, or any other powder or Calx of Lead Flux this
mixture in a Crusible covered in a wind Furnace, or by blast of Bellows, and
so let them flow well together for one hour, and it will turn to yellow glass,
then pour it forth least by delay it pierce the Crusible, and run among the
ashes. Powder this glass, and mix therewith half its weight of Sal Alcali, or
Soap, or Pot ashes: then put this mixture into an Iron Pot or Crusible, where
you may first put Nails or other Bitts of Iron, then Flux this in the Fire, and
the (...) Lead will be reduced into a body again by the said Iron; pour out
this into an ingot or Cone, and the Regulus of Lead will sink to the bottom,
and the Flints or Sand (like Scurffe and Dross) will swim on the top, but the
Lead will contract such a black roughness, that it will not easily flow. For
the which take this remedy. Place this Regulus in a Wind Furnace, and upon one
ounce of the melted Regulus cast a Dram, or something more of Salt Peter, and
let them flow together; Then the Sal Nitre will draw the black roughness from
the Lead into a Scurffe, which being poured forth and melted again, becomes
tractable and white, and will easily flow upon a Test, but if you have not the
skill to effect this work; put your black rough Regulus of Lead into such a
Crusible or Test, as the vulgar call Treibscerbe (which is like a large hard
Crusible bottom) cover it, and let it purge it self in the fire for half an
hour, or at least for a quarter, and it will be white and tractable. But the
washing or cleansing by Salt Peter is far better* weigh a penny weight, dram or
scruple of this, and a like quantity of Lead; Test them in a hard fixed Cupel
apart, and this Regulus will hold a grain of Gold, and the Common Lead only a
grain of Silver.

The Second kind of Proof.
TAke one part of white Flints or Sand, mix thrice the quantity of Salt of
Tartar, or any other Alcaly, and therewith fill a third part of a Crusible (but
not more least it run over) let it stand half an hour to be glowing red, and it
will turn to a white Pellucid glass, pour it into fair water, or rather into a
Lee; and the Sand or Flints will be dissolved into a thick Oil or Water. In
this water digest for an hour or two, half an ounce of filed, rasped, or rather
scraped Lead, and the Lead will extract a spiritual Gold from the said Water or
Flints, and will thereby become yellowish; which take forth day, and Test on a
Copel, and you shall find a grain of Gold, but out of so much common Lead will
be only a grain of Silver, which is the proportion to be found in any Lead;
whence you may certainly conclude that white Flints and Sand contain in them
spiritual Gold, the which being joined with Metals become Corporal.

The third kind or manner of Proof.
DIssolve or Lead in Aqua fortis* and pour it forth into Salt water, and all
the Lead will precipitate and fall to the bottom, in a white Calx or Powder,
mix three parts of this Calx with one part of powder of Flints or Sand, and add
half so much Salt out of Lees or other Alcali, mix them and put them into an
iron Crusible, where old nails or bits of Iron be put in, fill it to the top
and cover it close for half an hour to melt and flow, till all the sharp
corrosive spirits in the Lead be mortified by the Iron, and then the Lead will
be reduced to a body as before, which cast into a Taper pointed Ingot or Cone,
and the Regulus of Lead will sink to the bottom, the which must be washed and
cleansed by Salt Peter, or in a fixed Copel under a Tyle, till it purge out the
dross or faeces, then Test it, and as much of the same Lead severally apart,
and the one yields a grain of Gold, and the other only a grain of Silver, as
before is sufficiently expressed.

The true manner of proving all Flints, Rocky Stones, Pibbles, and Sands, etc.
Legitimately and Infallibly; whether they contain much Gold or little; With a
plain Reason for all.
TAke four ounces of Sand or Flints, or other Stones, neal them red hot in a
Crusible, and quench them in cold water, and so they become tractable to be
beaten or ground to powder. Put these four ounces of powder into a Glass
Cucurbit or Retort, and pour thereon two ounces of Aqua Regis, to moisten the
said powders very well and thoroughly, and let it stand so in warm sand for
half an hour, and the said Aqua Regis will extract all the Gold out of the
Flints or Sand; To which pour on two ounces of warm water, and stir it very
well about, then strain or filter it through Cap Paper, and the water will pass
through the paper with the Tincture, and leave the sand alone in the Paper;
then pour on more warm water into the paper, and let it run through the Sand
again, and so it will wash away all the remaining Gold and Tincture out of the
sand, and carry it into the Receiver, which is likewise to be added to the
rest; Then pour upon this impregnated water or Liquor, some ordinary Lees or
rather some spirit of Urine, and it will so mortify the Aqua Regis, that the
Gold will presently precipitate in a yellow Powder to the bottom; Cant off the
water and wash the said Gold with more fresh water till the powder of Gold be
sweet and perfectly clean; after dry it very warily, else the said Gold will
fulminate with that force as to break the glass in pieces, and whatsoever else
is about it. But if you mix a little powder of vulgar brimstone to the said
Calx or Powder of Gold, and let it glow in a glased Crusible, then it will not
fulminate at all. After this mix therewith some Borax and reduce it in a
Crusible. And thus you may know what quantity of Gold is contained in the rest
of the Sand or Flints of that nature. N. B. Unless perchance the said Sand or
flints have Iron mixed, whereby then the Gold will become Pale and Brittle. Now
in such a case you need not presently mix the said calx of Gold with Borax,
because both the Gold and Iron would be reduced together, and so would be
adulterate, and disappoint you of your expectation in that Trial; But such mixed
Gold must be separated from the Iron on the Test with Lead, and so your proof
will be good and without error.

There is another sort of trial and proof of Sand, flints, and Stones, etc. But
since this way is easy and sufficient, we shall rest herein.

N. B. Yet my Council is, instead of Aqua Regis, to make use of Spirit of Salt,
which will be cheaper, with and for a Loadstone, and Antimony for the flux.

Now learn the difference of natural, corporal, solid Gold, and that which is
volatile and spiritual, which is the Primum ens Auri, or first beginning of G
ld. Consider therefore that corporal gold by corrosive waters or salts, is
easily extracted and reduced, but the spiritual is not so.

But now the reason that corporal gold, by the aforesaid proofs and
experiments, is always* extracted and drawn forth, and happens upon this
account, for although in the said white sand there may be no corporal gold at
all, yet by the aforesaid proofs, some is extracted, though truly not much, nor
more then the Silver was which the Lead contained which was used in the said
Trials. Note therefore that the said silver in the melting, drew the said
spiritual gold out of the said flints, stones, or sand; so that thereby it
became tinged and transmuted into corporal gold; the which was very apparent
hereby, for that no more gold was found then the quantity of Silver contained
within the said Lead; and as it was in the other parcel of common Lead, used in
that Trial; for if more corporal gold had been in the Sand or Lead, it must
necessarily have exceeded the quantity of Silver in the said Lead, for the
Silver contained in the said Lead, mixed with the said Flints, could not fly
away in the air, to leave room only for so much corporal gold, and therefore
the cause that the Silver remained not Silver (as in the common Lead was) that
it was transmuted and turned to Gold* by the Tincture, and spiritual gold drawn
out of the first Ens of sand, stones, and flints; and must be ascribed to the
said first Ens or spiritual gold contained in the said sand, stones or flints.

Now I have written this book only for the extraction of corporal gold out of
sand, stones, and flints, etc but we leave the spiritual gold for the
Philosophers, that they may make their Stone out of it.

Wherefore, N. B. Whoever seeks to draw gold out of sand, stones, and flints,
etc. Let them choose such stones, sand, etc. out of which they may draw corporal
gold, with good profit which the Womb of common, white sand, and flints cannot
bear or bring forth.

The reason nevertheless, I wished you to take white sand or flints, etc. to
make experiments and trals, was because every one might see, that in all kind
of sand, good gold is contained, though out of all it cannot be profitably
extracted, by reason the white sand and flints, etc. are often without corporal
gold, but never without spiritual gold, by the which nevertheless silver may be
tinged, and transmuted into good gold, as may plainly appear by and in the
aforesaid practice and trials.

But now the Philosophers seek not corporal gold but spiritual, and they will
know where, and in what subjects the spiritual or first essence of gold is most
plentifully contained, and how to get the same with ease. Therefore although
the said first essence of gold be in white sand, and white flints, etc. yet the
said Philosophers will not meddle with that so willingly, nor will any expert
true Philosophers, tie themselves so to one subject, as not to use any other
thing to get their Tincture; To whom it is well known that the first essence of
gold is found in every thing throughout the whole earth; for wherever there is
any Sulphur, there may be had the first essence of Gold to have their Tincture.
But now in all Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals, there is a Sulphur certainly
known and found, Therefore in all parts of the world, the matter of the
Philosophers stone may be had every where: so that the Poor may have the same
without charge, no less then the rich, according to what the Philosophers do
proclaim, saying their matter is every were, and you may have the same in any
parts of the world without money, and it meets you, and is trod on under feet,
and cast out on the Dunghils; for so the true Philosophers do say, and write.
Also a true Philosopher will not require or need much Gold for his Medicine;
for if he have but half an ounce which he brings to perfection, it will
suffice for his whole life, and be in in his power to multiply, and bring it to
perfection as often as he please; and necessity shall require.

So that it may easily be demonstrated, that not only Gold, but somewhat more
rare (viz:) the true Tincture is in Stones, which the Ancients did intimate in
these words. Auro quid melius Jaspis, etc What is better then Gold, a Jasper
Stone, etc. So

Paracelsus exceedingly commends Red-Talc, Granats, Antimony, and Lapis Lazuli;
expressing further, that the Tincture or first Essence of Gold may be gotten
out by sublimation, etc. Take notice also further, that the first Essence of
Gold may be found in any other small or meaner stones, and amongst the first
and chief of these, viz. the Blood stone, Sythydis, Magnesia, Pedemontana,
Emery, and such like.

In the which also it is so fixed, that to possess it there needs no other art,
but the manner of extracting it, and giving it ingress by Gold. On the other
side, the first Ens of Gold, in the Vegitable, Animal, and Mineral Sulphurs,
Marcasites and Antimony are had in plenty; but are so Volatile, that those
little stones are to be preferred.

But now in brief I shall show, that in stones (of which hot Countries has
most Gold) there is not only fixed Gold, but also Volatile; whence the true
Tincture may be perfected: For whoever can make the first Essence of Gold that
is in stones Volatile, and gather it by distillation, does get a graduating
water by which our quick fluid Mercury or Quicksilver may be coagulated to
good Gold. And whoever can join, and marry this Volatile first Essence of Gold
to Corporal Gold, and this with that to be made one, and procure Ingression, he
may hope for far more good, and may expect undoubtedly to enjoy the same to a
better use and profit: For that the first Essence of gold is more useful and
needful to prepare the Tinctures then Corporal gold it self, as not a few
Philosophers have signified by the following words* who say, Gold and Silver
are not made by them, unless this first Essence do effect it.

The first Ens also of Gold, which lies hid in all Vegitables and Animals, does
Coagulate Mercury, even to Yallowness, but not constant and fixed; but if it be
made fixed, it also fixes and Coagulateth with constancy, but does not so
before. It remains therefore most assured true, that where ever Sulphur is
found, there is also the first Essence of Gold, and where the first essence of
Gold is, there is also the Tincture; wherefore, being Sulphur is found in every
thing of the world, to the least Herb, Stone, and Bone. It follows that also
out of any little Herb, piece of Wood, little Stone and Bone etc. the true
Tincture may be prepared.

^ow this our new light does not profit him that is blind, and will presume and
resolve to be so still,

More of this you may find in my third Century and also make first part of my
Spagyrick Pharmacopeia

How Sand. Flints, and the like impregnated Stones may be known, whether they
contain little or much Gold.
FLints, Sand, Stones, etc. that are White of all sorts, contain the least
quantity of Gold, and yet are never without some Volatile, though not to be
extracted with profit; but most commonly the Yellow and Red have most Gold, yet
not always to answer the charge in dissolving and extracting.

Yellow, duskish, and Black commonly hold much, and where through White, also
Yellow Sand and Stones, where Lines are found (like Veins through them)
especially if they shine clear and glister with many little sparks of close
together.

Likewise that Sand is rich with Gold, which appears like Talc, wherein are
found some stones, in which Red or duskish Talc appears, even as in all Talc
Gold is found but yet in some more some less.

All Flints and Stones in Brooks, called Bartenston, which though appearing
white externally, yet after they are made red hot in the fire, and broken in
water, appear Yellow like Gold, are sufficiently rich.

Green, Yellow, or Sky colored Stones, translucid like Horn (Vulgarly called
Horne-stone, are also for the most part rich.

Also all reddish, Black, and dark, dusky Flints, have always Gold, but for the
most part mixed with Iron, which therefore frustrate the Vulgar Labourants
Menstruum, and so makes it useless.

All Quarze Quarries, the coverings of Mines, and also Saphir Stones, or other
in the Earth in Veins like Metals, or open to the Air or Water, being Colored,
hold Gold.

The Boodstone, and that which is of kin to it, Emery, Granats, and Lapis
Lazuli, do all hold Gold.

The Granats hold Corporal Gold, and the first Essence of Gold, some much and
more then others, and others but a little: But these aforesaid Stones are so
hard, that strong Waters (as Aqua Fort) cannot work upon them; yet some remedy
may be found to extract them.

In all transparent Amphitams, Sapphirs, Rubies, Amathists and asinths, is the
first Essence of Gold, but hard to be extracted.

All (Fluores, Oars and Flowers) used in the Mines of and to reduce them to a
flux, whether Violet or Purple colored* Yellow, Red or Green, are endowed with
unripe Volatile Gold, which of you heat red hot* will vapor a king of Green,
Yellow, or Red fumes, and a Snow-white Color will remain on the stones. Now if
any can tell how to save those flying fumes, he may with it Coagulate Mercury
into Gold. In like manner by means of Distillation, a Green water may be drawn
out of all such like stones, in the which Mercury will Coagulate it self into
Gold* This Green water also the ancients have called their Green Lion, which
devours the or Gold, and prepares a Tincture for or.

I would say more of this matter, but shall refrain for the covetousness, and
wicked men, who seek nothing but the ruin of their neighbor, and to live in
pomp and pleasures, who as unworthy, God will have wander in darkness, without
this Knowledge. Wherefore let all that by Gods Grace have any illumination,
beware the communicate nothing to wicked men, though they seem Angels of Light:
Nusquam tuta fides, There is no faith to be found on Earth. Soli Deo tu
confidas, promissis hominum diffidas, Deus S^lus fidem servat, a Mundo fides
exulat; which is, In God shall thou put thy trust, man's promises distrust as
Dust; God only keeps his promised plight; but from the world all faith takes
flight. Wherefore I say, let all well-minded men beware of Luxurious, proud,
vain, and covetous persons; for these Vices proceed from the Devil, and return
again to him, and one can hardly find an honest man, though sought with
Diogenes his Lanthorn, amongst many: For which cause I shall e're long publish
a short Tractate of evil and wicked men, viz. How and whereby to know them by
their outward signatures and form, for virtue and vice? And had I known this
skill before, it had been a great advantage to have made me beware of such
dissembling Impostures.

If any shall hereby reap any benefit, let them give God the praise, and be
mindful of the poor: If otherwise, let them believe they are yet unworthy to
have such things communicated to them; for truly I have written here so plainly
and truly, as no Philosopher ever did before me.

But now nevertheless I confess I have a more easy way for these things, viz.
for extracting Gold out of Sand, etc. and such as never was known before to the
World.

1. My first Method is with a water of small charge or price, which may be had
in plenty without Distillation.

2. My second is a singular Metal, of which Chauldrons may be made, in which
these Stones and Sand, with this small prised water are boiled, and yet not
corroded or consumed thereby, and after the water shall dissolve any Gold out
of the Sand or Stones, then you may draw forth the sand and water with a Scoop
or Bowl proper for this use, with holes in the bottom, and a wooden basket
strainer thereupon, and so the impregnated* water or Menstruum, with the Gold,
may pass through, and leave the sand or stones behind in the scoop or bowl with
the strainer, then pour on more warm water on the said sand, to wash out the
remaining Gold and Tincture, and after all is washed out, throw the said sand or
stones quite away, as useless.

3. My third compendium is, to pour upon the said clear Menstrum, which has
the Gold or Tincture, another singular sort of water of small price, whereby
all the said Gold and Tincture (at such a height and quantity.) in the solvent,
will be precipitated to the bottom; and so the clear solvent being freed from
the Tincture, must be Canted off to serve again for the like use, as preserving
still its own strength and virtue, without any abatement or diminution
whatsoever, either by the said water precipitating, or by any other ways
whatsoever; and if any be lost or spilt by the usage, it may be easily
repaired, by getting more of the same, without much trouble or charge.

Now if any should mix any precipitating Lixiviat Liquor or Lees with the said
solvent, contrary to its Nature, and thereby mortify the solvent by
precipitating the Gold (which is done in other processes, and is used in and by
my former experiments and trials in this Books about the white sand and stones,
etc.) what damage and loss would come thereby; for every time there is
occasion to use it, our dissolvent should be destroyed, and the extraction
thereby become very troublesome and chargeable; especially being done in Glass
or Earthen Cucurbits or bodies; but this way all things cost almost nothing,
and may be done in greater Vessels, and cheaper, and the said waters be without
loss. And this kind of extraction may be compared like the making of
Saltpeter, where the workman having extracted the Saltpeter, throws away all
the ashes and dirt, and puts more matter into the (Cupam) Tubs or Bowls, for
^he like common water to extract more.

1. Our fourth Compendium is that precipitated Calx of Gold, after the
filtration in a bag, is taken ^ut, dried, and by a good, cheap, and singular
good matter flux it, is reduced to a body; and so ^o part of the said Gold will
be lost or diminish^d.

In these four Compendiums for the extraction of Gold, will come profit, but
not so much other ^ays*

Now let none marvel why I reveal not here any of ^^ese four Compendiums; I
have been enough bitten ^y the envy of other men: For where they could not
^nderstand my writings by their own dullness, though ^ad plainly enough
expressed the matter; and so could ^ot perform the same; they then publicly
brought scandal on me, and reported, that whatever I writ were lies; Nay, some
others have seen the thing performed, and yet afterward for hatred and envy,
have slighted it and me.

But however whilst I live, (by Gods Grace and Providence) I shall be helpful
to my neighbor, by using my Talent to serve them, and like a most bright
shining Light will show the wonderful great mystery of God, to the Ignorant and
simple people, against the will of all the enemies of Truth, though they fret
and vex never so much at it, I have resolved so to do; Yea, behold though my
adversaries should all conspire and wholly devour me alive, they should swallow
but a mean or lean Morsel of Earth; for Glauber should be and remain Glauber
still, till the consummation of the World or Ages; now if these men were of the
ancient stamp and frame of faith and virtue, they would not detract and
scandalize their Innocent neighbor, without deserving ill at their hands.

Let these things be sufficient at this time concerning the extraction of Gold
out of Sand, Stones, and Flints.

Now further I say; although every one should use this Extraction of Gold for
their Employment or Trade, yet the one would not be a hindrance to the benefit
of the other, by reason Stones and Sand are obvious to every body in all
Countries, as also the Salts that are useful to extract the same are plentiful,
so that nothing is wanting but a lover of the work to set his hand unto it.

Paracelsus in his book of vexation of Alchymists says, That more Gold and
silver is found upon the Earth* then in the Bowels thereof, and that often
times a Country Clown throws a stone at a Cow* which is worth more then the
price of the Cow, and it is most certain true, and will remain true; for a lie
cannot degenerate or exalt it self to a truth; but in its time hereafter shall
be punished in eternal darkness with the Devil (as the father and original of
all liers) without doubt Democritus his Laughter, and Heraclitus his Weeping
came from the contemplation of mortal man's eager pursuit after Gold and Silver
through great Anxities, Labors, and Troubles with loss of health and hazard of
Soul and Body sailing many times through the vast Ocean for it, and tearing
open the earth to rush and sink down therein to fetch out Gold and Silver,
which is so plentifully and easy to be had upon the superficies of the Earth in
every Region and Country, as that its ((...)) abundance may be had.

Solomon writ not from the purpose saying that great virtue was in Herbs, Woods
and Stones: For that which is fixed in Stones is Volatile in Herbs. As in my
little Treatise Printed 1663. demonstrated; although the first Ens of Gold
(whence Gold may be made) be in both.

We read also in Esdras there is much Earth to Vessels or Pots; but a little
powder or dust to make Gold. And all sorts of Earth are not so rich to gain by
Extraction of Gold, nor it is to be thought that all Stones and Sand and every
one are so rich in Corporal Gold as to yield any profit; yet they still contain
the first Ens of Gold, or yield such a Calx, by which (or the help thereof)
good Gold* may be made; the which Calx or Powder, if we knew how to extract and
order, we would make greater account, and esteem it more then of Gold it self.
Now since such an Aurifying, or Goldmaking Powder is so largely extended and
diffused in Stones and Sand, etc. Yet it is not easy to beat it or force it out
with a Hammer, but only by a peculiar Art, is to be extracted, and perfected;
thereupon the blind multitude of covetus Gold hunters will not believe it no
more then Ignorants, who knows nothing of the Art; and yet this art has been
always esteemed amongst Philosophers as their greatest Secret of Secrets, and
so has been preserved amongst them.

Also where Paracelsus writes of the first Ens or Essence of Gold, he tells us
it may be drawn forth by sublimation; and Basilius Valentinus also tells us,
That the preparation of the Universal Tincture, may be compared to the
distillation or extraction of the burning spirit of wine from the Lees, and may
so be obtained; Oh friends, this is truly a sufficient clear comparison; for as
in a great quantity of Lees of Wine or Beer, a little of the good spirit is
hidden and the residue is a useless mud; and yet that little quantity of spirit
is drawn out with profit by means of Distillation out of that great quantity of
mud or Faeces, and is thereby concentrated into a little room, and withal is
so virtuous and piercing a spirit that one spoonful thereof is more worth, then
the whole Runlet or Vessel full of Faeces. Now by such ways or means would the
Philosophers have us draw forth and extract the Primum Ens or Form of Gold by
art, out of Stones and Sand, though dispersed and diffused far abroad in them,
and so to concentrate their virtue and Tincture into a small compass, of the
which a very small quantity (if but as big as a Pea) is of more worth and
value, then a great Mountain of useless and unprofitable dead Earth.

Further, I would not conceal this from thee, that throughout all Germany by,
and in the Rivers are found stones, the which abound with Gold and Silver, and
are sufficiently rich; and if you beat or break them to pieces, you will find
within some of them some little holes, pits, or concavities, with a yellow or
fusky dark powder, which being melted with Borax will yield a silvery Gold, I
must avouch and affirm I never saw or knew any mortal man, that understood or
observed those stones before, much less the golden powder hid in them; which
without doubt is by reason of men's carelessness to find out the Physical great
mysteries of God.

Here now I must admonish all men, that it were of great consequence and
concernment for Parents to place their Children to be trained up in their
youth, with some honest Artist, or workman to teach them that, which in case of
necessity might gain them an honest and commendable livelihood. But the rich
having a plentiful estate, think they shall leave enough for their Children,
never to want; yet if one misfortune or another happens upon them, or upon
their Children, as Burning of Houses, or Ships, or Goods lost by Pirates or
Thieves, or Creditors fail, or Ships miscarry, Then whither to turn or what
course to take they know not, but only to fly away, or live like Vagabonds, or
fill a Gaol; and all this for want of some laudable Art learnt in their youth.
And thus they become desperate, The one forsakes Wife and Children to Travel to
the Indies, where not a few are devoured by beasts or Canibals, some drowned or
starved, others sell themselves or become Soldiers, and like mad Dogs at last
are slain; Others after they have spent their means cannot subsist or provide
for their family, and so become vicious livers, and have a miserable doleful
life, till they perish and go to hell. All which might have been avoided by
learning some good mechanic Arts in their youth, or flourishing conditions.
But when difficult and raging times approach, or that too many be of a Trade in
a City, the one beggars the other, and so there is no remedy but physic which
may likewise fail. But a Physician might learn something else that would get a
livelihood, besides his practice, Then he need not make so many visits to gape
for his fees of his poor distressed Patients: And so the Lawyer need not for
base Profit sell the Law or their Clients Cause to prepare himself a seat in
Hell, where afterward to dwell for ever. Nor the Divine be afraid of his
Patrons, or Benefactors, and so sooth them up in their sins, but preach the
truth to all without flattery, and so prefer Gods honor, and the peoples real
good, with a true zeal before his private profit, to the hazard of his soul. So
also of all the rest.

Now having declared or touched this matter, I am passing and go away sighing
and mourning, That the Genuine Hermetick Philosophy and Medicine, is so little
practiced or esteemed, as also the natural true Alchymy (and not adulterate)
which genuine Art is the Queen of all Arts, and shall remain so to the worlds
end.

When as therefore this art of extracting sand and stones, is so great a
treasure and useful as we have heard, and carelessly kicked by men at their feet
every where; why do we not rather extract them to nourish our selves and
families, and defend us from the injuries of the times, handsomely and honestly.
Why do we not I say leave the Indies to their own Inhabitants, and manage our
own Countries or earth in Europe where we dwell, where is abundantly sufficient
to sustain us, for whatever we want; I cannot but again and again ingeniously
confess, that if it were possible to renew my youth, or call back but ten
years, I would not neglect publicly to profess and teach the true Philosophy*
Medicine, and Alchymy, and so make it to be known demonstratively. But the sand
of my glass is almost run, and my day far spent, so that I cannot undertake
these so laborious practices, but must leave and resign the same to other more
in their prime of youth and strength, whilst I am fading and vanishing hence.
But all the good I can do whilst I live by faithful writing, I shall not
neglect for my neighbors profit and advantage, And (God favoring my purpose)
I shall shortly publish unheard of Secrets; here now it only rests to set an
end to this Tractate.

An Amonition to the Courteous Reader.
WHatsoever I have written in this little Book of extracting Gold out of Sand,
Stones, and Flints, is so true and certain that there needs be no question
thereof. Yet I may tell thee, as soon as this Treatice came under the Press,
another way of extracting Gold out of Stones came into my mind far better then
the former. By which gold may be drawn out and extracted much sooner and
better: because to this my new way, there is no need at all of Kettles of
Copper or Brass, etc. but great quantities may be extracted without boiling in
or with such vessels, but in others that are every where to be had; so that one
man in this new way in one day may easily extract the Gold out of a thousand
(M) pounds of sand or stones, etc. so that I cannot choose but communicate this
also (which is far beyond th eformer) If I shall understand, this may be
generally profitable, and gratefully accepted in these bad times and fear of
worse. Whereby to be publicly serviceable to my Country, and future
generations. And so I commit all to the guidance and protection of the Almighty.

Dated at Amsterdam 26/15 July, Anno Dom. 1666.
JEHIOR (...) OR The Day dawning; OR Morning light of Wisdom: Containing The
three Principles, or Originals of all things whatsoever.

Whereby are discovered the great and many Mysteries in God, Nature, and the
Elements, hitherto hid, now made manifest and revealed.

To the Honor of God, the love of our Neighbor, and to the Comfort and Joy of
the Children of Wisdom.

In the 4. Book of Esdras 6. v. 10. The Books will be opened before the Heaven;
insomuch that they all shall see.

Zachariah 14. 7. At the time of the Evening it shall be Light.

THE EPISTLE To the honest, sober READER.
Courteous Reader,
THis Spring or Dawning of Wisdom, was published some years since; but being
out of Print, and something better improved by the Author, and suitable to
Pythagoras his Metaphysical and Physical Figure, with my smaller Philosophical
Epitaph and Figures, I thought good to make them with the rest into one small
Volume, where much light of Divinity and Philosophy will appear, concentrated
and multiplied to any ingenious Spirits. It is Gods greatest bounty to give
light and Eyes to see, not only the Corporal, and Temporal; but the Spiritual
and Eternal Light of Wisdom. Quantum quidque habet Luminis, tantum and numinis.
The more Light the more of God who dwells in Light, and in his Children, who
are Children of Light and Life: For this is the Condemnation and death, That
Light is come into the World, and men love Darkness rather then Light; because
their deeds are Evil. This therefore as a Trumpet, these latter days may
awaken, and teach men what God, the World, and Devils are, that so their Souls
and Spirits hereby quickened and inspired, may the better know themselves, and
arise from dead works of Sin and sensual vanities (the first Resurrection of
Grace) to be sure to rise again with Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven in Glory:
For many talk of Heaven, and being in its Glory with Christ; which have it not
within them, or desire to be there with such mortified pure and peaceable
Company as go thither; who rather have Hell, and feed on it, and delight in it,
and such company; which the better to distinguish and reflect upon the the way
and Company for Heaven, take these four Observations. To do Evil for good, is
devilish; Evil for Evil, Natural, Sensual and Bestial; Good for Good, Humane;
and Good for Evil, Divine. The Wisdom therefore from above is still Pure, Holy,
and Good; gotten by mortification on the Cross of Christ, and brings Joy and
Peace in the Holy Ghost for the Kingdom of Heaven; but horror, amazement, and
misery attend the rest, who live not after the Gospel of the Cross of Christ
(which is the power of God to Salvation) but after the Flesh, and do evil to
serve the Devil. To know and fear God therefore is perfect Righteousness,
Wisdom, and Eternal Life; so that the Patriarchs and many termed Heathen, not
having the outward name of Christ, may have his Spirit and Essential name, and
be better members of him then we who live not thereafter: For (as the Scripture
says) he was the Rock of Ages, was slain from the beginning, and has
enlightened every one that comes into the World, and was before Adam. But most
men do not know nor fear God; but superficially believe there is a God, and
therefore talk of him as Parrots, and sometimes worse by Lies, Oaths and
Curses, etc. And therefore have no true faith in him or his Son: For did they
truly know and consider him still in his property and works, to be Infinite,
Wise, Omnipotent and Omniscient (just as well as merciful) and that he is able
to destroy them in a Moment, in the very Act of sin) then would they fear him,
(the first degree of Wisdom) and so after Christ's Example avoid all occasions
and appearance of sin, as they can and will do in some Acts for a very Child's
being present: And so would believe that he who made and Created the Eye and
Ear, and gives it Life and Sense in the instant of its exercise, can both see
and hear as well as any Eye and Ear, which can see or hear nothing at any time
without his help; and likewise that he is as really present (though invisible
to the outward Sense) as any Creature can be which he has made; yea, and that
he knows our very secretest thoughts too, in whom we live, move, and have our
Being. But I am not in a Sermon, but an Epistle; nor would I hinder thee in the
Porch from entering into this glorious building of Light, where thou may find
an heavenly Manna* and sumptuous Mansion or Eternal Tabernacle for thy self,
not made with hands and so I take leave to be

Thy Christian Friend and Servant, W. C.
July 3. 167^,
THE PREFACE TO THE Lovers of Wisdom.
Loving Readers,
WE remember and know that all understanding and Wisdom comes from God, and
all good things we receive from the Father of Lights: and that Wisdom is
nothing else, but the Breathing of God; who sends his Spirit, and teaches men
what Wisdom is, the Truth and true Knowledge. Syrach. 1. Jam. 1. Wisd. 7. 25.
Job 32. 5. Wisd. 9. 17. John 20. 22. Acts 2. Psalm. 94. 10. Syrach. 38. 6. Exodus
26. 1. 2.

This Knowledge consists chiefly in three things. 1. To know God. 2. Our
selves* 3. That which God has created*

After Wisdom and Knowledge, follows Judgment; namely, to discern Good from
Evil; Light from Darkness; Truth from Falsehood: Upon judgment and
understanding follows Election and will, to do the one, and to shun the
other.

The Knowledge or Understanding of all things is threefold; Namely, 1. Of Men,
2. Of Angels, 3. Of God. The understanding (or knowledge) of Men is but in
part. The Knowledge of Angels is in fear and trembling; But Gods knowledge
alone is perfect.

Wisdom, Knowledge, and the examining thereof, comes from the spirit alone,
which is in Men, Angels, and God. For the spirit searches into all, even into
the depth of God. 1 Cor. 10. 11.

The Wisdom, Knowledge, and Understanding of men is threefold, after the
spirit of the same. Namely, The spirit of men generally in this world is
Foolishness in Gods eyes, for let men be never so Learned and Wise, yet the
perfect and true wisdom is hidden from them, because they do not know
themselves, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Mat. 11. 25. Some of these wise men are called
Philosophers, according to the Spirit of Sects boasting of the holy Scripture,
of God, and of Christ: but they have no knowledge of them, because their Spirit
is not of God, but they are only men's opinions of God, and of Christ; and are
carnally and earthly minded, full of errors and confusion.

Lastly, The Spirit of Gods holy Ones, who being godly and spiritually minded,
are taught of God.

The Wisdom and knowledge of the first is full of folly, darkness and
Ignorance. The wisdom of the second is full of misleading Philosophy* and
continual contentions. The wisdom of the third sort of men who are Godly, is
but in part, although true and good. Romans 1. 29. Ephesians. 4. 18. Colos. 2. 8. 2 Timothy 3. 4. 1 Cor. 13. 9. 11.

Truly wise men dive into the best gifts and perfection, which are of three
sorts, Charity, Prophecy and Examination.

Love and Charity are the Center, and contain the circle of all godly virtues
and have Faith and Hope, but Prophesying has all knowledge, wisdom, and
doctrine. Lastly, examination contains all understanding, judgment and
discretion. In these three things all is contained that belongs to wisdom,
the Center whereof is the word of God.

This is that which all men ought to study, and should communicate to others
according as they have received a gift of the Spirit of grace^; That God the
Author of all good, may be glorified: and that none do boast of gifts and extol
himself above others; but rather be humble: And then none ought to quench the
Spirit, neither in himself nor others; but rather to stir it up. And lastly,
let no man despise Prophecy, that he may not offend God, his neighbor, nor
scandalize himself.

Love forbeareth all: The wisdom of the spirit searches all, and Examination
tries all.

Since we have undertaken, through the admonition of the spirit, to speak of
wisdom (as much as our knowledge in part may afford) Therefore we entreat the
Reader in Love, that those whom we displease (or who are offended) would
tolerate us in love, As knowing that wisemen also must bear with fools; And
things spoken of in this book may not presently be rejected, but rather be
suffered to stand, remembering that God also is patient unto Sinners. But if any
one do think himself wise, let him show the spirit of Judgment, and let him
discern thus, least he judge himself also. For we hold that we also have
received a gift of the Spirit of grade, which we will not suffer to dye; but to
the praise of the Lord we will put it out to use, out of love to the Children
of wisdom; although not as an instruction, but as a good testimony to our
selves* that we have received a gift of the Spirit not in vain.

The reason that induced us to the writing of this book is, because we hope to
be Beneficial to the children of wisdom. It may be we have published the like
twelve years ago, the Title of it being Aurora Sapientiae: yet since it has
been desired by some again, I have not altered the Title, hoping that it is not
a little mended and corrected. I have set it out briefly, that it may neither
be tedious to the Reader, nor chargeable to the Buyer, nor yet painful to the
Printer. Benevolous Reader, take all in good part, and thus we commend the well
wishers to Gods gracious ptotection.

THE CONTENTS Of the several Chapters of this Book.
OF the Books of wisdom, in which the same may be learned; how, and in what
manner? Chap. 1. Of the Principles and Beginnings of all things, as also of God
himself; and of all whatsoever. 2 Of the First Principle of all things which is
God. 3 Of the second Principle, which is Nature. 4 Of the third General
Principle, namely the Elements. 5 Of the three special Principles, Spirit,
Wind, and Water. 6 Of the particular Principles; Body, Soul and Spirit. 7 Of
the Elements and contrary Elements in the Creation. 8 Of the Principle or
Original of that evil one, and of the Angels. 9 Of the difference of the Light
and Darkness, as also of the Light and Fire. 10 Of the Principle of the Fire,
and its Mystery. 11 Out of what, wherein, and whereby all things good or bad do
subsist, pass away; and yet how they last for ever. 12 Of the Creation of the
World. 13 Of the particular Creation. 14 Of the Mystery of the Word. 15 Of the
Mystery of the Created lower visible things. 16 Of the Creation of Man* and of
his Anatomy. 17 Of the Image of God, after which man is Created 18 Of the
Mystical Image; that is of the Mystery of God. Chap. 19 Of the Truth and
Spirit, by which all wisdom is justified 20 Of the Mystery of Time and to
understand* (...) aright. 21 The Conclusion. 22
AVRORA SAPIENTIAE* Morning Light, OR Dawning of Wisdom.
WE take the liberty according to the gift of the Spirit, to speak briefly of
Wisdom, in this little Treatise, without any prolixity. And because we made
mention in the Preface of a threefold Knowledge, as of Men, of Angels, and of
God; now we will speak here that Wisdom also is threefold; as 1. The Natural of
all Created things. 2. The Wisdom of Faith unto Salvation. And 3. The Secret
and Mystical wisdom, which gener^lly is unknown: and that we call, vera
Philosophia, Theologia, and Theosophia Of these three we will speak as briefly
as may be possible. The Spirit of the Lord be upon both the Writer and the
Reader.

Amen.
JEHIOR, OR THE Morning Light of Wisdom.
CHAP. I. Of the Books of Wisdom, in which the same may be learned; How and in
what manner?
THere are chiefly but three Books in which all Wisdom is contained. Namely, 1.
The whole Nature and Creation, (...) great Book of Heaven and (...) 2. The Book
of the Holy Writ in the Letter of the Holy word of God. 3. Man himself. The
only Center or Principle of these three is the word of God, which is the book
out of which these three books have their Original.

The first book of Nature contains seven other books which are the seven
Elements, of which in particular here^fter.

These seven Books have three other books opposite, which are the three
contrary Elements, of which also hereafter.

The second book, the Holy Writ is divided into three other books, as into the
Law of the Old: Into the Gospel of the New: and into the Eternal Gospel of the
everlasting Testament and Covenant, which comprehends the book of the
Revelation of Jesus Christ.

The Third book of Man is only one book, and is sealed to the blind, but opened
to the seeing. In this book is hidden, sealed; and also manifest and opened all
Wisdom: and man is called the Image or Honor of God: (o^ which below) and man
cannot be called by any other name, 1 Cor. 11. 7.

Out of the first book we learn Philosophia the natural Wisdom in and about the
knowledge of created natural things which are of the Elements: and we learn
this wisdom out of the three Principles and seven Elements; and discern the
same from the three contrary Elements, else we cannot find the truth of the
Natural Wisdom.

Out of the second book we learn Theologia or Divinity, the wisdom unto
Salvation; and that in the three foresaid books through the seven spirits,
Isaiah 11. and we di^^^nguish it from all humane glosses, and books of Profane
ones. For the book expounds it self, and needs no humane interpretation, but
only has need of Faith, which apprehends all things.

Out of the Third Book, which is Gods Image, we learn the true knowledge of
God; as also his being and essence, and his whole Mystery: in so much as he
that desires to know God, must learn to know him in his image, and that
perfectly; which perfect knowledge is this, That God is man, and that he is
true man, who is of God; and God is in him.

This is the wisdom, that is mystical hitherto, and yet is manifest but only to
the wise: and is called Theosophia; because God does no where so clearly
manifest himself as in man, who is his image, or honor, or glory, 1 Cor. 11.
7. Therefore man needs not to go far, but only into himself, to learn the true
knowledge of God, and to seek after God in himself; and himself in God. If he
do not thus, all is vain, and no where else any wisdom to be found. Acts 17.
27. Luke 17. 21.

Seeing the three other books proceed only from the one Book, as the world of
God, therefore all three do testify unanimously of this book (...), namely
each in its letter, wisdom and testimony, but none so clearly as man does. This
is that great, whole and perfect Library of wisemen, wherewith in justice and
equity they may be contented.

All wisdom and knowledge, with their mysteries in these books, we may not learn
any where else, but only through the same Spirit, who himself has penned these
books, made, and testified. He therefore who is desirous to study these books,
must from the bottom of his heart acknowledge and confess his own blindness,
folly and ignorance; and must pray unto the Father of Lights, for illumination,
wisdom and understanding, that he would send his holy spirit which may lead us
into all truth, and take us away from all foolishness. and falsehood, and may
bring us to the Light of Gods glory.

Which may not be done by any other means, then through a love to God, and to
man's own salvation, and through a holy life without all Hypocrisy, and through
the Light that comes from above, and not from beneath, from man and his
wisdom, which all those must learn to deny, that desire to learn the wisdom of
the holy ones.

We will speak thus; That hitherto all these books were sealed up, but are now
opened in the end of the World according to the Prophecy, 4 Esd. 6. 20. Dan 12.
9. Zach. 14. 7. And if wise worldly men are offended at this, they betray
themselves, that the wisdom of the holy one is not in them

The books of wisdom testify unanimously of the word by which all things are
created, and in which only all wisdom does rest, and which is the beginning of
all beginnings, in which is all, and without which nothing is, which is all in
all, God blessed for ever; Amen.

CHAP. II. Of those principles and beginnings of all things, as also of God
himself, and of all whatsoever it be.
THe Principle of all Principles, and beginning of all beginnings, as also of
God himself, is only the word, according to the testimony of the divine truth
and word it self, John 1. Now the word may not be defined otherwise, then that
it is a Spirit, breath or voice of God, yea God himself in such a subsistence,
essence and being, as namely, How the image of God does represent us according
to the similitude which is man, as that he is a quic^ning spirit, a spiritual
Adam, and heavenly man, which is God the Lord glorined and magnified for ever,
Amen.

Now we hold altogether that this is the proper definition of God, and no
other, which the holy writ clearly signifies. 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47, 48. who
according to his Image and Similitude. has created a spiritual Adam, and
Terrestrial man; when God said, Let us make Adam or Man after our image, after
our Similitude, Genesis 1. 26, 27.

Now the word being the Beginning of all Beginnings, there is contained in the
same the Light, Life, and Love. The Light affords the Revelation of God, for
God is Light, and dwells in Light, and is the Father of Lights.

Life is the virtue and power of God, and a quickening Spirit, who has,
creates, and preserves all.

Love is a Testimony of God, in which is the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; in one word which is called Jesus Christ, the spiritual Adam, and
heavenly Man, Messiah, who is Essential, Alpha and Omega. All in All, the
Beginning and the End, the First and the Last, Blessed and Praised for ever.
Amen. Rev. 1. 22.

Now the word being the true Principle in God himself, then consequently all
proceeds from the word, out of which do chiefly manifest themselves three
general Principles, in which Principles, with and through which, all things are
contained, and are these, namely, God, Nature, Element.

Now these three general Principles afford also a threefold world, namely a
divine uncreated from Godflowing world from Eternity, then an Angelical world,
which proceeds or lights forth, or shines forth out of the Light in which
God dwells; and lastly an Elementary world, whose Original came out of the
water.

After these three general Principles, proceed also three special Principles,
namely Ghost, Wind and Water. Now every world has its proper Ghost, Wind and
Water in their Kind and Nature. All things Created out of the divine world from
above are Created out of Water and Spirit from above, through the wind and
breath of the Omnipotent God; for to the Divine world is properly competent the
Spirit; to the Angelical is properly competent the wind, and to the Elementary
world is water proper.

After these special Principles, follow lastly particular Principles, each of
which has its proper Being, out of which, in which, and from which it
consists: But these three Principles proceed from the former, and are Spirit,
Soul, and Life, and Body: All bodies are out of the Water: All Life and Soul
out of the Wind: And all Spirit out of the Spirit. But concerning the Angels,
their Body is out of the Wind of the Angelical World, their Soul and Life a
Fireflame, and their Soul a ^ight of which elsewhere:

These are our Principles in the Wisdom, out of which all things have their
Original: Whether other Principles may be showed unto us, we do much doubt.

The Primum mobile, first mover of all things is the Word, for in it is the
Life.

The Secundum mobile, Second mover of all things, is the Spirit, through which
all things are Created.

The Tertium mobile, Third mover is the Wind, and these three moving Principles
are the Perpetnum mobile, everlasting mover of all things, by which all things
move, live, and have their Being.

But these three do rest upon the Water bodily; out of which the World is and
all things are: And in the Air; according to the Life, wherein all things are:
And in Heaven, from which all things come from above after the Spirit; but the
Spirit from God, from which he comes and returns thither. John. 1. 4. Psalm.
104. 30. Acts 17. 28. Eccles. 12. 7. But all these come together on and in the
Earth, as in the heart of the world. Wisd. 1. 7.

In these Principles, out, with, and through the same, subsist all things: And
without these nothing can subsist, that is, or has a Being, and are Light,
Life and Love; God, Nature, and Element; Spirit, Wind, and Water; Body, Soul,
and Spirit, and that in the Word.

CHAP. III. Of the first Principle of all things which is God.
GOd, being the beginning of all Beginnings; as from which all things proceed,
then his beginning is from no other: He is without a beginning, because he is
not from another; yet though he has his beginning from no other, he
represents in himself his beginning to all.

This beginning of God is not a beginning to God himself, but to us; for he
himself is all in all. Now that he might show himself to us men, to testify
and instruct us of him, therefore God shows himself in his beginning, which
is the Word, which is God himself.

Now through this Word is showed to us, testified and taught that, and what
God is, and who he is: But without word or speaking may be neither Doctrine nor
Testimony, nor a presentation; as Reason does make it manifest. Therefore the
Word is the beginning of God to us, out of which all Testimonies, Names and
Relation of God do proceed; as out of the depths of God, which consist in their
own proper Spirit, wind and water.

The name of God is but one, according to the Essence, which no man knows,
but only he upon whom he is written, with the living Letters of the Spirit of
God, and his Word Essentially, which is Christ, and those that are of his
Being. These are they in whom the Word dwells Essentially, and that see his
Glory in a Light and Eye that no body else can see. All the names of God come
together only in this one name: For the whole fullness of the Godhead dwe leth
in him bodily, who is called Alpha and Omega. Zach. 14. 9. Col 2. 9. He that
sees him sees also God, and the Father, and the living Word, and the
quickening Spirit. John 14. 9. 1 John 1. 1 Cor. 15. 45. Even so he that sees
man, sees also with the Body, the Soul, and the Spirit, which are in their
Nature invisible.

The Testimony of God consists in three: Namely in three witnesses, which are
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit. Now as the name proceeds from the
word, so does every Testimony of God, and rests only upon the dear and true
witness that is called Amen; which is the beginning of Gods Creatures. Rev. 3.
14. And the Testimony of God stands thus. God Father, Word, Holy Ghost, Amen,
which is Christ.

Now because no body can testify of God, but he himself alone; and all
Testimonies of Truth must be justified by three: Therefore God also testifies
of himself by three; but they are not three persons, But one only person, and
one only God; even as in one Earthly man's Body, Soul and Spirit cannot be three
distinct persons, so in God are not three persons.

But this is the Testimony of God to us in the Name (non in Nominibus, sed in
Nomine) of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost which consist in the word, which
three are one thing and one: But this Testimony none acknowledges save he that
has it within himself Essentially, that is, that has the Spirit out of God,
and is anointed and sealed with it. This is the Testimony of God with one
word, through which we are Sons and Heirs of God. Romans 8.

Lastly, The Revelation of God consists in seven Powers, which are the seven
Spirits of God. Rev. 1. 4. Chap. 4. 5. Chap. 5. 6. Zech. 4. 2, 10. And rest
upon him who is called, and is Jesse; who is of no other; but out, through, in
and of himself, is is self subsisting, in whom is all, who has all; Also the
fullness of the Godhead. Rev. 3. 1. Isa. 11. Col. 2. 9. For through him all
things are Created in Heaven and in Earth, and by him all things are preserved,
by him also all is Redeemed and reconciled; He Reigns over all, and has all
under his Power, through him all lost things are restored at his glorious
coming; He also holds Judgment over all flesh, over quick and dead; And
lastly he will make old things new, and will abandon and put away all old
things Everlastingly.

Therefore the Mystery of God consists in One, Three and Seven; and according
to this Mystery all other things are Created and consist in One, out of Three,
through Seven; and are therein testified, learned, manifested, or justified;
nothing at all excepted whatsoever it be; and that for this Reason That God in
his mystery may be learned and glorified in and on all his Creatures.

Herein consists now the Mystery of the Wisdom in its measure, number and
weight, as in One, Three, and Seven, whereby all things are numbered, measured,
and weighed, so perfectly, that nothing can be added to it, or diminished from
it. For all the works of God are perfect, and testify of the Creator,
according to the Mystery of the wisdom; namely, that by the works may be known
Him, that made them, that what and who he is in his Mystery.

CHAP. IV. Of the Second Principle, viz. Nature.
NAture is the second Principle and beginning of all things, and stands betwixt
God and the Elements, through which God works into the Elements, at, through,
and by means, and is in its consideration even as Angelical, whose beginning is
out of God a forth-blown Breath, VVind and Air of the Almighty, in which
consists the Soul and Life of all Created things, and every living Soul, and is
concentred and fastened together essentially, bodily, and self-subsisting in
the Tree of Life, even as God in Christ, and the whole Elementary world in Man.

This second Principle is not everlasting according to the beginning* yet
eternal according to the end, even as the Angels are. It is not Created out of
nothing, as this world; but proceeds from God, even as the Life from the
Spirit, as a Breath, VVind, or Air does proceed; and is also the breath of Gods
Word* in which is Life thus, that the speaking of the word is a living Eternal
Breath, and is distinct from God, as a living breath or Soul from the
quickening Spirit.

The living breath, Soul or Life of all things i^ according to its Original out
of the Nature, but the Spirit out of God, namely after his measure, and the
body out of the Elements. The Spirit as the Soul, or the Life are distinct
thus: As God, who is Eternal Life, and the quickening Spirit himself, and has
Life from no other, because himself is the Spirit: And as the living Soul,
having her Life not out, from, and by, or through it self, but out of the
Spirit, which makes things alive, whose breath is the Life. Now that is
soulish which has its Life not from it self, but from the Spirit, and which is
not a Spirit, but only a breath.

All things whatsoever are in their Being, have the food of their Souls and Life
out of Nature, and that from Heaven through the Wind and Air, from which all
that has breath does live und feed, as through the forth-going breath of the
Word contained in the second Principle; for the word of God feeds every
Spirit, Life and Body with its breath or blowing upon; because Life is in the
word, which bears all things by his power, even as it has Created all things.

Now as all things consist of Body, Soul and Spirit, so they have three sorts
of food to their ilfe and substance, the bodily food to the body, out of the
Elements, as from that which comes out of the waters, and out of the Earth,
whence also the body does come, is taken and is made. The soulish food to the
Soul and Life in every thing out of Nature, through both the Elements of VVind
and Air, from whence also the Life and Soul does bome. The Spiritual food to
the Spirit, and that from God, at from whom the Spirit is, namely each Spirit
according to its measure, and to the Spirit in every way this food comes from
Heaven, through the Spirit and Light, as from the three Spiritual Elements,
from whence also the Spirit did come.

Nature does assemble it self in her Spirits Life, and body to the wind, Air
and water.

The Angelical world in its body is no earth, as the Elementary is, but it is
the right body of the water, out of which it subsisteth, and that body is here
beneath with us ICE, but above it is an Angelical earth like unto a Crystal.
And in a word, it is a most noble Salt of Life, fertile, or constant, or firm
over all, and is the Paradise in it self. It is an Angelical Air, which does
not fetch breath there as the living Soul, for the Life of Nature is Eternal in
regard of the end; but it lives and moves in the Virtue of Gods word
Eternally, sine respiratione, or without breathing.

Therefore death cannot Reign in the Angelical world over the Nature, and over
the Tree of Life, but is rather overcome by it (how much more by God) for the
Tree of Life stands unmovable: Therefore by the breaking of the fruit of this
Tree, at the glorious coming of Christ, all shall come from death to life, and
shall be freed and redeemed from death, Devil and Curse. Lastly, in its Spirit
also it is of an Angelical Spirit* by the power of the word and Testimony of
God. Thus namely, that the Dragon has no power over it, but is conquered by
the Spirit of the same, is cast out, and quite extruded and cast away; How much
more th^n by God. Therefore seeing the Nature in her Spirit is the wind of the
Almighty, and a going forth of the Light in which God dwells, and cannot come
to that evil one, or may not fall into an evil, neither may it be blasted or
poisoned by the breath of the old Serpent.

The Divine world in its being is compared to the most noble body of the water
and earth, as it were to a Heavenly body which is and are an Essential
Spiritual Salt, as the most noble and pure Gems, precious stones, and
glistering Gold. In its Life it is the breath of the Almighty, a Soul and Life
proceeding out of the mouth of God in and to an Eternal Life; and in its
Spirit, the Spirit of the Lord it self, who is God praised for ever. God is the
Spirit* the Nature is the Soul or the Life, and the Elements are the Body: But
be it known, that each world has its proper Nature and Element, and that the
one world is never changed into the other, neither can it be altered, nor one
Principle general into another. Now each Principle has its proper Spirit, Life
and Body.

CHAP. V. Of the third general Principle, namely of the Element.
GOd himself is all in all, out of him are all things according to the Spirit,
by him are all things according to the word, and to him are all things
according to the Providence or Confidence. Romans 11. 36. Wisd. 1. 7. Chap. 12.
1. Genesis 1. John 1. Psalm. 104. 27, 28. 136. 25. 145. 15, 16.

The nature is all, but not in all; because she is not in God, who has his own
Nature, and the Elements also are not all, but something only; which is a Salt.
This something is from God after the Spirit, from Nature after the Life and
Soul, and from the Spiritual water after the body. And again, the water out of
the Salt; each world is, and does flow out of the other,

The Nature stands to the Angelical world, and is a flowing out of the divine
world; and the Elementary world is an overflowing of the Nature and Angelical
world.

Lastly, Man comes forth out of the three worlds, and is the concentred or
conjoined Centrum of all the worlds.

There are seven Elements or Powers of the world, as Spirit Wind, Air and
Water; Light, Heaven and Earth, and are such, by which, in, and through which
this world consists and subsists, and without which it cannot subsist.

These seven Elements are Created out of such a one, which in the Elementary
world are all in all, and are incorruptible; namely Salt, which is an excretion
of Nature, Execrementum quasi sobrie sumptum, whereby in this world all things
bodily subsist, and are preserved. Now there is a threefold Salt, namely, a
Spiritual, soulish, and a Bodily and Palpable. The Bodily is fixed and
permanent, both in Water and Fire: Whence we know out of what, wherein, and
whereby all things stand firm and constant, both in the Water and the Fire,
that they may not be drowned, and wherewith they are closed up. The Soulish
Salt is flying; because life and Soul is in it, and the growth of all whereby
all things receive both body and life: but when it comes down again, and
turns to the fixed Salt again, then they receive Life. But the Spiritual Salt
is a right true essence, and in this world the most noble Being of all Being
(Spiritus universi) the Spirits of the Elements, and their Light, and Heaven in
its Essence.

The Spiritual Salt dwells in the Spirit, Light and Heaven, and gives to the
body of the Resurrection, as Spiritual from the Spirit, Light and Heaven.

The Volans or flying Salt dwells in the Wind, Air, Rain, and Dew, this
gives out of wind and air to the body after death,

The fixed Corporeal Salt dwells in water and earth, out of which this our
body does subsist: But Salt is the right fixed Salt, and the right water of
Life, which is a dry water, and together water and Earth, in which the air and
wind is secretly hid, and also the Heavens, Light and Spirit in its depths,
which are then the seven Powers of the Element and world; and all seven may
easily, undeniably, and manifestly to the eye be demonstrated, if the same be
Anatomized.

This only Element of all Elements, is a Power of all Powers in this World: The
Salt is an Excrement of Nature by the Word of God, and is bodily a seed of the
water, and all Elements from whence the water did spring, or proceed, or flow,
by the breathing of the Spirit of the Lord for a seed to all the world, and
abundantly increased by the moving of the Spirit of the Lord; so that the whole
Earth is formed out of it.

The fixed Salt is threefold, as in the Earth, in the Water, and in Heaven. The
flying Salt also, as in Rain, Water and Dew, Air and Wind. The Essential also
is threefold, as in the light Spirit, and upper water. The waters supply three
places or degrees, for out of them them the world did subsist, which is
remarkable, always the one is hid in the other. The flying Salt is the Key,
and opens with it, descending in the Spring, that every thing raises from
the dead, greeneth and grows, and with its ascending in the Harvest shuts
them again.

The Elements are threefold, namely, Spiritual Soulish and Bodily. There are
three of the Spiritual Elements, as bodily, the Heaven; Soulish the light, and
Spiritual the Spirit. The Soulish are twofold, as Wind and Air. The bodily
also, as Water and Earth: Always the one is hid in the other, and the one
always comprehends the other six in it; and always the one of them is bodily
manifest, visible, and knowing, or palpable, but the other six are hid in it.

Each Element also in it self is threefold, as spiritual, soulish and bodily.
The spiritual earth is, and are the Precious stones or Jewels, and that is the
body of the Spirit. The soulish earth is the gold, the spiritual water bodily
are the Pearls, the soulish is the Amber, afterward the Corals bodily.

In all these dwell many Powers, especially if out of water and spirit by means
of the Fire, they are made new and spiritual. All Elements are in the one with
all their Powers, which is a spiritual Rock, out of which the water of Life
does spring to all Creatures, and ebbeth and flows in the whole world, and
fills up Elementarily all in all. And when in the end of the world, this one
is taken away from them, then all the Elements are consumed in and by the fire.

CHAP. VI. Of the three special Principles, Spirit* Wind, and Water.
THe three special Principles, as far as they are Principles, come according to
their Original, as the spirit from God, the wind from the Nature, and the water
from the Rocks and Wells of the Element. Every body in the Elementary world is
out of the water, even also Heaven and Earth. All living, soul and breath is
from the wind, in all bodies, and all spirits are from the spirit: The spirit
has by it the light and Heaven, the wind, the air, the water, the earth. Now
as every thing has its original; so it is of the same fed, nourished, and
thither it returns again.

Now the water is a gathered, concentred, and bodily palpable air. The air is a
soft sensible bodily gathered wind. And the wind is a living gathered spirit.
But the spirit is such an out-spoken word, which Creates and makes some
living thing; so that it stands there essentially, where it was before. Psalm.
104. 29, 30.

In the beginning of the Creation, the spirit moved on the water; by which
moving is understood the wind, by which the spirit has breathed on the waters,
and made them fertile for the Creation of the world.

All things that are, move and have a Being, have their original from the one,
infini eternal Father, EHEVE, JEHOVAH and JESSE, which is the essential,
self-subsisting, living word, which is and was in the beginning, and remains
everlastingly* to which word all other things are just nothing. Through it all
things are Created, are preserved, nourished and fed in their spirit and life,
as through the breath of the Almighty. 4 Esd. 16. 13. Heb. 1. 3. Mat. 4. 4.

Now by the three special Principles, as spirit, wind, and water, which are
Elements also, all Creation is finished, not only because they are the means by
which the general Principles do work; but also because they contain in them the
right seed of all things, and the same in the only true Element of which we
made mention before. For these three bear in their body all Salt and feed,
fixed; and flying, and essential; as also Heaven and Earth, with all that is
therein, and bring forth into the world, each to its proper self-subsisting, or
substance.

Now as all is produced out of the special Principles, according to the
Creation and Nativity: But the sin with the curse and corruption has made all
evil; so must all that is born anew return to water, wind, spirit, and out of
the spirit and spiritual water, must by the wind be born anew to the Image of
the Coelestials; yet so, that in their glory they be no other then Angelical
and divine, and bear the Image of the Coelestials. This new birth goes out of
the upper waters, and out of a Celestial earth to speak Elementarily, and are
nothing else but salt. There is another birth also that goes out of the fire,
and is done in pain and torment. The new birth out of the water, and through
the water is done in drowning by water to death, That out and in the earth is
done through death and Corruption: The birth out of the fire, as a contrary
element, is done in and through the fire in Hell. Every new birth and
regeneration is done through the spirit, as also every Creation and alteration.

The new birth out of the water is done, when water is to be poured upon that
which shall be new born: which the bad contrary elementary does drown, kill,
and reduces to nothing: And on the contrary stirs up the good, draws it
out and makes it glorious, and distinguishes the good from the bad, rejects
the bad, and chooses the good, and keeps it.

The new birth out of earth is done, when a thing is reduced to its proper*
earth* dies and putrifieth therein, then afterward comes forth again, and
rises out of the earth with a new and spiritual body, and parts with the
naughty and corrupted.

The new birth in the fire is done, when all is cast into the fire, and that
which does not hold fire is consumed by degrees: and only that which is
spiritual remains and is saved: and then afterward the new birth with a
spiritual body comes forth: 1 Cor. 3 13, 14, 15. 1 Pet. 4 6. Although we speak
here Physically and Elementarily; yet understanding men will judge
Theologically, and the Wise may search Physically, how every thing has its
true Earth, Water, and Fire, and so mark and observe this mystery.

Now is the Spirit, Wind, and Water, by which all things in the world are
effected. These the word sends forth to all Creations, Births, and
Alterations. These are never quiet, for they are by and with the Word, the
Perpetuum Mobile, as above was mentioned, and cooperate continually into the
Light, Heaven, Air, and Earth: which four Elements stand still unmovable into
which the three special Principles do overflow with their body, soul, and
spirit, as to the Water, Wind and Spirit; and work out all, and finish the
same. The water is as it were the Element, the Wind is like as Angelical, and
the Nature, and the Spirit is Divine.

CHAP. VII. Of the particular principles, Body, Soul, and Spirit.
With those are the Principles enclosed and consists in a threefold Trinity;
and always one produces* another and stand always orderly in their
subordinates, and agree together, that they make up a true and whole Harmony,
and are enclosed at last in the Light, Life, and Love. The body of all them is,
and consists out of the water, also the Earth, the Water out of the Wind; the
Wind* out of the Spirit; and the Spirit o^t of God

There is a threefold body, namely, a sensible or palpable out of Water and
Earth: a Soulish out of Wind and Air* and a spiritual, out of Heaven* Light and
Spirit. So is an Elementary hody, an Angelical, and a Divine, very well to be
distinguished on man.

Further the Soul is corporeal out of the Air from whence it is fed also: and
soulish out of the Wind: and Spiritual out of the Light. The Spirit is
Corporeal out (...) from the Heaven: Soulish out of the Light: and spiritual
out of the spirit of the Elements, out of the Nature, and of God, according as
the Creature is. Out of these three general Principles, Man has also a
threefold spirit according to his measure, and is the perfectest creature:
Always one body dwells in the other: and as soon as one body is dissolved and
broken; in the same moment another and more noble body is manifest, and that in
all things. If now the body becomes nobler, needs must the Spirit be more
noble, high and glorious. But this is the body, after which the wise do seek;
Namely, the Salt which contains all in it self. This body they drown in a
Water, which flows out of the Centrum of the Vegetables; and draw out all
virtues, which afterward come together in a celestial spiritual body, and
afford that precious jewel. All things that are killd and dye naturally, are
drowned in a cold Saturnine Water, for all natural death is done by coldness;
but what is killed in the Fire without a Saturnine Water, is not fit to Nature
for a better state. Only the Salt we seek in the fire, and then through the
Water, and afterward cleanse and purify it with the Baptism of Fire and of
Water. We should therefore six our thoughts on the water, and use the fire very
carefully, because it is a contrary Element, before which nothing can subsist,
but only the Salt.

This is the true body of all Elements, and of all things in the whole world,
if that be taken away, th^^ all perishes quickly, and the Gold it self also in
the Fire. This is the right Heaven, wherein dwell all powers, and is in all
things in the whole world their Heaven, and is compared to the Tree of Life in
Paradise.

Now the soul according to the highest degree, is out of the nature: According
to the second degree, from the Light; and according to the third degree, out of
the Wind. These are the Principles of the living soul: soul and spirit are
distinct, as God and Nature, Spirit and Wind; as Angel and living soul, yea as
spirit and breath.

The middle Principle among the three Principles, is always instead of the
Mother, as the Nature, Wind, and Soul. The body is the Child; which the spirit,
^s a Father begets through the soul. Out of the spirit comes the soul, he lets
it out as his breath and from both these the body: The firm soul and spirit, as
the true life and spirit which is like unto the Angelical world, is always in
the right body of all things that is, in the Salt, when it is opened, then they
come forth in a great clearness, as in an Angelical glory.

At last the spirit of all things is out of the three general Principles, in
each according to their portion and measure. Now the spirit affords the right
inward essence, the forma essentialis, differentia specifica abstractum
essentiae, and nothing else. From the same the body and soul also receive their
essence, whereby the one from the other essentially and properly, are
distinguished; as man from beasts; a beast, foul, fish, vermin, etc from
others: and so one thing from another.

All Creatures are distinguished chiefly into three: as into Animalia, all
living souls: into vegetabilia, all that grow and spring out of the earth: and
into Mineralia, things that grow under the earth, and are dug out, and so in
the water also. These are distinct as the three Principles, and in our wisdom
always a fair harmony does represent it self.

All living souls consist out of Water and blood, in their seeds through a
moist warmth, and a warm moistness each in its mother. All growing things
consist in their seed, out of a slimy water, through the Salt, which is fixed
in the root, flying in the herb, leaf and grass, and essential in the flower;
and all three concentre at last in the seed.

All Minerals, Metals, and what belongs to it grow out of a fat earth, which
the Salt of the earth does hatch: and do coagulate through a cold fire, which
is a Saturnine Water, that is, a fiery water, and a waterish fire that does not
burn.

Even as upon earth all things grow by rain and dew, as also in the earth it
raineth, thaweth, and is misty, thereby grow the Minerals, Metals, and the
like; and all this from the salt fixed, flying and essential The flying Salt
begets Sulphur, the essential begets Mercury.

Among the Vermin the chiefest is the Viper, with her brood and kind, and is
Mercurial.

Among the Vegetables is the Vine, a channel, out of which come three sorts of
water, and also a noble Mineral, and is the Center of the Vegetables.

Among the Mineral is the Gold, yea the Salt. Of all these three the Concentred
Center is man, above all that is created.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Elements, and contrary Elements in the Creation.
THe seven Elements or Powers of the world do rest only upon one, which is a
right well of all Elements in our thoughts, because it contains all. An
Element is such a thing, out of which, and in which the world and all does
consist; without which, nothing can subsist Again, a contrary Element is such
whereby the world and Elements are altered and corrupt and at last must quite
perish thereby.

Now all things are Created out of three Principles Materialiter, namely out of
the word, as out of a spiritual; out of nature, as a soulish* and out of the
Elements and contrary Elements, as an incorporeal-corporeal, and
Corporeal-incorporeal; that is, out of the Elements after something, and out of
the contrary Elements according to nothing.

The word is the all, the Elements are the something; and the contrary Elements
are the nothing The nothing is become something by the word of God; and the
something will become nothing again, when at last the word is taken away.
Although the contrary Elements were once nothing, yet in the Creation they are
a Principle along, because they were made, which were not before, and are of God
counted not evil, but good; because God did look upon them, and has covered
and hid their Principle, which was nothing, yet concentred and fastened
together, Corporeal in and on the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, which
must have stood there as a witness; namely, that the world was Created out of
nothing; yet this should be undiscovered and not ashamed, that is, it should
not be broken, namely, that the shame of the whole world might not not stand
ashamed before the face of all the world, and for a confusion be quite dead and
perish.

Now as long as the contrary Elements remained unknown, and in their
concentrated Center were not broken, they are very good: But so soon as they
are known in their depths, they are such a thing as puts the world to a shame,
and at last altogether does consume it, and reduces it to nothing.

These contrary Elements are three, Darkness as Corporeal, Fire as Soulish, and
corruption as Spiritual; yet Corruption before the fall was no Corruption, but
only an alteration, not unto evil, but unto good, and a change and exchange of
all Created things. The Fire before the fall was not consuming, but in its
knowledge was good and useful: In like manner darkness was very good, and for a
rest and refreshing to all Creatures; but now it is an habitation to ill
Spirits, and as far as darkness in the air reaches and goes, so far and high
also in the air has Satan his Dominion and Reign. Ephesians. 22. Chap. 6 12. And
so are the contrary Elements become hereditary to Satan through sin, who is the
Prince of darkness, and Potentate of the fire, and the fire over him, and a
principle and beginner of perdition,

Out of darkness, Hell is harched, which is threefold. 1. Corporeal, according
to its place, under the earth in the nethermost places. Ephesians. 4. 9. Luke 16.
28. 1 Pet. 3. 19. 2. Soulish in the Reign of the Devil, and Prince of darkness
in high places. 3, Spiritual in the Devil himself and his Children. This Hell
will be cast at last into the fiery Lake.

Out of the fire is produced an unquenchable ever burning Sulphur, and such a
consuming fiery flame, which kills life, and yet always makes death alive.

The Hellish fire is three fold; in the Hell, in the Devil and his Children,
and in the fiery Pool: Out of this alteration, or rather perdition, is at last
Death gotten; which in its bodyliness is a cold fire, and a fiery coldness:
According to the Soulishness, a gnawing worm that continues, devoureth, and
never eats, yet always consumes and still begets again: According to the
Spirit, Death is the Devil himself essentially, who has begotten sin, and sin
has begotten him, the Devil.

Now darkness was good before the fall; for light was hid therein, which God
commanded to come forth out of the darkness: The fire also was good before the
fall; for life rested therein, because no flame was burning in the fire, nor
was manifest. The change and alteration was good also before the fall; because
love did show it self therein, by the increase of the Creatures. Now since
Light, Life and Love include all, therefore they were comprehended also in the
contrary Elements; but they were separated from the same, and thrust out and
parted through sin; and so that* which was very good became exceeding bad, and
turned good and evil to a contrary and adverse thing.

After the fall Hell and Death were begotten, and the fire was made manifest,
Visible and Corporeal; So that it went up into the height by Reason of sin; so
that by Gods permission and command it may fall down from Heaven upon the
wicked world, especially it does lie in and on the fiery Cherub before the door
of Paradise, and guardeth the way to the Tree of Life; but in the glorious and
joyful coming of the great God Jesus Christ* this fiery Cherub must be gone and
come down, and all contrary Elements must reduce to nothing, that is, they must
no more Reign; and also the Devil himself must from above be cast down, taken
Captive, and in Prison must be bound a thousand years, to the glorious liberty
and Redemtion of the Creature, from the Vanity, Curse and Death, where all
things as they were Created, will be renewed.

CHAP. IX. Of the Principle or Original of that evil one, and of the Angels.
BEfore this Elementary world was Created of God, the Angels, and the Angelical
world, and Paradise, which were above the upper waters, were first, and that so
certain, as the nature was first before the Elements, and God before all
things. Therefore always out of the upper things, things beneath were gotten,
and the upper is always before that which is below, even as the Spirit is first
before the Soul and Body,

Now the Angels God has called through his word out of the same light, wherein
God dwells after their spirit, for that end, that they should serve him, and
has presented them in the fiery flame, after the Soul, and as a wind, after
their body.

Now the Angels being out of the light, wherein God dwells, therefore they
can know on, in, and out of the same, what Gods command is, and this light is
the face of God in Heaven, a spiritual food of the Angels, which light the
Angel of the Children may behold, whereas on the contrary the Angels of sinful
men may not behold it, until the sinner does true repentance, then his Angel
may appear again before that light, and before the face of the Lord, of which
there is great joy among the other Angels: But as long as the sinner does not
repent; so long appears the Devil before God, and accuses the sinner day and
night before him.

Now amongst God' Angels* ^ucifer was the chief; for he carried the (...) clear
morning Star, which was and is the son of (...) but he was not content with
that great Honor and Dignity; but would fain have been Lord and God himself,
and no more a servant. This coveting was in Lucifer gotten by an ill look and
eye toward God, inflamed within himself, in the same fiery flame, out of which
the Angels, after their Soul are, and that so much and heavy, that the light
did depart in his Spirit from Lucifer, and instead thereof an unspeakable great
darkness came out of the fire, which Lucifer himself had kindled; and so
instead of Heaven, a Hell it self.

So the fiery flame unknown to Lucifer, undiscovered and hid, was blown up by
himself out of envy and grudgings, so that it turned to an essential anger, yea
to a consuming fire, wherein at first did rest the life* but was afterward
turned into a living death, which never dies, and a deadly eternal life made
manifest, as a soul to Satan. At last through Lucifers pride a strange wind was
gotten in Lucifer, as a body unto him, and Satan has quite lost the Angelical
Principle, and self-subsistance, and became a strange Bird, and a wild Fly.

Lucifer did try whether he could not be a God, or like unto God, which yet he
was in his portion and measure, therefore he is called a Tempter and Satan* and
he was become such an one, namely, both a God and a Creator, and a Creature of
his own, and lost all all Gods Testimony wholly, as also the Testimony of good
Angels. He is a Knave or Liar from the beginning through sin, which has
begotten him, and he has begotten sin, he is sins father, and sin is his
mother; that has begotten him, and he her through covetousness in the leering
eye of self-love and imagination.

Now as sin is that evil, and found out in its Principle by Lucifer, so it has
turned him into an evil one, and one is the Principle of the other; and so he
can be excused by no means. So Lucifer has murdered himself, and has lost the
Angelical Printiple, and is, and remains a forlorn Child, and son of
Perdition the right Antichrist for ever.

Thus is sin gotten through coveting, and coveting through looking upon, and
looking upon through imagination, and that through self-love, and that through
an arrogant liberty, this through security, and that through wantonness, where
there is no fear; for as fear is the beginning of wisdom, so is wantonness the
beginning of folly and sin. He that is fearful will not easily hazard upon
sinning.

Lucifer was Created of God a good Angel; and that so, that he might easily
have been kept from sining: So also might Man if he would himself; but
self-will brought him to that sin, yea his own wantonness; but now he could not
be so perfect Created, that he could not fall into sin at all. The reason is,
because his weight, measure and number could not endure it; because he was not
born of God, but had his Principles besides God, although through God; but what
is born of God and of his seed, that cannot sin, because it is born of God, to
whom it is impossible to commit sin.

Thus is made clear and manifest the mighty abundant difference in the
Creation, which was very good at the Renovation, which was done in and on the
old Creature, by means and help of the spirit of God, and among the new births
from above of God, which is it alone to make Children and Heirs of God, and
Coheirs of Christ, unknown to the world, and their wise Children.

Now the Angels consisting out of Wind, Fire and Light, and the fall of Lucifer
standing before them as a warning; therefore they cover their feet and faces
before God with fear and trembling, and are rather ashamed of themselves, that
they may find grace before the Lord God.

Now they are a fiery flame for a protection of the godly, and a perdition and
death to the wicked: God also is a consuming fire in his Angels, not on, or in
himself, and will come also with his Angels, and his Power, and with fiery
flames to judgment.

CUAP. X. Of the difference of the light and darkness, as also of the light and
fire.
HItherto the light was not reckoned under the Elements by the wise of the
world, though it be the first of them in the Creation, for in all Creatures the
Blood and Eyes are first* and not the Heart. Now the light is a going forth of
Gods glory* and it never goes down or decays in its spirit, an^ is a
dwelling of the seven spirits of God, as the darkness is an habitation of Evil
spirits. In the light dwells the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of Counsel and of strength, the spirit of Knowledge
and of the fear of the Lord. All wisdom understanding and knowledge, all
judgment and examination, and every truth and righteousness comes from, and
out of the light, and through the same.

And as the light does illuminate the whole world, and makes day, and is the
day it self: So it illuminates also every spirit in all living souls; and as
there is no day without light, neither can be; so no wisdom, nor knowledge nor
understanding can be without light. But the light in its body, in our opinion,
is a pure essential spiritual Salt from which all Gemms and precious stones get
their Color; as also all Flowers and Beauties their fairness. All which the
spirit of light does work, and adorneth all things with beauties; for in the
light all Colors are hid, and are gotten by the same, the soul of the light is
nothing else, but a joyful Life out of Nature, as an Angelical Life, and his
spirit and eternal love proceeding from the spirit of the Lord.

Out of this light God has made the lights of Heaven, which are coagulated,
living and comprehensible lights, and are nothing else in their essence, but a
spiritual essential and exceeding pure Christalline salt, so high tempered, as
ever any thing may be without any quality or property of heat; coldness,
warmth, moistness, drought, and have their proper motion in and on themselves;
especially the Sun ^unneth always with the light and day, but the Moon with the
darkness and night, and the other stars in and on their places and order.

Those lights of Heaven do show always and every where clearly the power of the
Elements and contrary Elements, what their operations be, through which powers
all things in the whole world are finished and wrought upon, but through the
lights of Heaven no less then a Looking Glass shows such and such you see.

Now the powers of the Elements and contrary Elements change and revolve daily,
weekly, monthly, and yearly. Now because out of the light comes knowledge,
which searches out all the depths in every spirit, soul and body, and presents
them in the lights of Heaven, prophecy, tell, and give to understand to the
beholders, who are the Children of the light. The spirit of light searches all
in all things, and shows by the lights of Heaven every ascendent or spirit in
all things, and also in Man, namely what spirit, soul and body he has received
at his nativity* out and according to the Elements and opposite Elements, as
also what spirits do incentre in him: All which if bad or evil Man may decline*
or resist by the holy and good spirit, as a beast can shake off the dust or
flies.

Now the Lights of Heaven rule the whole world, namely acording to their time,
and show things present, past, and future: Now because every Element has its
spirits, as the Earth, the Water, and the Air, and their eyes are more
spiritual then our bodily* they can therefore spy something in the lights of
Heaven, and reveal it to Man: But the Children of light do not use the
Communion of such spirits at all, neither should it be; because it is the next
degree to Witchcraft* The Natural Magic can do much; of which the wise Men of
the East made use profitably, who clime to Christ: But the Angelical may do
more yet, and much more the divine. But we must strive always after the best,
and Man has within him a threefold Magnet or (...) whereby he can draw to him
all spirits in the world, and can do wonders. But what says the Lord to it
Mat. 7. 22 Luke 10* 20. For by the natural Magic, Devils may be cast out, and
great wonders done by it. The Prince of darkness can turn to the shape of of an
Angel of light, and will have every where his hand in the work. Now is a very
dangerous time; because all spirits are stirring; because their end is so nigh,
that it is hardly believed. The Air is fuit of spirits, and the he Earth also
is full of them, and every man has his proper Angel, and his bad Angel also:
By the good Angels all good things man does, are set down truly, and the bad
Angels observe all evil that man does, and when once the books are to be
opened, men will be judged according to their works and words. Well be it with
him, who has blotted out his black Register with repenting tears. The spirit
we cannot see, unless our eyes be opened.

Lastly, between light and darkness, light and fire is such a great difference,
as between life and death; blessedness and perdition; yea as between God and
the Devil. The light is and will be an Eternal dwelling of God: But darkness
and fire is an everlasting habitation of Devils and the damned.

CHAP XI. Of the Principle of the fire, and its Mystery.
THere is a threefold fire, namely, the fire of the contrary Element, the fire
of the Angels, and the fire of the Devils.

The fire of the contrary element is threefold. First before the fall, a still
resting and unmanifested fire, without a burning flame. Secondly, after the
fall, a kindled, manifested, burning, flaming fire. Thirdly, a cold waterish
fire, which does not burn, yet smoketh, and works into the earth upon
Minerals, and Metals. With this cold waterish fire all things are forced, and
the Metals also; for it does calcinate them, and turns them as it were into
ashes, destroys and opens them.

This fire is chiefly threefold, as 1. Vegitable, which is as it were tempered,
and is a well rectified Vinegar, which is extremely useful. Of which not many
words, Sat sapienti dictum.

Secondly, it is a mineral fire, which chiefly is the true spirit of Nitre, a
spiritual water out of Saltpeter, which has both heat and cold, and is
Infernal and Celestial.

Thirdly, Mercurial or Saturnine, a strong Salt that has not its fellow.
Without this no Metal is engendered, nor broken, or grows, in which is a great
mystery hid, more then can be Imagined. But the true spirit of Nitre must not
be prepared without a cold fire; for the raging, horrible, and furious Hell,
which is in Saltpeter, must in its devouring and consuming fire be over
whelmed, drowned and devoured, and be reduced to a blessed Heaven.

Now when a Heavenly Water is at hand, then a new birth from above out of water
and spirit can follow. Here lies hid a great Medicine in time of the raging
Plague, Headaches, Leavers, Stone, Gout, and many more diseases, to be used.
And truly the time is come, when all things must be made manifest; and although
we have not yet with our hands prepared it; yet the spirit of wisdom can teach
us all what is secret and mystical, who searches into all deepnesses* and can
show, testify* and make known to us that which no eye has seen, no^ Ear has
heard, and which has never entered into man's heart.

Thirdly, There is also a Metalline cold fire, which reduces all Metals, yea
Gold it self to nothing; only that noble grain in the Gold hidden, stays and
remains, which cannot be forced, and that fire is Lead, Saturn, which
devoureth all Metals, and consumes also it self in the fire at last: Even as
the common fire does consume and devour all wood, and at last it self is
consumed, and goes out: But in the Cinders that remain, there lies the
treasure hidden, which must be drawn out of it with hot water.

The Metals have two sorts of waters, a Cold and a Hot, and both are fire. The
Cold is Saturn, Lead, the Hot is Mercury. Now as the one is an extreme Hellish
Cold; so is the other extreme hot of a Hellish Heat; so that by reason of heat
it stands in a continual flowing, although it feels outwardly Cold.

Now in this fire water, the Metals, especially Gold, after their death, are
born anew, namely, in the Metalline world, and Reign; and yet are anew
Clarified, Christalline, Spiritual, Heavenly body; which is so glorious, that
it can make inferior and less precious, yet to his nature not unlike Metals to
his own substance.

So much is it worth to know the nature of fire, and its mystery, without which
no good or profitable use of it may be had, for our good; for all must be
killed first in the cold fire, even as it were through its Winter, according to
the proceeding of nature, must dye and putrify, if it shall be produced again
in a new body*

Now the fire according to its principle, is begotten out of darkness, from
thence it is produced, and returns into it again: But darkness was begotten
out of the Nothing, and that Nothing stood there in the beginning of the
Creation to the Something, as a Testimony of that which was Created: For all
that is made and Created, that was before nothing, and before it be fashioned,
then it was not fashioned without a frame, and was as it were a dark Ens or
Being, out of which afterward is born the Light, that is a fashionable Being
that is out of the invisible, a visible thing is made.

Therefore the darkness and fire, in a good sense, and before the fall, are an
excrement of the Light, yet are good and useful, even as that which a
Workmaster heweth or cutteth away from that matter, which he intends to make
some fashionable thing: Even as Chips from wood are of the same substance with
that which is framed out of it; yet an excrement of it, and when these Chips
are flung into the fire, they return to nothing. So the contrary Elements when
they are known* they are no more good, but an opposition, adverse and stark
naught.

Further be it known, that in the divine world are no contrary Elements, nay
there can be none in it, although their power has pressed into it yea in the
depths of God, in which it grew dark, when the Lord of glory dyed on the Cross,
and the fire of the raging wrath of God consumed the same, and death and
perdition killed him, Who can speak it out, or who knows what this saying does
mean!

Also in the Angelical world there is no darkness* but yet there is fire. This
Angelical fire is an Excretion of the light, out of which the spirit of the
^ngels is; and this fire also in the beginning, and before the fall has been a
quiet and unknown fire, and very good; because it was and is the soul of the
Light in the Angels: But after the fall it was manifest, known and turned to a
flame, and such a one wherein the raging anger of God does rest, in which all
Gods Judgments do consist, and come out of the same.

This fire now in the Angels with its rage, anger, and consuming flame is not
evil at all; but a just fire of Gods justice to punish the wicked. All anger,
rage and judgment proceed out of the Angelical world, as also the Law, which
was promulgated with fire. Exodus 20. Acts 7. 53, 38. Gal. 3. 19. Heb. 2. 2.

Of the Devils fire was spoken above: More things could be said of the fire,
which for brevity sake we omit.

CHAP. XII. Out of what, wherein, and where by all things good and bad do
subsist, pass away, and yet how they last for ever.
ALthough our knowing and prophesying be but part; yet we will not quench the
spirit, and we are not to despise prophesying: And the Reader in the Lord may
know, that we have our wisdom, be it about natural things, or spiritual,
learned out of the Holy Scripture, and not out of pro hane writings; for the
Bible is sufficient to us to all wisdom, and we used in 24 years no other book
to find out wisdom, but the Bible: Out of this book the spirit of wisdom
through the anointing, can teach us all things, and needs no other spirit or
man to teach us.

Every thing in a word subsists only by Salt, they perish without it, and in
the same, and it lasts for ever in them both good and bad.

There is a threefold salt, namely a Divine, Angelical and Elementary. All must
be seasoned with salt, if it shall last good, and salt is the most noble and
wholsomest Balm, the best preservative and Conservative, the highest
strengthening. The salt of the Divine world is a true light, a Spirit and
Water from above, whereby we are illuminated, breathed on, and baptized, yea
seasoned and salted, that the hellish may have no power over us. For every one
must be seasoned with fire, and must be tried with fire, who and what does
subsist in it, that is blessed, else it is nothing at all. Mark 9. 49, 50. 1
Cor. 13. 14. The salt of the Angelical world is a quick life, in its glory
concentred of God into the Tree of Life; which when it shall be broken at the
glorious coming of Jesus Christ, then all Created things in Heaven and Earth,
in this Elementary world, he will so gloriously and powerfully season with
salt, that they shall be freed and redeemed from sin, Curse, Death, Devil,
Vanity, Pain and Misery, and that will be a noble food at that great Supper, of
which as of an Angelical, and Celestial Manna, all flesh, that is, all Created
things and whole Creatures, shall eat, and drink, and feed, And then also shall
be put away the sharp, bitter, sour, consuming, devouring, perishing, and ^o
nothing, reducing salt of the contrary Element, it shall dye, and to its place
be separated. Of the elementary salt we have spoken already above.

There is another salt also of the contrary element, which is threefold; namely
in the Earth, Sea and Air, The salt of the contrary element, is a sharp
devouring, consuming salt, and reigns in all Creatures, and is always mixed
with the good salt which in the consuming sharp salt is held Captive, and can
no sooner be set at liberty, till that which holds it Captive be drowned and
killed by a cold fire, which is a water above mentioned.

This Salt now is predominant chiefly in the Minerals of the Earth, in the
Mineral Salts, as common Salt, Vitriol, Saltpeter, Alume, Salmoniak, etc. and
is as it were fixed in this. In all Sulphur, especially in the common Sulphur
the Salt of the contrary Elements is flying: But he that can make it fixed with
a cold fire has a more precious thing then Gold is. But what is more abused
then Saturn, Saltpeter and Sulphur? They shoot it into the Air, being so
precious. O malice and wickedness of men! Is it not so that God has made
choice of things, which the world holds to be ignoble, foolish, and rejected,
and base.

Lastly in all Arsenicks is the Salt of the contrary Elements, essential and
spiritual. True it is a right Poison, but having an essence, why should not
some thing be hidden in it.

It must be carefully and purely killed with a cold fire, and be reduced to a
new noble birth.

It is to be observed by the by, that every Lee, especially that of quicklime
is a cold fire, and that same in the unmature Metals, that have yet their
Sulphur, Mercury and Arsenick, may doubtless be of good use, especially in some
Iron or Copper Mines, in which the Sulphur of Sol, the glory of Gold
sufficiently appears; for the flying must through a fixed, be made firm and
glorious. And truly herein is more hid then the world believes.

Now in the Salt is both life and death: And as good things have their Salt; so
have bad, and both are firm, the good therefore; because the life is in it; and
the bad also therefore; because there is both life and death in it. For what
death kills with extreme coldness, that life reviveth again by fire:
Therefore the fire is the life in the Devil and his Children, and the cold is
death: But it is such a life which is not of God; nor out of the light and love
but out of the Devil himself, out of darkness and anger, which is with
unspeakable torment, anguish* pain, misery.

The Salt in the Sea is a soulish Salt, raging and furious, of which something
may be said, because a Mystery is hid in it; it shines also in its fire, and
is a Sulphurious light so that it may be seen.

Lastly, the Salt in the Air is essential, and Arsenical, and poisoneth things
on Earth, man, beasts and fruits, etc. These three sorts of Salt of the
contrary element, are made known after the fall, therefore we must separate
Salt from Salt, that is good from bad, to reject bad, and embrace that which is
good In the end all bad things fall to the Devils share, especially the
contrary elements with their Salt, which makes up the fiery pools* devouring
and gnawning, and yet not consuming, living for ever; yet not alive, but dead,
dies for ever, and yet never lives: And thus it has rightly the name of a
contrary element.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Creation of the World.
NOw having known the Principles in their subordinates, and the Center
concentrated both in and on the Elements, as also in the contrary elements;
thence we may observe how all things are Created by the word, and then to know
also what Scha Ma Jm is, of which is written in the book of the Creation* that
God Elohim in the beginning have Created Scha Ma Jm which the Interpreters have
rendered Heaven and Earth, which runnneth contrary to the Text, and against the
order of the Creation. Who can tell us what Scha Ma Jm properly is? True we
cannot speak with Tongues; for we are more taken up with Prophesying, according
to the grace bestowed upon us. Therefore we will give the interpretation of it
to others, to let them search, to learn what Scha Ma Jm means.

So much is known, that out of Scha Ma Jm all other things are come, as also
the water, out of which Heaven and Earth in the beginning of the Creation were
Created; for it is not enough that we know, how that the world was Created out
of the water; but we ask also from whence came that water then, out of which
the world was made? For the wise go after wisdom, even to her depths, and give
not over, till they find the bottom, and all Principles.

The book of wisdom says, Chap. 11. v. 23. The whole world is before thee,
God, as a moment of the little Tongue in the Weights and Scales, and as a drop
of the Dew that falls in the mornings upon the Earth.

It is manifest, that all Water and Dew, before it is a bodily Water, is first
a Vapor. But how* and out of what, and from whence, and whereby that Vapor
arises, must be searched into: And in our opinion it is nothing else, but such
a bodily spirit, who in himself incloseth all in all, and yields and gives
all to all, and at last gathers all to himself. Out of which now the world is
Created, that same is also in all things, and without it there is nothing no
where, and when that is taken away from it again, then it can be no more of a
being.

That we may set out the depths of the Creation, out of which it was produced,
these are threefold. First the Word of God in which is Light, through which all
things were made, and that which is in all things, is instead of the spirit,
according to the highest degree in the Creation of the world; and this is the
true spiritual Seed of all things, without which nothing is, neither can be.
Afterward is the Soul of all the world, and is distinguished from God, as the
breath from the spirit, and is the breath of the speaking Word of God and
instead of the soul is the true life of all things, according to the highest
degree, and is the soulish seed of all things in the world.

Lastly, the salt is the body and bodily seed of all things, and of the whole
world, in which dwells and rests the Word, and the Spirit of God.

These three hatch from themselves a water, which is a Scha Ma Jm, out of which
the whole world has its original, according to the middle degree, but the
lower degrees are the elements. These three give and set down the three general
Principles for the Creation, as God, the Nature, and the Elements: And again
these three, the Spirit, Wind, and Water; and at last in these three every
Creature, and all is enclosed totally in the Light Life and Love.

The word is God, and God is the word, the Spirit is the Nature, and an
out-breathed breath of God, and the Nature is the Spirit and Soul of the World.
The Salt is an element of all elements, and the elements in their glory are
nothing else but a Salt, (...). Out of these three consists Scha Ma Jm, and the
whole Creation of the world, in each and all their true Principles. In all
Creations the word is the beginning, the spirit the middle, and the salt is the
end.

In the beginning of the Creation Scha Ma Jm was unfashioned and unframed;
there were also darknesses over the face of the depths, and there was a Chaos
or confused being: But the spirit of the Lord moved upon the water, thereby it
became seedy, and the first thing that was Created in it was Light, but was
comprehended of the darknesses so long, till God said Lehior, come forth thou
light, and come before the day, and make a day, that it may be Light: And
presently light parte^ from the darkness* and is according to its body and
being* an essential most refined spiritual salt, which not otherwise, but by
the eye may be brought to the sense. The darkness contains in it Fire, and
the light was parted from darkness, and the fire lay secretly hid therein*
which afterward by reason of sin broke forth to be visible; and is called not
Or, Light, but Vr, Fire.

After the the Light was Created the Heaven, a Firmament out of the water, as
Ice and Crystal: In which the flying soulish salt of life became fixed an
firm, and Heaven it self is such a salt, in which dwe^ all the powers of life,
and of the soul, and from thenc^ from above are poured forth into the nether
world through the Spirit, Wind, and Air, whose body i^ the water, into which
the flying salt is carried.

After the Heaven was Created, the Earth, the bodily Center of the world, a
gross body which contains in it self the fixed salt into which earth all the
elements do incenter. The light is compared to the divine world, the Heaven to
the English, and the earth to the elementary.

Above the Heaven and the Firmament are the spiritual, above the waters, into
which nature does pour forth it self, which above the upper waters have their
world, and the true Paradise, where there is mere light and no darkness. Which
world in these last times is made manifest, in which the Nuptial of the Lamb
and his Bride, and the great true Supper will be kept: Those that in the first
Resurrection and Change at the coming of Jesus Christ have part, shall meet the
Lord, and taken up into the Air to go with him into Paradise, and shall thus be
with the Lord always. The whole Sphere of the world of earth and water are
carried and held up by the air, even as a body is kept and held up by the
spirit and breath, that it may not fall.

CHAP. XIV. Of the particular Creation.
THe Creation in its order is threefold. First General in the Scha Ma Jm, which
was the first Materia, and is yet, out of which corporally all things are
Created, into which all Principles come together, and are concentred: Afterward
Special, on and in the Element, as Lights, Heaven, Earth, and Water, Spirit,
Wind, and Air, are contained in Scha Ma Jm. Lastly Particular, as in all these
things, which out, on, in, and by the Elements were Created, produced and made.

The first that was made in the particular Creation, were the Vegitables, all
growing things on earth, as Grass, Herbs, Trees, amongst which the Vine Tree is
the chiefest. Now every thing has its proper seed in it self: Therefore here
cease Creation; and Conception and birth begins, out, in, and by his own
seed; but at first all things were brought forth out of the earth, on Grass,
Trees and Herbs, through the Word, Spirit and Salt. The Salt has given to the
Grass, Herbs and Trees their bodies, which they all have in them. The Spirit
has given them Power and Virtue, especially for Physic; but the Word gives
the blessing to it. The true Physic. Virtue and Blessing may be sought, and
gathered out of the salt of the earth, and of every Herb, and be made
Corporeal; and at the time when it does greeny, that the essence may be
extracted, and reduced to a Spiritual and Celestial body, which comes forth
green, and yields power to Physic.

Christ says unto his Disciples, Mat. 5 13. Ye are the Salt of the Earth The
Reason, because thereby the whole world was seasoned, and made fertile, that it
did grow up to everlasting life and happiness. But now all Salt is become
unsavory; the Reason, because there is no Spiret nor Word of Life in it.
Therefore it is cast upon the Dunghill, and trampled upon: And behold the Lord
will Create a new one Amen. Halelujah.

The particular Creati^n has begun from, and on the lower, and went upwards.
As now the earth is adorned with Grass, Herbs and Trees; So had God on the
fourth day adorned the Heaven and Firmament with Lights, Sun, Moon and Stars,
which came forth and grew out of fixed flying and flying-fixed Salt of the
Heaven, and are even as the precious stones of the earth. They are fixed in
their Heavenly body, and at the highest temper, but they are flying in their
course, although some of them do stand still.

The chief Lights of Heaven are the seven Planets. Saturn is the highest, and
belongs to the earth, and stands to the earth; who knows whether he were
the highest at the beginning, or whether he came to be the highest after the
fall, and that Mercury was to give place to him. Many things are to us hid, and
much of mystical secrecy is in them. For Saturn eats all, and is Death, and
domineers over all. But Mercury makes alive and growing. Of all much were to
be said, but Sapienti satis. Therefore we must take good heed to the contrary
elements, which over the fall ruled over all: But we must be careful and witty
to rule over them, that death may be drowned and swallowed up in victory.

On the fifth day God Created out of the Waters all things that live therein,
and also the Birds out of the flying salt in the water: Hence it is that they
are so flying* and these have their particular consideration by reason of the
flying salt, and in their Feathers they are Physical in flying Mercurial
diseases, as in the Falling*sickness, Madness, Giddiness; for these diseases
have their original from the Spirits, through Gods permission, and must be
cured with a flying Salt, which is reduced to the highest degree.

Be it known also, that there is great Virtue in Precious stones, as in Pearls,
Amber, Coral, namely, when they are first baptized with a Celestial water,
which be altogether Spirit. The Lodestone also has its mystery: And who can
tell all? We may well say, Great are the works of the Lord: He that observes
them takes delight therein, and to them they are propounded. On the sixth day
God Created all the beast of the earth, and the Worms, and at last man, with
him he closed up the Creation. Among the ^ermius or Beasts, the Serpent is the
Center; in the beginning she did not creep upon her belly, and did not feed
upon earth, but that was laid on her as a Curse from God. Whether she had Wings
we will not deny: There is great subtilty in her, and a Mystery hidden therein:
At the beginning she was not venomous; and among all the Beasts she was the
next by and about Man, as she will also be the next about him in the new world,
when that enmity is at an end. Isa. 11. 8. No Creature is so bodily fair and
subtle as the Serpent. Now because she was at first always about Man, therefore
the Devil did persuade her to persuade Man, that he should break of the Tree of
Knowledge, and eat of the fruit thereof.

Because the Serpent is Mercurial and flying, and is the Center of all Beasts,
therefore needs must there be a great mystery in her for Physic, if rightly
prepared for the Mercurial diseases, especially being full of bones.

Therefore God has finished the work of Creation on the sixth day, with and on
men; of whose Creation hereafter; and on the seventh day the Lord did rest, and
blessed that same day. The six days bear a Curse by Reason of sin; but the
seventh day that now truly comes, that brings blessing and rest, Joy, Honor
and Glory; which joyful day of our Redemption, we through the spirit of
Prophesying do annunciate to all Creatures under Heaven in an everlasting
Gospel, and a very joyous Message, which to annunciate is given to us from the
spirit of prophesying.

CHAP. XV. Of the Mystery of the Word.
II is known out of the Holy Scriptures, that all things are made and Created
by the word, and that yet all things are made by the word, and are preserved
through the word. But here we will not speak Theologically, but only naturally
according to the Creation; Neither do we speak Theosophically of the depths of
God, both which we save till another time and place.

The word of Creation is the general power of God, out of which, in which, and
by which all things are, subsist, and will be. This general power of Almighty
God every Creature makes use of for its best good: But only Man abuses it, as
also do the Devils and Spirits by Gods permission: Hence it comes, that men
must give an account of every idle word; because they have abused the breath of
the Almighty, and use it to sin. Oh, that I could lay a Lock to my mouth, that
I might not transgress with my Tongue.

Because now all Mysteries are hid in the word, therefore the same also
performs all things in the world: Therefore we will say, that hence arises a
three fold Magic through faith, that is a power to know something to bring it
to an effect.

First there is a Natural Magic, which comes out of Natural Faith, wherein
there is such a Magnet or Load stone, that it can draw all things to it. This
faith is gotten in Man, either of nature in his Spirit, which is the true and
right ascendent, namely the spirit of man, and by no means this or that Astre
or Constellation, as the ignorant do imagine, which is only in signam
ascendentis, etc* Or this faith through the art and instruction of the natural
Magic, is wrought in man, so that his spirit receives the ascendent, and
rejoices in the same. As the ascendents in an may very well be transmuted,
transplanted, and altered by the spirits.

Of his natural Magic, without Witchcraft, the wise men of the East made
lawful use, who knew the Star, and proceeded so far therein, that they go not
only great knowledge, but have also done wonders.

This natural Magic is learned out of the true and perfect degree from the
Spirit of God, and goes before and beyond the ascendent, because commonly
other Spirits do mingle themselves into it. This Magic art Daniel and his
fellows had studied, as also Moses the Prophets, and went beyond the wise m^n
and Magicians of Egypt far with th ir skill.

From this natural Magic art the false Magicians took theirs, and because the
true ascendent was not in them, namely the Spirit of God, but had only their
Elementary, or their Masters ascendent, therefore also Lucifer made show of an
Angel of Light, and became ascendent in them, and made Sorcerers of them. Now
as true Magicians know and perform all by the Word of God, which speaks in
them, operates out of them, and by them; so the Sorcerers abuse the word in its
power, and perform wonders thereby, till Moses his staff and Serpent devoureth
theirs, and Daniels wisdom exceleth all the others wisdom.

Balaam was a right natural Magician; but the covetous spirit was ascendent in
him, that he went to the Sorcerers, that is to the spirit of Sorcery, and the
spirit of Avarice had blinded his eyes, that he could not see the Angel that
resisted him* but the Ass saw him and was shye, therefore Balaam must be killed
by the Sword, as others that deserved it. Number. c 31. v. 8.

Out of this false Magic art come all S rcerers and Witchcrafts with their
bewitching spel^, tokens, words and works, and all those that have familiarity
with Spirits: Let every one take heed of spirits, and let them not rejoice when
spirits draw near unto them; but rather fly from them, and pray to the father
of Lights for the Holy Ghost, that he may come to them.

Secondly, There is a Prophetical and Apostolical Magical art, which comes out
of faith of Gods Spirit in his Children, in which the word with glory dwells;
the same speaks to them, in them, as in the Prophets we read, The Lord has
spoken to me; namely, not always outwardly with a loud voice, but rather
inwardly. Thus old Simeon had an answer from the Lord; thus the Lord also spoke
through the Ephod, etc. By this Magical art the Prophets and Apostles have done
so many Miracles, raised the dead, and only by the word.

This Magical art the Devil presumes to imitate, namely that the word should
speak out of Chrystals, by looking into it, out of Rings, wherein perhaps
dwells a spirit, and speaks out of it, etc. But this is not the word, but
only a spirit bewitched into it.

Lastly, There is yet a higher Magic of Gods Children* which works over and
beyond nature, and that through faith, as when Moses divided the waters with
his Red, and Jos^uah bid the Sun and Moon to stand still, and the like; which
things are beyond the course of nature, but all is done by and through faith:
So also when Elias shut up the Heavens that it should not rain, and all these
things are performed in, out, and by the power of the word of God, which when
it calls and commands, then it must stand there.

The Sorcerers also think to make use of this Magic, but theirs is mere
Witchcraft by Gods permission; and yet things are performed really by them,
even as the Egyptian Sorcerers brought up Frogs, etc. but not by the finger of
God, but by the spirit of the Devil, by which shortly the three unclean spirits
and Frogs will do wonders, to seduce the Kings of the earth, as also other
false Prophets. Rev. 16. 13. Mat. 24. 29. Lastly the word speaks out, in and
by all things, because it is in all things, and that by the signature and mark
of every thing in the external viewing, and shows clearly what is hidden
within of power and virtue, if only the speech and voice of the word could be
heard and understood: But in the renewed future world, all these things will be
clear and manifest to the praise of God.

CHAP. XVI. Of the mystery of the Created lower visible things.
GOd has brought forth all Created visible sublunary things out of the
invisible that were so at the beginning, he made them to something and visible,
and gave to every of them a Body, Soul and Spirit after their kind, and in them
he has hid his invisible glory, that is the invisible in the visible. and the
Celestial in the Terrestrial. This is the mystery after which we must
diligently seek, that is after the hidden wisdom, which no eye has seen, nor
can see, neither ear has heard, nor has it entered into man's heart.

All these sublunary Created things visible, have a Terrestrial body, and is
visible: But they have also a Celestial body hid within them inwardly: The
same is so long invisible, till the visible body is dissolved and broke; and
afterward the invisible body is set forth to appear visibly, which is heavenly
and Spiritual, consisting out of water and spirit, and is nothing else but a
Christalline, yea new born salt of life, which cannot be overcome by the
contrary Element.

Further, every thing has a soulish life, that is such a one which must fetch
breath out of the common air, and this is nourished by the same, a life, which
in a moment is and must be mortal, so that nothing is lasting of it. Now to
this soulish life is a quickening Spirit, which does not fetch breath, as
soulish life; but it has life, and is in it self a Spirit of life, and not a
breath, and has eternal life in him, and is nothing else but the Spirit of
God, and the breath of the Almighty that quickneth all. Lastly, all things have
a spirit, that returns thither from whence it came, and does not stay in the
dead; because it is not the spirit of the dead, but of the living, and is the
Spirit of God, which in and by the old Creation and Creature does not stay for
ever, but only in and by the new, which is from above. Thus nothing is lasting
in this world, but vanity and corruption, but it shows to us clearly, how
that all these Created sublunary visible things are an Image of the things
above.

This mystery God has discovered to his Children and to the wise, that namely
this lower Created visible Elementary world is an Image of the upper visible
Spiritual, Celestial, yea divine world. Therefore when the visible Elementary
world does vanish, then the spiritual world yet invisible, will be made m
nifest and visible: Therefore there is no Creature, which does not show the
mystery of the superior spiritual world; of which mystery and wonders in the
future renewed world in Zion will be preached.

Now the Apostle siath clearly, We do not look upon the visible, but upon the
invisible, 2 Cor. 4. 18. Seek the things that are above, and not the things on
Earth. Col. 3. 2. In my fathers house are many dwellings that last for ever,
says Christ. John 14. Why should we regard the visible things which are fading
away. The Apostle says, If there be a Soulish body, then there is a Spiritual
body also. 1 Cor. 15. 44. And when this house of our Earthly Tabernacle is
broken, then we have an house from above of God, which is not made with hands.
2 Cor. 5. There are Terrestrial bodies, there are also Celestial. 1 Cor. 15.
40. Yet always the Spiritual, Celestial, and yet invisible, are hid within the
soulish, Terrestrial, and visible.

Now as God his invisible glory continually pours down into this sublunary
world, so he gathers it to him again, and then when all is ended in the end,
he will set them before him in a new Creation, as it is written Rev. 21. 5.
Behold I make or Create all things new.

But before this new Creation comes, the renewing of the old Creation and
Creature goes before. Namely, in the joyful coming of the Lord, which will be
with great power and glory, because all shall be set free that is called
Creature. Romans 8. 23. From the Devil, Curse, Death, then will be the joyful
Jubilee.

Now we must know, that there will be great difference between the renewing,
and the new being it self. The old Creature is made new in its old being; but
the new Creature has a new essence, and that not from below, as the old, but
from above, For above is the right essence, below is o ly the type and Image;
this is the mystery we are to observe. Above are the right Principles and
Elements; these below are only a shadow: Below are merely Terrestrial bodies;
but above are the Celestial, although they are hid in those below.

The Terrestrial bodies are mere Ashes, but the Celestial are a noble salt of
life. The Terrestrial life is only soulish and a mouth full of breath: If that
be gone, then down falls all. But the Celestial life is an Eternal life and
cannot dye. The Terrestrial spirit is but a wind, if that be gone it flies
into the air and vanishes: But the Spirit of God is a quickening Spirit' even
as God himself is.

Now as all things are an Image of the Heavenly, so in truth the soulish Adam,
and Terrestrial man, is an Image also of the Spiritual Adam, and Heavenly man,
which is Christ in God, and God in Christ. This is the great and miraculous
Mystery which thou O man, O Adam, O thou Image of God chiefly above all things
should observe, that thou may know thy self in God, and God in thee, and
may know and learn what man is, what Adam is, what the Image of God is, that
is, what thou thy self art (of which in our book Adam) which is the greatest
wisdom; Namely for one to know himself, after a perfect and true knowledge,
which is spirit and truth: He that does not regard this, but despises it,
which yet is Gods Image, rebukes himself, and will be rebuked of God also.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Creation of man and his Anatomy.
MAn has nothing so much to care for, as himself that he may know his own
best, and salvation, Now he that knows himself aright in spirit and in truth,
knows God also, and all things. Therefore man's knowing himself avails most
to himself. Now to speak briefly, all things, and man also consist in one,
three and seven. The one is individual, a self-subsisting in it self. The three
are Body, Soul and Spirit. And the seven are chiefly the seven Powers, after
the seven Powers of the seven Elements, and after the seven Spirits of God,
which seven Powers every Creature has in it self in its glory.

Even so man is an only man in himself personally, (...) individualiter, in his
self*subsistance: But is put together of three, as of Body, Soul and Spirit,
and is testified by seven Powers, as 1. by Moving, 2. by Hearing, 3. by Seeing,
4 by Smelling, 5. by Tasting, 6. by Thinking and Reasoning, 7. by Sounding or
Voice. Moving contains the life, to feel, see, go, etc. are reckoned all to
one.

In this part now Man is Soulish, like unto the living Souls and Beasts, which
have all these but in their portion and measure, number and weight, namely as
much as belongs to them. According to this, man has no more then they, and
has with them a living Soul, out and after the Elements, of equal beginning
out of the earth, and of like going down to the earth again. Sal. in Eccles 3.
19. After, Man has more then the Beasts which is out of another world, namely
out of the Angelical; which is the Mind, which in its spirit is a Preacher of
the Law, in all men from Nature, and has the Knowledge, Will and Conscience to
good, directs Man to all good, and accuses man in evil things, in his
Conscience. Number. 2. 15, 16. Lastly, Man has also a higher and more glorious
thing in him, which is the Breath of the Almighty a Heavenly Soul and life from
God, which God breathed into the first man's Nostrils and face, wherewith he
has marked and testified his divine inward love to his Image, in and on a
piece and part of the Eternal light and life. Genesis 2. 7. Job 27. 3. c. 33. 4.
According to this part, Man is Immortal, because he has such a treasure within
him, namely the Breath of the Almighty, and thus herein he is very much
distinct from the beasts, yea* he is above the Angels In this Heavenly Soul is
hidden the Kingdom of God, and in this Breath of the Almighty consists the true
Manhood, by which he becomes a true immortal man: But in the other Elementary
part, he is like unto the Beasts, Terrestrial, Corruptible, Mortal, Dust and
Ashes,

Now man having received at the Creation such a part out of God, from thence he
can be made partaker of the new birth, Creation and Creature from God, of his
Nature and Essential seed, which is the most holy Flesh and Blood of the Word,
which is Christ, and thus the new man is the new Creature out of Gods, and his
quickening Words seed, that is of Christ, and of this Spiritual Adam and
Heavenly man, of his flesh and bone* John 1. 13. c. 3. 1. John 3. 9. 1 Pet. 1.
23. 2 Pet. 1. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 17. 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47, 48. Ephesians. 5. 30. This Seed of
God Man receives into his Heavenly Soul, through the Holy Spirit to a new life
of Gods Inheritance: And this body together with this Heavenly Soul, and the
Holy Ghost from God in its full self-subsistance, does not personally appear,
till after the Angelical glory and laying down of the same body. Lastly, in the
end it enters into the divine world: Hence it is said not to be manifest yet,
what the Children of God are, 1 John 3. Only in a Riddle and obscure word is it
spoken of.

After the part of the first Resurrection of the changing, at the coming of
Christ, and according to the Jewel of the Heavenly calling, all these that are
partakers of it, receive an An elical body, life and spirit, therewith they
enter into Paradise, and the Angelical world, and will be (...), like to the
Angels. Mat. 22. 30. Mark 12. 25. Luke 20. 36.

Each body of man; also the soul and spirit are nourished and preserved from
that, from which they come and are taken as the Elementary body out of Water
and Earth, the soul out of Wind and Air, and the spirit out of Heaven, and go
again into the same, when they are dissolved.

According to the Elementariness there is a threefold body in man, whilst he
lives out of Water and Earth, when he is dead, out of wind and earth till the
Resurrection, and when he rises out of Spirit, Light and Heaven, and know that
every Element has its proper body, life and spirit. Further Gods Holy ones
rest after they depart in the Elementary part in the Earth, Grave, or where
they are deceased. So Samuel was heard out of that place of his Grave where he
deceased, to pronounce a ruin to the rejected King Saul. According to the
Angelical part they rest in Abraham's bosom, which are the Chambers of the Just
in the high Heaven: But according to the divine part, they are in Paradise; of
all three the Scripture testifies clearly.

Lastly, Infidels come to Hell and Prison with all, except the dead body: But
those that have sinned against the Holy Ghost, and have no pardon for it,
neither in this nor in the other world, are buried in the Death, because they
have committed a deadly sin. All the dead rise incorruptible, that is in a
Spiritual and Celestial body. But what glory or shame every body shall
receive, shall be known after the general judgment is past

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Image of God, after which Man is Created*
THat man is Created after Gods Image, is manifest out of Scripture. Genesis 1.
26, 27. Jam. 3. 9. But only this is the question, what this Image is, after
which Man is Created. Every Creature or Beast are made after their own Kind and
Image, but Man only after Gods Image. This Image is Christ, (...), essentially,
bodily the Image of the invisible God. Col. 5. 15, For God is a Spirit, and and
may not be felt nor seen, unless it be in his essential substance, and
substantial essence. Even as Man in his true Manhood, after which he is
distinguished from all other living Souls, a Spirit or Spiritual in and on his
Spiritual Soul, and Man's Spirit cannot be seen, felt or known, otherwise then
in his body, in which he dwells with all his fullness. So the invisible God,
who is a Spirit, cannot be seen or known but in Christ, and his substantial
body, as in which God the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, together with
the whole fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily. John 14 9. 1 John 1. Col. 2.
9. And this is the Spiritual Adam, a quickening Spirit, the Heavenly Man, the
Lord out of Heaven 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47.

The Image of God is threefold; Namely 1. the Image of the Essence essentially,
after man is, his own Image in his own proper Essence and Body: So Christ also
is the essential and bodily Image in God, even as Man's body in Man, and so is
God in Christ, as Man is in his body, his own essential self-subsisting bodily,
and personal Image. 2. The Image of that form, on the outward appearance of
that form, Face and Members, 3. The Image of the living properties, Power, or
what name soever it may be called. Here is manifest the Mystery of the Image of
God, and that God in Christ, and Christ in God was much sooner a Man then we;
for we are in all things fashioned after him, and so his counterfeit.

Christ the Image of God, and Man who is out of Gods Image and honor are thus
distinguished; Namely, 1. As the Image and Essence. 2. As Essence and Essence.
3. As Spiritual, Heavenly and Divine, and as Soulish, Terrestrial and from
beneath, that is as Adam and Adam, Man and Man, and as above and beneath. The
Soulish Adam is not an Image of God after the Essence, as Christ, Reason,
because his Essence is Terrestrial, and from beneath; but in and on that
Terrestrial body only that Image in that manner, as a counterfeit, and that in
a Terrestrial soulish Essence from beneath out of the Earth: So is the Soulish
Adam and Terrestrial Man, an Image of the Spiritual Adam and Heavenly man, as a
stony wooden or Image of Wax of a living man's Image, is not in humane Essence,
on the Flesh and Blood, but in another being.

Now as Essence and Essence are one distinct from another; so is frame and
frame. 1, The inward form of God, is the most holy Godhead, which with all
fullness dwells bodily in Christ. Of this form man has received the Breath of
the Almighty in a Heavenly Soul to his inward essential form and true Manhood.
2. The bodily visible, palpabl and personal form of God, essentially in which
God personally appeared, and personally was made manifest, is the flesh of the
word the body of Christ After this man has a body of flesh, blood and bones,
but not Divine, Spiritual and Heavenly, but Soulish, Terrestrial, and from
beneath. 3. The manifest face. (...), and looks, and presence on the head, body
and all Members, and their Powers and strength. After this also is Man framed,
and thus to be looked on; in which consideration many Mysteries may be
observed, although the spirit of Error says, as if God had no Head, Eyes,
Ears, Face, Nose, Mouth, no Hands nor Feet, because he is a Spirit* which
rather befalls those Spirits of Error, he has Eyes and sees not, neither
acknowledges the Image of God in Christ and in Man, has Ears and hears not,
and a Heart, and understands nothing,

Further Man is made after Gods similitude, and is like unto God; Namely 1. on
the Heavenly Soul, Eternal and Immortal* and thence he is of God. 2. Like in
Power, that he can do much, namely after his part, measure and weight. 3. Like
in Glory, as a God, over all other Creatures a Lord and Ruler,

Good Reader here you must know and observe, that this great Mystery does
manifest here, and Brings along the right Jehior let it be light, the day of
the Revelation of the Son of Man, of which Christ says* expressly, Luke 17. 22.
etc. On which the the Son of man is revealed, and that this is the Revelation
and appearance of Jesus Christ, of whom the Holy Apostles have prophesied. 1
Pet. 1. 7. and 5. 1 Timothy 6. 14. 16. ^ Joh. 2. 28. Tit. 2. 13. 2 Timothy 4. 8. and 2
These. 2. 8. Thus The Revelation or appearance of the coming is clearly
distinguished. Mal. 3. Mat. 24. 30. And chiefly Rev. 12. He that has Eyes let
him see, and he that has Ears let him hear, and an understanding Heart hearken
unto it.

But this is the Revelation and appearance of Christ, the day of the Revelation
of the Son of Man, namely, that God in Christ, and Christ in God, a Spiritual,
Divine, Heavenly Adam, and man from Eternity is, and has been in a Divine,
Spiritual, Heavenly Essence, flesh and blood, and after this his essential
Image he has in the Creation created and framed a Soulish Adam, and
Terrestrial Man.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Mystical Image, that is of the Mystery of God.
THis is the Mystery of God, as was said already, which is clear and manifest
on the Soulish Adam and Terrestrial Man from beneath, that namely above is the
true Adam and Man, but beneath is only his Image. Wonderful is Gods counsel,
and who has known the Lords mind, who was so pleased, that the last should be
the first, and should receive the Money or Penny, and the blessed glory at
first. Well may these last say, This is the day which the Lord has made, let
us rejoice in it* it is marvelous in our Eyes. ^sal. 118, To day is fulfilled
the Word which is written, The Stone which the builders rejected, is become the
Corner Stone, and it is mavelous in our Eyes; for the Spiritual Rock, of
which all the Fathers have eaten and drunk from the beginning of the world, and
upon which the Church of God is founded and builded, remained unknown, till to
the seventh Trumpet, where the Mystery of God must be manifested, and is also
made manifest; for the Spiritual Adam, and Heavenly Man in his Divine Flesh and
Blood, through which we are so dearly bought, is thrust away from the Holy
place; and on the contrary another Flesh and Blood from beneath out of sinners
is brought into the Holiest for an abomination of the desolation.

But now the new Creation is come, in which the Word says, and the Lord
himself speaks, as he has promised. Isa 52. 6. c. 40. 5. Saying, Jehior, or
let it be light for the day is come, which is known to the Lord, and to them to
whom he will reveal his Mystery. Zech. 14.

Concerning the Mystery of God in the Creation of Man, it is thus that God has
Created Man, a Man and Woman. Genesis 1. 27. And took the Woman out of the Man,
Chap. 2. 21, 22. To show the great Mystery of Christ, and of his Church, which
is his Wife and spouse, out of his flesh and bones. Ephesians. 5. 30, 31, 32. But
the Divine, Spiritual and Heavenly Eve is threefold. 1. The most holy Godhead
it self. 2. The Church of Christ. 3 The Heavenly Soul in Man. This is the body
of Christ his Church, whose Savior he was made, for which he gave himself. The
Divine Eve as the most Holy Godhead is the Mother of us all, and the right
Jerusalem which is from above. The Spiritual Eve as the Church of Christ is the
Mother, the Spouse of the Lamb. The Virgin and Daughter of Jerusalem. The
Heavenly Soul is the Heavenly Eve, a Maid of the Lord, a Daughter of Jerusalem,
who was married to a Terrestrial Man, who brought her to great misery and
death; but the Lord was made a Servant for her, and has made her free again
through his death, and has married unto her a new Adam man, out of his flesh
and bone, of which she has a divine Inheritance.

Now if we ask after the Mystery of God, how that may be made known, answer is,
on man it may be known: There is but one man in one Person, but in it three
witnesses of his substance, as Body, Soul and Spirit, and in seven Powers: The
Spirit is always in stead of the Father, and is the Father himself also, and
begets by the Soul, as by the true Mother, to himself a body, which is the
Child and the Son, in which dwells all fullness. So there is but one God, in
one only Person, but in three Witnesses, Father, Word and Holy Ghost, and in
seven Spirits or Powers of God: God is a Spirit and a Father, and begets
through the Word, and in the same to himself a Body, a Child, a Son, in which
he with all his fullness dwells bodily, in this manner, that he that sees the
Father, sees the Son also, the word it self, the quickening Spirit, and the
quickening Adam himself.

Afterward God begets a Son, not after the Person, or a personal distinction,
as one Man another Man, else there would be two Gods, although there is but one
only God: But after the Testimony for our sakes he begets a Son, that we namely
by that Witness, as of the Father and Son in God, might be made Gods Children,
Heirs and Co*heirs out of his Seed, flesh and bones; for God in and for himself
needs neither Father nor Son, because there is never no more in him but one in
number, but even himself is Jesse, and all in all, neither are there two or
three, but One only, and none else.

3 Lastly God begets also a Son, and is a father after the Testimony, and that
to all Creatures, and what ever he has Created, namely, that all might have a
trust and confidence in him as also the young Ravens, when they are forsaken by
the old ones. This Testimony is done by the Spirit, which from God is in all
things, and fills up all. Wisd. 1. 7. Chap. 12. 1. Who it is that cries to God
out of the young Ravens, Who is a God of the Spirits of all Flesh. Number. 16. 22.
And remembers to God, that he is a father of all Creatures, and cannot,
neither ought to forsake them. Now the Spirit is it, that calls upon God in
all Creatures, and praises and glorifieth, him where is is said in the Psalm.
All that has breath Praise the Lord; Every Spirit Laud and Praise the Lord;
The Earth, the Sea, and the Trees in the Forest Praise the Lord. O man there is
much in the Spirit, the knowledge of him avails much; for if you do not know
him, you are but a Beast without a Spirit, as Ecclesiastes and others more have
it.

CHAP. XX. Of the Truth and Spirit, by which all Wisdom is justified.
WHen we intend to speak of the Wisdom, it must be done in the Spirit and
Truth. Now nothing is Truth but only the Spirit, and the same can lead us into
all Truth, can teach us all, and can tell us of things to come; for all Spirits
are in subjection to him, he penetrates through them all, even as fire does to
Gold and Silver seven times, and the good that remains in it, it does not
undo, but rather thinks that there is a blessing in it, and blows into the
smoking ^lax, a fire of Life, Light and Fire, and in^useth it self into the
same, that it may be fitted for a new Creation, for a multiplication into many
thousands.

But nothing may attain unto Wisdom, unless it be first gone to the fire for a
Trial, even as the Gold cannot come to its glory, unless it be gone in the
Crusible through the consuming fire seven times, that afterward it may be
Baptized with Water and Spirit to a new birth, and become a new Gold, and
become out of the same Spirit and Water increased into many thousands, and as a
Heavenly Gold, Spirit and Metal, whereby other inferior metals may be turned
into the substance of the best Gold. So it fares with man that shall get
Wisdom, first he must be baptized with Fire, then with Water, and then with the
Spirit, and all this is done in the Crusible of the Terrestrial man.

But all wisdom is sufficient through the Spirit, and in Truth, through
Principia subordinata, and Concordantia, which do concenter afterward in a
Harmony. The Principia contain the true beginning of every thing from whence it
came, thither it does return also, and from thence it is preserved also. The
Subordinata contain the Order, straitness and perfection of every thing, as
they do hang one in another, stand and subsist one by another, even as a Ladder
or Stairs, there must not be one step amiss or wanting, else the subordinata
are not true. Commonly there are seven subordinata, and follow one upon another
orderly, and things that follow one after another are subordinata, and thus it
is perfect,

Lastly this is a Concordance, that all things may agree one with another, and
a Contrariety be no where found, seen or heard. Even as in sweet Music all
things are Harmonious, let the Voices be as many as they will, and change one
in another, going out of one into another, and an everlasting Ternarius
remains therein, and so the Principles and Concordance consist in Ternarius
and Unity, where one flows out of another till to the number of seven of the
Subordinata, which reach after the greater number till to Twelve.

At last the Harmony concentreth, and encloseth all, which takes altogether in
One, Three and Seven, and presents one as the other, namely the upper as the
lower, and the lower as the upper; so that none be against the other, although
they be so far distinct as God and Creature, Spirit and Soul, Heaven and Earth,
yet one is in the other, the one is known by the other, and the one is
justified by the other, and that in Spirit and Truth. Search now and see, try
and learn, hear, observe, and judge what Wisdom this is, and what Truth and
Spirit is presented in this Book. The fool knows nothing of the Wisdom, and
does not understand her way. Liars do not understand the Truth, nor do they
know her Principles; and the soulish, brutish, and profane know nothing of the
Spirit, although they hear his wind blow, yet they know not from whence it
comes, nor whither it goes. Therefore do not look upon men, do not inquire
after men that is nothing, and do not stare upon the image to the intent to
adore it, as all those do that dwell on Earth. Rev. 13. But only inquire after
the Spirit and fear him; for he will direct all in the Word of Truth and
Righteousness: Him you are to Honor, and against him do not think, speak, or
do, that you may not be condemned out of your own mouth.

Now all Spirit, Truth and Wisdom reveal themselve; in these three, and are
thereby known and justified, namely in a Divine Light, in a Divine Life, and in
a Divine Love, where these three are in, on, and about man, there is really
Spirit, Truth and Wisdom. The Divine Light contains all wisdom,
understanding, and knowledge. The Divine Life contains all Truth, Holiness
and Righteousness: And the Divine Love contains the whole Spirit, and pours
him out into our hearts, and thereby we know, that God has loved us, because
he has given us of his Spirit, which cries in us Abba, and gives Testimony
to our Spirit, that we are the Children of God; He pours forth our Tears and
Prayers before God, that we might find grace before the Lord, and teaches us
to pray aright before the Lord about things that are above, and makes
intercession for us with unspeakable sighs.

Thereby we know in the Spirit and in Truth, where the right Wisdom, the Divine
Truth, and the Holy Ghost is, for these three Light, Life and Love proceed from
God, and God himself is Light, and there is neither Darkness nor Fire, in or
about him. God is Eternal Life, there is neither Death nor Perdition out of
him, in or about him. God is Love it self, and there is neither Wrath, nor
Pain, Hell nor ^amnation, out or of him. He that stays by, in, and on these
three, namely by the Divine Light, in a Divine Life, and in a Divine Love, he
stays and abides in God, and God in him, in the Spirit and Truth, according
to the wisdom and true knowledge of God, and knows what is Truth, Spirit and
Wisdom, and tells their true Principles, Subordinates and Concordances in a
Divine Harmony, proved to the Elect Angels and Men in Spirit and in Truth.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Mystery of Time, to understand it aright.
NOthing so secret at night, but the day may reveal it, when the Light comes
to its Day, and the day to its light, and the clear Sun does shine over all
that is under Heaven. The Night is past, and behold the day breaks on with its
fair morning light, which is a light fire, and a fire-light, who can now
subsist; for the Lord comes, yea the Lord comes coming, Amen, Halelujah! He
is like unto the fire of a Founder, and like unto the sharp Lee of Soap
boylers, he will melt, prove try, etc. He will wash, purify and cleanse, And
who can stand before him. Mal* 3. This he does therefore, that all filth may be
done away before the Sun rises, and may not put the whole Earth and world to
banishment or destruction. Chap. 4.

Now that day being come with its light in this time, then the Mystery of the
time of the whole world will be revealed: But always is included and closed in
and with the number of Seven. For in the seventh day God finished the Creation,
and so in Seven always included: But the number 7 stands thus, 7, 49. 70. The
number Seven after our time, stands chiefly upon the Seventh Trumpet, in and
with it the Mystery of God is finished, yea revealed. Rev. 10, 11, 12. Chap. As
also with the seventh Vial of Gods wrath: But as much as we know in part, we
are and live betwixt the fifth and sixth Vial. The number 49. shows expressly
that fair Mystery of the time of the refreshing and restitution of all that is
lost. Levit. 25. And the number 49 is the end of the little seventh day, and a
beginning of the great seventh day, and Sabbath of God. Lastly the number 70
sees upon the 70 weeks in the Prophet Daniel, as also upon the expiration of
the 1335 days. Chap. 9. 24. and 12. 12. When these are about, then the
transgression will be reconciled, every Prophecy fulfilled, and the most Holy,
Holy with his Saints will take the Kingdom, and Jerusalem rebuilded, and the
Eternal righteousness, and all what has been lost by the fall shall be
restored.

Of this great glory and unspeakable joy, the Spirit prophesies in all
Creatures, yea in all Lights of Heaven, and in all the Elements. But where are
the Seers, where are the Hearers, and where are the Observers.

Further concerning the time of the world, it is divided in 1. 3. and 7. The
one time generally contains the whole great day of the World 12 hours. Mat.
12. Which shall be 6000. years, and so there were 500. years to an hour* but
the days shall be shortened, so that they shall not be full 6000. years and the
days or years of that shortning are clear in the Book of Genesis, at the first
judgment over the world, etc. The three times of the world now are, that they
shall be divided* namely, the 6000. years into three times: As the first time
from Adam till Noah at the Deluge, and contains 1656. years: From the Deluge
till to the Messiah, born of the Virgin Mary is the second time divided into 12
parts, each contains 214. years, or 214. year, which added together make
2568. years from the Deluge till to the Messiah. 4 Esd. 14. 11. Now if 1656.
are summed up with the other, then the Messiah is born into the world of the
Virgin Mary, in the year of the world 4230.

The third time of the world is from Christ's Nativity, till to his glorious
coming; the Mystery of which year is mystically signified in 4 Esd. 7. 28, 30*
and Chap. 9. Calculation.

Concerning the abovesaid threefold number, 7. 49. 70. therein is the Mystery
clearly signified without any diminution or addition, if only you will open
your Eyes, Ears and Hearts to see, hear and observe, clearer it cannot possibly
be told, these numbers in themselves calculated, namely, to know certainly how
many years every hour of the twelve do contain, because the 6000. years are not
complete, but those days must be shortened

But now as in the former times and judgments over the world, always seven days
went before the judgment came upon the world: So it is now in and with the time
of the judgment over this world. Genesis 7. 4. Josh. 6. Levit. 25. Now when the
judgment is proclaimed, seven days goes before the Proclamation. Now if you
have the Spirit of Daniel, then number and reckon how many days are past, and
how many are behind to the judgment. None believes what alterations there are
at hand, the whole World lies in wickedness, and it will perish in it.

But that we may keep nothing from the Reader, and wellwisher to wisdom, and
that he may fully conceive the time of the end, namely in the sure token of it,
then there are three signs of it; the first is, that presently after the great
horrible bloody Battle, that is at hand, he do come, whom we expect. Mal. 3.
and 4. and the Gospel of the Kingdom be Preached in the whole world for a
Testimony over all Nations, that one Shepherd and one Flock may be. Mat. 24.
14.* Rev. 14. 6. Zeph. 3. 8 9. The second time is, when the Ten lost Tribes of
Israel are found out again over the Water into the Land, and upon the Mount
Israel do come from the Orient after the sixth Vial is poured out, Rev. 16, 12.
4. Esd. 13. 4. Isa. 11. 11. Chap. 27. 13. Jer. 31. 8. Deuteronomy. 30. 4. Mica. 4. 6.
7. Romans 11. 25. Yea whole Israel and whole Juda will come again into their
Country, and will turn to the Lord their God. Hos. 3,

Lastly, The last sign of the coming of the Lord is when the Beast, and all
Kings of the Earth, together with Gog and Magog, by the seduction of the three
unclean Spirits into the Land of Israel, and to the Valley of Jehosaphat, and
upon the Hill of Israel come together to a Battle, etc. and are destroyed with
fire from Heaven. Rev. 19, 19, 20, 21. Ezekiel. 3. 8. Joel 3. Isa. 24. 21, 22.

This is the end, then begins the Kingdom and Priesthood of Melchisedech,
Halelujah,

Come Lord Jesus, and deliver us from the Evil One. Amen.
Conclusion.
COurteous Reader, we conclude this our Jehior or Morning Light, and salute you
in the Lord, from the Lord in the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, which the
Lord will pour out over us all, through the Power from above, that we might
find Grace before him at his coming, and may not be put to shame when he
judges.

Reader, if you are a wellwisher to Wisdom, then take of us the Crumbs which we
have gathered from the Lords Table, and accept of them till Melchisedech
comes, and distributeth the Holy Shewbread, and to drink of the New Wine of
his distributing at the great Supper of the Nuptials of the Lamb in Paradise,
the fruits whereof himself will set up. You are to give thanks with us to him,
from whom all good gifts come from above the Father of Lights, praying* that he
would inlighten us all, turn us to him, and make us happy for ever. This is
according to the love of God, whose dedesire is, that all men may be saved, and
that all may come to the knowledge of the Truth: Therefore let us be merciful,
loving and perfect, Even as our Heavenly Father is merciful, loving and
perfect, that it may be known and revealed, that we are his Children.

But Courteous Reader, if you affect folly, and art a despiser of Wisdom, go to,
and despise, but be sure that you do not despise men herein, but God himself,
who has given us his Spirit, and from whom all Wisdom comes, and think that
the Spirit of judgment will require an account of you in that day.

But Reader, if you are a Pharisee and Hypocrite, and seek rather Honor
from Men, then from God; We'll consider then, what the Lord says, 1 Samuel 2.
30. He that honors me, him I will honor also, and he that despises me,
shall be despised again. And Christ says, Mat. 10. 3^. He that confesses me
before men, him will I also confess before my Heavenly Father that is in
Heaven. He that denies me before men, him will I also deny before my Heavenly
father.

But Reader, if you are a simple Heart, and art not fit for Wisdom, then abide
on, in, and by the fear of the Lord, in a Godly life; which fear is not only
the beginning of Wisdom, but also the end of Wisdom, and it is no help to man,
though he be able to speak with an Angelical Tongue, and had all knowledge, and
understood all Mysteries, and had such a faith, whereby he could remove
Mountains, and withal had not the Love of God, which endured everlastingly,
all will profit you nothing. Therefore blessed are the Babes and sucklings
which know not these outward things, for theirs is the Kingdom of God, because
the Spirit of God is declared in them. Therefore let no man be puffed up with
Knowledge: And for our part we are not extolled therewith, for Satan also does
buffet us with fists, and does upbraid us with our shame. Therefore we humble
our selves that the Lord may accept of us in mercy, Who gives Grace to the
humble, and beholds low things, and him that is of a contrite heart, and
trembles at his Word.

Lastly, This is the Conclusion, that every one examine himself, and that
according to the Spirit, Truth and Wisdom, and no otherwise, whether God,
Christ, and the Holy Ghost be in him, which every one may know by his thoughts,
Words and Works, in his affection, will, and pleasure, and in his Knowledge and
Conscience. Every good thing is from God, and of God, and not of Men. All Sin
is from the Devil, who seduceth man, and leads him to perdition and
destruction. Well be to him, who separates bad from good, rejects bad things,
and makes choice of good, and bears fruit thereby.

The Lord Zeboah will at last take away the evil Eternally, and restore the
good again, and return bad things to that evil one, and recompense it upon his
head, Amen.

The Lord our God be gracious unto us, and help forward the works of his hands,
yea, the works of his hands he will help forward, Amen.

Praised be the Lord that comes, and blessed be his glorious name. All the
world be full of his Honor,

Amen* Hallelujah.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Chemical Books which have been written Originally, or
Translated into English.
ELias Ashmole Esquire his Theatrum Chymicum Britanicum; Or, a Collection of our
Famous English Hermetical and Poetical Philosophers, (viz.) Th. Norton, Geo.
Ripley, Geofr. Chaucer, Jo. Dastin, Pearce the black Monk, Rich. Carpenter,
Abrah. Andrews, Th. Carn^ck, Will. Bloomfield, Ed Kelley, Jo. Dee, Th.
Robinson, the Magistery of W. B. Jo. Gower, Mystery of Alchymists, Jo Lydgate,
Will. Redman, with diverse Anonymi, and certain fragments with Annotations upon
the same. Land. 1652. 4. -- His Fassiculus Chymicus; Or, Chemical Collections
of the ^ngress, progress, and Egress of the Secret Hermetick Science, Collected
out of the Choicest and most Famous Authors, Land. 1650. 8o. -- The way to
Bliss. Land. 1658. 4o Don Alexis of Piemont, His Collection of Secrets, with
the manner of making Distillations, etc. Land. 1580. 4o Fr. Antonies Apology
for his Medicine called Aurum Potabile, Land* 1616. 4. Aula Lucis, Or, The
House of Light* by S. N. Land. 1^52. 8, Artefius his Key of the greater Wisdom,
8. vide Flammell. Abr. Andrews his Hunting of the Green Lion, vide Theatrum
Chymicum Britanicum. Alphonsus King of Portugal his 2 Treatises of the
Philosophers Stone, vide Treatises. Albertus Magnus, his secrets of the Virtues
of Herbs, Stones, Beasts, etc. Land. 1637, 8.
Anonymi quidem. A Discourse of Magical Gold, vide Discourse. A True order to
Distill Oils, etc. aid true and perfect order. A Profitable Discourse against
bad garbling of Spices, vide Profitable. Secrets revealed concerning the
Philosophers Stone, vide Secrets. Secrets and Wonders of the world, vide
Secrets. Physical Dictionary, vide Physical. Hermetick Banquet, vide Hermetick.
Enchiridion Physic^ restitutae, vide Enchiridion. Liber Patris Sapientiae, vide
Theatrum Brit. Hermes Bird, vide Th. Brit. Experience and Philosophy, Th. Brit.
The Hermets Tale, vide Th. Brit. Description of the Stone, vide Th. Brit. The
standing of the Glass for the time of Putrefaction and Congelation of the
Medicine, vide Th. Brit. The distillation of all manner of Spices, Seeds,
Roots, and Gums, vide Distillation. The Method of Chemical Philosophy and
Physic, vide Method.
Th. Brown's Natures Cabinet Unlocked; Or the Natural causes of Metals, Stones,
Precious Earth, Juyces, Humors and Spirits; the Natures of plants in general;
the affections, parts, and kinds in particular, etc. Land. 1657, 12. Jo.
Beguines Tyrocinium Chymicum; Or Chemical Essays from the Fountain of Nature,
and Manual Experience, Land. 1669. 8. Hier. Bruynswayke's Virtuous Book of
Distillation of the Waters of all manner of Herbs, with the Figures of the
Stillatories, Translated by Lawr. Andrew. Land. 1527. fol. Geo. Baker's New
Jewel of Health; Containing the most excellent Secrets of Physic and
Philosophy; and of all Distillations of Waters, Oils, Balmes, Quintescences;
with the Extraction of Artificial Salts, the use and preparation of Antimony,
and Potable Gold, with the Vessels and Furnaces, and other Instruments
thereunto belonging; Being the Second part of the Treasury of Euonymus. Land.
1576. 4. Andr. Bertholdus, Of the wonderful Effects, Virtues, and strange use
of the new Terra Sigillata, found in Germany. Land. 1587, and 1589. 8. R.
Bostock Esquire Of the difference of the ancient Physic first taught by Godly
Fathers; and the latter from Idolaters and Heathens, as Galen, and such others,
Land. 1583. Ed. Boldnest's Aurora Chymica; Or a rational way to prepare
Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals for Physical use, and preservation of the
life of Man, 1672. 8. -- His Medicina Instaurata; or the Grounds and Principles
of the Art of physic made by Chemical operation; and the Insufficiency of the
vulgar way of preparing Medicines. Land. 1665. 8. R. Bacon's Art of Chemistry
16. -- His Mirror of Alchimy 1597. 40. -- His Admirable force of Nature and
Art. 4o -- His Tincture of Antimony, vide B. Valentine. Fr. Bacon Lord of
Verulam, his Natural History, with Articles of enquiry touching Metals and
Minerals, etc. Land. 1670, fol Ld. Blaise of Viginere, his Discourse of Fire
and Salt, Land. 1640. 4. Will. Bloomfield's Blossoms, vide Th. Brit. B. G.
Penotus a Portu Aquitano, his Excellent Works, vide Firovant. Sam. Boultons
Magical but Natural Physic; With a Description of the most excellent Cordial
of Gold, Land. 1656. 8. Rob. Boil Esquire Skeptical Chemist. Lon. 1661. 8. -- His
Essay about the Origin and Virtues of Gems* Land. 1672. 8. -- His
considerations touching the usefulness of Experimental Natural Philosophy, 2
parts, Oxford, 1664, and 1671, 4. -- His New Experiments Physico Mechanical,
touching the spring and weight of the Air, and their effects, Oxford 1660. 8.
ibid. with additions, and continuation, Oxf. 1662, and 1669, 4. -- His
phisiological Essays, and other Tracts; with some Specimens to make Chimical
Experiments useful to illustrate the Notions of the Corpuscular Philosophy,
etc. Land. 1669. 4. -- His Experiments and Considerations touching Colors,
beginning the Experimental History of Colors, Land. 1670, 8. -- His Origin of
Forms and Qualities according to Corpuscular Philosophy; Illustrated by
Considerations and Experiments, written by way of Notes upon an Essay about
Nitre, Oxon. 1666, and 1667, 8. -- His Tra^^s of Cosmical qualities, Things and
suspicions of the temperature of Subterraneal and Submarine Regions, and of the
bottom of the Sea; As also. An Introduction to the History of particular
qualities, Oxf. 1671, 8. -- His Experimental History and Observations of Cold,
London 1665, 8 -- His Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out by New Experiments,
Land. 1666. 8.
Dan. Coxe's Discourse of the Interest of the Patient in reference to Physic
and Physicians; With a detection of the abuses of the Apothecaries, and their
unfitness for practice discovered, Land. 1669. 8. Osw. Crollius and J. Hartmans
Basilica Chymica; or Royal and Practical Chemistry: Or a Discovery of those
excellent Medicines and Chemical Preparations of our Modern Chemists, Land
1670, fol. -- His Philosophy Reformed and Improved; Discovering the great and
deep Mysteries of Nature. To which is added, the wonderful Mysteries of the
Creation, by Th. Paracelsus, Land. 1657. 8. Th. Chaloner's Virtue of Nitre, and
the Effects thereof, etc. Land. 1534. 4. Will. Clark's Natural History of
Nitre; Or, a Philosophical Discourse of the Nature, Generation, place, and
artificial extraction of Nitre, with its Virtues and use, Land. 1670. 8. Will.
Clever's Flower of Physic, with three Books of Philosophy for the due
temperature of man's life, Land. 1540. 4. Nic. Culpeper's Treatise of Aurum
Potabile; Being a Description of the threefold world, Elementary, Caelestial,
and Intellectual* Containing the knowledge necessary to the study of Hermetick
Philosophy, Land. 1656. 8. -- His New Method of Physic; Or a short view of
Paracelsus and Galen's Practice of the Nature of Physic and Alchimy, etc.
Land. 1654. 8. Lancel. Colson, vide Philosophia Maturata. Geof. Chaucer's
Channons ^ eomans tale. vide Th. Brit. A Chemical Dictionary, Land. 1650 4.
vide Sendivogius. Th. Charnock's Breviary of Natural Philosophy, and Aenigma's,
vide Th. Brit. Lud. Combachius, Sal, Lumen, and Spiritus Mundi Philosophici;
Being a Treatise of the true Salt, and Secret of the Philosophers. Land. 1657.
8. Rich. Carpenter's Works, vide Th. Brit. Dr. Croon's Letter concerning the
present state of Physic, and the Regulation of the Prastice of it in England*
Land. 1665. 4.
Dud. Dudley s Metallum Martis, Land. 1665. 8. Jo. Dees Testament* vide Th.
Brit. St. Dunstan of the Philosophers Stone, vide Philos. Maturata. A
Description of the Philosophers Stone, vide Th. Brit. The Distillation of all
manner of Spices, Seeds, Roots, and Gums, Land. 1575. 8 Dictionary, vide
Physical and Chemical. A Discourse of Magical Gold. -- Against bad Garbling of
Spices, vide Profitable Jo. Dastin's Dream, vide Th. Brit.
Euonymus His treasure of the Secrets of Nature, and apt times to prepare and
Distill Medicines, as Quintessence, Aurum Potabile, Aromatic, Wines, Balms,
Oils, Perfumes, Garnishing Waters, etc. Land. 156^. 4. -- His Treasury, the
Second part, vide Baker's Distillations. Enchiridion Physica Restitutae, Land.
16. Experience and Philosophy, vide Th. Brit.
Nicas. le Febure, His Complete Body of Chimistry for the knowledge of that Art
and its Practice, London. 1670. 40. -- His Discourse on Sir Walter Raleighs
Great Cordial, Land. 1664. Leon. Firovants Compendium of the Rational Secrets
of Physic, etc. with the hidden Virtues of sundry Vegetables, Animals, and
Minerals; whereunto is an nexed Paracelsus his 114 Experiments; with certain
excellent works of B. G. Penotus a portu Aquitano; also Is. Holland's Secrets
concerning his Vegetal and Animal works; with Queritan's Spagyrick Antidotary,
Land. 1652. 40. Ed. Fentons Secrets and wonders of Nature, Land. 1569. Jo.
French's Art of Distillation of the choicest Spagyrical preparations,
Experiments and Curiosities; With the Description of the Furnaces and Vessels
used by ancient and modern Chemists, and the Anatomy of Gold and Silver, with
their preparations, curiosities, and virtues; with two Books of Sublimation and
Calcination. Also, The London Distiller, exactly showing the way to draw all
sorts of Spirits and Srongwaters; together with their Virtues, 1651, 1667* 4.
-- His London Distiller in 8. with a Clavis to un lock the deepest secrets in
that mysterious Art* Lon. 8. -- His Yorkshire Spaw; Or, a Treatise of Four
Medicinal Waters, (viz) The Spaw, or Vitrioline, the Sting, or Sulphur; the
Dropping, or putrefying; and S. Magnus Wells in Yorkshire, their Cause,
Virtue, and use, Land. 1654, 8. Nic. Flammel's Hyerogliphical Figures of the
Philosophers Stone; with Artefius his Key of the greater Wisdom, Land. 1624. 8.
Fragments of the Philosophers* vide Th. Brit.
Jo. Rod. Glaubers Description of the new Philosophical Furnaces; Or, the Art
of Distilling of the tincture of Gold, or the true aurum potabile, with the
first part of the Mineral work. Land. 1651, 4. -- His Golden Ass well managed,
and Mydas restored to Reason. A new Chemical Light, showing that Gold may be
found in cold as well as in hot Regions, or be extracted out of Sand, Stones,
Gravel, or Flints, etc. vide Philisophical Epitaph. Neh. Grews Anatomy of
Vegetables; With a General account of Vegetation, Land. 1671. 12. Jo. Goddard's
Discourse of the unhappy condition of the practice of Physic in Land. 166^. 4.
Jo. Gower of the Philosophers Stone, vide Th. Brit* Will. Gratarolle of the
Philosophers Stone, vide Treatises*
Jam. Hasolle, alias Elias Ashmole. Jo. Bapt. Van Helmont's Works of Physic
and Chimistry, Land. 1664. fol. -- His Ternary Paradoxes of the Magnetical cure
of Wounds, the Nativity of Tartar in Wine, and the Image of God in Man,
Translated by Dr. Walter Charleton, Land. 1650. 4. Helmont Disguised, or the
Vulgar Errors of Emperical and unskilful Practisers of Physic confuted, Land.
1657. 8. -- His Vindication, vide Starkie. Isaac Holland's Secrets concerning
his Vegetal and Animal work vide Firovant. -- His Work of Saturn, vide B.
Valentine. Jo. Hesther's Secrets, vide Quercitan. The Hermetical Banquet dressed
by a Spagyrical Cook for the better preservation of the Microcosme, Land. 1652.
8. Io. Fred. Helvetius his Golden Calf which the world adores and desires; Or,
The incomparable wonder of Nature in transmuting Lead into Gold, Done at the
Hague Land. 1670. 8. -- Ibid. Epitomized, vide Philosophical Epitaph. The
Hermits Tale, vide Theat. Brit. Jo. Hartman's Royal Chimistry, vide Crollius.
Jo. Heydon's Exhavaranna; or, English Physicians Tutor, in the Astrobolisms of
Metals, Rosy crucian, Miraculous Saphiric Medicines of the Sun and Moon; the
Astrolasmes of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, etc. all Harmoniously
united, with his Psonthonphanchia, etc. Land. 1665, 8.
Jo. Jones his Discourse of the Natural beginning of all growing and living
things, Land. 1574. 4. -- His Bathe of Bathes Aid, the Antiquity, commodity,
property, use and knowledge thereof, in Diet and Medicines; with the Benefit
of the ancient Bathes of Buckston, Land. 1572, 4. Jehior, the Day dawning or
the Morning light of Wisdom, containing the three Principles or Originals of
all things, vide Philosophical Epitaph. Edw. Iordans Discourse of Natural Baths
and Mineral Waters, and Original of Fountains, Land. 1632. 4o,
Sir Edward Kelley's Work of the Philosophers Stone vide Th. Brit.
Rob. Lovel's Complete History of Animals and Minerals; Being the sum of
Ancient and Modern Galenical and Chemical Authors concerning Beasts, Birds
Fishes, Serpents, Insects, and Man; and of Earths Metals, Semi-metals, Salts,
Sulphurs, and Stones, both Natural and Artificial; With their place, matter,
names, kinds, temperature, virtues, use, choice, etc. Oxford, 1661 -- His
Complete Herbal, or the sum of Galenical and Chemical Authors, touching, Trees,
Shrubs Plants, Fruits, Flowers, etc. Land. 1665. 12o Reym. Lullys Philosophical
and Chemical Experiments, with the right and due preparation of both Elixers,
and the perfect way of making the great Stone of Philosophers, as it was truly
taught in Paris, and some time practiced in England by R. Lully, in the time of
King Edward the Third, vide Paracelsus. Jo. Levens Pathway to health, for
Distilling of diverse Waters, and making of Oils, etc. Land. 1587. 4o and 1664.
12. Lathams Spaw in Yorkshire, with some remarkable Cases and Cures effected by
it, Land. 1672. 8. -- A further account of Latham's Spaw in Yorkshire, as it
may conduce to public advantage, Land. 1672. 8. A Letter sent by a learned
Physician to his friend, wherein are detected the manifeld Errors used hitherto
of the Apothecaries, in preparing their Compositions, as Syrups, Condites,
Conserves, Pills, Potions, Electuaries, Lozenges, etc. with a far better manner
to preserve and correct the same, Land. 1586. 8. A little Book of Secrets for
liquifying and using of Gold and Silver, Land. 8. Jo. Bapt. Lambye His
Revelation of the secret Spirit, declaring the most concealed secret of
Alchimy, Land. 1623. 8 Jo. Lydgate's Secreta Secretorum, or Letter of Alexander
the great to Aristotle, vide Theatrum Brit. Liber Patris Sapientiae, vide Th.
Brit. The London Distiller, vide French. Lev. Lemnius His secret miracles of
Nature, with Philosophical and prudential Rules for the health of Body and mind
of man, fit for those that search into the hidden secrets of Nature, Land.
1658. fol,
Magnetical Philosophy, 8o Nicol. Monardus Of the virtues of diverse Herbs,
Trees, Oils, Plants, and Stones, with their use in Physic, and a discourse of
the Bezoar Stone, of Iron, and the Virtues of Snow, Land. 1577. 4o. Jo. Maplets
Green Forest of Sovereign Virtues, in all the whole kind of Stones and Metals,
Plants, Herbs, Trees, and Shrubs; of Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, creeping Worms, and
Serpents, Land. 1567. 8. Chr. Merret's View of the frauds and abuses committed
by Apothecaries, in relation to Patients and Physicians, Land. 1069. 4o. Mich.
Majerus His Themis Aurea, or Laws of the Rosy Cross, Land. 1656. 12o, -- His
Lusus serius, or serious pastime. Land. 1654. 12o. The Magistery of W. B. vide
Th. Brit. The Mystery of Alchimists, vide Th. Brit. The Marrow of Chemical
Physic, or the Practice of making Chemical Medicines, showing the order to
draw forth from Vegitables, Minerals and Metals, their Spirits, Oils, Vinegars,
Salts, Extracts or Tinctures, Essences and Magisteries, Flowers and Salts, etc.
Land. 1669, 12o.
Hen. Nollius His Chemists Key, or Doctrine of Corruption and Generation, Land
1657. 8o. and 16o. -- His Hermetical Physic, or the right way to preserve and
restore health, Land. 12o. Ant. Neri His Art of Glass, showing the ways to make
and color Glass, Pastes, Enamels, Lekes, and other Curiosities by fire, Land.
1662. To which is added an account of the Glass-drops made by the Royal
Society, 1672. 8o. Th. Nortons Ordinal of Alchimy, vide. Th. Brit. Hen.
Oldenbourg Esquire His Collection of the Philosophical Transactions, for several
years, 40. The Method of Chemical Philosophy and Physic, Land. 1664. 8. Edw.
Mainwaring's Complete Physician, wherein are the Characters of the Chemical
Emperick, and Chimical Physician, with the Excellency of Chemical preparations,
Land. 1668. 8. March. Needham His Medela Medicinae, or Plea for the free
profession and a renovation of the Art of Physic, Land. 1665. 8.
Philosophia Maturata, or the Practick and operative part of the Philosophers
Stone, with the way how to make the Mineral Stone, and the Calcination of of
Metals with the work of St. Dunstan concerning the Philosophers Stone, and the
Experiments of Rumelius, and the preparation of Angel. Sala, published by
Lancelet Colson, Land. 1668. 12o The Philosophical Epitaph of W. C. Esquire for a
memento mori on the Philosophers (Tomb) Stone, with three Hieroglyphical
Scutcheons, displaying Minerva's and Hermes Birds, and Apollo's Bird of
Paradise in Philosophical Mottos and Sentences with their Explication, and a
discovery of the Liquor Alchahest, Of Salt of Tartar volatized, and other
Elixirs, with their differences and proprieties; also a Brief of the Golden
Calfe, discovering the rarest miracle in Nature, of a strange transmutation of
Lead into Gold, made by Dr. Jo. Fred. Helvetius with Figures* likewise Jo. Rod.
Glauber his Golden Ass well managed, and Midas restored to Reason, a new
Chemical light for comfort of the oppressed, demonstrating Gold to be easily
extracted in all places out of Sand, Stones, Gravel or Flints, and the true
matter of the Philosophers Stone, to which is added. Jehior the day Dawning, or
the Morning Light of Wisdom, containing the three Principles or Originals of
all things whatsoever, discovering the great and many Mysteries in God, Nature,
and the Elements, all published by W. C. Esquire Land. 1673, 8. -- His Secrets of
Alchimy* Land. 8, Aur. Theo. Paracelsus His Treatise of the Cure of French Pox,
with all other Diseases arising and growing thereof, Land. 1590. 4. -- His 114.
Experiments, vide Firovant. -- His Key of Philosophy, or The most excellent
secrets of Physic and Philosophy, with the Order of Distillation of Oils,
Gums, Spices, Seeds, Roots, and Herbs, with their perfect Taste, Smell, and
Virtues, and how to Calcine, Sublime, and dissolve all manner of Minerals, and
how to draw forth their Oil and Salts, Land. 1580, and 1633. 8. -- His
Dispensatory 8. -- His Archidoxes, 8* -- His Chemical Transmutation, Genealogy
and Generation of Metals and Minerals, with the Virtues, and use of Dr. Trigs
water, with the Mumial Treatise of Tentzelius. The Philosophical and Chemical
Experiments of Rym. Lully, with the right and due preparation of both Elixirs,
and the perfect way of making the great Stone of Philosophers, as it was truly
taught in Paris. and some time practiced in England by R. Rully, in the time of
King Edward the Third, Land. 1657. 8. Paracelsus His wonderful mysteries of the
Creation, vide Crollius. -- His Philosophical and Chemical Treatise of Fire and
Salt, 8. -- Of the Nature of things, 9 Books, 1650. 4o* vide Sendivogius. -- Of
the Supreme Mysteries of Nature, of the Spirits of the Planets, occult
Philosophy, the Magical, Sympathetical and Antipathetical Cure of Wounds and
Diseases, the Mysteries of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, Land. 1656. 8. Eug.
Philalethes Anthroposophia Theomagica, Land. 1650 8. -- His Magia Adamica,
Land. 1650. 8. -- His Anima magica abscondi^a, or a Discourse of the universal
Spirit of Nature, Land. 1650, 8: -- His Euphrates or Waters of the East, or a
Discourse of the secret Fountain, whose Water flows from the Fire, Land* 1671.
8. Eir. Phil. Philalethes, alias Geo. Starkies Marrow of Alchimy, being an
experimental Treatise of the secret and most hidden mystery of the Philosophers
Elixir, Land. 1654. 8. Hugh Plats Jewel house of Art and Nature, with diverse
Chemical Conclusions of the Art of Distillation, etc. Land. 1594. 4o. -- His
Subterraneal Treasure, Land* 40. Jo. Partridges Treasury of hidden secrets,
Land* 1591. 8: Nic. Prepositas Practice of approved Medicines, precious Waters,
etc. Land. 1588* 4o. Sim. Partlisius His new Method of Physic, or a short view
of Paracelsus, and Galens Practice of the Nature of Physic and Alchemy, Land
8. Hen, Power's Experimental Philosophy; or new Microscopical, Mercurial,
Magnetical, and Subterraneal Experiments, Land. 1664. 4o Bern. G. Penotus a
Portu Aquitano His ex^ellent Works, vide Firovant. A Profitable discourse
Composed by diverse Grocers against the bad Garbelling of Spices used in these
days, and against the Combination of the Workmen of that Office, Land. 4o A
Physical Dictionary, or an Interpretation of such crabbed Words and terms of
Art, as are derived from Greek and Latin, used in Physic, Anatomy, Chyrurg^ry
and Chemistry, 8. Eug. Philalethes Lumen de Lu^ine, Land. 1651. 8. -- His Forms
and Confessions of the fraternity of the Rosy Cross, Land. 1652. 8. Ioach
Poleman Novam Lumen Medicum, Land. 1662. Pearce The black Monck upon the
Elixir, vide Theat. Brit. Geo. Phaedro's Physical and Chemical works to cure
most difficile Diseases, with the secrets of Celestial Physic, Land. 1654. 8.
Io. Quercitan His true and perfect Spagyrick preparation of Minerals, Animals
and Vegitables, with their use, whereunto is added diverse secrets of Io.
Hesther, Land. 1591. 8. -- His answer to Jacob Aubertus, concerning the
Original causes of Metals, set forth by Aubertus against the Chemists, Land.
1591. 8. -- His Spagyrick Antidotary. vide Firovant. -- His Practice of
Chemical and Hermetical Physic, for the preservation of health, Land. 1604. 4o
Th. Raynoldes Declaration of the Virtues, use and excellency of the Oil
Imperial, Land. 1551. 8. Io. Rhenodeus His dispensatory of the natures,
properties and virtues of Vegitables, Minerals and Animals, of Galenical and
Chemical materials, with an absolute Pharmacop^ia, Land. fol. Lud. Rowzet Of
the Queens Wells, or a Tteatise of the Natures and Virtues of Tunbridge-water,
Land. 1670. and 1671. 8. Th. Robinson Of the Philosophers Stone, vide Th. Brit.
Will. Redmans Aenigma Philosophicum, vide Th. Brit, Geo. Ripley's Compound of
Alchimy, his vision, his verses, on the Emblematical Scrowl, his mystery of the
Alchymists. Preface to Medulla, and his short work, vide Th. Brit. Ian. Cunr.
Rhumelius His Experiments, vide Philos. Maturata. Florianus Randorff Of the
Philosophers Stone, vide Treatises.
Mich. Sendivogius His new light of Alchimy, taken out of the Fountain of
Nature* and manuel Experience, together with a Treatise of Sulphur; also
Paracelsus his nine Books of the Nature of things, with a Chemical Dictionary
explaining hard words in Paracelsus, and others, Land 1650. 4o Alex. van
uchtens Secrets of Antimony, in 2 Treatises with Basil, Valentines Salt of
Antimony, and its use, Land. 1670. 8. Io, Schroders Complete Chemical
dispensatory treating of Metals, Precious Stones, Minerals, Vegitables and
Animals. and how rightly to know and use them, Land. 1669. fol. -- His History
of Animals and their use, Land. 1669. 8. Tho. Shirleys Philosophical Essay,
declaring the probable causes whence Stones are produced in the greater world,
with a search into the Origin of all bodies, Land. 1671. 8 Dan. Sennertus His
Institutions, wherein are the grounds, of Chemistry. Land. fol. and 8. Geo*
Starkies Natures Explication, and Helmonts vindication, or a full Apology for
Chemical Medicaments with a vindication of their Excellencies, against the
Gallenists, Land. 1658. 8. -- His Marrow of Chemical Physic, or a Treaetise of
making Chemical medicines, Land. 1661. 12o Will. Salmons Synopsis Medicinae, or
a Compendium of Astrological, Galenical and Chemical Physic and Philosophy,
deducted from the Principles of Hermes and Hippocrates, Land. 1671. 8* Will.
Sympsons Hydrologia Chymica, or the Chymi al Anatomy of the Scarbrough and
other Spaws in Yorkshire, with some observations upon Dr. Witties Treatise of
Scarbroughs Spaw, with a Description of the Spaws at Malton and Knarsbrough*
with the Original of Springs, Fountains, etc. Land. 1669, 8. -- His
Hydrological Essays, or a vindication of Hydrologia Chymica, being a further
discovery of the Scarbrough Spaw, and of the right use thereof, with an account
of the Alom-works at Whitby, etc. Land. 1670. 8. Rob. Sharrock Of the
propagation and improvement of Vegitables, by the concurrance of Art and
Nature, etc. Land, 1671. 8. Simon Sturtevant's Treatise of Metalica. Secrets
for liquifying and using of Gold and Silver, Lo. 8. Secrets revealed, or an
open entrance to the shut Palace of the King, containing the greatest Treasure
in Chemistry, never so plainly discovered concerning the Philosophers Stone,
Land. 1669. 8. Secrets and wonders of the world, Land. 1587. 4o The Storehouse
of Physical and Pholosoprical secrets, teaching to distill all manner of Oils,
from Gums, Spices, Seeds, Roots, Herbs, Minerals, etc, Land. 1633. 4o Patr.
Scots Tillage of light, or a true discovery of the Philosophical Elixir, Land.
1623. 8. Angel. Sala's Preparation, vide Philosoph. Maturata. Io. Sawtre Of the
Philosophers Stone, vide Treatises,
Geor. Thomsons Galeno Pale, or a Chemical trial of the Gallenists, Land. 1665
8. -- His Gag for Iohnsons animadversions upon Galenopale, or a scourge for
Galen. Land. 1665. 8. -- His vindication of my Lord Bacon, and an assertion of
experimental Philosophy, with some observations of true Chemical Science, Land.
671. 8. -- His Letter to Dr. Stubs, wherein the Galenical method of Medicaments
are proved ineffectual, by experimental demonstrations, Land. 1672, 4. -- His
Apology against the Calumnies of the Gallenists, vide his Book of the Pest
Anatomized, Land. 1666. 8. Dr. Trigs Water, with its virtues and use, vide
Paracelus. P. Thybaults Art of Chemistry, as it is now practiced, Land. 1668.
8. Geo. Tonstal Of the Scorbroughs Spaw Spagyrically Anatomized, 1071. 8. And.
Tentzelius His Mumial Treatise, vide Paracelsus. Will. Turners Treasury of
English Baths, and of the Baths of other Countries, Land. 1587. 4o The true and
perfest order to Distill Oils out of all manner of Spices, Seeds, Roots and
Gums, Land. 1575. 8. Five Treatises Of the Philosophers Stone, two of Alphonsus
King of Portugal, one of John Sawtre the Monk, one of Florianus Randorff a
German Philosopher, and one by Will. Gratarole, by H P. Land. 1652. 4o Th.
Tymmes Philosophical Dialogue, wherein Natures secret Closet is opened, Land
1612. 4o Geo. Thor. His Cheiragogia Heliana, an easy Introduction to the
Philosophers Magical Gold, to which is added, Zoroasters Cave, and Jo.
Pontanus's Epistle upon the Mineral Fire, Land. 1659, and 1667. 8.
Basil. Valentine His last Will and Testament, with two Treatises, one of
manual operation, the other of things natural and supernatural, Land. 1670. 8.
-- His Triumphant Chariot, of Antimony, Land. 1656. 8 -- Of Natural and
Supernatural things, of the first Tincture, Root and Spirit of metals and
minerals, how the same are conceived, generated, brought forth, changed and
augmented with Rog. Bacons, Tincture of Antimony, and Is. Hollands work of
Saturn. Land. 1671. 8. -- His Salt of Antimony and its use, vide Suchten.
Io. Websters Metallographia or History of metals, with Signs of Ores, and
minerals, before and after diging, the causes and manner, of their Generations,
their kinds, sorts, and differenc s, with a description of new metals, and Semi
metals, and other things pertaining to mineral knowledge, also of Vegitability,
of mystical Chemistry, of the Philosophers Gold and Mercury, of the Liquor
Alkahest, Aurum Potabile, and such like, Land. 1671, 4. Dan. Widows His
Natural Philosophy, or Description of the world and several Creatures therein,
(viz.) of Angels, Mankind, Heavens, Stars, Planets, the 4 Elements with their
order, nature and government, as also of minerals, Metals, plants, and precious
stones, with their Colors, Forms and Virtues, Lon. 1631 4o Tim. Willis His
search of causes of a Theophysical Investigation of the possibility of
Transmntatory Alchymy, Land. 1616. 8. Rob. Witties Pyrologia Mimica, or an
answer to Mr. Sympsons Hydrologia Chymica, Land. 1669. 8, -- His Scarbroughs
Spaw, or a Description of the nature and vertnes of the Spaw at Scarbrough in
Yorkshire, and of the nature and use, of Sea, Rain, Snow, Pond, lake, Spring
and River-waters, with a discourse concerning Mineral-water, Land. 1660. 8.
Will. Williams His occult Physic, or three principles in Nature Anatomized, by
a Philosophical operation from Experience in three Books of Beasts, Trees,
Herbs, and their Magical and Physical virtues, Lon. 1660. 8. Weckers Secrets,
Land. fol.
The Yorkshire Spaw, vide French.
Zoroastres Cave, vide Thor.
THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
BE pleased to understand, that some (small Number) of these Books in this
Catalogue cannot absolutely be called Chemical, but have a very near affinity
thereunto, the knowledge of natural Philosophy being an Introduction to
supernatural things; nor do I pretend to publish this as an absolute Collection
of English Chemical Authors; (distrusting I may have forgotten some of common
note) but rather as an Essay to provoke others (better able) to perfect it.
Several of these Books I have drawn out of the Catalogues of And: Maunsel,
William London, and the Mercurius Librarius; others I have more largely
transcribed from the Books themselves, with the Date when Printed, and in what
Volume, as near as the shortness of my time would permit, having but a few days
to Collect it; and therefore I crave excuse for my mistakes, and leave the
perfecting thereof to time, and other men's ingenuity, who shall please to take
the pains to add what shall come within the verge of their Knowledge, or be
presented to their view. Vale.


