Christian Supports UNDER THE TERRORS of DEATH. A SERMON Preached to Sir John
FRIEND in Newgate, Preparatory to his Sufferings.

BY SHADRACH COOK Priest of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for E. Whitlock. near Stationers' Hall. 1696.

Some Books to be sold by Dan. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar.
SEveral Practical Discourses, in three Vol. viz. Vol. 1st. On the blessed
Sacrament. In 2. parts. Vol. 2d. On Charity and Humility.

Vol 3d. On Gods Law to Mankind, on Redeeming of Time, on Prayer. By Edward
Pelling D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to His Majesty, and Rector of Petworth in
Sussex. All of them to be sold single.

The Regular Christian's daily Sacrifice, or a Collection of Prayers, chiefly
out of David's Psalms and the rest of the Common Prayer Book, to be use by the
People in their private Devotion, ons all ordinary and special occasions, with
a particular Office for Sacrament Days. By Edward Pelling D. D. Chaplain to His
Grace the Duke of Somerset, and Rector of Petworth in Sussex. The second
Edition.

Christian Practice described by way of Essay, upon the Life of our Savior, by
Stephen Skinner Rector of Buckland in Hertford Shire, and late Fellow of
Trinity College at Cambridge.

The Cause and Cure of Offenses, in a Discourse on Math. 18. 7. By R. Kingston
M. A. Prebendary of Sou^ and Chaplain in ordinary to His Majesty.

Christian Supports UNDER THE TERRORS of DEATH.
PSALM. XXIII. 4. Yea tho I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I
will fear no evil, for thou art with me.
THAT mighty and continual care which the Divine Providence has over us, is
very gratefully represented by such soft and tender expressions, and characters
of God, as do be speak an abundant Affection and regard for us, giving us all
the assurance and security imaginable of an infinite kindness and compassion
constantly engaged for us.

So when our Lord does comfort his Disciples with the Doctrine of Providence,
he thus expresses it, Your heavenly Father knows, that you have Matt. 6. 32.
need of all these Things. What can be dearer and and more sollicitous than the
Affections and concernment of a Parent? Another of the like kind to the same
end and purpose, is here mentioned and applied by David, who seems to assure or
challenge to himself, the extraordinary care and protection of God, under all,
the very worst circumstances, from the suitable character of Kindness and and
Indearment he ascribes to him, ver. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd, and thence
makes this natural Inference, I shall not want. He will most certainly take
care of me, for to continue the Parallel or Similitude here before us, ver. 2.
He makes me lie down in green Pastures, or, Pastures of tender Grass, he
leads me beside still Waters, or Waters of quietness: Which is spoken with
allusion to the most grateful things or conditions, that God will bestow upon,
or provide for his People; his goodness will take care, that they shall have
what is most proper and convenient for them. And when they are brought to any
distress, he will deliver them out of it, reduce them to a happy condition, and
set them right and safe in their ways, ver. 3. He restores my Soul, he
leads me in the Paths of righteousness for his Names sake, and which is more,
when they are under the most unpromising circumstances, in that sad and doleful
condition, which we must all come to and lie under, the dismal pressure and
stroke of Death; even herein the People of God are relieved and supported by
this extraordinary Divine care and Goodness; Yea, tho I walk through the Valley
of the Shadow of Death I will fear no evil, for thou art with me.

In which words are two things considerable:

First, The terror or severity of a dying State, Yea, tho I walk through the
Valley of the Shadow of Death.

Yet Secondly under such dismal circumstances God does most abundantly comfort
and support us; Yea, tho I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death I
will fear no evil, for thou art with me.

First, It Is observable, that holy David does here remember us of the terror
and severity of a Dying State or Condition; Yea tho I walk through the Valley
of the shadow of Death; which is greatly signified by almost every word in it,
Yea (...) etiamsi, Notwithstanding, employing the utmost distress or
extremity, I walk (...) ambulavero, I shall walk; intimating a leasurely, and
so a more tormenting passage, (...) in Valle, the Septuagint (...) in the
middle, the depth or extremity of the shadow of death (...), in Valle umbrae
lethalis, in the thickest of the deadly shade, i. e. in ipsissima and
profundissima mortis umbra, in the deepest and utmost shade or sorrow of death.
The Words here says one, Notat horribilem quandam mortis speciem and figuram
(qualis morientium oculis observatur) tritissimam. It denotes a very horrid
appearance of death, and that most dismal apprehension of it, which Men usually
have when they come to die, every way beset with horror and distraction, in a
word, a terrible and approaching destruction, ( qui enim ad umbram accedit non
long a corpore abest) He that is in the shadow, is not far from that
Substance, or thing it self.

Thus the Psalmist represents a dying State as most severe and terrible,
agreeable to what he Ps^. 55. 4, 5.
tells us of it from his own experience, My heart is sore pained within me, and
the pains of death are fallen upon me, fearfulness and trembling are come upon
me, and horror, or as it is in the other Translation, an horrible dread has
overwhelmed me.

Death, or rather the preliminary passage to it, and the way into the other
World, is attended with great horror and affliction, and is beyond expression
harsh and terrible; to which Job may have some reference, when he says, O that
my Chap. 6. ^, 3. 4.
grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances together,
for now it will be heavier than the sand of the Sea, therefore my words are
swallowed up (that is, I want words to express my grief) for the arrows of the
Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirit, the terrors
of God do set themselves in array against me. And that this was the utmost
extremity of distress or affliction, he could think of, appears from that
Standard of Sorrow, which he makes it, Chap. 24. 1^. If one know them, they are
in the terrors of the shadow of death, which he therefore ^ls The King of
Terrors. The greatest of all humane Evils or Miseries. And now that great
terror and severity, which does accompany a dying State or Condition, may be
occasioned;

First, From the pains or agonies of it.

Secondly, Men's misgiving thoughts of their future State.

Thirdly, Their foregoing all the Pleasures and Enjoyments of this World.

Fourthly, The sense of Guilt or Sin, that will then crowd in upon us.

Fifthly, The more and greater Assaults of our Spiritual Adversary.

Sixthly, The thoughts and conviction of an ensuing Judgment, Upon all which
accounts our dying Circumstances will appear sufficiently dreadful and terrible.

The first great terror of Death does arise FROM THE PAINS OR AGONIES THAT
VSVALLY ATTEND IT; For however it is to appearance, there may be, its very
likely, even in the smoothest passage from this to the other World, some rugged
and uneven paths, which can be perceived by none, but those that tread them,
certain it is that in the general there is a great deal of hardship and
difficulty at such a time, and in such Circumstances as these, from those pains
and sorrows which do naturally attend that condition, for in loosing that knot,
in dissolving the close Conjunction of Soul and Body, there must be, and we
have reason to say there is, a great deal of unconceivable Anguish and
Affliction, it is an extreme violence to Nature, and the utmost contradiction to
it. And therefore must mightily fret and molest us, for whence (but from the
most horrid pain and uneasiness) can proceed such extravagant convulsions, cold
sweats, deadly faintings, short breathings, distraction of the Eyes, and other
dreadful Agonies that attend it? For if these and the like, which we observe in
daily Spectacles of Mortality are dreadful to behold; What must they be to
those poor Creatures that do, and to us that shall suffer under them? And
therefore a good man, that is not afraid of death, cannot but shrink and tremble
to think of the way to it, that is beset with such horror and distraction in
every particular; O my God, may be the language of the most pious Soul, I am
willing to die and prepared for thee, being desirous to depart and to be with
Christ, which is better than a continuance here, but my greatest concern is,
how to come to thee on the other Shore, there is a great Gulf between us, I
must be tossed on a boisterous Sea, and wracked by dreadful Ways, and
Tempests. Is there no way to Canaan, but through a desolate Wilderness, and
must I go through the valley of the Shadow of Death, to that Land which flows
with Milk and Honey, that Heavenly Jerusalem? These are things contrary to
Flesh and Blood, and such as will make the stoutest courage faint and tremble,
the pains and terrors of death cannot be expressed or conceived by any but who
are past or under them. And doubtless the holy Spirit of God does in some
measure intimate to us the sadness of them, when it mentions it as a great
blessing to men that it is appointed to them, but once to die, Heb. 9. 27.
and that there shall be no more death in the other Rev. 21. 4.
State. One undoubted privilege whereof, is, that there shall be no more of
those dreadful forerunners or concomitants of it, where are sorrows so severe
and terrible as endanger the safety of our Souls as well as Bodies, by urging
us to impatience, distrust, and the like; thence says our Church, suffer us not
at our last hour through any pains of death to fall from thee. Our greatest
troubles and most dangerous conflict in this World is usually our departure out
of it; so that to this case also we may apply Zeph. 1. 14, 15.
that of the Prophet, The great day of the Lord is near, it is near and hastes
greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord; the mighty Men shall cry
therein bitterly, That day is a of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day
of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds
and thick darkness.

Thus the Pains and Agonies of a dying State render it most terrible and
dreadful.

Secondly, It will appear again to be so, FROM MEN'S MISGIVING THOVGHTS OF THEIR
AFTER STATE. I do not mean their doubtfulness of it, for I am apt to think,
that the greatest pretenders that way are sufficiently convinced when they come
to die, and the sense of that their languishing Condition will soon rub up
their Belief of another Life; but now most or all Men are under no small
Distress and Perplexity from the conviction and consideration of that future
Life, for which none is sufficiently fitted and prepared, but has reason,
especially from himself, to have some diffidence, some distrust or suspicion of
his condition in it, and it is what becomes a prudent and a good Man; for an
overweening opinion of ourselves, and a confident presumption of our
preparation for Heaven may be ill grounded and mistaken, and seems to be
inconsistent with a truly devout and penitent Soul. Be not high minded but
fear, is the Rule that such go by even in these circumstances. We must be
sensible, and ought to be especially so, when we come to die, That we have had
a great work to do in a little time; and being that God now calls us to give up
an account of our Stewardship, it must put us into very great Fear and
Consternation to think with our selves what we have done, and whither we are
going, and how can we but suspect our condition, when we consider that we are
not able to answer God one word in a thousand, must it not then most deeply
concern, and mightily affect our Souls, to consider that near approach to their
endless and unalterable State, and the best of Men may have some Fear or
Suspicion: at least of their Condition in it. This now is their grand Affair,
and if they fail and miscarry here they are irrevocably gone and lost for ever:
Who then can avoid being concerned at this great and weighty change, when he
thinks with himself, that he is now hasting into another World, and at the Gate
of Eternity, though he fears not Death, yet the Apprehensions of another State
must strike a damp into his Soul, and make him hugely serious and perplexed in
his Thoughts; Men's Hearts failing them for fear of what may become of them in
another State. Nor is it blamable or unchristian to be so, for besides what
Reason the best of Men may have to suspect themselves, such a Temper as this,
will dispose us for all due Care and Circumspection in that most solemn time
and season, and such an humble distrust of ourselves may and will have better
Effects, than a very daring confidence and presumption: For the comfort of good
Men, at the most depending upon Hope, does show that at the best they lie under
some Doubtfulness and Insecurity: And therefore as you see Men's misgiving
thoughts, as to a future State, is no small Trouble and Perplexity to them in
their dying Circumstances.

Thirdly Their Trouble* herein does further arise, FROM THE THOVGHTS OF PARTING
WITH ALL THE PLEASVRES AND ENJOYMENTS HERE BELOW. Men that have lived in the
World must needs have some interest and affections fixed in it, and there is
scarce any that do or can sit so loose to these secular Affairs, as to bear the
removal from them with an even and undisturbed Spirit; nay so far is it from
this, that these frequently prove the most pungent Considerations or
Reflections in that dismal State: Have I, says one, labored all my Life time
for nothing but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, for I find it to be so now; I am
to be removed, and to be taken from it: For this have I beat my Brains, wearied
and molested my self, for this have I cheated and purloin'd, for this have I
over-reached or supplanted my Brother, wronged or oppressed my Neighbor, and
must I be deprived of all in a moment? What sorrow like to my sorrow will the
Worldling say? And those pleasures that others have too much indulged, will but
the more perplex their Thoughts when they are thus forced from them; nay, even
the moderate and lawful enjoyment of these things, will occasion in us no small
trouble and vexation of mind, at this final parting with them: Tho it behooves
us to do it with Christian courrage, and Resignation, yet we cannot without
extreme sorrow and concernment say at that time, Farewell Wife farewell Children,
farewell Friends, farewell the World finally farewell whatever was here dear and
valuable. And give me leave to add, the more have been Men's comforts, and those
of good Men have been the most and truest, the more and greater must be the
grief and concernment, for that utter removal, and dismal separation from them.

Fourthly, The troubles of a dying State must be again very great, FROM THE
SENSE OF SIN OR GVILT THAT WILL THEN CROWD IN UPON US. However we may forget
God and ourselves in a time of Health and Prosperity, when these decline or
forsake us, we are usually brought to a sober Sense, and in such a languishing
State and Condition can hardly avoid it; Conscience, if ever, will certainly
awake when we come to die, and we may have observed the greatest Affliction
that Men have then suffered under, was their not being able to avoid their own
thoughts, which are now more bitter and terrible than ever, (and by the way
it is not only Justice, but withal Goodness in God to make it so.) Now the Mind
has quick and unbiased Reflections on its own Actions, and sets forth its
Guilt in true and proper Colors, and therefore the Apostle may well say, The
sting of Death is Sin. No terror in this State like that which does redound to
us from our guilty Consciences which have now got us under hold, and will lash
us severely. We cannot now disguise or dissemble our Guilt, there is no stifling
of it by Riot or Intemperance; lewd and loose Company can divert us no longer;
all the live-long day our sins will plague and fret us, and in the wearisom
nights, when we count every minute, our Guilt will rush in upon our thoughts,
attend us in every turn and motion, and render our Souls as restless and
uneasy as our Bodies. If what the Prophet says of wicked Men be true at other
times, it is much Isa. 57. 20, 21.
more so at this, That they are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast up Mire and Dirt. There is no peace, says my God, to the
wicked. When we come to die, the greatest melancholy that shall then seize our
Spirits, will be from the heavy load and burden of our sins, that will be ready
to oppress and sink our Souls. Then we shall find that threatening verified in
us, I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine Eyes. And what
grief or anguish can be comparable to that, which redounds from this? When we
are going hence, and God gives us warning to remove, must it not concern and
afflict us beyond all thought or expression, to consider the danger our Sins
have now brought us to? They hide God's Face and Mercy from us, and in our
greatest Distress and highest need of Comfort, threaten us with utter Ruin and
Destruction; and nothing now can be so cutting and intolerable as the thoughts
of a displeased and angry God. And well may that be so to us which was the
greatest of our Saviors troubles, for at his dying hour, the guilt of our sins
that lay on him, occasioned the bitterest Agony of his Soul, and that dismal
exclamation, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Most certainly the
sense of guilt will be the bitterest Portion, and the very dregs of that Cup of
trembling; our Hearts will faint, and our Souls will sink within us, and we
shall shake and fear, and cry mightly, and have on us such passionate
concernment as is inexpressible, from the dismal apprehension of the Divine
Wrath and Indignation which our sins have kindled and provoked against us. So
that hereupon it may be said with Cain, My punishment Genesis 4. 13.
is greater than I can bear.

Fifthly, The troubles of a dying state will appear further considerable, FROM
THE ASSAVLTS OF OUR SPIRITVAL ENEMY, WHICH WILL BE THEN MORE AND GREATER THAN
EVER. For to this we may apply what is said of him, Woe to the Inhabitants of
the Earth, for the Devil is come down unto you, having great Rev. 12. 12.
Wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time. And accordingly we
may expect that he will apply his temptations now more vigorously than ever;
for if he discharges this last part effectually, they are utterly lost and
gone, and he has gained them for ever. Wherefore he may be supposed now to set
all his Engines on work, and to ply it closely, He takes all the advantages
that may be of these extreme and difficult circumstances; herein he tempts us
to fretfulness and impatience under God's hand, Job. 2. 9.
to a distrust or despair of his Goodness. Do thou still retain they
Integrity? Curse God and die. If this will not do, he tempts us with too great
presumption on the Divine Goodness, to a neglect of due Examination and
Repentance of our Sins, or distracts our thoughts with Secular Affairs: One way
or other, he either keeps us from the Duties requisite for that State, or
endeavors to make us increase our Sin in it. Most certain it is, that the
Devil does now hope, and Industriously watch, for his Prey; the last effect of
his Malice and Revenge. The case here may be somewhat likened to that mentioned
of him, Rev. 12. 4. The Dragon stood before the Woman that was ready to be
Delivered, for to devour the Child as soon as it was born. But may our Souls
escape like that, and be caught up unto God and to his Ver. 5.
Throne.

Sixthly, A dying State or Condition, is rendered very dreadful and terrible
FROM THE THOVGHTS OR CONVICTION OF AN AFTER ACCOUNT OR JVDGMENT. The Prisoner
when going to his Trial, has all along every step he takes, very strange and
perplexing thoughts, and is beyond expression troubled and uneasy within
himself. And what must the case be with Men, when on the confines of another
World, to think of that great and impartial Judgment and Tribunal, before which
they are now summoned to appear? And how must it effect and cut them, to
consider that they are now hasting to the presence of that Righteous and
Almighty Judge, who shall strictly examine every thought and idle World, before
whom all things are naked and open? To consider that after Death comes
Judgment, is that which makes a dying State the most Serious and weighty matter
in the whole World. What concernment and anxiety must a man truly
considerative, have at such a time? I am dying, I am departing; that is, in
other terms, I am called to give up my Accounts, I am going to be Judged before
the Great God; behold, what Matter so weighty, what Concernment comparable to
this? This single Consideration duly weighed, renders such circumstances very
straight and terrible: No other can be the genuine effect of Men's thorough
Belief and Conviction (at that time) of an approaching Judgment.

But we have sufficiently represented the black and tragical part, it may be
high time now to draw the Curtain, and set forth a fairer Scene. Well then,
notwithstanding a dying condition is thus severe and terrible, yet we have
particular, extraordinary supports and comforts under it. Yea, though I walk
through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I WILL FEAR NO EVIL, FOR THOU ART
WITH ME, to assist me in these straights and necessities, and to afford
suitable Helps and Advantages under them. And now those great Supports which
God does give us in these most difficult circumstances, may be considered under
these following Particulars:

First, The thoughts of this State; as the Appointment of God. Secondly, That
God is therein peculiarly present with us, and gives us extraordinary helps and
assistances of his Divine Care and Goodness. Thirdly, The near approach to
Heaven and Happiness. Fourthly, the Consideration of Christ's Death and
Sufferings. Fifthly, The Belief and Expectation of a future Resurrection.
Sixthly, The Promise and Assurance of Pardon and Forgiveness. Sevently, The
Attendance of God's Holy Angels that are ready to receive our Souls.
Which duly and seriously considered, will abundantly qualify and remove all
the Terrors and Difficulties of a dying State.

First, It is a very great Support at that time to consider, That the STATE WE
ARE NOW BROVGHT TO, IS ACCORDING TO THE DETERMINATE ORDER AND ALLOTMENT OF GOD,
in whom we live and move, and have our Being. He is the Breath of our Nostrils,
he put our Souls into these Tabernacles, and we are here only Tenants at Will,
liable to be dispossessed at Pleasure. And when we consider, that it is
appointed for all men once to die, and that it is an irrevocable Decree of
Heaven, that we MVST all walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, why
should we fear any Evil? Be dismayed or terrified, at that which is the will
and pleasure of the Almighty, as if some strange and unexpected accident did
befall us? For may we not hereupon say with the Apostle, That no man should be
moved with these 1 These. 3. 3.
afflictions, for your selves know that we are appointed thereunto. Is not
God's hand in my suffering? Is it not in my death? It Is an undoubted mitigation
even of this sorrow and affliction, to consider that God has appointed it as
the unavoidable Lot and Portion of all Men living; so that, on this account, we
may say, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me.

Secondly, In our dying State or Circumstances, GOD IS PECVLIARLY PRESENT WITH
US, AND GIVES US EXTRAORDINARY HELPS AND ASSISTANCES OF HIS CARE AND GOODNESS.
Thou art with me. That Providence which is always vigilant over us, has then a
more deep and special regard and concern for us. Are the very Hairs of our Head
all numbered? And does his Care extend so far, as that one of these shall not
fall to the ground, but by the permssion of our Heavenly Father? May we not
hence justly conclude, that he is peculiarly careful of us in such danger and
extremity as this? Thou art with me; it is rendered Penes me, in loco quo sto,
Thou art near at hand, in the very place where I am, not as an indifferent
unconcerned Spectator, but to be a very present help in trouble. Then this our
good God is with us, to comfort our Souls, to support our Spirits, to ease our
Pain, and give us patience under it; to soften our cares, to mitigate the pangs
and terrors of Death; then the Eternal God is thy Refuge, and underneath are
the Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
everlasting Arms. Such a mighty care of God over us, holy David was abundantly
sensible of, and does express very passionately, Thou art about my path, and
about my bed. The Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. Psalm. 41*
Thou will not deliver him into the will of his enemies. The Lord will
strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou will make all his bed in his
sickness. The Hebrew word signifies turn. Thou will turn all his bed in his
sickness, as it were to make him lie more soft and easy. And he seems to have
an undoubted reference hereunto, by what presently follows in this verse: Thou
art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me. At quid adferunt solatii virga
and baculus? adferunt and quidem plurimum, says Erasmus ingeniously upon it,
What comfort does the rod and staff here import? A great deal; adversus
latrocinia daemonum hoc molientium, They are those Instruments whereby this
great Shepherd does defend his Flock from the rage and malice of the Devils,
that wait to devour us. I am not ignorant, says he, that some of the Ancients,
by the Rod here, understand some light affliction, wherewith God does Chastize;
by the staff, some more severe and heavy Judgment, whereby he does punish his
People. An Opinion, though very pious, yet not so proper for this place; for
observe, says he, the Psalmist does not say, My rod and staff, but thy rod and
thy staff, and therein speaks more agreeably, to the Metaphor here of God's
being a Pastor; and so we may take the rod and the staff here according to what
is usual in Scripture, the rod may be his assisting Grace, the staff our
Defense against our ravenous Enemy. Haec virga pastoris Jesu, hic baculus
solatio sunt gregi imbecilli adversus terrores omnium malorum. 'This rod, this
staff of the shepherd of our souls, Christ Jesus, will be our protection and
security against all kind of evil. St. Paul, says he, mentions the fiery Darts
of the Devil; these Christ keeps from us with his staff here mentioned: Hoc an
non magnum interim militaris itineris solatium. And is not this by the way, a
great encouragement of our Warlike State? How dearly does our Lord Jesus love
us, who, as you see, will neglect nothing that may any wise conduce to our
Protection, our Refreshment, and our Comfort? Thus far he, which I have the
longer insisted on, because it is such a genuine, though unusual
Interpretation, and a seasonable representation of God's so great, and peculiar
care, and regard for us, in this most straight and difficult condition.

To sum up this Head; as nothing is surer than the day of Death, and our
Departure out of this Earthly Body, which very likely may be attended with
blackness and terror, with dreadful Pains, and Agonies, too great to be
expressed; yet I may comfortably say, that herein the Lord is my helper; yea,
though I walk through this Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil,
for thou art with me. Though the Arrows of the Almighty (...) in me, and his Hand
presses me sore; though my condition be painful and tormenting, and I be
stretched upon my Bed with Grief and Anguish, and my Friends about me lament to
think that the place which now sees me, shall see me no more, notwithstanding
the Decree is past, That God has numbered my Life and finished it, and I am
now beset with gloominess Dan. 5 26
and darkness, mine Eye Balls roll, and my Soul is just on the wing, ready to
take its flight into the unknown Regions of the other World, Nevertheess I am
continually with thee, thou have holden me by my right hand, thou shall guide
me with thy Council, Ps. 73. 23.
and afterward receive me to glory. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there
is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. My Flesh and my Heart fails;
but God is the strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever. Which brings us
to another thing that will relieve and comfort us, in a dying State and
Condition: And that is,

Thirdly, THE THOVGHTS OR CONSIDERATION OF OUR NEAR APPROACH TO HAPPINESS AND
GLORY. Having hitherto run the race that is set before us, We may expect
greater sweats and troubles, and to be more tired, the nearer we come to the
end of it. But this is the last Stage; if we can bear up under this only
remaining difficulty, the day and the prize is ours; we may go on with Patience
Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith. How must it encourage
our endeavors, and support our Spirits, under the sorest pressure of Death it
self, to behold, with an Eye of faith, the Glory ready to be revealed, and to
see our Lord, with open arms, ready to receive us? Come, bear up under this,
and as it is your worst, it is your very last trial. There are blessed Mansions
prepared for you, where there shall be no more Death, neither sorrow, nor
crying; neither Rev. 2. 4.
shall there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away. Tho it
may not seem consistent with what I have already delivered, to lessen the sad
and sorrowful circumstances of our dying hours, yet I may say, that if our
Souls be duly fixed on Heaven and Eternity, it must in a great measure abate,
and will, I Am sure, outweigh the worst that can be said or conceived of that
State. This is able to out-ballance the utmost Tyranny of Pains and Agonies,
and to dispel all Clouds and Melancholy from our minds. The Night is come, but
it brings us to the dawn of Eternity, and that shadow of Death is the confine
of the days of Heaven. Yet a little while, and we are gone into YONDER World;
and must it not be a mighty satisfaction to us now, to say with the Apostle, We
know that if our earthly House of this 2. Cor. 5.
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an House not made with
hands, Eternal in the Heavens. To think that the pain will be over in a short
time, is some ease to my mind in the greatest Affliction; but to add, and
consider withal, that it will be presently succeeded with Joy unspeakable and
full of glory, must administer to our Souls the highest consolation. I will
fear no evil, for thou art with me; to say farther, and I shall be with thee,
be transferred to that blisful State, to the presence of God, where there is
fullness of joys, and pleasures for ever, is my most Psa. 16. 11.
unspeakable support, and the very height of comfort and satisfaction, The
Years draw nigh in which thou shall Eccles. 12.
say I have no pleasure in them, while the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or
the Stars, are darkened. In the day when the Keepers of the house shall
tremble. Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall
be in the way. The Silver Cord is loosed. Observe, upon that melancholy, and
though Elegant description, of our dying condition, Soloman subjoyns us a comfort
against the dismal thoughts of those sad circumstances, and against Death it
self; the consideration of our acceptance with God in the Immortal State, Then
shall the dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to
God who gave it. In a word, this single consideration, that we shall ever be
with the Lord, duly weighed and relied on, will abundantly relieve and support
us against all the Powers of Death, in its most horrid and ghastly apperances,
and sufficiently subdue the great difficulties of the dying State.

Fourthly, This is again rendered further easy and supportable FROM THE
CONSIDERATION OF CHRIST'S DEATH AND SVFFERINGS; not only as they do expiate our
Sins, and so bring comfort to our Souls, as we may have occasion to show
presently, but withal, upon the account of his great and glorious conquest over
Death and the Grave, which he vanquished and subdued, in the very worst, and
most horrid circumstances, that they might have less power, and exercise less
Tyranny over us. Whereupon the Apostle triumphantly speaks, Death is swallowed
up in Victory. O 1. Cor. 15. 54.
Death, where is they sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? Thanks be to God,
which gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

To consider that Christ our Lord underwent the same before us, and in a more
dismal manner than we are able to bear or imagine, is some mitigation in this
most sorrowful condition; considering withal, that in doing so, he has made
the way more smooth and passable for us. Death spent his most fiery Darts on
him, and he has so subdued his greatest strength and utmost power, that he
either cannot, or dare not be over severe and rigorous with us; at least, he
can go no further than he will permit him, I am he that lives and was dead,
and behold I am alive for evermore, Amen: And have the Keys of Hell and of
Death. Rev. 1. 18.
Death is now purely under Christ's command, and can do nothing but by leave
from him; and therefore, we may justly hope that our gracious Lord will not
suffer him to exert his utmost fury upon us. How suitable then is that pious
Prayer of our Church at this season. O Savior of the World, who by thy Cross
Visitation of the Sick.
and precious Blood have redeemed us, save us and help us, we humbly beseech
thee, O Lord.

Fifthly, the troubles and Sorrows of a dying State, are again very much abated
and subdued FROM THE THOVGHTS OF A FVTVRE RESVRRECTION, which will satisfy our
Minds and make abundant amends for all the doubts or troubles that do now
attend us. What though we suffer under pains, and may be grieved to think that
part of us shall be the Prey of Worms and Corruption, yet the belief of this
truth will soon dispel the sorrows that arise from thence. The time is coming
(and Lord, what joy is it in these straights?) when my Soul now returning to
God, shall meet this Body again glorious and refined, never more to be vexed
with, or separated from it. This shadow of Death, and that sorrowful Night,
that is now beset with Clouds and horror, will conduct us to the morn of our
Resurrection; and how can we be sorrowful as Men without hope? This our Church
looks upon as the most comfortable support, for the consideration of our own,
or others dissolution, when in its great Prudence and Piety, it appoints that
Lesson concerning the great Article of the Resurrection in the Burial Service,
a Doctrine if rightly fixed and believed, that will render us steadfast and
unmovable in the deepest sorrows. Thy Brother shall rise again, Joh. 11. 23.
was the comfort our Savior gave to Mary, and is such as will be able to bear
up our Spirits, even in the heaviest Trials of a Dying State. For how must it
support me and others, at that time, to speak after this, or the like manner?
You behold me, Brethren, seemingly forsaken and distressed; and, indeed, My
Complaint is bitter, for my Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, and
my stroke is heavier than my groanings. But yet I would have you believe and
think as I do, that I am only to withdraw for a small season; and as the
Prophet speaks, to enter into my Chambers, and Isai. 26. 20
shut my Doors about me, and to hide my self, as it were, for a little moment,
for thy dead men shall live; together with my dead body shall they arise. And
thereupon, observe what follows: Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust.
This long and solemn parting may cause grief in our hearts, and tears in our
eyes; but shall we not be comforted, considering the time is coming, in which,
All that are in the Graves, shall hear St. Matthew. 5. 28.
the voice of the Son of God, and shall come forth?

Sixthly, The Terrors of a dying State are mightily qualified and abated, FROM
GOD'S MOST COMFORTABLE PROMISE AND ASSVRANCE OF PARDON AND FORGIVENESS. The
greatest and the truest sorrow of a dying State, is that which is occasioned
from the sense of Sin and Guilt: Hinc illae Lachrymae. This is the cause of our
chiefest trouble and uneasiness at that time, and very justly too, for it is
the most dismal fate as ever was threatened; Ye shall dye in your sins. But St.
John, 8. 24.
when I come with a message of Pardon and Forgiveness, and this be rightly
received and well grounded, St. Matthew. 9. 2.
then it is, Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. To be convinced
that I have made my peace with God, and that my Pardon is sealed in Heaven,
this will strengthen us in the midst of sorrows, even to the defiance of all
pain and anguish: Instead of complaints, we may hereupon joyfully say, Lord,
now let thou thy Servant depart in peace. I do neither care nor value what
I suffer, so I be reconciled to God, and have my sins washed away by the Blood
of Christ. And such may be the State of every one of us, for upon a sincere
Faith and hearty Repentance, God will have mercy Isa. 55. 7. Isa. 1. 18.
upon us, and abundantly pardon. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
as white as snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. This
blessed Promise takes away the sting of Death, and puts us beyond the reach of
its Terror and Malignity; and therefore our Church may well prescribe it as
the great, or only Comfort, and Security, in such a State or Condition. Thus
saying, The Almighty Lord, who is a most strong Visitat. of Sick.
Tower to all them that put their trust in him, to whom all things in Heaven,
in Earth, and under the Earth, do bow and obey, be now and evermore thy
Defense, and make thee know and feel, that there is no other name under Heaven
given to Man, in whom, and through whom, thou may receive health and
salvation, but only the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Seventh, and Last Comfortable Consideration that we have against the great
sorrows of Death, is, THE ATTENDANCE OF GODS HOLY ANGELS READY TO RECEIVE OUR
SOULS, AND TO CONDVCT THEM INTO THE MANSION OF THE BLESSED. For he will give
his Angels Charge Ps. 91. 11.
over thee to keep thee in all thy ways, certainly then in these, the most
difficult of any. For are they not all Heb. 1. 14.
Ministering Spirits sent forth to Minister (...) for them that shall, or are
ready to inherit Salvation?

The Blessed God, whose Instruments the Angels are (and who is therefore alone
to be adored for it) has out of wonderful condescension toward us, assigned
those glorious happy Beings, for our Safety and Protection in our dying
Streights and Difficulties. For the Holy Scripture tells us, They carried
Lazarus his Soul St. Luke, 16. 22.
into Abraham's bosom. And in our Savior's Dreadful Agonies, there appeared an
Angel unto him from Heaven St. Luke, 22. 43.
strengthening him. And if such were able to bring him Relief in his
Circumstances, they may well do it to ours, which at the worst, come vastly
short of his sorrowful Death and Passion. Why now should we be amazed, and
terrified at the thoughts or approach of that most serious and solemn hour? Why
art thou so Ps. 43. 5. 6.
heavy, O my Soul? And why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy trust in
God. He and his Blessed Angels continually watch over us for good. God in the
ways we have heard, or others, as he knows best, Will keep, thee from the hour
of temptation, which shall come on all Rev. 3. 10.
the World. God is our refuge and strength; a very present help in trouble:
Therefore will we not fear, though Ps. 46. 1.
the earth be moved. The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our
refuge.

In all time of our Tribulation, in the hour of Death, and in the Day of
Judgment, Good Lord deliver us.

FINIS.

