THE Copy of a Letter FROM SCOTLAND, To his GRACE The Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Subscribed by Eight Archbishops and Bishops of that Kingdom, as
follows: Viz.
Edinburgh, March 9. 1682. May it please your Grace,
HIS Royal Highness having parted from this place on Monday last, being called
by the King to attend his Majesty at Newmarket, we should prove very defective
in Duty and Gratitude, if upon this occasion we should forget to acknowledge to
your Grace, how much this poor Church, and our Order, do owe to his Princely
Care and Goodness; that his Majesty, and the worthy Bishops of England, may
from you receive a just account thereof.

Since the coming of his Royal Highness to this Kingdom, we find our case much
changed for the better, and our Church and Order (which through the cunning and
power of our Adversaries, were exposed to extreme hazard and contempt) sensibly
relieved, and rescued; which next to the watchful Providence of God (that
mercifully superintends his Church,) we can ascribe to nothing so much as to
his Royal Highness gracious owning, and vigilent protection of us:

Upon all occasions he gives fresh instances of his Eminent Zeal against the
most unreasonable Schism, which by rending, threatens the Subversion of our
Church and Religion; and concerns himself as a Patron to us, in all our
Public, and even Private and Personal Interests: So that all may take notice
of his signal kindness to us, and observe that he looks on the Enemies of the
Church as Adversaries to the Monarchy it self: Nor did we ever propose or offer
to his Royal Highness any rational Expedient, which might conduce to the Belief
and Security of the Church which he did not readily embrace and effectuate.

The Peace and Tranquillity of this Kingdom is the effect of his prudent and
steady conduct of Affairs; and the humors of our wicked Fanatics are much
restrained from dangerous Eruptions: upon their apprehensions of his Vigilance
and Justice. For they dread nothing so much, as to see him upon the Head of his
Majesty's Commissions and Forces against them.

We hope your Grace will make our dutiful Acknowledgments to his Royal Highness
for all his Princely Favors to us, and give him the most firm assurance of our
most sincere Endeavors to serve him, and of our most fervent Prayers for his
Temporal and Eternal Happiness; as is the bounden duty of,

May it please your Grace, Your Graces most humble and faithful Servants, Alex.
St. Andrews, Jo. Edinburgh, And, Dunkelden, Arth. Glascow, Ja. Gallocodein, Ja.
Dunbleyne, Geo. Brecheine, Lissimoren.


LONDON: Printed for S. Gardner. 1682.


