THE FONT UNCOVERED FOR Infant Baptism; OR AN ANSWER TO THE Challenges of the
ANABAPTISTS OF STAFFORD, Never yet Replied unto, though long since promised.

Wherein The Baptism of all Church Members Infants is by plain Scripture Proof
Maintained to be the will of JESUS CHRIST; and many Points about Churches and
their Constitutions are occasionally handled.

By WILLIAM COOK late Minister of the Gospel at Ashby-Delazouch.

LONDON, Printed by A. Miller for Tho. Underhill at the Anchor in Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-door. 1651.

TO The Faithful Servants of Christ, and Lovers of the Truth in STAFFORD And
the Parts adjacent, and others that are concerned in this Controversy of
INFANT BAPTISM, which desire to embrace the Truth in Love: Grace, Mercy and
Peace be multiplied; through the knowledge of God the Father, and Christ Jesus
our Lord.
Honored and Beloved Inhabitants of Stafford,
AS your Wisdom, Resolution, Faithfulness and Activity to appear for the
Truth, and contend for the Faith (shining forth in those whom God has set in
Civil Authority among you) in that great push of temptation; has given
occasion to many to glorify God in your behalf, rejoice in your steadfastness,
and pray for you, and (I doubt not) yielded comfort to your own consciences: so
they have engaged me to acknowledge my self your servant in Christ, and for the
Truth, in this cause which does so much concern the glory of Christ and comfort
of Christians. I therefore, though conscious of mine own weakness, when I
heard of those many loud and proud challenges, that had been made by the
contrary Party to dispute about this Subject, was willing, upon the advice and
persuasion of some of my Brethren, to undertake the Challenge, relying on the
help of Christ and the goodness of the Cause. And having received the Papers
of the Challengers, in as short a space as I could, prepared this Answer
(except some additions and explanations, which since its return to my hand, I
thought meet to insert, for the help of the ignorant, for whose sake it is
principally written) upon the giving in of a Copy, whereof a Reply was promised
shortly by the Challengers. I waited long and heard nothing of my Papers, nor
any Reply, until a Letter came to my hands from some of principal note among
you, dated November. 11. expressing the contrary Parties boasting of a Reply
ready long ago, which was to be Printed with their Propositions, and mine
answered. Whereupon I was then in that Letter, and since by word of mouth,
desired to Print mine Answer; lest I should be abused by others misrepresenting
of the same. My answer was, that I would consult with my Brethren, and if they
should think it meet, I would be willing to yield to you herein.

Ever since that time I have been cast on a wandering and unsettled condition (as
is well known,) far from my Study and Books. Yet when I could gain a little
time with the help of the Bible, I added something by way of explanation, for
the help of meaner capacities that are not able to see the strength of an
Argument, or answer when it is barely propounded. Two Arguments more I have
also added to the former number from one Scripture, whence I had only
propounded one Argument at the first.

It may be some will demand, What is the reason that their Challenge is not
accepted in a way of public Dispute, seeing they have urged it frequently,
and confidently upbraided your Town and all Ministers, that none would
publicly Dispute with them? To this I Answer.

1. What hope of a public Dispute on good terms, to be undertaken by a
Minister of Christ, when your own faithful and peaceable Pastor might not be
suffered to preach the Gospel to you, a people committed to his charge?

2. What encouragement can any rational man have to Dispute with such as
abhor Syllogismes, which are the rational way of disputing?

3. What hope of finding out, or clearing the Truth by Dispute, where there is
no likelihood that the laws and rules of disputing will be observed with
freedom, safety, peace and love, with the help of a Learned, Judicious and
Impartial Moderator.

4. What likelihood of good by a Dispute, wherein impudency, audaciousnesse
and verbosity, passion, bitterness and violence are like to bear sway?

5. What can a public Dispute in such a case (which case there is too great
cause to fear) be, but a sinful abuse of precious time, of peoples patience,
and even of Scripture and reason it self?

6. Who sees not that the drift of these men is to turn Religion into a matter
of contention, and to draw people together to vain-janglings and concertations,
as heretofore they met together at Stageplaies, Bear-baits and Cock-fights,
which abuse What pious heart does not abhor?

7. It was judged that most or all these evils might far better be prevented
by calm considerate writing, wherein the passions of fear, anger, etc. and all
tumults might be avoided; and reason might speak and be heard.

8. Yet if this way of discussing the truth shall not be satisfactory, and good
grounds of hopes shall be given, that the aforementioned evils may be prevented. I
doubt not, but the Challenge will be accepted. Otherwise no faithful Minister
of Christ may, to satisfy the irrational desires of some, and answer the
insolency of others, adventure on that, which will be by the judgment of the
prudent, no better then a taking of Gods Name in vain, and exposing of himself
to certain danger. Paul himself, though full of zeal for the Truth, was willing
to yield to the Disciples and his Friends, Act. 19.30, 31.
persuading him not to adventure himself into the tumultuous Theater.

It were much to be wished, that those men which have but weak reason, neither
knowing how to manage an Argument, nor capable of conviction thereby; but are
taken with plausible expressions and big words, or drawn by hopes of honor,
pleasure, gain, ease or liberty, into new ways, like children Carried about
with every wind of doctrine, would make more use of their sense (by which only
it seems they live, making no use of faith or reason in this case) to observe
the end and issue of these ways, into which they are so easily drawn.

We need not go to Munster or other parts beyound the seas to see the judgment
of God on these men: Our own Country gives too many sad experiences thereof. I
will only give one instance, of one whose name deserves to be written in the
dust, and does already stink throughout the Land, and therefore I will not
stain my paper with it: Yet he is so notorious and infamous, that a short
description of him will sufficiently put men in mind whom I mean. In
Warwickshire he appeared first, crying down in his Preaching the Ministry of
England, and Infant Baptism: After that he proceeded to be a great Dipper;
after that he became a Master of the Quakers, and would cast people into
Trances and Revelations, as is credibly reported: Lastly he became Head of the
Ranters, that abominable, rotten, blasphemous and hellish Rout. Warwickshire
and the Counties adjacent know whom I speak of, and the truth at large of what
I briefly touch. Yea this wretched man is notoriously known in the chief City
of the Land; so true is that of the Apostle, speaking of hypocritical
flagitious Deceivers, 2 Timothy 3.5, 6, 7,
That have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof: Which creep into
houses, leading captive silly women laden with lusts, ever learning and never
coming to the knowledge of the truth. But, says he, 9, 13.
their folly shall be made manifest to all men. And again, Wicked men and
seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.

It might seem strange that they who so much depend on the answers of
providence in outward success, as irrefragable arguments to demonstrate the
goodness or badnesse of causes and persons, should not acknowledge and tremble
at Divine providence, by this and many thousand such like spiritual plagues,
warning all men that have any care of their souls, to beware those ways that
lead thereto. But it is not strange that they thus preposterously judge; for
those whom God has given up to a sensual judgment, a reprobate mind, and
hard heart, do alike cry down those ways that are attended with outward
disgrace and misery, in a course of strictness and conscientiousnesse, though
accompanied with riches of spiritual graces, which usually is the lot of the
godly; and admire and greedily embrace the ways of sin and licentiousness,
which for a time visibly prosper in the world, though accursed from heaven with
invisible and spiritual plagues, which is the common condition of the wicked.

It is a sad and shameful thing that evil men should be more industrious,
active and bold, to study, plead for, and promote error and falsehood, then
Gods servants are for the maintaining of the truth; and particularly that these
men should do more to cast themselves and their children, others and their
posterity out of Covenant; then the godly will do to clear to themselves and
others, theirs and their childrens interest in the Covenant; but it is so. The
best see, know, believe and love, but in part: Whereas corruption, lust and
error, wholly reign in every unsanctified man, and have too strong a party in
the most sanctified. Divine truths and Evangelicall mysteries, are strangers to
our corrupt minds, and receive but cold entertainment there. Errors and lies
are connaturall to mankind, and soon closed with; when men speak lies they
speak of their own. Honors, pleasures, and filthy lucre, fleshly liberty and
ease, have a mighty influence upon carnal hearts, to carry them on in
promoting and receiving falsehood, and resisting and rejecting truth. Nothing
out pure zeal for God, love of Christ and his truth, care of our own and
brethrens souls, can stir up earnestly and sincerely to contend for the truth,
especially when it lies under outward discouragements, disgraces and frowns
from the world, and alas, how rare are those graces amongst men, and how weak
in the strongest Christians!

Yet surely in other respects, Holiness and truth (though as a spark of fire
in the midst of a sea of corruption, or as a Pearl in the bottom of a dunghill,
or as a little glimpse of light under a dark chaos of natural and acquired
sin and ignorance) have the advantage, for being of a divine original, they
are of prevailing invincible power, and therefore believers that have this
unconquerable truth in them, and on their side, cannot be excused if they do
not stir up the grace of God in them, and take care and pains that they may
be able to contend for, and maintain the truth that was once delivered to the
Saints; especially in these times of so great light, wherein (besides the
Scriptures in a known Language, and plentiful public Preaching,) in
Catachism^s and larger Treatises the Truth is so fully cleared. It may be that
God has as for other causes, so for the correction of our sloth and
carelessness, suffered these Controversies to break out, that he may quicken us
to the more diligent use of all holy means to grow in grace and knowledge. If
for this use dear brethren, this my poor labor may be serviceable to you, or
others to whom at your desire (upon the consent and approbation of my brethren
in the Ministry) it may be made common, I have my desire. But before I leave
you, let me entreat you and others that may make use of it, that you will not
content your selves with a slightly looking on it, but be serious as the matter
handled (concerning yours and your childrens interest in the Covenant of Grace
requires,) deserves: howsoever in the manner you may find sundry
imperfections in the instrument, yet let not that be any prejudice to the truth
whereof God is the author. Because I was forced at the first to quote
Scriptures briefly for speed, which their importunity called for, and since I
have not writ them out at large to prevent bulkinesse, which might deter many
from looking on it; let me entreat you to turn over to every proof in your
Bibles, and read and observe the same carefully; and if you would write them
out in the margin or some paper, it might be time well spent; without pains and
diligence no profiting can be expected; he that deals with a slack hand, will
come to poverty, but the hand of the diligent makes rich. Thus committing this
service and your use thereof to the blessing of God, desiring that he may have
the praise if you shall receive hereby any increase in the knowledge of the
truth and stability therein, and that I may have the help of your prayers, who
remain

Yours in Christ for the service of your souls to my power, WILLIAM COOK.

AN ANSWER to two PAPERS, subscribed by Henry Huggar and James Brown: Wherein
they endeavor to maintain their own Opinion and Practice of Anabaptism, and
oppose the Practice of Baptizing INFANTS.
They begin their first Paper thus,
Gentlemen,
YOu having avoided public dispute, by your selves so much pressed for at first;
H.H. and J. Br.
and since rather paper conference: We to gratify your desire herein, have
written these few lines, hoping thereby to beget some discussion of the truth.
Wherein we affirm, That the Baptism (or sprinkling) of Infants, whereby the
National Churches of Spain, England, France and Rome, etc. are constituted, and
from thence called Christians and Christendom, is not the Baptism (or dipping)
of Believers, which Christ Jesus ordained, and his Disciples practiced for the
right constituting of Churches under the Gospel, whereby they rightly became,
and were truly called Christians.

Answer.
IN this your stating of the Question,

1. As faith or interest in Christ, or the Covenant of grace, constitutes a
Christian; for the joint and orderly profession of faith and interest in that
Covenant, or Gods owning a people to be his in Covenant, is that which
constitutes them a Church.

2. Baptism is not essential to the constituting of a Church, being but
adventitious or additional, as a sign or pledge of peoples admission into the
Church. The penitent thief on the Cross was a true Believer though unbaptized,
and a multitude of such penitent ones jointly professing Christ should be a
true Church, Act. 7.38.
though they wanted opportunity to be Baptized, as that Penitent did. The
Israelites in the wilderness were a true Church, Josh. 5.5, 6.
though they wanted Circumcision for forty years.

3. This Church (or these Churches) of England, received its (or their)
constitution in or anon after the Primitive times, when by the Ministry of the
word, some were converted from heathenism to Christianity; at which time we
grant persons of years were Baptized upon their profession of faith, or
repentance, Genesis 12.4. Genesis 15.6. Genesis ^7.1^, 3, 4, etc. 7.
and for they and their children received into Covenant. As Abraham at the
first setting up of a Church, with a seal of admittance thereinto in his
family, was Circumcised when he had professed or declared his repentance, faith
and obedience, and then his children and posterity were Circumcised, whiles
Infants, by virtue of the Covenant into which they were taken with their
fathers. Now that being the first constitution of a Church in this Land which
never yet was overthrown, though many ways depraved, through Antichrists
usurpations (of whom it was foretold that he should sit in the Temple of God
for a time, 2 These. ^.4.
) but being after, through the rich mercy of God repaired, it has continued
still the same Church, having been never rased to the foundation; and so we
need not a new constitution, and therefore we deny that our Church was
constituted by Infant Baptism, any more then the Church of Israel was
constituted by Infant-circumcision.

2. Whereas you say, that National-Churches are constituted by Infant Baptism
or sprinkling. Ans. 1. I know none that you oppose to plead for the
constitution of National-Churches by Infant Baptism. 2. Though we boast not of
National-Churches, nor is there any necessity that the mention of
National-Churches should come into this dispute, yet are we not ashamed of the
name of a National-Church: But seeing you urge it upon us as odious, we desire
you, with us, to consider these things.

1. Genesis 22.18.
Did not God promise to Abraham, that all the Nations of the earth should be
blessed in his seed, Genesis 12.2.
viz. Jesus Christ. And how can Nations be blessed but by being made Churches?
as that one Nation which descended from Abraham, was blessed by being a Church
and people of God. Psalm. 2.8.
Has not God promised to give to Christ the Nations for his inheritance, and
utmost parts of the earth for his possession; Psa. 22.27, 28.
and that all the ends of the earth, and kindreds of the Nations shall turn to
the Lord and worship before him? Isa. 49.23.
That Kings shall be nursing fathers, and Queens nursing mothers to the Church?
And that Christ Jesus, whose visage and form was marred (with his blood
trickling down the same, Isa 52.14, 15.
when crowned with thorns, nailed to the Cross, and pierced into the heart)
shall sprinkle many Nations? Mat. 28.19.
Did not Christ bid his Apostles go into all Nations, make Disciples and
Baptize? Rev. 11.15.
Was it not foretold that the Kingdoms of the world should become the Kingdoms
of God and his Christ; and that the saved Nations should walk in the light of
the New-Jerusalem; Rev. 21.24, 26.
and that the Kings of the earth should bring their light to it, and should
bring the glory and honor of the Nations to it? Why then should the name of
National-Church be so odious?

2. Romans 16.15. 1 Cor. 16.19. Col. 4.15. Phil. 2.2. And if the number of
Believers in a small Village or Town, Romans one City embracing the truth in so
great number that no one room or place could contain them all at once for the
ordinary orderly edifying administration of Gods Ordinances, may be called the
Church of a City, or Classical, (...).
as the Church of Jerusalem, which increased into many thousand, yea many ten
thousand, and yet was but one Church, Act. 2.44.47. Act. 5.14, 15. and 6.1.
Act. 21.20. 4. Pet. 2.1. chap. 2.11. and chap. 5.2. 1 Cor. 15.9. 5. And if the
whole company of the faithful on earth, consisting for the most part of many
particular visible Churches, may be called the Church (Ecumenical) Mat. 16.18.
1 Cor. 12.28. 6. Lastly, If all the Believers in heaven and earth, Heb. 12.23.
I think no good reason can be given why men should make it so shy without scorn
or reproach to call the faithful in a whole Nation (especially when the whole
Nation does generally profess the truth) a National-Church.

3. The National-Church was not constituted by Infant Baptism, but by the
preaching of the Gospel God was pleased to call some in the Primitive times in
this land, and they became a Church, Mat. 13.3^, 3^, 33.
which was the first constitution of this Church. Afterward the leaven of the
Gospel seasoning the whole lump, and that little grain of mustard seed growing
up into a great tree; and the Primitive Believers of this Land increasing into
a Nation, Ezekiel. 16.13.
as Abraham's family did; the Church did grow up into a Nation, as was said
before; National, Ecumenical, Domestical or Congregational, being accidental,
not essential to a Churches constitution or continuance.

Thirdly, Whereas you say, The National Churches of Spain, England, France and
Rome, were constituted by sprinkling of Infants: I answer,

1. This is a poisonous insinuation, whereby the Church of England is put by
you into the same condition with the Churches of Rome, Spain, France, etc.
wherein you do not only wrong Gods holy people (which have striven, and
continue striving for Reformation against Antichrist) in matching them with the
popish rabble, and slander those Ministers and Ordinances of Christ amongst us
(by whose means, if you have any knowledge of Christ and his truth, you have
received the same) by equalling them with popish Ministers and superstitions;
but also blaspheme God himself, at whose call and through whose grace we have
come out of Babylon, have attained some, and breath after more Reformation. How
will Christ take it that his people and Churches are thus compared with the
slaves and Synagogues of Antichrist!

2. Yet we are not ashamed to own that which is of God amongst the Italians,
Spaniards and French. Shall we reject the Scriptures of the old Testament, or
be equalled with the Jews, because we embrace them as Gods word, which the Jews
also profess to do? Or must we cast off the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, and many precious truths gathered out of them, because professed by
the Papists, who yet overthrow by many false doctrines and superstitions what
truths they profess? no sure. Neither are we to think the worse of
Infant Baptism, because it is used amongst them.

3. Yea, we make no doubt but that if in Italy, Spain and France, they would
hold only that in doctrine worship and practice which is agreeable to Gods
word, even the holy Scripture, which they profess to embrace with us, and cast
away superstitious idolatry and impieties contrary thereunto, reforming
according to the word; God would own them for his Churches, neither should they
need a new constitution or new Baptism, any more then new Scripture. They have
added indeed to Scripture and Baptism of their own; but let them repent of, and
cast away their additions, and keep that which is of God in judgment, practice
and worship, according to the Scriptures which are amongst them, and they
become forthwith true and good Churches. The Church of Judah after it had
fallen to idolatry, by casting away that idolatry in the time of Asa,
Jehosaphat, Hezekiah and Josiah, was acknowledged a true and good Church
without new constitution. Nay more, if backsliding Israel, after her many
abominations, had returned to God when they had lien long in idolatry, Ier.
3.1, 2. and 4.1.
God would have received them as his people without new Circumcision.

Fourthly, Whereas you say, From this Infant Baptism they are called Christians
or Christendom, You do not prove it, We deny it, and assert That we are called
Christians or Christendom from our faith in Jesus Christ and the profession
thereof, and from our interest in the Covenant of Grace which God has made
with us in Christ the Mediator exhibited; yet granting that Baptism is the
badge of our Christianity, but not that which constitutes Christians. What they
of Rome or Spain say, we pass not.

Fifthly, Whereas you say or imply, Baptism is dipping (in your sense) and call
it sprinkling (by way of scorn) in our sense, and would imply that Christ
ordained, and his Apostles practiced dipping, or as others express it, dousing
over the head, not infusion or sprinkling: We wish you to prove it if you can,
either from the proper signification of the word, Mark 7.4. (...). Mat. 3.11.
(...). See the accomplishment of this Prophecy, Act. ^ v. 3. and 17, 18. Act
10.44 and 11, 15, 16. Luke 12.50. (...). Mat, 20, 22. (...). Isa. 63, 1, 3.
or from the nature of the Ordinance, or from the historical relation of the
Apostles practice or otherwise. We find that the word (...) signifies to wash
or bedew, or imbrew lightly, whether by infusion of, or dipping into any liquid
thing with a light touch; but that it should signify only dipping or dousing,
the use of the word will not allow.

1. It is used to signify the ceremonial washing of cups, pots, brazen
vessels, or tables, which may be as well done by infusion or pouring water upon
them, as by immersion or diping into the water, yea in some of them much better.

2. The same word is also used to signify Christ's baptizing with the holy
Ghost and with fire. This cannot be so understood that Christ should dip or
douse men into the holy Ghost and fire, but that in the Primitive times the
holy Ghost should be poured upon them, as the texts in the margin show, and
that Christ would in after times pour his Spirit ordinarily on his people,
which Spirit, in respect of operation, is compared to fire, as giving light,
heat, etc.

3. This word is used to signify Christ's death, wherein his blood was poured
forth and sprinkled on himself, and he washed in his own blood. I have, says
he, a Baptism to be baptized with, and again, Are you able to be baptized with
the Baptism that I am baptized with?

4. This word is also used to signify Christ's execution of Justice on his
enemies, he being compared to a mighty warrior, which with wounding and
slaying his enemies, is besprinkled with their blood, which spouts out of their
body; when they are gashed and pierced by him. Our Translators render that in
the Revelation, having his garments dipped in blood: Rev. 19 13.
But it may be well read as that in Isaiah, sprinkled with blood. For warriors
do not use to dip or douse their garments in their enemies blood lying on the
ground, but well may they have their garments besprinkled therewith as it
gusheth out of their bodies being wounded by them.

2. As for the nature, use and end of Baptism, it is to signify the pouring of
the blood and spirit of Christ on our souls for regeneration, remission of sins
and sanctification, wherein we are not said to be dipped or doused into Christ's
blood or spirit, but to be sprinkled therewith, or to have them poured upon us,
Heb. 9.13, 14. chap. 12.24. 1 Pet. 1.2. Isa. 44.3. Act. 2.18. So that Prophecy
of Christ's besprinkling many Nations, Isa. 52.15. may be understood of his
sprinkling them with his blood (which having spilled, he was so deformed, more
then any man, ver. 14.) for justification, and his Spirit (which by his truth
he purchased) for sanctification. The scope of the text and coherence speaking
of Christ's sufferings and the fruits thereof, confirm the interpretation as
most natural and proper.

3. As for the relation which the Scripture makes of the manner of baptizing,
Josh. 3.17.
Sometimes indeed it speaks of baptizing at the river Jordan; but how
improbable is it that they should go into that mighty stream, 2 King. 2.8, and
14. Act. 2.41.
which could not be passed over safely on foot (without a miracle) and there be
dipped with extreme danger of drowning. 2. We read of baptizing in a City,
diverse thousands in one day, without any mention of their going forth to any
great water to be dipped. 3. We read of baptizing a whole household in a City
in the deep night, without the least intimation of their going forth to a river
or any great water to be dipped, which if you consider well, it may be you will
not be so confident in calling baptizing, dipping.

Sixthly, You say that This baptizing or dipping of Believers was ordained of
Christ and practiced by the Disciples for the right constitution of true
Churches. This you speak as your own sense. Ans. This opinion was confuted
before, and by that which follows it shall further appear, that neither Baptism
nor diping is essential to the constitution of a true Church.

Seventhly, You say or imply, This baptizing or dipping is that whereby they
became, and were truly called Christians. Ans. This is false, that men cannot
be right Christians without your dipping: Yea though we understand it of true
Baptism, for faith or interest in Christ properly makes Christians. Being
interested in Christ, though we should be hindered by death or other providence
from Baptism, yet we are true Christians, as the thief on the Cross. Those
three thousand mentioned in the Acts, when they had believed, Act. 2 19, and 40.
were Christians, even before they were baptized; so Philip before he came to
the water. Baptism is rather an effect or consequent, then a cause or
antecedent of our Christianity. People are rightly baptized because Christians,
not Christians because baptized.

2. Neither were men hence at first called Christians, because baptized; for
many thousands had been baptized a long time before they were called
Christians: For whereas great multitudes had been baptized by John the Baptist,
Mat. 3.5, 6. Ioh 4 5, 6. See Act 2. and. 3. to the 7 chap.
and more by the Disciples of Christ before his death, and many thousands also
after his ascension, at Jerusalem, Samaria and elsewhere. Believers were not
called Christians until a good time after the Persecution and dispersion at
Jerusalem. For the faithful were first called Christians at Antioch, Act.
11.^6.
where Paul and Barnabas had taught an whole year, and the number of Disciples
was mightily increased, there is not the least intimation that Baptism or
dipping gave them the name of Christians, but rather their famous profession of
Christ. Thus much for particulars observable in the main proposition.

Eighthly, From the whole proposition in respect of the matter, let it be noted,
that besides your implicit fastening on us some things which we own not; and
asserting as your own some things which you neither have nor can prove. The
whole state of the Question is mistaken by you. You speak of Baptism which is
for the constitution of Churches, whereas the Question is, What Baptism is to
be used amongst us, who are a Church (or Churches) constituted already? We
grant that to the first constituting of Churches amongst Jews or Infidels,
which were never a Christian people, a Profession of repentance, faith or
obedience must be made by men upon the preaching of the Gospel, that they and
their children may be accepted into Covenant and baptized. As Abraham professed
his faith before that he and his family were circumcised, but after that his
children were circumcised, without requiring of actual faith and repentance
from them, as precedaneous to Circumcision. They that will constitute new
Churches amongst Infidels, ought as we judge, first to require actual faith and
repentance of that people before they admit them and their seed as members of
the Church. But whatsoever you think of us, we Christians in England know that
we were through Gods grace a Church constituted long ago, whose defects and
corruptions, though many, yet have not been inconsistent with the being of a
Church; neither (such has been the indulgence of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
head and King of the Church) were we ever unchurched. If you will go and preach
among Jews, Turks and infidels, and make it appear that you have a commission
for it; we will not gainsay your constituting of Churches amongst them, and
baptizing Professors of faith. But in the mean space let me advise you to take
heed, lest whiles you talk of constituting Churches amongst Gods people, Act.
1^.3. 2 Timothy 3.6. Tit, 1. 11.
Satan use you as his instrument to overthrow Churches, by subverting souls,
and whole houses, through speaking things you ought not for filthy lucre sake;
as he did those noted in the margin.

Ninthly, Let it be also observed, in the form of your propounding the whole
state of the Question, that you which would be accounted great disputers and
discussers of the truth, laying down a negative Proposition (as is evident to
any that can discern a negation from an affirmation) in propounding it say we
affirm -- when indeed you deny. Will not these so gross mistakes, in the parts
and the whole, the matter and manner of this main question stated by you, give
just cause to judge that you are such men as those of whom the Apostle speaks
in these words, 1 Timothy, 1.5, 6, 7.
Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, a good
conscience and faith unfeined, from which some having swerved, have turned
aside to vain jangling, desiring to be teachers of the law, understanding
neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm?

Whereas you say, H.H J.B.
If it be, we desire you to prove it by plain Scriptures.

Ans. We have nothing to do to prove that which we never affirmed; but you
falsely father upon us (as it may seem) that you may fight with your own shadow.
But we shall by Gods assistance prove, upon solid Scripture grounds, That the
Infants of Christians, which are members of a constituted Church (or Churches)
have right to the Covenant of grace, and so to Baptism the seal of entrance
into the Covenant; and that it is agreeable to Gods word that constituted
Churches should be continued by baptizing of children that are members thereof.

But first let us hear what you say for your way. You proceed thus,

That the Baptism of believing men and women by us practiced, H.H. J.B.
is the Baptism of Christ, we prove by these Scriptures.

Ans. For the answering of your Scripture-proofs, taken from Christ's command
and the Apostles practice; I will first propound some things in general to be
considered, secondly make answer to the several Scriptures.

1. I answer therefore, That neither any nor all these Scriptures do prove
plainly, positively, immediately and directly, without consequence or syllogism
(which I take to be your meaning when you call for plain and positive
Scripture) which I have heard that some of your way abhor and protest against,
that the Baptism practiced by you is the Baptism of Jesus Christ. In none of
these Scriptures it is expressly said, "The dipping of believing men and
women, practiced by Henry Huggar and James Brown, is the Baptism of Jesus
Christ. Nor do we read in the Evangelists, Go Henry Huggar and Ja. Brown,
teach all Nations and baptize, etc. Nor do we read that Christ gave a command
to you two to preach the Gospel to every creature: Nor do we find in the Acts
of the Apostles, that H.H. and J.B. said to the Jews, Repent and be baptized;
or that the Samaritans heard you two preaching; or that the Eunuch went down
with you to the water; or that the Jaylour or Crispus the Ruler of the
Synagogue were baptized by you or either of you. If you have any plain positive
Scriptures mentioning your selves, you may produce them. Neither have you cause
to take it ill to be urged thus: Seeing that you call for plain and positive
Scripture without syllogism or consequence, to prove that children or infants
by name should be baptized or sprinkled, why may not we require of you, plain
and positive Scripture without syllogism or consequence, that H.H. and J.Br.
should dip men and women? When you show us express Scripture for the one, we
will for the other.

2. "But it may be you will say, It will follow by good consequence from these
Scriptures, that your Baptism is the Baptism of Christ.

Ans. 1. It is well if you be not afraid of syllogisms, etc. you must either
prove your selves Apostles or Evangelists, for to such were these commands
given, and of such were these histories; Mat. 2^, 19, 20.
and that you have power and authority to preach to the whole world, power to
speak with strange tongues to any Nation whatsoever, and to work miracles, and
that you ought to preach to none, Mat. 16.15, 16, 17. Act. 2. and 8. Romans
16.15^.
but (or at lest principally) to Jews and infidels, not building on others
foundations, for these things belonged to those first founders of Churches: Or
else at least you must prove that you are Pastors or Teachers (whom God has
appointed to succeed those extraordinary primitive Ministers, who were employed
in founding and constituting Churches,) Ephesians. 4, 11, 12, 13, 14.
which are to build on the Apostles foundation, for perfecting of the Saints,
set apart for the work of the Ministry, and for edification of the mystical
body of Christ. And if so, you must make it appear, that upon due trial and
examination of your gifts, Act 14 23. 1 Timothy ^, ^, 2, 3, 4, 5. (...) 1 Timothy
4.14. and 5 22. Tit. 1.7, 8, 9. Act. ^0.28 1 Timothy ^^3, 14, 15.
and fitness in point of knowledge and holiness, you have been set apart to
that Office, by the approbation or imposition of hands of the Presbytery, for
that is the Gospel Order. You must make it appear also that you have a Flock to
oversee and watch over, and that you give your selves wholly to reading,
meditation and study, and that you fully discharge your Ministry in the Flock
of Christ; if you will with any comfort to your selves, and satisfaction to
others that are godly and judicious; apply the Scriptures which you have cited
to your selves. Besides, if you be Apostles, why do you build on others
foundations? If Pastors, what talk you of constituting Churches, as if that
were your work?

3. The reason is not in all things the same of a Church to be constituted, and
of a Church constituted already, as I have showed before in the example of
Abraham: when his family was to be made a Church, under the dispensation of the
Covenant sealed by Circumcision, upon his professed faith and repentance, he
was circumcised with his whole family; and after this his Domestical Church
grew up into a National; his posterity being acknowledged members of the Church
by Circumcision in Infancy, were not to stay for Circumcision until they
actually believed, after Abraham's example. The same course was taken with
Proselytes, Exodus 12.48, 49.
they at first were to profess faith, and afterward their children to be
circumcised in Infancy. In like manner in the New Testament, when Governors of
families were baptized, Act. 16.14, 15. and 31, 32, 33, 34
their whole families were baptized with them; of which hereafter. When men are
infidels, they and their seed are aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel; and
therefore must actually repent and believe before they and their children be
admitted to the Covenant: But having by faith laid hold on the Covenant for
themselves and theirs, their children are interested therein, at least
externally, so far as to have right to the seal of entrance. There is not the
same reason of the foundation and superstruction in all things, nor of planting
trees and their growing up and nourishing. Indeed at the first planting of a
Park, Vineyard or Orchyard, there must be a rooting or fastening of the first
stock, stem or branch immediately in that ground or grafting stock, but
afterward it is not necessary or fit that every sprig that sprouts forth thence
should be cut off, and immediately rooted in the earth; this course would hinder
growth and fruitfulness. So the first receivers of the Gospel being planted
into Christ, his Covenant and Church by faith, do successively convey
(according to the tenor of the Covenant of grace) the blessing to their
children (whiles succeeding parents, the offspring of those first Believers
continue in the faith,) so far forth, as that their Infants have right to the
Covenant (and seal of entrance) which runs thus, Genesis 17 7.
I will be thy God and the God of thy seed after thee. Thus it was
unquestionably from Abraham's unto Christ's time; the Apostle using the like
similitude tells us that some of the Jews were broken off from the Olive tree by
unbelief for a time, Rum. 11.17.
else they might with their seed still have partaked of the root and fatness
of the Olive tree as before, which privilege doubtless those that were not
broken off by unbelief, did retain; and these unbeleevers when they shall
return to Christ by faith, shall recover; and the believing Gentiles being for
the present planted in, in their room, must enjoy. Ephesians. 3 5.
The same Apostle says that the believing Gentiles are fellow-heirs and of the
same body with believing Jews, and so partakers of the same privileges. It is
true some things are common to the constituting and founding of a Church, with
its continuance and superstruction, these must be alike observed in both cases:
some things are proper to each; and here heed must be taken of confounding
these, Heb. 6.1, 2,
left if we be always laying the foundation, we never come to perfection.

4. Whereas your practice is to persuade believing parents to forbear baptizing
of their children, until they can actually repent and believe; Where do you
prove that Christ commanded or his Apostles practiced this? I am sure those
Scriptures which you set down, mention no such thing. The Apostles according to
Christ's command, preached to Jews and infidels, and having converted them,
baptized them with their families; but no where bid them keep their children,
until they profess their repentance and faith, and then baptize them; this
you practice without any Scripture-warrant.

5. Neither do any or all these Scriptures prove, that it is according to
Christ's institution, to baptize or dip those which have been already baptized
Into the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost (which is your practice) these
Scriptures I am sure contain no such command or practice.

If you say you find a warrant for rebaptizing Act. 14.3, 4, 5. I answer,

According as the Original will well bear it, Paul (rehearsed by Luke)
concerning the nature of John's Baptism, for the satisfying of those twelve
Disciples, that whereas they had been baptized by John, that was sufficient in
respect of the outward sign; For thus says Paul, John truly baptized the
Baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in him
which was to come, even Jesus Christ: But they which heard him (or the hearers
viz. of John) were baptized into the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ; meaning,
not only those twelve, but all John's hearers as they were taught by him to
believe in Christ, for they were baptized by him into the Name of Christ; so
that we must not judge that in the fifth verse Luke makes relation of what was
done at that present time by Paul, to those twelve disciples, but shows how
Paul continues his speech to satisfy them and others present, that the Baptism
which they had received of John, was the true Baptism, in the Name of Christ,
so that they needed no more external and material Baptism; nor had any cause to
scruple the truth of their Baptism. And this reading is confirmed by these
considerations, 1. Paul holding on his discourse concerning John's doctrine and
Baptism, as suitable, both of them referring to Christ; the one leading, the
other dedicating people to him. 2. When they heard this, it may be more
properly read so, (...).
according to the Original [ But the hearers, or they which had heard, or when
they had heard, they were baptized,] the word (this) is not in the Original. 3.
John's Baptism was not sufficient, but that they must have a new Baptism, it
will follow that John's Baptism was not the same for substance with Christ's and
his Disciples, which is not to be granted, seeing Christ was baptized by John:
And as our Savior showed his fellowship with the Jews Church, by receiving the
same Circumcision which they had; so he showed his communion with the Christian
Church by receiving the same Baptism for substance with them.

2. Others understand the fifth and sixth verses to speak of the same things,
and hold that these men were indeed baptized again; yet not with water, but
with the holy Ghost, Mat. 3.11. Act. 2 3, 4. Act. 10.11. and 11, 15, 6. Act. 8
15, 16, 17.
by the laying on of hands, according to that of John, I indeed baptize you
with water, but he that comes after me shall baptize you with the holy Ghost
and sire. And agreeably to those relations in the Acts, of the Spirit in the
shape of fire descending on persons, according to that prediction; and at other
times given by laying on of hands, a good time after Baptism, and thus
understood it will make nothing for you.

3. If we should grant it to be understood of different baptisms with water, it
will make nothing for you. For the Learned which hold that, say, that John's
Doctrine, Mat. 11, 11.
Ministry and Baptism were introductory to Christ's, and though higher then the
Ministry of the Priests and Prophets, yet inferior to the full
Gospel Ministry. Now you cannot say that the case is here alike, and that our
Ministry is subservient and introductory to yours by Gods appointment, as John's
was to Christ's.

4. Act. 19^7.
This Scripture will do you no service, if it be granted that those men were
baptized again, for they had not so much as heard if there were any holy Ghost:
but those whom you rebaptize were baptized into the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost, and were often instructed in the doctrine of
the blessed Trinity. If you reply, Though these whom you dip had heard of the
holy Ghost, yet they had never felt the work of the holy Ghost in them. I
answer, That indeed is too probable, at least in many of them, that because
they have played the hypocrites so long, being destitute of the spirit of
sanctification, 2 These. 1, 10, 11, 12. Iud. v. 19.
and right discerning, through their own fault, they are thus miserably given
over to strong delusions, to believe lies, separating themselves from Gods
humble people, and powerful Ordinances; because they are sensual not having
the spirit.

5. Yea though we should grant that these were baptized again by the Apostle
here, it was for this end, that by laying on of Paul's hands, they might receive
the gift of the holy Ghost, with speaking strange tongues and prophesying,
verse. 6. This you cannot procure for them whom you rebaptize. Therefore plead
not this place for your practice.

Now I come to consider of the particular Scriptures which you bring. First say
you, The commands of Christ, Mat. 28.19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost, etc. Mat. 16.15, 16. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel unto every creature, He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, he that believes not shall be condemned.

Ans. To these Scriptures I answer three things. 1. They make nothing for your
opinion and practice: For 1. These commands were given to the Apostles, (...).
15.21, 22. ^ Cor. 10.15, 1^^.
who were to lay the foundation of Christian Religion, where Christ had not
been heard of, as is plain in these very Scriptures, and by the example of Paul
and other Apostles, acting by virtue of this Commission: But you do not so, but
boast in things without your measure, even of other men's labors, and boast in
other men's Lines of things made ready to your hands; 2 Cor. 10, 15, 16.
as the Apostle implies the false teachers at Corinth did. It is well known
that you go to them which are by profession Christians already. 2. Though these
Scriptures command to make Jews and Gentiles disciples and baptize, or to
preach to all creatures and baptize, yet they forbid not baptizing those that
are not capable of outward teaching and preaching to for the present. If you
gather from the order of the words, that none but those that believe (actually
and personally) must be baptized, you may as well gather none but those that
are baptized shall be saved; for as in the text, believing goes before
baptizing, so baptizing goes before saving. Nay, though Christ says
peremptorily, He that believes not shall be condemned, you will not I think
hence conclude that all Infants which you say cannot believe; must necessarily
perish in their Infancy; though this might far more probably be concluded from
the text, then what you would conclude. The words therefore are not to be taken
so generally, as to admit of no restriction, but must be limited according to
the subject matter, viz. that when professed infidels, such as the Apostles
were sent to, are preached to, they must be made disciples and believe, and
then be baptized, and such as are quite out of Covenant, and have no means of
being taken into Covenant but by actual faith of their own, must be condemned
if they believe not.

2. These Scriptures make much against you, for while you urge them for your
warrant, you not only use no endeavors to go to the poor Nations and Heathens
to preach the Gospel to Jews and Infidels, as these Commissions require, but
are altogether unable for such a work. For, let me ask you, Can you speak the
tongues of all the people in the world? of Indians, Ethiopians, Turks,
Scythians, Jews, etc. Or can you work miracles, which were so necessary for the
laying of the foundation of Christianity amongst Infidels, which power Christ
promised to his Apostles to whom he directly gave this Commission, and
accordingly enabled them thereunto. If you cannot do these, boast no more of
these Scriptures.

3. Yea though you would insinuate that these Scriptures are much against our
judgment and practice; yet I hope it will appear anon that they are much for
us. Only let me first prevent an objection, which is this;

The difference of our judgment and practice from theirs, his proper charge,
and yielding mutual help upon occasion, by which means the whole is provided
for, not inchoatively by way of founding or constituting, but successively by
way of edifying and propagating. 2. Whereas we require of you to show miracles,
speak strange languages, because you profess on these Scripture grounds to
constitute new Churches, and lay the foundation of Christian Religion; we have
good reason for it, since miracles and tongues were necessary for this work to
the Apostles; and surely no less necessary for those that will undertake the
same work now. But seeing we build on the foundation laid by the Apostles,
laboring for the edification and propagation of the Churches constituted by
them, or at least, which have by propagation flowed from those which they
founded; and seeing those Churches (or that Church) which we labor to edify,
were first founded by them which had the gifts of languages and miracles, and
we teach a people that already profess Christ, and are convinced of the truth
of Christian Religion; miracles are not necessary to us, nor can be rationally
required of us. The same I may say of strange tongues, 1 Cor. 15.2^.
of which the Apostle says that they are a sign, not to them that believe, but
to them that believe not. We therefore that preach to Christians, Believers,
and Church Members, need them not; but you who pretend to constitute Churches,
look on those that are not dipped by you, as Heathens, Infidels, and without
Christendom, should speak with tongues, that you may convince these Infidels of
the truth of your doctrine. 3. You bring these Scriptures as directly, and
without deduction or consequence belonging to you; we argue from them, so as to
apply them to our selves, by deduction and consequence. By this it appears how
justly we make use of these Scriptures, being Ministers of those Churches,
which by a continued flux have been propagated from those founded by the
Apostles, and so may humbly boast of, Mat. 16.18. Mat. 28.20.
and lay claim unto those promises, Mat. 16.18. On this Rock will I build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it And Mat. 28.20. And
to I am with you always even to the end of the world; which promises could not
belong to the Apostles only (for they continued not unto the end of the world
in the work of the Ministry,) but to them and the Churches and Ministers which
should succeed them. For Christ promises to the Apostles that he will be with
them in discipling, baptizing, teaching the things which he had commanded them,
unto the worlds end, which work when the Apostles died, they delivered up to
succeeding Ministers.

I come now to show how these places make for us. 1. In Mat 28.19. That which
you read according to our Translation, (...)
Teach, is properly, Make disciples or scholars. Now not only aged persons
which are come to discretion, may be made scholars or disciples of Christ, Isa.
54.13. Ier. 31.34. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
but also children. 1. As God has promised that in his Church where his Gospel
and Covenant are dispensed, he will teach his people from the least to the
greatest, all the Churches children shall be taught of God. Gods Spirit shall
not depart from their seed, nor seeds seed, etc. 2. As they are with and by
their parents devoted to God, to be brought up in his School, by outward
instruction, when capable, and we know that little children, which yet cannot
learn, being sent to school are called scholars, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Ephesians. 6.4. 2 Timothy
3.15.
because they are in the school and intended for learning, when capacity shall
be given. Thus children of Believers are from their infancy devoted to to
Christ's School, to be brought in the nurture and information of the Lord, and
we know no age is incapable of Gods teaching. 3. It is said, Act. 15. v. 1.
compared with 10. that the false Apostles which urged Christians to be
circumcised according to the law of Moses (which we know was, that children
should be circumcised at eight days old) did put a yoke on the neck of the
disciples, so that they are called disciples on whom they urged Circumcision,
but they urged Circumcision not only on grown Christians, but also on their
children, Therefore their children are disciples. 4. In Act. 21.4, and 5.
verses, Those of Tire which are called disciples ver. 4. (whereof some were
endued with the spirit of Prophecy indeed (but all are not Prophets) and
warned Paul of the danger of going to Jerusalem, 1 Cor. 12.29.
) seem to be comprehended under these three heads, 1. Men, or the husbands and
fathers. 2. Women, 3. Their children, who accompanied the Apostle to the
seashore, and most likely the Infants in their mothers arms are here intended,
who with their parents were taken along, when they went to take their last
farewell of the Apostle, as well to express that dear affection and honor that
they did owe to him, as to obtain, not only for themselves, but also for their
little ones the benefit of the last prayer, wherein they were to join in
presence with that faithful Ambassador of Christ: The presence of children
and sucklings tending much to move the bowels of parents to crave, and the
Apostle to make affectionate prayers for those Saints and their children whom
he should never see more. Deuteronomy. 19.10, 11, 12.
As Moses before his last farewell to the Israelites, would have them stand
before God with their little ones, and enter into Covenant with him: So these
at their farwell-taking with the Apostle, did present themselves before God
with their little ones: And as Ezra in that solemn humiliation sought of God a
good way, not only for the aged, but also for the little ones. So it seems
these pious parents would have Paul to seek unto God for themselves and their
little ones; Ezr. 8.21.
they no less belonging to God and being disciples now, then in the time of
Moses his law, and therefore they enjoy the privilege of disciples or persons
in Covenant, viz. communion with the Apostle and the other Saints in solemn
prayer, which undiscipled persons and aliens from the Covenant, Ob. But the
fathers are evidently distinguished by the names of disciples from their
children, therefore the children were not disciples, Ans. If this reason were
good, the wives should be no disciples or believers, for they are no less
distinguished from the men (to whom the name of disciples is appropriated then
the children) but no man will deny the wives to be disciples or believers, for
this distinction, therefore neither the children. 2. But the children and wives
did equally partake in the privilege of disciples, viz. communion in the
prayer with the Apostles and Saints as well as the men, Therefore they were
disciples as well as the men. 5. They that are so to be received in Christ's
Name, that Christ himself is received in them, belong to Christ and are Christ's
disciples. For to show kindness or do service to any in Christ's Name, and
because they belong to Christ, and because they are disciples, or in the name
of disciples, or because they are such as believe in Christ, are all one in
Scripture phrase, as may appear by comparing these Scriptures, Mat. 10.42. Mar.
9.41, 42. But the little children of Believers or Church Members are so to be
received in Christ's Name, that Christ himself is received in or with them, Mat.
18.5. Mat. 18, 5.
Therefore they are Christ's Disciples and belong to him. So much concerning the
word (...), and hence I argue thus.

1. Disciples according to Christ's Commission laid down in Scripture, are to be
baptized: But children of the faithful, even whilst Infants, are disciples,
Therefore to be baptized.

2. Whereas it is said, Make disciples all Nations, baptizing them; hence I
gather, Children are not to be excluded: 1. Because children are a very
considerable and essential part of a Nation. 2. As the Jewish Nation had been a
Nation of disciples, and an holy people; so now in the time of the Gospel the
Christian Nations were to become Gods people. But the Jews were so a Nation of
disciples, and an holy people, as that their children were taken with them into
the Covenant, 1 Pet. 8.9.
and admitted to the seal of entrance: so should these; for Christians are
called an holy Nation now, as the Jews heretofore. Hence I argue, Discipled
Nations, or Nations made disciples, and all their members and considerable
integral parts, no where excepted, are to be baptized. For the whole
comprehends all the parts, and the command that appoints all Nations to be
baptized, must needs take in the several parts of those Nations which are no
where excepted: But children of believing Nations are members and considerable
integral parts of discipled Nations, as being more in number for the most part
then grown persons, the hope of posterity, in whom the parents live, and by
whom States, Churches and families are continued; being also more free from sin
(as incapable of actual rebellion and provocation against God, Number. 14.30, 31.
whom he is pleased sometimes to spare, when he punishes rebellious and
Covenant Breaking parents, and for whose sake sometimes he spares flagitious
parents) neither are children in this Scripture or elsewhere excluded out of
Christ's Commission; Ion. 4.11.
Therefore they are to be baptized.

3. From the order of Christ's Commission, it may be gathered, That discipling
and baptizing goes before teaching. Mat. 28.19, 20. Thus we read, Going
therefore, make disciples all Nations, Baptizing them into the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, teaching them to keep all things
whatsoever I have commanded you. Indeed the Gospel was to be offered to Jews
and Infidels, and they exhorted to accept Christ and the Covenant of grace,
before they were baptized; but Baptism was not to be deferred, nor they
rejected as no disciples, until they should have learned the whole Doctrine of
Christianity, and all the commands of Christ. But whosoever on the preaching of
the Gospel and offer of Christ, should not subbornly refuse him, but (Idolatry
being renounced) were dedicated to the worship of God and Christ (whether such
as had power to dispose of themselves by themselves professedly consenting; or
such as were at the dispose and under the power of others, and by their consent
and authority given up to Christ) they were to be admitted into Christ's school,
acknowledged his disciples, and baptized into his Name, and afterward to be
instructed in his doctrine and commands. Hence I gather thus. If Infants of
Believers are not to be baptized, it is because they are not capable of being
taught Ministerially in the doctrines and commands of Christ for the present.
All the arguments of the Anabaptists may be referred to this head, They say
they cannot repent, believe, enter into Covenant, etc. Why? because say they,
they are incapable of being taught; or at least they would gather from Christ's
Commission they are incapable of being preached to and taught; Therefore of
being baptized.

But this is not a sufficient cause why they should not be baptized: For
teaching the doctrines and commands of Christ, should go after, not before
Baptism, according to the order of Christ's Commission; It Is enough that persons
be devoted to Christ, upon the tender of the Gospel, by those that have power
externally to dedicate them to him, and then they are to be baptized, and as it
were, matriculated into his School, and after taught all things that Christ
has commanded them; the contrary course is a preposterous inverting of the
order of Christ; Therefore Baptism is not to be denied to the Infants of
Believers. But they are by their parents to be dedicated to Christ and then
baptized, and afterward instructed and taught in all the doctrines and
commands of Christ, which way is most agreeable to the order of Christ's
Commission.

4. Whereas it is said in Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized shall
be saved, he that believes not shall be condemned. If you will take these
words precisely, as containing a general and complete rule, by which we must
judge who must be baptized and saved, who not, without limitation to the first
calling of Jews and Gentiles to Christianity. I reason thus against you from
this Scripture, Children, even the Infants of Christians, either believe or
not. If they believe, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
having faith though but seminal or virtual comprehended in regeneration or
circumcision of the heart, which God promises to the seed of the faithful, or
maybe said to believe in their parents, who accept of the Covenant for
themselves and their seed, then they are to be baptiye^ as this Scripture
shows, and your own argument against their Baptism yields; this being your
great reason against baptizing children, because, say you, they cannot believe.
But if you say they do not, cannot believe, they are all damned by you, from
this Scripture, which says expressly, Whosoever believes not shall be
condemned. Take which you will, If you say the former the cause is yielded by
you. If the later, viz. That all the children of Believers, whiles Infants, are
condemned, and that there is no hope of salvation if they die before grown
years, this being so contrary to the Covenant of God, and his promises, will
make you deservedly abhorred, of all those that know God, his Covenant and
Scriptures. If you to avoid this dilemma say, this Scripture belongs only to
those of grown years, as were those unbeleeving Jews and Heathens, to whom the
Apostles were immediately sent; and therefore the condemnation of Infants,
through want of actual faith cannot be hence concluded; you answer your selves,
and might as easily see, that the exclusion of Infants from Baptism, for want
of actual, personal professed faith, cannot hence be gathered, especially
seeing these words are far more peremptory and express against the salvation,
then against the Baptism of non-beleevers.

Secondly, You say, What you practice is proved to be the Baptism of Christ, by
the practice of the Disciples in obedience to those commands, as Act 2.38. Then
Peter said unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the Name of
Jesus Christ unto the remission of sins, ver. 41. Then they that gladly
received the word, were baptized, and the same day added to the Church.

Ans. You cut off in the citation of this Scripture a very material part,
namely, the ground of the Apostles exhortation to them to be baptized, which if
you would have considered seriously, might have made you afraid to urge this
place for your purpose. It seems you thought it good policy to omit it, least
others should see how little it makes for your purpose, or rather how much
against you. The words you omitted are in ver. 39. The Apostle having exhorted
them to repent and be baptized in the Name of Christ, for the remission of sin,
and that they might receive the gift of the holy Ghost: adds this reason, ver.
39. For the promise is to you and to your children, and to all that be afar
off, so many as the Lord our God shall call. Using this argument to persuade
them to be baptized, and to expect the spiritual blessing signified in Baptism,
viz. the remission of sins and pouring of the Spirit on them; for the promise
(says he) is to you and your children: and least we should think that this
privilege was peculiar to the Jews, to have their children interested in the
promise with their parents; he adds, And to all that be afar off, so many as
the Lord your God shall call. Noting that all that shall be called of the
remote Gentiles, shall enjoy the like privilege, namely that the promise shall
belong, not only to them, but also their children. Whence I reason thus, To
whom the promise of remission of sins, and the gift of the holy Ghost belongs,
to the same also Baptism, the pledge thereof, belongs; for this is the sum of
the Apostles reasoning, to be gathered out of the 38. and 39. verse. But the
promise is to the faithful or people of God and their children, whether Jews
or Gentiles, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Mat. 46. compared with Psalm. 91.11, 12.
even those that were afar off, whom God shall call; and therefore Baptism
belongs to them and their children. You know who forbids to add to or take from
the word, and who is the ringleader of that art of curtayling the word.

2. Whereas it is said, Those that gladly received the word, were baptized; It
may be well understood, as they received the word they received Baptism the
seal and appendix of the word. But they received the word of promise as it was
propounded to them by the Apostles, which was thus, That it belonged to them
and their children, Therefore answerably the seal of the word, viz. Baptism,
belonging to them and their children, they were baptized and their children.

3. Whereas you say, They that received the word were added to the Church: The
text says, And the same day there were added to the Church three thousand
souls. It is not safe thus to make bold with, and mis-report Scripture.

The next Scripture which you cite is, Act. 8.1. But when they believed, Philip
preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, in the Name of Jesus, they
were baptized, both men and women. To this I answer.

1. Who knows not that the words, men and women, are names rather noting the
sexes then ages, and are appliable to Infants as well as grown persons? Did not
Eve when she had born her first child say, Genesis 4. (...)
I have gotten a man from the Lord? Will you hence gather, that because she
calls him a man, therefore he was at perfect age at the day of his birth? When
Christ says that the woman when she is delivered of a child, Ioh. 16.21.
remembered not her anguish for joy that a man is born into the world; does it
follow hence that the newborn child is a full-grown man? (...).
No sure, the word notes the species or kind of man distinct from other
creatures, without difference of age or sex: So then you cannot from the names
of men and women conclude the ripeness and perfection of years.

2. If you object, But they believed: Remember what is said on Mar. 16.15, 16.
and Act. 2.39. and you may gather thence. That when parents become Believers,
God accepts their Infant children as Believers, and gives them right to the
Covenant and promise.

3. But howsoever, enough has been said in the general considerations to show
how little help you can have from this or any other Scripture for your purpose.

The following proof is in Act. 8.36.37. The Eunuch says, Lo, here is water,
what does hinder me to be baptized? And Philip said, If thou beleevest with all
thy heart thou may.

Ans. We grant that they which never lived in a Christian Church, nor were born
of Christian parents, nor have interest in the Covenant by their parents faith
(which was the case of the Eunuch) are to be baptized when they believe and not
before: But what makes this for your purpose? 2. But what would you gather
hence? that none are to be baptized, but they which believe with their whole
heart? If so, I answer, 1. Then you will condemn not only us, Act. 8.12, 13.21,
but also the same Philip for baptizing Simon whose heart was not right in the
sight of God, and therefore he believed not with his whole heart: you must
condemn many of your own dippings, for doubtless many come to you to be dipped
for base ends. You cannot promise to your selves more dexterity then was in the
Apostles and Evangelists to baptize none but upright-hearted ones. 3. If so,
you must not baptize any until you see into their hearts, 1 King 8.9.
that they believe sincerely, and then you must lay down your new trade of
dipping; for none but God leeth men's hearts whether they be upright or no.

Your next Scripture is, Act. 10.47. Then answered Peter, Can any forbid water
that these should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as we?
and he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ.

Ans. 1. It is plain that the Apostle gives this as a reason why they should be
baptized, because they had received the gift of the holy Ghost. Act. 10.44, 45.
and 11.15.
Now you can hence gather immediately no warrant for your baptizing, until you
can procure by your preaching the effusion of the holy Ghost, in a visible and
miraculous manner; as it is evident that that in the text was.

2. But if you say, Indeed these visible and miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost
cease with the Primitive times: But God now pours his Spirit of sanctification
ordinarily, and invisibly on people, and such as have received that may be
baptized. I grant it, and assume, The gift of the holy Ghost is promised to,
and bestowed on Infants in the Church, not only extraordinarily, as in the
example of John the Baptist, but ordinarily according to Gods promise, Act.
2.38, 39. Isa. 44.3, 4, 5.

Your following example is, ^ct. 16.32, 33, 34. And they spoke unto him the
word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house. And he took them the same
hour of the night, and washed their stripes, and was baptized he and all his
straitway. And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before
them, and rejoiced that he and all his believed in God.

Ans. To this I answer, The last words are mis-cited (And rejoiced that he and
all his believed in God.) Our Translators render it, And rejoiced (believing in
God with ^ll his house.) Which if the Parenthesis had been observed, and in
stead of (believing) they had read ( having believed, or after he had believed)
had very fully and fitly set forth the emphasis of the Original; which is thus
word for word, (...).
He exceedingly rejoiced (or exulted) with ( in o^ through) his whole house,
after that he had believed in God, or he having believed in God, rejoiced in
his whole house. Here it is not said that the whole house believed in God; but
the words show that the Jailer when he had believed in God, and he and all his
were baptized, he made a feast, and showed his exceeding joy through his whole
house, or with his whole house. (...)
The Syriack Translation reads it thus, And he exulted and all the children of
his house, even all of them in the faith of God. Now consider in this History
these things. 1. How that when the poor affrighted Jaylour says, What shall I
do that I may besaved? Paul and Silas answer, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and
thou shall be saved and all thine house. They require faith of the Jaylour,
that he and his family might be admitted into a saving estate. They said not
that every one of his family must of necessity actually believe and profess,
that so his household might be saved with him; but they tell him If he believe,
both he and his household should be saved: Genesis 17.5. Luke 19.9.
As Abraham believed, and all his family, even Infants, were taken into
Covenant of salvation. And when Zacheus believed, salvation came to his house,
he being made a son of Abraham. So God shows here by his servants that he would
deal with the Taylour, not standing for the present on strict terms of actual
faith of all in his house. If the Governor believe, it is enough to put the
whole family into a saving estate, inchoatively at least in respect of
admission into Covenant, neither are any to be excluded, but such as by
stubborn refusal of the Gospel offered, deprive themselves of that privilege.

2. It is said indeed, that they spoke to him and all in his house, verse. 32.
the word of the Lord; but whether it be meant of the prisoners in the
Prisonhouse, with Paul and Silas, or of those of his household, is not
expressed; the former seems very probable rather then the later. 1. Those to
whom they spoke the word are said to be All that were in his house, v. 32.
Those that were baptized with him are said to be all his: Now prisoners and
strangers might be in his house, but those only of his own family were his. 2.
Ver. 32. It is said they spoke to all in the house, and yet afterward it is
said, ver. 34. that he brought them into his house; as if they had not been in
his dwelling house before.

3. If it be meant of his family to which they spoke the word, that proves not
that there were no Infants in the family, or that the Infants were not taken
into Covenant, and baptized with their parents, any more then the exhortation
of Moses to that great assembly of the Israelites, mentioned, Deuteronomy. 29.9, 10,
11, 12. proves either that there were no little children in that assembly, or
that they had no right to the Covenant; both which are expressly contradicted in
the context, verse. 9. Keep therefore, says Moses, the words of this Covenant
and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do. Verse. 10. Ye stand this day
all of you before the Lord your God, your Captains of your Tribes, your Elders,
and your Officers, with all the men of Israel. Verse. 11. Your little ones, your
wives, and thy stranger that is in the Camp; from the hewer of thy wood to the
drawer of thy water. Verse. 12. That thou should enter into Covenant with the
Lord thy God, and into his Oath which the Lord thy God makes with thee this
day, etc. Now as Moses made this exhortation to all Israel, though the little
children amongst them were not able to understand it, and be affected with it
for the present, and yet were present to be admitted into Covenant, and had
right to the seal of entrance thereinto: and this exhortation was for their
good, as their parents embracing it, were with their children received into
Covenant, and put in mind of their duty, in devoting their children to, and
bringing them up for God; and as it might serve for the childrens instruction
when they should come to age. So Paul and Silas might speak to the whole
family, amongst whom might be little ones; who though they understood not the
doctrine and exhortation propounded for the present, yet might upon the parents
embracing of this doctrine, be received into Covenant with them, and to the
seal of entrance thereinto; and afterward by their parents instructed in that
doctrine, which for the present they understood not.

4. It is said that he and all his were baptized straitway. There is no
expression or intimation that every one believed and made a profession of his
faith for themselves severally: (...).
but when the Jaylour had manifested his repentance and faith, he and all his
were baptized straitway. It seems that the faith and profession of the head of
the family, was sufficient to give right to the members, at least to those that
did not express their dissent or refusal of it.

5. The word (having believed) verse. 34. is of the singular number and
masculine gender, and must be referred to the Jaylour only, according to the
Grammatical construction.

6. Though it should be granted that he and his whole house may be said to
believe (which yet the words of the text prove not) It may be well understood
so as Abraham and all his family were believers in Covenant, and circumcised,
Genesis 18.19.
even those that were Infants: the Head having made profession of his faith and
engaged himself to take care of all his family should be instructed in the
faith and obedience of God. And this last answer (beside diverse of the former
general and special) may serve for the last Scripture, viz. Act. 18.8. And
Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue believed in the Lord with all his
house; and many of the Corinthians believed and were baptized. And indeed how
can it be thought probable that such families as the Jaylours, the Rulers of
the Synagogue, and Lydias (whose household was baptized upon her hearing and
believing of the word, no mention being made of the rests hearing or believing)
should have no children in them? Hence I gather thus,

If at the first preaching of the Gospel the faithful with their whole
families were baptized, so soon as God had opened the hearts of the governors
to receive the word and believe, then now the families and children of those
that have long professed the Gospel (at least so many in their family as do not
stubbornly reject Jesus Christ) are to be acknowledged within the Covenant, and
admitted to Baptism the seal of entrance. But the former is true, Therefore the
later.

Whereas you conclude your first Paper thus: Having proved by positive and
plain Scripture what we affirm, we conclude with the doctrine of the Church of
England which maintains the same, viz. That repentance and faith is required in
persons to be baptized, and that Infants by reason of tender age can neither
repent nor believe, which we leave to your consideration, and desire your
answer.

Ans. How positive and plain the Scriptures (cited by you to prove what you
affirm and practice) are, we have seen, and leave to the judgment of others.

2. In your concluding with the doctrine of the Church of England, you might
have done well to have told us what you mean by the Church, and in what book or
place that doctrine is main ained, and then we should have given answer
thereto, if the very citation of the place be not sufficient to answer it, and
make you ashamed of your citing of it. But in the mean space you have our
consideration and answer to what you bring out of Scripture.

By me William Cook.

You Preface to your second Paper thus:
IN stead of an expected answer in writing, H.H. and J.B.
to this our Paper, according to promise, we have received another verbal
request from you, viz. That we would give some reasons, why Infants should not
be baptized: By which we conclude you can give no reason, why you baptize them;
we having so much urged you herein, to prove your practice by Scripture, having
given you so large a proof of our practicing the contrary, by so many plain
truths, wherein you may find reason enough against yours, if you have any
mind, without further cavil to answer them.

Answer.
1. IT was agreeable to reason and equity; that seeing you had so fully and
frequently expressed your selves against Infant Baptism, you should give your
reasons thereof, especially we having been so long in possession: and being by
you charged to want right, it was fit that you should be required to produce
the grounds of your charge.

2. Whereas you conclude so hastily, that we can give no reason of our
practice; we see that though you dislike syllogisms, you are pleased with
sophistical Enthymems, making a conclusion from so weak a premise.

3. How much the many plain written truths prove for your own judgment and
practice, or against ours, we wish you to review in the foregoing Answer, and
you will there find that without cavils we had a mind to answer. You proceed,

But that you may see how really we intend the discovery of truth, and to
satisfy you in every desire that may any way tend thereto, we give you these
further in answer. 1. Because Christ has no where commanded it. And whatsoever
is practiced as an ordinance of his without institution, is Will Worship and
Idolatry.

Ans. This your reason in its full strength stands thus:

Whatsoever is practiced as an Ordinance of Christ without an institution, is
Will Worship and Idolatry; But baptizing of Infants is practiced as an
Ordinance of Christ without any institution, Therefore it is Will Worship and
Idolatry. The assumption which would by us be denied, you back thus; It has no
command from Christ, Therefore it is without an institution.

Ans. In answer to this I desire you to take notice of two distinctions,
necessary to remove mistakes. 1. We must distinguish between the essentials of
an Ordinance, and the accidentals and circumstantials, in respect of the
application of it to such or such persons in such a time, place, or manner:
This is necessary to be observed. Christ instituted the Ordinance of the Supper
or Communion of the body and blood of Christ; but never expressly commanded that
it should be administered to women. It Is sufficient that it may be gathered from
Scripture. He has instituted Bapti^^ but never expressly commanded that it
should be administered to or by Ta(...) W^av^rs, Jersey-combers or Cobblers; If
from general rules of Scriptu^^ (...) that this Ordinance is to be applied to
or by such persons, th^^ being found to have such qualifications, as the
Scripture requires in these cases, it is sufficient. It is an Ordinance of
Christ that his people should read the Scripture, but it is no where expressly
commanded that such as understand not the original, should read it in a
translated printed English Bible; it suffices, that this may be proved out of
Scripture by good consequence.

The second distinction is this, An Ordinance in respect of circumstantials or
applications, may be said to be instituted by Christ, either expressly and
immediately, or so as that the institution is to be gathered by consequence; of
this later kind is a believing woman's receiving the Sacrament of the Communion
of the body and blood of Christ, and mere English-mens and English-womens
reading the Scripture for spiritual instruction and edification, in a printed
English Bible, distinguished into Chapters and Verses. There is no express
command for admitting women to the Lords Table; nor for the translating and
printing of Scripture, for the help of ignorant people, yet these are not
Will Worship and Idolatry. It may be sufficiently proved from Scripture that
these are good and warrantable, and that Gods people should be greatly wronged,
if women should be driven from the Communion; and those that are ignorant of
Hebrew and Greek should be debarred from reading the Scripture.

I answer therefore, 1. By granting the proposition taken in a right sense,
viz. That whatsoever is practiced as an Ordinance and worship of Christ,
without an institution from him; at least in respect of the essentials, yea
whose essentials and circumstantials may not be gathered out of the Scripture,
either expressly or by good consequence, is at least Will Worship, if not
Idolatry; and therefore unlawful to be maintained or practiced. But I deny the
assumption; for the essentials and substantials of Baptism are expressly
commanded in Scripture, Mat. 28.19, 20. Mar. 16.15, 16, etc. The particular
application of Baptism to Infants, though not expressly in so many words in
Scripture, yet may be gathered therefrom by good consequence, as shall appear
hereafter, God assisting. Therefore the assumption being false in that sense
wherein the proposition is true, nothing can be concluded.

I come now to your second argument which is this.

It cannot be proved that Christ or his Apostles practiced Infant Baptism.
Which reason stands in its whole strength thus,

What cannot be proved that Christ and his Apostles practiced, that is
unlawful in Gods worship. But it cannot be proved that Christ and his Apostles
practiced Infant Baptism, Therefore it is unlawful.

Ans. The proposition is not universally ^rue, we may not argue from the
practice of Christ and his Apostles universally, either affirmatively or
negatively; not affirmatively, for they might do some things as such eminent
persons, which it is not the duty of, nor possible for all Ministers or
Christians ordinarily to do so. Nor negatively, for there may be some things
which are the duties of inferior men, which yet were below Christ and his
Apostles. We read not that they practiced or submitted to the Office of
Pastors, Elders, or Deac^^^, properly so called; will it follow therefore that
these are Willworshi^* They never (as can be proved) translated Bibles or read
the Scripture, (...) ^^unded the text of a Sermon out of a translated printed
Bible; nor took the notes of Sermons: Are these therefore Will Worship? If they
being busied in laying the foundation of Churches, practiced not some things
which are agreeable to our work, which is for the superstruction; we need not
to be troubled, having warrant or institution, either immediate, or to be
gathered by consequence.

Neither is the assumption so clear as to be easily granted, and though it
might suffice for the present to deny the main proposition; yet take also this
answer to the assumption; Though Christ did not baptize Infants nor any at all
in his own person (and therefore if his example is to be followed herein by
Ministers, Ioh. 4.2.
or those that may be conceived to have authority to baptize, none at all must
be baptized by them,) Yet he did that for Infants, which is at least equivalent
to baptizing, or lays sufficient ground to warrant their baptizing, he laid
his hands on them, blesses them, pronounces them to have right to the Kingdom
of God or Covenant of the Gospel; and gives command to his Apostles to disciple
all Nations, and baptize them. The Apostles acted according to this Commission,
held forth the promise, whereof Baptism is a seal or pledge, as belonging to
the faithful and their children, and baptized Believers and their whole
families; of which more largely, partly before, partly hereafter.

Your third Argument is this, " Because they are incapable subjects, having
neither understanding, reason, nor faith; and whatever is not of faith is sin.
Being put into form it stands thus;

Subjects incapable of Baptism are not to be baptized: But Infants are subjects
incapable of Baptism, Therefore not to be baptized. The proposition is granted,
the assumption denied, you endeavor to prove it thus;

They that have neither understanding, reason nor faith are subjects incapable
of Baptism; But Infants have neither understanding, reason, nor faith:
Therefore subjects incapable of Baptism.

1.

1. The children of the Jews when they wanted the actual use of understanding
which belongs to persons of age, were not incapable of Circumcision which was
of the same use to Jews; Genesis 17.7. Romans 4.1^. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
as Baptism is to us Christians, viz. to be a seal of the Covenant, and of the
righteousness of faith, and a sign of renewing and sanctifying the heart.

2. That they are capable, I prove it by the parts. Reason and even sense and
experience shows that they are capable of the outward sign, there being
required a mere passion of them, in the Ministers application of water. That
they are capable also of the spiritual grace of Baptism, Gods many promises of
circumcising the hearts of the faithful seed, and pouring his Spirit upon
them, etc. prove; as also the example of Jacob and John the Baptist, whereof
the one was beloved of God, the other filled with the holy Ghost, while little
ones.

2. actual exercise thereof which is in man they want; so a seminal virtual
habitual faith implied in regeneration and the gift of the holy Ghost, they
have, not a professed faith of ripe Believers.

2. If men will needs have actual professed faith for the admission of persons
to Baptism, I answer, Genesis 17.7. Act. 2.39.
As parents by faith accept the Covenant for themselves and children, according
as Scripture propounds the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. Act. 2.39. (which is agreeable
to the usual way of contracts and Covenants amongst men, that parents take a
Lease for themselves and infant-children, and bind themselves and children to
the condition) as infant-children are parts and adherents of their parents,
having no use of power, reason or will, to provide for, or dispose of
themselves in their own persons, until they come to years of discretion; so
the faith of their parents may be said to be their faith, as the parents act in
taking a house, or making a bargain, may be called the childs act, as no less
beneficial and obliging to the child then to the parent; at least until he
come to the use of reason, where in his own person he may by some voluntary act
ratify or disannul it. And here observe a second distinction of faith, namely
actual and professed. It is this professed faith may be distinguished into
Personal and private, which is required of all persons which are at their own
dispose, at their first entrance into Covenant and admission to the seal of
entrance: and Common or public faith, which in a common or public person may
suffice in the behalf of those that are wholly under his power and at his
dispose, as Infants are to their parents. This is sufficient for such to
interest them in the Covenant and seal of admittance, as we see in Abraham's and
the Jewish Infants; and Christians children which are holy by virtue of their
parents faith, 1 Cor. 7.14. and in this respect they may be said to have actual
professed faith, viz. of their parents. If the Jews with their children were
broken off by unbelief, as the Apostle affirms, Rom 11.29. then by faith they
and their posterity had continued implanted, until their posterity should by
actual professed unbelief break off themselves and their posterity: The same is
the case of the ingraffed Gentiles, and will be of the Jews that are to be
reingraffed, verse. 20.23, 24, 25. that by virtue of the faith of the parents,
infant-children should be in Covenant and believers (even professedly, by the
profession of parents,) as it had been with Gods people for many generations
before Christ; for the Apostle speaks of such a growing up in the Olive tree
that the implanted Gentiles and reimplanted Jews must expect, as was that which
the Church of the Jews had enjoyed to that time. And sure if the unbelief of
professed Infidels, leave their infant-children, in the case of professed
infidelity and estrangement from the Covenant, until by their own personal
individual faith, they embrace that Covenant; no less must the says of
believing parents leave their Infants in the state of professed or known
Believers, and persons in Covenant, until by their own wilful voluntary act
they reject the Covenant; for Gods promises to the faithful and their
posterity, are no less full then his curses to the wicked and their posterity,
Exodus 20.5, 6.

3. (Whatever is not of faith is sin) any one may see. And thus for the answer
to your Arguments.

You prevent an Objection thus, But you will say, H. H. and J.B.
Where does the Scripture forbid? That your Ministers will say, is an
unreasonable and unlearned question, there being no proving negatives; for then
where does the Scripture say, You shall not worship the Pope, go to Mass? you
shall not read the Common prayer book, or wear the Surplesse? But it does
forbid Idolatry, Will Worship, which is that, if you have no Scripture rule for
the same, and teaching for doctrine the commands of men, which is this, being
only traditionall, and that acknowledged by one of your Ministers lately in
this Town, that it was Ecclesiastical and not Apostolical.

Ans. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prove. 30.6. Iam 4.11, 17. Rev. 22.8, 9.
The Scripture is such a perfect rule to Gods people, of faith, worship and
holy walking, both affirmatively and negatively, that nothing may be urged as a
duty, Divine worship or truth, but what is there commanded or taught; nor
charged as a sin, Will Worship or error, but what is there forbidden or
condemned, either particularly and expressly, or at least in general, and to be
gathered by good consequence.

2. They are very ignorant and rash, that will condemn worshipping the Pope,
going to Mass, etc. and yet cannot find them forbidden in the Scripture* yea,
they are too great friends to the Pope, Mass, and other superstition, that
will say, or but insinuate, that the Scripture does no where condemn them, or
that will match Infant Baptism with them.

3. Forbear charging us with Will Worship, Idolatry, and teaching for doctrines
the commands of men, until you have heard what Scripture grounds we can bring
for our judgment and practice in this particular.

4. Why do not you name the Minister which acknowledged this traditional and
Ecclesiastical, not Apostolical? If there were any such let him answer for
himself. The Papists indeed call it a tradition of the Church, to prove the
imperfection of the Scripture, and necessity of tradition* Our Protestant
Writers confute them in this, showing that it is grounded on Scripture, not on
tradition. If any whom you call one of our Ministers, speaks as the Papist,
against the whole current of Protestant Divines, we are no more bound to stand
to his principles, or to defend him therein, or answer for him, then we are
bound to do it for you and the Papists which agree with him in that opinion.

Now before I lay down our Arguments, I must for the clearing of the truth,
confirm one thing which I have partly touched already. It Is this, That it is
not only lawful but necessary to argue from Scripture, by way of consequence
or deduction for the finding out of the truth; neither must we always expect
express and immediate commands in Scripture for the particular circumstances
and applications of the Ordinances of God, or for the justifying of every
matter of judgment and practice, in point of Religion. It is sufficient
sometimes, and in some cases, that by good consequence we deduce them from
Scripture.

1. Mat 22.32, 33
This was very usual with our Savior and the Apostles. Thus our Savior
proves the doctrine of the Resurrection against the Sadduces by consequence,
from that Scripture (I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob) laid together with another principle (God is not the God of the dead,
but of the living.) Which doctrine also the Apostle Paul proves by many
Arguments and consequences, 1 Cor. 15.13, to 33.
1 Cor. 15. from verse. 13. to 33. So our Lord Christ argues (for the
lawfulness of his disciples pulling ears of corn and eating them on the
Sabbath day,) Mat. 12.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
by consequence. 1. From David's eating of the Shewbread. 2. From the Priests
sacrificing on the Sabbath: and 3. From that sentence in Hosea, I will have
mercy, and not sacrifice. H^^. 6.^.
Which Scripture-examples and testimony do not expressly and immediately say.
It is lawful for the disciples, being hungry, to pluck ears of corn on the
Sabbath day, and eat them. But by good consequence each of these Scriptures,
much more all jointly prove it. So whereas it is said, Luke 24.27. and 44. Luke
24.27. and 44.
That Christ expounded the Scriptures of all the Prophets, showing that they
were fulfilled in him, It is not to be understood that those things which were
written of Christ in Moses, the Prophets, and Psalms, did expressly,
immediately, plainly, and positively say that Jesus the son of Mary, was the
Messiah, and must suffer all those things, and then rise again and enter into
glory: But by Christ's expounding them and arguing from them, the two disciples
were brought to see the truth. So Act. 2.25, 26, etc. the Apostle Peter shows
(to prove the resurrection of Christ from Scripture) that what was contained in
Psalm. 16.9, 10. was spoken of Christ. It does not appear immediately and
expressly, but by consequence thus; It was to be understood of David himself,
or of Christ the seed of David. No: of David, for he had seen corruption, and
his Sepulcher was yet extant, as Act. 2.29. Therefore it must be meant of
Christ David's seed, verse. 30.31, 32. So the other Apostles, in the Acts, and
the Epistles, and the Prophets before them, usually deduce conclusions, by way
of reasoning or syllogizing, either from Scriptures or other known principles,
or both laid together, as is evident to any that with understanding and care
read the Scriptures; so that further to prove this, were to light a candle at
noonday, and sure he is miserably blind that cannot see it.

2. If you deny the use of consequence, you have no warrant or proof for the
reading of Scripture in an English translation Printed (and so you must cast
away your English Bibles, as well as Infant Baptism, or else fall into
Will Worship and Idolatry.) Nor for women's receiving the Communion, nor for the
Christian-Sabbath. Overthrow these, and overthrow all Christian Religion. Yea I
may confidently say there is no Ordinance of God or religious act can be
externally observed, which you can perform, but at least in respect of some
accidentals or circumstantials thereof you must be beholden to consequence from
Scripture, or else must want warrant for the using of them, and so either
forbear them all, and cast off all religious exercise, and become visible
Atheists, or run into that which is Will Worship and Idolatry in your conceit,
and act against conscience and not in faith, which to do is sin.

3. Whereas all Scriptures were written for our learning, Romans 15.4. 2 Timothy
3.16.
that we may have patience, comfort and hope, and are profitable for doctrine,
reproof, correction and instruction: All or most of this benefit will be lost
unto us, if we reject the use of consequences. The Scripture does not
positively and plainly make particular application to several men that live
amongst us by name: this must be done either by public Ministry, or private
brotherly instruction and conference, or by our own conscience, which must by
reasoning show that the Scripture applied is pertinent and suitable to us, or
else we shall get no good by it.

4. For what use should the Ministry of the word, or preaching and teaching by
others serve, Pro. 2 2, 3, 4.
or what use is there of studying and diligently searching the Scriptures, as
for gold, silver, and hid treasures, if all things therein were so plain and
particular to us in them that there were no need of drawing particulars from
generals, gathering obscurer truths from plainer Scriptures, and applying them
according to exigency? Yea what use should there be of reason it self, if we
might not exercise it in this case, which so much concerns Gods glory and our
own and others edification and salvation? I study shortness, else it might be
easily made to appear, that they who deny and abhor syllogisms and
consequences in matters of Religion, do not only deny the principal use of the
most excellent gift of reason which God has given to men, for the finding out
of the truth; Romans 2.15. Romans 12.1.
but also must cast off all right use of Conscience, Scripture and Religion, if
they stick to that irrational and irreligious conceit. Taking it therefore for
granted, that no man who has the use of reason and the heart of a Christian,
will deny us the liberty of reason in drawing out the truth from Scriptures by
consequence: I will lay down several Arguments grounded on Scripture (whereof
some were touched in the Answer to the former Paper: what I shall here omit
which there I touched, the Reader may fetch thence,) for the baptizing of
Infants.

Arg.

But the children of believing parents, have, by Gods gracious grant, had
interest in the Covenant of grace, and the seal of entrance thereinto, at least
from Abraham's time to Christ's, which grant God did never repeal, neither did
the children of Believers cast it off, but God has continued in his Church the
Covenant of grace and seal of entrance thereinto, though in a different manner,
yet far more comfortable and glorious,

Therefore the children of believing parents are not to be debarred from the
Covenant or seal of entrance thereinto, which now in the time of the Gospel is
Baptism.

For the clearing of the Proposition let these things be noted:

1. Gods gracious grants of privileges to his people, wherein are also implied
engagements to thankfulness and obedience laid on them, are so sacred, that
they cannot without high offense to his Majesty, Deuteronomy. 4.1.
great wrong to Gods people, and extreme danger to their own souls, be denied
by any to those to whom they belong. God no less forbidding detracting from,
then adding to his word; and so much the more dangerous is diminution in this
case, as it tends to darken the glorious grace of God in the times of the
Gospel, which times he has reserved for the more full illustration thereof
above former times.

2. That those main privileges which God granted ordinarily to persons in
Covenant before Christ, as That their children should be in Covenant, and
admitted to the seal of entrance thereinto, should cease in the time of the
Gospel, is so unagreeable unto the wisdom and goodness of God, which reserves
his greatest and choicest blessings, for the last times, to be bestowed on his
people; so contrary to the nature of the Covenant of grace, which under
Evangelical dispensation is far more glorious and comfortable to the faithful,
then under legal; so contrary to the end of Christ's coming, which was to
multiply, increase and ratify, not cut off, diminish or abolish blessings and
privileges to his Church; and so contrary to the promises and prophecies
concerning the glory of the Church in the times of the Gospel, that he deserves
to be abhorred of all that know God, and Christ, and his Covenant, that should
tell us of a great fall and diminution of privileges, in Evangelicall times,
compared with legal, and yet can bring no pregnant and pertinent Scripture, to
prove a repeal of those privileges.

3. I grant, that where God has repealed privileges of the Old Testament
(which whiles they continued unrepealed, were privileges, yet cease to be so
when greater answerable thereto, yet more suitable to the Gospel Dispensation,
are vouchsafed in their place in the New Testament,) they, in respect of that
old administration, are not to be accounted privileges, neither are
privileges in this case properly revoked, but altered and enlarged, when the
old administration indeed is abrogated; but the same spiritual blessing is
given in a more comfortable manner, under a new dispensation. As when
Christians 1 In stead of the Old Testament Scriptures in the Jews mother tongue
(which was the Jews privilege) have both Old and New Testament Scriptures
translated into a known tongue. 2 In stead of the Jews Seventh-day Sabbath,
Ioh. 19.36. 2 Cor. 5.7.
have the first day or Lords-day-Sabbath. 3 In stead of the Passover, which to
the Jews was a Type of Christ to come; have Christ exhibited, and now
represented in the blessed Communion. And 4 in stead of Circumcision, have
Baptism. And 5 generally, when Christians in stead of the old Legal
dispensation of the Covenant of grace (which the Jews had) have the new
Evangelical dispensation of the Covenant: Here the same privileges are
continued, with enlargement under a new and different garb or dress.

4. It Is granted also that when men have wilfully rejected privileges, and
therefore God has cast them off; neither they nor theirs lying under that
obstinacy, may lay claim to obstinatly rejected privileges, as in the case of
the body of the Jews and their seed at this day.

To the Minor, 1. Gen 17.7. Exodus, 12.48. Ezekiel. 16.10, 21. Mat. 2.15. Act. 3.25.
It Is plain that from Abraham's time and so forward to the last of the Prophets,
yea to the time of our Savior Christ (unto which time Circumcision of children
was in force,) the faithful had interest in this privilege, that their
children were in Covenant and had the seal of admission.

2. It Is plain also, Genesis 17 10, 11, 12, 13. Romans 4.11. Rom 3.1, 2. Phil. 3.5.
that this was a great privilege or prerogative to the people of God and their
children, that they were in Covenant, and had Circumcision, which is called the
sign of the Covenant; yea the Covenant and the seal of the righteousness of
faith. As to be an Hebrew and Israelite was a great privilege before Christ's
coming, so to be circumcised.

3. That God has not recalled this grant of Believers children having right to
the Covenant and seal of entrance, it is evident; for neither the Scriptures of
Old or New Testament speak any such thing, but rather the contrary, heightning
the privileges of the Gospel above those of the Law, but never depressing them.

Obj. But Circumcision is repealed and abrogated. Ans. 1. True, The Church of
the Jews, which understood the Scriptures of the Old Testament without
translation is cast off, Must not Gods people now have the Scriptures in their
mother language by translation, because there is no direct express Scripture
for that purpose? The Jews Sabbath being the seventh day of the week, with us
called Saturday, is abolished; Must we not therefore have a Christian Sabbath
or Lords day? Nay rather, we may well gather from the Jewish-beleeving women's
privilege to partake of the Passover and sacrifices in the Old Testament, the
privilege of Christian women, to come to the Lords Table, and from Jewish
Believers liberty to have the Scriptures in a known tongue, we may gather
against the Papists, the privilege of Christian common people, of the like
nature, though in a different way; they by the Original writing, we by
Translation: and from the Jews Sabbath of the seventh day, that being appointed
by the moral Law, we may gather our Christian Sabbath; and so from the Jewish
infants privilege to have the seal of initiation into the Covenant and Church,
we may gather the like privilege to belong to Christians Infants, though in a
different ceremony; if we compare those privileges of the Jews in the Old
Testament, with what is spoken in the New Testament concerning
Gospel-priviledges, that are analogicall and succedaneous to these legal
privileges, and lay together other common grounds warranting unto them these
privileges, though there be no express immediate particular command, for
women's partaking at the Lords Table, nor for the common peoples enjoying
vernaculous translations of the Scripture, nor for the Christian Sabbath, nor
for the baptizing of Infants.

2.

4. Infants of believing parents never did cast off this privilege, so that by
any act of theirs all Infants should be deprived of it. For to cast off
Covenant-priviledges, imports actually to rebel against the Covenant, which
children cannot do; neither can any child's (suppose him capable of actual
rebellion and rejection of the Covenant,) or aged persons actual rebellion,
deprive all Infants of this privilege, unless he be the root, head and
fountain of all Believers Infants, which is not supposable. Anabaptists may
cast themselves and their children out of Covenant, but they cannot cast out
the children of other Christian parents, otherwise then by seducing the parents
into the same error and impiety with themselves or worse; which often falls out,
that those that compass land and sea to make proselytes, Mat. 23.15.
help to make them twofold more the children of hell then themselves.

5. Yea the Scriptures of the New Testament are so far from repealing the
privileges of Believers Infants that they strongly confirm and advance them,
as expressly telling us that to such belongs the Kingdom of God:
Gospel-promises belong to them, they are holy, Mark 10.14. Act. 2.39. 1 Cor.
7.14, etc. of which hereafter.

6. That now the same Covenant of grace for substance remains amongst
Christians as that which the Jews were under, that there is instituted a seal
of entrance into this Covenant, now in the time of the Gospel, viz. Baptism.
That Baptism the seal of entrance into the new, is come in the place of
Circumcision the seal of entrance into the old (as the new dispensation it self
succeeds the old) and is of the same use for the main; Col. 24, 12. 2 Cor. 3.6,
7, 8 9, etc. Heb. 8 8, 9, 10
and that the privileges of the Gospel Dispensation are more glorious and
comfortable then those of the legal were, are truths so clear, that he is very
ignorant of Scripture (I had almost said scarce worthy to be called a
Christian) that questions them, much more that denies them.

But for the clearing of this truth out of Genesis 17.7. In my answer to A. R.
I have written elsewhere, and may further if it be thought needful,
communicate In answer to M.T.
some things I have by me for vindication thereof.

Arg. 2. Those persons to whom Christ is so loving and gracious,

But our Lord Jesus Christ was, Mat. 19.14. Mar. 10.14. Luke 18.15, 16.
and is so loving to children of believing parents, that he would have them
come, or be brought to him, and cannot endure that they should be forbidden or
hindered from him,

Therefore the children of believing parents, have right to Baptism the sign
and pledge of admission to Christ; and so are to be baptized.

For the clearing and confirming of the Proposition, I will propound some few
things, which I desire may be considered. 1. That Christ refused commerce with,
or admittance of any persons to him with kind entertainment, but such as were
in Covenant, at least externally or in a way thereto, by their attentive
harkening to his word and receiving his doctrine. Mat. 15.23, 24 25, 28.
He tells the woman of Canaan that he was not sent but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, and that the childrens bread was not to be given to dogs;
implying that the Canaanites out of Covenant were as dogs, and not to be
entertained by him; neither does he give any comfortable answer to that woman,
until she had discovered by her faith, that she had right to Christ and the
Covenant. Ioh. 4.15, 19
The woman of Samaria indeed was received by Christ as ready to hear his
doctrine and be humbled. Pilate and Herod, he would hardly or not at all
answer, much less, familiarly and kindly invite to him. Therefore whom Christ
so kindly invites, he looks on, not as aliens to the Covenant, but as having
some interest in himself, and the sign of admission to himself and the Covenant.

2. We are said in Baptism to put on Christ, Romans 6 3, ^. Gal. 3.27. Col 2.12.
Ioh. 5.40.
be baptized into Christ and his death, and to be buried with him, which is for
substance as much as to come to him, and by coming unto him to be partakers of
him and have Communion with him.

3. There is now no visible way for children to come to Christ, since his
ascension ordinarily, but by Baptism, that being the first visible way of
admission to Christ (and that this coming of children was not confined to those
children, o^ that time of his humiliation, will appear by the reason, for
theirs is the Kingdom of God, but the Kingdom of God is dispensed since Christ's
ascension, Therefore children must come; of which anon.) Of coming to Christ in
hearing the word, prayer, the Lords Supper, they are incapable; of inward
invisible coming to or being united to Christ, we speak not now, neither does
Christ here speak of it. But by Baptism now, as heretofore by Circumcision,
Infants may be brought to Christ and the Covenant in a visible manner.

For the illustration and strengthening of the assumption, let these things be
considered. 1. These were properly little children or Infants which Christ
would have brought to him and not hindered; (...).
as may appear, 1. By their titles, Little children, Young children, Infants.
2. By Christ's manner of receiving them, viz. in his arms, which is proper to
babes.

2. They were children of believing parents in Covenant: 1. It Is out of
question they were children of Jews, at least, by outward profession of
Religion, which then were the peculiar people of God. 2. They which brought
them, whether parents or other appointed by them, had a reverend persuasion
concerning Christ, and believed that his blessing might profit the children. 3.
Our Savior approves the act of them that brought them, which he would not, if
it had not been done in faith. Heb. 7.6.


3. That Christ speaks not only of those children that were then brought to
him, but generally of the children of Believers (or all parents that are
willing to bring their children to Christ) is plain, in that he says not
Suffer those or these (individual) children to come unto me, but Suffer little
children, generally or indefinitely.

4. And moreover, that these words of Christ are not to be restrained to those
children only, or their manner of coming only, or to the time of Christ's being
on earth; may be gathered, 1. In that all the three Evangelists so carefully
and fully set down that History with all its circumstances, and holding forth
Christ's gracious expressions of his love to little children, which is
doubtless to show what is his affection to the Infants of the faithful at all
times; otherwise what profit or comfort were it for Christians to know that
Christ was indeed so loving to those Infants at that time, but would never show
afterward, when in glory, any more respect to Infants of Christians (whiles
such) then to the Infants of Infidels? 2. But the reason given by Christ puts
the matter out of question, that this expression of his affection to Infants,
is not to be restrained to those particular Infants, that manner of coming, and
that time of his visible abode on the earth: For of such, says he, is the
Kingdom of God, or of heaven; implying that so long as God has a Kingdom of
grace on earth, in the administration of the Gospel, and affords ordinary means
of bringing people to the Kingdom of glory, so long the children of the
faithful are to come or be brought to Christ in such a way, as they may be
acknowledged subjects of this Kingdom, which is by admission to the sign or
seal of entrance thereinto.

5. That it is the will and pleasure of Christ that little children in the time
of the Gospel, should be brought to him, appears in the text, in three
particulars, worthy to be distinctly observed. 1. In that he was much
displeased and moved with high indignation against his disciples, which rebuked
and discouraged the bringers of the children. Mat. 11.29. Man, 12.29.
Now Christ which was so admirably meek and gentle, would not have been so much
moved, if it had not been a great fault in his disciples to hinder Infants from
coming to him (It is doubtless a wrong to poor Infants that cannot plead for
themselves, and to pious parents to be checked in so good a work, and to the
Church of God to have these young members cut therefrom, and especially to God
and Christ and the Gospel, to seek to cast out Infants from the privilege of
the Covenant of grace, wherein they had been interested in the time of the
Law.) Though in the disciples it was more excusable by ignorance, because
likely before this time they had heard nothing expressly from Christ's mouth;
to hold forth the privileges of Infants in the time of the Gospel (howbeit
they might have gathered enough out of the Old Testament, if they would have
heeded it to have prevented this miscarriage, else Christ would not have been
so angry with them, if it had been out of invincible ignorance.) Now if Christ
was so offended with this first failing of his disciples through ignorance,
what may they expect that after this warning continue clamouring against and
reproaching the bringing of Infants to Christ?

2. Christ gives an express command to suffer little children to come to him,
(...).
let not any that profess obedience to Christ, and acknowledge his sovereignty
over them, dare to violate this command, in not suffering children to come to
Christ.

3. Christ adds, Forbid them not, which charge, by way of addition, does not
only show our Lord Christ's earnestness in this point, and confirm the former
precept; But also sufficiently warns all under pain of his displeasure, that
neither by word nor action, policy nor power, they dare to do any thing to
hinder the Infants of Believers from Christ.

My third argument I will draw from the same Scripture, which is this.

Arg. 3.

But to the children of believing parents, the Kingdom of God or heaven belongs
now in the time of the G^spel, Mat. 19.14. Mar. 10 14. Luke 18.16.

Therefore Baptism, which now in the times of the Gospel is the seal of
entrance into this Kingdom, belongs to the children of believing parents.

For the clearing and confirming of the proposition, let these things be noted.

1. That whether by the Kingdom of God (or heaven) be meant a state of grace
and professed subjection to Christ the King of the Church in this life, and the
state of the Church Militant under Christ, already exhibited in the flesh, as
the word is very frequently Mat. 3.2. Mat 14.17. Mat 1^.24, 32, 24, 47. Mat.
21.41. Mat. 25.^, 14.
used: or the Kingdom of glory and state of the Church Triumphant, as it is
sometime 2 Timothy 4.18.
used: It is all one for our purpose, and that argument holds most clearly in
the former, and most strongly in the later sense.

2. That Baptism is the sign, pledge, or seal of entrance into a Gospel state,
or Christian Church, is I think out of question on all sides, and if need were
might easily be proved by these and such like Scriptures, Mat. 3.2.6, Mat.
28.18, 19. Act. 2.38.40. Act. 8. and 9. etc.

3. Though some may have right to this Kingdom, and yet want Baptism, as the
penitent thief, and some may have Baptism that have no internal right to the
Kingdom of God, and spiritual blessing signified; yet those that have right to
the Kingdom of God, holden forth in the Gospel, have right to Baptism; and
those that are acknowledged according to the rules of Gods word to have right
to this Kingdom, must also be acknowledged to have right to the seal of
entrance thereinto.

4. Though only internal right to Gods Kingdom and the privileges thereof,
argue right to, or possession of the inward seal of the spirit; yet external
professed, or known right to this Kingdom, and the outward privileges thereof,
so as that persons are according to the Scriptures, acknowledged members and
subjects thereof, is sufficient to give Ecclesiastical and external right to
the seal of entrance thereinto; as the Jews, whiles they were not actually
discovenanted, were the children of the Kingdom; though so wicked as that they
were shortly cut off. Therefore let none object, If all the children of
Believers have right to the Kingdom of God they shall be all saved, But they
are not all saved, Therefore all have not right. This is answered by
distinction of external right, which gives interest to the external privileges
of the visible Kingdom, and internal right which gives interest in, or implies
possession of internal, spiritual and eternal privileges: The former right all
Infants of Believers have (and of this we speak now) the later only some
peculiar sanctified ones, according to the election of grace, as it is in the
case of visible professors and sincere Believers.

5. That to whom the Kingdom belongs, to them the seal or sign of entrance
belongs, right reason will yield, from the nature of correlatives, there being
a clear relation between the thing signified or sealed, and the sign or seal;
and the whole current of Scripture speaking of Baptism historically, or
doctrinally, shows that so soon as any were acknowledged to have right to the
benefit signified or sealed, they had right to the sign or seal.

The Assumption is expressly in the text, Mat. 19.14. Of such is the Kingdom
of heaven. Mat. 10.14. Of such is the Kingdom of God. So Luke 18.16. speaking
of little children; yea ver. 17. Christ with a serious asseveration asserts,
That whosoever receives not the Kingdom of God as a little child, shall in no
wise enter thereinto. And that this is meant, not only of those particular
children that were brought to Christ, is plain; 1. From what was said before to
the former Argument. 2. From the very words of Christ, he says not of these
little children, as excluding all other, but of such, that is, the children of
parents believing and in Covenant, as those were, which only the disciples and
other men that are not able to see the hearts can judge to be such.

Ob. This reason is grounded on a great mistake of the sense of the text; Of
such is the Kingdom, that is, of none else but such, as the next words which do
follow in this text, do manifestly declare, for in Luke 18.17. Mar. 10.15. in
both places; where Christ had said, Suffer little children to come to me, for
of such is the Kingdom of God; he presently confirms it in the next words thus,
Verily I say, Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child
shall not enter therein: As also, Mat. 18.34. Christ speaking to his disciples
says, Except ye be couverted and become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the Kingdom of heaven: Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this
little child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of heaven; his meaning is
not of them, or such as them in age nor understanding, 1 Cor. 14.20. but of
such as them in humility and like qualifications.

Ans. Unto them belongs the Kingdom: But the words are, Of such is (or to such
belongs) the Kingdom, etc. which makes more for our cause then if it had been
said, To them belongs, etc. two ways. 1. Hence it is clear that our Savior
speaks not of those individual Infants only, but of all such as they.
Notwithstanding the Disciples through ignorance (as before the Ascension they
had many mistakes about Christ's Kingdom) thought (possibly) that such Infants
were unfit subjects for the Kingdom of heaven; he peremptorily affirms, that Of
such is the Kingdom of heaven, indefinitely speaking of such, that their
nonage cannot debar them from this heavenly and spiritual Kingdom. Whereas
if Christ had said (of them) it might have been thought that those children
brought to Christ, had by extraordinary privilege or miracle, right to Christ's
Kingdom: Whereas by our Saviors expression (such) it appears to be the common
and ordinary privilege of the children of the faithful. 2. (...).
Whereas Christ says, Of such is the Kingdom (though our Translators render
it, To such belongs, because the idiom of our Language will not so well bear
the other phrase) it implies, that such are already in the Kingdom of God or
visible Church, as subjects and members thereof. Whereas if Christ had said,
Belongs to them, It might have been understood for the future in a remote
possibility (as the inheritance belongs to the Infant-heir, though he be not in
present possession,) viz. That when they should come to riper years they might
be externally called, and so brought within the Church; whereas this expression
of our Savior shows that such are already within Christ's Kingdom.

2. Though we should mistake this place, as the objector charge us, in that
we would gather hence that children are to be admitted to Christ, and have the
Seal of spiritual blessings. Whereas he would make it the scope of this place,
not that they or such as they in age or understanding have right to the Kingdom
of heaven, but such as they in humility and like qualifications; yet it is not
like that they which brought the children to Christ should be mistaken in their
ends (seeing none of the Evangelists speak of them as mistaken, but rather
mention their act by way of approbation) which were for prayer and imposition
of hands, to confer and signify spiritual blessings, which are the peculiar
privileges of Gods Kingdom. Or if they should so far mistake themselves as to
come for Christ's blessing for their children, though incapable, it is not
probable but Christ would have reproved them for their error before he
admitted them, and have told them, that he would receive them to him only that
they might be patterns of humility and such like qualifications to his
Disciples; but not so, as if the Kingdom of heaven did belong to them or such
as they were in age and understanding, lest he should harden them in their
error. But if Christ should have forborne to tell them of their error, and
make use of it that he might set before his hearers a pattern of humility and
such qualifications; yet surely Christ himself would not so far mistake, as to
lay his hands on, and bless them that were incapable of his blessing, as they
must needs be if the Kingdom of heaven belonged not to them, nor any such for
age; for Christ's blessing of persons, so solemnly represented and signified or
sealed with imposition of hands, are doubtless the privileges of his Kingdom:
so that this charge of mistake which the Objector makes, must lie on the
Objector himself or Christ.

3. It cannot be proved that these words, Whosoever receives not, etc. are
brought as a reason of that saying, Of such is the Kingdom: It is not joined to
the former sentence by a causall particle. But rather it is brought as a second
reason why they are to be brought and admitted to Christ, because they are not
only fit subjects of the Kingdom of heaven, but also may be patterns to the
more ripe and aged.

4. That place, Mat. 18.34. nothing pertains to this History, for it speaks of
Christ's teaching his Disciples humility (of which doctrine he took occasion
from his Disciples pride and emulation, which discovered it self in that
question, Who is greatest in the Kingdom?) by setting in the midst of them
(there is no mention of taking in his arms) a little child; and therefore
though this sentence may somewhat illustrate the later of these reasons in Mark
and Luke, yet it belongs not to this History or doctrine that is principally
and purposely handled therein.

5. But to make it evident, that Christ when he says, Of such is the Kingdom,
means it of these very children and such as they in respect of age, take these
reasons.

1. The Question was not, Whether such as were endued with humility and like
qualifications, might come to Christ? but Whether those Infants, and such as
they for age might? The parents or whosoever brought them (whose piety is here
approved) desired not that those that had such qualifications only as their
children, but that those very babes might be admitted to Christ for prayer and
laying on of his hands. The Disciples rebuked them for bringing (not humble
persons of ripe years and otherwise qualified as children, but) those babes:
Christ is angry with them for hindering those very children, pleads for the
children and the bringers of them, commands that the children should be
permitted to come to him (not such as them in humility and like qualifications
at this time) and gives this reason, For of such is the Kingdom of heaven. Now
how were this speech and reason of Christ pertinent or convincing, if when the
question was about little ones, he should speak only of those which were endued
with humility and such qualifications, yet of ripe years?

2. The word such is taken most usually in Scripture (if not always) for the
same persons or things of which mention was made immediately before, and those
that are of the same nature and kind, not those of different kind of form,
that only agree in some remote unquestioned, unmentioned qualifications; (...).
as may appear by these and such like Scriptures, Joh 4.23. But the hour comes
and now is when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and
truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him. 1 Cor 5.5. To deliver such
an one to Satan; this is meant of the incestuous man (of whom the Apostle had
spoken before,) and of those that were guilty of the same or like sins as he:
so 2 Cor. 12.2. Such an one taken up into the third heaven. verse. 3. I know
such a man. ver. 5. Concerning such a man I will glory. It Is plain that this is
spoken of the man that had Visions and Revelations of God, whether in the body
or out of the body he knew not; and that Paul would glory of that very man or
such others, for whom God had done such things, as none of the false Apostles
could glory of the like. The same may be observed, Gal. 5.21. Heb. 7.26. and
Heb. 13.16. By which examples it is plain, that though the word (such) in the
English tongue often signifies but similitude, yet in the Original it notes
entity, both specifical and numerical, and consequently here are not meant
those who were only like babes in humility and such qualifications, but those
very Infants that were brought, and other such Infants, viz. of the Church.

3. If therefore only Christ admitted children, took them in his arms, laid his
hands on them, and blessed them, because of their humility and such
qualifications, wherein these that will enter into the Kingdom of God must
resemble them; not because they themselves had interrest in the Kingdom of God,
and were capable of spiritual blessings; then it will follow that it had been
lawful and commendable, for men to have brought to Christ Sheep, Doves or
Serpents, Salt, Lights or Vine-branches, good Wheat, o^ good Fish, Mat 5.13,
14. Mat. 10 16. Ioh. 10, 14. Mat. 13. Ioh. 13.1, etc.
to have him put his hands upon them and prayed for them, and that Christ would
have taken these all, or any of them, into his arms or hands, laid his hands on
them and blessed them, for the Godly are resembled to these, and we required to
be like unto them in some qualifications, as we will be saved; and where the
same or like cause is, the same or like effect will, follow: But the consequent
is absurd and ridiculous (if not blasphemous) Therefore the antecedent is
false. I come now to the third Argument taken from this History, and it is my
fourth Argument in order.

Arg. 4.

But Christ has vouchsafed the little children of the faithful his dear
embraces, prayed for them, blessed them, Mat. 10 13.15 Mat. 10.16.
and laid his hands on them as a sign or pledge of his blessing;

Therefore the children of the faithful are in Covenant, and have right to the
seal of entrance thereinto, which is Baptism.

To the clearing of the Proposition let it be remembered, 1. The tender embraces
of Christ and ready entertainments of persons, argue those to be in Covenant
and in his favor whom he so entertaineth. For he that forbad his Disciples to
go to the Gentiles and Samaritans, Mat. 10.5. Mat. 15.24. Luk 7.29. Luk 15.1,
2, 3.
was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, would not have
eaten with publicans and sinners, but as they had been lost sheep and prodigal
sons, yet sheep and sons found again, which had been humbed by John's Ministry;
would not doubtless tenderly embrace any young or old, that were without God,
hope, Christ or Covenant.

2. These whom Christ prays for are not of the world, and therefore called
out of the world to the Church and Covenant, Joh. 17.9.

3. Christ's laying on of his hands being a sign or seal of spiritual blessing
(for we read not that these children were brought to be cured of any corporal
malady; but Christ's saying, Of such is the Kingdom of God, sufficiently
implies, that the blessings which he bestowed and confirmed to them, Romans
14.17.
by laying on of hands, were blessings of his Kingdom, which are principally
not corporal but spiritual) was of the same nature or equivalent to, or at
least implied right in Baptism: For we never read that God or Christ, or any
by Divine appointment, communicated imposition of hands as a sign of the
blessings of his Kingdom to unbeleevers and persons out of Covenant, and so
uninterested in the seal of entrance into Covenant.

4. Hence follows, each of these favors of Christ, much more all laid
together, prove, that those to whom they are vouchsafed, are in Covenant, and
so have title to the pledge of admission thereto.

As to the Assumption, let it be noted, 1. That it is in the very words of the
text. 2. That though this privilege of corporal or visible embracing, and
laying on of hands, and vocal or audible prayer, and blessing from Christ, was
peculiar to those Infants that were then brought to him; yet that the same
blessings for substance invisibly and spiritually to be conferred by Christ,
and what is equivalent to these outward signs, belong still to children of
Believers under the Gospel, may be gathered from the whole context, is partly
cleared in the handling of the two former Arguments, and might be further
proved if need were, and intended brevity would suffer.

Arg. 5.

But all Nations were to be made disciples and baptized by the Apostles,
according to the command of Jesus Christ, Mat. 28.19, 20.

Therefore the children of believing parents in those Nations, were and still
are to be baptized.

For the clearing of this ARgument I might suffice my self in referring the
Reader to what I have written heretofore, In Answer to A. R. In Answer to the
first Paper.
for the vindicating of this Scripture, Mat. 28.19 which is the ground of this
Argument. Yet briefly for the strengthening and clearing of the antecedent or
Assumption contained in the text, I shall propound these considerations to be
remembered, though some of them were touched before.

1. That children are a very considerable part of Nations, therefore
comprehended under this command of discipling and baptizing Nations: Especially
considering,

2. That no acception is made of them; neither does this or any other Scripture
show that they must be excluded out of this Commission. Did ever Christ say or
intimate thus much, Though the children of Believers have heretofore been in
Covenant and admitted to the sign of entrance thereto, yet now in the time of
the Gospel they are to be left out of Covenant, and kept from the seals
thereof, as Infidels and Pagans, till they profess their faith?

3. They are not incapable of being made disciples and baptized, as has been
said.

4. That one Nation of the Jews, which unto the time of Christ's giving this
Commission to his Disciples, Genesis 17.7. Exodus 12.42.
had been in Covenant and enjoyed the seals thereof, as his peculiar people,
had their children taken into Covenant with them, and admitted to the seal of
entrance; which privilege also Proselytes of other Nations had in common with
the Jews.

5. Not only among the Jews, but also in all Nations Infant-children were
always devoted to the same God and religion as their parents, and often (if
not always) by some solemn sign of initiation, the devil (not unfitly called
Gods ape) would have children with their parents dedicated to him, Lev. 18.21.
compared with 24, 25, 26. and it is so universal, that children, while Infants,
are still reputed to belong to the same religion and God with their parents; as
that the children of Papists, Jews, Turks and Indians, etc. are accounted from
their mothers womb, Papist, Jews, Turks and Indians, etc. until by the use of
reason and free will they make defection from their fathers religion; so that
it seems to be of the very dictate of reason and law of nature, that Infants
should be esteemed to belong to the same God and religion as their parents,
whether true or false.

6. The children of subjects and bondslaves, are accounted the subjects and
bondslaves to their Parents Sovereigns and Masters, until by some act of their
own they cast off their yoke: Now all Christians are subjects and servants to
Christ their King and Lord, therefore their children also are subjects and
servants to God and Christ, whiles Infants, Lev. 25.41, 42. Psalm. 116.16.

7. Hence it cannot be rationally conceived that the Apostles did understand
the Commission of discipling all Nations, otherwise then so as to take in the
children with their believing parents.

Arg. 6. Abraham, after his coming in the flesh, as much or more then the
Nation of the Jews were before the coming of Christ, then surely the children
of converted Nations must be in Covenant, and have right to the seal of
entrance thereinto, for this was a great privilege of the Jewish Nation before
Christ's coming. It would be an hortible eclipsing of the blessedness of the
converted Gentiles, and of the Jews when they shall be converted, to have their
children cut off from the Covenant and the seal thereof:

But the Nations of believing Gentiles shall be blessed as much or more in the
time of the Gospel by Christ, then the Jews were before his coming, Genesis 22.18.
Gal. 3.8. 2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9. Heb. 8.6, 7.

Therefore the children of believing Gentiles have right to the Covenant and
seal of admittance thereinto, which is Baptism.

For the fuller discovery of the strength of this Argument consider 4 things.

1. What is said on the foregoing Argument, is of use here also, for the
clearing of the extent and comprehensivenesse of the word Nation.

2. Consider the several confirmations of the Proposition, tending to clear the
consequence. 1. The Jews (as has been said) had interest in the Covenant and
seal of admission for their children in the Old Testament, before Christ's
coming, and this was in it self and their account doubtless a glorious
privilege; Therefore Christians after Christ's coming must have the same
privilege, seeing no less but rather greater privileges are promised to the
believing Gentiles then the Jews had. 2. Especially considering that now in the
time of the Gospel this would be in it self, and in the apprehension and desire
of all godly parents, accounted a most glorious privilege now, that their
children should be in Covenant and admitted to the seal thereof, and the
contrary a fearful loss. I appeal to all that esteem the Covenant of God,
whether next to their own salvation they would not esteem their childrens being
admitted to the Covenant of God and its seal an eminent privilege (what those
that through the spirit of error have cast off God, his Covenant and truth,
judge, we weigh not, considering they are given over to a reprobate judgment.)
It being unconceivable how those that ever tasted the goodness of God, the
privileges of the Covenant, and made right improvement of the seal thereof,
should not earnestly desire the same for their children, whom nature and grace
teaches dearly to love. Neither can any reason be given, why this should be so
great a privilege before Christ, and not remain a most desirable privilege
since Christ's coming, for parents to have their children in Gods Covenant and
under his seal. 3. Hence follows, that it would be a sad eclipsing of the
blessedness^, comfort and glory of believing Gentiles, if their children should
be dashed o^^ from the privileges of the Covenant, which the Jews children
had. How could that of the Apostle be true ( Romans 3.29. Is he the God of Jews
only, is he not also of the Gentiles? yea of the Gentiles also,) if God have
not as well taken the Gentiles with their children into Covenant, as well as
heretofore the Jews with their children. How should the converted Gentiles
rejoice with Gods people and praise him, as well as the Jews, according to the
Prophecy cited by the Apostle, Romans 15.10, 15. if they should be deprived of
so grand a privilege of Gods people, which had been so long possessed by them,
and their Infants left out of Covenant and debarred the seal? 4. What a
lamentable fall and abatement of the believing Jews comfort and glory, would
befall them by the coming of Christ, contrary to the Prophetical predictions,
Evangelical Proclamations, and all the faithfuls expectation; if whereas before
Christ's coming their little ones were in Covenant, had God for their God, and
were sealed with the sign of the Covenant; now upon this embracing of Christ,
whether on the first offer of the Gospel to them by the Apostles as in Act.
Act. 2.37, 38, 39, 40, etc. Romans 7 26, 27
2. or at their conversion in the latter end of the world, Romans 11. their
Infant-children should be left out of the Covenant, in Satan's Kingdom.

3. I will answer one Objection (once for all) which may seem to have some
force to take away those untheological and unevangelical absurdities that these
men fall into, which here and elsewhere it is showed their opinion leads them
to: it is this.

Obj. In the Old Testament indeed the Church had many external visible
privileges, consisting in Rites and Ceremonies, and therefore they were
circumcised and their children; but now in the Gospel the privileges are more
spiritual and invisible, and therefore it will not follow, If some of those
visible privileges be withdrawn, that the Gospel Dispensation is not more
excellent then the Legal, and so if Baptism be denied to Christians children,
that their state is worse then the state of the Jews.

Ans. This Objection which would seem to take off the former absurdities, will
appear anon to bring in other absurdities as great or greater, or leave the
force of the former Arguments untouched. For though it be true that amongst the
Jews was a worldly Sanctuary and carnal ordinances, Heb. 9.1.10. which are now
abolished and no visible ordinance left to Christians in the place thereof: Yet
generally to say that Jews privileges consisted in Rites and Ceremonies, and
Christians are spiritual and invisible, is to deny spiritual privileges to the
Jews, and the outward profession of religion to Christians, which is equally to
overthrow the power of godliness and truth of religion in both, then which
what more dangerous or absurd?

2. But if they will leave generals and come to the point in hand, they must
either deny that there is any such outward ordinance as Baptism left to the
Church of the New Testament, being of the same use for the main, and in the
place of Circumcision, Col. 2.11, 12. which to do were to contradict plain
Scripture, or if they grant it, their shifting distinction of visible and
spiritual privileges cannot help them, for here by their own concession it
cannot take place, seeing that they yield that in this case a visible
privilege is afforded alike to both Churches, Jewish and Christian.

3. This Objection should be acknowledged to say something to the purpose, if
it could be proved, 1. That the Jews were only under an external Covenant,
without spiritual graces. 2. That their privileges were only external. 3. That
Christians have now only spiritual blessings bestowed on them. 4. That
ordinarily God now gives his Covenant and spiritual blessings thereof without
any visible means or external way of dispensing the same. All or any of which
to assert were very false and wicked. But when it is acknowledged, or at least
may by plentiful Scripture be proved, 1.

That for themselves Believers need a seal or pledge, is granted by all parties
that acknowledge that God (who institutes nothing needless or superstuous in
his Church) has instituted Baptism as a standing Ordinance for Christians.
And that for their children they need a seal, as well as the Jews for their
children, or Christian Professors for themselves, may appear thus: 1. Have not
Christians children souls capable of salvation as well as the Jews? or reason
can be given to prove that Believers children in the time of the Gospel are
debarred from the Covenant and seal thereof (of which the believing Jews
children had been long in possession) and some more eminent privilege bestowed
on Christians children, which the Jews children never had, to compensate that
loss, of being driven from the Covenant and seal; when (I say) these six
things are at the least for the greater part acknowledged, and the other may be
easily proved, at least so many as are necessary for this purpose; it must
needs be a very contradictory thing, to say That the Gospel Dispensation is
more glorious and comfortable then the Legal, and believing Gentiles as much or
more blessed then the Jews, and yet Christians children driven from the
Covenant of grace and seal thereof, which the Jews children were under.

4. Having first propounded something in general for the clearing of the whole
Argument; secondly, confirmed the Proposition by some particulars: thirdly,
Answered an Objection: fourthly, I come to the fourth thing which I promised,
which is to speak of the Assumption; concerning which I need say no more, then
that it is plainly and fully proved in the Scriptures mentioned in the proposal
of the Assumption, and diverse others setting forth the glory of Gospel Times.

Arg. Act. 2.38, 39.
to them the outward sign of Baptism it self belongs; so the Apostle reasons,
and the sign and thing signified being correlatives, must go together:

But the promise of Gods Spirit, Act. 2.39. Isa. 44.3.
signified in Baptism (and so of Regeneration, Sanctification and Adoption)
belongs to the faithful and their children;

Therefore Baptism it self belongs to them.

Arg.

But where the Apostles had drawn, by the Ministry of the word, governors of
families to the faith, they baptized with them their whole family, Act. 16.14,
15. and 33, 34.

Therefore the children of believing parents are to be baptized.

For the clearing of the two last Arguments, to avoid tediousness (having been
more large in the former then I intended) I refer the Reader to what I have
said in the Answer to the former Paper, in the vindicating of those Scriptures,
Act. 2. and 16. cited by the other party.

Arg.

Children of believing parents are holy or Saints, 1 Cor. 7.14.

Therefore to be baptized.

See this Argument cleared in my first Book, in Answer to A.R. and hereafter
more may come forth for vindicating of that Scripture, 1 Cor. 7.14. from
exceptions.

Arg. Cor. 12.12, 13. Ephesians. 5.25, 26.

But the children of the faithful are members of the Church. 1. So they were
amongst the Israelites and never yet dismembered. 2. Such promises are made to
them as none without the Church have right unto. 3. Else they have no interest
in Christ's love, no benefit by his death, no purification and sanctification by
his blood, nor is there any hope that (if they die Infants) they shall be
presented holy and spotless, glorious and unblamable before God, all which are
the peculiar privileges of the Church, not communicable to any but members
thereof, Ephesians. 4.25, 26, 27. So that if the children of Believers be not members
of the Church, they are without, Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
without hope, without God, whiles children, which to affirm, is most
blasphemous to Gods grace, Covenant and nature.

Therefore the children of Believers have right to Baptism.

Arg.

But the duties of the Covenant lie no less on Christian parents, to teach and
instruct their children, Ephesians. 6.4.
and on their children to learn the fear and nurture of the Lord, now in the
time of the Gospel, then they lay on Jewish parents and children;

Therefore the Covenant, its privileges, and the seal of admission no less
belongs to Christian parents and their children, then they did belong to Jewish
parents and their children.

For the strengthening of the Proposition let these things be considered,

1. Ordinarily and in the usual dispensation of the Covenant, where God
requires like duties, he affords like privileges: I speak not of what God may
do out of his prerogative or in some extraordinary case, setting aside his
dealing with men by way of command, promise and threatening, which is his way of
transaction in Covenant.

2. If there be any difference in the Christian Church compared with the
Jewish, and later dispensation of the Covenant compared with the former, there
is rather an increase of privileges, and lessening of burdens and duties, then
an increase of burdens and duties and lessening of privileges.

3. If you say otherwise, Might not Christian parents, if urged to the
Religious education of their children by you, answer, By your judgment they
are dogs and swine, as being out of Covenant? how can we offer holy instruction
to them, or exercise any Christian discipline over them, bring them to public
assemblies, or pray for them, any otherwise then as Infidels? were no: this to
cast Pearls to swine, and give holy things to dogs? Mat. 7.6. 1 Cor. 5.12.
What have we to do to pray with or exercise Discipline and Censure over those
that are without? What poor encouragements do you give us to bring them up for
God, when you tell us that they have no right to the Covenant of God? Is not
your practice in denying us the privilege of the Covenant for our children,
and yet requiring the duties thereof, worse then that of the false Apostles, in
putting a yoke on the Disciples necks, which neither their fathers nor they
were able to bear? They indeed urged duties, but allowed privileges (according
to their apprehension, and what had formerly been indeed a privilege,) you
urge duty, but deny privileges, which do greatly ease burdens and facilitate
duties. But if you say, that you do not urge the duty of Christian education of
children, etc. as I fear practice speaks too loud: What is this but to profess
an intention to overthrow both the duties and privileges of the Covenant, and
so bring in Atheism, which if it take place in families, will soon overspread
the whole Church, and particular persons.

4. The Jews indeed were bound to circumcise their children, and observe all
those laws, Ceremonial and Moral, concerning them which were appointed by
Moses; but they had this ease and encouragement, their children were in
Covenant and had the seal thereof, and they might expect the privileges and
blessings of the Covenant on their children, by virtue of Gods promises,
Covenant and seal. Now no such privileges are allowed to Christian parents in
behalf of their children, if these men's opinion stand and the Proposition hold
not.

Obj. But if parents by their care bring them to actual faith, and so under the
Covenant, then they shall enjoy the privileges of the Covenant, and seal
thereof.

Ans. 1. If that be all, then by your opinion if they dye before actual faith
(as thousands of the children of the faithful do in their infancy) they perish
as Aliens to the Covenant. 2. The only way revealed in Scripture for parents
first bringing their children under the Covenant, is by faith to accept the
Covenant for themselves and their children, Genesis 17.7. They that hold out a new
way must show some Scripture for the abolishing of the Old, and establishing
the New, or must expect no regard from those that are not willing to be
deluded. 3. Show the ground of this distinction; Jewish children were to be
educated for God as being under Covenant and seal, but the children of
Christians only that they may be brought under the Covenant and seal, when they
come to actual faith, professed in their own person. What Scripture or reason
puts such a vast difference between them, that those should be brought up
Religiously, as actually in Covenant and sealed, these only as in a remote
possibility to be brought to the Covenant and seal?

5. The fifth consideration will not only strengthen the Proposition, but also
further answer the foregoing objection: It Is this, If the children of the
faithful be not already actually in Covenant, from their infancy, and so
interested in the privileges of the Covenant, not only parents may be afraid
to instruct them in Scripture, Catechize and pray with them, require their
presence in the Congregation and family duties, and their sanctification of the
Lords day (which are both duties and privileges of the Covenant) least they
should cast Pearls to swine, and judge them that are without; But also the
children, if urged hereunto, may demand of their parents, What have you to do
to require of us any Christian duties, or to correct us for the neglect
thereof, or for the commission of any sin against the Gospel, as profanation of
the Lords day, blaspheming Christ, Christian Religion, or the Scripture, etc.
Might not they plead liberty of conscience, and say, What have you to do to
judge us that are without? we are to choose, our Religion, and as free to
worship Mahomet as Christ. The Jews indeed had authority to bring up their
children in the Jewish Religion, as being devoted thereto from their infancy,
by the Covenant and seal thereof, under which they were: but now we children of
Christians are under no such privileges nor engagements. Which practice, I
fear, will be the genuine fruit of this opinion, argued against and swallowed
down as no absurdity, by those that are poisoned with Anabaptisticall fancies;
but must needs be detested by all that prize the Covenant of God, and love
Christ sincerely, or their own and childrens souls spiritually.

To clear the Assumption, let these things be considered: Genesis 18.19. Exodus
12.26, 27. Josh 24.15. Psalm. 78.5, 6. Prove. ^. 3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 3.15.


1. How can it be doubted but that all those moral duties that lay upon
Abraham and his children, and the Israelites and their children, enjoining the
one party to teach, and the other to learn the way and commandments of God, lie
now upon Christian parents and their children.

2. Paul greatly commends Timothies happiness, and his parents care in that he
had been brought up from his infancy in holy Scripture, which he would not have
done, if either Timothy had not been in Covenant from his infancy (for what
have those to do with the tables of the Covenant, that are strangers or aliens
to the Covenant?) or that example had not been of moral equity to be imitated
by Christian parents and their children, in the time of the Gospel.

3. That Scripture cited to prove the Assumption, contains a full express
charge which lies on all Christian parents to teach, (...).
and children to learn the fear and information of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. which
argues also that children of the faithful are disciples of the Lord, to be
trained up in his school, being dedicated to his discipline and nurture.

4. Were not this so, that moral Law, which the Apostle in special manner above
all the rest, urges upon Christians children, would be abrogated, or greatly
weakened as to the children of Christian parents, at least until they come to
actual faith. Children (says he) obey your parents in the Lord. Ephesians 6.1, 2.
And Honor thy father and mother, which is the first commandment with promise.
For how can they obey them in the Lord, when the parents have no authority to
command them any thing in the name of the Lord, they not being under his yoke
and Covenant? How can parents challenge honor from their children by virtue of
Gods command, when they bring not up their children for God and to his honor?
Or how can children Religiously and Christianly honor their parents, that have
left them in the state of Infidels? Especially considering this commandment,
Honor thy father, etc. as it was given to the Israelites, supposed their
children to be in Covenant with their parents, and to have the like interest
with their parents in the Covenant and its seal, and the like engagement to the
duties thereof, in respect of outward dispensation, which is denied now to the
children of Christians, unless the Assumption, yea and the main point in
controversy be granted.

Twelfthly, I argue thus: been born of Christian parents. 2. Neither is there
Scripture-example for it, for the examples we read of were according to
Commission, none (as we read in Scripture) that were born after their parents
were Christians, were baptized, when grown; Scripture speaks only of those that
had been Jews and Infidels children that were baptized by the Apostles. 3.
Neither stands it with right reason, that Believers children should be left
(until they profess their faith) in the same state with Jews, Turks and
Infidels, considering Gods promises and Covenant:

Therefore it remains that they must be baptized while Infants; this being most
agreeable, 1. To Gods dealing with Abraham the father of the faithful, that
children, while Infants, should be admitted with their believing parents, and
that Covenant and seal thereof. 2. To the nature of this Sacrament, which is to
be administered the first opportunity, to persons known to be in Covenant, and
members of the Church. 3. To all those commands and examples of baptizing new
converted Jews and Infidels; for as their conversion did put them into the
Covenant of grace, whereupon they had right to the seal of entrance: So these
Infants being born of Christian parents, does inright them to the Covenant,
whereupon they have right to the seal of entrance.

Arg.

But the doctrine and practice of these Anabaptists, leaves Christians children
in the same condition with the children of Turks and Infidels, as casting them
out of Gods Covenant and Christ's Kingdom, which is the Church, and denying to
them the seal of admittance thereto, and so leaving them in the visible kingdom
of the devil, denying to them faith, without which they must certainly perish;
and reason, without which they are bruits, and so cut off from all hopes of
salvation.

Therefore their doctrine and practice is to be abhorred.

Thus you have seen our Arguments, or at least some of them.

Now before I conclude I will Answer two or three Questions or Objections.

Obj. 1. But if children of Believers have right to the Covenant, Christ, the
promises, and gift of the holy Ghost, How can we know this? Men of years if
they believe and repent, can make profession; but how can children make
profession in the Covenant, that we may have sufficient warrant to baptize them?

Ans. It Is true they cannot make profession of their interest in the Covenant
and promises, but that is done sufficiently for them, by God the Father, Son
and holy Ghost, speaking in Scripture, as Genesis 17.7. Exodus 20.6. Psalm. 102.28.
and 103.17, 18. Psalm. 112.2. and 127.3, 4, 5. Es. 44.3. Mar. 10.14. Act. 2.39.
1 Cor. 2.14, etc. These and many other Testimonies are given in Scripture by
God himself, concerning the right of the faithfuls children to the Covenant,
promise and Kingdom of God, which I wish the Reader to turn over unto and
observe: Surely this testimony of God for children, is not less then the
testimony of men of years for themselves. So that if parents when they bring
their children to Baptism, make a due profession of their repentance, faith and
resolution to walk with God in Covenant, and both to accept Gods Covenant for
themselves and their children, and give up themselves and theirs to God in
Covenant, the Ministers and Congregations may have satisfaction concerning
their childrens right to the Covenant and promise (by virtue of these
Scriptures) and so to Baptism.

Obj. 2. If children of believing parents have title to the Covenant and
promises, either all have this title or some only: If some only, how will you
distinguish them, that those only may be baptized? If all, how is it that many
prove wicked, which were baptized in infancy? Do you hold falling away from
grace?

Ans. The promises and Covenant belong to all the faithfuls children in regard
of outward station in Covenant, and right to the seal of entrance (which is the
thing now in question) the inward efficacy we leave to the good pleasure of
God. The whole body of Israelites aged and children, 1 Cor. 10.5.
were Gods people by Covenant, and under the promise; Yet with many of them God
was not well pleased. The Churches of the New Testament are called Saints, said
to be in Christ, and yet many persons therein proved wicked and e^roneous; as
may appear in those Epistles that are written to them, giving them the title of
Saints. The Covenant and promises as they are outwardly dispensed are
conditional, neither does God therein any further bind himself to his people,
then as the condition of regeneration, holiness, repentance, faith or
obedience, are found in them or performed by them. Indeed the inward working of
regeneration, drawing to and giving Communion with Christ, giving a new heart
and spirit, faith etc. are absolutely bestowed according to Gods good pleasure,
upon what number of these persons externally in Covenant he sees good,
according to the election of grace, agreeably to those Scriptures, Romans 9.15,
16, 18.

2. Here is no more necessity then possibility of distinguishing between Elect
and non-elect Infants; their being members of the visible Church, gives them
right to the privilege of new admitted members.

3. Neither do we hold falling from the inward efficacy of grace, Ioh. 13.^. 2
Per. 2.1. Rev. 3.1, 7. Heb. 6.4.5, 6.
as from true solid Sanctification, Justification and Adoption, though we grant
men may fall from the outward dispensation of the Covenant of grace and turn
Apostates; or continue under the outward dispensation, and yet fall short of
the saving efficacy of grace. Mat 25.29.
Yea moreover that those which have seemed to themselves and others to be
Justified, Sanctified and Adopted, may fall from what they seemed to have, and
utterly perish.

4. The Objection will hold as strongly against the baptizing of the
professors of faith, for not all those whom the Apostles or any others
baptized upon their profession have held our, many proved wicked and reprobate,
none can certainly distinguish among professors, which are elect and which
not, Must they not therefore be baptized?

To conclude therefore, They that by their own profession, or Gods profession
for them, are discovered to have right to the outward dispensation of the
Covenant, let them enjoy it without gainsaying; and let us leave the inward
efficacy of the Covenant to God, to whom alone it belongs.

Obj. 3. But what need you write so much in answering so little? It seems your
cause is not good you take so much pains about it: Why did not you Answer as
briefly as the other party Propounded?

Ans. 1. The truth often lies deeep and will not easily be found out: as it is
more precious then gold and silver, Pro. 3 13, 14.
so it requires more diligent search. Gold Mines are not obvious to every eye,
much skill and labor are requisite to find them out, and bring the gold to
light.

2. Though the other party have but briefly propounded their judgment, and
grounds thereof in their now-Answered Papers; yet it is known what large
discourses they have made amongst the people, and how many Treatises are
written on this subject.

3. It is not an argument of a bad cause to be somewhat large in clearing it;
the better the cause is, the more it deserves diligence in handling of it,
least we should wrong God, his people and truth by sleightinesse. A cup of
poison may be prepared, drunk down and dispersed into the body in an hour,
which the wisest Physician can hardly expel out of the body, with all his
skill and pains in many months. A desperate cutthroat may give a wound or
stab in a moment, which the most dexterous Chyrurgion cannot heal in a short
time. An incendiary may set an whole Town on fire suddenly, which cannot be
built up by many Carpenters and Masons in few years. Yet the cause and work of
the later is much better then of the former. I have been willing therefore to
be somewhat large, as my poor ability, small leisure, time allowed, and others
importunity would permit.

You conclude your Paper thus. H. H. J. Br.
If you therefore or your Ministers have any thing to say or write herein, we
desire you, for the truth and your promise sake, to do the same, else we must
necessarily conclude, that neither you nor they have any thing to gainsay it,
but by your silence justify both our principle and practice.

You see I hope by this time, that we have something to say and write herein,
and for the truths and our promise sake have done the same in part, and are
ready by the grace of Jesus Christ, to do more when duly called thereunto,
therefore you have no cause to conclude that we have nothing to gainsay, or
that by silence we do justify your principle or practice, against which we
have born witness in love to the truth.

And now Sirs, you which have subscribed the Papers here answered, let me
entreat you seriously to peruse what has been here returned to you in Answer,
and acknowledge what is of God and agreeable to his truth; and if you find any
thing dissonant thereto, discover it and spare not, and let me have a punctual
and particular reply to the several parts of this answer, and till then forbear
your high confidence, in promoting your opinions and practicing answerably,
then will you give us good ground of persuasion, that your profession of desire
to have the truth discussed is real. But if you shall be unable to answer this
(as I am persuaded you will not be able with any show of truth) and yet proceed
in your opinions and practice; let me tell you, God will be certainly avenged
of those which abuse his people, ordinances and truth, speaking evil of the
things they know not; if not with visible and temporal, yet certainly with
invisible spiritual and eternal punishments: Read I pray 2 Timothy the third
Chapter. 2 Pet. 2. and the Epistle of Jude.

As for you, dear Brethren, that mourn for what you cannot amend, and endeavor
to contend for the common salvation once delivered to the Saints, and not to be
as children, carried about with every wind of vain doctrine, I exhort that you
will hold fast the truth which you have received, Rev. 2.25. and 3.10.
keep the word of Christ's patience, that he may keep you in this hour of
temptation that is befallen the whole world to try them that dwell on the
earth. Be sure that you receive the truth in love, knowing that many for want
of this are given over to strong delusions to believe lies that they may be
damned, because they had pleasure in unrighteousness. Remember the counsel of
Christ and his Apostles in these following Scriptures, Mat. 7.15, 16. Romans
16.17, 18. Gal. 5.1. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. 2 Pet. 3.1, 2. and
17.18. 1 John 4.1, 2. Jude 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.

Thus I have answered these Papers, hoping that I shall be ready by Gods
assistance, to give a reason of my faith and hope herein, either by word or
writing so far as I may have a good call thereto, may do it with safety, and
may deal with men that will hear and speak reason and Scripture pertinently
applied, and may observe those rules of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.16.23. Tit. 3.9,
10.

Thus desiring that the God of truth will more and more clear his truth, and
subdue thereto or break in pieces all the ignorant and wilful opposers
thereof, I end,

William Cook.

FINIS.

