GAROLUS SECUNDUS Dei Gratia, Angl, Scotice, Francice Et Hibernice Rex, Fidei
Defensor etc.
woodcut frontispiece, protrait of Charles II royal blazon or coat of arms HONI
SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

MEMORABILIA: Or, the most Remarkable Passages and Counsels Collected out of
the several DECLARATIONS AND SPEECHES That have been made by the KING, HIS L.
Chancellors and Keepers, AND THE SPEAKERS Of the HONORABLE House of Commons IN
PARLIAMENT: Since His Majesty's Happy Restoration, Anno, 1660. till the End of
the last Parliament, 1680.

Reduced under Four Heads;

Viz.
1. Of the Protestant Religion. 2. Of Popery. 3. Of Liberty and Property, etc.
4. Of Parliaments.
By Edward Cook, of the Inner Temple, Esquire.

Humbly Dedicated to the GRAND COUNCIL, or SENATE of this KINGDOM.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons, Tho. Simmons, and Sam. Lee, at the Three
Cocks at the West End of S. Paul's, the Princes Arms in Ludgate Street, and the
Princes Arms in Lombard Street. MCDLXXXI.

THE INTRODUCTION.
SOME Persons there are in the World of a humor, not to be pleased with any
thing they shall see in Print, unless withal, the Author puts himself to the
trouble of giving them some considerable Reason, which induced him to that
undertaking: now whether or no this, that I shall give them, will be to their
greater satisfaction, I am not certain; but however I will thus far ingenuously
confess my self to them, as to declare it was the true and only One that moved
me to present the World with these following Sheets.

HAVING too notoriously observed of late, since this licentious Sickness of the
Press, the many abominable Pamphlets that have come abroad, no doubt with
Malicious design enough to alienate the Affections of the good people of
England, and to infuse strange Perplexing Fears and Jealousies into them of the
King and the Government, as if presently the whole Nation was to be turned
Topsy Turvy, our Laws Cancelled, our Liberties and Properties to be quite taken
away from us, our Parliaments to be cashiered, our Religion changed, and our
Lives wholly at the Merciless Devotion of Thirsty men of blood; I say, having
observed with great and sorrowful Resentment these ill and dangerous Books,
that have with a too open and insolent face appeared to the heinous scandal, as
well as disturbance of the peace of these Kingdoms; This is to prevent His
Majesty's Declaration to all his loving Subjects. Dec. 26. 1662. p. 12.
the mischiefs aimed at by the cager endeavors of rash, and unquiet men, whom
(though weak and credulous Persons may be beguiled by them, yet I am sure) all
honest and good men will look upon with detestation, as the most dangerous
Enemies of the Crown, and of the peace and happiness of the Nation.

AND among the many venomous Insinuations which have been Lord Keepers Speech.
Jan. 7. 1673. Fol. 18. 19.
made use of, the Fears and Jealousies of Religion and Liberty are of the worst
sort, and the most dangerous impressions.

CERTAINLY Malice was never more buisy, than it has been in these Reports, and
it has been assisted by a great deal of invention.

BUT it is to be hoped that no man's Judgment or Affections will be either
misled or disturbed by such reports.

THIS, as nothing is capable of gratifying them more, the great Lord Keepers
Speech Ap. 13. 75. Fol. 18.
Enemies of our security are most industrious to promote, as knowing very well,
that this alone will do them more Service than the best of their Auxiliaries;
These are they, that hope to see, and Practice to bring about, new Changes and
Revolutions in the Government.

IT IS almost an irreparable reproach the Protestant Religion has Lord Chancel.
Speech Sep. 13. 1660. p. 22.
undergone from the divisions and distractions which have been so notorious
within this Kingdom. This you shall find hereafter, I will demonstrate to you
in its proper place.

AND as differences and distempers in Religion have too much disturbed Lord Chapter
Sp. Sep. 13. 1660. p. 19, 20.
the Peace of the Kingdom, which is a consideration that must make every
Religious heart to bleed, to see that Religion, which should be the strongest
Obligation and Cement of Affection, and Brotherly kindness and compassion, made
now by the perverse wranglings of Passionate and Froward men, the ground of all
Animosity, Hatred, Malice, and Revenge: So no less heaty and distempered have
some persons been on the other hand, in wickedly laboring to set us altogether
by the Ears, and to put us into a fatal Combustion by their slanderous
Calumnies, and Factious reproaches of the State: Never was this Spirit of
Libelling more Lord Chapter Sp. Monday May 19. 6^. at their Prorog. p. 10, 11.
pregnant than it is now; nor King, nor Parliament, nor Church, nor State, ever
more exposed to those flagella linguae, those strokes of the Tongue, from which
God Almighty can only preserve the most Innocent and most Excellent Persons; as
if repining and murmuring, reviling and affronting public Authorities, were
the peculiar exercises of the Nation, to keep it in health; as if England had
so much of the Merchant, Nunquam habendi fructu faelix, semper autem quaerendi
Cupiditate Miserrima. Now does it not His Majesty's Speech Mond. March 21.
1663. p. 5.
behoove us all to be as watchful to prevent, as they are to contrive their
mischief? Should not we make it our business to strengthen the hands of
Government, and to shame the Enemies of it, by bannishing all manner of
distrust? If we do not, we shall be in danger to Lord Chapter Sp. Thurs. May 23.
78. p. 18.
become, not only the most miserable, but the most unpittied Nation under
heaven.

Let this then be to restore the whole Nation to its primitive temper Lord Chapter
Sp. Thurs. Sep. 13. 1660. p. 12.
and integrity, to its old good manners, it is old good humor, and it is old
good nature; a Virtue so peculiar, so appropriated by God Almighty to this
Nation, that it can be translated into no other language, and hardly practiced
by any other people. His Majesty's Speech Tuesday July 30. 1661. The Day, of
Their Adjurr. p. 5.


And though there are very many, (alas too many) distempered Spirits, which lie
in wait to do mischief, by laying Reproaches upon the Court, upon the
Government, reproaches upon the King, and reproaches upon the Parliament; yet I
hope by our Joint Unity, and right understanding, our vigilant carefulness, and
application, we may be able to weigh down, and prevent any Mischief they intend
against us.

Foreign Nations have laid it down for a Maxim in their Politics, Lord
Chancel Speech Thurs* March 6. ^^78. p. 18
that England can never be destroyed but by its self, and that it is in vain to
make any attempt upon this Nation, until they be in some great disorder and
confusion amongst themselves; Let us then, every one in the way of our several
capacities, endeavor to make the ambitious despair as soon as we can, by
establishing so perfect an intelligence, that there may be but one heart, and
one soul among us. He that does not now put his Hand and Heart to support the
King Lord C. S. to Si. Job. harleton, then chosen Speaker to the House of Com.
Feb. 5. 1672. p. 23.
in the Common cause of this Kingdom, can hardly ever hope for such another
Opportunity, or find a time to make satisfaction for the Omission of this.

Let us tryby our means to raise up the hearts and hopes of all those, whom ill
men have wrought upon to such a degree, as to cast them into a sadness, end
into a despondency which is most unreasonable. Lord Chapter Sp. Ap. 13. 75. p. 22.


What the Romans Scorned to do after the Battle of Cannae, what the Venetians
never did when they had lost all their Terra firma, that men are now taught to
think a virtue, and the sign of a Wise and Good man, desperare de Republica.

And let us try what we can to confirm the faith of those that p. 23.
are made weak, and give to the King the present of all our hearts, [and the
full assurance of all our Lives and Fortunes, to preserve him in his just
Prerogatives, that he may with the Greater confidence, and cheerfulness still
secure, and further promote the true protestant Religion, and all due Liberties
and Properties to these Kingdoms.]

Then will the King esteem himself a Richer Prince, then if he were possessed of
all the treasures of the East. And if any man should question or suspect His
Majesty's affection toward the Protestant Religion, and his firm resolution
still to maintain it, together with all our Civil Rights, let him be pleased to
hear him give his own Royal word for it, and as Solomon says, where the word of
a King is, there is Power.

And first, to begin with Religion.
CHAP. I.
Of the Protestant Religion.
FOR as his Majesty very wisely has observed to us; (in his Declaration to all
his Loving Subjects, of his Kingdom 1. Of Religion.
of England, and Dominion of Wales, concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, in the
very year of His Happy Restoration, 25th day of Oct. 1660. page 3.) There is
so close a Connection between the Peace of the Church, and the Peace of the
State; That the One cannot be disturbed without the Other: These are his words,
how much, says he, the Peace of the State is concerned in the Peace of the
Church: and how difficult a thing it is to preserve Order and Government in
Civil, whilst there is no Order or Government in Ecclesiastical Affairs, is
evident to the world; and this little Part of the World our own Dominions has
had so late experience of it, that, we may very well acquiesce in the
conclusion without enlarging our self in discourse upon it; it being a Subject
we have had frequent occasion to contemplate upon, and to lament abroad, as
well as at home.

TRUE Religion has an enlightening Influence 2. What Religion is.
over the minds of men; It works upon Lord Keep. Speech April 13. 1675. page 11.
the Conscience, and is an inward Principle of the divine Life, by which good
men do govern all their actions. And if rightly followed and obeyed, how great
3. How sweet and peaceable where it is right.
would the harmony of affection be amongst us? The Impressions, which the Law
of Religion makes in the hearts of good men, are all healing and Sanatory:
There is no divide and Impera within her Districts; no furious Heats and
hostile Clashings to be heard, where she has uncontrolled Power and
Sovereignty. That unruly and unmanly Passion (which no question the Divine
Nature exceedingly abhors) sometimes, and I fear too frequently Transports
those who are in the right, as well as those who are in the wrong, and leaves
Lord Chan. Speech Thursday Sept. 13. 1660. p. 20. 21, 22.
the latter more excusable than the former, when men who find their manners and
dispositions very conformable in all the necessary obligations of humane
Nature, avoid one another conversation, and grow first unsociable, and then
uncharitable to each other, because one cannot think as the other does. And
from this Separation we Entitle God to the Patronage of, and concernment in our
Fancies and Distinction, and purely for his sake, hate 4. An Eminent Instance
of Christian Love and Charity.
one another heartily. It was not so of Old, when one of the most Ancient
Fathers of the Church tells us, that Love and Charity was so signal and eminent
in the Primitive Christians, that it even drew admiration and envy from their
Adversaries. Vide (inquiunt) ut invicem se diligunt! Their Adversaries in that
in which they most agreed, in their very prosecution of them, had their
Passions and Animosities amongst themselves; They were only Christians, that
loved and cherished, and comforted, and were ready to dye for one another: Quid
nunc illi dicerent Christiani, si nostra viderunt tempora? Says the
Incomparable GROTIUS: how would they look upon our sharp and virulent
Contentions in the Debates of Christian Religion, and the bloody Wars that had
proceeded from those Contentions, whilst every one pretended to all the Marks
which are to attend upon the True Church, except only that which is inseparable
from it, Charity to one another.

How did These in the Late Distracted Times, who would 5. How different
Christians are from the temper and spirit of Christ.
needs be called Christians, differ from Christ, the True and Only Head of the
Church? How calm and quiet, how sedate and peaceable was he throughout the
whole Conduct of his Life? though he walked in the midst of a stubborn and
perverse Generation, that despised his Doctrine, reproached him for his
Miracles, in saying, That he cast out Devils through Beelzebub the Prince of
the Devils; he came to his own, and his own received him not; yet he was sweet
and affable in all his Conversation, 6. Christ was meek and Courteous, gentle
and affable to all.
continually doing good to those who were his Enemies, and the worst of them
too: Though he was reviled, yet he reviled not again, and though he was
oppressed and afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; when he was wounded for
our Transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities, and the Chastisement of our
Peace was upon him; and by his Stripes we are healed; yet he went as a Lamb to
the slaughter, and as a Sheep before the shearers, he was dumb, and opened not
his mouth; but just before his expiration upon the Cross, he mercifully poured
out this prayer for those his Enemies, that could not forbear breaking forth
into this curse of his Blood be upon us and our Children, that God would freely
pardon them in this their sin, Father, says he, forgive them, they know not
what they do. But how did these make it their business to rend 7. We are sour
and morose, fierce and bitter one against another.
and divide the Church, by tying it up just to such a Party and such a
Persuasion, as if only, Lo here was Christ, where they were pleased to have
him, and not there? whereas (alas!) it is not different Forms, as to
Circumstantials, that denominate us Christians, but it is the holding of the
Truth in the substance of it. And is it not too much so now in our days? what
Parties, what Factions, what Interests, and separations are among us? and in
matters merely circumstantial, how hasty are we in stamping a Jus Divinum on
such things as are doubtful, dark, and disputable among men, that perchance are
equally wise and pious, judicious and learned on both sides. We ought to put no
more weight nor a greater necessity on those things than the Divine Wisdom has
clearly put upon them in his word; nor to Spend more of our Zeal about such
things than is proportionable to its weight and measure. We should allow for
the imperfection of men, and the imperfect state of the Church; for here we
know but in part, and therefore we should bear with one another, if in any
thing we be otherwise minded one to another: But we are, instead of this,
pecking one at another. How positive are we of our own ways, as if we were all
infallible, stretching our Authority far beyond our just Rule and Line: when we
have catched up a new Notion, strait we lay it upon Conscience, as that which
must be maintained, although to the great prejudice of the whole Interest of
Religion, and so rend the Church, and run away from all those that agree not
with us in all things: Oh! what peeques and grudgings, what heart-burnings and
contentions are there between parties that differ? What defamatory Speeches,
what scandalous Reflections, and how unbecoming are their heats of language one
against another? so much, that we are in a very fair way of running into the
same, if not more violent, and worse distractions, than we were in, in the late
sad and dismal times, if God, of his infinite wisdom and mercy, heal not these
our breaches, and compose our differences.

-- Quis Talia fando
Temperet a Lachrymis?
THIS disquisition has cost the King many a sigh, many a 8. This division
among us has cost the King many a sigh --
sad hour, when he has considered (as was said before) the almost irreparable
reproach the Protestant Religion, has undergone, from the divisions and
distractions, which have been so notorious within this Lord Chan. Speech.
Thursday Sept. 13. 1660. page 22.
Kingdom. What pains he has taken to compose them, after several discourses
with learned and pious men of different persuasions, you shall see by and by,
as also his great Indulgence to those who can have any protection from
Conscience to differ from their Brethren.

And he is a most discerning, generous, and merciful Prince, who has had more
experience of the Nature, and humor of mankind, than any Prince living; can
best distinguish between the tenderness of Conscience, and pride of Conscience,
between the real effects of Conscience, and the wicked pretenses to Conscience;
who having fought with Beasts at Ephesus, knows how to guard himself and Lord
Chan. Speech. Monday, May 19. 62. page 17.
the Kingdom from the assaults and violence of a strong, malicious, corrupted
Understanding and Will, and how to secure himself and the Kingdom from the
feeble traps and nets of deluded fancies, and imaginations: In a word, He is a
Prince of so excellent a Nature, 9. Who is a most discerning Prince, and of a
tender Conscience himself, and has the highest compassion for all Errors of
that kind.
and so tender a Conscience himself, that he has the highest compassion for
all Errors of that kind, and will never suffer the weak to undergo the
punishment ordained for the wicked, and knows and understands better than any
man that excellent Rule of Quintilian, Est aliquid quod non oportet, etiam si
licet, and aliud est jura spectare, aliud justitiam. Therefore let us hold
Communion in such things wherein we are agreed, and Love and Charity wherein we
differ.

HIS Majesty has considered Religion, first in General; as 10. Religion
considered 1st. generally as opposite to Popery. 2 d. as established by Law in
the Church of England.
it is PROTESTANT, and stands in Opposition to Popery: and Secondly, more
particularly, as it is the Protestant Religion, Established by Law Lord Keep.
Speech. Apr. 13. 1675. page 9. 10, 11.
in the Church of England; he sees that as such, it is not only best suited to
the Monarchy, and most likely to defend it, but most able to defend it self
against the Enemies of all Reformation. Upon the former account 11. Therefore
the Laws against both Papists and Dissenters are now awakened.
he has awakened all the Laws against the Papists: there is not one Statute
extant in all the volume of our Laws, but his Majesty has now put it in a way
of taking its full course against them: Upon the latter account, his Majesty
with equal and impartial Justice, has revived all the 12. Not with equal
severity against the latter.
Laws against dissenters and Non-conformists, but not with equal severity: for
the Laws against the Papists are edged, and the execution of them quickened by
new rewards proposed 13. These and all other Laws subject to the pleasure of a
Parliament.
to the Informers: those against Dissenters are left to that strength which
they have already. Both these, and all other Laws whatsoever, are always
understood to be subject to the pleasure of a Parliament, which may alter,
amend, or explain them as they see cause, and according unto public
convenience.

FOR when we consider Religion in Parliament, we are supposed 14. Religion how
to be considered in Parliament.
to consider it as a Parliament should do, and as Parliaments in all Ages have
done, that is, as it is a part of our Laws, a part, and a necessary part of our
Government. Of this more hereafter: Let us now hear what this our most
Excellent Majesty has declared, and said to us concerning it.

WHEN he was at his Court at Breda, a little before his 15. How the King
declares for the establishment of the Protestant Religion.
happy coming over to us, and sent his Letter to the Speaker of the then House
of Commons Assembled in Parliament, he thus Writes to him what he should read
to the House; If you desire, says he, the advancement April 14. 1660. page 5.
6.
and propagation of the Protestant 16. Nothing could stratle the King, or make
him in the least degree swerve from the true Protestant Religion.
Religion, we have by our constant profession and practice of it, given
sufficient testimony to the World, that neither the unkindness of those of the
same faith toward us, nor the civilities and obligations from those of a
contrary profession, (of both which we have had abundant evidence) could in the
least degree startle us, or make us swerve from it; and nothing can be proposed
to manifest our Zeal and Affection for it, to which we will not readily
consent. And we hope in due time, our self so propose some what to you for the
propagation of it, that will satisfy the World, that we have always made it
both our care, and our study, and have enough observed what is most like to
bring disadvantage to it.

HIS Majesty saw that it was the first 17. Religion as it was first in our
thoughts: so it was the Kings first and principal ca
thing in all our thoughts, and we cannot but Lord Keep. Speech. April 13.
1675. page 9.
see, that it has been, and still is the first and principal part of his care.

AND this Royal declaration of himself, joined to what 18. Therefore we need
not doubt.
he has since done, carries in it self so evident an assurance, and is stamped
by so sacred an Authority, that there remains no place for doubting, nothing
can scarce be added to the efficacy of it. Id. ib.


THEN, after a repetition of the same words just above cited, to the Speaker of
the House of Commons, in his Majesty's Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
affairs: He proceeds thus. And the truth page 4. 5.
19. The King most fit to propose, being the most competent Judge from his
experience with the most learned of the reformed Churches abroad.
is, we do think our self the more competent to propose, and with Gods
assistance to determine many things now in difference from the time we have
spent, and the experience we have had in most of the reformed Churches abroad,
in France, in the Low Countries, and in Germany, where we have had frequent
Conferences, with the most learned men, who have unanimously lamented the great
reproach the Protestant Religion undergoes, from the distempers, and too
notorious Schisins in matters of Religion 20. Our Religion suffers from the
distempers and schisms that are in the Church.
in England: And as the most learned amongst them have always with great
submission and reverence acknowledged and magnified the established Government
of the Church of England, and the great Countenance and shelter the Protestant
Religion received from it before these unhappy times: so many of them have with
great ingenuity and sorrow confessed, that they were too easily misled by
misinformation and prejudice into some dis-esteem of it, as if it had too much
complied with the Church 21. Church of England the best fence against Popery in
the World.
of Rome; whereas they now acknowledge it to be the best fence God has yet
raised against Popery in the world; and we are persuaded they do with great
Zeal wish it restored to its old dignity and Veneration.

AND a little after in page 8, 9. he further says, We need 22. The Kings great
esteem for the Church of England.
not profess the high Affection and Esteem we have for the Church of England as
it is Established by Law; the Reverence to which has supported us with God's
blessing, against many temptations.

AS to the Opinion of the Presbyterians concerning Episcopacy, hear how the
King declares himself in this point: When we were in Holland, says he, we were
attended by many grave and learned Ministers from hence, who were looked upon
as most able and principal assertors of the Presbyterian 23. Presbyterians
affectionate to the King, Zealous for the Peace of Church and State, and no
Enemies to Episcopacy.
Opinions, with whom we had as much conference as the multitude of affairs,
which were then upon us, would permit us to have; and to our great satisfaction
and comfort found them persons full of Affection to us, of Zeal for the Peace
of the Church and State, and neither Enemies (as they Page 5. Declar. conc.
Eccles. affairs. October. 25. 1660. at Whitehall.
have been given out to be) to Episcopacy, or Liturgy, but modestly to desire
such alalterations in either, as without shaking Foundations, might allay the
present distempers, which the indisposition of the time, and the tenderness of
some men's consciences had contracted.

AND We further find upon the full conference we 24. The Mischiefs the Church
labors under as well as the State result from the passions and Interests of
private persons.
have had with the learned men of several persuasions, that the mischiefs,
under which both the Church and State do at present suffer, do not result from
any formed Doctrine or Conclusion Page 7. Of the same.
woich either party maintains or avows, but from the passion and appetite and
Interest of particular persons, who contract greater prejudice to each other
from those affections, then would naturally arise from their Opinions,

FOR we must for the honor of all those of either persuasion 25. The
professions and desires of both persuasions for the advance of Religion are the
same.
with whom we have conferred, declare, that the professions and desires of all
for the advancement of piety and true godliness, are the same; their
professions of Zeal for the Peace of the Church, the same; of affection and
duty to us, the same; they all approve Episcopacy; they all approve a set form
of Liturgy; and they all disprove and dislike the sin of Sacrilege; and the
alienation of the Revenue of the Church; and if upon these excellent
foundations, in submission to which there is such a harmony of affections, any
superstructures should be raised, to the shaking Page 8. Of the same.
those foundations, and to the contracting and lessening the blessed gift of
Charity, which is a vital part of Christian Religion; we shall think our self
very unfortunate, and even suspect that we are defective in that administration
of Government with which God has entrusted us.

NOW we do not think that Reverence which we have 26. No Reverence for the
Church of England lessened by dispensing with some Ceremonies in it for a while.
for the Church of England, in the least degree diminished by our
condescensions, not peremptorily to insist on some particulars of Ceremony,
which, however introduced by the piety and devotion, and order of former times,
may not be so agreeable to the (then) present, but may even lessen that piety
and devotion, for the improvement whereof they might happily be first
introduced, and consequently may well be dispensed with; and we hope this
Charitable compliance of ours will dispose the minds of all men to a cheerful
submission to that Authority, the preservation whereof is so necessary for the
Unity and 27. The support of Episcopacy the best support of Religion.
Peace of the Church; and that they will Page 9.
acknowledge the support of the Episcopal Authority, to be the best support of
Religion, by being the means to contain the minds of men within the Rules of
Government.

IF we had the command of as many tongues, as his Majesty 28. His Majesty
cannot be sufficiently thanked for his dispensing with some Ceremonies.
has of hearts, we could not express our great Joy and thankfulness for his
Speak of the House of Commons Speech, to the King in the Banquet-House at
Whitehal. Nov. 9. 1660. p. 3, 4.
continual and indefatigable labor and pains in repairing, and making up our
sad breaches, and composing our unhappy differences; and in particular, for
this his most gracious declaration concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, wherein
his Majesty has provided wholesome food for all clean Stomachs, strong meat for
such as are able to bear it, allowing them the use of our Church Liturgy,
together with comely vestments, Ornaments, and Ceremonies in the service and
worship of God; as likewise Milk for tender Babes, dispensing with their
Conformity in such matters and things, as are not so much of the substance and
Essence of Faith and Religion, as of Decency and becomingness; which gives
abundant 29. Which will abundantly satisfy all reasonable and sober men, and
such as are truly Religious.
satisfaction to all peaceable, sober minded men, and such as are truly
Religious: for those that are really and truly so, will find themselves bound
ever in Conscience, to the observation and practice of that excellent lesson
taught us by the Apostle, which is, sap^re ad temperantiam and spartam ornare,
with a Vade tu, and fac simile.

AND this General Thanks of that whole house was not 30. His Majesty very well
deserved that thanks of the House of Commons.
presented rashly and precipitately to the King; for if you will please to hear
further what he did for the settling of the Church upon firm foundations, you
will find they had good reason for their so doing. For, 1. Says he, He do
declare our 31. The Kings Resolution for promoting the power of Godliness, in
having the Lords day duly observed
purpose and Resolution is and shall be, to promote the power of Godliness, to
encourage the exercises of Religion both public and private, and to take care
that the Lord's day be applied to holy exercises, without unnecessary
divertisements; and that insufficient, negligent, and scandalous Ministers be
not permitted in the Church; 32. In turning insufficient Ministers out of the
Church.
and that as the present Bishops are known to be men of great and Exemplary
Piety in their Lives, which they have manifested in their notorious and
exampled sufferings 33. In providing learned and pious Bishops to govern in the
Church.
during these late distempers; so we shall take special care, by the assistance
of God, to prefer no men to that office and charge The King's Declarat.
concern. Ecclesiast. Affairs, page 10.
but men of Learning, Virtue, and Piety, who may be themselves the best
Examples to those who are to be governed 34. They shall be frequent Preachers,
unless sickness or some notable occasion excuse them.
by them. And we shall expect and provide the best we can, that the Bishops be
frequent Preachers, and that they do very often Preach themselves in some
Church of their Diocese, except they be hindered by sickness, or other bodiln
infirmities, or some other justifiable occasion, which shall not be thought
justifiable, if it be frequent.

AGAIN, it is said in Page 12. 13. Fol. 5. We will take care that Confirmation
be rightly and solemnly performed, by the Information and with the consent of
the Minister of the place; who shall admit none to the Lords 35. Confirmation
rightly performed.
Supper, till they have made a credible profession of their Faith, and promised
Obedience to the will of God; according 36. None to be admitted to the Lords
Supper, till they have professed their faith, etc.
as is expressed in the considerations of the Rubric before the Catechism; and
that all possible diligence be used for the instruction, and reformation of
scandalous offenders, whom the Minister shall not suffer to partake of the
Lords Table, until they have openly declared them 37. Care taken to instruct
and reform all scandalous offenders, and not to let such communicate, etc.
selves to have truly repented, and amended their former naughty lives, as is
partly expressed in the Rubric, and more fully in the Canons. Moreover the
Rural Dean and his Assistants are in their respective divisions to see that the
Children and younger sort be carefully instructed by the respective Ministers
of every Parish, in the grounds 38. Ministers to see that youth be instructed
in the grounds of Christian Religion.
of Christian Religion, and be able to give a good account of their Faith and
Knowledge, and also of their Christian conversation conformable thereunto,
before they be confirmed by the Bishop, or admitted to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper.

6. NO Bishopsh all exercise any Arbitrary Power, or do 39. Bishops only to act
according to the law of the Land.
or impose any thing upon the Clergy, or the people, but what is according to
the known Law of the Land. Page 14.


7. WE are very glad to find, that all with whom we 40. A set form of worship
held lawful by all.
have conferred, do in their Judgments approve their Liturgy, or set form of
public Worship, to be lawful; which in our Judgment, for the preservation of
Unity, and Uniformity, we conceive to be very necessary: and though we do
esteem the Liturgy of the Church of England, contained in the book of Common
Prayer, and by Law established, to be the best we have seen; and We believe
that We have seen all that are extant, and used in this part of the world, and
well know what reverence most of the Reformed Churches, or at least the most
learned men in those Churches, have for it; yet since we find some exceptions
41. Yet since some things in the Liturgy are excepted against, Divines on both
sides shall reveiw and alter what is thought most necessary.
made against several things therein, we will appoint an equal Number of
learned Divines of both persuasions, to review the same, and to make such
alterations as shall be thought most necessary; and some additional forms (in
the Scripture phrase, as near as may be) suited unto the nature of the several
parts of worship, and that it be left to the Minister's choice to use one or
other at his discretion. In the mean time, and till this be done, although we
do heartily wish and desire, that the Ministers in their several Churches,
because they dislike 42. Tho some clauses be disliked, yet let those parts be
read, against which there can be no exception.
some clauses and expressions, would not totally lay aside the Book of Common
Prayer, but read those parts against which there can be no exception; which
would be the best instance of declining those marks of distinction, which we so
much labor and desire to remove; yet in compassion to diverse of our good
subjects, who scruple the use of it as now it is, Our will and pleasure is,
that none be 43. But if not, none shall be punished or troubled for such
omission.
punished or troubled for not using it, until it be reviewed and effectually
reformed as aforesaid. Page 14, 15.


8. LASTLY, concerning Ceremonies, which have administered so much matter of
difference and contention, 44. Ceremonies tho the occasion of difference, yet
were brought into the Church for the improvement of piety.
and which have been introduced by the wisdom and authority of the Church for
Edification, and the Improvement of Piety: we shall say no more, but that we
have the more esteem of all and Reverence for many of them, by having been
present in many of those Churches where they are most abolished, or
discountenanced; 45. How every National Church may introduce such Ceremonies as
may seem most proper to improve piety.
and it cannot be doubted, but that, every National Church, with the
approbation and consent of the Sovereign Power, may, and has always introduced
such particular Ceremonies, as in that conjuncture of time are thought most
proper for Edification, and the necessary improvement of Piety, and devotion in
the people, though the necessary practice thereof cannot be deduced 46. That
which is in it self indifferent, ceases to be so, when established by Law.
from Scripture; and that which before was, and in it self is indifferent,
cease Page 15.
to be indifferent, after it is once established by Law: And therefore our
present consideration and work is, to gratify the private Conscience of those
who are grieved 47. But yet to indulge tender Consciences.
with the use of some Ceremonies, by indulging to, and dispensing with their
omitting Page 16.
those Ceremonies. 48. They shall not be obliged against their wills to kneel
at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the act of receiving.


AND though we shall receive the Blessed Sacrament upon our knees, which in our
Conscience is the most humble, the most devout, and the most agreeable posture
for that holy duty, yet since some other men, upon reasons best, if not only
known to themselves, choose rather to do it sitting or standing; none shall be
denied the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, though they do not use the gesture
of kneeling in the act of receiving. 49. None compelled to use the Cross in
Baptism.


SO likewise, out of Compassion and compliance toward those who would forbear
the Cross in Baptism, we are content that no man shall be compelled to use the
same, or suffer for not doing Page 17.
it: But if any Parent desire to have his Child Christened according to the
form used, and the Minister will not use the sign, it shall de lawful for that
Parent to procure another Minister to do it: And if the proper Minister shall
refuse to omit that Ceremony of the Cross, it shall be lawful for the Parent,
who would not have his Child so baptized, to procure another Minister to do it,
who will do it according to his desire. 50. None compelled to bow at the name
of Jesus.


NO man shall be compelled to bow at the Name of JESUS, or suffer in any degree
for not doing it, without reproaching those who out of their Devotion continue
that Ancient Ceremony of the Church. 51. Or to wear the Surplice.


FOR the use of the Surplice, we are contented that all men be left to their
liberty to do, as they shall think fit without suffering in the least degree
for wearing, or not wearing it; provided that this liberty do not extend to our
own Chapel, Cathedral, or Collegiate Churches, or to any College in either of
our Universities; but that the several Statutes and Customs for the use
thereof in the said places, be there observed as formerly.

AND because some men, otherwise pious and learned, 52. None shall be compelled
to subscribe, or take the Oath of Canonical Obedience.
say, they cannot conform unto the subscription required by the Canon, nor take
the Oath of Canonical Obedience; we are content, and it is our will and
pleasure, (so they take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy) that they shall
receive Ordination, Institution, and Induction, and 53. But shall exercise
their function* and enjoy their livings without it.
shall be permitted to exercise their Function, and to enjoy the profits of
their Livings, without the said subscription, or the Oath of Canonical Page 18.
Obedience: And moreover, that no persons in the 54. None, by not subscribing*
hindered taking their degrees.
Universities shall for the want of such subscription be hindered in their
taking of their degrees; lastly, that none be judged to forfeit his
Presentation or Benefice, or be deprived of it, upon the Stat. 13. Eliz. cap.
12. So he read 55. None to forfeit their benefice, etc. that will read and
assent to all the Articles.
and declare his assent to all the Articles of Religion, which only concern the
Confession of the true Christian Faith, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments
comprised in the Book of Articles in the said Statute mentioned. In a word, we
do again renew what we have formerly said in our declaration from Breda, page
3. for the liberty of tender 56. None shall be disturbed for differences of
opinion in Religion, who disturb not the public peace.
Consciences, that no man shall be disquieted or called in question for
differences of Opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace
of the Kingdom.

THIS you see was declared and granted within a little time after his Majesty's
arrival here, who said then that he would leave all decisions and
determinations of this kind, 57. All decisions of this kind to be left to a
National Synod.
if they shall be thought necessary for a perfect and entire Unity and
Uniformity throughout the Nation, to the advice of a National Synod, Page 16.
Of the same.
which he promised should be duly called, after a little time, and a mutual
Conversation between persons of different persuasions, has mollified those
distempers, abated those sharpnesses, and extinguished those jealousies, which
for a while did then make men unfit for those Consultations: and, says he,
upon such advice we shall use our best endeavor that such laws may be
established, as may best provide for the peace of the Church and State.

TO conclude, and in this place to explain what we mentioned before, and said
in our Letter to the House of Commons from Breda, Page 18, 19.
that we hoped in due time, our self to propose somewhat for the propagation of
the Protestant Religion, that will satisfy the world, that we have always made
it both 58. The King conjures us all to submit to this his Declaration.
our care and our study, and have enough observed what is most like to bring
disadvantage to it: We do conjure all our Loving Subjects to acquie see in, and
submit to this our Declaration concerning those differences which have so much
disquieted the Nation at home, and given such offense to the Protestant
Churches abroad, and brought such reproach upon the Protestant Religion in
general, from the Enemies thereof; as if upon obscure notions of faith and
fancy, it did admit the practice of Christian duties and obedience to be
discountenanced and suspended, and introduce a License in opinions and manners
to the prejudice of the Christian Faith. And let us all 59. And to strive to
advance the Protestant Religion abroad, by supporting the Dignity of the be
Reformed Church at home.
endeavor, and emulate each other in those endeavors, to countenance and
advance the Protestant Religion abroad, which will be best done by supporting
the dignity and Reverence due to the best reformed Protestant Church at home:
and which being once freed from the Calumnies and reproaches it has undergone
from these late ill times, will be the best shelter for those abroad, which
will by that countenance both be the better protected against their Enemies,
and be the more easily induced to compose the differences among themselves,
which give their Enemies more advantage against them. 60. No wonder why the
^ing was ^o zealous to Establish the True Protestant Religion before Indul^ent
Dissenters from it.


NOW it must not be wondered at, that being so zealous as we are, says our
Royal Master again to us, (and by the grace of God shall ever be) for the
maintenace of the True Protestant His Majesty's Declaration to all his loving
Subjects, December. 26. 1662. page 7.
Religion, finding it so shaken (not to say overthrown) as we did, we should
give its Establishment the Precedence before Matters of Indulgence to
Dissenters from it. For it is the great Wall and Bulwark of all the Reformed
Churches abroad; by this they stand, are sheltered and defended, and therefore,
as it were still the better to explain his meaning to us, he repeats with
enlargement, saying, We have been zealous to settle the Uniformity of the
Church of England, in Discipline, Ceremony and Government, page 8.
and shall ever constantly maintain it.

AND whereas according to a former Declaration of the 61. The King Declares
Liberty to Tender Consciences.
King from Breda, 14 April 1660. in these words, viz. We do declare a Liberty
to tender Consciences, and that no man shall be disquieted, or called in
question page 3.
for differences of Opinion in Matters of Religion, which do not disturb the
Peace of the Kingdom; and that we shall be ready to consent to such an Act of
Parliament as upon mature deliberation shall be offered to us for the full
granting that Indulgence.

SO says he, as for what concerns the Penalties upon those who (living
peaceably) do not conform thereunto (i. e. to the Act of Uniformity) through
scruple and tenderness of misguided conscience, but modestly and without
scandal perform their Devotions in their own way: We shall make it our special
care, so far forth as in us lies, without invading the freedom of Parliament to
incline their 62. And Promises to try to incline the Parliament to consent to
an Act of Indulgence for that purpose.
wisdom at this next approaching Sessions, to concur with us in the His
Majesty's Declaration to all his loving Subjects, December. 26. 1662. Published
by advice of his Privy Council, page 7. 8.
making some such Act for that purpose, as may enable us to exercize with a
more universal satisfaction, (for it seems the King did before now remember
this Part of his Declaration, and was sollicitous for one: but he says just
before that, That Parliament to which those promises were made in relation to
an Act never thought fit to offer us any to that purpose.) I say to exercize
with a more universal satisfaction, that power of dispencing which we conceive
to be inherent in us: Nor can we doubt of their cheerful cooperating with us in
a thing wherein we do conceive our selves so far engaged, both in Honor, and
in what we owe to the Peace of our Dominions; which we profess we can never
think secure, whilst there shall be a color left to the malicious and
disaffected, to inflame the minds of so many Multitudes upon the Score of
Conscience, with despair of ever obtaining any effect of our promises for their
ease. 63. But the Parliament by no means did think it fit that such persons
should have an Iudulgence who would dissent from the Act of Uniformity.


BUT the Parliament, though they did with great joy receive his Majesty's Most
Gracious Speech, wherein they were invited to consider this his above said
Declaration, did thus humbly give their advice hereupon, That it was in no sort
advisable that there be any Indulgence to such Persons who presume to Dissent
from the Act of Uniformity, and the Religion Established; for these reasons:
64. For several reasons here shown.


BECAUSE it is not a Promise in it self, but only a Gracious Declaration of
your Majesty's Intentions, to do what in you lay, and what a Parliament should
advise your Majesty to do; and no such advice was ever given, or thought fit to
be offered; nor could it be otherwise understood, because there were Laws of
Uniformity then in Being, which could not be dispensed with but by Act of
Parliament.

THEY who do pretend aright to that supposed Promise, put the right into the
hands of their Representatives, whom they choose to serve for them in this
Parliament, who have passed, and your Majesty consented unto the Act of
Uniformity. If any shall presume to say, that a Right to the benefit of this
Declaration does still remain after this Act passed;

IT tends to Dissolve the very Bonds of Government, and to suppose a disability
in your Majesty, and the Houses of Parliament, to make a Law contrary to any
part of your Majesty's Declaration, though both Houses should advise your
Majesty to it.

WE have also considered the nature of the Indulgence proposed, with reference
to those consequences, which must necessarily attend it.

IT will Establish Schism by a Law, and make the whole Government of the Church
precarious, and the censures of it of no moment, or consideration at all.

IT will no way become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law at
one Session for Uniformity, and at the next Session (the reasons of Uniformity
continuing still the same) to pass another Law to frustrate, or weaken the
execution of it.

IT will expose your Majesty to the restless Importunity of every Sect or
Opinion, and of every single person also who shall presume to Dissent from the
Church of England.

IT will be a Cause of increasing Sects and Sectaries, whose Numbers will
weaken the True Protestant Profession so far, that it will at least be
difficult for it to defend it self against them; and which is yet further
considerable, those Numbers which, by being troublesome to the Government find
they can arrive to an Indulgence, will, as their Numbers increase, be yet more
troublesome, that so at length they may arrive to a general Tolleration, which
your Majesty has declared against; and in time, some prevalent Sect, will at
last contend for an Establishment, which for ought can be foreseen, may end in
Popery.

IT is a thing altogether without Precedent; and will take away all means of
Convicting Recusants, and be inconsistent with the Method and Proceedings of
the Laws of England.

LASTLY, it is humbly conceived, that the Indulgence proposed, will be so far
from tending to the Peace of the Kingdom, that it is rather likely to occasion
great disturbance. And, on the contrary, the asserting of the Laws, and the
Religion Established, according to the Act of Uniformity, is the most probable
means to produce a Settled Peace and Obedience throughout your Kingdom; because
the variety of Professions in Religion, when openly indulged, does directly
distinguish Men into Parties, and vvithall gives them opportunity to count
their Numbers; which considering the Animosities, that out of a Religious
Pride, will be kept on foot by the several Factions, does tend directly and
inevitably to open disturbance; nor can your Majesty have any security that the
Doctrine or Worship of the several Factions, which are all governed by a
several Rule, shall be consistent with the Peace of your Kingdom.

These Reasons were too powerful for his Majesty not to be 65. These Reasons
o'repowred the King so, that He yielded to them, and He hoped that the Truly
Religious and Peaceable would soon do so too.
overcome by them, and therefore he yielded to their force and prevalency; and
doubted not but in a little while, The Truly Religious, and the Peaceable,
would likewise be brought over to a submissive Acquiescence, and a dutiful
compliance with them; and that their minds would be better composed, and the
Peace of the Church Established: And though he was verily persuaded, That the
great Piety and Devotion, the Moderation, Wisdom, Charity and Hospitality of
the Bishops would in a short time recover the Weak and the Misled to 66. And
that by the Bishops Care and Example the Weak would be brought over to their
Primitive Temper of Obedience to Laws and Government.
their Primitive Temper of a cheerful Obedience and Submission to Laws and
Government; and so to be the best Neighbors, and the best Friends, and the
best Subjects of the World; yet was he not also insensible, that the
forwardness and pride of some might not be yet enough subdued; The Humors and
Spirits of such Men being too rough and boisterous, and therefore was willing
that there should be prepared sharper Laws and Penalties, to contend with those
Refractory Persons, and to break that stuborness which would not bend to
gentler 67. That those who would not, must feel the weight of sharper Laws.
Applications; and it is great reason, that they upon whom Clemency cannot
prevail, should feel that severity they have provoked: but still the Execution
of those sharp Laws depends upon the Wisdom of the King, who is the most
discerning, 68. But yet the Execution of those Laws depended on the King who
was merciful, and of a tender conscience himself.
generous and merciful Prince in the world, and of so excellent a Nature, and
so tender a Conscience himself, that he has the highest compassion for all
Errors of that kind, (as before is said) But his constant zeal for the Church
has been visible throughout the whole course of his Reign: scarce can he admit
a Speech to come from him, unless it has in it some 69. His constant zeal the
Church went above all things.
earnest request that his Parliament would take care of the Protestant
Religion; That they would see to secure the Church of England; and to keep that
up in all its just and Ancient Rights.

THIS Zeal of his for the Church, after the Dreadful Conflagration of his great
City of London, made the King so earnest with them soon after to get up some of
their Churches Reedified, that so the Service of God in the public Worship
might be performed; and that we might there mourn for those our grievous sins
which was the cause of Gods so heavy a judgment upon us; These are his words,
We do heartily recommend it to the Charity and Magnanimity of all well-disposed
Persons; 70. How instant the King was to have Churches Rebuilt after the Fire
of London, that some might have public places to worship and serve God in.
and we heartily pray unto Almighty God, that he would infuse into the hearts
of Men speedily to endeavor by degrees to Reedifie some of those many Churches
which in this Lamentable Fire have been burnt down and defaced, that so men may
have those public places of God's Worship to resort to, to humble themselves
together before him upon this his heavy dipsleasure; and join in their Devotion
for his future mercy and blessing upon us; and as soon as we shall be informed
71. The King invites his People to it by the promise not only of his assistance
and direction, but of his Bounty too.
any readiness to begin such a good work; we shall not only give our assistance
and direction for the Model of it, and freeing it from Buildings at so near a
distance, but shall encourage it by our own Bounty, and all other ways we shall
be desired. Is not this sufficiently expressive of his zeal for upholding the
True Religion? What, after this astonishing Judgment of Fire upon the
Metropolitan City of this Kingdom, was the King's first care, ought to have
been that of us all, to endeavor to have God worshipped in his Sanctuary; for
this makes up the Beauty of Holiness, and declares our great desires for, what
we all do at least outwardly profess to believe, the Communion of Saints.

NOR did his Majesty rest here; his zeal for the Church, was his zeal for the
service of it; and he was resolved that nothing justly belonging to it should
be lost: Says He, Our Care and Endeavors for the Preservation 72. His Majesty
has all along shew^d his care to preserve the Rights and Interests of the
Church.
of the Rights and Interests His Majesty's Declaration to all his Loving
Subjects, March, 15. 1671. page 3. 4.
of the Church, have been sufficiently manifested to the World, by the whole
course of our Government, since our happy Restoration, and by the many, and
frequent ways of Coercion that we have used for reducing all erring or
dissenting persons, and for composing the unhappy differences in matters of
Religion, which we found among our Subjects upon our Return; but it being
evident by the sad experience of twelve years, that there is very little 73. By
the way, the Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, is not only inherent in
the King, but is Recognized so by diverse Acts of Parliament.
Fruit of all those forcible Courses; We think our Self obliged to make use of
that Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical Matters, which is not only inherent in us,
but has been declared and recognized to be so by several Statutes and Acts of
Parliaments: and therefore we do now accordingly Isiue this our Declaration, as
well for the quieting the minds of our good Subjects in these Points, for
inviting Srangers in this Conjuncture, to come and 74. Therefore to quietminds,
invite strangers to live here, and to encourage Trade; He is now by himself,
with the advice of his Privy Council resolved to declare.
live under us; and for the better encouragement of all to a cheerful following
of their Trade and Callings, from whence we hope by the blessing of God, to
have many good and happy advantages to our Government, as also for preventing
for the future, the danger that might otherwise arise from private Meetings,
and seditious Conventicles.

AND In the first place we declare our express resolution, 75. That the Church
shall be kept entire in its Doctrine Discipline and Government.
meaning and intention, to be, That the Church of England be preserved, and
remain entire in its Doctrine, Discipline and Government, as now it stands
Established by Law; and that this be taken to be, as it is, the Basis, Rule,
and Standard of the general and public worship of God; and that the Orthodox,
Conformable Clergy do 76. Clergy to receive their just Revenues.
receive and enjoy the Revenues belonging thereunto; and that no person, though
of a different Opinion and Persuasion shall be exempt from paying his Tithes,
or other Dues whatsoever. And further we declare, that no person 77. None
exempt from paying Tithes
shall be capable of holding any Benefice, Living, or Ecclesiastical Dignity or
Preferment of any kind in this 78. None capable of any Church Preferments, but
those that are exactly conformable.
our Kingdom of England, who is not exactly conformable. page 5.


BUT notwithstanding all this great Reverence to, and Care 79. He has a tender
regard likewise of those that dissent from the Church, provided they will live
peaceably and orderly.
of the Church of England, yet you shall see what a tender regard his Majesty
has to those too that cannot come up to a thorough compliance with the Church;
for his eyes are over all, and his thoughts and heart extend to all his
Subjects, as long as they will keep themselves within the due bounds of an
honest peaceableness, and an orderly subjection.

WE do in the next place, says he, declare our will and pleasue to be, that
the execution of all, and all manner of penal Laws in Matters Ecclesiastical,
against 80. All Penal Laws against all Nonconformists hereby suspended.
whatsoever sort of Nonconformists or Recusants, be immediately suspended, and
they are hereby suspended. And all Judges, Judges of Assize, and Jail-deliver,
Sherifs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailifs, and other Officers whatsoever,
whether Ec-clesiastical or Civil, are to take notice of it, and pay due
Obedience thereunto. page 6.


AND that there may be no pretense for any of our 81. A sufficient number of
public places to be allowed for Nonconformists to meet in
Subjects to continue their illegal Meetings and Conventicles: We do declare
that we shall from time to time allow a sufficient number of places as they
shall be desired, in all parts of this our Kingdom, for the use of such as do
not conform to the Church of England, to meet and assemble in, inorder to their
public worship and devotion; which places shall be open and free to all
persons. page 6.


BUT to prevent such disorders and inconveniences, as 82. But none to meet in
any place until such place be allowed, and the Teacher approved of.
may happen by this our indulgence, if not duly regulated, and that they may
be the better protected by the Civil Magistrate; Our express will and pleasure
is, that none of our Subjects do presume to meet in any place, until such place
be allowed, and the Teacher of that Congregation be approved by us. page 7.


AND lest any should apprehend that this Restriction 83. This allowance of
places and approbation of Teachers to extend to all sorts of Nonconformists but
the Papists
should make our said allowance and approbation difficult to be obtained: We do
further declare, that this our indulgence as to the allowance of the public
places of worship, and approbation of the Teachers, shall extend to all sorts
of Nonconformists and Recusants, except the Recusants of the Roman Catholic
Religion, etc. of which more an^n in its due place. page 7.


AND now what methinks every one should readily agree to, and be very careful
punctually to observe this injunction with which his Majesty is pleased to
conclude; says He, If after this our Clemency and Indulgence, any of our
Subjects shall presume to abuse this Liberty, and shall 84. Now none must abuse
this Liberty, by seditiously, or reflectingly preaching against the Eastblished
Church.
preach seditiously, or to the derogation of the Doctrine, Discipline, or
Government of the Established Church, or shall meet in places not allowed by
us: We do hereby give them warning, and declare, we will proceed against them
with all imaginable severity; and We will let them see we can be as severe to
punish such Offenders, when so justly provoked, as we are indulgent to truly
tender Consciences.

BUT to return, where most the King's heart is set, I mean to the Church of
England, you shall hear what he says to his House of Commons of it. Gentlemen,
says he, I hear you are zealous for the Church, and very 85. House of Commons
zealous for the Church.
solicitous, and even jealous that there His Speech to the House of Commons at
the Banqueting House, March 1. 1661. page 7, 8.
is not expedition enough used in that Affair. I thank you for it, since I
presume it proceeds from a good Root of Piety and Devotion; but I must tell
you, I have 86. The King suspected to be a Presbyterian.
the worst luck in the world, if, after all the Reproaches of being a Papist,
whilst I was abroad, I am suspected of being a Presbyterian now I am come 87
The King as zealous for the Church, as any of his House of Commons, and as much
in love with the Common Prayer Book.
home: I know you will not take it unkindly, if I tell you, that I am as
zealous for the Church of England as any of you can be, and am enough acqainted
with the Enemies of it, on all sides; that I am as much in love with the Book
of Common Prayer as you can wish, and have prejudice enough to those who do not
love it; 88. Desires to see an Uniformity settled and they may rely upon it,
that he will expedite it with all convenient speed.
who, I hope in time, will be better informed and change their minds; and you
may be confident, I do as much desire to see an Uniformity settled, as any
amongst you. I pray trust me in that Affair, I promise you to hasten the
dispatch of it with all convenient speed; you may rely upon me in it.

I have transmitted the Book of Common Prayer with those Alterations and
Additions, which have been presented to me by the Convocation, to the House of
Peers, with my approbation, that the Act of Uniformity may relate to it; so
that I presume it will be shortly dispatched there: and 89. It requires great
prudence and discretion, no passion and precipitation.
when we have done all we can, the well-setling that Affair will require great
prudence and discretion, and the absence of all passion and precipitation. You
see how his Majesty promised, that he would give up all his endeavors to
compose the unhappy differences in matters of Religion, and to restore the
Languishing Church to Peace, Unity and Order: Constantine himself hardly spent
so much of 90. How mightily his Majesty has laid out himself to restore the
Church to peace, unity and order.
his own time in private and public conferences to that purpose; His Majesty
Lord Chancellors Speech to both Houses of Parliament, on Saturday December. 29
1660. The Day of their Dissolution, page 8.
in private Conferred with the Learned Men, and heard all that could be said
upon several Opinions and Interests apart; and then in the Presence 91.
Constantine himself scarce spent so much time about it.
of both Parties, himself moderating in the Debates, (and less care and
diligence, and authority would not have done the work.) And if after all this,
his Majesty does not reap 93. If after all some will keep up old Breaches, they
must be reduced by Law to the obedience of the Law.
the full Harvest he expected from those Condescentions; if some men by their
Writing, and by their Preachings endeavor to continue the old Breaches, etc. I
shall say no more, than that I hope their want of modesty and obedience will
cause them to be disclaimed by all pious and peaceable men, who cannot but be
well contented to see them reduced by Law, to the obedience they owe to Law

ON Tuesday, April 5. 1664. as if his Parliament were somewhat doubtful of it;
The King when he came then to give his Royal Assent to two Bills, breaks out
into these words to them, I do assure you upon my word, and I pray believe 9^.
The King has no other thoughts or designs in his heart, but to support the
Religion Established, and make us happy by it.
me, That I have no other thoughts or designs in my heart, but to make you all
happy in the support of the Religion and Laws Established. page 4. The Late
King lost his Life in the defense of the Reformed Religion; and his present
Majesty (whom God Almighty long continue among us) has manifested his
affection to the Church of England, as by Law Established, in despite of all
calumnies, and through extreme difficulties, with the highest acts of Solemnity
imaginable.

WHEN his Majesty met his both Houses of Parliament in 67. how instant was he
to have them take it into their considerate thoughts, how to settle Religion
more to the quieting of his Peoples minds, and His Majesty's Speech to both
Houses, Monday 10 Feb. 1667. page 4.
for the Establishment of Unity and Concord among them. Says he, one thing
more I hold my self obliged to recommend unto you at this 94. And therefore
reminds his Parliament that they would think of some course to beget a better
union among his Protestant Subjects as being the best way to support the
Government.
present; which is, that you would seriously think of some course to beget a
better union and composure in the minds of my Protestant Subjects, in matters
of Religion; whereby they may be induced, not only to submit quietly to the
Government, but also cheerfully give their assistance to the support of it.

WHEN the King sent his Grace the then Earl of Lauderdail, his Majesty's High
Commissioner for the Parliament of Scotland: You shall hear what he said to
them concerning his Majesty's 95. The Kings constant and unalterable zeal to
maintain and defend the True Reformed Protestant Religion in Scotland.
Resolution to maintain the True Protestant Religion there; It was by command
from his Royal Master, to say in his Name at the opening Earl of Lauderdail 's
Speech to the Parliament of Scotland, Oct. 19. 1669. page 3. 4.
of that his Parlirment: And first, says he, I am to assure you of his
Majesty's constant and unalterable zeal for maintaining and defending the True
Reformed Protestant Religion in this 96. That ^e will maintain and defend the
autient Government of it, being most suitable to Monarchy.
his Kingdom, for which he will constantly lay out his whole power and
authority; as also for discouraging and punishing all Atheism and Prophanities,
and all that is contrary to true Religion and Godliness. I am further
particularly commanded to assure you, that with no less zeal and constancy he
will maintain and defend the Ancient Government by Archbishops 97. Episcopal
Government the most Primitive and Apostolic.
and Bishops as now it is happily settled as a sure Fence for the True Refromed
Protestant Religion, a Government most suitable to Monarchy; and well may I
call it Ancient, for whoever 98. The King will refend the persons of the
Archbishops, and Bishops, and all the Orthodox Clergy in their Functions.
will look into Antiquity, shall find Episcopal Government has continued in
the whole Catholic Church, both East and West, even from the most Primitive
and Apostolic Times; and a little after in the said 4 page after he had just
touched upon the sad Calamities and Confusions of the Late Times, he says
farther, in his Majesty's Name, and by his special Command, I do assure you, he
will employ his utmost power in the maintenance 99. Will not endure those
numerous Conventicles that tend to Sedition and Schism.
of that Government, and will protect the persons of my Lords the Archbishops,
and Bishops, and of the Loyal Orthodox, and Peaceable Clergy in the exercise of
their Functions: he will not endure those numerous and unlawful Conventicles
100. The King of late has set up some that were peaceable men, in vacant
Churches, though they came not up to the Rules Established; They should
therefore carry themselves worthy of that high favor.
which tend to Sedition and Schism, which have been too frequent in some few
Shires of this Kingdom: Good Laws have been made, and in prosecution of those
Laws, the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council have shown their care for
suppressing those Seditious Assemblies; yea, and of late his Majesty has
graciously indulged the planting of some who were esteened peaceable men in
vacant Churches (though they came not up to the Rules Established;) it will be
expected that they walk worthy of so great a favor; but if after this removal
of the very pretense of unlawful Conventicles any Factious People shall in
contempt of his Majesty's Laws, yea, 101. But if any factious people in
contempt of his Majesty's Laws shall afterward Assemble; They must ^o brought
to condign punishment.
and of his Indulgence also, seditiously assemble themselves under pretense of
Religious Worship, his Majesty does require his Parliament, and all in
Authority under him, vigorously to suppress such Meetings, and to bring the
pretended Preachers, and Ringleaders of such unlawful Assemblies to condign
and exemplary punishment.

AGAIN his Majesty's Commissioners Speech to the Parliament of Scotland, that
were met at Edinburgh, 102. The King is unalterable in his zeal to maintain the
True Reformed Protestant Religion, and Government by Archbishops and Bishops.
mentioning Religion, has these words, I July 28. 70. p. 5, 6, 7.
need not repeat the assurances of his Majesty's constant and unalterable
zeal, for maintaining and defending the true Reformed Protestant Religion in
this his Kingdom, and that with no less zeal and constancy, he will maintain
the Ancient Government by Archbishops, and Bishops, now Happily Restored and
Established here; for, in 203. And will not endure those numerous Conventicles
that tend to Sedition and Schism.
all the exercises of his Royal Authority, he does daily give full and
undeniable testimonies thereof.

AT the opening of the first Session of this Parliament, I told you in his
Majesty's Name, that he would not endure those numerous and unlawful
Conventicles, that tend to Sedition 104. But will have them suppressed, and the
most guilty brought to punishment.
and Schism, which had been too frequent in some Shires of this Kingdom; and
the King did then require you, and all in Authority under him, vigorously to
suppress such Meetings; and to bring the most guilty to condign punishment. In
prosecution of which, the Lords of the Privy Council 105. Field Conventicles
look more like rendezvouzes for Rebellion than any thing for Religion.
have done their duty carefully, though not with that success which they
desired: for his Majesty has been informed that this Summer, diverse Seditious
and numerous Conventicles have been kept, even in the open fields which look
liker endeavors to rendezvous for Rebellion, than any pretense 106. Because it
was in contempt of the Kings Authority, and of the Parliament, which they knew
so soon would Assemble.
of Religious Worship; and that in high contempt of his Majesty's Authority,
and of this Parliament, which they well-knew was so soon to Assemble. Yea, such
has been the Insolent Barbarity of that incorrigible sort of Non-Conformists,
that in some places the Houses of Orthodox, and Peaceable Ministers have been
Robbed, their persons and Families wounded, and they threatened to be murdered,
107. And some of those Non-conformists robbed the Conformable Ministers houses,
wounded the Parsons, and threatened to kill them if they stayed in their
Churches.
if they stay at their Churches.

THEREFORE His Majesty does most seriously recommend 108. Therefore good reason
why the King recommends them to make good Laws, and vigorously to prosecute
them.
it to your special care. by good Laws, and vigorous prosecution of them, to
curb, punish and prevent those Seditious Conventicles; to cure the withdrawing
of Protestants from their Paroch Churches, and the Ordinances there, which is
the occasion of those Conventicles, and cannot 109. For this cannot be
conscience, but de^^gn to perpetuate Faction and Schism.
be pretended for conscience, but must be esteemed only out of design, to
perpetuate Faction and Schism, (seeing the Form of Worship here is the same
which has been since the Reformation) as also to punish Exemplarly those
Barbarous Robberies and Assassinates, committed against honest and peaceable
Ministers; and generally to provide what you shall think necessary for
continuing the peace of the Kingdom. The Work will be easy, and I doubt not
your care in it. The Kingdom generally is Loyal, Peaceable and Dutiful; it is
but 110. The Kingdom generally is Loyal, Peaceable, and Dutiful.
a small part of it which is tainted with such principles and practices. page 7.


AND again, further in the year 1672. His Majesty's High Commissioner for his
Kingdom of Scotland, at the opening of that Session of Parliament, continues
the same Language to them, and assures them his Majesty's Resolution is not in
the least altered; says he, I am particularly commanded to renew again to you
His Grace the Duke of Lauderdail 's Speech, June 12. 1672. to the Parliament of
Scotland, page 12.
111. The Kings Resolution continues the same still for the Government of the
Church by Archbishops, and Bishops and for suppressing of Conventicles,
preventing the growth of Schism, and securing the peace of the Church.
the assurances of his Majesty's most constant continuance in his unalterable
resolutions, to maintain the True Reformed Protestant Religion, and the
Government of this Church, by Archbishops, and Bishops, whatever Seditious and
Disaffected Persons may suggest to the contrary; and I am fully empowered to all
such further Acts, as you shall judge convenient, for the quieting the minds of
peaceable people, and for curbing and punishing Seditious Conventicles, for
preventing the increase of Schism, and by all good means securing the Peace of
the Church.

BY this you may see, that his Majesty was not only resolved to settle
Episcopacy in this his Kingdom, but his pious intentions were all along
visible, firmly to Establish it throughout all his Dominions.

BUT to return to our selves here of England; when the House of Commons
Presented the Bill to his Majesty, to Repeal that Law, which was made in 17
Car. whereby the Bishops were Excluded the House; how great was the King's joy,
and thankfulness to them at the Receipt of it! You shall hear both their
Speeches of this Matter.

AND first, to begin with the Speaker's when he Presented the Bill, says he,
Your Majesty's Royal Grandfather was often wont Sir Edward Turner 's Speech
delivered on Tuesday July 30. 1661. at their Adjournment, page 4, 5.
to say, no Bishop, no King; we found 112. No Bishop, no King, found true in
the late times of confusion.
his words true, for after they were put out, the Fever still increasing in
another Fit; The Temporal Lords followed, and then the King himself: nor did
the humor rest there, but in the Round, The House of Commons was first
Garbled, and then turned out of their doors.

IT is no wonder when a Sword is put into a mad Man's hand, to see him cut off
Limb by Limb, and then to kill himself.

WHEN there is a great Breach of the Sea upon the low Grounds, by the violence
of the Torrent, the Rivers of sweet Waters are often turned aside, and the Salt
Waters make themselves a Channel; but when the Breach is made up, good Husbands
drain their Lands again, and restore the Ancient Sewers.

THANKS be to God the Flood is gone off the Face of this Island; our Turtle
Dove has found good footing; Your Majesty is Happily Restored to the
Government; The Temporal Lords and Commons are restored to sit in Parliament,
and shall the Church alone now suffer?

Sit Ecclesia Anglicana libera, and habeat libertates suas illaesas. Magna
Charta.
IN order to this great work, the Commons have prepared 113, A Bill brought by
the Commons to Repeal the Act f^^ exclusion of the Bishops from sitting in the
House.
a Bill to repeal that Law, was made in 17. Car, whereby the Bishops were
excluded this House: These Noble Lords have all agreed; and now we beg your
Majesty will give it life; speak but the word, Great Sir, and your Servants yet
shall live.

TO which his Majesty presently was pleased to return this 114. The great
thanks the King gives them for the Repeal of that Act, as being an unhappy Act
in an unhappy time.
most gracious Answer; I thank you with all my heart, indeed as much as I can
The King's Speech to both Houses, July, 30. 1661. page 4, 5.
do for any thing, for the Repeal of that Act which excluded the Bishops from
sitting in Parliament: it was an unhappy Act in an unhappy time, passed with
many unhappy circumstances, and attended with miserable events; and therefore I
115. It has restored Parliaments to their Primitive Institutions.
do again thank you for repealing it: You have thereby restored Parliaments to
their Primitive Institutions.

AND his Majesty was so greatly pleased with this Act of Repeal, that he found
it, as it were impossible for him to forbear coming to his House of Lords, even
the very first day of their meeting after the Adjournment; and what was it for?
you shall immediately know from his own words: I know the Visit, says he, I
make you this day, is not ne necessary, is not of course; yet if there were no
more in 16. How the King visits them the first day of their next Meeting to
give them thanks again, and how he rejoices to see the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and House of Commons met together, etc.
it, it would not be strange, that I come to see what You and I have so long
desired to see, The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of England
met together to consult for the peace and safety of Church and State, by which
Parliaments The King's Speech to both Houses, on Wednesday November. 20. 1661.
page 1.
are restored to their Primitive Luster and Integrity: I do heartily
congratulate with you for this day.

THIS surely was a signal evidence of his true love to the Church, his hearty
joy to behold the great Supporters and Pillars of it, restored to their
rightful Seats in Parliament. And this both the King and the Parliament knew
was one ready way to restore to them their due honor and reverence from the
People. If the Authority of the Church should not carefully be upheld, how
quickly should we come to have no Church at all? and into what sad Calamities
should we lapse by such an abandonment, which in some sense but little differs
from a Persecution.

LET us suppose that possible, which the piety and goodness of the Kng has
made next to impossible; says the 117. What would become of the Church if her
Authority were despiled?
Lord Keeper in his Speech to both Houses of Parliament, but let it be for once
supposed, Lord Keepers Speech April, 13. 1675. page 12, 13.
that the Church of England were forsaken, her Authority made insignificant,
her Government precarious; suppose her disarmed of all those Laws by which she
is guarded, denied all Aid from the Civil Magistrate, and that none were
obliged to obey her commands, but those that have a mind to it; would not this
turn a National Church into nothing else but a Tolerated Sect, or Party in the
Nation? Would it not take away all appearance of Establishment from it? would
it not drive the Church into the Wilderness again, where she should be sure to
find her self encompassed with all sorts of Enemies, if at least she should
find her self at all in the midst of so many Tolerations.?

THEREFORE is it not most fitting, that a strict Rule should be observed, and
that we could have the Law to be that Rule, and not to leave every Man to be a
Law and Rule unto himself?

WELL, then may the King say to his Parliament, (what 118. His Majesty's
assurance, that he will preserve the True Reformed Protestant Religion, and the
Church as now established.
he has said since in almost every one of his Speeches to them;)

I will conclude with this assurance to you, that I will preserve the True His
Majesty's Speech to both Houses, Feb. 5. 16672. page 4.
Reformed Protestant Religion, and the Church as it is now Established in this
Kingdom; and in the whole course of my indulgence to Dissenters. I do not
intend that it shall any ways prejudice the Church, but I will support its
Rights, and it in its full power.

THE Church of England, and all good Protestants, (says 119. The Church and all
good Protestants have reason to rejoice in this their Defendour.
the Lord Chancellor to this Speech of the King, in his own, page 12, 13.) have
reason to rejoice in such a Head, and such a Defendour. His Majesty does
declare his care, and concerns for the Church, and will maintain them in all
their Rights and Privileges, equal, if not beyond any of his Predecessors; He
was born and bred up in it: It was that his Father died for; 120. Good reasons
to induce his Majesty to it.
We all know how great temptations and offers he resisted abroad, when he was
in his lowest condition: and he thinks it the honor of his Reign, that he has
been the Restorer of 121. He hopes to bring it into greater luster than ever
yet it has been
the Church: It Is that he will ever maintain, and hopes to leave to posterity
in greater luster, and upon surer grounds than our Ancestors ever saw it; but
his Majesty is not convinced, That violent ways are the interest of Religion,
or the Church. 122. violent ways not conducing to it.


AND after his Majesty's conclusion of his Speech, let me 123. Let us then all
bless God and the King.
conclude, nay, let us all conclude with blessing God and the King. Let us
bless God, that he Idem. page 14. 15.
has given us such a King to be the Repairer of our Breaches both in Church
and State. and the Restorer of our paths to dwell in.

LET us bless the King for taking away all our fears, and 124. That God has
given us such a King who makes the Church of England his great care.
leaving no room for jealousies: for those assurances and promises he has made
us. Let us bless God and the King, that our Religion is safe; that the Church
of England is the care of our Prince. what more has a good English Man to ask,
but that this King may long Reign. 125. Long therefore should we pray that this
King may Reign.


WHEN He met his Parliament about eight months after: you shall see the King
keeps close to the same Text, as being that which he can never find in his
heart to forget; and therefore he may very well begin thus, I Ihope need not
use many words to persuade you that I am steady in maintaining all the
professions and promises I have 126. The King steady to all his professions and
promises.
made you concerning Religion: King's Speech to both Houses. Monday, October. 27.
73. page 4.
and I shall be very ready to give you fresh instances of my zeal for 127. Is
ready to give fresh inuances of it.
preserving the Established Religion and Laws, as often as any occasion shall
require.

BY this you cannot but take notice, that, as to Religion, 128. His Majesty's
heart, with those of his people.
His Majesty's heart is with the hearts of his people, perfectly with their
hearts. Lord Chancellors Speech to the same, page 9.
129. If therefore any thing be wanting to secure Religion, all reasonable
proposals shall be kindly received.


AND therefore, about three months after that, says the King again to his
Parliament, If there be any thing else which you think King's Speech January 7.
73. page 4.
wanting to secure Religion; there is nothing which you shall reasonably
propose but I shall be ready to receive it. One would wonder with ones self
what can be expected more from a Prince to be said, than such a hearty and
generous Declaration as this. It is delivered with so obliging, and so
satisfactory an Accent, that he whose affections are not raised by that
discourse; he who cannot acquiesce in the fullness of this Lord Keepers Speech
to the same, page 7
130. He who cannot acquiesce in this assurance, will never be prevailed upon
by any other expedient.
assurance, he whose heart is not Established by it in such a belief as may
entirely dispose him to the service of the Crown, will hardly be recovered to a
better disposition by any other expedient.

IS not this an ample demonstration of his willingness to repair the Hedge
about our Vineyard, and to make it a Fence indeed against all those who are
Enemies to the planing of it? Who would be glad to see it trodden Id page 8.
down, or rooted up; and study how to sapp and undermine our very Foundations?

THE King calls his Parliament to examine, and concur with 131. The King calls
his Parliament to examine and to concur with him in the best ways to preserve
the Protestant Religion.
him in the best expedients, for the Preservation of the Protestant Religion,
The Lord Keeper's Speech to both Houses, April 13. 1675. page 8.
and for securing the Establishment of it by a due execution of the Laws.

HE gives them leave to study and contrive their own assurance, and if they
think they want any further security, if any 132. And will be persuaded by them
in all reasonable things.
thing has escaped his Majesty's care, who meditates nothing more than The
Lord Keeper's Speech to both Houses, January 7. 73. page 10.
our preservation: you see they have free leave to make any reasonable
proposition, 133. This surely should satisfy all our wi^^es.
and his gracious promise that he will receive it.

THIS one would think were a satisfaction equal to all our wishes; and that
there wanted no more to the improvement of this happiness, but the wisdom of
the Id ibid.
Parliament to use these advantages with a due moderation.

AND still his Majesty seems to be dissatisfied with himself, and that he has
not yet done enough for the interest of Religion; no, he must be further
solicitous and importunate; his chief design of Assembling his Parliament, is
again to refresh their memories with it; and as he thinks it can never be too
much in his thoughts, so likewise it can never be too often repeated 134. The
Kings chief end in calling the Parliament to think what yet may be wanting to
secure Religion.
by him.

THE principal end, says he, of my calling you now, is to know what you His
Majesty's Speech April 13. 1675. page 3, 4.
think may be yet wanting to the security of Religion, and to give my self the
satisfaction of having used the utmost of my endeavors 135. And will leave
nothing undone to show his Zeal for it.
to procure and settle a right and lasting understanding between us. I will
leave nothing undone, that may show the world my zeal to the Protestant
Religion, as it is established in the Church of England, from which I will
never depart.

AND may he not then very justly begin his next Speech to his Parliament after
this manner, and say? I think I have given sufficient evidence to the World,
that I have not 136. The King not wanting in his endeavors to establish our
Religion, and our property.
been wanting on my part in my endeavors to procure the full satisfaction of
Kings Speech. June 9. 1675. page 3.
all my Subjects, in the matters of both Religion and property. I have not only
invited you to those considerations at our first meeting, but I have been
careful through this whole Session, that no concern of my own should divert you
from it.

WELL, the next Speech of his Majesty to them, is still to provide what they
shall think fitting to make us all safe in our Religion. And particularly,
says he, 137. It Is his particular recommendation to his Parliament to secure
the Protestant Religion.
I recommend to you, whatever may Wednes. Octo. 13. 1675. The Kings Speech. p.
4.
tend to the security of the Protestant Religion as it is now established in
the Church of England.

TO that you cannot but plainly take notice, that his Majesty has so often
recommended to his Parliament the Considerations of Religion, so very often
desired them to assist him in his care and protection of it, Lord Keepers
Speech to the same. p. 6.
that the defender of the Faith is become 138. The Defender of the faith is the
Advocate for it.
the Advocate for it too, and has left all those without excuse who still
remain under any kind of doubts or fear.

AGAIN does that noble and eloquent Lord thus say, speaking to both Houses of
Parliament, in page 8. and 9.

WOULD you raise the due estimation and reverence of the Church of England to
its just height? Would you provide for the safety and establishment of it?

ALL your Petitions of this kind will be grateful to the King, and you may with
ease effect this, and much more which your great wisdoms will suggest to you.

WHEN the King met his Parliament after (as he himself is there pleased to call
it) a long Prorogation, he still keeps up the same language to them, as you
have heard him speak all along. 139. The King still putting Parliament in mind
to make his people happy.
I am now resolved, says he, to let the world see that it shall not be my
fault, if The Kings Speech to both Houses, Feb. 15. 1679. page 1, and 2.
they be not happy by your Consultations in Parliament.

AND how shall the world see this? why, says he, in the 140. By securing the
Protestant Religion to them.
very next words, For I declare my self very plainly to you, that I come
prepared to give you all the satisfaction and security in the great concerns of
the Protestant Religion as it is established in the Church of England, that
shall reasonably be asked, or can consist with Christian prudence.

TO be sure, his Majesty, when he said this, was sufficiently sensible of what
the Lord Chancellor at the same time had in command to say, viz. that

The Peace of the Church is harder to preserve than the 141. For the Peace of
the Church is harder to be preserved than that of the State.
peace of the State; for they who desire Innovations in the State, most
commonly Lord Chancellors Speech to the same. p. 6.
begin the attempt upon the Church.

AND by this means it comes to pass, that the peace of 142. Hence it is so often
disturbed by two sorts of persons, by mistaken souls, and by malicious
designing men.
the Church is so often disturbed, not only by these poor mistaken souls, who
deserve to be pitied, but by malicious and designing men, who deserve to be
punished. And while things continue in this State, it cannot be avoided but that
the Laws which are necessary to restrain the malicious, must and will sometimes
disquiet and wound those that are weak.

Yet the Phanaticks, Sectaries, and Nonconformists, as the 143. How Phanaticks
no friends to the established Government.
Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons then said, as they differ in their
shapes and species, accordingly are more or less dangerous; but in this they
all agree, they are no friends to the established Sir Edward Turnors Speech
Tuesday, May 14. 1664. page 9.
Government either in Church or State. And if the old Rule hold true, Qui
Ecclesiae contradicit, non est pacificus, we have great reason to prevent 144.
Therefore was the Bill against Conventicles.
their growth, and to punish their practice. Therefore was the Bill then
prepared against their frequenting of Conventicles, the Seed-plots and
Nurseries of their Opinions, under pretense of Religious Worship.

BUT yet by such Bill no man is hindered the use of his own Judgment, in the
exercise of Religion, by himself or in his own Family, or in the presence of
145. But by it none are hindered the use of their own Judgment in their
families.
four strangers; but because the peace Sir Edward Turnors Speech to the King,
Monday, April 11. 1670. Upon the Parliaments adjournment. p. 5.
of the Nation may be endangered by more populous meetings, contrary to the
Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, therefore from a prudent
prospect of such a destructive inconvenience to the weal of the State, did the
Parliament prepare such a Cautionary prevention.

AND yet for all this their great care and wisdom, it is somewhat an unpleasant
observation, to see how slow many inferior Magistrates are in the 146. How
slow the inferior Officers are in this, to discharge their duty.
discharge of this part of their duty, Lord Keepers Speech to both Houses,
April 13. 75. p. 11, 12.
which refers to the safety of the Church against the Enemies on both sides of
it, the Papists and the Dissenters. For this is that which opens men's mouths
to object against the Laws themselves: This is that which encourages offenders
to dispute that 147. This encourages Offenders to dispute Authority, and to
judge the Laws.
Authority which they should obey, and to judge those Laws by which they ought
to be judged. They have found a way to make, even Justice it self criminal, by
giving it a hard name, and calling it persecution.

IT is no doubt a duty which we owe to God and to our 148. It is the duty of us
all to improve the opportunities God gives us to fence our Vineyard.
selves, to the present Age, and to posterity, to improve the opportunities God
gives us of fencing Lord Chan. Speech Thursd. May 23. 1668. p. 13, 14.
our Vineyard, and making the hedge about it as strong as we can. And therefore
goes the Lord Chancellor on, saying, The King has commanded me to tell you (i.
e, the Parliament) that he is ready to concur with you in any thing of this
kind, which shall be found wanting, and which the Christian Prudence and
Justice of a Parliament can propose as expedient.

LET not any then give themselves up to complain of the danger 149. Let none
complain of the dangers of Religion.
of Religion, for fear lest they should, and that too justly too, be thought to
complain only for complaining sake. id ibid.
FOR what can possibly be said to satisfy any people, as to 150. What more can
be said to satisfy the people of the security of the Protestant Religion, than
what the King has said to his Parliament.
the security of the Protestant Religion, than what the King said to his
Parliament, When he gave them all his most hearty thanks for the great and
extraordinary care they had already taken, and still did continue to show, for
the safety and preservation of his Royal Person in these times of danger.

NOR says he, do I think it enough to give you my thanks only, but I hold my
self obliged to let you see withal, that I do as much study your preservation
too, as I can possibly; and that I am as ready to join with you in all the ways
and means that 151. Our own hearts cannot with for more than what he is ready to
do for us that way.
may establish a firm security of the The Kings Speech to both Houses, Nov. 9.
78. p. 3, 4.
Protestant Religion, as your own hearts can wish.

AND this not only during my time (of which I am 152. He would secure it to us
for ever.
sure you have no fear) but in all future ages, even to the end of the world.

HE proceeds in the next Speech to give them a further demonstration of his
Zeal, and he says, I meet you here with the most earnest desire that Man can
have, to unite the minds of all my Subjects, both to me, and to one another,
and I resolve it shall be your faults, if the success be not suitable to my
desires: I have done many great things already in order to that end; as the
Exclusion of the Popish Lords from their Seats in Parliament, 153. He has
excluded the Popish Lords the House.
etc. And above all, I have commanded His Majesty's Speech to both Houses, on
Thursday, March 6. p. 3, 4.
my Brother to absent himself from me, because I would not leave 154. Commanded
his Brother to absent himself.
the most malicious men room to say, I had not removed all causes which could
be pretended to influence me toward Popish Councels.

BESIDES that end of Union which I am at (and which I wish could be extended to
Protestants abroad as well as at home) I purpose by this last step I have made
to discern whether the Protestant Religion, and the peace of the Kingdom be as
truly aimed at by others, as they are really intended by me.

FOR, as he afterward brings it in, in the same Speech, 155. He will defend
the Protestant Religion with his life.
page 7. says he, I do give you this assurance, that I will with my life
defend both the Protestant Religion, and the Laws of this Kingdom.

NOW with a very easy transposition of the Lord Chancellors own words in his
Speech at the same time to both Houses of Parliament, page 10. I may with great
truth say, that if his 156. Sure then his Majesty wants no evidence of his Zeal
for our Religion.
Majesty had wanted any evidence of his Zeal for our Religion, surely this
testimony from his Enemies, who were about to sacrifice him for it, is
sufficient to satisfy the whole World.

For as there neither is, nor has been these fifteen hundred 157. Not a purer
Church than ours these 1500 years.
years, a purer Church than ours, so it is for the sake of this poor Church
alone that the State has been so much disturbed. It is her truth and peace,
her decency and order, which Our Enemies labor to undermine, and pursue with
so restless a malice. Id. Page 14.


WHEN we consider the afflicted condition of the Protestants 158. What the
Protestants abroad suffer is in some measure a weakening of the Protestant
Interest.
abroad, we may be sure that every calamity they suffer, is in some measure a
weakening of the Id. p. 15.
Protestant Interest, and looks as if it were intended to make way for a
general extirpation.

HOW watchful therefore does it become us all to be, that the same evil Spirit
and temper does not get too much ground 159. Let us watch that no ill men do us
harm at home.
among us here at home? how ought we all to use our utmost vigilance and
activity, care and prudence, to prevent those disturbances, which the restless
spirits of ill and unquiet men will be always contriving?

THERE are so many things to do, and so little time to 160. No time to be lost.
do them in, that there ought not to be one minute lost. Id. p. 16.


AND therefore the King makes it his constant care to do 161. The Kings
constant care to do all things to preserve our Religion, and to secure it for
the future.
every thing that may preserve Our Religion, and secure it for the future in
all events; and he there says, he hopes the several particulars Kings Speech
to both Houses, Wednesday, April 30. 1679. p. 4.
he has commanded my Lord Chancellor to mention, will be an evidence that in
all things that concern the public security, he shall not follow Our Zeal, but
lead it.

THAT Royal care which his Majesty has taken for the general quiet and
satisfaction of all his Subjects, is now more evident by this new and fresh
instance of it.

HIS Majesty has considered with himself, Lord Chancellors Speech to the same,
page 5.
that it is not enough that your Religion and Liberty is secure during his own
reign, but he thinks he owes it to his people to do all that in him lies, that
these blessings may be transmitted to your posterity, and so well secured to
them, that no succession in after ages may be able to work the least
alteration.

AND what he there had in command to say to that Parliament, I shall refer you
to the Speech it self, it being too tedious here to insert it all, but shall
conclude this with my Lords own words, page 7.

THUS watchful is the King for all your safeties, and if he could think of any
thing else that you do either want or wish to make you happy, he would make it
his business to effect it for you, and therefore we may tell those who still
contrive the ruin of the Church, the best, and the best reformed Church in the
Christian world; reformed by that Authority, and with those circumstances as a
Reformation ought to be made, that God would not so miraculously have snatched
this Church as a brand out of the fire; would not have raised it from the 162.
And therefore surely God would never have done so much for our Reformed Church
as he has, unless it were a Church very acceptable to him, and which shall
continue for ever.
grave, after he had suffered it to be buried so many years, by the boisterous
hands of profane and sacrilegious persons, under its own rubbidge, to expose
it again to the same rapine, reproach, and Impiety: Lord Chancellours Speech
Dec. 29. 1660. p. 20, 21
That Church which delights its self in being called Catholic, was never so
near expiration, never had such a Resurrection; that such a small pittance of
Meal and Oil, should be sufficient to preserve and nourish the poor Widow and
her family so long, is very little more miraculous, than that such a number of
pious, learned, and very aged Bishops should so many years be preserved, in
such wonderful straits and oppressions, until they should plentifully provide
for their own succession: that after such a deep deluge of sacrilege,
profaneness, and impiety, had covered, and to common understanding swallowed it
up; that That Church should again appear above the waters, God be again served
in that Church and served as he ought to be; and that there should be still
some revenue left to support and encourage those who serve him; nay, that many
of those who seemed to thirst after that revenue till they had possessed it,
should conscientiously restore what they had taken away, and become good Sons,
and willing Tenants to that Church they had so lately spoiled, may make us all
piously believe, that God Almighty would not have been at the expense and
charge of such a Miracle, so manifested himself to us in such a deliverance,
but in the behalf of a Church very acceptable to him, and which shall continue
to the end of the world, and against which the gates of hell shall not be able
to prevail.

The End of the first Chapter, concerning Religion.
CHAP. II.
Of Popery.
BUT notwithstanding his Majesty's unquestionable affection 1 But yet
notwithstanding the People are mighty jealous of Popery
and zeal for the True Protestant Religion manifested in his constant
profession and practice against all temptations whatsoever; yet many of his
Subjects generally are much affected with jealousy The Parliament Petition to
the King concerning Romish Priests and Jesuits, 1663, page 3, 4.
and apprehension, that the Popish Religion may much increase in this Kingdom;
(which yet his Majesty has most piously desired may be prevented) and so the
Peace 2. Because of the Resort of so many Jesuits and Popish Priests.
both in Church and State may be insensibly disturbed to the great danger of
both;

WHICH was the reason of both the Houses of Parliaments Humble Suit to the
King, That he would be pleased to Issue out his Proclamation to command all
Jesuits and Popish 3. Therefore the Parliament desire the King to issue out
his Proclamation for their departure.
Priests, etc. to depart this Kingdom by a day, under the penalties of the Laws
to be inflicted on them; but says his Majesty to them presently, in his Speech
at the reception of that Petition, page 5.


It may be the general jealousy of the Nation has 4. His Majesty's present
answer to them.
made this Address necessary; and indeed, I believe nothing has contributed
more to that jealousy, than my own confidence that it was impossible there
should be any such jealousy, and the effects of that confidence; (but says he
in the next words) I shall give you satisfaction, and then I am sure you will
easily satisfy and compose the minds of the Nation.

Answer to this Representation and Petition, he 5. Afterward his more
deliberate return
AND in his April 1. 1663. page 7. 8.
says, having seriously considered it, and having made some reflections upon
himself and his own actions; he is not a little troubled, that his Lenity and
Condescensions toward many of the Popish Persuasion (which were but natural
effects of his generositie, and good nature, etc.) have been made so ill use
of, and so ill deserved, that the Resort of Jesuits and Priests into this
Kingdom has been thereby increased, with which his Majesty is, and has long
been highly offended; and therefore his Majesty readily concurs with the Advice
of his Two Houses of Parliament, and has given order for the preparing and
issuing 6. That he readily concurs with the advice of his Parliament to grant a
Proclamation, and that to be more effectual than any of that kind have ever
been.
out such a Proclamation as is desired: -- and his Majesty will take farther
care that the same shall be effectual, at least to a greater degree than any
Proclamation of this kind has ever been.

AND his Majesty further declares and assures both his Houses of Parliament,
and all his Loving Subjects of all his Dominions; that as his affection and
zeal for 7. For nothing is greater than his zeal for the Protestant Religion
and to hinder the Growth of Popery.
the Protestant Religion, and the Church of England has not been concealed, or
untaken notice of in the world; so he is not, nor will ever be so sollicitous
for the settling his own Revenue, or providing any other expedients for the
Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom; as for the advancement and improvement
of the Religion Established; and for the using and applying all proper and
effectual 8. That being the best way to Establish the Peace, etc. of all his
Kingdoms.
remedies to hinder the Growth of Popery, both which he does in truth look upon
as the best expedient to Establish the Peace and Prosperity of all his Kingdoms.

AND when it was as artificially, as the King himself truly phrases it, as
maliciously divulged throughout the whole Kingdom: That at the same time we
deny a fitting liberty to those other His Majesty's Declaration to all his
Loving Subjects, December 26. 1662. page 3.
Sects of our Subjects, whose consciences will not allow them to conform 9. The
Malicious Scandal of his being more favourabie to Papists than other Dissenters.
to the Religion Established by Law: We are highly indulgent to Papists, not
only in exempting them from the penalties of the Law, but even to such a degree
of countenance and encouragement, as may even endanger the Protestant Religion.

As to that most pernicious and injurious scandal, so artificially spread and
fomented, of our favor to Papists, says 10. A Repetition of the same
detestable Arts of the late Rebellious Times.
the King, as it is but a repetition of the same detestable arts, by which all
the The same Declaration, page 9, 10, 11, 12.
late calamities have been brought upon this Kingdom, in the time of our Royal
Father of Blessed Memory, who (though the most pious and zealous Protestant
that ever Reigned in this Nation,) could never wash off the stains cast upon
him by that malice, but by his 11. And therefore we should all be prepared
against such poison.
Martyrdom; We conceive our Subjects should be sufficiently prepared against
that poison by memory of those disasters; especially, since nothing is more
evident, than that the wicked Authors of this scandal are such as seek to
involve all good Protestants under the odious name of Papists, or Popishly
affected: yet we cannot but say upon this occasion, that our Education and
course of Life in the True Protestant Religion, has been such, and our
constancy in the Profession of it so eminent in our most desperate condition
abroad among Roman Catholic Princes; 13. Yet the Education of the King in the
Protestant Religion has been such that should any but believe this Scandal, it
would be a most impardonable offense.
when as the appearance of receding from it had been the likeliest way in all
humane forecast, to have procured us the most powerful assistances of our
Re-establishment, that should any of our Subjects give but the least admission
of that scandal into
their beliefs, We should look upon it as the most impardonable offense that
they can be guilty of toward us. It Is true, that as we shall always according
to justice retain, so we think it may become us to avow to the world a due
sense we have of the greatest part of our Roman Catholics 14. It Is true the
Roman Catholics did adhere to the King his Father with their Lives and
Fortunes, against those who employed both against him.
of this Kingdom, having deserved well from our Royal Father of blessed Memory,
and from us, and even from the Protestant Religion it self, in adhering to us
with their Lives and Fortunes for the maintenance of our Crown in the Religion
Established against those who under the name of zealous Protestants, employed
both fire and Sword to overthrow them both. We shall with as much freedom
profess unto the world, that it is not in our intention to exclude our Roman
Catholic Subjects, 15. Therefore ought not to be excluded from all share in
the benefit of the Act of Indemnity who have demeaned themselves well.
who have so demeaned themselves, from all share in the benefit of such an Act,
(viz. the Act of Indemnity) as in pursuance of our promises, the wisdom of our
Parliament shall think fit to offer unto us for the ease of tender Consciences.
It might appear no less than injustice, that those who deserved well, and
continued to do so, should be denied some part of that mercy, which we 16. For
that would seem unjust.
have obliged our Self to afford to ten times the number of such who have not
done so. Besides, such are the Capital 17. It is grievous to put any to death
for their Opinions in matters of Religion only.
Laws in force against them, as though justified in their vigor by the times
in which they were made: We profess it Would be grievous unto us to consent to
the execution of them, by putting any of our Subjects to death for their
Opinions in matters of Religion only: but at the 18. Yet let them all know if
they hope for Toleration of their Profession etc. or that Priests shall appear
and avow themselves to the scandal of good Protestants, and of the Laws we will
be severe.
same time, That we declare our little liking of those Sanguinary Ones, and our
Gracious Intentions already expressed to such of our Roman Catholic Subjects,
as shall live peaceably, modestly, and without scandal: We would have them all
know, that if for doing what their Duties and Loyalties obliged them to, or
from our acknowledgment of their well-deserving, they shall have the
presumption to hope for a Toleration of their Profession, or a taking away
either those marks of distinction, or of our displeasure, which in a
well-governed Kingdom ought always to be set upon Dissenters from the Religion
of the State, or to obtain the least remission in the strictness of those Laws,
which either are, or shall be made to hinder the spreading of their Doctrine,
to the prejudice of the True Protestant Religion; or that upon our expressing
(according to Christian Charity) our dislike of Bloodshed for Religion only;
Priests shall take the boldness to appear, and avow themselves to the offense
and scandal of good Protestants, and of the Laws in force against them: They
shall quickly find we know as well to be severe, when wisdom requires, as
indulgent when charity and sense of Merit challenge it from us.

WitH this we have thought fit to arm our good Subjects 19. This is to arm the
good Subjects minds against the practices of our ill ones.
minds against the practices of our ill ones, by a True Knowledge of our own, of
which now rightly persuaded, we make no question, but that whatsoever they be
from whom they can derive the spreading or somenting of 20. That those who
foment such suggestions, are the most dangerous Enemies of the Crown and the
peace of the Nation.
any of those wicked suggestions, they will look upon them with detestation as
the most dangerous Enemies of our Crown, and of the Peace and Happiness of the
Nation.

I thought it could not be too tedious either for me to Recite, or for you to
hear thus much of his Majesty's Declaration upon this Head, because he has in
it so clearly and fully delivered himself, as one would think it should be to
the general, if I may not say, Eternal satisfaction of all his loving and
dutiful Subjects.

IS it not a superlative expression for the King to say of those 21. What can
be higher said than this?
that give out that most pernicious, as well as malicious scandal of his favor
to Papists, that he looks on it as the most unpardonable offense that any can
be guilty of toward him? and that those wicked Aspersers by all his good and
Loyal People will (as they deservedly ought to) be looked upon as the most
dangerous Enemies both to his Crown, and the Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom?

AND whereas still some men would fain possess the people, 22. Never any Prince
has given more convincing proofs to the contrary, of his favoring Papists.
that his Majesty is a Favourer of Popery, though never any Prince in
Christendom has given more convincing and irrefragable proofs of the contrary;
let them take heed and consider, that by such aspersion they run the hazard of
a Praemunire upon the Act for the safety of the King's Person, in scandalizing
his Majesty for a Favourer of Popery.

NOW where the humors and spirits of men are too rough 23. Where men's humors
are too rough for soft indulgence; shar Laws must be made to break their
Stubborness.
and boisterous for the soft remedies of signal indulgence and condescensions
of suspension of the rigor of former Laws; there must be prepared sharper Laws
and penalties to contend with those refractory Lord Chancellor's Speech to both
Houses, May 19. 1662. page 16.
persons, and to break that stubbornness which will not bend to gentler
applications: and it is great reason, that they upon whom Clemency cannot
prevail, should seel that severity they have prcvoked.

I pray hear what the Speaker of the House of Commons could say in his Address
to the King, from the whole House, they being there present: Above The Address
of the House spoke by Sir Edw. Turner Feb. 28. 1662. page 7.
all, says he, we can never enough remember, to 24. The Speaker of the House
of Commons acknowledges His Majesty's most solemn invitations of them to make
Laws against the growth of Popery.
the Honor of Your Majesty's Piety, and our own unspeakable comfort, those
solemn and most indearing invitations of us Your Majesty's Subjects, to prepare
Laws to be presented to Your Majesty, against the growth and increase of
Popery, and withal to provide more Laws against Licentiousness and Impiety, at
the same time declaring Your own resolution for maintaining the Act of
Uniformity.

And when, a little after, both the Lords and Commons Petitioned His Majesty,
by his Proclamation to command all Romish Priests and Jesuits, etc. to depart
this Kingdom by a day; at the reception of the Petition, His Majesty thus
begins his Speech to them. My Lords and Gentlemen,

You do not expect that I should give you an Answer presently to your petition,
yet I will tell you, that I will speedily send you an Answer, which I am
confident will be to your satisfaction: and was it not so, think ye, when he,
in his Gracious Answer, on the 1st. of April, 1663. told them, that he did
readily concur with their advice, and that he had given order for such a
Proclamation as they desired; which you may see more at large a little before?

This made the Speaker of the House of Commons, no doubt so sensible, that he
could not be kept off from a fresh mention of it, when he spoke to his Majesty,
although it was almost four years afterward.

Says he, We have been allarum'd from all parts of the Kingdom 25. His
Majesty commands all his Officers and Soldiers to take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy ^d and Priests an* Jesuits to de part by a day which
much secures us aginst fears, etc
by the insolences of Popish Priests and Jesuits, who by their great numbers,
and bold writings declare to all the world, they are in expectation of a
plentiful harvest here in England: Sir Edward Turner 's Speech to the King
Friday, January 13. 1666. page 3.
But your Majesty by your gracious Answer to the desire of both your Houses,
your command, for all Officers and Soldiers in your Majesty's pay to take the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and your Proclamation for the departure of
Priests and Jesuits out of this Nation, have in a great measure secured us
against those fears.

WHEN his Majesty was pleased to declare his indulgence as 26. If the King
allowed Public places of Worship to all Nonconformists but the Papists.
to the allowance of public places of worship, and approbation of the
Teachers, he said, it should extend to all sorts of Nonconformists and
Recusants, His Majesty's Declaration to all his Loving Subjects, March 15.
1672. p. 7.
except the Recusants of the Roman Catholic Religion, to whom we 27. They only
to have their share in the common exemption from the execution of penal laws
shall in no wise allow public places of Worship, but only indulge them their
share in the com(...) exemption from the execution of the penal Laws, and the
exercise of their worship in their private houses only.

In the King's Speech to both Houses of Parliament, on Wednesday, February 5.
1672. He tells them, how he had been forced to a most important and necessary
war, and that some few days, (says he) before I declared the War, I put forth
my Declaration (that which is mentioned just above) for indulgence to
Dissenters, and have hitherto found a good effect of it, by securing peace at
home, when I had War abroad. There is one part in it that has been subject to
misconstruction, which is that concerning the PAPISTS; as if more liberty were
granted them, than to the other Recusants; when it is plain there is less: 28.
They only to have the freedom of their Religion in their own houses, without
the concourse of others.
for the others have Public Places allowed them, and I never intended that
they should have any, but only have the fradom of their Religion in their own
Houses, without any concourse of others. And I could not grant them less than
this, when I had extended so much more grace to others; and in the whole course
of this Indulgence, I 29. And this no way to prejudice the Church.
do not intend that it shall any way prejudice the Church; but I will support
its Rights, and it in its full power.

WHEN he made his Speech to the Parliament at their Prorogation, he says to
them, In the mean while I will not be wanting to let all my Subjects see, that
no care can be greater than my own; in the The Kings Speech, Nov. 4. 1673. p. 4.
30. When he prorogued his Parliament he said, No Care shall be greater than
mine to suppress Popery: do you as much in your own Countries.
effectual Suppressing of Popery; and it shall be your faults, if in your
several Countries the Laws be not effectually executed against the growth of it.

A Year and a half after he comes again to them, and then he plainly
acknowledges, that as he had before given them a strong assurance of his care,
so now he has de facto made it good to them: says he, I have done as much as
on my part was possible to extinguish the fears and Iealousies of Popery, 31
And when he met them again, he told them, he had done what he could to
extinguish the fears of Popery.
and will leave nothing undone that may show the World my Zeal to the
Protestant The Kings Speech April 1675. page 4. and 5.
Religion, as it is established in the Church of England, from which I will
never depart.

SO That you see, His Majesty has so fully vindicated himself from that
Calumny, concerning the Papists, that no reasonable scruple 32. Therefore no
reasonable scruple can be made by any good man.
can be made by any good man, says my Lord Chancellor, in his Speech to both
the Houses on the 5 Feb. 1672.

He has awakened all the Laws against the Papists, there is not one Statute
extant in all the Volume of our Laws 33. All the laws are awakened against them.
but His Majesty has now put it in a way of The Lord Keep. Sp. April 13. 75.
p. 9 and 10.
taking its full course against them. The Laws against the Papists are edged,
and the execution of them, quickened by new rewards proposed to the Informers.
This was so necessary to be inserted here, that I could not forbear repeating
it again; although I have before mentioned it in another place: but to proceed;

HIS Majesty having on February the Third, 1674/5 been pleased to Command an
Order made then in Council to be forthwith published, that was for the
execution of the Laws against Popish Recusants, etc. he did likewise on the
12th day of the said February, publish a Declaration for enforcing that Order,
and therein says, More particularly we Require and Command, 34. The King
commands the Convictions of Popish Recusants to be every where encouraged, etc.
that the Convictions of Popish Recusants be every where encouraged, quickened,
and made effectual; and that all Convictions, as soon as they shall be
perfected, be forthwith certifyed into the Exchequer; and that speedy process
do issue upon all such Convictions as are or shall be certifyed; and that care
be taken that no persons of Quality, who shall be suspected to 35. And speedy
process to issue thereupon.
be Popish Recusants, be omitted to be presented; and that no delay be used,
nor any practice suffered, which may hinder or obstruct the completing of such
Convictions as are now preparing. 36. None should be omitted to be presented.
And we do strictly Charge and Command, that no Mass be said in any part of
this Kingdom, the Chapels of our dearest Consort the Queen, and the Chapels
of Foreign 37. No Mass to be said in this Kingdom, only the Queens and
Foreign Ministers Chapels excepted.
Ministers only excepted: And to prevent all extraordinary resort to those
Chapels, by such who are not menial Servants to the Queen, or to Foreign
Ministers, we declare that every such offender shall incur the forfeiture of
one hundred Marks, provided by the Statute made in the twenty third year of
Queen Elizabeth; whereof one third part shall 38. Whoever, not Menial Servants,
resort to them, shall forfeit 100 Marks.
be given to the Informer for his further reward and encouragement. And we
require all Officers and Ministers of Justice, to cause diligent search to be
made, in all other places where they shall hear, or suspect, that Mass is said,
and to cause all Offenders in this kind to be apprehended, and proceeded 39.
All suspected places are to be searched by the Justices, etc. and where found,
all Offenders to be apprehended, etc.
with according to Law. And we forewarn all our Subjects, that they presume not
to send any person to be educated abroad in any Popish College Or Seminary;
and we command all Parents, or Guardians of any Person or Persons, now
remaining in any such College or Seminary, that they cause the said Person or
Persons speedily to return home, as they will answer the contrary at their
peril. Moreover, we require all 40. None to be brought up in Popish Colleges
abroad; and where any are there, speedily to return home.
Persons born within any of our Dominions, and out of Prison, who have taken
Orders by any Authority derived from the Church or See of Rome (except Mr. John
Huddlestone) to depart the Kingdom before the twenty fifth day of March next,
according to the tenor of our late Proclamation; and also to depart the Court
within the fourteen days appointed by our late Order in Council. And we forbid
all Papists, or reputed 41. And all born here in any of these Dominions, that
have taken Orders by any Authority from Rome, to depart the Kingdom.
Papists, to come into our Palace at Whitehal, or St. James's, or into any
other place where our Court shall be, contrary to our late Prohibition, upon
pain of Imprisonment in the Tower, if he be a Peer of the Realm; or in some
other Prison, if he be of lesser Quality.

SO that you see, if the Conviction of all Recusants, and bringing them under
the penal Laws, can suppress Popery: If without 42. And no Papist, nor reputed
Papists, to come to Court, upon pain of Imprisonment.
staying for the Forms of the Law in Lord Keepers Speech to both Houses, Jan.
7. 1673/4. page 8, and 9.
points of Conviction, the present forbidding all Papists or reputed Papists to
come to Court, and the extending this Prohibition to his Royal Palace, be
enough to discountenance them;

THEN surely His Majesty has reason to believe, that scarce any thing is
wanting, which can lawfully be done, or modestly 43. So that surely now scarce
any thing is wanting, either for satisfaction or security.
be wished, either for your satisfaction or your security.

INDEED I cannot but think, and confess, that we have good cause to be
sollicitous after such security: for they are persons whose Doctrines teach
them to study how to sap and undermine our very Foundations, as I could at
large prove, were it not improper to my present business and design.

BUT further, It has been so stale a Project to Undermine 44. A stale Project
to undermine the Government, by accusing it of endeavoring to bring in Popery.
the Government, by accusing it of endeavoring to introduce Popery and
Tyranny, that a man would wonder to see it taken up again. Chancellors Speech
to both Houses, 23 May, 1678. page 12, 13, 14.


HAVE we forgotten that Religion and Liberty were never truly lost, till they
were made a handle and pretense for Sedition? Are we so ill 45. Our Religion
and Liberty never lost, till made a handle and pretense for Sedition.
Historians, as not to remember when Prelacy was called Popery, and Monarchy
Tyranny? When the property of Nobility and Gentry was held to be destructive of
Liberty, and that it was a dangerous thing for Men to have any sense of their
Duty and Allegiance?

DO we know all this, and suffer men without doors to hope 46. Therefore the
same Artifices must not prevail now.
by our Divisions to arrive at the same times again? Can we endure to see men
break the Act of Oblivion every day, by reviving the memory of forgotten Crimes
in new practices?

IF Fears and Jealousies can ever become wise and good men, it is only then
when there is danger of a relapse. No 47. It is wisdom in this respect to fear
and to be jealous.
caution can be too great against the Returns of that fatal Distemper from
which we have been so lately recovered, especially when some symptoms of it
begin again to appear in printed Libels, and in several parts of the Nation.

IT might perhaps be worth our while to consider, whether we do not bring some
kind of Scandal upon the Protestant 48. But not to doubt the continuance of the
Protestant Religion, since we have so many Laws to guard it.
Religion, when we seem so far to distrust the truth and power of it, that
after so many Laws that have been past to guard it, after all the Miraculous
Deliverances from the Attempts which have been made against it, we should still
be afraid of its continuance.

IT is no doubt a duty which we owe to God, and to our selves, to the present
Age, and to Posterity, to improve the opportunities 49. It Is our duty to
improve all opportunities to fence our Vineyard.
God gives us of fencing our Vineyard, and making the Hedge about as strong as
we can. And the King has commanded me to tell you, that he is ready to concur
with us in any thing of this kind, which shall be found wanting, and 50. The
King ready to concur in any thing which yet is wanting for our Security.
which the Christian prudence and Justice of a Parliament can propose as
expedient.

HAS not the late Act made it impossible, absolutely impossible, for the most
concealed Papist that is, to get into any kind of Employment? and did ever any
Law since the Reformation, 51. No Papist can get into any Employment.
give us so great a security as this?

THE October after, the King comes himself to his Parliament, and there says
to them, I now intend to acquaint You, (as I 52. About the Kings acquainting
the Parliament with the Plot against his person, etc. He will leave the matter
to the Law, and he will do all he can to prevent the practices of those who are
contriving to bring in Popery.
shall always do with any thing that concerns me) that I have been informed of
a Design against my Person, by the JESUITS, of which I shall forbear any
Opinion, lest I may seem to say too much or too little; but I will leave the
matter to the Law, and in King's Speech on Monday 21th Oct. 1678. p. 4, 5.
the mean time will take as much care as I can to prevent all manner of
practices by that sort of Men, and of others too, who have been tampering in a
high degree with Foreigners, and contriving how to introduce Popery amongst us.

NOW that the Fears of Popery may not too much disquiet you, be pleased to
consider, that you have one Security 53. This is one Security more to us: for
that which was always the interest of the Kings honor and conscience, is now
the interest of his Person too.
more; since that which was always the Interest of his Majesty's Honor and
Conscience, is now become the interest of his Person too, to protect the
Protestant Religion, and to prevent the swarming Lord Chancellors Speech to the
same, p. 13 and 14.
of Seminary Priests: For his Majesty has told you, that he has lately
received Information of Designs against his own Life by the Jesuits. And
though he does in no sort prejudge the Persons accused, yet the strict enquiry
into 54. This is a Plot of the Jesuits.
this matter has been a means to discover so many other unwarrantable
practices of theirs, that his Majesty has reason to look 55. But the King will
look to them.
to them.

NOR are these kind of men the only Factors for Rome; 56. Lay-persons too are
agitators to promote the Interests of a foreign Religion.
but there are found among the Laity also some who have made themselves
Agitators to promote the Interests of a Foreign Religion, who meddle with
matters of State and Parliament, and carry on their designs by a most
dangerous Correspondency with Foreign Nations.

WHAT kind of Process the Proof will bear, and to how high a degree the Extent
and Nature of these Crimes will rise, is under consideration, and will be fully
left to the course of Law.

ALAS, it is the professed and avowed principle of these 57. It Is the
principles of such men to kill Kings rather sooner than other men.
sort of men, not to distinguish between the King and another man; nay, to kill
him sooner than any other man; and yet the King's Mercy has been no less
obstinate, than their Malice and Wickedness; few persons have suffered, and he
has restrained the Law from being severe to many, who at the same time
continue their This was spoken by the Lord Chancellor, May 8. 1661. of those
Traitors that went armed through the City; but it may justly be applied to
these of this damnable Popish Plot.
Guilt, and undervalue his Compassion: There has not been a Week 58. Scarce,
since the Plot was first found out, a week has been free without some fresh
Conspiracies.
since the first breaking out of this Jesuitical Plot, in which there have not
been fresh Combinations and Conspiracies formed against his Person, and against
the Peace of the Kingdom: And yet upon all these Alarms, and the interception
of such Letters, as would in all other Countries have 59. Which in other
Countries would have produced the Rack, here the Offenders are tried by the
precise Forms and Rules of Law.
produced the Rack for further Discoveries, he has left the Offenders to his
Judges of the Law, and those Judges to the precise Forms, and ordinary Rules of
the Law.

HOW has his Majesty invited all persons, (even those that are criminal to the
highest degree of guilt, upon his gracious promises of Pardon, nay, and of
reward too, if they would but in the prescribed times lay hold of the Scepter
of his Grace,) to come in, and make their ingenuous confessions to him and his
Council, of this Damnable and Hellish Design against both his Royal Person,
and these his Kingdoms! yet how obstinately have they withstood all the tenders
of his Proclamations, that have been so unspeakably to their own benefit, and
have chosen Death rather than Life; as if they were resolutely bent to outgo
all his infinite Kindnesses by the most cruel revenge upon themselves? So that
very well what was said of Caesar, might here be spoken of his Majesty, that
libentius vitam Victor jam daret, quam victi acciperent.

WELL, but to proceed -- The Parliament having showed 60. When the Parliament
had showed their great care for the Kings preservation, he could not satisfy
himself, but must heartily thank them.
their great and extraordinary care for the safety and preservation of his
Majesty's Person in these times of danger, the King, as he says there, could
not satisfy himself without coming thither on purpose King's Speech to both
Houses, Saturday, Nov. 9. p. 3, 4.
to give them all his most hearty thanks for it.

NOR do I think it enough to give you my Thanks only, but I hold my self
obliged to let you see withal, that I do as much study your preservation too,
as I can possibly; and 61. But not only so, he studies as much our
preservation as they did his, and will join with them in all the ways that may
establish the Protestant Religion.
that I am as ready to join with you in all the ways and means that may
establish a firm security of the Protestant Religion, as your own hearts can
wish.

AND this not only during my time, (of which I am sure you have no fear) but
in all future ages, even to the end of the world.

AND therefore I am come to assure you, that whatsoever reasonable Bills you
shall present to pass into Laws, to make you safe in the Reign of any
Successor, (so as they tend not to impeach the right of Succession, nor the
descent of the Crown in the true Line, and so as they restrain not my Power,
62. And that not only now, but for future ages.
nor the just Rights of any Protestant Successor) shall find from me a ready
Concurrence.

AND I desire you withal to think of some more effectual 63. And therefore he
tells them, all reasonable Bills shall find from him a ready concurrence.
means for the Conviction of Popish Recusants; and to expedite your Councils as
fast as you can, that the World may see our Unanimity, and that I may have the
opportunity of showing you how ready I am to do any thing that may give comfort
and satisfaction to such dutiful and Loyal Subjects. 64. And he desires them to
think of some more effectual way to convict Popish Recusants, etc.


HE meets his new Parliament in March, and then he tells them what he has been
doing since the Dissolution of the other, to gain the hearts of all his people:
says he,

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I meet you here with the most earnest desire that Man can have, to unite the
minds of all my Subjects, both to me, and to one another; and I resolve it
shall be your faults, if the success be not suitable 65. He has excluded the
Popish Lords from their Seats in Parliament, he has executed several men, and
has not been idle in prosecuting the discovery of the Plot.
The Kings Sp. on Thursday 6 March, 1678/9. p. 3, 4.
to my desires. I have done many great things already in order to that end; as
the Exclusion of the Popish Lords from their Seats in Parliament, the execution
of several men, both upon the score of the Plot, and of the Murder of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey; and it is apparent that I have not been idle in prosecuting
the discovery of both, as much further as has been possible in so short a time.

AND above all, I have commanded my Brother to absent himself from me, because
I would not leave the most malicious 66. He also commanded the absence of the
D. of York.
men room to say, I had not removed all causes, which could be pretended to
influence me toward Popish Councels. I shall not cease my endeavors daily 67.
And will daily endeavor to find out what more he can, and desires his two
Houses assistance in that work.
to find out what more I can, both of the Id. p. 5.
Plot, and Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, and shall desire the Assistance of
both my Houses in that work.

I have not been wanting to give Orders for putting all the present Laws in
Execution against Papists, and I am ready to join in the making such further
Laws as may be necessary for the securing of the Kingdom against Popery. 68. He
has ordered that the present Laws be put in execution against Papists, and is
ready to add such further Laws as may secure the Kingdom against Popery.


I will conclude as I begun, with my earnest desires to have this an healing
Parliament; and I do give you this assurance, that I will with my Life defend
both the Protestant Religion, and the Laws of this Kingdom.

AND now my Lord Chancellor coming to speak to them, I pray take notice with
what force and Eloquence he delivers himself. The Considerations, says he,
which now are to be laid before you, are as urgent and as weighty as were ever
yet offered to any Parliament, or indeed ever can be. So great and so
surprising have been our dangers at home, so formidable are the appearances of
danger from abroad, that the most united Councels, the most sedate and the
calmest temper, together with the most dutiful and zealous affections that a
Parliament can show, are all become absolutely and indispensably necessary for
our preservation. Id. p. 10.
69. The Plot industriously carried on by Priests and Jesuits and their
Adherents, who, to subvert our true Religion, find the most likely way to be by
wounding us in the Head, and by Killing the King.


AT home we had need look about us, for his Majesty's Royal Person has been
in danger, by a Conspiracy against his Sacred Life, maliciously contrived, and
industriously carried on by those Seminary Priests and Jesuits, and their
Adherents, who think themselves under some obligation of Conscience to effect
it; and having vowed the Subversion of the true Religion amongst us, find no
way so likely to compass it, as to wound us in the Head, and to kill the
Defendor of the Faith. Id. Ibid.


HIS Majesty wanted not sufficient evidence of his zeal for our Religion,
without this Testimony from his Enemies, who 70. His Majesty needed not this
Evidence to testify his zeal for our Religion.
were about to Sacrifice him for it: but it has ever been the practice of
those Votaries, first to Murder the Fame of Princes, and then their Persons;
first to slander them to their people, as if they favored Papists, and then to
Assassinate them 71. What has ever been the practice of the Roman Votaries.
for being too zealous Protestants. And thus by all the ways and means which
our Law calls Treason, and their Divinity calls Merit and Martyrdom, they are
trying to set up the Dominion and Supremacy of the Pope; as if the Dignity of
his Triple-Crown could never be sufficiently advanced, unless these Three
Kingdoms were added unto him, and all brought 72. The search into this Plot has
been closely pursued.
back again under that yoke, which neither we nor our Forefathers were able to
bear. 73. More Evidence found.
Page 11.


THE Enquiry into this Conspiracy has been closely pursued, and the Lords of
the Council have been careful to prosecute 74. More Malefactors discovered.
this Discovery, ever since the Rising of the last Parliament; and the King
does now recommend it to you to perfect: 75. Justices stirred up to perform
their duty.
More Evidence has been already found out, and more Malefactors discovered,
some in hold, some fled, Justices of Peace have been quickened in the Execution
of their duty; the 76. Faithful Messengers sent all over the Kingdom, where any
hopes of service was to be done.
Negligent have been reproved and punished, the Diligent encouraged and
assisted in doubtful cases by the Opinions of the Judges: active and faithful
Messengers have been sent into all the corners of the Kingdom, where there was
any hope of Service to be done; the very Prisons have been searched, to 77.
Prisons have been searched.
see whether any had fled thither to hide themselves there, and under pretense
of Debt to escape the pursuit: and if any have desired leave to go beyond Sea,
they have first given security 78. Persons going beyond sea, first, have given
security not to go to Rome, nor send their Children to be bred up in Foreign
Seminaries.
not to go to Rome, nor send their Children to be bred in any Foreign
Seminaries; and then they have been obliged to give in a List of all their
Menial Servants, and those Servants too have been examined upon Oath; and order
is given that they be again examined at the Ports, and make Oath they are the
same persons were examined above: so that all possible care has been taken
that no Malefactors might escape us in 79. Their menial Servants are Listed,
and examined upon Oath.
Disguise. Ibid.


AND though the Priests themselves do not keep the Confessions of their
Proselytes more secret than these keep the Injunctions of their Priests, yet
enough has appeared 80. All care taken that no Malefactors should escape in
disguise.
Page 12.
to bring some Capital Offenders to public Justice, and to convict them of the
Crime: some of the Traitors have been Executed, several Priests have been
Arrested and Imprisoned, 81. Some have banished themselves, others Imprisoned
for not taking the Oaths.
all are hiding themselves and lurking in secret corners like the Sons of
darkness. The Murderers of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey have been Condemned, and
suffered death; some Papists have banished themselves out of the Kingdom,
others are Imprisoned for not taking the Oaths, all are prosecuted toward
Conviction; 82. And the shame that attends such practices has converted
several.
and the very shame and reproach which attends such abominable practices, has
covered so many faces with new and strange confusions, that it has proved a
powerful argument for their Conversion: nor is it to be wondered at, that they
could no longer believe all that to be Gospel which their Priests taught them,
when they saw the way and means of introducing it was so far from being
Evangelical. Ibid.


IN a word, so universal is that Despair to which the Papists 83. Their despair
is so universal, that all their hopes now are, that we may overdo our own
business.
are now reduced, that they have no other hopes left but this, That We may
chance to over-do our own business, and by being too far transported with the
fears of Popery, neglect the Opportunities we now have of making sober and
lasting Provisions against it. Ibid.


AND it is not to be doubted, but that it would infinitely 84. How pleased they
would be, to see us distracted with Jealousies incurable.
gratify the Papists in the revenge they wish for this Discovery, if they
could see us distracted with Jealousies incurable, and distrusting the
Government to such a degree as should weaken all that Reverence by which it
stands; for then the Plot would not be altogether without effect, but those
whom they could not destroy by their Conspiracy, they should have the
satisfaction to see ruining themselves after the Discovery: So 85. This would
make them see us ruining our selves.
that though we had escaped that Desolation which they intended to have brought
upon us, nothing could save us from that Destruction which we should bring upon
our selves. Id. p. 13.


BUT their expectations of this are as vain, as their other 86. But these their
expectations are vain.
designs were wicked; for his Majesty has already begun to let them see with
what severity he intends to proceed against 87. For his Majesty has let them
see with what severity he will proceed against them.
them: he has passed a Law to disable all the Nobility and Gentry of that
Faction ever to sit in Parliament; and not content with that, he did offer to
the last Parliament, and does again renew the same Offer to this Parliament, to
pass any further Laws against Popery which shall be desired; so 88. And that
he will pass any further Laws against Popery, so as they do not entrench on
Prerogative, alter the Descent of the Crown in the right Line, nor defeat the
Succession.
as the same extend not to the diminution of his own Prerogative, nor to alter
the descent of the Crown in the right Line, nor to defeat the Succession. He
has refused the Petition of the Lords, who, during the interval of Parliament,
desired to be brought to their Trial; and after so long an imprisonment might
reasonably enough have expected it: But his Majesty thought it fitter to
reserve them to a more public and conspicuous Trial in Parliament. Ibid.


BUT that which the King has been pleased to mention to you this morning,
surpasses all the rest, and is sufficient of it self alone to discharge all
those Fears of Popish Influences 89. He has parted with his Brother the D. of
Y.
which many good men had too far entertained: For now You see his Majesty of
his own accord has done that which would have been very difficult for You to
ask, and has deprived himself of the Conversation of his Royal Brother, by
commanding him to depart the Kingdom; to which Command his Royal Highness has
paid a most humble and a most entire 90. And he that could do this, sure now
has no Favorite but his People.
submission and obedience. This Separation was attended with a more than
ordinary Sorrow on both sides. But he that for your sakes could part with such
a Brother and such a Friend, you may be sure has now no Favorite but his
People. Since therefore his Majesty has shown so much readiness to concur
with, and in a manner to prevent the desires of his Parliament, it is a
miserable Refuge our Enemies trust to, when they hope to see our Zeal outrun
our Discretion, and that we our selves should become the unhappy Occasion of
making our own Councels abortive.

AND now, that I may come to the highest step of all, and 91. Now it is not
enough that our Religion be safe during only his Reign, but he will so well
secure it to us, that no after-Succession shall be able in the least to alter
it.
show you what his Majesty once more had commanded his Chancellor to declare
unto his Parliament, says he, His Majesty has considered with himself, that
it is not enough that your Religion and Liberty is secure during his own Reign,
but he thinks he owes it to his People to do all that in him lies, that these
blessings may be transmitted to your Posterity, and so well secured to them,
that no Succession in after-Ages may be able to work the least Alteration. And
therefore his Majesty, who has often said in L. Chanc. Speech to both Houses,
30 Apr. 79. p. 5, 6, and 7.
92. And therefore that no Papist may make any change either in Church or
State, 1. a Popish from a Protestant Successor is to be distinguished, and then
to circumscribe his Authority thus.
Parliament, That he is ready to consent to any Laws of this kind, so as the
same extend not to alter the descent of the Crown in the right Line, nor to
defeat the Succession, has now commanded this to be further explained.

AND to the end it may never be in the power of any Papist, if the Crown
descend upon him, to make any Change either in Church or State, his Majesty is
willing that provision may be made, first, to distinguish a Popish from a
Protestant Successor; then so to limit and to circumscribe the Authority of a
Popish Successor in these cases following, that he may be 93. No Popish
Successor to present to Ecclesiastical Benefices.
disabled to do any harm.

First, IN reference to the Church, his Majesty is content that care be taken
that all Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Benefices 94. As already no Papist can
sit in Parliament, so there shall never want a Parl. when the K. shall happen
to die, but that then in being shall continue indissoluble for a competent
time; or if there be no Parl. then the last Parl. to reassemble, etc.
and Promotions in the Gift of the Crown, may be conferred in such a manner
that we may be sure the Incumbents shall always be of the most pious and
learned Protestants; and that no Popish Successor, while he continues so, may
have any power to control such Presentiments.

IN reference to the State and civil part of the Government, as it is already
provided that no Papist can sit in either House of Parliament, so the King is
pleased that it be provided too, that there may never want a Parliament when
the King shall happen to die, but that the Parliament then in being may
continue Indissoluble for a competent time; or if there be no Parliament in
being, then the last Parliament which was in being before that time, may
re-assemble, and sit a competent time 95. During such a Popish Successor's
Reign, no Privy Counselors nor Judges shall be put in or displaced.
without any new Summons or Elections.

AND as no Papist can by Law hold any place of Trust, so the King is content
that it may be further provided, that no Lords or others of the Privy Council,
no Judges of the Common Law or in Chancery, shall at any time during the Reign
of any Popish Successor, be put in or displaced, but by Authority of
Parliament. And that care also be taken, that none but sincere Protestants may
be Justices of Peace.

IN reference to the Military part, the King is willing that 96. No
Lord Lieutenant or Deputy-Lieutenant, nor Officer in the Navy, to be put in or
out but by Authority of Parl.
no Lord Lieutenant, or Deputy-Lieutenant, nor no Officer in the Navy, during
the Reign of any Popish Successor, be put in or removed, but either by
Authority in Parliament, or of such persons as the Parliament shall entrust
with such Authority.

It Is hard to invent another Restraint to be put upon a Popish Successor,
considering how much the Revenue of the Successor 97. And it is hard to invent
another Restriant upon a Popish Succes.
will depend upon consent of Parliament, and how impossible it is to raise
Money without such Consent. But yet if any thing else can occur to the Wisdom
of the Parliament, which may further secure Religion and Liberty against a
Popish Successor, 98. And if a Parl. can think of any thing else further to
secure Religion, the K. will consent to it.
without defeating the Right of Succession it self, his Majesty will most
readily consent to it.

BEAR with me now in this necessary Repetition which you had at the latter end
of the last Chapter: Thus watchful is the 99. Thus watchful is he for all our
Safeties.
King for all your Safeties; and if he could think of any thing else that you
do either want or wish to make you happy, he would make it his business to
effect it for you.

AND we may tell those desperate wretches, who yet harbor in their thoughts
wicked designs against the sacred person of the King in order to the
compassing their own Imaginations, That God Almighty would not have led him
through 100. And certainly now God would never have done so much, but for a
servant whom he will always preserve from the utmost malice of his Enemies.
so many Wildernesses of Afflictions of all kinds, conducted him through so
many perils by Sea, and perils by Land, snatched him out of the midst of this
Kingdom when it was not worthy of him, and when the hands of his Enemies were
even upon him, when they thought themselves so sure of him, that they would bid
so cheap and so vile a price for him, he would not in that Article have so
covered him with a Cloud, that he traveled even with some pleasure and great
observation through the midst of his L. Chancellor's Speech, December. 29. 1660.
page 21, 22.
Enemies; he would not so wonderfully have new-modelled that Army, so inspired
their hearts, and the hearts of the whole Nation, with an honest and impatient
longing for the Return of their dear Sovereign, and in the mean time have so
exercised him (which had little less of providence in it than the other) with
those unnatural, or at least unusual Disrespects and Reproaches abroad, that he
might have a harmless and an innocent appetite to his own Country, and return
to his own People with a full value, and the whole unwasted bulk of his
Affections, without being corrupted or by assed by extraordinary foreign
Obligations. And let me add, that he would not now have so miraculously (as it
were) preserved him from the many late most wicked and hellish Conspiracies of
the Papists. God Almighty would not have done all this, but for a Servant whom
he will always preserve as the Apple of his own Eye, and always defend from the
secret Machinations of his Enemies. 101. Let us to the utmost then labor to
improve the confidence between the King and his People.


LET us then extinguish our fears and jealousies, and lay out our utmost
endeavors to improve the confidence between the King and all his people. He
sufficiently takes notice, that the malice of his Enemies has been very active
in sowing so many Tares, as are almost enough to spoil that harvest of Love and
Duty which his Majesty 102. He finds he has Enemies enough to grapple with.
Lord Keeper's Speech, Jan. 7. 1673/4. page 18. and 19.
may justly expect to reap from all the good seed which he himself has sown.

FOR Calumnies and Slanders of this nature, are like Comets 103. But Calumnies
are nothing after a while.
in the Air; they may seem perhaps, especially to the fearful, to be ill
Prognostics, and the direct forerunners of mischief; but in themselves they
are vain Apparitions, and have no kind of solidity, no permanence or duration
at all: For after a little while the Vapor spends it self, and then the base
Exhalation quickly falls back again into that Earth from whence it came.

LET not the whispers or evil surmises of those who lie in 104. Let not ill
surmises endanger the state of the Government.
wait to deceive, make any man the unhappy occasion of endangering the safety
Lord Chancellor's Speech on Thursday, May 23. 1678. page 18. 19.
of the Government by mistrusting it. But let the world now see, that our Zeal
105. But let the world see our Zeal to preserve it.
to preserve the Government, is the same it was when we were ready to die for
its restoration.

LET us labor to show the world the most effectual significations 106. And by
our Loyalty and Duty let us dsscourage our Enemies.
of our Loyalty and Duty, that we are able to express: for nothing in Lord
Chancellor's Speech, Oct. 21. 78. page 15.
the world can more discourage our Enemies, 107. Then shall the King possess
the greatest Glory, that of reigning in our hearts, and we the highest felicity
that this world can afford.
as on the contrary, nothing does or can so ripen a Nation for destruction, as
to be observed to distrust their own Government.

THEN shall the King be possessed of that true Glory which others vainly
pursue, the Glory of reigning in the hearts of his People; then shall the
People be possessed of as much Felicity as this world is capable of. (...)


CHAP. III.
Of Liberty and Property, etc.
AND now having thus at large shown you the Pious 1. The Proem.
Zeal of the King, and his firm resolution to maintain and defend the Church of
England, as it is now established by Law, in all its Rights and Privileges; as
also his great and extraordinary care to suppress the Growth of Popery, by
awakening all his Laws against the Papists, and Popish Recusants, and by his
frequent Declarations to his Parliaments of his readiness to concur with them
still in all further necessary Bills against them, which are fit and reasonable
for them to present 2. How affectionate the King is, and how desirous to keep
up the just Measures of our Liberties.
him with to pass into Laws: I presently imagine that you will in the next
place be desirous to hear what he has said in the behalf of your Liberties and
Properties. I am sure, to your Religion, that is the Second thing in all your
thoughts, and I wish to God my fears may be groundless, if I should tell you
that in truth I am jealous whether your Liberties and Properties are not a
great deal dearer to most of you than your Religion, which yet makes 3. His
Majesty's Care of them has been so much, that we are obliged to all
Acknowledgments.
so loud a noise in the World.

GOD knows, these are as the great Diana of the Ephesians to us; of these we
are fond, even to Superstition: and you shall find the King as affectionate to
you, and as desirous to preserve them all in their just Measures, as you can
possibly with any Conscience wish he should be. 4. The Annals of our most happy
times scarce have one Year in them but what is more severe, than a whole Reign
has yet produced.


NAY, The Care of your Civil Rights and Liberties has been so much His
Majesty's, that the more The Lord Keepers Speech on the 13th. of October, 1675.
page 6, and 7.
you reslect upon these Concerns, the more you will find your selves obliged to
acknowledge His Majesty's Tenderness of you, and Indulgence to you.

SEARCH your own Annals, the Annals of those Times you account most happy, you
will scarce find one Year without an Example of something more severe, and more
extraordinary, 5. Statues have been erected for those Princes in Foreign
Nations, that never had half that Moderation which we have lived to enjoy.
than a whole Reign has yet produced.

PERUSE the Histories of Foreign Nations, and you shall find, Statues and
Altars too have been erected to the Memories of those Princes, whose best
Virtues never arrived to half that Moderation, which we (let me add, for these
twenty Years, have) lived to see, and to enjoy.

AND Let us all evermore remember this unexceptionable A Letter from His
Majesty at Breda, Apr. 4/14 1660. to the Speaker of the House of Commons, page
4.
Truth, which His Sacred Majesty was pleased 6. This Liberty is best preserved
by preserving the King's Honor.
himself to lay down to us long ago; that Our Liberty and Property is best
preserved by preserving the Honor of the King.

FOR the Greatness and Dignity of the King The Lord Keeper's Speech, Wednesd.
Oct. 13. 1675. p. 7. The Lord Chancellor's Speech to Baron Thurland at the
taking of his Oath, January 24. 1672/3. page 3
7. The King's Greatness the Peoples Safety
is the Greatness and Safety of his People. Therefore,

LET not the King's Prerogative and the Law be 8. Therefore the King's
Prerogative and the Law should not be two things with us.
two things with you. For the King's Prerogative is Law, and the principal part
of the Law; and therefore, in maintaining that, you maintain the Law. The
Government of England is so excellently interwoven, that every part of the
Prerogative has a broad mixture of the Interest of the Subject; the Ease and
Safety of the People being inseparable from the Greatness and Security of the
Grown.

THE knowing of our own Interest will secure June 26. 1673. page 4.
9. The knowledge of our own Interest secures us to the King's and Nations.
us to the King's and the Nation's. I repeat them thus together (says the Lord
Chancellor in his Speech upon the Lord Treasurer 's taking his Oath in the
Exchequer,) because none but Mountebanks in State Matters can think of them
asunder. 10. Prerogative not extended beyond its due Limits.


AND if the not extending his Prerogative beyond The Lord Keeper's Speech to
both Houses, January 7. 1673/4. page 9.
its due Limits can secure our Liberties; then surely we have no need to fear
the least Diminution of them. For, 11. The King only considers his Prerogative
in order to preserve the Peace and Security of the Kingdom.


SAYS The King, The Peace and Security The King's Speech, April 5. 1664. page
3.
of the Kingdom, and the Welfare of my Subjects I study more than my
Prerogative: Indeed I consider my Prerogative only in order to preserving the
other.

DO We not see that the King has made it his The Lord Keeper's Speech, Jan. 7.
1673/4. page 8.
Care and his Business to do all that is possible to 12. The Laws of the
Kingdom the Measures of both his Power and Prudence.
preserve us in our Civil Rights, that he makes the Laws of his Kingdom the
Measures, not only of his Power, but his Prudence; that he suffers no Man to be
wiser than the Law; that he thinks he cannot judge of the Health or Sickness of
his State by any better Indication than the Current 13. Their Current gives the
best Judgment. either of the Health or Sickness of the State.
of his Laws, and suffers nothing to remain that may in the least measure
hinder Justice from flowing in its due and proper Channels.

NOW The Administration of Justice, according His Majesty's Declaration for
enforcing a late Order made in Council, Feb. 12 1674/5. page 3.
to the settled and known Laws of the Land, is, certainly, the most reasonable
and 14. Administration of Justice according to the known Laws of the Land.
proper Method for attaining and preserving the Peace and Safety both of Church
and State.

FOR Laws are the Strength of a Kingdom, the Walls and Bulwarks of a Nation;
without which, Places are but as the Forests 15. What Laws are to a Kingdom.
of Wild Beasts to dwell in: and the Ends of the Law are to bridle Men's wild
and loose Exorbitances, and to be instructive, and to direct to Duty. Now you
shall hear what His Majesty has 16. Their end.
been pleased to say as to this Point. And first, If you will but look into
that Letter which he sent to the Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons,
you will find there these words.

SAYS He, If you desire that Reverence and Obedience may be paid to the
Fundamental April 4/14 1660 page 6. 7.
17. Reverence and Obedience to the Fundamental Laws of the Land is that the
King desires to be sworn to, and all Persons in Authority.
Laws of the Land, and that Justice may be equally and impartially Administered
to all Men; it is that which we desire to be sworn to Our Self, and that all
Persons in Power and Authority shall be so too. In a word, There is nothing
that you can propose, that may make the Kingdom happy, which we will not
contend with you to Compass. And upon this Confidence and Assurance, we have
thought fit to 18. Nothing can be proposed to make the Kingdom happy, but he
will contend with us to compass.
send you this Declaration, that you may, as much as is possible, at this
Distance, see our Heart.

AND In the Declaration that was enclosed therein, His Majesty thus delivers
himself: Ve do not desire more to enjoy what is Ours, than that all Our The
Declaration, page 2.
Subjects may enjoy what by Law is theirs, 19. The King desires no more to
enjoy his own, than to have his Subjects enjoy what by Law is theirs.
by a full and entire Administration of Justice throughout the Land, and by
extending Our Mercy where it is wanted and deserved.

AND When he granted a Free and General Pardon to all his Subjects, of what
Degree or Quality soever, who would not persevere in their Guilt for the
future, by opposing the Quiet and Happiness of their Country, in the
Restoration both of King, Peers and People, to their Just, Ancient and
Fundamental Rights, but would return to the Loyalty and Obedience of good
Subjects. Says His Majesty, Let all our Subjects, how faulty soever, 20. By
his General Pardon no Crime shall ever rise in Judgment against any, eito
endammage their Lives, Liberties or Estates, who will now become obedient to
Laws.
The same Declaration, page 2. and 3.
rely upon the Word of a King, solemnly given by this present Declaration, that
no Crime whatsoever, committed against Us, or Our Royal Father before the
Publication of this, shall ever rise in Judgment, or be brought in question
against any of them, to the least Endamagement of them, either in their Lives,
LIBERTIES, or Estates; (Nay, so tender is the King of their Credit, that he
goes on) or (as far forth as lies in Our Power) so much as to the prejudice of
their Reputations, by any Reproach, or 21. Nay, their Reputations shall not
suffer, if he can help it.
Term of Distinction from the rest of Our best Subjects.

IN The King's Speech to his Parliament, April 5. 1664. p. 4. He thus says to
them; I do assure you upon my Word, and I 22. He has no other thoughts but to
make us happy in our Laws, and prays so to be believed.
pray believe me, that I have no other Thoughts or Designs in my Heart, but to
make you all happy in the Support of the Laws established.

NAY, The Speaker of the House of Commons, when he addressed himself to His
Sacred Majesty, in the Name of the whole House, who are the Representative Body
of all the Commons of England, could say: Most Gracious and dread Sovereign,
23. When any thing of Right or but Convenience has happened to be a measuring
Cast, a disputable Case, he has always cast it against himself, if it has
been for his People's Good.
though the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses Saturday, December. 29. 1660. being
the day of their Dissolution, p. 25, 26.
now assembled in Parliament, have no cause to complain, they cannot but take
notice of your Partiality: for when any thing in point of Right, or but
Convenience has fallen out to be, as we use to say, a measuring Cast, a
disputable Case between your Self and your People, without any regard or
respect had unto your own Right, or the Advantage that might accrue to your
Self by asserting the same, if the Good of your People has come in Competition
with it, you have always cast it against your Self, and given it in on your
People's side. 24. The Restoration of the King, and the Restoring us to our
Magna Charta Liberties.


AND then a little before he concludes this his Speech, he returns his thankful
Acknowledgment to God for his Infinite Goodness and Mercy in restoring His
Majesty to his Royal and Imperial Crown, Throne and Dignity, and for making him
the Restorer of our Religion; as likewise, says he, for restoring us to our
Magna Charta Liberties, having taken The same Speech page 31, 32.
the Charge and Care of them into your own Heart; which is our greatest
Security, and more than a thousand 25. The good old Rules of the Law our best
Security.
Confirmations.

THE King says it himself, and it is true beyond all Contradiction, That the
Good old Rules of the Law are the best Security. These shall be ever dear His
Speech, May, 19. 1662. page 4.
26. No Man's Property or Liberty shall ever be invaded.
to him, these will he command his Learned Judges to cherish with Upright and
Impartial Justice. And in his Speech to both his Houses, he ends thus: I will
Wednesday, Feb. 5. 1672. page 4.
conclude with this Assurance to you, that no 27. The King steady in
maintaining all his Promises to us concerning Property, and ready to give fresh
Instances of his Zeal for preserving the established Laws.
Man's Property or Liberty shall ever be Invaded. What Expressions can go
higher? And how can the King more expatiate himself to you? Is not this
Security a Satisfaction equal to all your Wishes?

BUT To proceed, be pleased to hear the words of the King again to his
Parliament. Says he, I hope I need not use many words to persuade you, that I
The King's Speech Monday October 27. 1673. page, 4.
am steady in maintaining all the Professions and Promises I have made you
concerning Property. And I shall be very ready to give you 28. For his Heart is
perfectly with his Peoples in it.
fresh Instances of my Zeal for preserving the Established Laws, as often as
any Occasion shall require.

AND The Lord Chancellor tells us in his Speech then, I 29. Reverence and
Obedience will be given to Laws when they are well understood that they conduce
to the Peoples Profit.
can add nothing to what His Majesty has said. For as to Property, his Heart
is with your Heart, page 9.
perfectly with your Heart.

IT Was a right Ground of Considence, such a The Lord Chancellor's Speech,
Monday, May 19. 1662. page 14. and 15.
one as seldom deceives Men, that the great Lawmaker, the wise Solon had, when
he concluded that Reverence and Obedience would be yielded to his Laws, because
he had taken the pains to make his Citizens know and understand, that it was
more for their profit to obey Law and Justice, than to contemn and break it:
and indeed, the Profit, Benefit and Ease is very great, which always attends a
cheerful Obedience to Laws and Government.

NO Wonder then we stand up so vigorously for our Old Laws, since in
maintaining them consists our Perfect Freedom, our greatest Liberty. And herein
too is the King chiefly solicitous, because it tends so much to our real Good
and Happiness. Therefore says he to his Parliament, I shall consent to any
reasonable Bills you shall offer me for the Good 30. His willingness to consent
to any reasonable Bills for the Good of the Nation.
The King's Speech, Thursd. May 23. 1678. page 6.
and Safety of the Nation.

AND He thus continues;

MY Lords and Gentlemen,
I shall say no more, but only to assure you, whatsoever some ill Men would
have believed, I never had 31. The King never had any Intentions but of Good to
his People, and will do all things for their Safety.
any Intentions but of Good to you, and to my People, nor ever shall; but will
do all that I can for your Safety and Ease.

AND Wherein does our Safety and Ease more consist, than in an orderly
Government by Law, which preserves to every Man his true Rights and Interests?
And is there any Invasion on us here? Are not the Laws in full force and power?
and has not 32. Our Safety most consists in being governed by Law
Justice been equally and impartially administered to all, ever since the happy
Restoration of the King?

LET There be then no Complaining in our Streets, no Murmurings 33. And if our
Civil Rights can be yet made more firm to us, the King's Heart is full of
gracious Intentions for our general Satisfaction.
in our Borders; if we have not Laws enough to secure, and please us, if we
think our Liberties and Civil Rights can be yet more firmly established to us;
then let us lay down our just Necessities before him: Who says, God knows, Our
Heart is full of Gracious Intentions; The King's Declaration to all his Loving
Subjects, Dec. 26. 1662. page 13.
not only for the Plenty and Prosperity, but for the Universal Satisfaction of
the Nation. And, no doubt but he will concur with us in all things which may
advance our Peace, and preserve our Just Rights to us.

THIS We may steadfastly believe, when he assures his Parliament, 34. For
nothing can be reasonably proposed, but he will readily receive.
That If there be any thing you think wanting to secure Property, there is
nothing The King's speech, Jan. 7. 1671/4. page 4.
which you shall reasonably propose, but I shall be ready to receive it.

THEREFORE, Be but pleased your selves, 35. Therefore being pleased our selves
he is best pleased.
and persuade others to be so, contrive all the ways ^^e Lord Chan^^llor's
Speech, ^eptemb. 13. ^^60. page 23.
imaginable for your own Happiness, and you will make him the best pleased, and
the most happy Prince in the World.

NOW nothing recommends the present Age 36. Nothing so much recommends the
present Age as the good Laws made in it.
unto Posterity so much, as the Wisdom, and the The Lord Keepers Speech, Apr.
13. 1675. p. 15.
Temper of the Laws that are made in it, for all succeeding Ages judge of our
Laws, as we do of our Ancestors, by the true and unerring Rule of Experience.

IN Making of Laws therefore, it will import us to consider, that too many Laws
are a Snare, (for Id. ibid.
37. But too many Laws are a Snare.
Mr. Grivel, in 35 Eliz. said in Parliament, (as Sir Robert Filmer reports it
in his Freeholders Grand Inquest,) he wished not the making of many Laws; since
the more we make, the less Liberty we have our selves, Her Majesty not being
bound by them, 38. Too few a Weakness in the Government.
page 49, 50.) too few are a weakness in the Government, too gentle are seldom
obeyed, too severe are as seldom executed: And Sanguinary Laws are, for the
most part, either the Cause 39. And Sanguinary Laws either the Cause or Effect
of a Distemper in the State.
or the Effect of a Distemper in the State.

TO establish this State, there seems not to need Id. ibid.
many new Laws, some will always be wanting. And therefore says the King to
his Parliament, in his Speech before this of my Lord Chancellor's; The
principal End of my Calling you now, is to know what The King's Speech, Apr.
13. 1675. page 3.
40. Some Laws will always be wanting.
you think may be yet wanting to the Security of (Religion and) Property.

THIS Speech of the King's, as my Lord Chancellor says very 41. Therefore the
King calls his Parliament to know what is wanting.
truly; Was in order to unite the Hearts of his The Lord Chancellor's Speech,
Apr. 13. 1675. page 8.
Parliament and People to himself, by all the Emanations of Grace and Goodness
that from a great and generous Prince can be expected. And here, 42. And this
in order to unite the Hearts of both Parliament and People to him.
The King is pleased to add the Consideration of your Id. ibid.
Liberties and Properties: And while he does so, you may be sure that he who is
so careful of your Rights, will be mindful of his own too; for he that does
Justice to all, can never be wanting to himself.

AND, Says the King about two Months after; I think I 43. And he that is so
careful of our Rights, sure ought to mind his own.
have given sufficient Evidence to the World, that I have not been wanting on
my part, The King's Speech to both Houses, Jun. 9. 1675. page 3.
in my Endeavors to procure the full Satisfaction of all my Subjects, in the
matters 44. The King not wanting in his endeavors to have all his people
satisfied in matters both of Religion and Property.
both of Religion and Property. I have not only invited you to those
Considerations at our first Meeting, but I have been careful, through this
whole Session, that no Concern of my own should divert you from them.

RELIGION and Liberty stand secured by The Lord Keepers Speech, Jan. 7. 1673/4.
p. 19.
the most Sacred Ties that are. Nay, the King He invited his Parliament to
those Considerations not only at first, but all along.
Religion and Liberty secured by the most sacred Ties that are.
The King's Interest to prefer both, greater than ours.
has a greater Interest in the preservation of both, than you your selves: for
as Religion, the Protestant Religion, commands your indispensable Obedience, so
it is a just and lawful Liberty which sweetens that Command, and endears it to
you.

DOES not every man see that the King has 48. The King has given new life and
motion to Laws.
given new Life and Motion to such Laws as were The Lord Keeper's Speech, Jan.
7. 1673/4. page 19.
long dead, or fast asleep?

HAS he not commanded a rigorous and severe Prosecution at Law of all the
Officers and Soldiers in His 49. All Officers and Soldiers severely to be
prosecuted when they misbehave themselves.
Majesty's ordinary Guards, when they mis-behave themselves toward the meanest
Subject? And does not this secure your Properties?

ARE not all the Privileges from Arrests, which were claimed by His Majesty's
Servants extraordinary, Id. ibid.
who are very numerous, abrogated? And does not this 50. All Privileges of
Arrests claimed by any of the King's Servants abrogated.
prevent the Delays and Obstructions of Justice?

THESE are not single and transient Acts, but such Acts as flow from Habits:
These are not Leaves Id. ibid.
and Blossoms, but true, solid and lasting Fruits. Long! long! may that Royal
Tree Live and Flourish upon which these Fruits 51. These not single and
transient Acts, but such as flow from Habits*
do grow.

BUT the King does not think this yet sufficient, but he will go further on,
and give us new Assurances, that nothing can be more welcome to him, than the
receiving of such Bills from his Parliament, as may truly tend to the Happiness
and Ease of his 52. The King ready to gratify his People in further securing
their Liberties and Properties, by as many good Laws as can be proposed, and as
may comport with the safety of the Government.
Kingdoms and People.

SAYS He, I declare my self freely, that I am ready to gratify you in a
further The King's Speech, Thursd. Feb. 15. 1676/7. page 2, 3.
securing of your Liberty and Property (if you can think you want it) by as
many good Laws as you shall propose, and as can consist with the Safety of the
Government; without which there will neither be Liberty nor Property left to
any man.

Having thus plainly told you what I am ready to do for you, I shall deal as
plainly with you again, and tell you what it is I do expect from you.

I do expect and require from you, that all occasions 53. The King being ready
to do this for us, expects
of Difference between the two Houses be carefully avoided: For else they, who
have no hopes to prevent your good Resolutions, will hope by this Reserve to
hinder them from taking any effect. 54. That all occasions of difference
between the Houses be taken away.


AND Let all Men Judge who is most for Arbitrary Government, they that foment
such Differences as tend to dissolve all Parliaments; or I that would preserve
this and all Parliaments from being made useless 55. And let any judge who is
most for Arbitrary Government; he, or others that foment Differences.
by such Dissentions.

THE Preserving a State of Peace and Unity The Lord Chancellor's Speech, May
23. 1678. page 12.
56. Keeping Peace at home now more necessary than ever.
at home, is now more necessary than ever. He that foments Divisions now, does
more mischief to his Country than a Foreign Enemy can do: and disarms it in a
time, when all the hands, and all the hearts we have, are but enough to defend
us.

NO Fears of Arbitrary Government can justify, no Zeal to Religion can
sanctify such a Proceeding.

FOR this directly tends to unhinge us all, this has nothing but Ruin and
Desolation, Anarchy and Confusion in the end of it. 57. Divisions only, tend to
Ruin.
This would the King suppress, he would have Right prevail, and every man to
enjoy all those Civil Privileges which belong to him as his just due; for he
would have things to stand upon their Ancient and Sure Foundations. Complaints
should be heard, and Wrongs should be relieved, to all alike should Justice be
imparted, and there should be no respect to persons: and this would be the way
for the Land to have abundance of Peace. For the truth hereof, hearken to the
words of the King: I do not pretend to 58. The Nation never had less cause to
complain of Grievances, than since the Kings Restoration.
be without Infirmities, but I have never broken my Word with you; and if I do
not flatter The King's Speech, Jan. 18. 1666, page 4.
my self, the Nation never had less cause to complain of Grievances, or the
least Injustice or Oppression than it has had in these seven Years it has
pleased God to restore me to you.

AND when he came to Prorogue his Parliament till toward Winter; that so they
might in their several places intend the Peace and Security of their several
Countries, where there were unquiet Spirits enough working. I do pray you,
says he, 59. And he desires his Parliament so to tell the people in their
respective Countries, for he is sure of it.
and I do expect it from you, that you will use your utmost endeavors to
remove all The King's Speech, Feb. 8. 1666, page 5.
those false Imaginations in the hearts of the People, which the Malice of ill
Men have industriously infused into them, of I know not what Iealousies and
Grievances: for I must tell you again, and I am sure I am in the right, (and it
is worthy of the most solemn regard) that the People had never so little cause
to complain of Oppression and Grievances as they have had since my Return to
you.

THIS is not all: The Words of the Lord Keeper, who spoke 60. But this is not
all.
the Sense and Mind of the King, and which he commanded him to declare to them,
are more large yet. Says he, If any just Grievances shall have happened, His
Majesty will 61. If any just Grievances shall happen, he is as ready to redress
them as the Parliament to represent them.
be as willing and ready to Redress them for the future, The Lord Keeper's
Speech, Thursd. October 10. 1667. page 8. Id. page 7.
as you to have them represented unto him.

AND therefore, although His Majesty hears, and has reason to believe, that
some disaffected persons have spread abroad Discourses and Rumors, reflecting
upon the Government, intending thereby to beget a disaffection in his good
Subjects: and it is an easy thing to take exceptions; Cum neque culpam humana
Infirmitas neque Calumniam regnandi difficultas evitet. Yet His Majesty
promises himself from your good Affections, that every one of you in your
several places will endeavor to preserve a good Understanding between him and
his People. Id. page 7, 8.


WELL, but the King, as if he had not been satisfied in trusting any other to
speak his mind, comes and tells his Parliament himself. I assure you, I shall
willingly receive 62. And he will willingly receive all Bills of that nature.
and pass any Bill you shall offer me, The King's Speech to both Houses,
Saturd. Mar. 8. 167^/3. page 4.
that may tend to the giving you satisfaction in all our just Grievances.

WHAT is there now that you can complain of, 63. we shall be Righted in all our
Complaints.
wherein you shall not be righted?

DO there want any Laws to secure the Peace and Quiet of the State? says my
Lord Keeper to The Lord Keeper's Speech. October. 13. 1675. page 8, 9, 10, 11.
that Parliament. 64. In Laws to secure the Peace of the State.


WOULD you at once enrich and adorn the Kingdom, by providing for the Extent
and Improvement of Trade, by introducing new and useful Manufactures, and by
encouraging those we have already? 65. In Provisions for the Extent and
Improvement of Trade


WOULD you prevent all Frauds and Perjuries, all Delays, and Abuses in the
Administration of Justice?

WOULD you preserve a famous City from being depopulated 66. In preventing all
Frauds and Perjuries, all Delays and Abuses in the Administering of Justice.
by the Suburbs. Would you restrain the Excess of those new Buildings which
begin to swarm with Inhabitants unknown?

ALL your Petitions of this kind will be Grateful to the King, and you may with
ease effect all this, and much more, which your great Wisdoms will suggest to
you. A little time 67. In restraining the Excess of new Buildings.
will serve to make many excellent Laws, and to give you the honor of being
the Repairers of all our Breaches, so as that time he wholly employed upon the
Public, and not taken up by such Considerations as are less meritorious. 68.
And a little time serves to make many excellent Laws if that time be wholly
employed on the Public.


IF therefore there be any without Doors, that labor to disunite your
Counsels, or to render them ineffectual; if they can hope that the occasions
for this may arise from some difference within your selves, or hope by those
differences to disguise their own Disaffections to your good Proceedings; it is
in your power to defeat those hopes, to pull off this Disguise, and to secure
69. Therefore let none be able to disunite our great Councils.
a happy Conclusion of this Meeting, by studying to preserve a good
Correspondence, and by a careful avoiding of all such Questions as are apt to
engender Strife.

AND if ever there were a time, when the Gravity, and the Counsel, the Wisdom,
and the good Temper of a Parliament For it is in their power to preserve a good
Correspondence.
If ever a Parliament had need to be Grave and Temperate, it is now.
were necessary to support that Government which only can support these
Assemblies, certainly this is the Hour.

YOU see with what Zeal the King has recommended to 72. The King's Zeal to
recommend a good Agreement among them.
you a good Agreement between your selves, and that he does it with all the
Care and Compassion, all the Earnestness and Importunity, fit for so great a
Prince to express; who would be very sorry that any such misfortune as your
Disagreement, should either deprive him of your Advice and Assistance, or 73.
For the contrary would deprive him of their good Advice and Assistance, and the
people of good Laws.
his People of those good Laws which he is ready to grant you.

There is no other way our Enemies can think of, by which it is possible for
this Session to miscarry; for Fears and Jealousies cannot enter here, Calumnies
and Slanders will find no place amongst wise and good Men.

THEY that use these Arts abroad will quickly be discredited, when the World
shall see the Generous Effects of your Confidence. 74. This the only way our
Enemies can think of to make us miscarry.
Men will despair of attempting any Disturbance in the State, when they see
every step that tends that way, serves only to give you fresh occasion to
testify your Loyalty and your Zeal. 75. But Men will despair of attempting any
disturbance in the State when they see the Parliament united.


YOU have all the reason in the World to make Men see this; for you have the
same Monarchy to assert, the same Church to defend, the same Interests of
Nobility and Gentry to maintain, the same excellent King to contend for, and
the same Enemies to contend against.

AND now you shall hear what my Lord Chancellor had to say to the Parliament
concerning this Point. He tells them; There 76. And they have all the reason in
the World to be so.
is little cause to be jealous of our Liberties and Properties; nor do they
believe themselves who pretend The Lord Chancellor's Speech, Thursd. May* 23.
1678. page 14, 15.
to be afraid of either. Can there be a greater Evidence of the moderation of a
Prince, and his 77. Little cause to be jealous of our Liberties and Properties.
tenderness of the Liberty of the Subject, than to suffer, as he does every
day, so much Licentious and Malicious Talk to pass unpunished? If there be not
any one instance to be 78. For who else would suffer such malicious Talkers to
go unpunished.
found in a whole Reign, of a Man that has suffered against Law, and but very
few Examples of those that have suffered by it, shall we endure them that dare
say in Coffee-houses, and in other public places, that the Nation is enslaved?

LET it be lawful to provoke and challenge the most discontented, and the most
unsatisfied Spirit in the Kingdom, to show 79. One may challenge the most
discontented Spirits in the Kingdom to show when there were less Grievances, or
less cause of Complaint than now.
that time, if he can, since the World began, and this Nation was first
inhabited; wherein there were fewer Grievances, or less cause of Complaint than
there is at this present. Nay, give him scope enough, and let him search all
Ages, and all places of the World, and tell us, if he can, when and where there
was ever found a happier People than we are at this day.

AND if Malice it self ought to blush when it makes this Comparison, what
strange Ingratitude both to God and Man are they guilty of, who behave
themselves so, as if they could Nay, search all Ages and places of the World,
and none more happy than we are.
Therefore how ungrateful both to God and Man are they who are ill at ease
under so temperate a Government?
be ill at ease under so temperate a Government.

AND the King, as if all he had hitherto spoken did not seem enough to him for
the satisfaction of his People, makes one apvance 82. The King declares he will
with his Life defend the Laws of this Kingdom.
higher yet, and says to his Parliament, I do give you this Assurance, that I
will with my Life defend the Laws of this Kingdom; and (may The King's Speech,
Thursd. March 6. 1678/9. page 7.
he not then, let us in cool Blood consider, justly go on thus to them?) I do
expect from you to be defended from the Calumny, as well as danger of those 83.
Therefore let us defend him from the Calumny of those who would render him and
the Government odious to the People.
worst of Men, who endeavor to render me and my Government odious to my People.

THAT there are such, and especially at this time, it is too notorious; and if
due Care and Circumspection be not taken, they will quickly be in no small
hopes to raise a Storm that nothing shall be able to allay.

SUCH are they who are industriously active in improving Fears and Jealousies
among the Populace, and in nourishing all 84. It is too notorious that there
are such.
the base Suspicions which they can devise.

THESE should diligently be looked after; who, with their Ill meant
distinctions between the Court and the 85. And they are those that improve
Fears and Jealousies.
Country, between the Natural and the Politic Capacity; The Lord Chancellor's
Speech, Feb. 15. 1676/7. page 15, 16.
go about to persuade others that these are two several Interests. 86. they
have ill meant distinctions between the Court and the Country, between the
Natural and the Politic Capacity.


BUT says the Lord Chancellor immediately after, let such Men have a care of
that Precipice to which such Principles may lead them; for the first Men that
ever began to distinguish of their Duty, never left off till they had quite
distinguished themselves out of all their Allegiance.

AND I wish with all my heart that That known Truth of my Lord Keeper's was
imprinted into the hearts of all His Majesty's Subjects; and which, I am sure,
would keep us then within the 87. But let such have a care of a Precipice.
decent Bounds of our Loyalty and Obedience to him, That there is no distinct
Interest between the King and his People; but the Good of one is the Good 88.
There is no distinct interest between the King and his People.
The Lord Keeper's Speech, October. 10. 1667. page 8.
of both.

AND, for the public Good, the King will give no intermission to his own
thoughts. Away The Lord Chancellor's Speech, Sept. 13. 1660. page 18.
then with all the vain Imaginations of those who labor 89. For the Public
Good the King will give his thoughts no Intermission.
to infuse a misbelief of the Government.

WE that have the happiness to live under so excellent The Lord Chancellor's
Speech, Feb. 15. 1676/7. page 15.
a Monarchy, so admirable a Constitution and Temper of Government, we that
remember what the want of this Government cost us, and the miserable
Desolations which attended it, have all 90. We that have the happiness to live
under so temperate a Government have all the Motives that can be to secure the
Interests of it.
Id. page 14.
the Motives, and are under all the Obligations that can be, to secure and
advance the Interest of it.

THE King on his part, (as the Lord Chancellor 91. The King meets his
Parliament with an open and full heart, and is resolved to glad the hearts of
his People by all things he is able to do for them.
admirably well speaks to both Houses of Parliament,) Id. Ibid.
meets you with so open and so full a heart, and is so absolutely resolved and
determined to do all that in him lies to glad the hearts of his People, that it
must be the strangest infelicity in the World, if either he or his Subjects
should meet with any disappointments here.

FOR the King has no desires but what are public, no Ends or Aims which
terminate in himself; Id. page 15.
all his Endeavors are so entirely bent upon the Welfare of all 92. The King
has no desires but what are public: all his endeavors are for the Welfare of
his People.
his Dominions, that he does not think any Man a good Subject, who does not
heartily love his Country: and therefore let no Man pass for a good Patriot,
who does not as heartily love and serve his Prince.

PRIVATE Men indeed are subject to be misled by private Interests, and may
entertain some vain Ibid.
and slender hopes of surviving the Misfortunes of the Public: 93. And he
thinks none good Subjects who do not heartily love their Country.
but a Prince is sure to fall with it, and therefore can never have any
Interests divided from it.

TO live and die with the King is the highest Profession a Subject can make;
and sometimes it is Ibid.
a Profession only, and no more; but in a King it is an absolute 94. Private
Men may be misled by private Interests.
Necessity: it is a Fate inevitable, that he must live and die with his People.

To be sure then the King will do any reasonable thing to cherish and maintain
the Rights and Interests of his People, since by 95. But a Prince is sure to
fall with his People.
that means he knows he does the more firmly establish himself in all their
Affections; and that, he has always accounted, his Best Security. He has said
it himself in a Letter to his Parliament in Scotland, assembled October 19.
1669. page 2. That, By the 96. For it is an absolute necessity in a King to
live and die with them.
Union of the Hearts and Hands of our People, our Throne shall be strengthened,
and they have Peace and Love settled amongst them for ever.

AND in his Declaration to all his Loving Subjects, two Years after his happy
Restoration to us, says he, We are very sure 97. By the Union of the People's
Hearts and Hands the Throne is strengthened.
that what Guards soever may be found necessary for us to continue, as in
former times, December. 26. 1662. page 6, 7.
for the Dignity and Honor of our Crown; the sole Strength and Security we
shall ever conside in shall be the Hearts and Affections of our Subjects, 98.
Therefore the sole Strength and Security the King shall confide in, shall be
the hearts of his Subjects, endeared and confirmed to him by the steady
Government according to Law.
indeared and confirmed to us by our Gracious and steady manner of Government,
according to the Ancient known Laws of the Land; there being not any one of our
Subjects, who does more from his Heart abhor, than we our selves, all sorts of
Military and Arbitrary Rules.

HERE you see is Liberty and Property assured to you upon 99. Here is Liberty
and Property assured to us upon the Word of a King.
the Word of a King; for no Government is so dear to him, as that which is
upheld by the Ancient Laws of his Ancestors. And as there is Nothing in the
World which ought to be held so Sacred and Inviolable among Kings and
Sovereigns, as the true and exact Observation of their Words, so this His
Majesty very well knew: and this it was that made him say, I do value my 100.
Who values himself much on keeping his Word.
self much upon keeping my Word, upon The King's Speech at the Opening of the
Parliament, May 8. 1661. page 1.
making good whatsoever I promise to my Subjects.

WHAT Reason then is there for so strange a 101. What reason then for any
distrust?
Diffidence and Distrust? which, like a general Infection, begins to spread it
self into almost all the The Lord Chancellor's Speech, Feb. 15. 1676/7. page 11.
Corners of the Land. Arbitrary Rule and Government, you find, the King can no
more endure to think of, than you your selves. He tells you, It is that which
his Soul abhors, perfectly abhors: 102. What the King has thus freely spoken,
surely he will as fully maintain and justify.
and therefore, consequently, it must be that which you are never likely to see
him take up.

THIS, methinks, should confirm our Faith, and make us confident, that what the
King has freely spoken, he will as fully maintain and justify.

LET us then readily and unanimously give to the King our 103. Let us then give
the King our hearts, who is always opening his arms to us.
Hearts, Who is continually opening and stretching his Arms to all who are
worthy to be his Subjects, The Lord Chancellor's Speech, Thurs. Sep. 13. 1660.
page 11.
worthy to be thought English Men. How would he extend his Heart with a pious
and a grateful Joy, to find all his Subjects at once in his Arms, and himself
in theirs!

SAYS this Gracious Majesty, in his Declaration to all his 104. The King
accounts his Dignity and Greatness more happily founded on his Clemency, and
his Subjects Loves, than in their Fears, and his Power.
Loving Subjects; It has been always a constant Profession of ours, that we
do, and December. 26. page 5.
shall ever think our Royal Dignity and Greatness more happily and securely
founded on our own Clemency, and our Subjects Loves, than in their Fears, and
our Power.

WHICH most sincere Profession of ours, goes he on, may suffice also to expose
the Id. ibid.
Wickedness and Falsehood of that Malice, concerning 105. What malice is that to
talk of his Arbitrary Government.
the Design of introducing a way of Government by Military Power.

NO, He knows a better way of Ruling, than by that of the Sword: it is both
more easy, and more suitable, and agreeing with his Nature, his Clemency. He
had rather come to you in Love, than in Power. It Is in your Hearts he aims to
live, for there he finds his Surest Rest.

THE King of Spain's Mines will sooner deceive him, than that Revenue will fail
him; for his The Speech of the Speaker of the House of Commons to the King,
Saturd. December. 29. 1660. at their Dissolution, page 31.
Mines have Bottoms: but the deeper His Majesty sinks himself into the Hearts
and Affections of his People, the greater he will find his Wealth to be, and
the more invincible his Strength.

THEREFORE did the King ingenuously deal 106. Never any King valued himself
more on his People's Love than he does.
with us all, when he said, Never King valued himself more upon the Affections
of his People, The King's Speech, Aug. 29. 1660. p. 5.
than I do; nor do I know a better way to make my self sure of your Affections,
than by being just and kind to you all: and whilst I am so, I pray let the
World see, that I am possessed of your 107. And the best way to have their
Loves is by being just to them all.
Affections.

AND says the Lord Chancellor, The King thinks himself the happiest, and the
greatest Prince of the World; not from the Situation of his Dominions, and the
The Lord Chanceller's Speech, December. 29. 1660. p. 17, 18.
108. The King thinks himself the happiest Prince of the World, from being
possessed of his People's Hearts and Affections.
Power of his great Navy, with which he can visit his Neighbors, and keep them
from visiting him; or from the Noble Revenue you have settled upon him, which he
will improve with all good Husbandry: But from being possessed of the
Affections and Hearts of such Subjects, that
he does so entirely love them, and depend upon them, that all his Actions, and
all his Counsels, shall tend to no other end, but to make them happy and
prosperous: that he thinks 109. And all his Actions and Counsels shall tend to
no other end but to make them happy and prosperous.
his Honor and his Interest principally to consist in providing for, and
advancing the Honor and Interest of the Nation: that he is so confident in the
multitude of his very good and faithful Subjects, that he is very hard to be
persuaded, that his few ill and unfaithful Subjects can do him much harm; that
he so much depends upon the Affection of honest Men, and their Zeal for his
Security, that he is not so sollicitous and vigilant for his own Safety as he
ought to be, amidst so many Combinations, of which he is so well informed, that
his Servants, who with Grief and Anguish importune him not to take so little
care of his own safety, can obtain no other Answer from him, than what Caesar
heretofore gave to his jealous Friends: Mori se male quam timeri, or timere. He
will die any death, rather than live in fear of his own Subjects, or that they
should live in fear of him. 110. His Lenity and Mildness is remarkable.


HIS Lenity and Mildness, and his great and wonderful Condescentions to his
People, do plainly testify, that all his Endeavors have been, and his
Resolutions are, to make his Kingdom a 111. Therefore let other Princes glory
in their Subjects Obedience, the King only values himself on his People's
Affections.
Kingdom of Loves to them.

LET other Princes glory in the most refined The Lord Keeper's Speech, Jan. 7.
167^/4. page 19, 20.
Obedience of their Vassals, His Majesty values himself upon the Hearts and
Affections of his People, and thinks his Throne, when seated there, better
established than the most exalted Sovereignty of those who tread upon the Necks
of them that rise up against them.

SINCE the World stood, never had any King so great a 112. Never had any King
such cause to rest on this Security.
cause to rest upon this Security.

THEY were your Hearts that mourned in secret for the absence of the King: They
were your Hearts and Affections to the King which tired out all the late
Usurpations, by your invincible Patience and Fortitude: It was you that taught
our English 113. For the People's hearts have been seen all along toward him.
World to see and know that no Government could be settled here, but upon the
true Foundations of Honor and Allegiance.

WHAT may not the King now hope for from you? What may not you assure your
selves from him? Can any thing be 114. Therefore what may not the King hope for
from them, and what may not they assure themselves of from him?
difficult to Hearts so united, to Interests so twisted and interwoven
together, as the King's and yours are?

BEFORE ever he touched the English Shore, of his own free motion, how
graciously was he pleased to declare, that he granted a free and general Pardon
to all his Subjects, how heinous soever any of their Offenses had been to him
(excepting only some few Persons, as should afterward be excepted by
Parliament:) 115. How readily did he pass the Act of Oblivion? so that no Crime
should be remembered against them to the prejudice of their Lives, Liberties,
Estates or Reputations.
and how readily did he pass the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, when it was
presented to him, To the intent (as the Act in the Preamble expresses it) that
no Crime whatsoever committed against His Majesty, or his Royal Father, should
hereafter rise in Judgment, or be brought in question against any of them, to
the least Endammagement of them, either in their LIVES, LIBERTIES or ESTATES;
or to the prejudice of their Reputations, by any Reproach, or term of
distinction; and to bury all Seeds of future Discords, and remembrance of the
former; as well in his own Breast, as in the Breasts of his Subjects one
toward another: and that so there should be a firm Resettlement of both his
own just Rights, and the Rights of his People. I say, how readily did he pass
that Act? And, Certainly there can be no greater Evidence, The Kings
Declaration, Dec. 26, 1662. page 4, 5.
116. And there can be no greater Evidence that the passing it proceeded from
his Clemency, than his care to have it confirmed by a new Act.
that the Passing it did proceed from the Clemenly of our Nature, (as he
himself has said it) than that we have been pleased to make it our especial
care to have it confirmed by a new Act: and whereas, says he, we not only
consented unto, but most earnestly desired the passing that Act at first, and
confirming it since, as being no less conformable to our Nature, than
conducible to a happy Settlement: so we do hereby most solemnly renew unto all
117. And it never shall be in the power of any to make him decline the strict
Observance of it.
our Subjects concerned in it, this Engagement, on the Word of a King, that it
shall never be in the power of any Person or Interest whatsoever, to make us
decline from the Religious Observance of it.

AND what high and losty things does he speak of it? says he, I shall conclude
with this, which I cannot say too often, nor you too often, where The King's
Speech, December. 29, 1660. p 4, 5
you go, (for it was at the Dissolution of that Parliament) that next to the
miraculous Blessing of God Almighty; 118. He did impute the Security we were
all in to that happy Act.
and indeed, as an immediate Effect of that Blessing, I do impute the good
Disposition and Security we are all in, to the happy Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion: that is the principal Cornerstone which supports this excellent
Building, that creates kindness 119. That the chief Cornerstone that supports
this excellent Building.
in us to each other; and Confidence is our joint and common Security. You may
be sure, I will not only observe it Religiously and Inviolably my self, but
also exact the Observation of it from others. And if any 120. Confidence our
joint and common Security.
Person should ever have the boldness to attempt to persuade me to the
contrary, he will find such an Acceptance from me, as he would have, who
should persuade me to burn MAGNA CHARTA, cancel all the old 121. What
Acceptance he should find, that would go about to divert him from the
Observation of it.
Laws, and to erect a new Government after my own Invention and Appetite.

WHEN His Majesty came to see his new Parliament, what was one (and a great)
part of his Speech to them, but this? Above all, I must repeat what I said when
I was last here, says he, that next to the miraculous Blessing of God
Almighty; and indeed, as an immediate Effect of that 122. Still he calls this
Act the chief Cornerstone that supports this excellent Building.
Blessing, I do impute the good Disposition and Security we are all in, to the
happy Act of Indemnity and Oblivion: that is the principal Cornerstone which
supports this excellent Building, that creates Kindness in us to each other,
and Confidence is our joint and common Security. 123. That Confidence is our
joint and common Security.


I am sure I am still of the same Opinion; The King's Speech, May 8. 1661. at
the Opening of the Parliament. page 2, 3.
and more, if it be possible, of that Opinion, than I was, by the Experience I
have of the Benefit of it, and from the unreasonableness 124. He is of the same
Opinion he was by the experience he had of the benefit of it.
of what some Men say against it; though, I assure you, not in my hearing. In
God's Name, provide full Remedies for any future Mischiefs, be as severe as you
will against new Offenders; especially if they be so upon old Principles; and
pull up those 125. Therefore when any clamor against it, be as severe as
possible against such new Offenders upon old Principles.
Principles by the Roots. But I shall never think him a Wise Man, who would
endeavor to undermine or shake that Foundation of our Public Peace, by
Infringing that Act in the least degree: or that he can be my Friend, or wish
me well, who would persuade me ever to consent to the Breach of a Promise, I so
solemnly made when I was abroad, and performed with that 126. He is no wise Man
who shall go about to infringe that Act in the least degree: or can he be the
King's Friend, who would make him break such a Promise.
Solemnity; because, and after I promised it, I cannot suspect any Attempts of
that kind by any Men of Merit and Virtue.

AND now it would be very unseasonable and unreasonable to endeavor to shake
that Foundation, The Lord Chancellor's Speech to the same, p. 10, 11.
which, if you will take the King's Judgment, supports the whole Fabric of our
Peace and Securirity. He tells you what he shall think of any who goes about
127. This is a Zeal no Prince could be transported with but himself.
to undermine that Foundation; which is a Zeal no Prince could be transported
with but himself. It might have seemed enough for a King who had received so
many Injuries so hardly to be forgotten, undergone so many Losses so impossible
to be repaired? to have been willing to confirm, and to re-enact the Act of
128. For him, after such Indignities, etc. to prepare such an Act for us, and
to conjure his Parliament by all their Friendship to him, to dispatch it, is a
piece of Fatherly tenderness indeed.
Oblivion and Indemnity, when you should present it to him: But to prepare such
an Act for you, to conjure you by all that is precious, by your Friendship to
him, to dispatch those Acts with Expedition; is such a piece of Fatherly
Tenderness and Piety, as could proceed from no Heart, but such a one, in which
God has treasured up a stock of Mercy, and Justice, and Wisdom, to redeem a
Nation. And truly, My Lords and Gentlemen, for our selves; if we consider how
much we owe to those, who with all the Faculties of their Souls, contributed
to, and contrived the blessed Change, the restoring the King to his People, and
his People to the King: and then how much we owe to those who gave no
Opposition to the Virtuous Activity of the other; (and, God knows, a little
opposition might have done much 129. For there were but few who did not deserve
to be forgiven by him.
harm) whether we look upon the Public, or upon our own private Provocations,
there will remain so few who do not deserve to be forgiven by us, that we may
very well submit to the King's Advice, and his Example: of whom we may very
justly say, as a very good Historian said of a very great Emperor; and 130. The
only Instances of the King's Greatness and Power over us, have been the giving
of us Peace, Honor and Security.
I am sure, it could never be so truly said of any Emperor as of ours: Facere
recte cives suos, Princeps Optimus faciendo docet; cumque fit imperio Maximus,
Exemplo Major est. Nor indeed has he yet given us, or have we yet felt any
other Instances of his Greatness, and Power, and Superiority, and Dominion over
us. Nisi (as he said) out levatione periculi, aut accessione dignitatis, by
giving us Peace, Honor and Security, which we could not have without him; by
desiring nothing for himself, but what is 131. This made the House of Commons
unanimously return him their Thanks for his constant Observance of the Act of
Oblivion.
as good for us, as for himself.

AND certainly, the Consideration of this made the Honorable House of Commons
Resolve, upon the Question, Nemine contradicente; That the Humble Thanks of
their House should be returned to the King's Majesty, for his Constancy Feb.
25. 1652. page 3. Of the House of Com^^^ Votes and O^^ers then.
in the Observation of the Act of Indemnity.

AND also it was then Resolved, etc. Nemine contradicente; That the Humble
Thanks of their House 132. As also for his professing against introducing a
Government by Military Power.
should be returned to the King's Majesty, for his Profession against
Introducing a Government by a Military Power, in his Declaration to all his
Loving Subjects, December. 26. 1662.

AND in the Speech which their Speaker delivered in the Name of the whole
House, Feb. 26. 1662. p. 6, 7. he says thus: We your Majesty's most Dutiful
and Loyal Subjects, etc. do for our selves, and in the Names of all the Commons
of England, render to your Sacred Majesty the Tribute of our most hearty
Thanks, for that infinite Grace and Goodness, wherewith Your Majesty has been
pleased to publish your Royal Intentions of adhering to your Act of Indemnity
and Oblivion, by a constant and Religious Observance of it. And our Hearts are
farther enlarged in these Returns of Thanksgivings, when we consider Your
Majesty's most Princely and Heroic Professions of relying upon the Affections
of your People, and abhorring all sort of Military and Arbitrary Rule.

AS for the several Sums of Money which have been given to 133. As for his
laying out the Moneys that have been given him.
His Majesty, have they not been given him upon the Nation's Account, and for
its Good, Welfare and Security? We have had briefly a By-regard to our own
selves, and it was the sake of our dear Interest and Safety that made us so
full of Generous Liberality to him: and how all those great Sums have been laid
out to those Ends, you shall not take my Word for it; but, as I have done all
along hitherto, so I will still continue, what must needs be your best and
fullest satisfaction, to repeat to you the King's own Words.

WHEN the House of Commons had passed the Bill entitled An Act for a speedy
Provision of Money, to pay off and disband all the Forces of this Kingdom, both
by Sea and Aug. 29. 1660. The Speech of the Speaker of the House of Commons to
the King in the House of Lords, page 7.
Land: Upon which they hoped such a Sum would be advanced and brought in, as
might be sufficient, fully to discharge and dispatch that Work. And humbly
prayed His Majesty's Gracious Acceptance of, and Royal Assent to it. The King
was pleased to come and tell them; That he thanked them for the many good
things they had done for The King's Speech to both Houses, Septem. 13. 1660 p.
4.
him, and for the Kingdom. And, says he, In truth, I do thank you more for
what you have done for the Public, than what you have done for my own
particular; and yet I do thank you too 134. He promises, which is the best way
he can take to gratify his Parliament and People, that not one Penny of it
shall be laid out to his own particular Occasions, till it is evident, the
Public will not need it.
for that with all my heart: But I confess to you, I do thank you more for the
Provision you have made to prevent Free Quarter, during the time the Army shall
be Disbanding, which I take to be given for my Satisfaction, than I do for the
other Present you have made me for my own particular Occasions: And I do
promise you, which is the best way I can take to gratify you, I will not apply
one Penny of that Money to my own particular Occasions, what shift soever I
make, till it is evident to me, that the Public will not stand in need of it:
and if it do, every Penny of it shall be disbursed that way; and, I dare say, I
shall not be the poorer for it.

WHEN the King came to his Parliament, the first day of their Meeting after
their Adjournemnt, he tells them; The Occasion of my coming hither is
Extraordinary: It is to say something to you on my own behalf, The King's
Speech to both Houses, Wednesd. November. 20. 1661. page 1, 2.
to ask somewhat of you for my self; 135. And when his Majesty came again to
ask them for some more Money, he tells them, if it did most concern himself,
and his Straits etc. and did not manifestly relate to the public Peace more
than to his own particular, he would not ask.
which is more than I have done of you, or of those who met here before you,
since my coming into England. I need not do it now: They did, and you do, upon
all Occasions, express so great an Affection and Care of all that concerns me,
that I may very well refer both the matter and the manner of your doing any
thing for me, to your own Wisdoms and Kindness. And indeed, if I did think that
what I am to say to you now, did alone, or did most concern my self; if the
uneasy Condition I am in, if the Straits and Necessities I am to struggle
with; did not manifestly relate to the public Peace and Safety, more than to
my own particular, otherwise 136. For he can bear his own Necessities patiently
enough
than as I am concerned in the Public, I should not give you this trouble this
day; I can bear my Necessities, which merely relate to my self, with patience
enough* 137. And then, after he had laid open the Obligations of the Crown to
provide for the Interest, Honor and Security of the Nation: and declared to
them the pressing Occasions that made him so earnest, He desires them to
examine thoroughly whether such Necessities were real or not, or whether fallen
by his fault upon us, and give him accordingly.


AND having in short given them an Account of the Insupportable Weight that the
Public Necessities laid upon the Crown, and the Obligations it lies under, to
provide for the Interest, Honor and Security of the Nation; he says, These are
the pressing Occasions which I am forced to recommend to you with all possible
Earnestness, Id. page 3, 4.
and do conjure you to provide for, as speedily as is possible; and in such a
manner as may give us Security at home, and some Reputation abroad. I make this
Discourse to you with some Confidence, because I am very willing and desirous
that you should thoroughly examine whether these Necessities I mention be Real
or Imaginary, or whether they are fallen upon us by my Fault, my own ill
Managery or Excesses; and provide for them accordingly. I am very willing that
you make a full Inspection into my Revenue, as well the Disbursements as
Receipts; and if you find it has been ill managed by any Corruption in the
Officers I trust or by my own Vnthriftiness, I shall take the Information 138.
But not to believe any loose discourses of giving away vast sums of Money in a
Morning.
and Advice you shall give me very kindly: I say, if you find it: for I would
not have you believe any loose Discourses, how confidently soever urged, of
giving away Fourscore Thousand Pounds in a Morning, and many other
Extravagancies of that kind. 139. For he is sorry he can reward his faithful
Servants no better.
I have much more reason to be sorry that I have not to reward those who have
ever faithfully served the King my Father, and my self, than ashamed of any
Bounty I have exercised toward any Man.

HERE you find is plain dealing: The King comes to ask of 140. Thus if the King
ask for Money, it is to provide for our Safety and Interest.
his Parliament some Supply; but it is to this end, that the Nation may be the
better by it; that some necessary Provisions for the very Safety of the Kingdom
may be made without delay: that we may have cause to rejoice in our own Peace
and Quietness, being under the Covert of his Wings, whose Princely Heart and
Head cannot (no more than it ought to) be free from cares and thoughts of our
Protection and Happiness.

NOR unless, upon serious Examination, these pressing Necessities be found
real, and that they have not happened by any fault in him, (who is perfectly
willing that they should enter into the strictest Search in the Case) does he
require any thing. And he would take the Information kindly from them, if they
would be so free as to tell him, upon the Enquiry, that they do find Corruption
in any of the Officers that he trusts.

WHEN His Majesty met the House of Commons in the Banqueting House at
Whitehall, in March, and told them, That, 141. And he is exceedingly deceived,
if whatever he has had given him be any otherwise given, than to be laid out
for the public use and benefit, and so it shall, and we shall find we are the
richer by our giving.
in truth he did not know they were any whit nearer settling his Revenue than
they were The King's Speech to the House of Commons, Mar. 1. 1661/2. page 5, 6.
at Christmas: Says he, I am sure I have communicated my Condition to you
without Reserve, what I have coming in, and what my necessary Disbursements
are; and I am exceedingly deceived, if whatever you give me, be any otherwise
given to me, than to be issued out for your own use and benefit. Trust me, it
shall be so; and if you consider it well, you will find that you are the richer
by what you give, since it is all to be laid out, that you may enjoy the rest
in Peace and Security.

GENTLEMEN, I need not put you in Id. ibid. and page sequente.
142. Miserable have been the effects that attended the Wants of the Crown.
mind of the miserable Effects which have attended the Wants and Necessities of
the Crown; I need not tell you that there is a Republical Party still in the
Kingdom, which has the Courage to promise themselves another Revolution: and
methinks I 143. Therefore to have such Provision made for the Crown, as that it
might be able to support it self, and secure us, is all the King desires, and
that only for our Preservation.
should as little need to tell you that the only way, with God's Blessing, to
disappoint their hopes, and indeed, to reduce them from those extravagant Hopes
and Desires, is to let them see, that you have so provided for the Crown, that
it has where withal to support it self, and to secure you; which I am sure is
all I desire, and desire only for your Preservation. Therefore I do conjure
you, by all the Professions of Affection you have made to me, by all the
Kindness I know you have for me, after all your Deliverations, betake your
selves to some speedy Resolutions; and settle such a real and substantial
Revenue upon me, as may hold some proportion with the necessary Expenses I am
at for the Peace, and Benefit, and Honor of the Kingdom: that they who look
for Troubles at home may have that Esteem and Value of us, as may secure the
Interest and Honor of the Nation, and make the Happiness of this Kingdom, and
of this City, once more the Admiration and Envy of the World.

THUS you see, the Peace and Benefit, the Interest and Honor, and Happiness of
this Nation, the King's Heart is full of Gracious Intentions to procure and
support. This is it he greatly desires; and desires it for our sakes, as well
as his own. Under his 144. Well, when the Parliament had given the King Moneys,
how does he thank them for it, and tell them he will apply it all to the
greatest advantage for the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom.
Protection he would have us to enjoy our Safety; not only that our Persons
should be safe, but that all that belongs, or is dear to us, should be so
likewise; our Religion, our Liberties, and all our Civil Rights. And what more
is it possible for a King to do, to win over all the Hearts of his Subjects to
him? And shall he so deserve our Affections, and we ever grudge him our Purses?

BUT, to return to the King's own further Words: Says he to his Parliament; My
Lords and Gentlemen, You have so much obliged me, not only in the The King's
Speech to both Houses at their Prerogation, Mond. May, 19. 1662. page 4.
matter of those Bills which concern my Revenue, but in the manner of passing
them, 145. And with the best Advice and good Husbandry he can, he will contract
his Expenses.
with so great Affection and Kindness to me, that I know not how to thank you
enough. I do assure you, and I pray assure your Friends in the Country, that I
will apply all you have given me to the utmost Improvement of the Peace and
Happiness of the Kingdom; and will* with the best Advice and 146. How the King
found the Crown when he came to it.
good Husbandry I can, bring my Expenses within a narrower Compass.

THE Lord Chancellor, in his Speech after this of the King's, said to them, You
know how our Sovereign Lord 147. How he gave more Money to the People, than he
has received from them.
the King found the Crown at his blessed Return to The Lord Chancellor's Speech
to the same p. 12
it. You can tell the World, that as soon as he came hither, besides the
infinite that he forgave, he gave more Money to the People, than he has since
received from them: That at least two parts of three, that they have since
given 148. How the Moneys have been laid out that were given him.
him, have issued for the disbanding Armies never raised by him, and for
payment of Fleets never sent out by him, and of Debts never incurred by him.

AND, after a great deal more of much what to the same purpose, 149. The Charge
the Crown is at both by Sea and Land, for our Peace and Security.
may he not very well go on and say? You may with a very good Conscience assure
your selves, and your Friends and Neighbors, that the charge the Crown Id.
page 13.
is now at by Sea and Land, for the Peace and Security, and Wealth and Honor
of the Nation, amounts to no less than eight 150. God, in giving us this King,
has given us the most cheerful Giver; that has given us all we have asked,
all he has to give.
hundred thousand Pounds a Year: all which did not cost the Crown, before these
Troubles, fourscore thousand Pounds the Year; and therefore they will never
blame you for any Supply you have given, or Addition you have made to the
Revenue of the Crown.

FOR, Besides all other Stupendous Blessings that God Almighty has conferred
upon us, he has, Id. page 20.
in this our King, given us the most cheerful Giver, that ever 151. He only
retains what we give him for our sakes, that we might be the better by it.
People have been blessed with: A King that has, with all imaginable
cheerfulness, given us all we have asked of him, all he has to give; who would
not take or retain any thing we give to him, but for our own sakes; that by
receiving and retaining it, he may give it to us again in more abundance; in
abundance of Peace, and Plenty, and Honor; and all the Comforts which 152. The
Greatness of the King is the greatness of the People.
can make a Nation happy.

THUS spoke that Noble Lord: and did we not see the Fruits and Effects of it?
The Greatness of the King, is the Greatness and Safety of his People. The
Springs The Lord Keeper's Speech, October. 13. 1675. page 7.
153. The King's thanks to the Parliament for their Present to him.
and Rivers, which pay Tribute to the Ocean, do not lessen, but preserve
themselves by that Contribution.

SAYS the King, (and, oh! how full, upon every Occasion, is his heart of
Generous Gratitude!) when the Parliament 154. The Necessities of the Crown not
coming by the King's Improvidence or Ill-Husbandry.
had presented him with a Money-Bill; I thank you for the Present you have made
me this Day; and I hope your Countries will thank you when The King's Speech to
both Houses at their Prorogation, Mond. July 27. 1663. p. 3, 4.
you come home for having done it. I am not Conscious of having brought the
Straights and Necessities I am in upon my self by any 155. Nor would the King
have had the Supply, if it were not necessary for our Peace and Quiet.
Improvidence or Ill-Husbandry of my own: I know the contrary: and I do assure
you, that I would not have desired or received the Supply you have now given
me, if it were not absolutely necessary for your Peace and Quiet, as well as
mine. And I must tell you, it will do me very little good, if I do not improve
156. He will rather impose upon himself than upon his Subjects.
it by very good Husbandry of my own, and by retrenching those very Expenses,
which in many respects may be thought necessary enough. But you shall see I
will much rather impose upon my self, than upon my Subjects: 157. Nothing more
of public consideration than to support the Dignity of the Crown.
And if all Men will follow my Example in retrenching their Expenses, which (it
may be) they may do with much more Convenience than I can do mine, the Kingdom
will in a very short time gain what you have given me this day.

NOTHING is, or can be of a more public The Lord Chancellor's Speech to both
Houses, October. 21. 1678. page 16.
158. It is unsafe as well as dishonorable for the King's Revenue to fall
short of his most necessary ^pences.
Consideration, than to support the Dignity of the Crown; which is, in truth,
the Dignity of the Nation. Besides, it is unsafe, as well as dishonorable,
that the King's Revenue should fall short of his most necessary, and most
unavoidable Expenses. 159. It is fit there should be such a constant growing
Revenue as may preserve the Crown from scandalous Wants and Necessities as
formerly it lay under.


WHEN the Parliament, like the richest and the noblest Soil, a Soil manured and
enriched by the bountiful Hearts of the best Subjects in the World, had yielded
the King two full Harvests in one Year: Says the Chancellor to them on the Day
of their Prorogagation: You have not only supplied the Crown to a good degree,
for discharging many Debts and The Lord Chancellor's Speech, Monday, May 19.
166^. page 8, 9.
Pressures, under which it even groaned, and enabled it to struggle with the
present Straits and Necessities; Debts not contracted, and Necessities not run
into by Improvidence and Excess. You may, when you please, 160. Our late
Distractions may be imputed much to the Poverty of the Crown.
receive such an Account as will clear all such Reproaches. But you have
wisely, very wisely provided such a constant growing Revenue, as may, with
God's Blessing, preserve the Crown from those scandalous Wants and Necessities,
as have heretofore exposed it and the Kingdom to those dismal Miseries, (as he
said 161. The want of Power the effect of want of Money.
then) from which they are but even now Buoyed up: For whatsoever other Humane
Causes may be assigned, according to the several Fancies and Inclinations of
Men, of our late miserable Distractions, they cannot be so reasonably imputed
to any one 162. The Militia Bill and the Additional Revenue, the Foundation of
our Peace and Security.
Cause, as to the extreme Poverty of the Crown: the want of Power could never
have appeared, if it had not been for the want of Money.

AND I am confident, both the present and succeeding Ages will bless God, and
celebrate your Memories for those two Bills, of putting the Militia into the
King's Hands, and supplying the 163. Treasures the Sinews of War and the Bonds
of Peace.
Crown by an Additional Revenue, as the Foundation of their Peace, Quiet and
Security.

OUR Treasures are as the Sinews of War, and as the Bonds of Peace; and the
great Aids which are 164. Our Aids to the King like the Blood in its
Circulation.
Sir Edward Turner 's Speech to the King, Frid. 18. Jan. 1666. p. 2.
given to the King are but like the Blood in its Circulation, which will return
again, and nourish all the Parts.

WHEN the Speaker of the House of Commons presented His 165. Upon the Bill of
Supply of 180000. l. for the War, the King assures us the Money shall be laid
out for the same ends it was given.
Majesty with a Bill of Supply, for carrying on the then War, of 1800000 l. The
King, in his Speech to both the Houses, thus says: My Lords and Gentlemen; I
thank you for this other Bill of Supply which you have The King's Speech, Feb.
8. 1666. page 3.
given me; and I assure you, the Money shall be laid out for the Ends it is
given.

NAY, says the King to them in another Speech, I can tell you truly, I desire
to put you to as little Cost 166. The King desires to put us to as little cost
as possible.
as is possible: I wish with all my Heart, The King's Speech to both Houses,
Sept. 21. 1666. p. 3.
that I could bear the whole Charge of this War my self, and that my Subjects
should reap the benefit of it to themselves. 167. He wishes he could bear the
charge, and his Subjects reap the benefit of the War.


AND he told them, Though they had given him very lar^e Supplies for the
carrying on the War, yet he was forced to anticipate his own Revenue, Id. page
4.
and so raise a very great Sum of Money, or he had not been able to set out the
Fleet that last Spring; and he had some hopes upon the same Credit, to be able
to pay off the great Ships as they came in.

AND all this he was very willing and ready to do himself, because he would be
as little burdensome and uneasy to his People as possibly he could; having
found them so free upon all Occasions, 168. Though Necessities pressed him, yet
he was unwilling to ask for further Assistance till he saw he could no longer
tarry; and then he assures us that the great Sum that was last given him was
wholly applied to the Navy, as it was intended.
to give him necessary and large Supplies.

THIS, doubtless, made him say to his Parliament, I have had great Experience
of your Affection and Loyalty to me, and am very confident of the The King's
Speech to both Houses, Tuesd. October. 19. 1669. page 3, 4.
Continuance of it. It is now almost a Year and a half since your last Sitting;
and though my Debts have pressed me very much, yet I was unwilling to call for
your Assistance till this time. What you gave me last was wholly applied to the
Navy, and that extraordinary Fleet for which it was intended.

AND when he met them the February following, says he, When we last met, I
asked you a Supply, and I ask it now again with greater Instance. The
Uneasiness 169. His earnestness in asking was only from a Prospect of very ill
Effects which would besal the whole Kingdom without a new Supply.
The King's Speech, Mond. Feb. 14. 1669/70. page 4.
and Straitness of my Affairs cannot continue without very ill Effects to the
whole Kingdom. Consider this seriously and speedily; it is yours and the
Kingdom's Interest as well as mine: and the ill Consequence of a Want of an
effectual Supply must not lie at my Door. And that no Mis-apprehensions or
Mistakes, touching the Expenses of the last War, may remain with you, I think
fit to let you know, 170. And he says again, that no part of the Moneys given
him for the War, had been diverted to other Uses.
that I have fully informed my self in that matter; and do affirm to you, that
no part of those Moneys that you gave me for that War have been diverted to
other Uses: but on the contrary, besides all those Supplies, a very great Sum
has been raised out of my standing Revenue and Credit, and a very great Debt
contracted; and 171. His Majesty in his own Person has examined the Accounts,
and finds this true, that all the Moneys have been justly laid out on the War.
all for the War.

HIS Majesty has not only by his Ministers, but in his own Royal Person
examined the Accounts, touching the Expenses of the last War: and has thought
himself The Lord Keeper's Speech to the same, page 7, 8.
concerned to let you know, that all the Supplies which you gave him for the
War, have been by him applied to the War, and no part of them to any other
Uses. Nay, so far from it, that if the Preparations toward the 172. Nay, and
accounting the Preparations, many hundred thousand pounds of his own Revenue
have been employed also.
War shall be taken to be for the use of the War, as they must be; a great part
of his own Revenue, to many hundred thousands of Pounds, has been employed
also, and swallowed up in the Charges of the War, and what did necessarily
relate to it: To which may be added the great Debt^ contracted by His Majesty
in the War.

THUS you see, that though your Supplies have been great, yet the Charges
occasioned by the Id. page 9.
War, and the Calamities which accompanied it, have been greater: and that the
Debt which is left upon His Majesty, and which he complains of, has been
contracted by the War, and not by the diversion of the Moneys designed for it.

HIS Majesty did not enter into this War upon 173. His Majesty entered not upon
it upon any private Inclinations, the first step arose from their Advice, and
promise of Assistance.
any private Inclination or Appetite of his own; the Id. ibid.
first step he made toward it did arise from your Advice, and the promises of
your Assistance. But if the Charges and Accidents of the War have out gone all
your Supplies, and left him under the burden of this Debt; he thinks that, as
well the Justice to your Promise, as the Duty and Loyalty you have always
showed him, will oblige you to relieve him from it. And the rather, when you
shall seriously consider, how uneasy this burden must be to 174. Therefore no
more questions your Justice to your Fromise, than your Duty and Loyalty to him.
him, and what ill Consequences the Continuance under it must draw upon all his
Affairs: In which particular, you, and every Person you represent in this
Nation, will be concerned as well as himself. Id. page 10.


AGAIN, His Majesty, in his Speech, could not leave them without a fresh thanks
for their complying with his desires, and their ready helping him in his
pressing Necessities; and without giving them still further Assurances, that he
would be a very faithful disposer of those Moneys to the ends for which they
were presented 175. And upon this Supplying him, how does he thank and assure
them that he will make it go as far as he can toward the satisfying of his
Debts.
him; says he, I heartily thank you for the Supply you have given me: and I
assure The King's Speech, April 11. 1670. p. 9.
you, I will make it go as far as I can toward the Satisfying of my Debts.

THE Lord Chancellor most admirably speaks to both the Houses; saying, His
Majesty is resolved to give his People as much respite from Payments and Taxes,
as The Lord Chancellor's Speech, Feb. 5. 1672/3. page 5.
the necessity of his Business, or their Preservation will permit. You see, it
is only absolute Necessity, 176. The King resolved to give his People much
respite from Payments and Taxes, even as much as ever he could.
and a Paternal Princely Regard to the Security, Peace and Quietness of his
People, that puts the King at any time to ask a Supply of his Parliament.

WHEN you consider we are an Island, it is not Riches nor Greatness we contend
for; yet those The Lord Chancellor's Speech, October. 27. 1673. page 8, 9.
must attend the Success: but it is our very Beings are in Question. We fight
pro aris and focis in this War. We are no longer Freemen, being Islanders; and
Neighbors, if they master us at Sea: there is not so Lawful or Commendable a
Jealousy in the World, as an English Man's, of the growing Greatness of any
Prince or State at Sea. If you permit the Sea, our British Wife, to be
ravished, an Eternal Mark of Infamy will stick upon us.

THE King declares (and shall we not believe him?) 177. The King not in love
with War for War's sake.
that He is very far from being in Love with The King's Speech, Jan. 7. 1673/4.
page 4, 5.
War for War's sake: And as that cannot be well made without a Supply, so
neither can Peace be had without being in a posture of War: Therefore the way
to a good Peace is to set out a good Fleet; and if after, a good Peace should
follow, says he, yet the Supply 178. The Supply well given, and the reason why?
would be well given. And why so, perhaps some may be apt to say. Why? the King
gives you a very good reason, for, goes he on, whatever remains of it, I am
willing should be appropriated for building more Ships. No putting into his
Coffers, no; but all should be disbursed, the more to secure us, and to keep up
the Honor, Ease and Happiness of the Nation. This is the best Account of our
Supply 179. Our Enemies cannot be gratified more than by our denying a Supply.
our Hearts can wish; and there cannot be a higher The Lord Keeper's Speech to
the same, p. 17.
Gratification of our Enemies, than to be backward in this point; which we are
sure shall be so well laid out for us.

THE Safety and Honor of the State are then best provided for, when we keep up
the Strength and Reputation of our Fleet.

SO the Roman State thought, when (as the Orator tells us) they decreed, Non
solum praesidii, sed etiam The Lord Keeper's Speech, Apr. 13. 1675. page 14.
ornandi Imperii causa, Navigandum esse.

AS for his own Debts, says the King to his Parliament; 180. The King's Debts
great.
You know me to be under a great burden of Debts, and how hard a shift I The
King's Speech, Thurs. Feb. 15. 1676/7. page 3.
am making to pay them off as fast as I can.

NOW, as the Lord Chancellor's Words are, Justice 181. And Justice and Honor
obliges the King not to forsake them who have assisted him with their Estates
for the public Good.
and Honor oblige the King not to forsake those who have assisted him with
their Estates in the The Lord Chancellor's Speech to the same, page 10.
Defense of the Public. And although the necessary Issues of his Revenue, in
the many new and chargeable Emergencies of State, did for a while postpone
their Satisfaction; yet His Majesty has now gone very far in it, and has
provided for the Security and Payment of an Immense Sum, with such
difficulties, as none but a Just and Generous Prince would ever have undergone.

WHEN the King came and told his Houses, that We cannot 182. We cannot have
less than Ninety Sail of Capital Ships constantly maintained, nor less than 30
or 40000 Land-Men.
have less on our parts than ninety Sail of Capital Ships constantly
maintained; nor The King's Speech, Mond. Jan. 28. 167^/^. page 5, 6.
less than thirty or forty thousand Land-Men (with their Dependencies) to be
employed upon our Fleets, and elsewhere. Now mark how he is pleased to go on:
And because there shall be no fear of misemploying what you shall give to these
Uses, I am contented that such Money be appropriated to those ends, 183. And
therefore what shall be given to these Uses shall be appropriated to those ends
as strictly as we can desire.
as strictly as you can desire. I have given testimony enough of my Care in
that kind, by the Progress I have made in building the new Ships: wherein, for
the making them more useful, I have directed such larger Dimensions as will
cost me above one hundred thousand Pounds more than the Act allows. I have gone
as far as I could in repairing the old Fleet, and in buying of necessary Stores
for the Navy and Ordnance. And so he proceeds, giving his Parliament an exact
Account how just he has been in laying out all their Moneys, and a great deal
more of his own for his People's Good and Welfare.

ALAS! Says His Majesty in another Speech, 184. The King's Revenue under great
Anticipations.
My Revenue is under great Anticipations, The King's Speech to both Houses,
Mond. October. 21. 1678. page.. 5.
and (indeed, all things con^^dered, how can it be otherwise? Seeing* as the
King himself protests* it) was, at the best, never equal to the constant 185.
Never was equal to the constant and necessary Expense of the Government.
and necessary Expense of the Government; whereof I intend to have the whole
State laid before you, and require you to look into it, and consider of it,
with that Duty and Affection which I am sure I shall always find from you.

I think now by all this that has been repeated to you, it is evident, that
there is no real Cause why any fears of our Liberties or Properties should
disturb us: for what has the King done himself to secure them to us upon the
best and most lasting Foundations? How often has he invited and conjured his
Parliament, if it be possible, to find out more ways to satisfy his People,
that it is only their Good, and a firm Establishment of all their Civil 186.
Our Kingdom likely to continue a long time safe and happy.
Rights, which he is so sollicitous for.

SURELY it is enough for any Kingdom, and more than most Kingdoms in the World
can boast The Lord Chancellor's Speech, Thursd. Feb. 15. 1676/7. p. 12.
of, to have their Affairs brought into such a Condition, that they may, in all
Humane Probability, 187. Future Contingencies not capable of certain Prospect.
and unless it be their own default, continue for a long time safe and happy.

FOR, Future Contingencies are not capable of any certain Prospect: a Security
beyond that of Humane Id. ibid.
188. Let us bless the King for taking away our fears and jealousies; that our
Properties and Liberties are safe.
Probability; no Nation ever did, or ever shall attain to.

LET us therefore bless the King for taking away all our Fears, and leaving no
Room for Jealousies: The Lord Chancellor's Speech, Feb. 5. 1672/3. page 15, 16.
Let us bless the King, that our Properties and Liberties are safe, as well as
our Religion. What more has a good English Man to ask, but that THIS KING may
long Reign, and that the Tripple Alliance of King, Parliament 189. And may the
Tripple Alliance of King, Parliament, and People never be dissolved.
and People may never be dissolved.

AND let all who pray for the long Life and Prosperity of the King, add their
Endeavors to The Lord Chancellor's Speech, Thursd. Feb. 15. 1676/7. p. 17.
their Prayers, and study to prolong his Sacred Life, by giving him all the
Joys of Heart which can arise 190. And let those who pray for the King's Life
and Prosperity add their Endeavors to their Prayers.
from the Demonstrations of the lively and the warm Affections of his People.

TO which most excellent Prayer of the Chancellor, let all the People join with
me in this Response, of Amen.


CHAP. IV.
Of Parliaments.
NOTHING conduces more to the Happiness of a Nation, than a right
Understanding 1. Nothing tends more to the happiness of the Nation than
frequent Meetings in Common Council, for the Security of all we have, or are,
is lodged in our English Parliaments.
Sir Edward Turner 's Speech to the King, Friday, Feb. 8. 1666. on the
Prorogation, page 1, 2.
between the Prince and the People; and nothing more advances this
Correspondence, than frequent Meetings in Common Council. By the Wisdom of our
Forefathers, the Security of our Lives, our Liberties, and our Properties, is
lodged in our English Parliaments: And so Gracious have Your Majesty's
Predecessors been, that for the satisfaction of their People, they have made
several Laws; some for Triennial, some for Annual Parliaments. Your Majesty, by
their Example, upon the humble Suit of your Lords and Commons, has, in a
former Session of this Parliament, passed an Act for Triennial Meetings in
Parliament. But in this Your Majesty has exceeded all your Predecessors; that
as your happy Restoration was in a Convention of Parliament, so of your own
Accord, for the Public Good, and as a Demonstration of your extraordinary Love
to Parliaments, You have vouchsafed, ever since Your Return, to converse with
your People in Parliament; this being the Sixth Year, and the Sixth Session of
this present Parliament.

I DO choose to begin with these words of the Speaker, as being vere Emphatical
in themselves, and most convenient and apposite to usher in the several other
following Declarations and Speeches to prove this to you; that the King's
Affection to Parliaments is extraordinary, and that it has been his Delight
and wonderful Satisfaction, as well as his very often Use and Practice to
converse with his People in them.

AND that you may have no reason, why to disbelieve me, I shall, without any
further trouble of my own words, straight fall upon what the King himself has
said.

IN the Letter which His Majesty sent to the Speaker of the Commons assembled
in Parliament, what Security did he give us of this? in saying,

WE do assure you, upon our Royal Word, 2. No former Kings have had a greater
Esteem of Parliaments than our present King.
that none of our Predecessors have had a The King's Letter to the Speaker of
the Commons from Breda, April 4/14. 1660. page 4.
greater Esteem of Parliaments, than we have, in our Judgment, as well as from
our Obligation. We do believe them to be so Vital a Part of the Constitution of
the Kingdom, and so necessary for the Government of it, that we well know,
neither Prince nor People can be, 3. Neither Prince nor People can be happy
without them.
in any tolerable degree, happy without them: And therefore you may be
confident, that we shall always look upon their Counsels as the best we can
receive, and shall be as tender of their Privileges, and as careful 4. Their
Counsels the best the King can receive.
to preserve and protect them, as of that which is most near to our self, and
most necessary for our own Preservation.

AND, as this is our Opinion of Parliaments, that 5. He will be tender of their
Privileges, and careful to preserve them.
their Authority is most necessary for the Government of the Kingdom, so we are
most confident that you believe, and find, that the Preservation of the King's
Authority is as necessary for the Preservation of Parliaments; 6. The
Preservation of the King's Authority as necessary for the Preservation of
Parliaments as their Authority is necessary for the Government of the Kingdom.
and that it is not the Name, but the right Constitution of them, which can
prepare and apply proper Remedies for those Evils which are grievous to the
People, and which can thereby establish their Peace and Security. And therefore
we have not the least doubt, but that you will be as tender in, and as jealous
of any thing that may infringe our Honor, or impair our Authority, as of your
own Liberty and Property, which is best preserved by preserving the other.

HOW far We have trusted you in this great Affair, and how much it is in your
7. It is in their Power to restore a ruined Nation.
Id. page 5.
Power to restore the Nation to all that it has lost, and to redeem it from
any Infamy it has undergone, and to make King and People as happy as they
ought to be, you will find by Our enclosed Declaration (a Copy of which We have
likewise sent to the House of Peers;) and you will easily belie^e that We would
not voluntarily, and of Our Self, have reposed so great a Trust in you, but
upon an entire Confidence, that you will not abuse it, and that you will
proceed in such a manner, and with such due Consideration of Us, who have
trusted you, that We shall not be ashamed of declining other Assistance (which
we have Assurance of) and repairing to you for more Natural and Proper Remedies
for the Evils We would be free from; nor sorry that We have bound up Our own
Interest so entirely with that of Our Subjects, as that We refer it to the same
Persons to take Care of Us, who are trusted to provide for them. We look upon
you as Wise and Dispassionate 8. As being wise and dispassionate Men, and good
Patriots.
Men, and good Patriots; who will raise up those Banks and Fences which have
been cast down, and who will most reasonably hope, the same Prosperity will
again spring from those Roots from which it has heretofore, and always grown:
nor can We apprehend that you will propose any thing to Us, or expect any thing
from Us, but what We are as ready to give, as you to receive.

AND toward the latter end of the same Letter, says he, We have thought fit
to send you this Declaration, 9. The King's Heart is in all this Declaration.
that you may, as much as is possibly Id. page 7.
at this distance see Our Heart; which when God shall bring us nearer together
(as We hope He will do shortly) will appear to you very agreeable to what We
have professed.

IT was much al out that time, no doubt, that the Speaker of 10. England in the
late times but a great Prison.
the House of Commons meant, when he said, that England was but a great Prison,
where the worst of Men were our Governors, and their vilest Lusts the Laws by
The Speaker's Speech to the King, Aug. 29. 1660. page 3.
which they governed.

THE Great and most Wise God conveyed Divine 11. The King's Restoration was our
Deliverance from Sufferings.
Intelligence into your Patient and Pious Soul; and taught you how, by
suffering for us, to deliver us from our Sufferings; to knock off our Shackles,
and set your People at liberty; when neither Power nor Policy could effect it.
So soon as Your Majesty set your Foot upon your English Shore, our Prison was
turned into a Paradise of Pleasure, and the whole Nation filled with Joy, and
Love, and Peace.

THIS great Blessing is already registered in your 12. And so the People
acknowledged in their Joys.
People's thankful Hearts; and they desire that the Page ibid. and sequen.
Memory thereof might be perpetuated: and therefore they have laid it up
amongst their choicest Jewels, and annexed it to their MAGNA CHARTA; which they
are willing to pawn unto Your Majesty, upon Condition, when they forget this,
to forfeit that and all.

THIS was a most true, and noble Saying, and worthy such a Speaker. And now,
the King being settled in his Throne, and that Parliament having accomplished
the Ends for which they had met, and we all Received the Fruit and Benefit of
their Counsels and Conclusions: and they being willing to be 13. The
Dissolution of that Parliament was at their own Requests.
relieved from the extraordinary Fatigue, to which The Lord Chancellor's
Speech, Saturd. Dec. 29. 1660. page 6, 7.
they had so long submitted; and to return to the Consideration of their own
particular Affairs, which they had so long sacrificed to the Public; it was no
wonder that such a reasonable wish and desire should bring the King to comply
with them: and he made no doubt, but all succeeding Parliaments would pay them
their Thanks for all they had done, and look upon their Actions and their
Example with all possible Approbation and Reverence.

BUT when His Majesty, within a few Months after, met his new Parliament, and
upon their Choice of Sir Edward Turner for their Speaker, he was pleased to
accept of him, what high and lofty thoughts had that brave Man of this August
Assembly?

YOU shall hear his own words, and they are these; (and he had both the Houses
within his view, when he made his second Speech to the King, after the
Chancellor had declared the King's Approbation of the Choice of the House of
Commons;) Pray, let me beg Your Majesty's Patience for a while, and 14. The
sight of such an August Assembly is transporting
from this place to look about me. Sir, a weak Sir Edward Turnor 's Speech, May
10. 1661. two days after the Opening of the Parliament, p. 5, 6.
Head is soon giddy, but the strongest Brain may here be turned; the Presence
of this Glory, and the Glory of this Presence do transport me. Whilst I
contemplate the Incomparable Beauty of this Body Politic, and the goodly Order
of this High Court of Parliament, where at once I behold all the Glory of this
Nation, I am almost in the Condition of S. Paul, when he was taken up into the
Third Heavens; all he could say upon his Return was, he saw things unutterable.

AS the last Meeting here in Parliament was happy 15. The last Parliament happy
in healing our bleeding Wounds.
in healing the bleeding Wounds of this Nation; Id. page 9, 10.
so they were blessed, even for their Works sake: Your Sacred Majesty did bless
them, and therefore they shall be blessed to all Posterity.

BUT, Sir, we hope you have a Blessing left for us too: That 16. This hopes to
be so in an Emulation to exceed the Actions of their Predecessors.
was your Parliament by Adoption, but this is yours by Birthright. This
Parliament is Freeborn. I hope this Honor will beget in us an Emulation to
exceed the Actions of our Predecessors; and not only to meet Your Majesty, as
our Sovereign, with the Duty of Subjects, but with the Love of Sons to a most
indulgent Father.

NEXT to the Glory of Your Majesty's Royal 17. The Glory of the House of Peers.
Throne, I cannot but observe the brightness of this Id. ibid.
Second Orb; (meaning the Noble Lords) this Firmament is richly decked with
Stars of several Magnitudes; each Star appears like the Morning Star, and yet
each Star differs from another in Glory.

YOU cannot want Commanders, either by Sea or Land, to manage your Designs,
whilst all Id. ibid.
these Sons of Mars stand Candidate to serve you in the Wars.

YOU cannot want Counselors to advise you in the great Affairs of the Nation,
whilst all these Id. ibid.
Senators, each fit to be a Consul, contend who shall most ease you in the
Thorny Cares of the Government.

AMIDST these Noble English Barons, and at Your Majesty's Feet, are placed the
Reverend Judges Id. ibid. and sequent.
of the Land, the Sages of the Law: Men so Learned, and expert in the Customs,
and Statutes of this Land, that if Wat Tyler, or Jack Cade, or the new
Fanatics of this latter Age, had burned our Books, they were able to restore
our Laws in Purity and Perfection.

AND next to these, though in a lower Orb, 18. Of the House of Commons.
appear the Worthy Knights, the Prudent Citizens Id. page 11.
and Burgesses of the House of Commons; being the third Estate of Parliament.

WHEN the Fame of Solomon's Wisdom had filled the Neighbor Nations, the Queen
of Sheba Id. ibid.
could not contain her self at home; but with many Camels laden with Spices,
with Gold, and Precious Stones in Abundance, she comes to Solomon, to commune
with him of all that was in her Heart. Great Sir, whilst this your Native
Country was unworthy of you, Foreign Nations were made happy in the Knowledge
of your Person, your Piety, and your Wisdom; and now the Lord our God has
brought you home, and set you on your Throne, your Subjects long to see you.

WHAT Striving and Rejoicing was there at Id. ibid.
19. What rejoicing at the King's Landing.
your first Landing, to see our Rising Sun?

WHAT Striving was there at your Coronation, to see the Imperial Crown set upon
your Royal Head.

WHAT Striving has here lately been, in all 20. What at his Coronation.
the Counties, Cities and Buroughs of this Nation, Id. Ibid.
who should be sent up to hear your Wisdom, and confer with 21. What Striving
to be Parliament Men to hear his Wisdom, and confer with him there.
you in Parliament?

ROYAL Sir, These Chosen Worthy Messengers are not come Empty Handed; they are
laden, Id. ibid.
they are sent up to you heavy-laden, from their several Counties, Cities and
Buroughs.

IF the Affections of all English Men can make 22. How Happy, Great, and
Considerable the King may be both at home and abroad by his Parliament.
you happy; if the Riches of this Nation can make Id. page 12.
you Great; if the Strength of this Warlike People can make you Considerable at
home and abroad; be assured, you are the greatest Monarch in the World. Give me
leave, I beseech you, to double my words, and say it again; I wish my Voice
could reach to Spain, and to the Indies too: You are the greatest Monarch in
the World.

HAVING thus at large given you the Speaker's Words (as it were) in Ecstasy, of
a Parliament, I shall now return to give you the King's; which you will find
full of a tender and endeared Affection to them. 23. The King's Aims have been
such as were most agreeable to the ancient Order of Parliament, and he hopes
they will reduce the Proceedings to those ancient Rules and Orders.


AND what have the Aims and Endeavors of the King been, but such as he has
Thought most agreeable to the ancient Order of Parliaments? And The King's
Speech, Thursd. September. 13. 1660. page 5.
I hope you will all join with me, says he, in reducing the Proceedings of
Parliaments to the Ancient Rules and Orders of Parliaments, the Deviation from
which has done us no good. And when they desired a Recess, though he had then
some Inclination to have made a Session; yet, upon Id. ibid.
the desire, and Reasons given by the House of Commons for an Adjournment
without a Session, he did very willingly depart from that Inclination. And did
not this testify a very great Kindness?

BUT you shall hear more Gracious Words from him; says he, three Months after
this. I will tell you, that when 24. When God restored the King he brought
along with him an extraordinary Affection for Parliaments.
God brought me hither, I brought with me an extraordinary Affection and Esteem
for The King's Speech, December. 29. 1660. at the Dissolution, page 3, 4.
Parliaments. I need not tell you how much it is improved by your Carriage
toward me. You have outdone all the good and obliging Acts of your
Predecessors toward the Crown; and therefore, you cannot but believe my Heart
is exceedingly enlarged with the Acknowledgment.

MANY former Parliaments have had particular Denominations from what they 25.
Former Parliaments have had particular Denominations, let this be called The
Healing and the Blessed Parliament.
Id. ibid.
have done: They have been styled Learned and Unlearned; and sometimes have had
worse Epithits: I pray, let us all resolve, that this be for ever called, The
HEALING and the BLESSED PARLIAMENT.

AND in the Absence of a Parliament, which he promises shall not be long, how
he will carry and behave himself, he has been pleased to give us a very open
and ingenuous Confession, in these his following Words.

AS I thank you, though not enough, for what you have done; so I have not the
least doubt, by the Blessing of God, but when I shall call the next Parliament,
which I shall do as soon as you can reasonably expect or desire, I shall
receive your Thanks for what 26. The King will not more propose any Rule to
himself in his Actions and Counsels than what the Parliament is like to think
of them.
I have done since I parted with you: For, I deal truly with you, I shall not
more propose any one Rule to my self in my Actions, and my Counsels, than this;
What is a PARLIAMENT like to think of this ACTION, or this COUNSEL? And it
shall be want of Understanding in me, if it will not bear that Test. Id. Ibid.

A PARLIAMENT, is such an Assembly My Lord Chancellor has said, that, for
which the 27. The King has a kind of Reverence for a Parliament.
The Lord Chancellor's Speech, Thursd. 13. Septem. 1660. page 6.
King him self has even a kind of Reverence, as well as an extraordinary
Kindness.

IT will very easily appear so, if you will mind what the King tells you, that
He has caused two Bills to be prepared for you (i. e. the new Parliament on
the 8th. of May, at their Opening,) which are page 2.
for Confirmation of all that was enacted at our last Meeting.

AND, as the Chancellor said, he commends the Dispatch of those to you, with
some earnestness. The Lord Chancellor's Speech, May 8. 1661. page 8, 9, 10.
The Truth is, it is a great part of the Business of this Parliament to
celebrate the Memory of the last, by confirming, or re-enacting all that was
done by that Parliament: which, though it was not called 28. The last
Parliament, though not called by the King's Writ, yet seems to have been called
by God himself.
by the King's Writ, may be reasonably thought to have been called by God
himself, upon the Supplication and Prayer of the King, and the whole Nation, as
the only means to restore the Nation to its Happiness, to its Self, to its
Honor, and even to its Innocence. How glad the King was of it, appears by what
he writ to them from Breda, when he referred more to them, than ever was
referred to Parliament: He referred, 29. He refers to them more than ever was
referred to Parliament.
in truth, (upon the matter) all that concerned himself, all that concerned
Religion, all that concerned himself, all that concerned Religion, all that
concerned the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom to them: And to their Honor
be it spoken, and to their Honor be it ever remembered, that the King,
Religion, and the Kingdom have no reason to 30. The Kingdom have no reason to
be sorry for it.
be sorry that so much was entrusted to them; nor they to be ashamed of the
Discharge of their Trust. It would have been a very unseasonable Scruple in any
Man, who should have refused to bear his part in the excellent Transactions of
that Parliament, because he was not called thither by the King's Writ. And it
would be a more unreasonable Scruple now, in any man, after we have all
received the Fruit and Benefit of their Counsels and Conclusions; when, in
truth, we owe our Orderly and Regular Meeting at this time to their
extraordinary Meeting then, to their Wisdom in laying hold upon the King's
Promises, and to the King's Justice in performing all he promised, and to the
Kingdom's Submission and Acquiescence in 31. A Parliament is that Foundation
which supports the whole Fabric of our Peace and Security.
those Promises. I say, it would be very unseasonable and unreasonable now to
endeavor to shake that Foundation, which, if you will take the King's
Judgment, supports the whole Fabric of our Peace and Security. He tells you
what he shall think of any who goes about to undermine that Foundation: which
is a Zeal no Prince could be transported with but himself.

WE use to say, and say truly, that the King, when seated in Parliament, is
then in the fullness The Lord Chancellor's Speech, March 6. 167^/^. page 18.
32. The King in Parliament is in the Fullness of his Majesty and Power.
of his Majesty and Power, and shines forth with the brightest Luster: Let no
Exhalations from beneath darken or obscure it.

FOREIGN Nations say, and say truly, that the King of England, in Conjunction
with his Parliament, Id. ibid.
33. And as great and dreadful a Prince as any in Europe.
is as great, and as dreadful a Prince, as any in Europe.

IT was no less a Consideration, you may be sure, that made the King thus speak
to both his Houses: I need 34. No King so beholding to Parliaments as he has
been.
not tell you how much I love Parliaments: The King's Speech to both Houses,
March 21. 166^/4. page 6, 7.
Never King was to much beholding to Parliaments as I have been, nor 35. The
Crown cannot be happy without frequent Parliaments.
do I think the Crown can ever be happy without frequent Parliaments.

WHEN, upon the King's desiring the House of Commons to give the Triennial Bill
a Reading in their House; and upon their ready Obedience to that Request, both
the Houses presented His Majesty with a Bill entitled, An Act for the
Assembling and Holding of Parliaments once in three Years, at the least: And
for the Repeal of an Act entitled, An Act for the preventing of Inconveniences
happening by the long Intermission of Parliaments: His Majesty says to them,
You will easily believe that I have come very willingly to give my The King's
Speech, Apr. 5. 1664. page 3, 4.
Assent to this Bill; I do thank you very heartily for your so Unanimous
Concurrence in it, and for desiring me speedily to finish it: And if I
understand any thing that concerns the Peace and Security of the Kingdom, and
the Welfare of my Subjects, (all which I study more than my Prerogative:
Indeed, I consider my Prerogative, only in order to preserving the other) every
good English- Man will thank you for it. For the Act you have repealed could
only serve to discredit Parliaments, to make the Crown Jealous of Parliaments,
and parliaments of the Crown, and persuade Neighbor Princes that England was
not Governed under a Monarch: It could never have been the occasion of Frequent
Parliaments. I do promise you, I will not be one Hour the less without a
Parliament for this Act of Repeal. For, They are the Great Physicians of the
Kingdom: and, as such, can best search into the Distempers of the State, and by
their good and wholesome Prescriptions, if they cannot absolutely bring it to
its perfect Health, they can, at least, preserve it in some very good degrees
of CONVALESCENCE.

THIS made His Majesty to desire their Concurrence with him 36. A Parliament is
the Great Physician of the Kingdom.
in his Just and Necessary Severity, toward those that were resolved yet to
keep up their Factious and Turbulent Spirits against the Peace of the State.
And though, says he, I do very willingly pardon all that is pardoned by 37.
Though Clemency be most agreeable to the King's Nature, yet he will be severe
to the editions dislikers of the Government.
the Act of Iudemnity; yet, for the time to The King's Speech to both Houses,
Aug. 29. 1660. p. 4, 5.
come, the same Discretion and Conscience which disposed me to the Clemency I
have expressed, which is most agreeable to my Nature, will oblige me to all
Rigor and Severity, how contrary soever it be to my Nature, toward those who
shall not now acquiesce, but continue to manifest their Sedition, and dislike
of the Government, either in Actions or Words. And I must conjure you all (my
Lords 38. And desires the Parliament to concur with him in that just and
necessary severity toward such.
and Gentlemen) to concur with me in this just and necessary Severity; and that
you will, in your several Stations, be so jealous of the public Peace, and of
my particular Honor, that you will cause Exemplary Justice to be done upon
those who are guilty of Seditious Speeches or Writings, as well as those who
break out into Seditious Actions; and that you will 39. The traducers of the
King's Person are not well affected to Parliaments and the Public Peace.
believe those who delight in reproaching and traducing my Person, not to be
well affected to You, and the Public Peace.

AND here, as they found it most absolutely necessary for the good of the
Weal-publick so to do, they most readily, and most religiously, obeyed the
Commands of their Sovereign Lord the King: So that upon the day of their
Dissolution, he could not forbear in his Speech thus to deliver himself.

MY Lords and Gentlemen, I will not entertain The King's Speech, December. 29.
1660. p. 3.
you with a long Discourse; the sum of all I have to say to you, being but to
give you thanks, very hearty thanks: And I assure you, I find it a very
difficult Work to satisfy my self in my own Expressions of those Thanks.
Perfunctory Thanks, Ordinary Thanks for Ordinary Civilities are easily given;
but when the Heart is as full as mine is, it is a Labor to thank you: You have
taken great pains to oblige me, and therefore it cannot be easy for me to
express the sense I have of it.

THERE cannot be a greater manifestation of The Lord Chancellor's Speech to the
same, p. 6.
40. The greatest Evidence of the harmony of Affections throughout the Nation,
is when the King and his Parliament meet with the same alacrity at the
Dissolution, as at the first Convention.
an excellent Temper and harmony of Affections throughout the Nation, than that
the King and his two Houses of Parliament meet with the same Affections and
Cheerfulness, the same Alacrity in their Countenance at the Dissolution, as
when they met at the Convention of Parliament: It is an unquestionable
Evidence, that they are exceedingly satisfied in what they have done toward
each other, that they have very well done all the Business they came about:
This is now your Case; You have so well satisfied your own Consciences, that
you are sure you have satisfied the King's Expectation and his Hope, and the
Desires and Wishes of the Country. 41. They have asked nothing of the King, but
what he has readily granted; and his Majesty has scarce wished any thing
which they have not done for him.
It was very justly observed by you, Mr. Speaker, That you have never asked any
one thing of the King, which he has not with all imaginable cheerfulness
granted; and in truth, his Majesty does with great comfort acknowledge, That
you have been so far from denying him any thing he has asked, that he has
scarce wished any thing that you have not granted. The King and you have given
such Earnest to each other of your mutual Affection, you have been so exact and
punctual in your proceedings toward each other, that you have made no promise,
no profession to each other, of the making good, and performing of which the
World is not witness. Id. p. 7.


AND I cannot here forbear inserting the most admirable words of that
Chancellor to the Noble Lords, and Honorable Members of the House of Commons
then in particular, but yet which at all times may be repeated to, (and it were
well if they were duly remembered by) any succeeding Parliament: They are these:
Your Lordships will easily recover that Estimation and Reverence 42. By the
Lords exercise of that Virtue from whence their Honors sprang, they will
inflame the peoples hearts, and from thence they will make a Judgment of the
King himself.
that is due to your High Condition, by the exercise and practice of that
Virtue, from whence your Honors first sprang; the example of your Justice and
Piety, will inflame the hearts of the people toward you; and from your
practice, they will make a Judgment of the King himself: They know very well,
that you are not only admitted to his Presence, but to his Conversation, and
even in a degree to his Friendship, for you are his great Council; by your
Example they will form their own Manners, and by Yours they will make some
guess at the Kings. Therefore under that obligation, you will cause your Piety,
your Justice, your Affability, and your Charity Id. p. 15, 16, 17.
to shine as bright as is possible before them. They are 43. They are too much
in love with England, who believe it the best Country in the World; but it is
but just to say, England i^ an Enclosure of the best People in the World.
too much in love with England, too partial to it; who believe it the best
Country in the World, there is better Earth, and a better Air, and a better,
that is, a warmer Sun in other Countries; but we are no more than just, when we
say, that England is an Enclosure of the best people in the World, when they
are well informed and instructed; a people, in Sobriety of conscience, the most
devoted to God Almighty; in the Integrity of their affection, the most dutiful
to the King; in their good Manners and Inclinations, most regardful and loving
to the Nobility; no Nobility in Europe so entirely loved by the people; there
may 44. No Nobility in Europe so beloved by the People.
be more awe, fear, and terror of them, but no such love toward them as in
England. I beseech your Lordships, do not undervalue this Love; they have
looked upon your Lordships, and they will look upon your Lordships again, as
the greatest examples and patterns of duty to the King; as their greatest
security and protection from Injury and Injustice, and for their enjoying
whatever is due to them by the Law, and as the most proper Mediators and
Interposers to the King, if by any failure of Justice they should be exposed to
any Oppression and Violence: and this exercise of your Justice and Kindness
toward them, will make them the more abhor and abominate that parity, upon
which a Commonwealth must be founded, because it would extirpate, or suppress,
or deprive them of their beloved Nobility, which are such a support and
security to their full happiness. 45. As the Commons came up the Peoples
Deputies to the King, so he returns them his Deputies to the People.


AND you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, you are now returning to your
Country, laden with a Trust not inferior, or weighty, than that you brought
from thence; you came up their Deputies to the King, and he returns you now his
Deputies to them, his Plenipotentiaries, to inform and assure them, that he
thinks himself the happiest and the greatest Prince of the World, from being
possessed of the affections and hearts of such Subjects. And that you may have
the more credit in what you say, he will not take it unkindly, if you publish
his Defects and Infirmities: You may tell them as a great Infirmity, that a
troubled 46. A troubled countenance so afflicts the King, that he would remove
it at his own charge.
and discontented countenance so afflicts him, that he would remove it from
them at his own charge, as if he himself were in the fault: And when he has
been informed of any less kind, or jealous thing said amongst you, as your
Windows are never so close shut, but that the sound of your words goes to the
several corners of the Town, His Majesty has been heard to say no more but,
What have I done? I wish that Gentleman 47. The King wishes his People knew him
better
and I were acquainted, that he knew me better. Id. p. 18.
Oh, Gentlemen, you cannot be your selves, nor you cannot make your Friends too
zealous, or too jealous for such a Prince's safety, or too solicitous for such
a Prince's satisfaction and content, to whom we may very justly say, as the
King of Tire writ to Solomon, Because that God has loved his people, he has
made 48. Where the King's defects are necessary toward the full measure of our
prosperity.
thee King over them: even his Defects and Infirmities are very necessary
toward the full measure of our prosperity.

AND though the Speaker could that day affirm, in the Speech he made to his
Majesty, that No man can say, that has made the 49. As that Parliament was
very good, so whilst we have this good King, we may see such onother.
most curious search into Books or Records, that there ever was such a
Parliament as this: yet he could add further, what since has been sufficiently
known, And its our unspeakable joy and comfort that no man can say, so long as
your Majesty lives, but we may have such another: And he gives us a very good
Id. p. 32.
50. For the King has set his Royal heart to do his People good.
Reason, why we may expect it; For, says he, You have set your Royal heart
upon it, to do your people good.

WHAT this next Parliament was in the King's thoughts, you will quickly find,
if you have but a due regard to his own words; for, says he to them at their
opening, I think there are not many 51. And he is sure that there will be a
mutual concurrence between him and them, in all things that may advance the
Nations happiness.
of you who are not particularly known to me; there are very few of whom I have
not heard so King's Speech to both Houses 8 May 1661. page 2.
much good, that I am as sure as I can be of any thing that is to come, that
you will all concur with me, and that I shall concur with you in all things
which may advance the peace, plenty, and prosperity of the Nation, I shall be
exceedingly deceived else.

SAYS my Lord Chancellor to this Parliament, The King has called you hither
by his Writ, to assist him with your Information and Advice in the greatest and
weightiest affairs of the Kingdom: By his Writ, which is the Lord Chanc. Speech
to the same, page 7.
52. The King's Writ is the only good and lawful way for the meeting of a
Parliament.
only good and lawful way to the meeting of a Parliament; and the pursuing that
Writ, the remembering how and why they came together, is the only way to bring a
happy end to Parliaments.

WHAT the work of this Parliament was, you shall hear him in the same Speech
tell them thus:

My Lords and Gentlemen,
Though the last Parliament did great and wonderful things 53. And a Parliament
have very great things to do.
indeed, as much as in that time they could, yet they have left very great
things for you to do: You are to finish the Structure, of which they but laid
the Foundation; indeed Idem. page 11. and 12.
they left some things undone, which, it may be, they thought they had
finished, the inspection into which things will become your wisdoms.

YOU need not question but this their care to perform and perfect, made his
Majesty thus say to his House of Commons: I do 54. Never a more Loyal
Parliament than that elected in 1661.
speak my heart to you, when I tell you, that I do believe, that from the first
Institutions of Parliaments, to this hour, there was never a House of Commons
fuller King's Speech to the House of Commons, Mar. 1. 1661. page 4.
of affection and duty to their King, than you are to me; never any that was
more desirous and solicitous to gratify the King, than you are to oblige me;
never a House of Commons, in which there were fewer persons without a full
measure of zeal, for the honor and welfare of the King and Country, than there
are in this.

HOW glad was He, to hear they had repealed that Act, which 55 By repealing the
Act which excluded the Bishops from sitting in the House, Parliaments are
restored to their primitive Institutions.
excluded the Bishops from sitting in Parliament; because, says he, You have
thereby restored Parliaments to their primitive Institutions.

THIS was an effect, to be sure, of his great kindness and affection to them;
and this, doubtless, made him go on as he did, saying, I hope, my Lords and
Gentlemen, you will in a short 96. To restore Parliaments to their primitive
order, is to restore them to its primitive veneration with the People, which
the King wishes they may always have.
time restore them to the primitive order and gravity of debates and
determinations, which the license of King's Speech 30 July 1661. page 2, 3.
the late distempered times had so much corrupted, which is the only way to
restore Parliaments to its primitive veneration with the people, which I
heartily wish they should always have.

AND how well they acquitted themselves in all things tending to the happiness
of both King and Kingdom, Sir Edward Turnor tells his Majesty in these words:
Since your Majesty did convene the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the
Commons House of Parliament, they have with unwearied Speakers Speech 30 July
1661. page 1.
57. And see how they acted.
labor consulted for the Service of your Majesty, and the good of this Nation.

VERY justly then might the Lord Chancellor begin his Speech as he did, with
refreshing their memories with what the King first said to them: It is now
little more than a year that the King first called you to attend him here, at
the opening of the Parliament; then you may remember he told you, that he
thought 58. The King was not deceived in his confidence of them.
there were not many of you, who were not particularly known to him; that there
were very few of whom he had not heard so much good, that he was (he said) as
Lord Chanc. Speech, 19. May 1662. p. 7. and 8.
sure as he could be of any thing that was to come, that you would all concur
with him, and that he should concur with you in all things, which might advance
the peace, plenty, and prosperity of the Nation: His Majesty said he should be
exceedingly deceived else.

IT was a Princely declaration, and a rare confidence, which could flow from no
other Fountain, but the sincerity and purity of his own Conscience, which
admitting no other designs or thoughts into his Royal breast, but such as must
tend to the unquestionable prosperity and greatness of his people, could not
but be assured of your full concurrence and cooperation with him. It was a
happy, and a blessed Omen, which at the instant 59. This was a happy Omen, to
defeat those that thought to get advantage by their differences.
struck a terror into the hearts of those, who promised themselves some
advantages from the differences and divisions in your Counsels, and hoped from
thence to create new troubles, and molestations in the Kingdom; and, God be
thanked, the King has been so far from being exceedingly deceived, that he
does acknowledge, He has been exceedingly complied with, exceedingly gratified
in all he has desired, and he hopes he has not in the least degree
disappointed your expectation.

THEY had so exceedingly gratified him, and he had such an extraordinary
kindness and affection for them, that, though he had designed to have Prorogued
them four days sooner, because of the arrival of the Queen; yet, for the good
of his people, who 60. And he was so pleased with them, that he staid four days
longer than he would have done, because their Bills should be perfected.
are always dear to him, he was pleased to condescend to tarry so long, until
they had fully perfected the work they were about, and prepared all their Bills
for the Royal assent: And there cannot be a more transcendent instance of the
King's love and passion for his people, as my Lord Chancellor well observed,
Id. p. 21.
than that he has staid these four days to take his leave of you; and, that he
might give you this days work, all these good Laws, has denied himself so long
the enjoying the greatest comfort he is assured of in this World. 61. That
Parliament satisfied in the King's love to them, and in his Judgment that the
happiness of the Crown consists in the frequency of Parliaments.


THE Parliament was so very well satisfied with the King's love to them, that
Mr. Speaker could not forbear using these expressions at their Prorogation,
May* 7. 1664. We are assured not only of your personal affection to
Parliaments, but of your Judgment also, that the happiness of the Crown
consists in the frequency of Parliaments.

HIS Majesty's love to Parliaments is yet further evidenced by his love to
have good appearances when they meet; He having, as he says himself, most
confidence in full Houses, 62. His love to Parliaments further shown, in his
love to have full Houses.
where the well-being of the Church, and all other King's Speech Mond. Feb. 14.
1669/70. p. 3:
interests of the Crown and Nation are best secured.

AND the King can never doubt his Parliament: 63. The King could never doubt
such a Parliament.
a Parliament, who in their affection and loyalty to Lord Chanc. Speech, Feb.
5. 72/3. p. 10. Id. p. 14, 15.
their Prince, have exceeded all their predecessors; a Parliament, with whom
the King has many years lived with all the caresses of a happy Marriage. Has
the King had a Concern? You have wedded it. Has his Majesty wanted Supplies?
You have readily, cheerfully, and fully provided for them. You have relied upon
the Wisdom, and Conduct of his Majesty in all his affairs; so that you have
never 64. Who never exceeded their bounds.
attempted to exceed your bounds, or to impose upon him: whilst the King, on
the other hand, has made your Counsels the foundations of all his proceedings;
and has been so tender of you, 65. Their Counsels the foundations of the Kings
proceedings.
that he has upon his own Revenue and Credit endeavored to support even
Forcign Wars, that he might be least uneasy to you, or burdensome to his
people.

THEREFORE the King may not only assure himself of your 66. And he hopes that
his Parliament will do what they can to beget a mutual confidence between him
and his People, which may extinguish all fears and jealousies.
affections to him, but from such affections so known and so tried as yours, he
may expect that you Lord Keeper's Speech Jan. 7. 1673/4. p. 18.
should do your endeavors to restore and improve the mutual confidence between
him, and his people, and that you should do it to such a degree, that it may
recover its full strength, and quite extinguish all their fears and jealousies.

FOR he does not only find himself safe, but he 67. His safety and defense in
them.
Lord Keeper's Speech 13 Ap. 1675. p. 21.
thinks himself armed too, whilst he is attended with such a Nobility, such a
Gentry as this.

AND who can wonder then, that, the King resolves to enter 68. He will
therefore wholly rely upon his Parliament, and give them whatever yet can be
wanting for their good.
into terms of strictest correspondence with his Parliament, to take your
Counsel in his most weighty affairs, to impart all his Cares to you, to
acquaint you with Lord Keeper's Speech Wednesd. 13 Oct. 1675. p. 5.
all his Wants and Necessities, to offer you all that can yet be wanting to
make you enjoy your selves, to establish a right understanding between himself
and his three Estates, and between the Estates themselves, to redress all your
just complaints, and to put all his Subjects at ease, as far as in him lies,
and can consist with the honor and safety of the Government.

AND having made all these advances toward you, he doubts 69. And doubts not
but that they will behave themselves accordingly.
not but you will behave your selves like those that deserve to be called the
King's Friends, and that you Id page 6.
will put him at ease too.

THE King expects your Advice, and your Assistance; your 70. This makes him to
expect their advice and assistance.
Advice in matters of the highest deliberation, your Assistance in matters of
extreme and pressing difficulty.

YOUR deliberations will chiefly be exercised about those 71. Their
deliberations will chiefly be exercised about the things which belong to the
Kingdoms peace.
things which do belong unto your peace, the peace of the Church, and the peace
of the State, two considerations of so close a connection between themselves,
that in the very original Writ of Summons, by virtue of which you Chanc. Speech
15 Febr. 76/7. p. 5, 6.
sit here, they are jointly recommended to your Counsel, and your Care.

AS to the former, the peace of the Church, I have handled it at large in my
Chapter of Religion, and shall not trouble you now with any repetition; only I
will mind you of this one Paragraph, which ought never to be out of your
consideration, and it is, That what Remedies are fit for those that disturb its
peace, whether 72. All things concerning Religious matters are entirely left to
their considerations, for the peace of the Church.
the poor mistaken Souls, who deserve to be pitied, or the malicious and
designing men, who deserve to be punished; whether the fault be in the Laws, or
in the Id. p. 6, 7.
men, in the men that should obey, or in the men that should execute; whether
the Cure be a work of time and patience, or of zeal and diligence; or whether
any new expedient can be found to secure the Ship from that Storm, which the
swelling of two contrary Tides seems to threaten, is wholly left to your
advice, the King has called you for that end, and doubts not but your Counsels
will be such as shall tend to safety and to establishment.

THE peace of the State requires as much of your care, and vigilance 73. And so
likewise the peace of the State is left to their care.
too; our peace at home, and our peace abroad.

AS for that abroad, we are at this time, blessed be God for 74. The peace
abroad
his mercy to us, and blessed be the King for his care of us, in perfect peace
with all the Nations upon Earth: such a peace, as makes us the Envy of the
Christian World, and has enabled us to do our selves right against the
Infidels: such a peace, 75. It is now such a peace as brings with it all the
fruits of peace.
as brings with it all the fruits of peace, and deserves not Id. ibid.
only our prayers for the continuance of it, but our best and most watchful
care, that nothing may be done on our part to give it an interruption.

BUT then we must consider again, that our peace abroad will 76. Peace at home.
not subsist any longer, than while we do maintain our peace at home; for,
without this, no Kingdom can be able to act in its full strength, and without
that, the Friendship or Id. p. 8.
Enmity of any Nation ceases to be considerable to its Neighbors.

Now it is a great and a dangerous mistake in those, who think 77. They are
deceived who think it is peace at home, because the Sword is not drawn.
the peace at home is well enough preserved, so long as the Sword is not drawn;
whereas, in truth, nothing deserves Id. ibid.
the name of peace, but Unity: Such an Unity as flows from an unshaken trust
and confidence between the King and 78. Nothing deserves the name of peace but
Unity.
his people, from a due reverence and obedience to his Laws, and to his
Government, from a Religious and an awful care, not to remove the ancient
Landmarks, not to disturb those Constitutions which time and public
convenience has settled, from a 79. What Unity that is to be.
zeal to preserve the whole frame and order of the Government upon the old
foundations, and from a perfect detestation and abhorrency of all such as are
given to change. Whatsoever falls short of this, falls short of Peace too. Id.
ibid.


WHEN the Parliament met on the 21. October 1678. after several short
Prorogations, says the Chancellor to them: How much 80. How much the King
relies upon, accounts of, and thinks himself safe in his Parliament, is evident
in his not letting them be out of his reach.
the King relies upon the advice and assistance of his Parliament, how
necessary he accounts it to him, and Lord Chanc. Speech, 21 Oct. 78. p. 6.
how safe he thinks himself in it, is evident by this, that he has not
suffered you all this year to be out of his reach, but has continued you from
time to time by a succession of little and short Prorogations.

A Parliament is the great, the wise, and the powerful Counsel 81. A Parliament
the great, wise, and powerful Counsel ^f the Nation.
of this Nation; from the wisdom of this Counsel the King is sure he shall
receive the best advice, from Lord Chanc. Speech Thurs. 6 March 78/9. p. 9, 10.
the duty and loyalty of this Assembly he can never want a cheerful assistance,
and the King resolves to meet you all with so much grace and goodness, that he
hopes this Parliament shall end in no disappointment of any, but our Enemies.

IT may seem strange perhaps to some, that his Majesty, who 82. The dissolution
of the late long Parliament.
had so long and large an experience of the duty of the last Parliament, should
now, and in this present conjuncture, think fit to call a New one; but the King
has so equal a confidence in the affections of all his good Subjects, that he
intends to be acquainted with them all, and to have many and frequent
Consultations with them, and hopes by this means to attain, first a true and
right understanding of his people, and next to that, to be rightly understood
by them.

AND as he did dissolve that Parliament, which (as you may see) had done both
him and the Nation so many good and profitable services; so likewise, for very
great and weighty Reasons, he saw it good and necessary to dissolve his
numerous Privy-Councel, 83. Dissolution of the Privy-Councel.
and to constitute such a one, as may not only by its number be fit for the
consultation and digestion of all business both Domestic and Foreign, but also
by the choice of them out of 84. And the constituting a new one.
the several parts this State is composed of, may be Declaration which the
Chancellor read to the Privy-Councel, being caused to meet extraordinarily,
April 20. 79. page 2, 3.
the best informed in the true Constitutions of it, and thereby the most able
to Counsel him in all 85. And by their constant advice the King to govern his
Kingdom, together with the frequent use of his Parliament.
the Affairs and Interests of this Crown and Nation. And by the constant advice
of such a Council, his Majesty is resolved hereafter to govern his Kingdoms,
together with the frequent use of his Great Council of Parliament, which he
takes to be the true ancient Constitution of this State and Government.

NOW for the greater Dignity of this Council, his Majesty resolves 86. Their
number limited to that of thirty.
their number shall be limited to that of thirty: And for their greater
Authority, there shall be fifteen of his Chief Officers, who shall 87. Who
those thirty shall be.
be Privy-Counsellors by their Places: And for the other fifteen, he will
choose ten out of the several Ranks of the Nobility, and five Commoners of the
Realm, whose known Abilities, Interest, and Esteem in the Nation, shall render
them without all Id. ibid.
suspicion of either mistaking or betraying the true Interests of the Kingdom,
and consequently of advising him ill.

AT the opening of that Parliament, 8th. of May 1661. his Majesty then said,
Without hearing the advice of my 88. Without the advice of his Privy-Councel he
will do nothing of public importance.
Privy-Councel, as I never did, so I never will resolve King's Sp. page 6.
any thing of public importance. And how much he has made use of them, I need
not tell you; the whole World is sufficiently sensible: And what great use he
means to make of this his new Council, you cannot but be abundantly satisfied
with his own words to his Parliament, which tell you, I have made 89. And
therefore has chosen such as are worthy, and able to advise him.
choice of such persons as are worthy and able to advise me, and am resolved in
all my weighty and important King's Sp. April 21. 1679. p. 9.
affairs, next to the advice of my great Council in Parliament, (which I shall
very often consult with) to be 90. Fresh promises of often consulting with his
Parliament.
advised by this Privy-Councel.

IT is the duty then of all Parliaments and Councels, with unwearied labor to
consult for the service of his Majesty, and the good 91. The Parliaments and
Councels duty.
of this Nation, (as I before have hinted how that Parliament did) so would in
a little time our Fields grow white to Harvest.

THEN let not needless fears and jealousies possess our minds, and because
immediately we are not as (perhaps) we would be, let us not be rash in drawing
any ill consequences, of concluding, that we never shall be otherwise.

THE design was mischievous enough, no doubt, that made some men, a good while
since, talk of Dissolutions, and that then Parliaments were even just expiring;
when the King himself declared, it was as distant from his thoughts, as it
would have been little to his Interest, it should be so: but because the King
did Prorogue his Parliament from July 1663. to March 1663/4. some
ill-affection'd persons to the peace and quiet of the State and Government,
would fain have had their seditious whispers credited of their never seeing
them to meet again; but their malice could not be hid, for at the stated day
the doors were open, and the Houses full: says the King to them,


My Lords and Gentlemen, 92* Whatever peoples surmises be of him, the King
would not have his Parliament think any thing ill of him, as to any
disaffection for them.

You see, God be thanked, you have met together again at the time appointed,
and I do assure you I have been so far from ever intending it should be
otherwise, that I do not know one person who ever wished it should be
otherwise. Think therefore, I pray, what good meaning those men could have, who
from the time of the Prorogation, to the day of your meeting, have continually
whispered, and industriously infused into the minds of the people, that the
Parliament should meet no more; that it should either be presently dissolved,
or so continued by Prorogation, that they should be kept without a Parliament.
I pray watch these whisperers all you can, as men 93. He would have his
Parliament to watch all those who make it their business to sow jealousies
between them and him.
King's Speech to both Houses Mond. 21 Mar. 63/4. page 3, 4.
who use their utmost endeavors to sow Iealousies between you and me: and I do
promise you they shall not prevail with me; and I do promise my self they shall
not prevail with you: and the truth is, we are both concerned they should not;
and we shall then with God's blessing prevent all the mischief they intend.

NAY, so sensible was the King of this same evil Spirit among some, at his
receiving of the Parliaments Petition concerning Romish 94. The King extremely
angry at those who talk of his resolutions to dissolve his Parliament.
Priests and Jesuits, a year before this, that, says he then in his Speech to
them, I confess (my Lords and Gentlemen) I have heard of one Jealousy, which I
will never forgive the Authors of, that I had a Jealousy of your affections,
that I was offended with the Parliament to that degree, that I intended King's
Speech 1 Apr. 1663. page 5. and 6.
to dissolve it. They say, men are naturally most 95. Which he says reflects
much upon his understanding.
angry with those reproaches which reflect upon their understanding, which
makes them thought weak men: truly, I should appear a very weak man, if I
should have any such passion, any such purpose: No, my Lords and Gentlemen, I
will not 96. For none so much obliged to Parliaments as He was, and his love to
them shall be proportionable.
part with you upon those terms; never King was so much beholding to a
Parliament, as I am to you; and if my kindness to you, and my confidence in
you, be not proportionable, I am behindhand with you, which, God willing, I
will not be.

AND as he has laid out very great endeavors that there might not be any
misunderstanding between him and his people, so, in a more peculiar manner,
has his Majesty shown himself industrious in his carefulness to preserve a
right correspondence between him and his Parliament, and has been continually
engaging them by all the earnest expressions of an affectionate and endearing
tenderness, to preserve the same toward each other, as you shall see from
these following instances.

I am sorry to find that the general temper and affections of 97. The King
sorry to find the Nation no better composed.
the Nation are not so well composed, as I hoped they would have been, after so
signal blessings from God Almighty upon us all, and after so great indulgence
and condescentions from me toward all Interests. There are 98. Many ill
persons labor night and day to disturb the public peace.
King's Speech 20 Nov. 1661. page 4, 5.
many wicked Instruments still as active as ever, who labor night and day to
disturb the public peace, and to make all people jealous of each other: it
will be worthy of your care and vigilance to provide proper remedies 99. Find
out fit remedies for such, and we shall do well enough.
for the diseases of that kind; and if you find new diseases, you must study
new remedies. Let us not be discouraged, if we help one another, we shall with
God's blessing master all our difficulties. And, a few lines lower, says he, I
shall not need to recommend, 100. A good correspondence necessary for us all.
or put you in mind of the good correspondence that ought to be kept between
you, for the good of your selves and Me, and the whole Kingdom; and I may tell
you, it is very necessary for us all. You will find, whoever does not love me,
does not love you; and they who have no Reverence for you, have little 101. Who
have no reverence for Parliaments, have no kindness for the King.
Kindness for me: therefore, I pray, let us adhere fast to each other, and then
we shall, with the help of God, in a short time persuade, o: oblige all men to
that submission and obedience to the Law, as may constitute a full measure of
happiness to Prince and People, and persuade our Neighbors to that esteem and
value they have formerly had for us.

THIS Harmony of tempers is certainly the best way (in Humane 102. Harmony of
affections between the King and his Parliament, the best way to make both
Church and State happy.
foresight) to bring down blessiings upon us all, and to cause both the Church
and the Statc to return to that Unity Lord Chanc. Sp. 13 Sept. 1660. p. 22.
and Unanimity, which will make both King and People as happy as they can hope
to be in this World. 1660. p. 22.

THIS his Majesty's adopted Parliament very well understood, and therefore
behaved themselves accordingly; for their hearts were set upon it, after so
long distractions, (if it were possible) to restore the Nation to its former
felicity; and this could no way be so well done, as by the sweet agreement of
their Spirits, and their mutual kindnesses and respects each to other.

THIS, as they observed it, did the King observe too, and by his Chancellor
renders them very kind acknowledgments for it: Says that Noble Lord in the
same Speech, at the very beginning of the next page, My Lords and Gentlemen, I
shall conclude 103. And therefore the Chancellor thanks them as from the King,
for the good correspondence and respect to each other.
with the King's hearty thanks to you, not only for what you have done toward
him, which has been very signal, but for what you have done toward each
other; for the excellent correspondence you have maintained; for the very
seasonable deference and condescension you have had for each other, which will
restore Parliaments to the veneration they ought to have.

WHEN there is visible such a harmony of affections, and a unity in resolutions
to advance the public service, then they who look for troubles at home, may
despair of their wishes, and our Neighbors abroad, by seeing all is well at
home, 104. This will make our Enemies at home to despair and those abroad to
have a just honor and esteem for us.
may have that esteem and value of us, as may secure King's Speech to the House
of Commons, Mar: 1. 1661. page 5. and 7.
the Interest and Honor of the Nation, and make the happiness of this Kingdom,
and of this City, once more the admiration and envy of the World.

WELL may the King therefore be solicitous to have this maintained, since that
the peace and security, the honor and the happiness of these Nations is
concerned in it. This was a consideration 105. And this made the King to desire
and conjure his Parliament again to keep a good correspondence together.
prevailing enough with him, to desire and conjure both his Houses to keep a
very good correspondence King's Speech to both Houses Mond. 21 Mar. 1663/4. p.
8.
together, that it may not be in the power of any seditious or factious
Spirits, to make you jealous of each other, or either of you jealous of Me,
till you see me pretend one thing and do another, which, 106. And not to be
jealous of him, till they see he pretends one thing and does another, which
shall never be.
I am sure, you have never yet done; trust me it shall be in no bodies power to
make me jealous of you.

AND again, says his Majesty, My Lords and Gentlemen, I did desire and conjure
you at the opening of this Session, that you would keep a very good
correspondence together, that it might not be in the power of any seditious or
factious Spirits, to make you jealous of each other, or either of you jealous
of me. I must confess to you, you have 107. And they have done as his Majesty
desired, viz kept a very good correspondence toward each other, and respect
toward him.
King's Speech to both Houses Tuesd. May 17. 1664. p. 3, 4:
complied very fully with me, for which I can never thank you enough; You have
performed those good respects toward me, and kept so very good correspondence
toward each other, that you have exceedingly disappointed those ill men, who
both at home and abroad had raised great hopes and expectation of ne^ troubles
and confusions: This harmony will (with God's blessing) make us all esteemed
abroad, and secure at home.

ABOUT six years afterward he comes to them, and says, One thing I must
earnestly recommend to the prudence of has Houses, that you will not suffer
any 108. Unity of Minds and Counsels, brings happiness both to King and Nation.
King's Speech Mond. 14 Feb. 1669/70. p. 4, 5.
occasion of difference between your selves to be revived; since nothing but
the unity of your Minds and Counsels, can make this meeting happy either to Me,
or to the Nation.

AND on Monday the 11th. of April 1670. upon the Adjournment of the Parliament,
the Speaker thus says to his Majesty: By the blessing of God, all differences
are buried in 109. And they followed his Majesty's wholesome advice.
oblivion; your Majesty's happy expedient, has, Sir Edw. Turnor's Speech,
page 2.
like a strong gale of Wind, blown up the Rolling-Sands, and filled up all
Impressions. Vestigia nulla Retrorsum: and as your People will universally
enjoy the fruit of this happy Union, so our united prayers to God shall be,
that your Majesty may be crowned with the promised blessing, Beati pacifici.

AND when, about three years and a half after this, the King had heard of some
differences in Parliament, which his Majesty thought fit to come and put a stop
to by an immediate Prorogation, how kindly and affectionately did he speak to
both his Houses, and say, My Lords and Gentlemen, I need not tell you, how
unwillingly I call you hither at this time, being 110. How unwilling the King
was to Prorogue his Parliament, though it was to put a stop to some differences
then risen.
enough sensible what advantages my Enemies King's Speech Nov. 4. 1673. p. 3.
and 4.
both abroad and at home will reap by the least appearance of a difference;
nay, being assured, they expect more success from such a breach, (could they
procure it) than from their Arms.

This, I say, shall (whilst I live) be my chief endeavor to 111. But it was
but a short one, that good men should recollect themselves.
prevent, and for that reason I think it necessary to make a short Recess, that
all good men may recollect themselves against the next meeting.

AND the January following he tells them most affectionately, 112. And
therefore Enemies could not hope for a breach between the King and his
Parliament from that short Recess.
When I parted with you last, it was but for a little time, and with a
resolution of meeting suddenly again. That alone was enough to satisfy my
Friends that they need not fear, and my Enemies that they could not hope for
King's Speech Jan. 7. 1673/4. page 3, 4.
a Breach between us. I then told you that the time of this short Recess should
be employed in doing such things as might add to your satisfaction. I hope I
have 113. For in the mean time the King would do that which should be to their
satisfaction.
done my part toward it, and I do now expect you should do your parts too: for
our Enemies chief hopes are to dis-unite us at home; it is their common
discourse, and they reckon upon it as their best relief. 114. All our Enemies
aims are to disunite us.



My Lords and Gentlemen,
It is not possible for me to doubt your Affections at any time, much less at
such a time as this, when the evidences of your 115. The King can never doubt
the affections of his Parliament.
Affections are become so necessary to us all.

THE King has spoken so fully, so excellently well, and so like himself, that
it is almost impossible to show greater demonstrations of an earnest and tender
affection; and Lord Chanc. Sp. 5 Febr. 72/3. page 5.
there is not a word in his Speech that has not its full weight.

AND says he in another, The principal end of my calling you now, 116. The
Kings utmost endeavors to settle a right understanding.
is to give my self the satisfaction of having used the utmost of my endeavors
to procure and settle a right and lasting understanding between us: for I must
tell you, I find the contrary so much labored, and that the pernicious King's
Speech Apr. 13. 1675. p. 3, 4:
designs of ill men have taken so much place under 117. For the contrary is
much labored.
Specious pretenses, that it is high time to be watchful in preventing their
contrivances, of which it is not the least, that they would by all the means
they can devise, make it unpracticable 118. Speeches abroad of dissolving the
long Parliament, long before it was.
any longer to continue this present Parliament: for that reason, I confess, I
cannot think such have any good meaning to Me; and therefore when I consider
how much the greatest part of this Parliament has either themselves, or
Fathers, given me testimony of their affections and loyalty, I should be 119.
But the King loath to gratify such Enemies, by parting with such Friends.
extreme loath to oblige those Enemies, by parting with such Friends; and they
may be assured, that none shall be able to recommend themselves to me by any
other way than their good Services.

AND because the Season of the year would not permit any long 120. Therefore
again he persuades them to be united in Counsel and Affections, to disappoint
such expectations.
Session, and he did intend to meet them again in Winter, therefore says he,
in the mean time, I earnestly recommend to you all, such a temper and
moderation in your proceedings, Id. page: 5. and 6.
as may tend to unite us all in Counsel and Affections, and disappoint the
expectations of those, who can hope only by violent and irregular Motions, to
prevent the bringing of this Session to an happy conclusion.

WHAT could be more obligingly spoken by any Prince in the 121. And what can be
more?
World? has he not here laid out himself, to unite the hearts of his
Parliament and People to himself, by all the Emanations of grace and goodness
that from a great Lord Keepers Speech to the same, p. 8.
and generous Prince can be expected?

HIS Majesty, said the Lord Chancellor then, has not as yet learned to deny you
any thing, and he believes your wisdom and moderation is such, he never shall;
he asks of 122. Peace in one another is the way never to be deceived.
you to be at peace in him, as he is in you, and he Lord Chanc. Sp. 27 Oct.
1673. p. 9.
shall never deceive you.

NO influences of the Stars, no consigurations of the Heavens 123. Nothing to
be feared so long as these two Houses concur together, and both with the King.
are to be feared, so long as these two Houses stand in a good disposition to
each other, and both of Lord Keepers Sp. 13 April 1675. p. 17, 18, 19, etc.
them in a happy conjunction with their Lord and Sovereign.

WHY should we doubt it? never was discord more unseasonable. 124. Discord
never more unseasonable.
Id. p. 18.


THEY understand well enough, that the best health may be 125. The best health
may be destroyed by too much care.
destroyed by too much care of it, an Anxious scrupulous care, a care that is
always tampering, a care that labors so long to purge all ill humors out of
the Body, that at last Id. ibid.
it leaves neither good Blood nor Spirits behind.

WHO does not see that there are in all Governments difficulties 126.
Difficulties more than enough in all Governments
more than enough, though they meet with no intestine divisions; difficulties
of such a Nature, that the united endeavors of the State can hardly struggle
Id. p. 19.
with, but after all is done that can be, they will still remain insuperable?

THIS is that which makes the Crowns of Princes, when they 127. The Crowns of
Princes at the best but glorious Thorns.
are worn by the clearest and noblest Title, and supported by the mightiest
Aids, yet at the best but wreaths of glorious Thorns; he that would go about to
add to the cares Id. ibid. and sequen.
and solicitudes of his Prince, does what in him lies to make those Thorns
pierce deeper, and sit closer to the Royal Diadem, than ever they did before.

NO Zeal can excuse it, for as there may be a Religious Zeal, 128. Religious
Zeal, and State-Zeal.
a Zeal for God which is not according to knowledge; so there may be a
State-Zeal, a Zeal for the public, which is not according to prudence, at
least, not according to that Id. ibid.
degree of prudence, which the same men have, when they are not under the
transport of such a fervent passion.

HAS is not been a strange mistake in some General Councils, and a mistake
which is fatal at this day to the peace of the Christian Church, that in most
of their Canons and Sanctions they have more considered whom they should
oppose, than what they should establish. Id. p. 20.


AND may it not prove a piece of as ill conduct in any Secular 129. It Is ill to
pursue good ends by violent means.
Assembly, to pursue good ends by violent means, and in the heat of that
pursuit to choose rather to lose that good they might have compassed, than to
fall short of any of those good ends which they have once proposed unto
themselves. Ibid. and p. 21.



My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE King is far, infinitely far, from fearing any excess of this 130. The King
will not apprehend any kind of error either in the Parliaments Judgments or
Affections.
kind here, he knows too well the Wisdom, the Honor, and the Loyalty of this
great Assembly, to apprehend any kind of error, either in your Judgments, or
your Affections. Id. ibid.


YOU that were able to raise the King's affairs, when they were 131. For those
that raised his affairs when at lowest ebb, will surely keep them from
relapsing.
in their lowest and most deplored condition, will surely be able to keep them
from any relapse. Ibid.


YOU that were able to make this Government take root again, will surely be
able to preserve it in a growing and a flourishing Estate. Ibid.


SUCH Pilots need not fear a Storm. Ibid.


IF you could, this consideration alone were enough to support you, that you
carry Caesar and his Fortunes, you serve a Prince 132. In our King's
preservation Miracles are become familiar.
in whose preservation Miracles are become familiar, a Prince in whose style
Dei gratia seems not to be written by a Vulgar Pen, but by the arm of
Omnipotence it self. Ibid. and p. 22.


RAISE up then, by your example, the hearts and hopes of all those, whom ill
men have wrought upon to such a degree, as to cast them into a sadness, and
into a despondency which is most unreasonable. Id. p. 22.


CONFIRM the Faith of those that are made weak, by showing 133. Give the King
all his Subjects hearts in the present of your own.
them the stedfastness of your belief; give the King the hearts of all his
Subjects, by making him a present of yours. Id. p. 23.


THEN though this Session should close in a few weeks, yet it 134. It would
make the Session memorable to posterity.
may be perpetual for the fruit it shall produce, and for the commemoration
that will follow it. Ibid.


THEN will this year be a true year of Jubilee, and we shall have nothing left
to wish, or pray for in this World, but the blessed continuance of his
Majesty's long and happy reign over us. Ibid.


BUT it seems this did not meet with that happy effect the King 135. Yet the
ill designs of the Enemy were too prevalent against the good ones the King had
proposed to himself in behalf of his People.
could have wished it had, as it appears by his own Speech to them two months
after, which (though much against his will) caused him to make that Prorogation
you shall hear of: says he, The ill designs of our Enemies have been too
prevalent against those good ones I had proposed to my self, in behalf of my
people: and those unhappy differences between my two Houses are grown to such
an height, that I find no possible King's Speech 9. June 1675. page 4.
means to put an end to them, but by a Prorogation. 136. But still the King is
uneasy, in making use of the expedient of a Prorogation.
It is with great unwillingness that I make use of this Expedient, having
always intended an Adjournment for the preserving of such Bills as were
unfinished: but my hopes are, that, by this means, the present occasion of
differences being 137. But hopes the old differences will be buried by it.
taken away, you will be so careful hereafter of the public, as not to seek
new ones, nor to revive the old.

AND therefore when he met them next after this Prorogation, with what warm
affections for the good of his people does he speak to them? I meet you now
with a more than usual concern 138. His warm affections to them at the next
meeting.
for the Event of this Session, and I know it is but what may reasonably be
expected from that care I owe to the prefervation of the Government. The causes
of the last Prorogation, (and 139. He will remember nothing of former
businesses himself, and hopes his Parliament will follow his example.
has he not here set a most generous Example indeed for all good Subjects to
imitate?) as I for my part do not desire to remember, so I hope no man else
will, unless it be to learn from thence, how to avoid the like occasions King's
Speech to both Houses Wednes. 13 Oct. 1675. p. 3.
for the future; and I pray consider how fatal the consequences may be, and how
little benefit is like to redound to the people by it: However, if any 140. Or
at least will defer them till public Bills are perfected.
thing of that kind shall arise, I desire you would defer those debates, till
you have brought such public Bills to perfection, as may conduce to the good
and safety of the Kingdom.

NO King did ever meet a Parliament with juster cause of confidence 141. No
King met a Parliament with more confidence in their affections, and therefore
relies upon it that they will never forsake him.
in their Affections.

AND therefore his Majesty will not suffer himself to doubt, but relies firmly
upon it that you will never forsake him, when he is under any kind of
difficulties.

FOR it is impossible that those Affections which Piety and Allegiance first
planted, which persecution could not abate, 142. For it is impossible those
affections of Piety and Allegiance they have ever had, should now decay.
which the gracious influences of his Majesty's happy Government have hitherto
increased, should now Lord Keepers Speech to the same, p. 7.
appear to wither and decay.


My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE happiness of this present Age, and the fate and fortune 143. The happiness
of both the present and next Age, is much in the Parliaments hands.
of the next too, is very much in your hands; and at this time, all that you
would desire to settle and improve, all that you would wish to secure and
transmit to your Posterities, Id. p. 8.
may now be accomplished.

AND you see with what Zeal the King has recommended to 144. The Kings Zeal in
recommending to them a good agreement.
you a good agreement between your selves, and that he does it with all the
care and compassion, all the earnestness and importunity fit for so great a
Prince to express, who would be very sorry that any such misfortune as your
disagreement, should either deprive him of your Advice and Assistance, or his
People of those good Laws which he is ready to grant you. Id. p. 10.


WELL, his Majesty did not think he had yet done enough, or, at least, if more
would rather induce and prevail with them, he was resolved to spare no words,
to forget no arguments, that had any cogency and weight in them, to bring his
Parliament over to that calmness of temper, that necessary moderation, so much
desired by all good and honest men, as might settle us upon the sure and
lasting foundations of peace and happiness: says he,


My Lords and Gentlemen, 145. His further earnestness after a long Prorogation.

I have called you together again after a long Prorogation, that you might have
an opportunity to repair the misfortunes of the last Session, and to recover
and restore the right use and end of Parliaments.

The time I have given you to recollect your selves in, and to consider whither
those differences tend, which have been so unhappily managed and improved
between you, is King's Speech 15 Febr. 1676/7. page 1, 2.
enough to leave you without all excuse, if ever you fall into the like again.

I am now resolved to let the World see, that it shall not be 146. The Kings
desire to have the People happy by his Parliaments consultations.
my fault if the people be not made happy by your consultations in Parliament.
Id. ibid.


AND therefore, that you may hear the sum of the whole matter, and which the
King was pleased to refer to his Parliament, says he, in page the 4th. To
conclude, I do recommend to you 147. He recommends to them the peace, the
safety, and the prosperity of the Kingdom.
the peace of the Kingdom, in the careful prevention of all differences; the
safety of the Kingdom, in providing for some greater strength at Sea; and the
prosperity of the Kingdom, in assisting the necessary charge and support of the
Government.

And if any of these good ends should happen to be disappointed, 148. And would
have no disappointment of them, if possible.
I call God and Men to witness this day, that the misfortune of that
disappointment shall not lie at my door. Id. ibid.


IF therefore there be any endeavors to renew, nay, if there 149. But would
have all remembrances of former things extinguished.
be not all the endeavors that can be to extinguish the memory of all former
provocations and offenses, and the occasions of the like for the future; if
there be such divisions Lord Chanc. Speech to the same. p. 8, 9.
as beget great thoughts of heart, shall we call this Peace because it is not
War, or because men do 150. Or otherwise such divisions look rather like War,
than Peace.
not yet take the Field? as well we may call it health, when there is a
dangerous fermentation in the Blood and Spirits, because the Patient has not
yet taken his Bed.

MUCH of this strange diffidence and distrust, which, like a 151. All this
diffidence rises from the artifices of ill men.
general Infection, begins to spread it self into, almost, all the corners of
the Land, rises from the Artifice of ill men, who create and nourish all the
suspicions which they can devise; but the Cure of it lies perfectly in your
hands, for all Id. p. 11.
this will presently vanish, as soon as men shall see your Acquiescence, and
the fruits of it in a cheerful concurrence with his Majesty to all those good
and public ends which he has now so earnestly recommended to you.

IT would be somewhat strange, and without all example in 152. It would be
strange for a Nation to be twice undone by one and the same way and means.
story, that a Nation should be twice ruined, twice undone, by the self-same
way and means, the same Fears and Jealousies. Id. ibid.


Machiavel, who, they say, is an Author much studied of late 153. Machiavel an
Author much studied of late.
in this Kingdom, to extol his own excellent Judgment and insight in History,
in which indeed he was a Master, would persuade men to believe, that the true
reason why so many unexpected Accidents and Mischiefs fall out, to the
destruction of States and Empires, is, because their Governors 154. By
nonobservance of former mischiefs to other States, we our selves come to fall
into the like.
have not observed the same Mischiefs heretofore in Lord Chanc. Sp. 19 May 1662
p. 17, 18, and 19.
story, and from whence they proceeded, and what progress they made; which, he
said, if they had done, they might easily have preserved themselves from ruin,
and prevented the Inconveniences which have fallen out. I am sure you are all
good Historians, and need only to resort to the Records of your own memories.
Remember how 155. If we will but remember the late ill times, and suffer our
selxes again to be undone by secret courses of such vile men, we shall be held
very ill Historians, and worse Politicians.
your peace has been formerly disturbed, by what contrivance and artifices the
people have been alarmed, with unreasonable and unnatural Fears and Jealousies,
and what dismal effects those Fears and Jealousies have produced. Remember how
near Monarchy has been dissolved, and the Law subverted under pretense of
reforming, and supporting Government, Law, and Justice. And remember how many
honest persons were misled by not discerning Consequences, who would as soon
have renounced their part in Heaven, as have concurred in the first
unwarrantable Action, if they had suspected what did follow: and if we suffer
the same Enemy to break in upon us at the same Avenues, if we suffer our peace
to be blown up by the same Trains and Machinations, we shall be held very ill
Historians, and worse Politicians.

HOW happy may a Kingdom be in the frequent Assemblies of 156. How happy may
the Kingdom be in the frequent assembly of its great Council, if nothing
disturbs it.
their Great Councels, where all that is grievous may be redressed, and all
that is wanting may be enacted, if those Councels Lord Chanc. Sp. 15 Feb.
1976/7. p. 13.
are not rendered useless and impracticable, by continuing endless distractions.

IF the presaging malice of our Enemies should pretend to foretell any such
Fate as this to befall us, the wisdom and the magnanimity of this Great Council
will quickly be too hard for all their Auguries. The Honor and the Loyalty of
this August and Venerable Assembly, will leave no kind of room for any such
divinations. Id. ibid.



My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE King has so long had, and still retains such honorable 157. The Kings
honorable thoughts of his Parliaments.
thoughts of these Assemblies, that we ought to make it one great part of our
business to deserve the continuance of his Majesty's grace, and good opinion.
Id. p. 16.


LET no Contention then come near this place, but that of a 158. The contention
of a Parliament should be that of Emulation who should best serve his Country.
Noble Emulation who shall serve his Country best, by well serving of the King;
let no passion enter here, but that of a pious zeal to lay hold upon all
opportunities of promoting the honor and service of the Crown, till our
Enemies despair of ever profiting by any disorders amongst us. Id. ibid.


FOR says the King, I assure you, whatsoever some ill men 159. The King never
had any intentions but of good to them.
would have believed, I never had any intentions but of good to you, and to my
people, nor ever shall, but will do all that I can for your safety and ease, as
far as you your selves will suffer me. And since these are my resolutions, I
desire you will not drive me into extremities, which must end King's Speech
Thursd. 23 May 1678. page 6.
ill both for you and me, and (which is worst of all) for the Nation, which we
ought all to have equal 160. All ought to have an equal care of the Nation.
care of: therefore I desire we may prevent any disorders, or mischief that may
befall them by our disagreement; and in case they do, I shall leave it to God
Almighty to judge between us, who is the occasion of it.

LET me add this likewise, which the King would always have to be remembered,
and that is, says he, To let you know, that I 161. The King will never suffer
the method of passing Laws to be changed.
will never more suffer the course and method of passing Laws to be changed;
and that if several matters shall ever again be tacked together in one Bill,
that Bill shall certainly be lost, let the importance of it be never so great.
Id. p. 7.


THE King will not suffer himself to believe it possible, that 162. The tacking
of several matters to one Bill, will lose that Bill.
you should ever forsake him when any difficulties or distresses are near him;
and therefore he does Lord Chanc Speech to the same, p. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19
with great assurance expect your care to preserve him in the affections of his
People.

BUT the King has so far expressed himself this day, that it is evident the
manner of your proceedings is to him as considerable as the matter; and that he
will not accept a good Bill, how valuable soever it may be, unless it come to
him in the old and decent method of Parliaments.

THE late way of tacking together several independent and 163. For it seems to
alter the whole frame and constitution of Parliaments.
incoherent matters in one Bill, seems to alter the whole frame and
constitution of Parliaments, and consequently of the Government it self.

IT takes away the King 's Negative voice in a manner, and 164. It takes away
the Kings Negative voice in a manner.
forces him to take all or none, when sometimes one part of the Bill may be as
dangerous for the Kingdom, as the other is necessary.

IT takes away the Negative voice of the House of Peers too 165. And that of
the House of Peers too.
by the same consequence, and dis-inherits the Lords of that Honor they were
born to, the liberty of debating and judging what is good for the Kingdom.

IT looks like a kind of defamation of the Government, and 166. It looks like a
kind of defamation of the Government.
seems to suppose the King and House of Lords to be so ill affected to the
public, that a good Bill cannot carry it self through by the strength of its
own Reason and Justice, unless it be helped forward by being tacked to another
Bill that will be favored.

IT does at last give up the greatest share of Legislature to the 167. And
gives up the greatest share of Legislature to the Commons.
Commons, and by consequence the chief power of judging what Laws are best for
the Kingdom.

AND yet it is a privilege that may be made use of against 168. Yet may be
made use of against the Commons.
the Commons, as well as by them: for if this method hold, what can hinder the
Lords at one time or other from taking advantage of a Bill very grateful to the
Commons, and much desired by them, to tack a new clause to it of some Foreign
matter, which shall not be altogether so grateful, nor so much desired, and
then the Commons must take all, or none too.

THUS every good Bill shall be dearly bought at last, and one 169. This is the
way for every good Bill to be dearly bought at last.
chief end of calling Parliaments, the making of good Laws, shall be wholly
frustrated and disappointed; and all this by departing from that method, which
the wisdom of our Ancestors prescribed on purpose to prevent and exclude all
such inconveniences.

THESE Innovations the King resolves to abolish, and has 170. These
Innovations the King will abolish.
commanded me to say to you, State super vias Antiquas.


My Lords and Gentlemen,
THERE never did, there never can again, so much depend 171. What great things
depended on the success of that Meeting.
upon the happy success of any one Meeting, as there does upon this.

IF this Session do not repair the misfortunes, and amend the faults of the
last, it will look like a fatality upon the Nation.

LET not the whispers or Evil surmises of those who lie in 172. Let no evil
surmises of base men make any mistrustful.
wait to deceive, make any man the unhappy occasion of endangering the safety
of the Government, by mistrusting it.

HE whose House is destroyed by Fire, would find but little consolation, in
saying, the Fire did not begin by his means; but it will be a matter of
perpetual anguish and vexation of heart, to remember that it was in his power
to have extinguished it.

EMBELLISH the History of this Parliament, by showing 173. Good Service very
acceptable to the King, who never forgets any thing but Injuries.
us the healing virtue of this Session; so shall your Service be acceptable to
the King, who never forgets any thing but Injuries; so shall you recommend your
selves to posterity, by transmitting to them the same peace and happiness you
are trusted with.

LET us then carefully avoid all differences amongst our selves, 174.
Differences that our Enemies wish for, is the best way for us to ruin our
selves.
all manner of clashing about Jurisdictions, and all Lord Chanc. Sp Mond. 21
Oct. 78. p. 15, 17, 18, 19.
disputes of such a nature as can never end in any Accommodation: For this is
still what our Enemies would wish, who would be glad to see us ruined, without
their being at the charge of it. 175. Great significations of Loyalty and Duty,
the only means to discourage our Enemies.


AND therefore we must now above all other times, labor to show the World the
most effectual significations of our Loyalty and Duty, that we are able to
express: for nothing in the World can more discourage our Enemies, as, on the
contrary, nothing does, or can so ripen a Nation for destruction, as to be
observed 176. As nothing sooner destroys a Nation, then to distrust its own
Government.
to distrust their own Government.

YOU now find the King to be involved in difficulties as great and, without
your assistance, as insuperable, as ever any Government 177. The King involved
in great difficulties.
did labor under.

AND yet his Majesty does not think that there need many 178. There needs not
many words to bespeak our zeal, for the things themselves speak aloud.
words to bespeak your Zeal and Industry in his Service: for the things
themselves now speak, and speak aloud. The public and the private Interest do
both persuade the same things, and are, and ought to be, mighty in persuasion.

IF the honor and safety of your Country, and, which is next 179. The honor
and safety of our Country, the concerns of our Families and Posterities call to
us.
to that, the concerns of your own Families and Posterities, cannot awaken your
utmost care to preserve that Government, which only can preserve you and yours,
all other discourses will be to no purpose.

THERE can be no difficulties at all to them who take delight 180. No
difficulties to them who delight to serve the King and their Country.
in serving of the King and their Country, and love the occasions of showing
it.

SUCH are all here. But though the King have had for many years a large and
full experience of your duty, yet there never 181. No time like this to try all
our affections.
was a time like this, to try your affections.

THERE is so strange a concurrence of ill accidents at this 182. A strange
concurrence of ill accidents.
time, that it is not to be wondered at, if some very honest and good men begin
to have troubled and thoughtful hearts. Yet that which is infinitely to be
lamented, is, that malicious men too begin to work upon this occasion, and are
in no small hopes to 183. Malicious men begin to work upon this occasion.
raise a Storm, that nothing shall be able to allay.

IF you rescue the Kings affairs from such a Tempest as this; 184. If the
Parliament can weather this Storm, they will do as good service to the King as
ever yet he stood in need of.
If you can weather this Storm, and steer the Vessel into Harbor; If you can
find a way to quiet the Apprehensions of those who mean well, without being
carried away by the passions of others, who mean ill; If you can prevent the
designs of those without doors, who study nothing else, but how to distract
your Councels, and to disturb all your Proceedings: Then you will have
performed as great and as seasonable a piece of Service to the King, as ever
yet he stood in need of.

AND when the World shall see, that nothing has been able to disappoint the
King of the Assistance he had reason to hope from this Session, but that there
is a right understanding between the King and his Parliament, and that again
strengthened and increased by new Evidences of your Duty and Affection, and
raised above all possibility of being interrupted.

THEN shall the King be possessed of that true glory which 185. And he will be
possessed of the true glory which others vainly pursue.
others vainly pursue, the glory of reigning in the hearts of his People. Then
shall the People be possessed of as much felicity as this World is capable of:
And you shall have the perpetual Honor and Satisfaction, of having been the
means to procure to 186. The People of the greatest felicity.
so much solid and lasting good to your Country, as the Establishment of the
Peace and Tranquillity of this Kingdom; and 187. And themselves of perpetual
Honor.
consequently of all his Majesty's Dominions.

AND now what remains, but that the Parliament, when e're they sit again,
should have these most profitable words of the King continually in their
Memories, which he was pleased to deliver to both his Houses, on Thursday, 6th.
March, 1678/9. p. 4. and 188. Parliaments to be employed on the great concerns
of the Nation.
5. and carefully see, that they Employ their time upon the great concerns of
the Nation, and be not drawn to promote private Animosities under pretenses of
the public; So will their proceedings be Calm and Peaceable, in order to those
good ends the King has at all times, and to be sure will recommend to his 189.
And to curbthemotions of unruly Spirits*
Parliament; and that they curb the motions of any unruly Spirits, which would
endeavor to disturb them. For there can be no man that must not see how fatal
differences amongst 190. The considerations to be laid before them as urgent
and weighty as ever any Parliament had.
our selves are like to be at this time, both at home and abroad.

FOR the considerations which are now to be laid before them, are as urgent and
as weighty, as were ever yet offered to any Parliament, or indeed ever can be;
so great, and so 191. From our dangers at home and a broad.
surprising have been our dangers at home, so formidable Lord Chanc. Speech to
the same, p. 10.
are the appearances of danger from abroad, that the most united Councels, the
most Sedate and 192 Therefore all need of united Councels, Calmest temper, and
zealous Affections.
the Calmest temper, together with the most dutiful and zealous Affections that
a Parliament can show, are all become absolutely and indispensably necessary
for our preservation.

AND therefore the King hopes, the good understanding 193. And a good
understanding between the King and his People.
between him and his People shall be for ever maintained by a perpetual
Reciprocation of Grace and Favor on his part, and duty and affection on yours.
Id. page 16.


YOU will have now an opportunity of doing great things for 194. They have
opportunity to do great things both for the King and Kingdom.
the King and Kingdom, and it deserves your utmost care to make a right use of
it; For it is not in the power of a Parliament to recover a lost opportunity,
or to restore themselves again to the same Circumstances, or the same
condition, which they had once a power to have improved. Id. page 17.


WOULD you secure Religion at home, and strengthen it 195. This is the time to
secure Religion at home, and to strenghten it from abroad.
from abroad, by uniting the Interests of all the Protestants in Europe? This
is the time. Id. ibid.


WOULD you let the Christian World see the King in a condition 196. To put the
King in a condition to protect all his Adherents.
able to protect those who shall adhere to him, or depend upon him? This is the
time. Id. ibid.


WOULD you extinguish all our Fears and Jealousies? Would you lay aside all
private Animosities, and give them up to the 197. To extinguish all Fears and
Jealousies.
quiet and Repose of the Public? This is the time. Id. ibid.


WOULD you lay the foundations of a lasting Peace, and 198. And to lay the
foundations of a lasting Peace.
secure the Church and State, against all the future Machinations of our
Enemies? This is the time. Id. ibid.



My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE present face of things, and the State wherein we now are, is so well known
and understood abroad, that the whole 199. All the World in great expectation
of the Resolutions of the Parliament.
World is in great expectation of those Resolutions which shall be taken here;
the results of this Counsel seem to be decisive of the fate of these Kingdoms
for many Ages, and are like to determine us, either to happiness or misery of a
very long duration. Id. page 18.


MAY then your Wisdom and Moderation be such, that the King may never deny you
any thing.

AND when ever you meet, may you make it your business to 200. May our
Parliament make it their business to repair the Hedge about our Vineyard.
repair the Hedge about our Vineyard, and make it a fence indeed against all
those who are Enemies to the Planting of it; who would be glad to see it
trodden Lord Keepers Speech 7. Ja. 73/4. page 8.
down, or rooted up, and study how to sap and under-mine our very Foundations.

THE Heathens were wont to observe and envy the Christians for their Unity and
Love of one Sir Ed. Turnor's Sp. to the King, May 17. 1664. page 12.
201. May a happy Correspondence be kept between the King and both Houses.
another, Ecce, ut invicem se diligunt Christiani: May this happy
Correspondency between his Royal Majesty, and the two Houses of Parliament,
increase and grow to be the Envy of the World, till all his Majesty's Enemies
are forced to cry,

Ecce, ut invicem se diligunt Anglicani. THERE wants nothing more to the
improvement 202. May their wisdoms use their advantages with a due moderation.
of our happiness, but the wisdom of the Parliament, Lord Keepers Speech Jan.
7. 71/4. page 10.
to use their advantages with a due moderation.

AND if, upon enquiry, you shall think it needful to apply any 203. Few
Remedies are extremely to be wished.
other [new] Remedies, it is extremely to be wished that those Remedies may be
few, and withal, that they may be gentle and easy too. Id. ibid.


FOR they that are sick perish as often by too many Remedies, 204. The Sick
perish as often by too many, as by none at all.
as by none at all; but none fall so fatally and finally as they who, being
entered into some degrees of convalescence, resolve to recover in an instant,
and had rather make some great effort, or try some bold experiment upon
themselves, than observe the methods, or attend those gradual progressions
which are necessary to perfect that health, and complete that recovery. Id.
ibid.


DOUBTLESS the King will surpass himself at this time, in 205. Doubtless the
King will surpass himself in endeavoring the Kingdoms good, may you excel
your selves in enlarged Affections.
endeavoring to procure the good of the Kingdom, do but you excel your selves
too in the enlarged evidences of your Affections, and then the glory of
reviving this State will be entirely due ^^ your happy meeting, as being
attended with an unparalled Vna^i^ity, Constancy, and Resolution, beyond the
president of former Parliaments. Id. p. 20.


THEN they who wait for the languishing and the declination 206. It will strike
terror and amazement in all ill persons.
of the present Government, will be amazed to see so happy a Crisis, so blessed a
Revolution. Ibid.


AND Ages to come will find cause to celebrate your memories, 207. And future
Ages will celebrate your memories.
as the truest Physicians, the wisest Counselors, the noblest Patriots, and
the best Parliament that ever King or Kingdom met with. Ibid.


So that it may perfect what the last begun, for the safety of 208 May it
perfect what the last begun, for the safety of the King and Kingdom.
this King and Kingdom; that it may be ever famous for having established upon
a durable foundation, our Religion, Laws, and Properties; that we may not be
tossed with boisterous winds, nor overtaken by a sudden dead calm: but that a
Lord Chanc. Sp. 27 Oct. 1673. p. 10.
gentle fair gale may carry you in a steady, even, and resolved way into the
Ports of Wisdom and Security.

AND since a whole Session of Parliament is in the Judgment 209. The whole
Session of Parliament is but as one day.
and Construction of our Law but as one day, may you all endeavor that the
morning of it, the first entrance upon it, may be with such fair and such
auspicious circumstances, Lord Keepers Sp. Wcdnes. 13 Oct. 75. p. 11, 12.
as may give the whole Kingdom an assurance of a bright and a cheerful day.

LET no ill humors gather into Clouds to darken or obscure 210 May no ill
humors gather into Clouds to darken it.
it, for this day is a Critical day, and more depends upon that Judgment of our
affairs which will be made by it, than can easily be imagined.

IT imports you therefore to take care that no part of this time 211. May no
part of this time be lost.
be lost; let every precious minute of this day be spent in receiving such Acts
of grace and goodness as are ready to flow from the King, and in making such
retributions for them, as may become the grateful hearts of the best Subjects,
to the best of Kings.

SO shall this day become a day of disappointment and discomfort 212. So this
will be a day of disappointment to our Enemies, and a joyful day to this and
all future generations.
to our Enemies, but to us and all good men a glorious day, a day of triumph
and deliverance, a memorable and a joyful day to this present, and to all
future generations.

AND the God of Peace and Unity prosper all your Lord Chanc. Sp. Thursd. 23 May
78. page 19.
consultations, to the honor and happiness of the 213. And the God of Peace
and Unity prosper all your consultations.
King, and the joy and comfort of all his good Subjects.

AND let us all pray, that He who has once more miraculously 214. And continue
his Divine protection over us.
delivered the King, the Church, and the State, would be pleased still to
continue his Divine protection, and give us thankful and obedient hearts: And
when we have offered up those hearts to God, let us in the next place offer
them again to the King, 215. And may you have the honor of making him the
greatest King, and he the glory of making us the happiest people.
and lay them down at the footstool of his Throne, that so the King may see
himself safe in your Councels, rich in your Affections, victorious by your
Arms, and raised to such a Lord Chanc. Sp. Thursd. 6 Mar. 7^/9. p. 18, 19.
height by your Loyalty and Courage, that you may have the honor of making him
the greatest King, and he the glory of making you the happiest People.

Neve major, neve minor cura and opera suscipiatur, quam causa postulet. Tull.
Offic. lib. 1.

FINIS.
Addenda.
THE Title Page having (it seems) promised you the material substance of the
several Speeches in Parliament, upon the aforesaid Heads, inclusively till the
end of the last, viz. in January 1680/1. I found my self in Duty bound to add
these that follow, by way of Appendix, to make good the Promise; because the
Title Sheet was all wrought off before ever I had a view of it: And so I hope
my Generous Readers will accept of this as a reasonable Excuse in my favor.

HIS Majesty being very sensible how much our Divisions at home would be likely
to render our Friendship less considerable abroad, says, To prevent these as
much as may be, I think fit to renew His Majesty's Speech to his two Houses,
Monday, October. 21. 1680. p. 4, 5.
to you all the Assurances which can be desired, that nothing shall be wanting
on my part to give you the fullest satisfaction your hearts can wish, for the
Security of the Protestant Religion, which I am fully resolved to maintain
against all the Conspiracies of our Enemies; and to concur with you in any new
Remedies which shall be proposed, that may consist with preserving the
Succession of the Crown in its due and legal course of Descent.

AND in Order to this, I do recommend it to you, to pursue the further
Examination of the PLOT, with a strict and an Impartial Enquiry. I do not think
my self safe, nor You neither, till that matter he gone through with: and
therefore it will be Necessary that the Lords in the Tower be brought to their
speedy Trial, that Justice may be done.

IN his next Speech to his Parliament, the King is pleased to remember the same
thing, and says, I did promise you the fullest satisfaction your hearts could
wish, for the Security of the Kings Speech, Wednesday December 15. 1680. page 4.
Protestant Religion, and to concur with you in any Remedies which might
consist with preserving the Succession of the Crown in its due and legal course
of Descent: I do again, with the same Reservations, renew the same Promises to
you.

WELL, His Majesty, you see, having thus given us the greatest Assurances that
Words are capable of expressing, of his readiness to do any Reasonable thing
that shall be proposed and offered to him, for the maintaining and defending
the Protestant Religion to us and our Posterities; his next work is to tell us
wherein he chiefly relies, and thinks himself most safe, great, and happy; and
that is, in the Hearts and Affections of his Good People, and in their joint
union among themselves.

Take his own words for your security, in these that follow.

THAT which I value above all King's Speech to both Houses, October. 21. 1680.
page 6, and 7.
the Treasure in the World, and which I am sure will give me greater Strength
and Reputation both at home and abroad, than any Treasure can do, is a perfect
union amongst our selves.

NOTHING but this can restore the Kingdom to that strength and vigor which it
seems to have lost, and raise us again to that Consideration which ENGLAND has
usually had.

ALL Europe have their Eyes upon this Assembly, and think their own happiness
or misery, as well as ours, will depend upon it.

IF we should be so unhappy as to fall into such misunderstanding amongst our
selves, as would render our friendship unsafe to trust to, it will not be to be
wondered at, if our Neighbors should begin to take new Resolutions, and
perhaps such as may be fatal to us.

LET us therefore take care that we do not gratify our Enemies, and discourage
our friends by any unseasonable disputes.

IF any such do happen, The world will see it was no fault of mine; for I have
done all that was possible for me to do, to keep you in peace while I live,
and to leave you so when I die.

BUT from so great Prudence, and so good Affections as yours, I can fear
Nothing of this kind; but do rely upon you all, that you will use your best
Endeavors to bring this Parliament to a good and happy Conclusion.

NOW that Gracious and pious disposition which God has put into Your Royal
Heart of doing your Subjects good, (says the Speaker of the House of Commons
to the King in the Banqueting House, November 9. 1660, page 5, 6.) is the
greatest Temporal Blessing we are capable of here in this world. We must
confess your Majesty has not only Jacob's voice, but you have likewise Jacob's
hands: You have spoken kindly unto your People, and you have handled them
gently; and therefore we must for ever make it our humble Requests in our daily
prayers unto his Throne of Grace, to bestow upon your Majesty Jacob's blessing,
de Rore Coeli, variaque pinguedine terrae; that you may have for your Portion
of the Dew of Heaven, and of the Fatness of the Earth; Serviant tibi populi,
and incurvant se tibi Nationes, honorem exhibentes. Let your People serve you,
and the Nations of the Earth bow down before you: Those that curse you, let
them be cursed; and they that bless you, let them for ever (yea and they shall)
be blessed.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
TItle page, l. 24. for Inner r. middle. p. 3. l. 24. blot out the parenthesis.
p. 7. l. 42. for so r. to. p. 10. l. 47. r. bodily. l. 50. for fol. r. Number. p.
11. l. 24. for their r. the. p. 12. l. 10. for by r. by. p. 20. l. 9. blot out
[what] p. 27. l. 30. for II hope, r. I hope I. p. 31. l. 35. for said r. said
more. p. 32. l. 22. for am r. aim. in the second Cutting in, add (after March
6.) 1678/9. p. 34. l. 41. for about r. about it. p. 50. l. 12. for grown r.
Crown. p. 76. l. 25. for vere r. very. p. 105. l. 22. blot out the last [to.]
There are perhaps several other literal mistakes in the printing, which it is
hoped the Reader will favorably correct.


