POEMS, SONGS AND Love-Verses, Upon several Subjects.

By Matthew Coppinger Gent.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel street, in
Covent Garden, 1682.

TO HER GRACE THE DUCHESS OF Portsmouth.
MAdam, it is but just, since you receive
All the Delights our Sovereign can give,
That we; in gratitude unto our King,
Should to your Highness bring an Offering.
For we by Duty are obliged to Prize
Those that are Gracious in our Princes Eyes,
As well as hate his greatest Enemies.
Accept this also, Madam, sent to you,
Both as Your Merit, and Your Beauties due;
Which to You not the least of Glory brings,
Having by it subdued the best of Kings.
And now Your Country may Precedence claim,
Since You have gave it such a lasting Fame;
Greece, Helen; England, Rosamond did boast,
But France You henceforth will Glory most;
For by Your conquering Eyes You have made known
The Monarchy of Beauty is Your own.
You are the Darling of my King, His Pleasure,
His Indies of incomparable Treasure;
That precious Gem, who from your Country came,
Too narrow for the Limits of Your Fame,
Into the Bosom of a King who knows
What it is for to deserve, and to dispose.
But stay, my Muse, no Sacrilegious Eye
Should dare be so Profane, as once to pry
In Princes Actions; they like Gods appear,
And never move in any common Sphere:
We should from their Concerns our selves retire,
And what we understand not well, admire.
Your Pardon, Madam, if my zealous Passion
Has erred beyond the Rules of Dedication;
And if so high and rare a Contemplation
Should fly beyond all bounds of Limitation,
And on Dedalian Wings should dare to pry
Too near the Beams of Sacred Majesty;
Since my Ambition for your Service may
Make me speak more than others dare to say.
Then prostrate at your Feet I now lay down
This Infant Book, which may deserve your Frown;
But hopes a better Fate, since the intent
Was good, and only for your Service meant.
Which if you view but with a pleasing Eye,
It will presage such a Felicity,
That all the Frowns of Fortune, and the rage
Of time shall want a Power to engage.
Your Highnesses Most humble and devoted Servant, Matthew Coppinger.

TO THE READER.
TILL this minute I was in doubt whether or no I should afford you an Epistle,
being as indifferent whether you take the pains to read it, as you are to go to
the cost to buy my Book. It was designed for my own Pleasure, (being the
rellicts of some Idle hours) wherein though I have borrowed the name of Clelia,
I would not have you think I do it as your Epigrammists do, only to sill up my
Verse, or to invoke an unknown Deity; but that I veiled my Ambition under it,
not daring to name a Person whose Quallity and Merit did so far exceed all my
pretentions, that it had been a sin as great as my Ambition, to have once but
mentioned her name, and to have exposed it to the public view. And as for what
else you find contained in this slender Vollumn, if you think it worth your
time to give it the perusal, you will find I took more care to please my self,
than you.

Your Friend, M. C.

POEMS.
On Clelia's Garden.
O Garden, unto me more blessed
Than the Elizian Fields, possessed
By happy Lovers; and more Fair
Than the Hesper'an Orchards are,
Which all in Golden Metal shine,
With Boughs, and Leaves, and Fruit Divine;
Such Paradise it self might be,
In its first virent Purity;
On which the Heavens did then dispense
An incorrupted Influence.
Here grow no Dodan Oaks, nor Pines,
Nor Elm-inamour'd clasping Vines,
No Paphian Myrtle, nor the Bays,
Nor Laurel binding Phoebus Rays:
No Cedar, nor the pleasant Palm,
No Poplar dropping precious Balm.
Such Ornaments are far too mean
In Clelia's Garden to be seen
Within these Walks are neither set
The Couslip, or the Violet.
No Dary, nor Narcissus grows,
No Tulip, nor the fragrant Rose,
No Marigold, nor running Vine,
Of the embracing Cullumbine.
Here is no Alabaster Font,
With Seagreen Tryton carved on it,
Nor yet Arion, to bestride
The sporting Dolphins watery side;
Nor Neptune riding on the main,
Whose Hand a Trident does sustain.
No Silver Stream here glides along,
Bearing the Goose, or Princely Swan;
Nor yet through pleasant Shades displays
Its murmuring Streams a hundred ways.
Here Is no Colossus to bestride
The fronting Walks from side to side:
Nor any Statues that surpass,
Of sollid Marble, or of Brass.
These and the like may such delight,
Whose Eyes cannot bare a better sight.
The Airy Nation sing not here,
But gladly lend a listening Ear.
The chattering Pie (if here) grows dumb,
And prating Parrats Note is done.
Domestic Robin naught can say,
Not does its chat avail the pay.
The Goldsinch, Linnet, and the Thrush,
Confine themselves unto their Bush;
And for their silence you may swear,
They mute Pythagoreans are;
And Philomel is here afraid
Tereus with Incest to upbraid.
Now some, perchance, may ask me where
My Gardens excellencies are,
To which no other may compare?
I answer thus; The shady Trees,
Whose spreading branches some may please,
My Clelia's presence does supply,
Who may with Art and Nature vie.
For when she please for to unfold
Her braided Tresses, to behold,
You Would guess it for a Grove of Gold;
But that her Eyes such Luster make,
That any one may well mistake,
And think it Paradise, and she
The Guardian Angel of the Tree.
Upon her Princely Forehead, there
The the azure Veins so clear appear,
In such a rich composure set,
As far exceed the Violet.
But when she please for to disclose.
Her blushing Cheeks, the new blown Rose
For shame into its bud does close,
Not once presuming for to vie,
With such a pure Vermillion Dye.
Her Skin so rare a White does show,
As may lend Beauty to the Snow.
The paler Lillies close do stand,
To steal some whiteness from her Hand.
Her clasping Arms (O Charms Divine!)
Do far excel the Cullumbine;
Within whose close embraces are
Two Virgn Fonts, so lovely fair,
That every drop which flows from thence,
Such Sovereign Virtue will dispense,
As might (if such a thing could be)
Cloth us with Immortality.
But when she please to touch her Lyre,
Or with her Voice our Souls Inspire,
The general Choire of Birds will be
Ravished with such a Harmony.
The Angels too, that turn the Spheres,
Would to her Anthems lend their Ears.
This is the Eden of my Pleasure,
The Indies of my choicest Treasure;
The Venus of my Love and State,
And the Sole Ruler of my Fate.
The Inquest.
Where Is absent Clelia?
Where are those Eyes,
That steal away
My Heart in Play,
And over it so strangely Tyrannize?
I thought I had been free;
But looking round,
Alas for me!
I naught could see,
Yet found my self in Fetters closely bound.
I laid me down to rest;
And yet my mind
Was still oppressed,
And in my Breast
I did a hundred thousand torments find.
I walked the City round,
In search of ease;
But nothing found
On which to ground
A hope of Remedy for my Disease.
Into the Country straight
I made repair,
To mittigate
My cruel Fate,
But I found nothing there, but sad Despair.
I viewed the Arched Sky,
And foaming Sea,
The first too high
For me to fly,
And the other deep, as is my Misery.
I could not tell what course
Or way to Steer;
Or by what force
To gain Remorse,
And ease my Heart of this my cruel fear.
At last my Clelia came,
O blessed Reprieve!
And ceased to blame
My ardent Flame;
And for her sake commanded me to live.
What happiness was this,
To one as lost?
O who could wish
So great a Bliss,
Half starved at Sea, to gain so blessed a Coast?
To the King's Majesty.
IF that this Book, without Command,
May chance (Great Sir) to kiss your Hand,
Vouchsafe one smile, my bashful Muse
Will then grow bold, no more refuse
To bear Loves Standard, and desie
All force, but from a Female Eye.
The vigorous God of Love dares say,
That Mighty Kings his Power obey;
And that his force is felt by all,
The Rich, the Poor, the Great, the Small,
None are exempt, he conquers all.
The Gods themselves his Vassals be;
Apollo's Love became his Tree.
Jove was a Bull, although Divine;
And Pluto's Love was Proserpine.
And you (Dread Sir,) more Great, we know
Have felt the power of Cupid's Bow.
And may you always in the Night,
Be sill'd with Venus's delight;
And in the day have choice of Pleasure,
Which may in sum outvie your Treasure;
Which grant, O Heaven, so great may be,
That one small Bag may come to me.
A Song.
COY Clelia, veil those Charming Eyes,
From whose surprise there is none can part;
For he that gazes, surely dies,
Or leaves behind a conquered Heart.
I durst not once presume to look,
Or cast my wary Eyes aside:
But as a Boy that Cons his Book,
Close sitting by his Masters side,
Dares not presume to look awry,
On Toys that catch the wandering sense;
So if I gaze, I surely die:
Against those Charms there is no defense.
Thus Heathens at the Suns up-rise,
Unto the Ground did bow their Head,
Not able with their feeble Eyes
To view their God they worshipped.
Sent to Clelia.
GO tell her that I love;
Yet have a special care
Lest thou despair,
Whilst thou do strive to move,
A Love whose happiness does fly so high,
It Is the next Mansion to Divinity.
If she but ask thee where
Thy Master lives or lies,
Look on her sparkling Eyes,
And boldly tell her there;
And that thy duty made thee come to find
Him that by gazing left himself behind.
If she desire to know
Where first I saw her face;
Tell her the happy place
To which my life I owe,
Was in her Garden; there I heard her sing,
And with her Fingers touch the quav'ring String.
Nor had thy Thracian Lyre,
Orpheus, when thou did play,
More Power the Beasts to stay,
Or Trees or Stones Inspire.
Thy Auditors were senseless ones, but here
Angels came listening from their Heavenly Sphere.
If she in anger say,
How durst he come so nigh,
TO invade my privacy,
When I my self retired away?
Tell her the Queen of Love brought me to see
The full perfections of her Deity.
Epig. 43. lib. 5. Martial.
THe crafty Thief may rob thee of thy store,
And greedy Flames thy Household Gods devour;
Thy Debtor Principal and Use deny;
In barren Fields, thy Corn that is sown, may dye.
Thy Steward, by his crafty Mistress spoiled;
And laden Ships be in the Ocean foiled:
But what thou giv'st the Poor with liberal Hand,
This Fortune can alone thy Power withstand.
Omnia mutantur.
MY Genius hurried by that haste
Which brought the Universe to waste,
And all things by its Power defaced,
Compels me to reflect upon
Past Ages, others coming on,
By a swift Revolution.
For by the eating Teeth of Time,
There Is naught so noble, or sublime,
But shall be turned into slime.
The four great Monarchies that were
So vast, as kept the World in fear,
Their Exits past, and disappear.
Cities so vast, that one may say,
The Sun scarce viewed them in a day,
Are nothing now, but heaps of Clay.
Wonders, of which the World did boast,
For their Magnificence and Cost,
Are now in their own Ruins lost.
All things are subject unto change,
And into several orders range:
Natures events are often strange.
Yet Man, whose Glory's but a shade,
Oft-times his fancy does persuade
That nothing can his Power invade.
And yet their Honors quickly rust,
And all their glorious Titles must
Be mingled with the common dust.
Their Pageant Pomp does fade away,
And greatest Trophies soon decay,
And Death the Victor turns to clay.
Riches remain but for a Night,
And e're the Morning take their flight,
And leave the miserable Wight.
Beauty decays much like a Flower,
Which buds and spreads, and in an hour
The Impartial Scythe does it devour.
That Beauty which e're-while might seem
Enough to grace the Cyprian Queen,
Is counted now of no esteem.
When in her Glass fair Hellen spied
Her Face, by Time so mortified,
Which was e're-while her chiefest pride,
She weeping said unto her Glass,
Is this the Beauty did surpass?
Tell me why I twice ravished was.
O Time, whose greedy Teeth devours
The prime and glory of our Powers,
And leave us what was none of ours;
Who lay'st thy ravenous hands on all,
The Rich, the Poor, the great, the small;
None are secure until they fall.
When will thy wanton lust have end?
Or till what date do thou pretend
These outrages thus to defend?
Thou need'st not answer; for I know
Thy furious course shall forward go,
Till Heaven does Ne plus ultra show.
Tempus edax rerum tuque invidiosa omnia distruitis, etc.
An Epitaph on A. P.
IF that Extortion, Fraud, and Strage,
Lust, Envy, Rapine, in this Age
May claim your Tears, I justly may
Claim all the Tears that you can pay.
For though the pious Hand of Death
Has nimbly snatched away my Breath,
It had prevented him before,
And Sin had made my Age fourscore.
Say then, who-e're shall name my loss,
Here lies extinct Misanthropos.
Senex Tempus Mors and Chorus.
Sen. HAil ancient Brother, what is in thy mind,
To count the Sand, and mow the whistling VVind?
Has age deprived thee of thy sense, to be
The perfect Emblem of Foolery?
Come leave this madness, do as I have done,
Cast thy old skin, and be again as young
As is Aurora at her first up-rise,
Youthful by virtue of her Lovers Eyes.
I am all Air, there is not a part in me
But has shook off it is dull Mortality;
Prithee go run and fetch me Charles his VVain,
To hurry me over the Celestial Plain.
O Love, Love, Love, thy strong Medean Charms
Has gave new strength and motion to my Arms.
My Legs and Thighs are able to support
The mighty Fabric of Heavens starry Court.

Temp. Are you in Love?

Sen. I am.

Temp. With whom;

Sen. There stay;
One that would make thee throw thy Scyth away,
And break thy Glass, if thou should chance to spy
One of the smallest Cupids in her Eye:
How then could thou resist united Charms,
Which conquer Men and Gods with their Alarms?
But let that pass, sure I have seen before
Thy Picture painted on a Usurers Door;
They called it Time.

Temp. It Is true, and I am he
Until this day regarded not by thee,
And something slightly now. See thou this Glass?
Thy Life and Sand in the same moment pass.

Sen. Thou lie, base Slave, though Sixty years are run,
Double their Number are as yet to come;
My active Blood runs quick, and every part
Performs it is Duty round about my Heart:
My strength at Thirty never was more great,
Nor does one part fail of it is usual heat;
All pains and groans have now forsook the Stage,
And like the Phoenix I Have renewed my Age.

Temp. Fond Man, thy present State is but a Breath,
And lightsomness does but foretell thy Death
Just as a Lamp, when all the Oil is spent,
Gives the last farewell to it is nourishment.

Mor. Here ends thy Labor, thy last Thread is spun,
Embrace me silently now I am come.
You seem to wonder, doting Age, I am Death,
Come to demand this moment of thy Breath.
How soon he is gone? how silently he lies?
When I once come, in vain are all Replies;
No Charms can stay m'inexorable Hand,
All Sexes bow the head when I command;
If I once strike, no Wards against my Blow,
Youth, Beauty, Strength, and what are prized below,
Are menial things, and here may please the Eye,
But Vassals-like, desert their Lords, when I
Do once appear; in vain are Prayers or Tears,
No sound of Mercy ever pierced my Ears.

Chor. Then happy he who leads a life so blessed,
That when thou come, thou only shall divest
Of Earthly dross, whose better part shall fly,
A welcome present to the Deity;
There shall be lasting Pleasures to be found,
That he shall thank the Hand that gave the wound.

An Elegy on Mr. W. L.
MEek, Kind, and Good, could I relate
Our loss, and thy too sudden fate,
I Would force the World to lend their Eyes
As Conducts to thy Obsequies.
But since thy loss too great appears
To be the Subject of our Tears,
We will contemplate on thy Worth,
Too great for any to set forth;
And only saying, Thou art dead,
Will be as much as can be sed.
Quid de te jactor? fama and tua gloria major.
A Song.
I Will not tell her that she is fair,
For that she knows as well as I,
And that her Virtues equal are
Unto the Glorys of her Eye.
And that I love her well, she knows,
For who can view that Heavenly Face,
Not paying that Respect he owes
To Beauty, bearing such a Grace?
But this I Will tell, and tell her true,
She takes upon her too much State;
For, by the Gods, it would undo
A King to Love at such a rate.
Let Common Beauties boast the Power
Of some uncommon Excellence,
And thank Dame Nature for the Dower
Of that decoying Charming Sense;
Adorn themselves with Pearls and Gold,
In Rubies and Rich Di'monds shine,
In choicest Silks that may be sold,
And all to make such Ladies Fine.
These are like some Rich Monument,
Raised all of carved and costly Stones,
Painted and Gilt for Ornament;
But full within of dead Men's Bones.
Such common ways my Clelia scorns,
Her lovely Soul is too sublime,
She Is not complete that Clothes adorn,
Or does in ought but Nature shine.
To Clelia.
FAir, and yet Cruel, sure it cannot be,
Nature denies such Catastrophe;
The spangled Orbs serenely do display
Not in a Cloudy Night the Milkie way;
The misty Shades do swiftly disappear,
When Sol's Bright rays do Crown the Hemesphere;
But Love is subject to the Chains of Fate,
And more unhappy proves than fortunate.
How often have my Vows to Clelia paid
My Constant Zeal? How often have I made
The same consession of my Love to thee,
As mortals pay unto Divinity?
Yet the requital of my Love's Disdain,
And Cruelty the Medicine for my Pain;
A Viper which does seed upon my Heart,
And plays the Tyrant upon every Part;
Forcing a Lethargy through all my Soul,
Which does my vital Spirits so control,
That though you would strive for to prevent my fate,
My Doom's confirmed and pity comes too late.
Thus the faint Pilgrim with Devotion bows
Unto the Sacred Shrine, and pays his Vows;
Beging a Blessing on his feeble knee,
Supported by his Faith and Piety;
His daily Orisons do beg Direction
From that great Power that is his sole Protection;
But when at last his fatal Glass is run,
And time casts Mists before his glimmering Sun,
In some old ruined Monastry or Cave,
Shunning the World, he seeks a quiet Grave.
A Song.
I Have drank too much Lethe of late,
I Have forgot that I e're was in Love,
I am Crowned with a nobler Fate;
It Is a passion that is too much above
That pitiful State
Which sometimes moves pity, but oftener hate.
The sad looks of a Lover in pain,
When my fancy descends to his Breast,
Makes me Smile when I think how in vain
He does so much disquiet his rest,
In thinking her best
Who in mocking his Love does think her self blessed.
Such Whiners as these, at their leisure,
With an ang'ry glance from their Eye,
They quickly deject at their pleasure,
Who during their anger do dye;
Such is the measure
These predicant Fools do get from their Treasure.
To Clelia.
THink not, fair Madam, that your high disdain,
Which wounds my Heart, shall cause me to sustain
The ponderous bulk of all your Tyranny,
And the Insulting Conquest of your Eye.
Against your scorns I Will arm my panting Heart,
Secure from wound, and safe in every Part;
Biding defiance to your Conquering Eyes,
I Will give you no more leave to Tyrannise.
Yet if at last no Remedy I find
To ease the troubles of my tortured Mind,
And with despair must yield to Fate, my Breath
Shall censure you the Agent of my Death:
Then you that are the cause of this my fate*
Shall mourn and grieve like one that is desolate,
And on my Hearse engrave my Tragedy,
With Tears proceeding from your doleful Eye.
Yet have a care, for if a Tear should steal
And touch my Corpse, I instantly should feel
The Fire of Love to kindle in my Breast,
'Twou'd wake my drowsy Senses from their rest.
Me tamen urit amor, quis enim modus adsit amori.
To Clelia.
Mirror of Beauty, from whose conquering Eyes
All Power of Love and Glory does arise;
Resistless Charms does Crown your Heavenly Brow,
You Hellen-like no Second can allow.
Here Nature strove to show her greatest Art,
Each part of you does captivate a Heart,
Your wounding Beauty spreads through every Part.
Pardon me then if that I soar above,
The Merits of undeserving Love.
I needs must love, for it is my cruel Fate,
Let not my kindness then deserve your hate;
Since to your Beauty I have Prisoner been,
Divinest Creature, think it not a Sin:
The Torrent of my Grief oreslow'd my Heart,
And Love concealed still swelled in every Part.
All my Ambition only is to gain
Your love, but (Cruelty) I strive in vain:
One Smile from you has power enough to save
A drooping Corpse that is catching at a Grave.
One Frown would make a Miser, 'midst his store,
Forsake his Wealth, his Fate for to deplore:
The Gods bewail their Case, and mourn to see
Mortals so blessed, more than Immortals be.
Juno till now from her Olympic Throne
Nere saw a Beauty greater then her own.
Since then all Beauty is in you alone,
You are that Goddess I Will adore, or none.
Scribe aliquid magnum.
I Thank you, worthy Sir, your good advice
Is like the Recepes of a Doctor's Bill,
Where an Ingredient's dear, to save the price,
You Will leave it out, though it the Patient kill.
You Would have me take some Noble Theme, and make
Verses that might be worthy of the Press,
Which if I were so mad to undertake,
You Would see a Giant in a Pigmies dress.
I am no Mole, nor can I feed on Earth,
Nor yet Camelion, to browse on Air;
I always have sed well, e're since my Birth;
And now to starve my self I do not care.
Would you but be Mecenas, then I Would try
To what my bold Invention could aspire,
And strive for to excel in Poetry
Great Maro, and the Rhodopean Lyre.
No barren fancy should possess my Brain,
Each Verse should flow as from Apollo's Quill,
In such a lofty and Heroic strain
The Universe I Would with my Numbers fill.
I Would frame such raptures in Immortal Verse,
As should the brightest Stars from Heaven convey,
And every Cloud the Muses should disperse;
And with my Feet I Would tread the Milkie way.
Otia da nobis: sed qualia fecerat olim
Mecenas Flacco, Virgilioque suo.
Condere victuras tentem per secula chartas
Et nomen flammis eripuisse meum.

De Pompeo and Filiis, e Martial.
THe Sons of Pompey yielded up their Breath
In diverse quarters of the spacious Earth.
Europe within her Bowels does contain
One of the Sons of Noble Pompey slain.
In Asia's Confines does the other lie,
And he himself in Africa did dye.
What makes the World as Thunderstruck appear,
That such a Slaughter should be every where?
So great a Ruin could not likely be
Contained in One place, nay scarce in Three.
De Sacerdote qui Caniculum in Coemeterio Sepelivit.
A Wealthy Thuscan Priest, of no mean note,
One that could say his Decalogue by rote,
And Paternoster too, and, if such need,
Could make a Repetion of his Creed,
Had a small Dog he did so much regard,
That dead, he Buried him in the Churchyard;
The Bishop glad that he had got a Claw
Whereby to get the Priest into his Paw,
Summons him to a strict Examination
Of his so irreligious Violation
Of Holy ground. The Priest, who knew his mind,
How much he was to Avarice inclined,
Appears, and with him brings full Fifty Pound,
Which he knew well would make the matter sound.
The Bishop urged the Crime, and so far went,
That he, poor Man, must be to Prison sent;
To whom the Priest, My Father, did you know
How much you to that loving Creature owe,
And how in Wisdom he did antecede
All that I ever knew was of the breed,
I am sure you would not blame my action then,
Since he deserved a Burial among Men.
For whilst he lived, and did enjoy his Breath,
He was as wise as Men, but more in Death.
The Bishop ask't him how. The Priest replied,
He wisely made his Will before he died;
And knowing that it was a Pious deed,
He left you Fifty Pounds to help your need;
With that produced the money. Sure replied
The bishop, never Dog more fairly died;
And God forbid I should at all detract
From this your Zeal in such a Pious Act.
If you have more, let there be set apart,
A place to bury Dogs of such Desert.
On Suadela.
THey say Ulisses by his Art
Had power to hear the Sirens Sing,
And from their Charming Notes depart,
Tasting the sweets without a Sting.
I wonder not, since free from harms
I have left Suadela and her Charms.
Nobis placeant ante omnia Sylvae.
HAil Sacred Woods, and all the rural Gods,
Who in these Coverts make your blessed abodes;
Ye Fauns and Satyrs that do here reside,
And Watery Nymphs that near these springs abide;
And ye, ye pretty mourning Turtle Doves,
The living emblem of chastest Loves;
May no devouring Hawk e're fly this way,
Of so much Innocence to make a prey:
Let all be happy, chirp sweet Birds, and sing,
And with your Melody these Woods shall ring.
For here I first beheld that Angels Face,
Which to these Coverts gave the greatest Grace.
And thou, old Oak, beneath whose spreading shade
That Heavenly Object did my sight invade,
May no rough Wind e're rend thy aged top,
Or thankless hand thy Beauties glory crop;
Or shivering Winter, which the Woods bereaves,
E're rob thee of thy green and shady Leaves;
But may each year new Strength and Verdure grant.
'Till thou grow young, as when thou were a Plant;
And may thou flourish many Ages more,
And still more green than e're thou wast before.
But when thou must decay, for eating Time
Will not permit thee always thus to shine,
From thy old Trunk may thousand young ones Flower,
Weaving their tender Boughs into a Bower.
And thou great Paphian Goddess, ever bless
This goodly Bower with so much happiness,
That whosoever shall come within it is shade,
Shall to thy Mystic power be Captive made;
Each Lover then this Covert shall invite
To taste the happiness of Loves delight;
Thus shall thy fall be greater then thy rise,
And of a Tree become a Paradise.
An Epitaph.
JUst as I lived, just so I died,
Contemning God and Man,
With Earthly dross nere satisfied;
Now satiated am.
Desire not to know my Name,
Which justly is accursed,
For making Gold my chiefest aim,
Even with Tantalian thirst.
A Dialogue.
Lover. REnder your Heart, or else give mine again.

Virgin. What, change with Men?

Lov. Justice commands you to do one or the other.

Vir. Yes, to a Lover.

Lov. Then I am he, sweet Saint, that owns that Flame.

Vir. You are much to blame.

Lov. For loving you? I must until I dye.

Vir. Pray tell me why.

Lov. Most mighty Love no reason can endure.

Vir. Is your Love pure?

Lov. As pure from spot as Elemental fire.

Vir. N'ere to expire?

Lov. No, not when Time it self shall cease to be.

Vir. You have conquered me.

Lov. Blessed voice, that very word new life does give.

Vir. With thee I Will live.

Lov. Our mutual Joy shall with our Loves combine.

Vir. I am only thine.

Lov. Triumphant Love, what never lose the field?

Vir. Love makes me yield.

Lov. Then let us enjoy each other without fear.

Vir. Agreed, my Dear.

A Pastoral Courtship.
COme, my Dear Love, into this Grove,
This Paradise shall cover
The secret Pleasures of our Love,
Which we will here discover.
See how the Trees do bend their Boughs,
And silent murmuring make,
Whilst the inviting Shade allows
A place to recreate.
The pleasant Birds do sit and sing,
No cause of sorrow's here,
Here nothing lurks will terror bring
To Hare or timorous Deer.
The pretty cooing Turtles take
This place for their delight,
And an inviting moaning make,
Nor fear the ravenous Kite.
And all stand wondering and admire
That we delay so long,
The gentle Choire of Birds conspire
To please us with a Song.
But why so coy? thou needst not fear,
No danger's in this Grove,
Venus her self did here enjoy
The Pleasures of her love.
Come let me kiss those Lips, those Eyes
That Captivate my Heart,
And are to me a Paradise
Beyond the power of Art.
O let me touch those milk-white Breasts,
Which like the Alps appear,
Which never yet fond Love has pressed
To make his Vintage there.
Come let that Belly, which might well
A Stoick's courage move,
Which does so far, dear Love, excel,
Receive the stamp of Love.
So, do not blush, the buding Rose
That hangs upon the Tree,
Retains his glory, though the Nose
Has ravished its Virginity.
Come do not grieve, thou needst not fear,
This place will all conceal,
There Is none can know what we did here,
Our Pleasures to reveal.
Nor does thy Angels Beauty seem
Less lovely than before,
For then thy Face but here and there
A little Cupid bore.
But now ten thousand Cupids crown
That heavenly Face of thine
Angellick Essence flowing down
Has made thee quite Divine.
Therefore each day we'll try the Power
What charms of Love can do,
And create Pleasures for each Hour,
Until the Gods shall sue,
My Joy, my Paradise, to Worship you.
Ite triumphales circum mea tempora lauri
Vicimus, in nostro est ecce Corinna sinu.

An Epitaph.
ALas, poor Infant! Death was too severe,
Over such small Bones to raise a Trophy here.
Merciless Tyrant, thus for to bereave
Thee of thy life, scarce giving time to Breath.
Thou were a Gem, as quickly lost as found,
Thy Life and Death was in one Volumn bound.
If Prayers and Tears could have preserved thy Breath,
Thou yet had lived triumphant over Death.
But thou were snatched away, thy rising Sun
Finished its Course e're it had scarce begun;
And we in darkness mourn, yet we can see
The Hand that cuts the Twig may fell the Tree.
Sweet Fruits soon drop, but those that longer last
Always do relish with a sower taste.
Optima prima fere manibus rapiuntur avaris
Implentur numeris deteriora suis.

The Sirens Song.
YE Powers above, and ye Celestial ones,
We Sirens sing a doleful Lullaby
To those who by our false enchanting Tones,
We draw to hear our pleasant Harmony.
No Ulyssean stratagem nor skill
Can save poor Mariners that coast our way,
But with Enchanting Notes we please and kill
Who on our Road to hear our voice do stray.
And Women-like, our Tongue can play its part;
Whilst like to Deities we seem to be,
At the same instant we can by our Art,
Read to poor Mariners their Destiny.
An Elegy on the Death of that Noble and Renowned Gentleman, Colonel Simon
Lambert, of the Island of the Barbados.
Dignum laud virum musa vetat mori.
BEfore some Famine, Pestilence, or War,
Or Monarchs Death, Heaven sends a blazing Star,
To let us know not what to hope, but fear,
When such Portents his Messengers appear.
And can great Lambert dye, and Nature show
No sign, so great a ruin to forego?
Had I beheld the Illustrious Prince of Light
Resign his glorious Rays to sable Night,
And some bright Constellation fall from thence,
I instantly should have inferred from hence
Our certain loss, and boldly would have said,
The Heavens declare that virtuous Lambert's dead.
But none of these presented to our view,
Yet that he is dead, we know to be too true.
Let us consider then what loss we have,
And what great Virtue's buried in his Grave:
For we lament no shrub that was but small,
But grieve to see this stately Cedar's fall.
Beneath whose spreading Branches, whilst it stood,
Whilst it did flourish like a verdant Wood,
We did enjoy all that was just and good.
Great Jonathan, a Witness thou may be,
He lived to serve his Sovereign and thee.
He was no gilded Image, that did show
A Glorious outside, and did nothing know:
But he in every part was so complete,
As showed that he was wise, as well as great.
Among the Best, he Noblest was, and where
The Noblest were, there he did Best appear.
Mercy and Justice both did in him dwell,
And each did strive which should in him excel.
He, like another Atlas, did sustain
This Islands burden, with Minerva's Brain;
And in each Exigent he did advise,
As if that he had seen with Argus Eyes.
In sum, Each action has deserved Renown,
For which he shall receive a Heavenly Crown,
And sing with Angels in that Heavenly Choire,
To which his Righteous Soul did still aspire.
To Madam Lambert.
NOW, Madam, since you have sustained a loss,
Which all the pleasures of your Life may cross;
And such a loss as does all loss exceed,
Whose very name may make your heart to bleed;
Yet comfort take, since he is gone before,
To wait your coming at the Heavenly Door;
Where you shall enter an Immortal Bride,
With Saints and Angels to be glorified.
Nor let it be a grief that you have none
To pattern your dead Lord, I mean, a Son:
His Virtues have immortalized his name,
And still he lives in a perennal Fame.
The Epitaph. An Acrostick.
Strong Monuments of Wood, Marble, or Brass,
In time time decay and into Ruins pass;
Making a mock of all that Pomp and Pride,
On which the hopes of Fame has still relied.
Note here a President did know full well,
Life justly led all Monuments excel.
A Person of such great Desert and Fame,
Might all the highest worths of Honor Claim;
By which he to himself has been so kind,
Eternal Monuments to leave behind.
Reader, who-e're thou art, believe thus much,
This Island scarce can find another such.
On my Ladies Lap-Dog.
LElaps, my Ladys Dog, must sit at Meat,
And be her Taster, e're my Lady'l eat:
The choicest bits the Table can afford,
My Lady cuts, and gives them to her --
And many a lick his Curship gives my Lady,
Who cries, Poor Creature, he is as kind as may be*
And when it is Night, e're she can take her rest,
My Lady calls for that which she loves best.
Her pretty Dog is all my Lady's care;
I smell a Rat, Madam, you would best beware.
All Night she folds him in her Arms, the Cur,
Perchance, may fare the worse for loving her.
He Is slick and sporting, who can choose but dote
On that which lies under a Ladis Coat?
But why a Dog? Cannot my Lady find
Some spruce young Gallant that will please her mind?
Is Earth so barren, can it not afford
Something will better personate a Lord?
Yet it is the mode, I grant it, so you keep
Your Dogs to watch, whilst, Madam, you do sleep.
However, we'd suppose this done for fashion,
Did not your actions show too much of Passion:
For It gives suspicion unto every Guest,
To see a Christian served after a Beast.
Her Plea is Innocence; yes, in this sense,
A kind of dogged brutish Innocence,
And Pretty: May be so, Nature, you are wise,
In giving Ladies such perspicuous Eyes.
When first I saw him lying on her Bed,
I could have left him shorter by his Head,
For all his Beauty; nor yet could I find
One part more rare in him than all his Kind.
And yet she doats upon this ugly Cur;
He and my Lady it is keeps all the stir.
Many do think the Dog is too obscene,
Or what the Devil should my Lady mean?
De Leone and Lepore, e Martial.
WHat makes the trembling Hare the Lion fly
Thy death agrees not with his Majesty.
A nobler Object does his rage possess,
And thou by flying makes his Glory less:
His Hunger is asswag'd by blood of Bears,
And mighty Bulls he in his anger tears.
The choicest Stag the Coverts can afford,
Is made a Dish to serve the Forests Lord
Dogs prey on Hares. Let not the Irish Boy
Fear mighty Charles will his base Youth destroy
To the Worshipful Jonathan Atkins, Knight, Governor of the Island of the
Barbados.
WHat ails the Poet? What a new desire
Inflames his Heart, and does his Soul inspire,
With emulous Notes to touch Apollo's Lyre?
It Is you, dear Sir, as great by Birth as Fame,
Whom Merit and true Honor gives a Name;
Who Heaven (Great Soul) did send for to revive
This drooping Island, and to keep alive
Those who Oppression did before enslave,
And Cruelty deject unto the Grave.
You are the Subject of my Verse, to you
All the Encomiums of our Praise is due.
Astroea now appears with Heavenly Grace,
And banished Justice re-assumes her place.
The course of things are changed, and we are now
No more deceived by Ianus double brow.
Blessed Halcyon days, and you that made them so!
Unto what Land soever I shall go,
Your Memory I Will strive for to display,
Whilst Phoebus with his Beams adorns the day.
But yet methinks I hear some say, Where Is he
Dares contradict us in our Seigniory,
And tax our actions? Come, and you shall see
One famed for Justice, Mercy, Piety;
Whose Eye no difference knows between the poor,
And him whose laden Ships can hold no more;
Whose actions Justice guides, for in each Hand
The Sword and Balance equally do stand.
Here Is no Perversion; here is the Motto too,
Give God and Caesar equally their due.
O glorious Sunshine of this Western Isle,
What noble Appellation, or what Style
Befits thy Praise? Or how can we express
Our Joy, your Bounty, and our Happiness?
Whose liberal hand bestows, e're we can think,
Whole Bowls of Blessings, filled up to the brink,
Beyond our hopes: Yet thus the Powers we serve
Are wont for to reward, e're we deserve.
O thou great Author of all earthly things,
Whose hand deposes Princes, throws down Kings*
Who view'st from thy Olympic Throne the State,
And actions of each mighty Potentate;
Who rules the worlds vast Frame, O Crown the days
Of our blessed Jonathan with living Bays;
And that his Progeny may ever live,
Propitious Heavens, grant, as I believe.
First shall the liquid Waters cease to flow,
The Earth to cause both Plants and Trees to grow*
Heavens radiant Monarch shall deny his light,
The Machine of the World involved in Night;
The Lamb shall slay the Lion, and the Hare
Of the swift Hound no more shall stand in fear;
The Eagle court the Dove, and all things be
In Sympathy with their Antipathie:
It Is then, and not till then, my Pen shall stay,
And strive no more your Glory to display;
Which like the Sun in his Meridian height,
Cheers the whole World with his illustrious Light.
Ante leves ergo pascentur in oethere cervi, etc.
Quam nostro illius labatur pectore vultus.

The Lovers Greeting.
WHen bald-pate Winter, with his hoary head,
By the Springs kind aspect was vanquished;
When sturdy Boreas Storms were over past,
And milder Zeph'rus breathed his gentle blast;
In pleasant May, when Flora did invest
The Fields with green, and shady Coverts blessed;
When every where the bright refulgent beams
Of glorious Titan shined upon the streams
Of gliding Crystal Floods, whose waving pace
Seemed as it were to emulate with Grace
The various Clouds, and gladly to invite
Faint-hearted Lovers to their dear delight.
It was my chance to meet my dearest Love,
Who, Gods you know, I do esteem above
All earthly Treasures, and to me what-e're
Under both Polls can be accounted fair.
I came (and with a modest pace) and bent
My timorous body, full of discontent,
And at her feet (who the great Gods above
Can testify, I do sincerely love)
I prostrate fell, thinking thereby to gain
One loving smile, but it was all in vain.
For, O my cruel Fate, at the first view
Her smiling Countenance my Love withdrew,
And with an ireful look she cast her Eye,
Bending her brows, now full of Tyranny.
So have I seen when Phoebus in his might,
Shoots forth his glorious Rays, whose shining light
Does dazzle all Men's Eyes; yet by and by
An envious Cloud does hide him from our Eye.
But all this time I stood amazed, nor knew
To bear those sudden storms of frowns she threw*
Just as when Jove does thunder in the Sky,
The amazed beholder, ready for to dye,
Trembles and shakes, not knowing how to free
Himself from danger that he is forced to see.
Yet at the last, when I could naught perceive
That might at all my timorous heart relieve,
Like a bold Soldier, mad, with desperate Fate,
Resolved my cruel Fortune to abate,
And give the Onset with a Heart that is free
From Fear, or any such base ignomy.
I tried a thousand ways, but all in vain*
Still what I did, did more increase my Flame.
Ah cruel Nymph, abate your high disdain,
And grant me Love to mitigate my pain;
Which if you do deny, for my relief,
It Is Death shall ease the burden of my grief.
Sui minus est animus nobis effundere vitam
In me crudelis non potes esse diu.
Farewell to Pleasure and to fond Delight,
Farewell those thoughts which an unconstant mind
Is still perplexed with, pond'ring in the Night,
For what his wearied Lust can never find;
His Rage is blind,
And he far more unconstant than the Wind.
When I but think how my disordered Heart
Has by the motion of one flattering look,
By that detested, vile and cursed Art,
Venus, I mean thy subtle tempting Hook,
Been tamely took;
Thus tempting Toys make Children leave their Book.
O then those Charms that did my Heart control,
Burst in a Fury from my swelter'd Breast,
And the disordered passions of my Soul
Their damned and treacherous ways does so detest,
That over-prest,
My wearied mind is robbed of all its rest.
On Clelia's Sore Eyes.
WHat makes the Frontiers of the sable night
Display their Mists, and thus expel the light?
Dire Queen of Shades, what power, as yet unknown,
Have thou assumed, that is stronger than thy own?
These sable Mists are worse than those that fell
On impious Pharaoh for an Israel:
For but a time those dismal Clouds did stay,
Which gave a greater welcome to the day.
But now the Gods, the angry Gods, I find,
All human kind has at one stroke struck blind,
And robbed the World of Glory in its height,
Having eclipst its main and greatest light:
And now, alas! muffl'd in Clouds, it lies
Groping in darkness, robbed of both its Eyes:
Nor can we hope our Fate for to reverse,
But are like mourners drooping over a Hearse,
Till in your Eyes, your Eyes, we may behold
Beauty enthroned, more bright than burnisht Gold,
Which now is hid, and does obscurely lie,
As pearls in the Oceans vast profundity.
But sure the mighty Powers had some design,
And our neglect of you they thought a Crime;
And took from us, what we as slightly prize
As Indians Gold, and precious Treasuries;
And now think sit, lest by those Stars we fall,
And so receive a general Funeral,
For to restore us by degrees those Eyes,
Which else would make mankind a sacrifice;
As Men not quite recovered of their sight,
Do lose the same by the excess of light.
A Dream.
TEll me, thou pale-faced Empress of the Night,
What horrid terror did my mind affright.
I saw, and in a Dream a Damsel stood
Before me trembling, all besmeared with Blood.
In her right Hand a withered Branch she had,
And with a sable Veil her Brows were clad;
And to her self she mourning seemed to say,
'Twas love, alas! fond Girl, did thee betray.
And so she vanished. Then I heard a cry.
Of a lost Damsel, at the point to die.
Her latest Breath did on Narcissus call,
Cruel Narcissus, cruel in my fall.
For thee I did honor and life forsake,
And gave thee Love, which thou refused to take;
For thee I did Philanders Love despise,
Who now may glory at my injuries.
Her other words she did in Tears confound,
Abruptly mangled in a dying sound.
With that I shrunk, and sudain terror pressed
My melting Heart in my molested Breast;
I pondered in my mind, at length I knew
The voice was Phillis, that her self had slew;
And art thou dead, said I, false unto me?
His hate's a just reward of Perjury.
But O that yet my life could thine redeem,
My Soul should vanish as of no esteem:
O cruelty! what made thee so unkind,
To kill the Joy, and Darling of Mankind?
And since thy Death by Pen cannot be expressed,
I Will write thy Elegy upon my Breast.
But snatching at my Sword, a Hand was sent,
My suden Execution to prevent;
And Phillis, who before I thought was dead,
Appeared, and with a Garland Crowned my Head,
And told me death had not the power to sever
Two Hands, two Hearts, that must be joined for ever.
Then waking suddenly, I knew the Theme
Was my molested fancy in a Dream.
Even when I wake or sleep you are in my mind,
Unconstant Phillis, cruel, and unkind.
Omnia qua sensu volvuntur vota diurno,
Tempore nocturno reddit amica quies.

An Elegy on the Death of his very good Friend Mr. Edward Lynch, Buried in
Salisbury Cathedral.
ASist my Muse, thou gravest of the Nine,
Melpomine, assist, and let Line
Proceed from thy more solemn state, which shall
Attend the Rites of this sad Funeral.
Shall then Eternal sleep rich minds repress,
And leave them only to enjoy their bliss?
And must their Names no more be thought upon,
Buried in silent Oblivion?
And with their Bodies must their Names be thrust
Into the Earth, and Buried in the Dust?
No, no, their Fame swift Time shall never devast,
But flourish still, so long as Time shall last.
Why then does Death involve my Friend, who sleeps,
And in the Dust a silent Requiem keeps?
But that thy Name henceforth may never die,
I Will write in Verse thy mournful Elegy.
Yet Ink's too black a Color to infold
Thy virtuous Name, that should be writ in Gold.
That honored Marble that does bear thy Name,
Henceforth shall be Immortal by the same.
Nor Time nor eating Age shall e're devour
What bears the Impression of so fair a Flower.
When first my steps unto thy Grave drew nigh,
To pay my duty to thy memory,
The pious Marble thawed into a Tear,
As silently expressing thou were there.
The Marble Statues, Bishops, Prebends, Lords,
And many other that the place affords,
Through stony Mantles wept their sufferings,
And seemed to me like Arethusa's Springs.
And may they ever weep, for Piety
Is seldom found among them till they dye.
Who e're shall hear thy Name, and shall not spend
One Tear for thee, unpitty'd be his end,
And may his Ghost do penance at thy Grave,
Honored (though restless) such a Doom to have.
Methinks I could grow ang'ry with my Muse,
That should at such a time her aid refuse;
But that she told me that her Lungs were weak,
And far unfit thy Praises for to speak;
And that whilst she thy Fame did strive to express,
Her halting Numbers only made it less.
We knew thy worth e're we discerned thy Age,
And budding Glory gave a true presage
Of what thou did, and what thou would have done,
Had not thy rising* proved thy setting Sun.
O could I speak thy praise, I would disperse
Thy living Fame throughout the Universe:
To tell thy worth, how vert'ous and how wise,
In this I know none can Hyperbolise.
Each of thy actions strove for to excel,
As rolling Waves which in the Ocean swell.
My Muse, in contemplation now of thee,
Has struck the Poet in an Ecstasie.
Love Triumphant.
It Was at the time when Phoebus with his Rays
The Universe with equal Beams serveys;
When Flocks and Herds to the cool Shades repair,
TO enjoy the Breezes of a cooler Air.
I laid me down upon the Grass to rest,
Whilst Loves fierce God inflamed my tender Breast.
Millions of thoughts I interweav'd with fears,
And my blessed Saints Idea washed in Tears.
Ah, cruel Nymph, said I, what God unkind
Has with such Cruelty incensed thy mind?
Lay by Jove's Flames, Salmonean terrors fear,
Least you his Thunder and his Lightning bear.
For that great God that rules the arched Sky,
Can never be pleased with acts of cruelty.
But if you needs will take a Goddess form,
Which can your native Beauty naught adorn,
Take her whose milder form Mankind did move
To honor and adore as Queen of Love.
Thus shall you gain that honor that is your due,
And we take you for her, or her for you.
Thus whilst my mind passion tossed too and fro,
As Waves by Winds which on the Ocean blow,
Behold my Clelia came, and forward pressed,
Whilst the light Wind her lower Parts undrest;
Rich in Attire, in Beauty richer far:
Thus Venus used to court the God of War;
And thus themselves who in the Woods retire,
The Naides, and Draydes attire.
I silent lay, as if with sleep oppressed,
Whilst her right Arm surrounds my willing Breast.
I made return, and often Clelia cried,
She who you seek is here, she then replied;
With that I gave a start, to let her know
How great a passion in my Breast did slow;
She smiled, as something pleased to see me start,
And by my actions seemed to know my Heart.
Then, as if newly risen from a trance,
Or death-like sleep, I did my Head advance,
And mildly speak her thus, Goddess most fair,
If you are come to comfort my despair,
You have nob'ly done, taking that shape whereby
You may at once deceive and please my Eye.
But if you come for to deride my fear,
And make me think my absent Clelia here,
You have lost your aim, for to my grief I know
My Clelia never did so much kindness show.
However I Am content, be what you will,
Nothing that bears that form can e're be ill.
Much more I would have said, but she, too kind
To bear my passion with a steady mind,
With loving words my sorrow did assuage,
Commanding me no farther to engage
My self in sadness, since before my Eyes
No flying shade did stand to Tantalize;
But real Substance, which did passion move,
And her who I so often had vowed to love.
I gave attention unto what she said,
And millions more of Protestations made
To keep my faith inviolate, whilst she,
Poor Soul, did both believe and pity me.
I often kissing wring'd her by the Hand,
And by dumb signs gave her to understand
My headstrong Passion would no more obey,
Since she her self had took the curb away.
But she, too Innocent, never understood
The swelling Tides of Passion in my Blood:
Yet from her Eyes some pity did distill,
Like Pearls thrust out, though shrewd against their will;
Unwilling for to leave that happy place,
Where sorrow could not choose but have a grace.
Thus tempered Steel is sometimes clad in rust,
And grains of Gold are mingled with the Dust.
But I, who in the Wars of Love had been
A Voluntier, thought now or never to win
The honor of the day, and in some sort
To gain the conquest of the Virgin Fort;
Which I assaulted with so free a force,
(Not with Battallions of Foot and Horse;
But smooth and courtly Complements) as might
Have moved the chaste Diana to delight,
And made the cold Lucretia to desire
To wanton in the Flames of Venus fire.
Then Clelia surrendered, all her Treasure
Was solely at the Conquerours will and Pleasure;
Which was so great, that nothing can augment
My Joy, or add unto my blessed Content.
Divinest Creature, to whose heavenly Brow
Our yielding Hearts do with submission bow;
Rare Master piece of Nature, here I lie
Conquered by Beauty, and by Beauty dye.
To you my Ghost shall in the Night appear,
And though I die, I Will never leave you here.
Yet you are cruel, and will not afford
My dying Corpse but one poor parting Word.
O that your Beauty had less mortal been,
Or that to love had not been held a sin!
I boldly to the World would have made known
Thy Beauty claims Desert, and thine alone.
But stay, methinks there is something in thy Eye
That tells me that thy Lover must not die.
And since that thou have gave this blessed Reprieve,
I for thy sake will be content to live,
And by some signal Service henceforth try
For to requite your generosity.
AS you are fair, can you be loving too,
And make me happy in adoring you?
Not all the Wealth that India can give,
Without your love, can make me wish to live.
As in the Ocean, on a Summers day,
You may behold the Fish keep Holy day,
Are all o're-joy'd, and smile as 'twere, to see
Fair weather gild the rough and angry Sea.
Can so my Fortune more auspicious prove?
You having smiled upon my hopeless Love,
Be as you are so kind, so truly fair,
Loving of me, who now cast off despair;
Too soon a flame will else my Heart control,
And leave my drooping Corpse without a Soul.
Make me but sure that you will ever love
Me, who no other joys could ever move;
Happy that day, thrice happy, wherein I
In you beheld my chief felicity.
Adoring you, I feel a scorching fire;
You, you alone, can make that flame retire.
Not that the Ardor can e're quite retreat,
All you can do is to allay the Heat;
The scorching Fervor never will give over,
Wealth cannot do it, nor a whole Nations store.
That you are good, we know, Virtuous, and Wise:
India's bright Sun took luster from your Eyes.
Can else his Beams so dazzle all Men's sight?
Give me but leave, I Will say, He robbed his Light.
Without your Beauty, he eclipsed must lie;
Your Presence comprehends a Deity.
Love heads his Golden Arrows, and from you
Can take such Charms as may the World subdue,
Make all things yield, even the great Gods above:
Me thinks I hear them cry, Great Queen of Love;
Wish ing to fall by your more pleasing Fate,
To you they come, and for their Sentence wait;
Live, Queen of Love, with most Imperial State.
On a Sigh.
GO, mournful Sigh, haste to my Fair,
And to her what thou know declare;
Tell her, that thou were so oppressed
Within the Prison of my breast,
That having broak the Gaol, thou fled'st to her for rest.
But if unkindly she deny,
Then shall thy wretched Jailer die;
And by this means thou shall be free
From thy Confinement, she from thee,
And I from all my grief and wretched misery.
But yet, poor mournful Breath, beware
Thou do not draw from her a Tear.
For if thou do, I will confine
Thee to this hollow Breast of mine,
And give thee no more leave or time to wander there.
For who can tell, but she may be
So loving as to pity thee,
And on thy sorrow notice take,
And entertain thee for my sake,
In Paradise of Joy and full felicity.
Mount Ida.
IN times of old, when Kings did not disdain
The sweet Employment of the silly Swain;
When to the Gods the rural Altar fumes
With Sacred Incense and with sweet Perfumes,
Were daily blessed, and all things seemed to be
A Paradise for Man's felicity.
Then no insulting Tyrant did molest,
Hind'ring the quiet of his Subjects rest:
But then Simplicity did crown the day,
And Innocence did every Scepter sway.
Within the Confines of vast Asia's Womb
Once was a stately City, now a Tomb;
Imperial Troy, whose stately Structures Pride
Did Egypts lofty Pyramids deride.
Rich in a King, their glory to augment,
No Stranger, but by lineal descent;
And blessed with Children of such high Renown,
Which did augment the honor of his Crown;
But that this Sentence might have its Probatum,
Nihil est ab omni part beatum.
Whilst Paris, Priam's Son, with care did keep,
In flowery Meads, his Fathers Flocks of Sheep,
Lo, Three triumphant Goddesses, of Birth
Celestial, guide their steps unto the Earth,
VValking to view the Fields, whose Fragrant smell
The richest Indian Odours did excel.
Discordia grieved (as 'twas her course) to see
Three potent Goddesses so well agree,
Throwing a Golden Ball before them, says,
Let her take this, whose Beauty wins the Bays.
All plead their Titles in the slowry Field,
And each unto her Rival scorns to yield.
Till walking forward, they did soon espy
The sprightly Son of Priam, who did lie
Under a lofty Tree, whose spreading shade
Sols Radiant Beams did all in vain invade.
Between them then, to end this fatal grudge,
They all consent to make brave Paris Judge:
But when the youngster saw the glorious sight,
His Heart was straight way ravished, and the sight
Inflamed his generous Soul, he prostrate lies,
He worships and adores the Deities.
Nor can he longer gaze, so great a light
Could not be bore by any mortal sight.
Which when they see, and think upon the Prize,
They add new force and vigor to his Eyes.
To whom Queen Juno mildly did begin,
Both with applause, and promise for to win.
Juno's Speech.
Thou who of Priams Court the glory art,
More beautified by Nature than by Art;
Give me the Ball, let not thy Hand refrain,
But give it me, and I Will give thee again
Glory and Honor, and what e're can be
Than this more happy, that I Will give to thee.
I Will set a Crown of Gold upon thy Head,
These words thereon shall be Entitled,
THE GLORY OF THE WORLD. Riches and State,
Honor and Fame shall ever propagate.
The Worlds vast Confines shall a tribute yield
To thee alone, the Caesar of the Field;
The breath of Fame shall all thy state declare,
And all the world shall term thee Fortunes Heir;
And if there is ought thy mind can covet more,
Command Queen Juno, scorn for to implore.
The youngster stands amazed, his Hearts on fire,
A thirst of Honor does his Soul inspire;
His eager heart had soon a Captive been,
Had not brave Pallas soon prevented him,
Whose Princely presence does his mind control,
And adds new force unto his vigorous Soul.
Pallas Speech.
To whom the Goddess mildly thus, Brave Prince,
Does Juno's powerful promise so convince
Thy easy fancy to dispose the Prize?
Art thou become a Captive to her Eyes?
Can Wealth and Honor make thee to contemn
The certain gift of Wisdoms Diadem?
Wisdom gains Riches; Honor's but a slave,
A Lambent fire; our fancy more does crave.
I scorn to court thee for the Ball, yet know,
If thou on Pallas do the same bestow,
Thy Wisdom through the spacious Earth shall ring
And Foreign Nations shall their Presents bring
Thy Foes shall yield unto thy conquering Hand
Nor shall thou fear any invading Band,
Or Foreign Force, for thou alone shall Reign
From East to West, and over the floating Main.
And ending thus, Venus drew near, whose smiles
The youngster of his Senses quite beguiles;
She robs him of his Heart, and therewithal
Obtains the longed for prize, the Golden Ball.
For when the Prince had with a pleasing Eye
Beheld the glory of the Deity,
A sudden Joy through every Member steals,
And by his blushes he his Love reveals.
To whom the Queen of Souls, Goddess of Loves,
More sweet and gentle than her Team of Doves,
Makes her address with words so courtly mild,
As might the watchful Dragon have beguild,
Or charmed the Brazen-footed Bulls, and made
The Sons of Tellus cease for to invade
Each others life; such was her charming Tongue,
As without Magic might make Aeson young,
And bring the Hesperian Fruit into her lap,
Force Argus hundred Eyes to take a nap.
Here Majesty and Love did well agree,
And both concur, great Queen, to favor thee.
Such charms her looks did bear, such her aspect,
When she to Parris did this Speech direct.
Venus Speech.
Brave Prince, to whom the Goddesses have been
Both suppliants, endeavoring to win
The Prize, which only does belong to me,
The Fates themselves grant the Priority.
They promise Conquest, Wisdom, and a Throne,
All this is naught but what is before thy own.
But yet suppose it so, could thou delight
In cruel Wars, where blood does blood excite?
Is this the way to gain thee honor? No.
Kingdoms thou may possess, and perish so.
Who gains by Blood and Death, shall, at the price,
Have the reward of blood and avarice.
Or rather, would thou choose on Beds of Down,
In Cupids Fields to gain the sweet renown,
Spending thy youthful days in merriment,
Such as pale War did never yet invent,
With Grecian Dames, whose Beauty may not be
Expressed by Tongue, or Pens Indignity?
If this can please, give me the Prize, I sue
Both as my merit, and my Beauties due;
And thou shall gain a Lady, such another
Titans Majestic Rays did never discover;
Whose Beauties form there is none can Parallel,
Her Skin for Whiteness does as far excel
The driven Snow, as does the Suns bright Rays
A glittering Star: should I disclose her praise,
How red unto the sight her Cheeks do seem,
That you would term her to be Beauties Queen;
Indulgent Nature out of all her store,
Has not enough to make one Beauty more.
Now Paris burns with Love, his warm desire
At length is turned into a Flame of Fire;
He knows no medium now, Love sways each Part,
And reigns as Monarch over his very Heart;
And, with a willing Hand, he gives the Ball
To Venus, most deserving it of all.
Juno, and Pallas, with an ireful Eye,
Ascend into the Turrets of the Sky,
There mindful of their wrongs, deliberate
The Ruin of the mighty Trojan State.
-- Manet alta mente repostum
Iudicium Paridis spretaeque injuria formae.

On Clelia's Picture.
Do not thou see this Picture set,
Round with the Rose and Violet,
Crowned with the Garlands of the Spring,
And Looks that might entice a King?
And can thy Eye find any place
To gaze upon, but on this Face?
Do not thou see that sparkling Eye
Inflamed with Love and Majesty;
Those tempting Lips, than which to kiss,
I could not hope a greater bliss;
Those lovely Cheeks, nay, every Part
Not able to be praised by Art;
And ask me whom it represents?
My Life, my Soul, my blessed Contents.
It Is Clelia's Shadow, which her Eye
Reflected here as she past by.
To which, as it is her due, I pay
A thousand Offerings a Day.
And now, methinks, I cease to blame
The Ethnicks, who did Idols frame,
If that among their Number they
Had any one like Clelia.
MY Friend John Clement the other day,
Was very Sick and like to dye,
And, as 'twas thought, did only stay
To bare Tom Flavel company.
He made his Will, and all his Lands
By Testament were mine to spend,
And soon had come into my Hands,
If death, like him, had been my Friend.
But, curse upon it, unawares
That Wicked Rogue Tom Flavel died,
At which my Friend John Clement swears
The Rascal did it out of Pride.
With that he bid 'em sill his Grave,
And (truly) swore he would not dye,
Since the unlucky peevish Slave
Had slighted thus his Company.
So I, who half an hour ago
Built lofty Castles in the Air,
Did to my sorrow quickly know,
I was an Heir, not worth a Hair.
Heredem scripsit me Numa convaluit.
A Song.
REstore my wounded Heart, Dear Love,
And let thy conquering Eyes
Thy hardened Heart with pity move
Toward a sacrifice,
Who prostrate lies,
Your shade with reverence to Idolatrize.
Let not those powerful Siren Charms
Which do my Heart delay,
Take me and Lull me in their Arms
With an intent to slay,
Or only to betray,
That you by this the Prize may bear away.
But if the cruel Fates decree
That Love must end in Death,
I Will scorn, my cruel Destiny,
And will resign my Breath,
Grasping the clammy Earth,
Cursing my Fate, my Fortune, and my Birth.
To Venus.
VEnus, I often have heard thy Name,
Adored thy Godhead, felt thy Flame;
And often invoked thy Power, to find
Some mercy in a Female mind.
And Cupid, I to thee did pay
My faithful Orisons each day;
And thou so well perform'dst thy Part,
I reigned over many a Virgins Heart.
But now I Have other work to do,
Faith thou must Court thy Mother too.
Nay, many such a trick is done,
A Mother cheated by her Son.
And thou, my pretty courtly Lad,
Of me shall find a loving Dad.
No clamorous Mars shall make thee fear,
Nor Vulcans Horns become a jear,
Nor yet his Net, which did proclaim
To all the Gods thy Mothers shame;
Tell her I Am active, young, and free,
And that, I Am sure, thou know I be;
A Lover too, thou often did prove
The mighty force I had in Love.
Nor can my Parts, so well inclined,
Fail for to please thy Mothers mind;
Nor will this Match be a disgrace,
Since I supply Anchises place,
Or young Adonis, who did move
Thy Beauteous Mother once to love;
Nor can thou this my passion blame,
That art the Author of my Flame.
Consider then the wound you gave,
Whose Power alone has strength to save;
And let thy never-erring Dart
Reign Monarch of thy Mothers Heart;
Least from my Arms her self she shroud,
And I embrace Ixion's Cloud,
And courting of the Substance, may
With empty Shaddows only play,
Which never can quench my ardent Flame,
That Is as Immortal as her Name.
To Vesper.
SWeet Vesper bring the Night,
Why do thou thus delay,
To rob me of delight,?
Too long has been thy stay,
Make have away,
And check the lasie Dawning of the day.
And Phoebus tell from me,
That he his Rays lay by,
Nor so discourteous be
As once to mount the Sky,
Or once came nigh
With one small Beam, to wake my Love and I.
Should he scorn my desire,
I Would send his Bastard Son
To set the Heavens on fire,
And he again should run
Without the Sun,
And grieve for what his folly shall have done.
How soon the Sun makes have
Unto his Thetis Bed,
Longing to be embraced,
And cool his radiant Head,
Which now looks red:
Such longing hopes has Lovers ever fed.
How soon my Prayer is heard,
Cynthia's bright Horns appear:
No, it is my Love prepared
Her Lover for to cheer;
In all her Sphere
Her borrowed Luster never shines so clear.
E Libro quarto Horatii Carmin. Ode 7.
THe Snow's dissolved, the grassie Fields grow green,
And bald-pate Trees with dangling Locks are seen.
Earths course is changed, and Rivers by the Sun
Exhaled, with pregnant Floods their Banks o're-run.
The Graces and the Nymphs their Steps advance,
And, being disrobed, do lead a Country Dance.
Times Mutability does make appear,
That naught is permanent beneath the Sphere.
Mild Zeph'rus chides the Cold, the Heat does blast
The slowry Spring, and then posts on as fast.
Next fruitful Autumn comes upon the Stage;
Then lazy Winter, like decrepid Age.
And yet the Moon, which shady Night adorns,
With waxing Light repairs his waining Horns.
But when we to the lower Shades repair,
Where Aeneas, Tullus, and Ancus are,
We instantly to Dust and Ashes turn,
No more return, but rest, us in our Urn.
Who knows whether the Gods above will cast
One day, to add to what is already past?
Nor shall thy greedy Heir for ever find
What thou bestowest with a liberal mind.
When thou art dead, and Minos shall of thee
Give Judgment, according to equity,
Torquatus, not thy Stock nor Eloquence,
Nor yet thy Piety, shall fetch thee thence:
For, neither from the streams of Cocytus
Could Dian bring her Chaste Hyppolitus,
Nor yet the friendly Theseus e're retake
Perithous from the Lethean Lake.
A Song.
FAir Clelia, did thou know
How great a sorrow in my Breast does flow,
Thou could not be
Cruel to me,
Nor think it any gain
To mock my Sorrow, and deride my Pain.
Far be it yet from me
To hope for Life that is disdained by thee;
For if I thought
There might be ought
In me, that thou do hate,
I Would Court my Ruin, and I Would hug my Fate.
But if thou do desire
TO augment my grief, and so increase my Fire,
Let me but know
Thy pleasure's so;
For I am so much thine,
As never to speak, exclaim, or once repine.
An Abcdary.
A sure Foundation makes a Building stand,
But he is a Fool that builds upon the Sand.
Consider Virtue in her glorious form,
Does Youth in all her Ornaments adorn.
Extol her Beauty, Court her Princely Eye,
For with her Wings she will raise thee to the Sky.
Get but a place within her Breast, and know
How mean thy thoughts were when thou were below.
If thou do once observe the Path she treads,
Keep close, though over Rocks and Hills she leads:
Let not the error of the way deceive,
Mark well her course, and thou wilt some tract perceive.
Nothing so hard but Industry will gain,
Obtain her once, thou wilt find her worth thy rain.
Perchance thou wilt say, Vice leads a smoother way.
Question not so, lest thou thy self betray.
Rewards are virtues due, but pains confound,
Such vagrant Fools, with a never dying wound.
Turn then, and take that path that is so severe,
Unto Eternal Joy that Course will steer;
When those who court a smoother path, may go
X times more quick, yet to their overthrow.
Youth, Beauty, Strength, do often ill advise,
Zeal only with a Crown adorns the Wise.
A Deserted Lover.
AH, lovely Fair! can you so cruel be,
To scorn my Vows, yet never pity me?
Can you prove false, who once I did adore?
Pity a Youth that never loved before.
How wavering like the Wind? What subtle dart
Had you at first to penetrate my Heart,
Obdure as Steel, which never no torture found,
Or ever knew for to receive a Wound;
Till in your Eyes, the little twinkling Boy
Taught me at first how to begin to toy?
He taught me Love, whose active Fire first grew,
And more increast, the more I looked on you:
Yet you more Cruel than the Tigers Rage,
Relying on your Beauty, Wealth and Age,
Disdain what you before did seem to prize,
And blast my Laurel with your lightning Eyes.
Thus to the World your Cruelty is known,
And after Ages shall repeat my moan.
Persidious Maid, your hatred makes me bow,
And Curse the rashness of my idle Vow.
And since it is alone for you I dye,
'Twill change your Honor into Infamy.
A Song.
VEnus of Souls,
Whose Hand controls
The greatest Monarchs breast;
Under whose Shade
All Beauty's laid,
Where every one would rest:
Were I to choose,
I Would not refuse,
But in thy very Heart
My mind should rest,
And in thy breast
I Would Reign by Love, not Art;
Where I would be
For ever free,
Till I could satisfy
My curious mind,
That Is so confined,
And in that Instant dye.
To one that dissuaded him from the Love of Clelia.
GO, dull Mechanic! whose Invective Pride
Dares the Epitome of love deride;
Go to black Acheron, there tell thy deeds
To the dull Winds, which on the Valleys feeds;
And let thy poisonous Breath extol the Fame
Of some old VVitch, or Hagg, or canting Dame.
Croak Carrols to the Toad or hissing Snake,
And breathe thy Venom over the Stygean Lake.
And for to please thy fancy, may thou be
Enchanted with thy VVises deformity.
O Divine Clelia! can the Gods connive
At Blasphemy, and let the Slave survive?
If you thus deal with such unequal odds,
I Will scorn to worship such Plebeian Gods.
There Is not an Air, a Whisper, or a Breath
Proceeds from her, but triumphs over Death.
The blushing Sky grows pale, if she but frowns,
And the shrill Orbs leave their harmonious sounds.
Prometheus from her Beauty stole that Fire,
With which he did his new formed Man inspire.
Her Breath the Zeph'rus is that chears the Earth,
Those sweet Perfumes that give the Phoenix birth.
Her Eyes, Mouth, Nose, and Cheeks, Waste, Thighs and Feet,
Are quite beyond Comparison complete.
Go then, grim Cur, repent what thou have done,
And leave to bark at such a glorious Sun.
My Clelia is so fair, and free from harms,
Such Innocence in her all-conquering Charms,
That should the admiring World but chance to pry
Into those hidden Glories of her Eye,
They Would never adore another Deity.
To Clelia.
Shall still my suit prove void, then bid me die,
I only hope in vain, tell me, shall I
Enjoy that very word torments my Soul;
Your Eyes do promise what you will Control.
Beauty 's too great to be a Tyrant there,
I harbor nothing now but sad despair,
Adore ing you, my hopes are naught but Air.
Epigr. 72. lib. 6. Martial.
CIlex, a Thief, much noted for his Crime,
Did on a time, into a Garden Climb:
But in that spacious Garden looking round,
Naught but the God Priapus could be found;
Unwilling then empty to go, or stay,
He took Priapus up, and went away.
Rare Guardian Gods! Rome could not choose but fall,
When such base Gods did keep her Capitol.
Romans their Gods, not Gods did Rome defend,
Their Empire else had sooner had an end:
For who relies on such Egyptian Bands,
Shall find, like Reeds, they will run into their Hands.
A Song.
SO strange a Distemper I never yet did know,
It Is too strong to be called an Impotent Foe;
It Is too weak to surprise and conquer my Breast,
Yet with sundry Alarms it often does infest;
It roars and it rages, and makes such a do,
That though it is a Slave, 'twou'd be Conqueror too.
With a Courage more stout than Achilles slew Hector,
I swore, that no Passion should be my Director;
Disdaining those Bonds that the Predicants wear,
My Soul is a Monarch as free as the Air.
When such puling Passions my Fancy discovers,
Like Physicians, I gain by the Sickness of others.
If Nature would show me a Creature Divine,
I Would smile in her Face, and I Would swear she was mine:
I Would urge her with Pleasures, my glory should move
Ten Millions of Cupids to enforce her to love.
I Would spare not one Kiss for the wealth of a Mine;
It Is death for a Lord, if he touch but her Shrine.
Such Affection I bear to the Creature I love:
But if she were Heiress to thundering Jove,
And full of disdain, I defy all her Charms,
As Heat repels Heat, and Arms repels Arms.
And rather then bear their scorn and their flight,
I Will worship the Owl, the Queen of the Night.
Eurialus, Hersilia, Dares.
Eur. Beauteous Hersilia, those that rule above,
In you have placed so much Divinity,
That I am compelled to tell you that I love,
And in those scorching Flames, alas! I fry.
O do not frown, nor yet divert your Eyes,
But let one loving glance prolong my end.
What Glory is it for you to defy
Your Slave, that you are bound for to defend?

Hers. If Heaven in me had placed ought worthy love,
I should have liked this Honor done by you;
But since it is only Fancy that does move,
'Twere base in me, to take what is not my due.
Or if I would, I cannot ease you now;
Your fond desires you never can attain:
Think you a Votress will reject her Vow?
One of the Quiver-bearing Goddess Train?
Besides you may as well go Court a Saint
To leave her Heaven, and visit Earth again,
As ever hope to move me by your 'plaint,
To taste the sorrows that attend on Men.

Dar. Here comes the mighty Daros, Madam, choose
The solid Oak, or else this slender Reed,
Which if I touch, I instantly should bruise;
Yet such an Act would make my Honor bleed.
I love, and will enjoy; nay, be not Coy;
Were mighty Turnus, or Aeneas here,
I Would not defer one moment to enjoy.
A noble courage scorns to stoop to fear.
Thou art mine by Heaven, and were the Gods unkind,
As not to aid me, if I should desire;
I Would search their Palaces, and there I Would find
A subtler Flame than was Prometheus Fire.
With this I Would gain thy Love, or else compel
Thy stubborn Fancy to obey my will;
Nay, more, I Would ransack the abiss of Hell;
The Stygian Prince should my Commands fulfill.

Hers. Though you're so proud to menace, know that I
Do neither fear, nor yet respect your force;
My Virgin honor's able to desie
The furious Current of your mighty Course.
If Heaven and Earth were all at thy Command,
And I alone thy Bondage did deny,
My Chastity is able to withstand
The Rage of thy audacious Tyranny.
Besides, the Gods, (who thy malicious Tongue
Has gloried in upbraiding thus)
Would with a Thunderbolt prevent the wrong,
And send thee headlong into Erebus.

Chorus. So have I seen a lofty Cedar stand
Amidst a Cops of Shrubs and ragged Trees:
Her lofty Top did wave, when gently fanned
And Courted by Favonius milder breeze.
But when in Storms the angry North did frown,
Threatening the ruin of her losty Pride,
She scorned to veil unto the angry Clown,
Her sollid strength did all her force deride.

An Acrostick on Madam Ann Tirrell.
Admired Beauty, whose victorious Eyes
Never wants a Heavenly Virtue to surprise.
Nature in you alone may boast what-e're
To Grecian Hellen was accounted fair.
I you, as Persians do adore the Sun,
Revived Phoenix, that art still but one.
Roses and Lillies are too mean a Grace,
Etherial Beauty Crowns your Heavenly Face;
Lasting as Fame, still may your Honor be,
Like verdant Laurel, still from Envy free.
Admit my Fancy be too high, or low,
Regent of Hearts, know you have made it so.
On Clelia's severe Command.
TO thee, O Wood, I make my moan,
And sing the Accents of my groan,
Which else I durst entrust to none.
For since that she who I adore
Has gave Command, that I no more
Should blaze her Fame, as heretofore,
Silence it self shall louder be
Than any voice which comes from me,
Where any Auditor shall be.
Yet every whist'ling Wind shall bear
My sad Complaint unto her Ear,
That her Commands were too severe.
And on each Tree I Will carve her Fame,
Which still shall flourish by the same.
The Immortal Grove shall be its Name.
In which each chirping Bird shall raise
Encomiums on my Clelia's praise,
Whilst I in sorrow spend my Days.
I Will search the Aetnean Caverns, where
The fiery Sallamanders are,
To me those Flames cannot compare.
Though Mulciber does there display
His slaming Ensigns Night and Day;
In time those Flames may yet decay.
But mine is Eternal, and will stay,
The substance never consumes away,
The more it burns, the more it may.
They are no Lovers that can tell
What caused, how strong they love, how well;
Love does ad Infinitum dwell.
I live on air of endless love,
And as a shadow only move,
By that which does the substance prove.
I Will search where the Chamelions are,
And unto them I will declare,
That Love's as bad a Food as Air.
Nay, worse, for though their Food's but Breath,
Air is their Life, Love is my Death,
Hunger more Comfort would bequeath.
But now I nearer come, I see
There can but little difference be,
I am a Shadow, so is he.
I Will dig the Earth, that I may know
What Nature has denied to show,
To Moles that in her Bowels grow.
And there I Will whisper Clelia's Name,
That Mines and Stones may hear the same,
And tell from whence their knowledge came.
But now I nearer come, I find
That Moles and I are nigh of Kind;
For they as well as Love are blind.
For what they dig they do not know,
And laboring pain do undergo;
I love, my case is even so.
Their pain is pleasure, so is mine;
But here we differ, mine is Divine;
Their aim is Earth, mine too sublime.
I Will dive into the Watery-deep,
And see the Bodies that do sleep,
For whom the Waves themselves do weep.
And there together with the throng
Of numerous Fish I Will swim along,
Who are like me deprived of Tongue.
Yet could I like Arion play,
I Would make those Mutes stand at a bay,
Whilst I my Clelia's praise display.
That so, when ever I should dye,
Each Element might then supply
The praises of her memory.
A Song.
THE Fetters of Love are far stronger than hate,
Fast binding the Captive, by that they call Fate,
Inslaving the Senses, and dulling the Brain,
For a thing of no moment, scarce worth a name,
A delight that does cloy, as soon as enjoyed,
And a Fancy obtained we after avoid.
The pleasures are past soon as ever they come,
And gallop away as the Deel upon Dun.
A Complaint against Cupid, for causing a distastful Love.
FArewell, my scornful Female Saint,
In vain you boast your conquering Eyes,
Whilst your deportment does depaint
A Tygress over a Sacrifice.
Desist, for by the Powers above,
And by the Oath they use to swear,
My anger's greater than my Love,
And your disdain I scorn to bear.
For your base pride you hold so high,
Will at the last your self anoy,
Like to the Cockatrices Eye,
Whose self-reflection does destroy.
Know then, that I am no such Fool,
To dote on your Complexion;
My Passion is become too cool
For such a weak Infection.
Those amorous glances which I paid
To those disdainful looks of thine,
Are now ashamed that e're they made
An Idol to adorn thy Shrine.
Cupid, henceforth I vow despite
Against thy Quiver and thy Bow,
Did I plead Nonage in thy sight,
Fond Boy, that thou should use me so?
I was not born of Stygian race,
Against the Gods I never made War,
Nor did thy Temples e're deface,
Or blemished Venus with a Scar.
It was not I that took the pains
Her secret Love for to discover,
And bound her in Cyclopean Chains,
Caressing her Licentious Lover.
How came it then that thou should make
So strange a love my Heart to seize,
And give new vigor to the Snake
Which was before content to freeze?
Did thou at random shoot a Dart,
Directed by no certain slight,
To see if thou could hit a Heart
Which did thy Childish Godhead slight?
Or art thou like some Idle Lad,
Whom no delight can e're content,
But in a humor raging mad,
Throws stones into the Element?
If so, a Rod is fitter far
For to correct thy Childish will,
And thousand petty Gods there are
Can draw thy Bow, yet never kill.
But I Blaspheme, great God of Hearts,
Thou did this thing, that thou might try
With what a strength thy powerful Darts
Force Love against Antipathy.
On his viewing a Fragment of the Old James.
THis piece of Wood, which now does lie
Neglected by each passer by,
Not for so base a use designed,
Did once despise the Waves and Wind.
This was a Member of that Frame
That once did bear great James's his Name;
Within whose bulk there did embark
More Souls than Creatures in the Ark;
And unto cruel Death did drive
Far more than Noah saved alive.
His wide-mouthed Cannon often did make
The Watery Region to quake;
And frighted Neptune from his Seat,
Whilst his shrill Tryton blew Retreat.
The quondam rageing Waves did sly,
And left the Neighboring Ocean dry.
His Warlike sides with fire and smoke
Did often the drunken Dutch provoke;
And made the modish French to find
The difference 'twixt Smoke and Wind.
Yet now, in midst of all his State,
His Glory he resigns to Fate;
Like Hercules, (though Jove his Sire)
Yields to consuming Flames of Fire.
This makes the English Proverb sound,
Who Is born to hang, shall never be drowned.
For whom the Waves could never tire,
Lies here at last, consumed by Fire.
An Anagram on His Highness James' Duke of York and Albany.
JAMES STUART. Anagram. A JUST MASTER.
Epigram.
I WILL boldly on, not fearing a disaster,
If Life or Death can serve so Just a Master:
Susana Witherell.
Anagram. U are all Whitness.
Epigram.
SUch great Perfection reigns through all your Soul,
You are all Whiteness, not one part is soul.
Another.
You are all Whiteness, rare perfection; hence
Your very Name creates a Quintessence.
An Acrostick.
So Sweet, so Good, so Virtuous, and so Fair!
United Forces still most powerful are.
Such conquering Charms do in your Eyes appear,
As gives new Luster to the Hemesphere;
Nature in you performed her utmost skill,
Allowing privilege to save or kill;
Who can resist the Dictates of your will?
Interior motions from your Beauty rise,
Teaching me love, which you alone despise;
How can you be so cruel for to slay
Each minute, that which does your will obey?
Reprieve's in vain, when Death has sealed the Fate,
Ever be cruel, pity'll come to late.
Like Niobe I Will mourn, and my last breath,
Like Swans, shall sing the Omen of my Death.
A Song to Lucifer.
WHy do thou thus delay,
O Lucifer, to usher in the day?
Sluggard, I know thy fear;
Thou know my Clelia will then appear,
Whose blessed and heavenly sight
Will doom thy Light unto Eternal Night.
Nor shall we need the Sun,
Bid him unto the lower World return,
And with his Beams of light
Expel from the Abyss the Queen of Night;
For from my Clelias Eyes
Proceed such Rays as does all Light surprise.
Nor shall we need the Powers
Of Moon, or Stars, or Hail, or Snow, or Showers;
For whilst on Earth she stays,
With her more glorious and refulgent Rays,
Proceeding from her Eyes,
Gives Birth to all, and Natures course supplies.
But when she please to sly
From Earth to Heaven, and be enthroned on high,
And there look down on Men,
The Golden Age shall Visit Earth again;
And all the World shall be
Blessed with its Primitive Fecundity.
To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
OF mighty Jove I lately ask't a Boon,
Which, like a God, he granted me as soon
As I could ask; and gave me this Command,
Go, and receive it at thy Princes Hand,
Great Charles, to whom the World shall Homage pay,
The Dutch, the French, the Spaniards all obey;
Whose mighty Fleets shall from the Indies bring
Spice, Pearls, and Gold, as Presents to the King.
Thou need'st not doubt, thy wants he will soon supply,
From his so unexhausted Treasury.
No more he said, the God I straight adored,
With Hecatombs of Thanks his Altar stored;
And big with expectation to receive
The promised Gift, I thought my King would give.
Some Days, some Weeks, some Months I spent in vain,
Each moment full of hopes of promised gain;
And still my want increased. I therefore then
Swore never to trust a Heathen God again,
But to my Sovereign my wants declare,
Whose Clemency shall suit unto my Prayer.
Thus shall the admiring World perceive the odds
Between our Christian Kings, and Heathen Gods.
A Song.
FRom Salamis when Teucer fled,
And left his Country, then
With Poplar Boughs he Crowned his Head,
And all his Warlike Men;
And with a Bowl of fragrant Wine
With Bachus did caress,
Drowning their Souls in Muscadine,
Joy'd with such happiness.
So let us like Immortal Souls
Our life in pleasure spend,
Quassing our time in lusty Bowls,
Which never shall have end.
Thus shall we make the Powers above
To envy our delight,
And Cupid, Prince and God of Love,
To Revel all the Night.
Thus shall we make the Gods despise
The sweet and pleasant taste
Of Nectar, which they once did prize,
Drank by Immortal Race.
Thus each of us shall be a Star,
And with the Gods combine
In their Divinity to share,
As they shall in our Wine.
Frange ^oros, Pete vina, rosas cape, tingere nardo.
Dido's Expostulation.
THey say, that Souls departed, first must run
To Styx, and so unto Elysium.
They tell me wonders, and they likewise show
The Immortal Pleasures of the Shades below.
I dare not trust loud Fame, but, if I might,
My wandering Soul should pass to Styx this Night.
Fond Heart, never fear, undoubtedly it is so,
Be resolute, for thou may safely go.
Well, I Am resolved, and if that Fame does lie,
Let Fortune do her worst, I can but dye.
And now this Sword shall pass into my veins
And ease my Heart of all my cruel pains;
My vital Spirits saint, I come, I come,
To my sweet rest, even to Elysium.
Dido and Charon.
Did. A Boat, a Boat.

Chapter Who calls?

Did. Charon, it is I,
A Soul drove by Immense extremity
To leave the furious Earth, and now am come
To thee, to row me to Elysium.

Chapter What is thy Name?

Did. Dido, who just now swayed
Thy Scepter, Carthage, who great Kings obeyed.

Chapter What brought thee hither? freely now relate
The real cause of this thy sudden Fate.

Did. Make no delay, sweet Charon, pity me,
Involved by Fate in this Calamity.

Chapter Thou can not pass, it is vain for thee to strive,
The Gods command, and I cannot connive.

Did. O Cruelty! then must I tell the cause?
I have transgressed the great Commands and Laws
Of the just Gods, thus to anticipate
The desperate force of my too rigid Fate.

Chapter What was the motive?

Did. Love.

Chapter The Gods forbid.
Would such a thing from Mortal Race were hid?
O 'twas not Love, but Glory and Revenge,
And had not Fate commanded such to range
A hundred years on this side Styx, my Boat
Ere now had been as tattered as my Coat.

Did. Charon.

Chapter I cannot stay, but must be gone,
And leave thee here most sadly to bemoan
Thy desperate folly, with those Shades that fly
Like numerous Troops of Atoms in the Sky.

Did. But where is then Sicheus?

Chapter Pish, he is free
From all those troubles that attend on thee;
He Is in Elysium.

Did. What can he rest,
When I with sorrow am so much oppressed?
Let not the burden of my grief exceed.

Chapter This is enough to make the Rocks to bleed,
And Gods relent.

Did. My very Soul does swell,
My Heart does burn worse than the Flames of Hell;
My Princely Power is gone, where is Honors now,
Those regal Titles that did crown my Brow?

Chapter Honor! there is no such thing, the meanest Slave
Is equal to a Queen when in the Grave.
Here Is no distinction, Kings and Princes all
Must bear that equal Sentence that shall fall
Upon them, for their bad or good intent,
Firmly enacted by Heavens Parliament.

Sub tua purpurei venient vestigia Reges
Deposito luxu: turbaque cum paupere mixti
Omnia mors equat, etc.

AN envious, angry, sluggish, drunken Lover,
His Passion, and his Vice at once discover;
A vicious Passion quickly will discover
An envious, angry, sluggish, drunken Lover;
A sluggish drunken Lover in a trice
Discovers both his Passion and his Vice;
His anger and his envy quickly be
Disclosed by Wine, In Wine is Verity.
Desire of sloth, and lust of Wine may prove
An Antidote against the power of Love;
Anger and Envy, in one Breast confined,
Love never will stumble at, though Love is blind.
Who e're to Wrath or Envy will give place,
May he never meet with any chaste Embrace.
Those that to Sloth and Wine addicted be,
May live with Epicurus, not with me.
The Confidence of a Just Man.
NO Salvage Tyranny, no desperate War,
No cruel Fortune, nor unlucky Jar,
No trembling Earthquake, nor the Potent Hand
Of thundering Jupiter, whose high command
Does claim obedience, no, not if the frame
Of Nature were involved in the same,
And the whole Fabric by disorder brought,
Should be converted suddenly to naught;
Like hopeless Wretches, it could never fright
My Heart, and make me tremble at the sight;
Nor could it shake the Castle of my Soul,
That Is fortified beyond such weak control.
My Valiant Heart never sears the scorching Sun,
Nor the strange Operations of the Moon;
No Comet has the power to make me fear,
Not though his Beard portend a Famine near,
Or Pestilence, or Sword, or what is worse,
All Heavenly Influence turned into a Curse.
For what are these, but secondary things,
And in the Hands of the great King of Kings,
Who can dispose of us, and all of these,
Not as we would, but as himself does please?
Si fractus illabatur orbis
Impavidum ferient ruinae.

On the Death of Mr. William Goffe, late Gallant to the Lady Willoughby
Yeomans, killed by Richard Love.
HOw, Goffe forsook her! it is as true as may be,
He has took distaste, and so has left my Lady.
This should not be, for Ladys have such Art,
When they have got possession of a Heart,
They know their forces, and with cunning sway,
No Heart can mutiny or disobey.
Some say he is dead. This then will end the strife,
Death robbed my Lady, as she robbed his Wife.
By what rude Hand was it that he did fall?
By Love. O mighty Love, thou conquer'st all!
Have thou again mistook? has Death and thee
Been conversant and changed Artillery?
Reclaim thy Error, see what thou have done,
Give Death his Arrows, and take thou thy own.
Ah Madam, now where were those powerful Charms
That should have kept your Lover in your Arms?
Come tell me, Venus, is not Love your Son,
The same with Cupid? Then what has he done?
O he has slain thy Mars, and Arms put on
Would fright Achilles and his Myrmodons;
But yet methinks your Lover should not dye,
Death sure cannot resist a Ladies Eye.
Go touch his liveless Corpse, and when that is done,
The Tyrant needs must give you what is your own
But that Dame Mr. Gosss Wife.
Baucis will put in a Plea,
E'ne take him Death, for he belongs to me:
Unless to share him, you have got the Art,
Half for my Lady, Death take Baucis part;
As the Twin Stars by turn shine in the Sky,
One day he shall survive, the next day dye.
But we have found a better way then this,
Madam, my Lady, or what else you please,
Shall put on all her Ornaments and Geer,
Step down to Hell, and find her Lover there;
There intercede with Proserpine the Queen,
And if she can but him from thence redeem,
She shall in partnership no longer be,
But by this means gain the Monopoly.
Now Orpheus for a Women once did so,
She for a Man, will make it quid for quo.
But here perchance you will say, it is basely done,
Thus to insult upon a Ladies wrong.
Which I Will deny, for many in your sight,
Do think far worse than I intend to Write;
And though they do not speak, their thoughts are free:
A secret's worse than open Enemy:
But I am neither. Deaths severer Brow,
Presents his Image, that I write of now,
And to my thoughts most sadly does discover
The grief that you conceive for such a Lover.
But this does most of all my passion move,
That he who lived by Love, should dye by Love.
But I have done, lest this should give offense,
My Ne plus ultra makes a recompense.
A Lovers Complaint.
AH fainting Breath, there is naught can yield relief
Unto a wounded Soul, whose murmuring grief
Loves no delay, but like the rising Sun,
Still perseveres until his course is done.
What shall I speak? or what can I devise?
I Will rather dye, than once Apostatize.
Nor shall my panting Breath your shade defame,
I Will honor you, and Idolize your Name;
And though at last you scorn me till I dye,
I needs must love you to Eternity.
Love in Ambiguity.
WHy should I urge my Love, since that I know
Her Merit's great, and my Desert's as low?
My thought's as high as his who did aspire
To climb the Chariot of Etherial Fire;
And rashly perished, such has my fault been,
His was the King of Light, and mine the Queen.
I fondly thought, Prometheus-like, to steal
The heavenly Flame her Beauty does conceal;
And for my Error feel the raging smart,
Which Vulture-like does seed upon my Heart.
Pardon my rashness, mighty Queen of Hearts,
And thou great God of Love, whose peircing darts
No Medium knows, but either help or kill,
Must I the Number of thy victims sill?
O play not with my Heart, as Children do
With some poor Bird, which while they love, they show.
One overweening grasp of life bereaves,
And in a moment all the joy deceives.
But why do I thus deprecate in vain,
Hoping for what I never can obtain?
Alas! unworthy Wrecth, too great a sire
Has on a sudden kindled thy desire
Beyond thy Fortune; as some Country Wight,
Who never knew the Wars, or how to fight,
Talks Big or Stoutly, and resolves to try
His never proved Courage on the Enemy;
But when he sees the adverse Host draw nigh,
And now or never all his Manhood try,
He throws his Arms away, resolves to yield,
And like a Vassal quits the never sought Field;
Just so did I, my actions, thoughts, and all,
Let all objections in a moment fall;
Until your Heavenly Beauty I did see,
Alas! too strong an Enemy for me.
At the first sight I yielded Heart and Will,
Lady, to be at you Devotionr still.
Among the many Trophies then that wait
Upon your Beauty, let it be my Fate,
Or rather Fortune, since it cannot be
Counted a Bondage, where the Body's free,
But why the Body? Body, Heart, and Mind,
Unto your Beauty are alike confined,
Are either fixed, or move by your direction;
Yet proud, in being Vassals to Perfection.
Echo to the Painter, out of Ausonius.
ALas! fond Painter, why do strive to grace
An unknown Goddess with a fancied Face?
I am the Daughter of the Tongue, and Wind,
An empty Mother, Voice without a Mind.
I dying sounds fetch back with living tone,
And others mock with Words that are my own.
I in thy Ears my Habitation found,
And if thou mean to paint me, paint a Sound.
A Dialogue between an Ethiopian, and a White Virgin.
Vir. AFfright me not, you urge your suit in vain;
More Fear than Love your Hellish looks have bred.
Eternal terror seize you for your pain;
Think you I Will take a Devil to my Bed?
Go Court the Darkness, Wed thy self to Night;
Fry in your Sands, and search for grains of Gold;
O Sun, how can thou thus behold a sight
That will thy glorious beams in darkness fold!
Sure thou art Pluto, ugly infernal Prince,
Be gone, I say, be gone to the Divine
And Beauteous Creature thou did ravish hence,
The lovely, Fair, and Charming Proserpine.

Eth. Whitest of Whites, more lovely than the day,
Which from the East in radiant beams appears,
More lovely to my sight than Cynthia,
Which twice six times a year her Beauty clears,
Despise me not because that I am black;
The Sun you speak of lies so near our Land,
We have him in our Face, you on your Back;
Nay, sometimes with him we walk Hand in Hand.
Since then that he who the whole World surveys,
Does deal his Blessings with partiality,
You he does warm, us scorcheth with his Rays;
Your Beauty works the like effect on me.

Vir. My Beauty, Slave! stop that presumptious word;
Shall such a Harpy ever speak my Name?
Does Earth another Cacus yet afford?
What was I born to be a sport to Fame?
Thou art that brand the fatal Sisters threw
Into the Fire at Meleager's Birth,
Which half consumed, in have Althaea drew
Out of the Flame; be gone, thou Son of Earth*

Eth. Alas! too cruel Nymph, despise me not;
A Slave I am, but unto none but you.
Whiteness in you none counts as a spot;
And in our Black lies our chief glory too.
The Day is pleasant unto every sight,
And all men praise the glory of the Sun;
Yet when it is gone, how soon they hug the Night,
And sleeping, in its sable Bosom run.
It Is only Fancy moves the Sphere of Love;
No Color wards, where Cupid shoots his dart;
Thou God, who all things with thy power do move,
With one small touch O wound this Virgins Heart;
That she who does thy Power so much despise,
May quickly by experience learn to know,
Thou only giv'st those leave to Tyrannize
That pay submission to thy Conquering Bow.
Observe the Rainbow, view the Colors there,
Looks it not pleasant unto every Eye?
Diversity of Colors makes it fair:
Discord in Music makes an Harmony.
Since then that I am Black, and you are Fair,
What a sweet Babe may come from such a pair?

An Epitaph.
UPon this Marble Stone forbear to tread,
Or to deface the Relics of the Dead;
Yet Read, and so let fall a Tear in Verse,
To pay Devotions to his mourning Hearse.
Here Is Virtue laid, and Piety lies slain,
Who the three Graces shall revive again:
Those Powers Immortal, who in Heaven do shine
That Trinity, although One God Divine,
Shall raise his Body glorious from the Dust,
Who in his Maker did repose that trust.
The Lovers Iubile.
'TWas Evening when the Suns departure made
The open grounds a comfortable shade;
When walking forth to view the fragrant Fields,
The sweet variety that Flora yields,
Near to a Myrtle Grove a Cave I spied,
By which a pleasant Stream did gently glide:
Amidst the Grove an ancient Altar stands,
Almost defaced by irreligious hands.
This I repaired, and said, O Goddess, now,
Who e're thou art, receive my sacred Vow,
And grant my Suit, and let some pity move
In Clelia's Heart a more propitious Love.
Offerings by me shall ever be repaid
Upon this Altar, though by time decayed,
And Man's ingratitude. Then looking round,
I spied an Ivory Image on the ground.
Hail Power, said I, what impious hand has done
So vile an Act? who would such honor shun?
I washed it in the Stream, and to it said,
Ah beauteous Image, fair Pigmaleon Maid:
Then gazing on it, where a Fillet tied
The Ivory Hair, this Motto I espied;
In Honor of the mighty Cyprean Goddess.
O thou Illustrious Queen of Love, said I,
What Hand could do this great Impiety?
What Impious Creature was it durst profane
Thy sacred Shrine? O Sin without a Name!
Against a Myrtle by the Altar stood
The Goddess Seat, Arched round with Carved Wood,
There I the Image set, and having laid
My Hand upon the Altar, thus I prayed.
Great Paphian Goddess, Cytherean Shrine,
Whose presence, I acknowledge, is Divine.
If to this Grove or Altar I have done
Ought Meritor'ous, or have favor won,
Let Love to all more mild and gentle be,
And cease to punish Man's Impiety.
A thousand Lovers shall this Grove frequent,
And offer Odours of the purest scent.
The Shepherds that possess the Vales shall bring
Their Sheep-hooks crowned to thee an Offering.
The Altar shook, the Myrtles seemed to move,
Resounding murmuring Notes of happy Love.
Celestial Music did salute my Ears,
When lo, the God of Love to me appears,
And says, Young Man, this Bow my hand does hold,
Lets sly no Arrow, but the Head is Gold.
Thy Prayer is heard, the Goddess is appeased,
And every Lover of his pain is eased.
No Jealousy or Fears shall now torment
A Lovers Joy, or ravish his Content.
The fairest Nymphs, whose Beauty wins the Bays,
Shall sing Encomiums of her Lovers praise.
The fairest Shepherdess (for Love has Charms)
Shall fold a naked Shepherd in her Arms;
Fair Daphne playing on a rural Quill,
Both Hills and Dales with Corydon shall fill,
And Corydon shall VVoods and Springs possess
With praises of his Loving Shepherdess.
Loves mutual Sympathy shall Crown the Year,
And thou whose Heart does Loves Idea bear,
Shall in thy Clelia find a quick return,
Who, in thy absence, flames of Love do burn:
And e're the Sun the Horizon decline,
Her beauteous Body shall be joined to thine.
This said, he lightly from the Altar Springs,
And Fans the sounding Grove with towering wings.
Then on a sudden, through my swelling Veins
Loves passion glides, and all my Bones inflames;
And having gained the Conquest of my Breast,
Reigns Monarch there, and scorns to be suppressed,
The Goddess then adoring, I a way
Espied, which 'twixt the Shrine and Altar lay:
This path I followed, Fortune was my guide,
And led me all along the River side,
Where Multitude of Lovers did resort,
Filling the Fields with all delightful sport.
Some in the stream their tender Limbs unite,
Like Salamacis and Hermaphrodite;
Others upon the ground so closely lie,
You Would take them for the Zodiac Geminy.
One's plaiting Garlands, 'tother's twisting Boughs,
Commixt with Flowers, to bind her Lovers brows.
One's braiding of the Hair, another tries
With pleasant Songs to close her Lovers Eyes.
This seeming coy, a thousand pretty ways
Her eager Lover to her Arms betrays.
That skilled in nothing, but pure Innocence,
Thinks to delay her Lover's an offense.
O happy place! said I, and down I lay
Upon a rising ground that did survey
The posture of each Lover, when from far
A Lady came, just as a rising Star.
The lighter Vestments that her parts infold,
Were Azure Silk, and interweav'd with Gold;
Her Hair was braided, dressed with Ribbons; so
Iris appears, dressed in her mantling Bow.
A Silver Veil her beauteous Face did shade,
So fine, you would say 'twas by Arachne made.
The emulous Winds her swelling Garments kiss,
Which to my view betrayed a Lovers Bliss.
I gazed, not able to revert my Eyes
From Loves great Charms, and sacred Novelties:
Thy Fate, Act on, then I did bemone,
And feared it instantly might be my own;
But as she nearer came unto my view,
My doubts were cleared, and I my Clelia knew;
I ran to meet her, when her eager steps
Prevents my speed, and in my Arms she leaps;
Clasping I laid me gently on the ground,
Millions of kisses their successors found.
I ruffled up her Silks which kept the way
Unto the Paradise where Cupid lay;
She made resistance, such as might be said,
Thou shall enjoy, and yet I Will dye a Maid.
Her Eyes declared her Pleasure and Content,
And what she did was out of Complement.
What thought can know the Pleasures I enjoyed?
Immortal Pleasures, never to be cloyed.
But till in modest terms I can express
My full fruition, you have leave to guess.
We bound our Brows with Myrtle, and teturn'd
Unto the Grove, and sweetest Odours burned;
We decked the Shrine with Garlands, and this day
For ever we our Annual Rites will pay;
And unto every Lover this shall be
(Great Paphian Queen) a joyful Jubilee.
On Love.
LOves Charms all humane force do sway,
And Monarchs do his Power obey.
Nor is there any can resist,
He makes them Love, and when he list,
No place prescribed, now here, now there,
The surest place is any where.
A Song.
COme, let us to the Tavern be gone,
The day does begin to decline,
All the time we do lose
We basely abuse
The longing desire of Wine.
Boy, call up your Ladies of Pleasure,
No Stoic with us shall tarry,
We Will drink all the Night
And take our delight,
Let Sectary Dreamers marry.
Come, fill the Glass full to the Brim,
Though Jove our Pleasure opposes,
Our Pallates 'twill please
And expel all Disease,
And inflame our frollick Reposes.
We laugh at the madness of those
Who heap up a Mass of Treasure,
We hate a base Miser,
But we will be wiser,
And confound all our Riches in Pleasure.
Thus, like Gods, we'll have pleasure in store,
And our Wine shall roar in like the Waves,
And in spite of pale Death,
That destroyer of Breath,
We'll keep Revellings yet in our Graves.
The Surrender.
I Yield, dear Enemy, nor now
Can I resist so sweet a Brow;
For who would not a slave remain,
On whom thou please to lay thy Chain?
For with such love thy Yoke I take,
As Martyrs that embrace a Stake.
Now since I own this great defeat,
Command thy Forces to retreat,
And vail those charming looks, from whence
My Ruin comes, by Innocence:
And since I yield my self your Slave,
Let Beauty, which the conquest gave,
Not triumph in the vanquished foil,
Or glory in your Captives spoil.
The noble Lion in his rage
Disdains his Forces to engage
Against a prostrate Worm, from whence
His valor can have no pretense:
Such honors always did pursue
The Roman Valor as their due:
And since that you have now put on
The Courage of an Amazon,
An Angels Beauty, such a form
May glorified Saints adorn;
May all their Virtues take a place
To grace thy Heart as well as Face,
And in thy Breast some pity plant,
The only Good that thou do want:
Thus shall my Chain more gentle prove,
Supported by the Wings of Love.
I love a Lass that will not wed,
Yet vallues not her Maidenhead;
That is not peevish, proud, nor poor,
That scorns the Title of a Whore;
That can both Dance, and Sing, and Quass,
And, in what ever humor, Laugh;
Who swears by Fate, she will not abuse
What Nature gives her leave to use;
Yet to a Friend will not be coy,
But give him leave for to enjoy
What he desires, so he will conceal
Those hidden Pleasures which they steal.
She is not such as stand without,
And call to every rabble Rout,
Crying, Turn in, thou honest Fellow,
Until their -- is grown so mellow,
That even the Pox would scorn to dwell
In such a loathsome nasty Cell.
A vengance take such Whores as these,
(...) are far worse than the Disease;
I cannot guess but their descent
Was from some nasty Excrement;
Else could they never infect the Earth
With Plagues, but from so base a Birth.
A Dream.
WHen Titan hasted from his heavenly Sphere,
And Thetis modest Blushes did appear;
Grown weary with the fervor of the day,
Upon the Banks of a cool Brook I lay;
The shallow Stream soft murmuring did yield,
A whistling Zeph'rus cooled the heated field;
The Birds in Trees with their mellodious Throats
Prattled the discord of divided Notes.
The Hills the sound repelled, the Virgin Voice
To every accent lent a parting Noise.
The Grasshopper (whose shriller voice repairs
The smalness of his kind) with pleasant Airs
Made all the Fields to ring, such harmony
Proceeded from the Innumerable Fry.
I fancied this to be the Elizean Groves,
The happy Paradise of all chaste Loves;
And wished my Clelia here, when happily
A silent slumber closed my twinkling Eye.
Behold, the God of Dreams before me stood,
And with his Leaden Wand he smoothed the flood,
And brusht the whistling Winds, which forthwith lay
Upon the ground as Dews that fall in May.
A general silence covered all the place,
And on my Head he laid his drowsy Mace;
Earth seem to vanish, Heaven for to descend,
A hundred Thrones one Goddess did attend,
Who in a Rainbow Robe, commixt with Rays,
Such as Sol wears when he the World surveys,
Enters the Palace; from her sparkling Eye;
Proceeded Love, and awful Majesty.
A Throne there was, Twelve Lions did uphold,
Set round with Amethysts in beaten Gold.
The steps were Crowns, Scepters, and Diadems,
Rubies, and Saphirs, and commixed Gems.
The Goddess this ascends, whose heavenly Face
Did quite eclipse the luster of the place;
Millions of Cupids, in their Liveries,
Attend the motion of her sparkling Eyes.
A Herald then the Goddess will proclaims,
And summons all who burn with Love's fierce Flames
TO appear before the Throne. Without delay,
Innumerable Troops her will obey.
And here 'twas worthy of ones observation,
To see each Mimick fool it in his station.
One in an antic posture leads a Dance,
And swears each step is Alamode de France;
'Tother more solid, walks a State-Corant,
And Pedigreed Antiquity does vaunt.
The next a puling Lover, foreward steers,
His Eyes deject, distill abundant Tears,
Complaining of his cruel Fate, to move
In some base Punk a more auspicious love;
A braging, roaring Russian next appears,
Who talks of desolation, racks and fears;
Affrights his Love, who he does strive to gain,
And thinks Bellona one of Venus train.
Some aged Fools I saw among the rest,
Who time of every Sense did quite divest;
Shaking their hoary Heads, in their esteem,
As Complaisant as when they were Sixteen;
Protesting Love, in such a doleful strain,
As Ghosts are wont who Visit Earth again.
But that which moved me most, was for to see
My Brother Poets senseless foolery.
Laden with Anagrams, Acrosticks, time
Was never spent in cobling of such Rhyme:
Some weep in Elegy, and Epitaph,
Whose Nonsense well might cause the dead to laugh;
Others more Jocund, Songs and Catches make,
And sure they are, that every Clause will take.
And in a word, though all was but delusion,
It was the perfect Map of mere confusion.
The Goddess smiled, (as well she might) to see
The true adorers of her Deity
So much deluded by each Idle Passion,
Which was by custom grown into a fashion;
And gave Command, for 'twas her will and Pleasure,
Which rashly broke, they might repent at leisure,
That none should Court in any other sort
Then what was used when Mars and she did sport;
Think you, said she, that Peleus e're had sped
So happily in Thetis pregnant Bed,
Who often by varying forms she did delude,
If not by force he had her charms subdued?
Did not the Infernal Prince ascend from Hell,
To Lights abode, where Gods and Men do dwell,
And took thy Daughter, Ceres, to Command
The utmost limits of the Infernal Land?
Yes, Proserpine was fair, a Goddess too,
What cannot Love, that mighty Monarch, do?
Think you that Jove, Father of Gods and Men,
Had e're enjoyed Agenor's lovely Gem,
If not by Policy made his escape,
And then confirmed his Passion with a Rape?
And thousands more were won after this fashion,
Not courted with an Idle whining passion.
Fortune assists the bold, who Courts by Letter
Is counted modest, yet thought never the better;
For Women love those that are brisk and free,
And hate the lasie Lovers Pedantry.
If they slight you, do you but then slight them,
The Women soon will learn to Court the Men:
Did not the Beauteous Echo Court in vain
The self admiring Boy, who with disdain
Her love repaid, did not Medea woe
The Emonean Prince with love and Magic too?
And Sylla too, by Impious love misled,
Her Father slew, to gain just Minos Bed;
And both her self and Purple Hair did bring
Pledges of love, unto the Cretan King.
And Dido, whilst her love she did pursue,
The Trojan Prince to her embraces drew.
It Is only Custom makes them claim as due
The Adoration that belongs to you;
Your servile Yoke of passion quickly break,
And put in practice what you hear me speak.
They all assent, and wisely did approve
The wholesome Counsel of the Queen of Love,
And so departed: when a pretty Lass,
Which in the dark might for my Lady pass,
Gave me a kiss, and to me smiling sed,
She thought the Grass as good as any Bed;
I hugged a wholesome Girl in my esteem;
So waked, and vexed, I found it but a Dream.
To the Honorable Jonathan Atkins, Governor of the Barbados.
WIth joy like ours the mighty Roman State
Their Capitolean Triumphs celebrate.
Sing Io Peans for their Victory,
And Trophies bring, great God of War, to thee.
Yet we to you Great Sir, will Trophies bring
Of Peace, a more delightful Offering.
Our VVoods shall ring, whilst we bring Myrtle Boughs,
Commixt with Bays, to crown your sacred Brows.
And thou Daphnean Laurel too shall join
Thy verdant Leaves, which shall his Temples twine.
Ceres, Pomona, Flora, all shall bring
The Glorys of the Summer, Autumn, Spring.
The great Survey or of the East, and West
Shall fire the Spices of the Phoenix Nest;
And Jove's great Bird shall in her Tallons bring
The living Phoenix as an Offering;
Iris to both the Poles her Bow shall tie,
Whose party-colored Robes adorn the Sky.
The spangled Orbs their glory shall dispense
Upon this Isle, with sacred Influence.
All things shall strive to add some glory to
This Fertile Isle, that is Governed by you,
Even senseless things: And shall I silent sit,
And slear at all, for to be thought a Wit,
Like many Foppish Gallants now adays?
No, I Will present you with this sprig of Bays.
Inspire my Muse, thou sacred God of Verse,
Whilst in Heroic Numbers I rehearse
The glory, safety, and the blessed content,
Depends, Great Sir, upon your Government.
The Rich, the Poor, the Strong, the Impotent,
Each in his Station reaps a blessed content.
The Rich his Land and Cattle does obtain,
The Poor Man reaps the fruit of all his pain,
The strong Man's strength is curbed from Tyranny;
The weak never fears his angry Enemy.
Here no Man falls by cruel hand of War,
Nor raging Tumults terrify from far;
But here in safety every man does lie,
Reaping the joys of such Tranquillity.
Vive le Roy. Great Charles, thou did foresee
This Countries good, and Longed for Liberty.
Great Jonathan our David well did know,
On whom his Love and Honor to bestow;
Else had this Isle never seen this happy time,
More Fertile by your presence, than the Clime.
O happy Island! O Thrice happy Land,
Whose Regiment is given to your Hand*
Rule as you please, those Powers that reign above
Inspire your Soul with a paternal Love;
Infusing in our Hearts Obedience still,
Governing all our Actions by your Will.
O mibi tam long maneat pars ultima vitae
Spiritus, and quantum sat erit sua dicere facta
Non me carminibus vincet nec Thracius Orpheus,
Nec Linus.

On the Nine Muses, out of Ausonius.
CLio relates things done, and gives the time;
Melpomene delights in Tragic Rhyme;
Thalia sports it in lascivious Verses,
Euterpe sweet and pleasant things reherses;
Terpsicore with Harps the mind inspires;
Erato dancing most of all desires;
Calliope brave Deeds to Books commits;
Urania to Astronomy submits;
Polhymnia describes with hand and gesture
In midst of these, Apollo most Divine
With his diffusive Spirit cheers the Nine.
To Clelia.
HEiress of love, and glory of the Time,
Angelick Beauty shining in your Prime;
Thus Gods in ancient times did terrify
Poor Mortals by approaching Deity,
As when you show the luster of your Eye;
Whose high Majestic grace, when looked upon,
Does cause an awful adoration.
Never did Egypt Apis worship more,
Offering their lives, then we do you adore;
The Sunburned African, of sable hue,
Worships the Moon, and thinks it may be you.
The Persian, the Sun, and thinks he spies
The glory only propper to your Eyes.
But we enlightened by that glorious light
Would make a Sunshine in the darkest Night,
Do really adore that high persection
Which they enjoy but only by reslexion.
Fair Clelia, then give me but leave to say,
I shall no more delight to see the day,
Than see you happy, which shall ever be
The greatest happiness can come to me.
On the undaunted Courage of a Shipwrackt Captain.
HArk how the roaring Winds, (great God of Thunder,)
Exalt the briny Floods, to tear a sunder
Our well rig'd Vessel riding on the Main,
Whose lofty threatened Pendant does disdain
Proud Neptunes angry Power, and awful wrath,
Dashing the boldest of his Waves to Froth.
Which when the King of Floods with anger saw,
His awful Trident scorning to withdraw,
He summoned all the Waves, and did implore
The Eolean aid, which made the Winds to roar.
Now like to Mountains rise the Waves on high,
Tossing the nimble Vessel to the Sky;
Then by a great descent she falls again
Into the gaping Bowels of the Main.
No voice is heard, in vain they spend their Breath,
Two Elements at once conspire their Death.
The Mariners are stupisi'd with fear,
The skilful Pilot knows not how to steer.
The Ocean boils, and, to augment the rage,
The Winds from every Point the Floods engage.
Heavens face is covered with a Veil of Night,
The Thunder bearing Clouds ejected Light
From all Parts flies, and in this wretched state,
Presents to all an unavoided Fate.
Which when the Captain saw, he gazed a while,
To see their manly Courage thus recoil;
And with more Power than Neptune, which does sway
His watery Trident, which the Waves obey,
His loud Imperial voice commands a peace,
Whose Echo stops the Waves, and makes them cease.
Or like fierce Mars, with an undaunted mind,
As if their God the watery Realm did bind,
He cuts the smiling Ocean, and does stand
As the Supreme that Governs Sea and Land.
Now by this time a frighted Wave appears
At Neplune's Court, relating all their fears;
Telling, some mighty God usurped his Seat,
And all the Waves lay prostrate at his Feet.
The Seagreen God all in a rage appears,
And the shrill Trytons Visage anger bears;
The Mermaids skip and dance about the Boat,
Which Seamen say does dreadful Storms denote,
And so it was. The Misty Shades of Night
All on a sudden robbed 'em of the Light.
The Heavens began to roar, the Waves arise,
Dashing their briny Floods against the Skies.
The Captain strives in vain the Ship to save,
While on each side appears a threatening Grave.
There Is no cessation, Waves the Waves outvies,
And threaten Heaven with their batteries.
What should they do, poor men? their Courage fails,
And all their hopes are shattered as their Sails.
They all stand stupifi'd, like senseless stocks,
Whilst the crazed Vessel's dashed against the Rocks.
The Captain then, with a Courageous motion,
'Leaps in the raging Bowels of the Ocean,
And with his threatening Sword he cuts the Waves,
The raging Floods with Valor he outbraves;
And swimming to the Shore, his Sword he shakes,
Whereat the roaring Sea retires and quakes.
But all his men, alas! like silly Sheep,
Sink to the bottom of the swelling Deep.
Yet he is never daunted, his firm Soul stands fast
Upon its Basis, steadfast to the last.
What Noble Hero ever could do more
Than be over Land and Sea a Conqueror?
To his Verses.
Go tell my fair, that I
Must let her know I love, or dye.
Nor can the knowledge be
Enough, O no, she too must pity me.
Alas! What did I say?
Is pity all that she must pay?
No, she must yet do more,
Love me as much as I adore,
And join in One these Three,
Know, Love, and Pity me.
On Parson Andrew's, Parazitical Sermon to Mr. Evans, Mayor of Shaston.
WHere is this Boanerges, that dares batter
The Churches Faith, and in a Pulpit slatter?
Who fears not both in Sermon and in Prayer*
For to delude Our Worshipful the Mayor,
And make the People think, if he were able,
That he in all things is Infallible?
Let him do what he will, it does appear,
He must be one of Gods Vicegerents here.
Believe him but in this, and next you then
Must both believe in Mayor and Aldermen,
And add it to your Creed; and then you may
Say Mass, and to the Fur-gown'd Idol Pray;
And thus he puts a slur upon the Nation,
And brings it off, This Ancient Corporation.
This ancient Corporation's not so blind,
But see the VVallet of his faults behind;
And hold it for a true and Christian Canon,
The Parson cannot serve his God and Mammon:
But Andrew's sham-Apostle thought in Meter
Something to say in praise of Simon Peter.
Nor will his Plea excuse him, though he say,
It Is Oratoria licentia.
On a Wife.
OUt, or I burst! What damned confounded spell
Made Orpheus run to fetch a Wife from Hell?
What was it moved that madness in his Breast?
He by a Legion surely was possessed
Of master-Devils. Had he loved the Pox,
And all the Plagues were in Pandora's Box,
Embraced all Vice, though loathsome and impure,
Heaven might in pity yet afford a Cure.
But when they come to that licentious life,
To fawn, and hug, and dote upon a Wife,
There Is no Salvation for such cursed Elves,
They may, like Judas, go and hang themselves.
Had Adam never seen Eve for to entice,
He doubtless yet had lived in Paradise.
That cursed Satanick Engine, not content
To damn her self to endless punishment,
Enticed our Father Adam for to eat
The fruit of Life, and Death inflicting meat.
And ever since each cursed Iezabel
Has led her Husband the right way to Hell.
O rare advice to Job! why do retain
Thy foolish Righteousness so long in vain!
Lo, the reward of all thy Piety!
Take thy Wife's Counsel, curse thy God and dye.
Counsel so good, who coud not choose but take,
Though not for Hells, yet for his poor Wifes sake?
Damned Monster, could thou find no other way
Than this, thy righteous Husband to betray?
Can e're a Man expect a moments rest,
That hugs so cursed a Viper in his Breast.
Woman brings VVo, it is true, her very Name
An adjunct is of Sorrow unto man;
Let her be fair or foul, airy or dull,
Peevish or pleasant, kind or unnatural;
She Is but the Devils bait for to trepan
Poor, fond, uxorious, and silly Man.
Naides, Draides, Hymen, Orpheus, Euridice.
Naides. O Hymen, come away,
Frame no excuses for a longer stay;
For hand in hand
The Lovers stand,
And think each hour a year
Until thy tedious Godhead does appear.

Dra. Great God of Nuptual Rites,
Orpheus and his Euridice invites
Thee to their Feast,
Which shall be blessed
With mutual Joy, if thou appear,
And cause a general Mirth throughout the year.

Him. Shame on your uglie have,
That thus disturbs and calls away so fast,
In Stygian damp
They have dipped my Lamp,
Yet may the Omen be
Far from my Orpheus and Euridice.

Chorus. Far be the Omen, we
Do hope from him, and his Euridice.
Ye Gods that hear
What we prepare,
Our Sacrifice and Song,
Where Beasts and Trees shall caper in a throng.

Orph. What over tedious stay,
My fair Euridice does thus betray?
The slying hours,
Whose mutual powers,
Lest they too slow appear,
Take Cupids Wings, and hasten from their Sphere.

Eurid. The time I think misspent
That robs my Orpheus of the least content.
A Lovers fear
Is always near;
Yet shall thy Beauteous praise
Appear more blessed, cause thou did Tantalize.

A Song by Orpheus.
Poor Tantalus, I pity thee,
Who Court'st the Wave, and Woo'st the Tree;
The water slides just as he sips,
And so avoids his amorous Lips;
The Golden Fruit his lust entice,
Which he would taste at any price:
But Fare resists his strong desires,
For whilst he gapes, the Fruit retires;
What fault, alas! could this deserve,
In midst of plenty thus to starve?
Thou art like a Miser* clothed in Rags,
Whilst he sits brooding over his Bags.
And dares not touch ought of his store,
But is in midst of plenty Poor.
Him. Hail to the lovely pair,
For whose sweet sake I hither made repair,
Firmly to lie
In Amity,
Beauty and Love, which be
Comprised in Orpheu's and Euridice.

Orph. VVelcomer than the day,
Hymen, what was the cause of this delay?
Could thou find out
A cause of doubt,
Or thought that there might be
In either of us Mutability?

Him. Brave Prince of Poets, no;
By this delay I strove to let you know
Some cruel Fate
Does on you wait,
Which all your Pleasure banes,
Fast bound by Fate in Adamantine Chains.

Orph. The Gods with ease afflict
Poor Mortals, who their power cannot contradict;
And we adore
That power the more,
And herein surely trust,
If we but once are good, that they are just.

Eurid. None but the Guilty fear,
And what they fear, it is Justice they should bear:
Let nothing cause
A farther pause,
But in this Temple join
Two Hands, Two Hearts, which Fate cannot untwine.

Him. Goddess of Hearts,
Before whose Throne
With equal parts
Two and yet One
Themselves present,
To the intent
That thou may ever be
Propitious to their Love and Amity.
Grant their Requests,
Let lasting Peace
In mutual Breasts
Ever increase;
And may they prove
True as the Dove,
And may they also be
Enriched with a most numerous Progeny.
For by this Light,
And Altars fume,
Which in thy sight
We here consume,
Thou never did bless
With happiness
Two Lovers that will prove
More great in Merit, or more true to Love.

Chorus. Let pleasing smiles
And mutual Joy
The time beguile,
And never cloy.
Let pleasant Theams,
In gentle Dreams,
Increase their generous fire,
And kindle Flames that never shall expire.

Hymen. The Goddess frowns, and with dejected Eyes
Seems slightly to regard our Sacrifice.
One of the Turtles which the Offering were,
Died on the Altar, e're I made my Prayer.
The Tapers shone but with a heavy light,
One sputtering Blue, resigned his Flame to Night.

Orpheus. The Gods deep wills are seldom known,
'Till put in Execution;
And 'twere a folly to lament
A certain doom none can prevent;
Then why should we capitulate
With what recorded is by Fate?

Euridice. The power of Fate cannot our love control,
And fear's too base for any generous Soul;
The Gods, who in a higher Orb do move,
May take our lives, but never wrong our Love.
Let Us then like Turtles sitting on a Tree,
Wait for the Hawk would catch us if we flee.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
A Wealthy Thuscan Priest, of no mean note. Page. 23. Alas poor Infant, Death
was too severe. Page. 30. Assist my Muse, thou gravest of the Nine. Page. 45.
As in the Ocean on a Summers day. Page. 50. A sure Foundation makes a Building
stand. Page. 67. Ah lovely fair, can you so cruel be. Page. 68. Admired Beauty,
whose victorious Eyes. Page. 76. An Anagram and Epigram on James D. of York.
Page. 83. An Anagram, Epigram, and Acrostick on Su. W. Page. 84. A Boat, a
Boat. Page. 89. An envious, angry, sluggish, drunken Lover. Page. 91. Ah
fainting Breath, there is naught can yield relief. Page. 95. Alas, fond Painter,
why do strive to grace. Page. 97. Affright me not, you urge your suit in
vain. Page. 98.
B.
Before some Famine, Pestilence, or War. Page. 32. Beauteous Hersilia, those
that rule above. Page. 73.
C.
Coy Clelia, veil those Charming Eyes. Page. 7. Come my dear Love into this
Grove. Page. 27. Cilex, a Theif, much noted for his crime. Page. 71. Come lets
to the Tavern away. Page. 106. Clio relates things done, and gives the time.
Page. 116.
D.
Divinest Creature, to whose heavenly brow. Page. 50. Do thou not see this
Picture set. Page. 59.
F.
Fair and yet cruel! sure it cannot be. Page. 17. Farewell to pleasure and to
fond delight. Page. 41. Fair Clelia, did thou know. Page. 66. Farewell my
scornful Female Saint. Page. 80. From Salamis when Tucer fled. Page. 87.
G.
Go, tell her that I love. Page. 8. Go mournful sigh, haste to my fair. Page.
52. Go dull Mechanic, whose infective pride. Page. 70. Go tell my fair that I.
Page. 102.
H.
Hail ancient Brother, what is in thy mind. Page. 13. Hail sacred Woods, and
all ye rural Gods. Page. 24. How, Gosse forsook her! it is as true as may be.
Page. 93. Heiress of Love, and glory of the time. Page. 106. Hark how the
raging Winds (Great God of Thunder.) ibid.
I.
If that this Book without command. Page. 6. If that extortion, fraud and
strage. Page. 12. I will not tell her that she is fair. Page. 16. I have drank
too much Lethe of late. Page. 18. I thank you, worthy Sir, your good advice.
Page. 21. Just as I lived, just so I died. Page. 26. In times of old, when
Kings did not disdain. Page. 53. I yield, dear Enemy, nor now. Page. 107. I
love a Lass that will not wed. Page. 108.
L.
Lelaps my Ladys Dog, must sit at meat. Page. 35. Loves Charms all humane force
does sway. Page. 105.
M.
My Genius hurried by that haste. Page. 10. Meek, kind, and good, could I
relate. Page. 15. Mirror of Beauty, from whose conquering Eyes. Page. 20. My
Friend John Clement 'tother day. Page. 60.
N.
No Salvage Tyranny, no desperate War. Page. 91.
O.
O Garden, unto me more blessed. Page. 1. Of mighty Jove I lately asked a Boon.
Page. 86. Out or I burst, what damned confounded spell. Page. 121. O Hymen come
away. Page. 123.
R.
Render your heart, or give mine again. Page. 26. Restore my wounded heart, dear
Love. Page. 61.
S.
Shall still my suite prove vain? then bid me dye. 71. Sweet Vesper being the
Night. 63. So strange a distemper I never yet did know. 72.
T.
The crafty Thief may rob thee of thy store. 9. Think not, fair Madam, that
your high disdain. 19. The Sons of Pompey yielded up their breath. 22. They say
Ulisses by his art. 24. Tell me, thou pale-faced Empress of the Night. 43.
'Twas at the time when Phoebus with his rays. 47. The Snow's dissolved the
grassy Fields grown green. 64. To thee, O Wood, I make my moan. 76. The Fetters
of love are far stronger than hate. 79. This piece of Wood which now does lie.
82. They say that Souls departed first must run. 88. 'Twas Evening when the
Suns departure made. 101.
U.
Venus, I often have heard thy Name. 61. Venus of Souls, whose hand controls. 69.
Upon this Marble stone forbear to tread. 100.
W.
Where Is absent Clelia. 4. What makes the Frontiers of the sable Night. 42.
What ails the Poet, what a new desire. 37. When bald-pate Winter with his hoary
head. 39. What makes the trembling Hare the Lion fly. 36. Why do thou thus
delay. 85. Why should I urge my love, since that I know. 95. When Titan hasted
from his heavenly Sphere. 109. With joy like ours the mighty Roman State* 113.
Where is this Boanerges, that dares batter. 102.
Y.
Te powers above, and ye Celestial ones. 31*
FINIS.

