

A true Description OF THE MIGHTY KINGDOMS OF JAPAN AND SIAM.

Written Originally in Dutch by FRANCIS CARON And JOOST SCHORTEN: And now
rendered into English by Capt. ROGER MANLEY.

LONDON: Printed by Samuel Broun and John de l'Ecluse, at the Sign of the
Queens Arms, near the little North-Door of St. Paul's Church, 1663.

I Find nothing in this Translation why it may not properly enough be Printed,

Joseph Williamson.
By the appointment of the Right Honorable Mr Secretary Witehall November 10.
1662. BENNET.

To my dear BROTHER Major Francis Manley.
Dear Brother,
THe Dedication (as well as Writing) of Books being strongly warranted by
Custom (the great Moderatour of our Affairs and Actions) it appears not
injurious to me, that this Translation pass into the World under your conduct;
whose pretentions as they stand fair to the Patronage of more sublime Labors,
so I am assured they will not be vvanting in their Indulgence to the
Infirmities of this Trifle, upon which the Bookseller having prevailed with
me to cast away some spare hours, as a Complement to my Country (at least to
his Interests) I was more easily tempted to undertake it, as what might be
advertisement to you; so that how cheap soever it appear in it self, my dear
Brother has goodness enough to consider it, as exposing me to the censure of
thousands upon the single account of diverting him alone; and that having been
a principal design of my life, I make this address, where my affection, not my
ambition, leads me.

For the Matter, it is the Author must stand accountable, not I; (and I can
assure you, he is of a passable reputation in his own Country) but for the
bad English, I hope a Fourteen years Exile may excuse the Errataes in our very
Mother Tongue. I will not further bespeak your protection, left it be judged
the effect of my importunity, and not your kindeness; I therefore commit you to
Him, who has preserved you and me, through no ordinary dangers, to see the
Land of our Canaan, though not to enjoy the fruits of it; but the happiness of
our Sovereign does virtually comprehend in it that of all His Creatures; in
which number as it is your honor and mine, upon the score of an unalterable
loyalty, attended with many sufferings, and our best services to stand ranked;
so is it my extreme contentment and satisfaction, that I may style my self,

Dear BROTHER, Your most faithful and most affectionate Brother, and humble
Servant, Roger Manley.

The Contents.
1. HOw great the Country of Japan is, and whether it be an Island or no Page
3. 2. How many Provinces it contains p. 5. 3. What quality and authority the
supreme Magistrate has p. 15. 4. His dwelling Place, Magnificence and Train p.
16. 5. The number of his Soldiers and their Arms p. 35. 6. The Authority of
his Councillors and Vassals p. 37. 7. The quality of his Princes and Lords,
and their might p. 38. 8. Their manner of Justice p. 52. 9. What Crimes they
punish most severely p. 53. 10. What Divine Service they use p. 62. 11. What
Churches they have p. 62. 12. What Priests they entertain p. 63. 13. What
Sects are prevalent among them p. 63. 14. The Persecution of the Romish
Christians p. 66. 15. How this Nation lives in their Houses and Families p. 71.
16, 17. How they receive each other, and of their Hospitality p. 73. 18. Of
their Conjugal state p. 74. 19. Of the bringing up of their Children p. 75. 20.
What Succession ab intestato p. 77. 21. Whether they be faithful or false in
their dealings p. 78. 22. What Traffik, and with what Nations p. 80. 23. Of
their domestic Trading and Navigation p. 81. 24. The Profits amounting thence
p. 84. 25. Their Correspondence with Strangers p. 84. 26. The Commodities which
Japan yields p. 85. 27. Their Mint, Measures, and Weights p. 85. 28. What
Beasts and Fowl they have p. 87. 29. What Medicinal Waters p. 87. 30. How the
Kings, Princes, and Peers of the Kingdom receive Audience from his Imperial
Majesty, and what Train they must have p. 89. 31. Their Language, manner of
VVritings, Reckonings, and how far they transmit their History to Posterity p.
92.
Directions for placing the four Figures belonging to the BOOK.
1. THe Map of the Country of Iapan, between page 2 and 3. 2. The manner of
Cutting up their Bellies, between page 50 and 51. 3. The Persecution of the
Christians, between page 66 and 67. 4. The Emperors Admittance of the Kings,
Princes, and Peers of the Kingdom to his presence, between page 88 and 89.
Perfeckte Kaert vande gelegentheydt des Landts van IAPAN.

map of Japan

A True Description of the Mighty Kingdoms of IAPAN and SIAM.
MY fourteen years residence in the low Countries, (I may rather say my
banishement thither,) being upon the rendition of one of the Kings Garrisons,
in the year, 1646 obliged by my Articles to depart the Kingdom within six
months (As it has, in some measure, furnished me with the knowledge of the
Dutch tongue, so has it given me room to observe the indefatigable industry
of that people, who all of them, in their several stations, and according to
their several powers and capacities, do unanimously conspire and cooperate
to their support and growth in the World. And that I, by their example, or
rather by the impulse of my own Genius, may cast my mite, into the service of
my Country, I judged it not wholly unprofitable to put this short relation of
the Great Kingdoms of Japan and Siam into the English tongue, which for the
vastness of those Territories (scarce known to us by name) The Reputation of
the Author (whose Collections are of great credit) But principally, as a spur
to the Improvement of further discoveries and Traffic by my own Country
men, will not, I hope, be unacceptable to the Reader, who I wish may so far
indulge the bad English of one almost degenerated into a forreigner, (at least
in his language) that it may receive a fair acceptance, which is all I
propose to my self in this matter. I am not ignorant that amongst the multitude
of books, under which the Press groans, it is not enough, to write well. But
I being restrained to a Translation, must not pretend to rise higher then my
fountain head. And my Author having made rather a collectio^ then a History,
wherein he seems to affect truth and brevity, more then the ornament of words
I thought it becoming me, if I would walk in his ground, to tread in his
steps, wherein if you will please to divert your self I shall in his Person
proceed to tell you.

How great the Country of Iapan is and whether it be an Island or no.
THe Country of Japan is supposed to be an Island, though there be no
certainty of it, this vast territory not being yet wholly discovered to the
inhabitants themselves. I have often enquired and been informed that Travelers
have gone from the Province of Quanto, the principal of his Majesty's dominions
wherein the Imperial City and Palace of Iedo are situated, 27 days
North-East wards, before they could reach the utmost point of the land of
Sungaer, bordering upon the Sea; being come thither they passed over an Istmus
of thirty three English miles broad, leading into the Country of Iezzo
abounding in skins and furrs of price. This territory is very great,
mountainous but little inhabited. The Iappaners attempted its discovery several
times but in vain, for though they entered to and fro, far into the Country,
yet they could never find its end, nor any certainty concerning it, their
provisions ordinarily failing them, which enforced their fruitless returns.
The discoverers reports of these, were so imperfect that his Majesty
dispaired of any further Satisfaction, the country being presented as desolate
and unpassable, though in some place inhabited with a people all over hairy
(wearing their Beards long, like the Chinesses) brutish, though otherwise well
shaped. To consider therefore the uncertianty whether this Country be an
Island or no; we may observe that the passage betvveene Sungaer and Iezzo is
no running water, but an Inlet or long Istmus of the Sea it self, 120 English
Miles long, extending it self betwixt Iezzo and Iapan, where it bounds upon
vast mountains and deserts, about the Province of Ochio; so that, that way
being wholy unpassable by land, travelers are forced to ferry over the
aforesaid Isthmus from Sungaer to Iezzo, in Barks and such shipping as they
have: The two great Islands of Chirkock and Saykock are governed by Kings and
Lords that share with them in the Magistracy. Chirkock has one King and
three Lords. Saykock being the bigger of the two, has more Governors, but
both are accounted Provinces of this great Empire, though least in extent of
those whereof it is composed.

How many Provinces it contaynes.
THat great Territory which we call Iapan, and the inhabitants Nippon, borders
upon those before mentioned Islands and strecheth to the unknovvne Country of
Iezzo, and is divided into five Provinces, to wit, Iam Aystero, Ietsengo,
Ietsesen, Quanto and Ochio, the which, with the Islands of Saykock and
Chirkock, make seven in all, whose Dominions, Cities and Castles are
subdivided under several Kings and Lords as the follovving specification of
the Revenue of the whole land abundantly shows.

An Extract of the Sealed accounts and specification of the Revenue (Excepting
the Emperors) of the Kings Princes Dukes and Lords of Japan together with the
names of their Countries and Castles according to the Japans account in
Cockyens each Cockyen being ten Carolus Guilders which is some Twenty
Shillings Sterling.
CAngano Tsiunangon, King of Canga, Ge^tichu, and Natta, has his Residence in
the Castle of Canga, his Revenues amounts to 1190000. ^^rngano Daynangon, King
of Surngo, Toto and Mitaunca dwells in the Castle Fayt^i^s has in Revenue
700000 Ouvvarino Daynangou, King of Ovvary and Mimo dwells in the Castle of
Mangay and has. 700000 Sendaino Thiunangon, King of Massamne and Ochio, lives
in the invinsible Castle of Senday and has 640000 Satsumanon Thiunangon, King
of Satsumae Ossimus Fiungo and Quchio lives in Ka^gasima and has 600000
Rinocaouny Daynangon, King of Kimo and Ishe, lives in the Castle of Wake Iamma
and has 550000 Catto Fingonocamy, King of Tingo lives in the Castle of
Koumam^tte, and has 554000 Matsendeyro Iemenofi^ King of Tsunkis^n and
Faccatia dwells in Foucosa and has 510000 Matsendayro Ionocany King of the
Great Province of Ietchesen lives at Ocede and has 511100 Calto S. Kibo King
of Osio dwells in the Castle of A^s and has in Revenue 430000 Assaino Taysima
King of Bingo dwells in the Castle of Oky and has 420000 Matsendeyro Nangato
King of Soua dwells in the Castle of Fangy and has 370000 Mittono Thionangon
King of Fitayt^ dwells in the Castle of Mit. and has 360000 Nahissima Simano
King of Thisien dwells in the Castle of Logtois and has 360000 Matsendeyro
Sentairo King of Ianabasoky dwells in the Castle of Tackaham has 360000 T^do
Isumy King of Ianga Iche dwells in the Castle of Son: has 320000 Matsendeyro
Lonuey King of Bissen dwells at Ossaiamma has 310000 Inno Cammon, the bravest
of the Princes King of Totomy dwells in Savaiamma and has 300000. Fosso Covva
Ietchin King of Boytes lives at Cokera and has 300000. Oyesungi Daynsio King
of Iotsengo dwells in the Castle of Gunisauvva and has 300000. Matsendeyro
Denrio King of the Province of Ietsengo lives at Formando and has 300000.
Matsendeyro Auvva Duke of Auvva dwells in the Castle Incts and has 250000.
Matsendeyro Ietchigonacam^^ Duke of the land of Conge dwells at Takato and has
250000. Matsendeyro Tsiusio Duke of Ioo dwells at Mats Iamma and has 250000.
Ariama Grimba Duke of Tsirkingo dwells at Courme has 240000. Morimo Imasack
Prince of Imasaka dwells at Tsiamma and has 200000. Tory Inganocanij Prince of
Sevvano dwells at Iummengatta has 200000. Matsendeyro Tosa Prince of
Tosnacorij dwells at Tocosiamma has 200000. Satake Okion Prince of Wano dwells
at Akita, and has 200000. Matsendevro Simo Sautamy Prince of Simosa dwells at
Tatebays and has 200000. Forriwo Iamaissiro Prince of Ins^^o dwells at
Masdayt^ and has 200000. Ikouma Ikinocanij Prince of Sanike dwells at Couham
and has 180000. Forivvo Iamassiro Prince of Insimo dwells at Masdayts and has
180000. Fonda Kayokamij Knight and Lord of Faryma dwells in Tayeno and has
150000. Sackey Counay Knight and Lord of the great Province of Wano dwells at
Fakfio and has 150000. Tara sanvva Simado Knight and Lord of Fisen dwells in
Lata^s and has 120000. Kiongock vvakasa Knight and Lord of Wakasa dwells in
Osamma and has 120000. Fory Tango Knight and Lord of ^etchesen dwells at
Kavvantisma and has 120000. Minsio Fiongo Knight and Lord in Bingo dwells at
F^u^ke Iamma has 120000. Sackopharra Eskibon Knight and Lord of Kooske dwells
in the Castle of Tattays has 120000. Matsendeyr^ Tavvayts Governor of the
Emperors Castle in Quana has 110000. Oeckendyero Imysacka Knight and Lord of
Simotske dwells in O^tsnomio and has 110000. Sannada Iut Knight and Lord of
Sinano dwells at Koske and has 110000. Taysibanna Finda Knight and Lord of
Sickingo dwells in Imangonvva and has 110000. Ongasaura Oucken Knight and Lord
of Farima dwells at Kays and has 100000. Indatiji Voutumij Knight and Lord of
Gyo, dwells in Itasima and has 100000. Nambon Sinano Knight and Lord in the
great Province of Ochio dwells at Mortiamma and has 100000. Niwa Groysemon
Knight and Lord in the great Province of Ochio dwells at Sirakovva and has
100000. Abeno Bitchion Governor of the Emperors Castle Ivvatsuky in the
Country of Moysays has 80000. Kiongock Oenieme Knight and Lord of Tanga
dwells in Tanabe and has 70000. Makino Surnga Lord in Ietchingo dwells at
Wangerecka and has 70000. Nackangonvva Nysien Lord in Bong^ lives in the City
of Nangoun and has 70000. Matsendayr^ Comba Lord in Sinano dwells in Matsmo^^
has 70000. Nay^^o Samma Lord in Fitayts dwells in the City of Ivvaysko and
has 70000. Ieckenda Bit^hiou Governor of the Emperors Castle Matsivmma in
Bitchiou has 60000. Matswia Fisennocamij Lord in Fisen dwells at Firando where
the Ships belonging to the Company have their Haven and Traffic his income is
60000. Sengoock Fiwo Lord in Sinano lives at Ojonda and has 60000. Catta
Sewado Lord in Gyo dwells at Oets and has 60000. Tosruwa Okion Lord in Dewano
lives in the Lordshipp of Shimchiro and has 60000. Matsendeyro Iwamij Lord in
the Country of Farima dvvells at Bisongori and has 60000. Matskonra Bungo
Lord in Fisen dwells at Simabarra and has 60000. Iescoun a Tonnomon Lord in
Bongo dwells at Fita and has 60000. Tsungaer Ietchin Lord in Ochio dvvells at
Tsungaer a Sea town and has 60000. Ongasauwara Simano Lord in Farimer dwells
at Sekays and has 60000. Itho Chiury Lord in Fonga dvvells at Orasi and has
50000. Fourta Fi^a Lord in Iwamy dvvells at Daysiro and has 50000. Wakesacka
Arbays Lord in Sinano and dvvells at Ino 50000. Touky Nangato Lord in Iohe
dwells at Toba has 50000. Arima Soymonoskie Lord in Niko dvvells at Acconda
and has 50000. Outa Fiwo Lord in Iamatta dvvells at Ouda and has 50000.
Matsendeyro D^w^do Lord in the great Province of Ietsesen dvvells at Oune and
has 50000. Minsnokuyte Foky Lord in Ietsengo lives at Ribatta and has 50000.
Innaba Mimbro Lord in Bonngo lives at Ousthero and has 50000. Croda Caynokamij
Lord in Chimano lives at Camro and has 50000. Matsendeyro Sonodonno Lord in
Isumij lives at Kisnowadda and has 50000. Tonda Sammon Lord in Sonno^^mmy
dvvells at Amangasack and has 50000. Stotsianangy Kemmot^ Lord in I^hie lives
at Congon and has 50000. Fondo Ichenocamy Lord in Micanwa lives at Ocha Sacka
and has 50000. Matsendeyro Iamayssiro Lord in Tamba dwells at Cassaiamma and
has 50000. Mory Caynocamij Lord in Ingal Iche dwells at Sowro Sada and has
50000. Tonda Notanocamij Lord in Farima dwells at Fimens has 50000. Akito
Sionoske Lord in Fitayts dvvells at Chi^hindo and has 50000. Assano Oenime
Lord in Chions lives at Casseme and has 50000. Neyto Cinocamij Lord in Chions
lives at Akandate and has 50000. Cattes Kibodo Lord in Ochio lives at Ay^s and
has 50000. Samma Daysiennocamij Lord in Ochio dwells at Sama and has 50000.
Fonda Iamatta Lord in Taysima lives at Isius and has 50000. Ouckob Cangato
Lord in Mino lives at Canno and has 50000. Nayto Boysen Lord in Dewano lives
in Iodata and has 50000. Inawa Aways Lord in Tamba lives at Fucokuytscamma and
has 40000. Camij Asirick Lord in Iwamij lives at Mongamij and has 40000.
Cattaygiri Ismou Lord in Iammano dwells at Tatsta and has 40000. Chonda
Findanocami Lord in the Province of Ietsesen lives in Maroka and has 40000.
Itacaura Sauadonne Governor of the great City of trade Miako has 40000.
Matsendeyro Bougo Lord of the Country of Iwamy dwells at Nakasima has 40000.
Fonda Nayky Lord in Farima lives at Fimris has 40000. Matsendeyro Tango Lord
in Ochio lives at Suckey and has 40000. Caenna Maury Isonmo Lord in Finda
lives at Oumory and has 40000. Ciongock Chiury Lord in Tango lives in Tannabe
and has 36000. Outta Giuwe Lord in Mino lives at Itsnoday and has 30000.
Matsendeyro Getsio Governor of the Castle Ionda in Iamaysiro has 30000.
Matsendeyro Ouckon Lord in Farima lives at Ako and has 30000. Minsonoya
Ichenokamy Lord in Kooskie lives in Chitiotay^^ and has 30000. Immasacka
Kaynokamij Lord in Bitchou lives at Na^se and has 30000. Matsendeyro Iammatto
Lord in Ietsesen lives at Catsiamma and has 30000. Inno Fiveo Lord in Costie
lives at Amma and has 30000. Matsendeyro Tonnomon Lord in Mikaura lives at
Iuffinda and has 30000. Akisuckie Nangako Lord in Niko lives at Sumyno and
has 30000. Sauo Inaba Lord in Sinano lives at Soua and has 30000. Foysimo
Fongo Lord in Sinano lives at Tackaboyts and has 30000. Sunganoma Owribe Lord
in Totomij lives in Sese and has 30000. Simaes Oemanoske Lord in Nicho lives
in Sando Barra and has 30000. Kinostag Iemmon Lord in Bongo lives at Fins and
has 30000. Sono Tsinsima Lord in Tsinsima has 30000. Koyndo Fimano Lord in
Tongo lives at Okada has 30000. Fondo Fimoso Governor of Nissiwo lives at
Mikauwa has 30000. Gorick Serfnokamij Lord in Mikauwa lives at Fammats and
has 30000. Chinsio Swraga Lord in Fitayts dwells in Tsuytowra and has 30000.
Secuma Fisen Lord in Sinano lives at Iraiamma and has 30000. Todo Toinsima
Lord in Mino lives at Cannaiamma and has 30000. Fonda Isumij Lord in Fitayts
lives at Minangaura and has 30000. Tongauwa Tosa Lord in Bitchion lives at
Nikays and has 30000. Matsendeyro Tosa Lord in the Province of Iessesen lives
at Konomatra and has 30000. Sugyfarra Foky Lord in Fitayts lives at Gungowry
and has 20000. Kynostay Kounay Lord in Bithion lives at Korousy and has
20000. Matsendeyro Koysero Lord in Farima lives at Farima and has 20000.
Inasacka Tsonokamij Governor of the Emperors Castle Osacca has 20000.
Matsendeyro Kenmots Lord in Tamba lives at Cammeiomme and has 20000. Mastey
Sake Lord in Ochio lives at Sanboumats and has 20000. Oumowra Mimbou Lord in
Fisen lives at Daymats and has 20000. Matsendeyro Isumij Lord in Mino lives at
Iwamoura and has 20000. Matsendeyro Chinocamy Lord in Tsonnotamy lives at
Faynotory 20000. Minsuo Fayto Lord in Micauwa lives at Corea and has 20000.
Nito Tutewaky Lord in Chiono lives at Iway Fouwo and has 20000. Ongusawary
Wakasa Lord in Simosa lives at Sekyda and has 20000. Fithicatta Cammon Lord in
Chiono lives at Mawasa and has 20000. Iwaky Sirrosy Lord in Chiono lives at
Iedowra and has 20000. Rekongo Fiongo Lord in Dewano lives at Iwry and has
20000. Takennacia Oenieme Lord in Boungo lives at Fouway and has 20000. Moury
Ickenocaney Lord in Boungo lives at Ounays and has 20000. Wakebe Sackion Lord
in Totomij lives at Oumiso and has 20000. Is^ifoi^ Insnocamy Lord in Totamy
lives at Cosioys and has in Revenue 20000. All these Sumes amount to 17794000.
Here follow some lesser Lords whose Lordshipps and places for brevity are
omitted as less considerable their names only and Revenues being specified as
follovveth.
Sangoro Saffioye 20000. Fory Minnasacka 20000. Quire Iamma Sa^mon 15000. Fossa
Cawa Geruba 15000. Fackyna Deysen 15000. Matsendeyro Deysen 15000. Gottoways
Lord of the Island Goto: 15000. Catayngori Iwami 15000. Cussima Ierfingo 15000.
Coubary Tomoty 15000. Tackamy mondo 15000. Miake Ietsingo 15000. Cackebe
Sayngow 10000. Mynangaua Chynomoceamij 10000. Iaydsio Dewanocanij 10000.
Coungay Inabae 10000. Sackan Oukon 15000. Condae Iwanij 15000. Nasno Ients
15000. Oudaurae Bisen 10000. Toiamma Gidwo 10000. Fira Ougae Giu^mon 10000.
Oseki Iemmon 10000. Fayssien Gowas 10000. Outano Tango 10000. Fieno Owrabi
10000. Auby Ceynocams 10000. Otana Monsoys 10000. Majudda Iametta 10000.
Taitsibanna Saoken 10000. Octana Caweyts 10000. Nimas Kybon 10000. Fory Arbays
10000. Fosio Mimasacka 10000. Sango Wake Sakea 10000. Tonda Inaba 10000.
Samnanda Nyki 10000. Ikenday Ietseses 10000. Miangi Simsen 10000. Iton Tangow
10000. Tonda Nayki 10000. All hitherto comes to 18395000
Here fallows the Emperors Counselors who receive their Sallary out of his
Majesty's Revenues, whose Lordshipps we likewise omit for brevityes sake, and
shall only mention their names and Salleryes.
Doyno Doydonno President 150000. Sackey Outadono Chancellor 120000. Nangay
Sywodonno 100000. Sackay Samikodonno 90000 Ando Oukiondonno 60000 In^s^
Cawaytsdo 50000 Inabe Tangedonne 40000 Sackay Auwado 30000 Sakay Iamessicodo^no
30000 Nayda Ingado 20000 Tsitia Winbondonno 20000 Misson Oukiedonno 20000
Metsendeyro Iemoudonno 20000. Iammanguyts Tassimandanno 20000. Matsendey^
Iurdonno 20000. Abe acoungo Donno 15000. Auwe Iamon Oukerodonno 15000. Ciongock
Siensendo^ne 15000. Itacaura Nistenda 15000. Nacsie Iucdonno 15000. Akimouta
Taysionadonno 15000. Forita Cangadonna 15000. Miura Symadonne 10000. Maynda
Gonoske done 10000. Missona Iamacta 10000. Fory Itsuocamij 10000. Mury
Oemonoskedonno 10000. Fondo Saniadonno 10000. The Total 19345000.
Moreover, his Majesty spends in his own and his Sons Table and cloths
together with his Wives and their Table and Cloths, four Millions of Guilders
yearly which in Sterling Moneys is 400000.

His Majesty's life guard being all persons of quallitie receive in pay and
pensions yearly 500000.

All these vast Expenses amount to 283 Millions 450 thousand Guilders or
28345000 sterling money

What quality and authority the supreme Magistrate has.
THe supreme Magistrate in Japan is styled Emperor in respect of the Kings and
Princes that are under his Obedience, He is Sovereign Lord and Owner of the
whole land and has power (as it happened several times during my residence
there) to banish and punish with death, at pleasure, his offending Kings and
Lords, and to give away their Commands and Treasures to those he fancies more
deserving then they.

His dwelling place, magnificence and Train
The Imperial City of Iedo, where his Majesty resides, is very great, his
Palace co^taynes in circuit six English miles, being enco^passed with three
Moats and three Counterscharpes: These Ditches are very deep, being bordered on
both sides with high and strong Stone vvalls strangely angular: The first
circumference, entering into the second, the second into the third, and this
again into the second and first, so odly that it is impossible, by reason of
the multiplicity of the points and works, to remember the fashion of the
whole, and it is not permitted to take the plain thereof. Such as enter must
go through a passage of three or four hundred paces, fortified with Eight or
Nine huge gates not right over each other, but answering the points and half
circles in the mentioned wales, betwixt every two ports there is a large
plain guarded with a Company of Soldiers, and those being past several
heights with broad stone Stairs and Walls, which being likewise surmounted,
several great Plains bordered with large Galleries against the Sun and Rain, do
present themselves to the common view. The Streets in the Castle are
extraordinary large, built on each side with goodly Palaces, belonging to the
Lords of the Kingdom: The Castle Gates are very strong, and covered on both
sides with iron Bars of an inch thick crossing each other, and fastened with
Bolts of the same: every Gate has his House large enough to contain two or
three hundred Soldiers, and defensible upon occasion: within, in the midst of
the first circumference, stands his Majesty's Palace; it is great, and
consists of several dwellings beautified with Woods, to the envy of Nature,
full of Ponds, Rivers, Gardens, Plains, Courts, places to Pickeer and Sport in,
and moreover, contains all the dwellings of his Women. The second Circumference
is inhabited by the next Princes of the blood, and those of the Council: And
the third is possessed with the proud Palaces and dwellings of the several
Kings and principal Dukes, and Lords of Japan. The Cheifs of Lesser note have
their Houses without the third Round, each adorned according to the Dignity and
Riches of the Owners, all almost gilt, so that this goodly Edifice appears at a
distance not unlike a Mountain of Gold; for all the Lords (none excepted) rack
themselves to please his Majesty by beautifying his Castle and their own
Habitations; which their lawful Wives and Children do likewise enjoy after
their decease, continuing always under the Emperors eye as Hostages of their
fidelity. This City of Iedo is nine English Miles long, and six broad, and is
as closely built as any City in Europe.

The Court, how great soever, is daily crowded with multitudes of Nobles, who
with their numerous Trains with Horses and Palanquins make the Streets too
narrow for their passage. When the Emperor goes abroad, sometimes on
Horseback, and sometimes carried in a Pallanquin, open on every side, he is
ordinarily accompanied with these Lords, who are called his Majesty's
Companions; being all of them of high State and Revenues, though without Lands
or other Office save their attendance: They are Persons extraordinarily
qualified; some in Music and Singing, others in Physic, Writing, Painting,
Elocution, and the like. These are followed by the Lifeguard, all Persons of
quality and choice, being the natural Sons of Kings and Princes, begot on their
Concubines and incapable of succession; and the Brothers, Cosins and Kindred of
great Lords, which, by reason of their many Women, are very numerous: I will
give you one example. The Emperors Uncle, King of Mito, now fifty four years
old, has as many Sons as he has years, and many more Daughters, whose number
is unknown. After these follows part of the second Lifeguard, which consisting
of some thousands, is so divided, that half goes a Cannon shot before his
Majesty, and the other half follows at the same distance.

However the number of these Soldiers be great, yet there is not one of them
which has not passed Examination, and found to be thus qualified: They must be
active of body, ready in the use of all sorts of Arms, and somewhat knowing in
their Studies; especially well exercised and trained, which they are to a
wonder: for when his Majesty moves, they go along, Horse and Foot, clothed all
in black Silk, and ranked before, behind, and on each side of him: They march
in such comely order, that never a one is observed to go out of his place; and
with such silence, that they neither speak nor make any the least noise:
Neither indeed do the Citizens move their lips when the Emperor passes,
nothing being then heard but the ruffling of Men and Horses: The ways and
streets, are at such times, made very clean, strewed with sand and sprinkled
with water: No doors are shut, and yet no body dares look out either at them or
at the windows, or so much as stand in their shops to see the Emperor pass; all
must keep within doors, unless such who will kneel upon mats before them. When
his Majesty goes on progress to Miako, sometimes the imperial City, which
happens once every five or seven Years, to give the Deyro (which is the true
Heir of the Kingdom and lives there) a visit, the preparations are making an
whole year before the orders are given on what day and with what train every
great Man shall go, to the end that the ways may not be pestered with their
numbers. Half of the great Lords, according to their turns set out some days
before, then follows his Majesty with his Councellers, who are followed some
days after by the remaining Kings and Lords. The concourse of people at such a
time is incredible, the whole City, though containing above One hundred
thousand Houses, not being big enough to lodge them all; so that tents and huts
are raised round about the same for the Soldiers and common People.

The distance betwixt Jedo and Miako is reckoned to be one hundred twenty five
Dutch miles; At every two or three miles there is a City or open Town; and the
whole is divided into twenty and eight Gists or Lodgings, whereof twenty are
strong Castles: there is in every quarter, from the first to the last, a train
of Gentlemen, Soldiers, Horse, Provisions, and all necessaries befitting so
great a Prince, ordered there for his reception and entertainment. Those that
set out with him from Jedo stay in the first lodging; those that were there
remove with him to the second; those of the second to the third, and so to the
last; so that each train and their dependants follow his Majesty but half a
day, until all of them, according to their instructions, marching in order, do
at length arrive at Miako, leaving the aforesaid Castles and Lodgings to their
usual Governors and Guards. In the return from Miako to Jedo the same method is
observed, all things being prepared as formerly, without trouble or confusion.

This year 1636 there is an extraordinary great Edifice and Building at Niko,
four days journey from Jedo, which is to be the Burial place of the Emperors
Father, in whose Temple the great Copper Crown which the East-India-Company
gave his Majesty last year, is hung up. There is likewise in this territory of
Niako a very great Castle, with double moats and stone walls, strong and
sumptuous: there are several Palaces in it; as also a great number of
Artificers, as Painters, Masons, Statue-Cutters, Gold, Silver, and Iron-Smiths,
Cloathiers, and all sorts of Handy-Crafts-Men, who have their tasks set them,
but are well paid. This Castle, which seemed to require three years for its
building, was finished in five months, though it lies far in the Country, and
out of all ways, being only made to receive his Majesty in his ceremonious
visits of his Fathers Sepulcher.

His Majesty's Treasure consists in Silver and Gold, packd in Chests, each
weighing one thousand Teyls, that is about fourscore ordinary pounds weight:
these are placed in the several Towers of his Castle together, with other
legacies, with their writings, which are kept for their Antiquity. This vast
Treasure increases daily, for the Revenue of two months, is sufficient to
defray the Emperors expenses, how great soever, for one whole year.

This Emperors Father being the Son of Ongoschio, who possessed himself of the
Government after the late troubles, died about the fiftieth year of his age, in
the year of our Savior 1631: being sensible of his end, he called his Son to
him, and amongst many other good counsels, concluded to this purpose; My
Kingdom and all my Treasures are yours; but what I recommend to you I
likewise deliver you, The old Laws and Chronicles of the Country, our
written Sentences and Wisdom are enclosed in this Cabinet, the principal
Jewels of my Crown are likewise in it; receive them all as they deserve, for
they are mine, and were highly valued by your Forefathers. The Jewels which
were accounted inestimable, are these following; whereof he gave to his eldest
Son, Emperor of Japan, A crooked Sable, called Jeiuky Massamme. Another Sable
called Samoys. Another less called Bungo Doyssero. A Pot called Naraissiba. A
great t'Siapol called Stengo. A Manuscript called Anckocky kindo. To his
Brother King of Ouvvay and Atstanomia, A Picture called Darme, to be vievved
backvvards. A Sable called Massamme. To his second Brother King of Kinokouny, A
Sable called Jees Messamme. A Picture of Frogs. To his third Brother King of
Mito. A Sable called Sandamme. A Manuscript called Seuche.


These six pieces bestowed on the three Brothers are but of little worth, in
comparison of the six other given the Emperor, and yet they are valued at a
thousand gold Oebans, that is forty seven Teylens a piece. The Silver and Gold
which his Majesty gave to the Princes of his blood, to several of his favorite
Kings, their Wives, his companion Lords, his Soldiers and Gentlemen amounted
upon account to above Thirty Millions sterling.

The present Emperor being after his Fathers decease in full and peaceable
possession of the Government, had as then no lawful Wife, being much given to
Sodomy, which moved the Deyro to send him two beautiful Ladies, (of his own
kindred, and every way accomplished) with a desire that he would be pleased to
choose one of them, that best pleased him, for his Midia or Empress. He did
indeed consent to the Deyros request, but followed his old way of living; so
that the young Lady, being destitute of the conversation she might reasonably
expect, was extremely afflicted, although she durst not let it appear for fear
of her Husband's displeasure. At length her Foster-Mother (a Lady of great
credit, both in respect of her age, and in that she had bred up so great a
Princess) finding the Emperor one day in a good humor, adventured, though very
submissively, to speak to him in behalf of her Mistress; which she did as
follows. How is it possible that your Majesty's affections should be carried
away with such unnatural pleasures, and that so beautiful a Creature as your
own Handmaid, who would rejoice you in bearing another like to your Self,
should be forgotten, certainly she ought to be preferred. The Tyrant, though
till now in his frolicks, grew angry, yet said nothing; but rising up retired
immediately: and sending for all the Overseers of his Buildings, commanded them
forthwith to begin and build him a Castle, with high Walls, Moats, Bridges, and
strong Gates; as also to adorn it within with all manner of necessary and
sumptuous appertainments and Lodgings. The work being finished with more then
ordinary haste, the beautiful Queen, her Foster-Mother, and all that train of
young Ladies which she brought with her from Miako, were put into it, where she
is kept without the sight of men, and entirely forsaken of her Husband. The
Emperor's own Foster-Mother, who was likewise in great esteem and respect as
his own Mother, being much troubled at this action of his Majesty, and seeing
he had no Children, neither was like to have any whilst he lived thus, sent
into the several Countries in his Dominions to search out the most charming
beauties that could be found; which done, she disposes of them in such manner,
that his Majesty insensibly had the sight of them all; among the rest there was
a slight maid, an Armorers Daughter, who did so far please him, and gain upon
his affections, that he lay with her. The great Ladies of the Court, seeing an
Artificers Girl preferred before them all, mad with jealousy and rage,
resolved to strangle her Child in its birth, which they cruelly performed; but
have hitherto kept the knowledge of so black a deed from the Emperor, fearing
his just indignation and revenge.

The Japan Chronicles write, that this great Kingdom has, until this hundred
years, been still governed by an Hereditary Prince, which they call Deyro, who
was in such reverence with the people, that never any tumults or civil broils
were raised against his Person or Authority: He was esteemed so Sacred, that to
oppose him was judged no less criminal then to fight against the Gods; both
being inexpiable. When any difference arose betwixt his subject-Kings, so that
they armed each against other, there was a Generalissimo appointed to mediate
their quarrels, and punish, if need were, the offending or transgressing
Prince: For the Deyros themselves were esteemed so holy, that they never trod
upon the ground; neither was the Sun or Moon ever suffered to shine upon them;
nothing of their Body was diminished or paired off, their hair, beard and nails
being suffered to grow at length: When they did eat, their meat was still
dressed in new pots, and served up in new dishes. They have twelve married
Wives apiece, who are severally honored and brought with various ceremonies to
this height and state: When the Deyro goes abroad, he is followed with these
twelve Women, each in her Coach, adorned with her Arms and Titles; these have
their Houses and Trains apart, all in the Deyro's Palace, built in rows, six on
a side, very magnificent, and beautified (as the Coaches) with their Names,
Arms and Titles. The Concubines dwell likewise by themselves. Supper is
provided every evening in every one of these twelve Houses, with voices and
instruments, though none knows who shall be honored with the Deyro's company.
Where the Deyro enters, the banqueting and provision of the other eleven Houses
is immediately brought thither; the other eleven Wives following with their
Ladies and Music, to divert and make merry with her whom the Deyro thinks at
present worthy of his conversation: They have their Comedies likewise, and such
other pastimes as befit so splendid an entertainment.

When the Deyro is blessed with a Son, the hoped Successor of that Empire, a
Nurse is chosen for him out of eighty of the loveliest Women of the Country,
young and Noble Wives to Persons of great quality and birth: These Women are
honored and received by the Deyro's twelve Wives, and all his Women, as also
those nine principal Lords who are of his blood and kindred, and next the
inheritance in case he have no issue male, with extraordinary ceremonies and
feasting. The following day forty are chosen out of the fourscore, the which,
the number decreasing, are entertained more honorably then before; the day
being spent in usual and pompous diversions, the recited forty retain the
Titles and Dignities of Foster-Mothers, but are dismissed from further
attendance, though not without gifts and rich presents. Ten are again chosen
out of the remaining forty; out of these ten three; and lastly, out of these
three one; in all which elections the honors, ceremonies and presents are
successively heightened. Three days after the last chosen Nurse is again highly
entertained; which being done, the milk is pressed out of her breasts into the
Childs mouth, (which all this while is held by one of the noblest Ladies of
the Court;) which ceremony done, the Nurse is as then esteemed worthy to take
that Child into her custody, being it has tasted of her milk and substance.

The Ceremonies and Feasts of their Weddings, Childe-bearings, and those other
which they celebrate yearly, are performed with much state and modest pomp, and
are at this day in use by the Deyro, who wants nothing, save that the Land is
governed by another; the reason and history whereof we will briefly declare.

The Office of Chief General was formerly the first in the whole Kingdom, which
ordinarily was conferred upon the Deyro's second Son; but having then another
Son, which, for the Mothers sake, he was willing to advance, he divided this
great charge betwixt them, with command, that they should govern each his three
years by turn. This took for some time, until one of them, having tasted the
sweetness of ruling, was loath to quit so splendid an employment; he therefore
leagues with the great Lords of the Country, and settles his power so fast,
during his Commission, that neither the commands and entreaties of his Father,
nor the violence of his offended Brother, were able to remove him: Yet this
being a business of so ill and so great consequence, and like to embroil the
Kingdom in disorders, the Deyro resolved to chastise his rebellious Son; which,
by the assistance of his Kings, and the valor of his former General, he did.
And this was the beginning, and the first intestine war that ever happened
against the Deyro's State and Authority.

The aforesaid General being for his good service continued in his command,
ordered his business so well, that after his Majesty's death he made himself
Lord of his inheritance, usurping the Government of the Kingdom wholly into his
hands; leaving yet the Deyra's Court in its former state and greatness, (his
Successor to his Revenue) and commanding he should be used in all things with
the same respect and ceremony as before. These proceedings produced another
War, another General being chosen; who having overthrown the former, usurped to
himself what he had condemned in his Predecessor, the Soveraignity of the whole
Land; which occasioned a third intestine War more cruel and more destroying
then the other two: For now the Kings and Governors of Provinces began to set
up each for himself, so that the Country was well nigh ruined (Town being
against Town, and City against City) by these dissenting Grandees: During these
troubles it fell out that a bold active Fellow, formerly a private Soldier,
thinking it best fishing in troubled waters, resolved to put in for a share;
Having therefore got together forty or fifty Companions, as desperate as
himself, he in a little time, what with his good fortune and good conduct, grew
very numerous and considerable, and having taken several Castles and Towns,
drove likewise all that stood him out of the field; so that in less then three
years he became absolute and Sovereign Lord of the whole Kingdom. He, as the
other Usurpers, left the Deyro in quiet possession of all he formerly enjoyed
(except the Government) which he held himself; and was afterward, by the said
Deyro, (unable to vindicate his own right) acknowledged and crowned Emperor of
Japan with unimaginable pomp and magnificence.

This Emperor, whose name was Taycko, being no less prudent then brave, fearing
lest the great Lords of his Kingdom, reflecting upon the lowness of his former
condition might contemn his present Authority, as disdaining to be governed by
one less then themselves, thought it best to keep them in action, the better to
divert them from caviling a new; he therefore sent those Kings and Chiefs, that
he feared most, with an Army of sixty thousand Men, to war against Corea, and
reduce that Country to the obedience of the Iapan Empire. These he held there
with kind messages, and reiterated promises of succors seven whole years,
commanding they should not return till they had subdued and made conquest of
all: But the Army longing for their Country, their Wives and Children, and
despairing of a return, mutined; and destroying, burning, and plundering all
they could meet, endeavored the satisfaction of their pretended wrongs by the
desolation of others. The Coreans, unable to endure this violence any longer,
sent an Ambassador to the Emperor Taycko, who, being admitted into his Court,
found means to take away his life by poison, in revenge of the manifold wrongs
his Country had suffered by the injurious ambition of this Prince. The Kings
and Lords, commanding the Army in Corea, hearing of their Emperor's death,
resolved to quit that Country, and to return every one to his own, in
expectation and hopes who amonst them might be chosen to succeed in the
Sovereignty.

The Emperor being removed, left one only Son behind him, called Fideri, about
six years of age; but before he died he appointed him a Governor, one of the
greatest Lords of his Country, by name Ongoschio; one whom he had obliged by
his favors, and relied upon above all others for his fidelity: To this Person
he delivered his Infant-Son, with command, that when he was fifteen years of
age, he should cause him to be crowned by the Deyro, with the usual Pomps and
Ceremonies, as Emperor of Iapan. Ongoschio being thus declared Governor of the
Princes Person, was likewise by Taycko's will, and the consent of his
Subject-Kings, made Regent of the Kingdom during the minority, which for some
time he peaceably ruled in his Master's name: But growing now weary of
subordination, he quickly forgot his promise made to Taycko, and sealed with
his blood; Fideri being therefore to be removed, to make place for his
greatness, he assaulted him first in his reputation, by laying those things to
his charge he was no way guilty of; amongst others, he accused him of distrust
of his Tutor, and that he made private preparations to extort the Government
out of his hands by force, before his time; he laid likewise ambition, and an
untimely desire of honor to his charge, in that he suffered himself to be
adored as Emperor before he was invested with the Power; and that the Kings and
Lords of the Realm, had done him that reverence which was only due to a
received Emperor. But armed ambition needs not many excuses, Ongoschio musters
his united forces in the Kingdom of Surnga, and marching thence to Onsacka,
where Fideri held his Court, besieged him with all his might. Fideri, having
held out three months, being now reduced to great extremity, would prevent his
ruin by a sordid submission; he therefore sent to Ongoschio to beg his life,
quitting all his pretense to the Empire, and desiring only to survive a Vassal
to the Conqueror. But Ongoschio refused all manner of capitulation; and though
Fideri sent out his Wife, who was his Adversaries Daughter, to supplicate his
safety, she could not be heard of her Father. The Castle being taken, the
Palace where Fideri had retired himself, with his Mother and chief Friends, was
encompassed with great posts and pallisadoes, and much wood being piled up
about it, the unfortunate Prince, and all them that were with him, were
miserably burnt and consumed with sire. Ongoschio having thus destroyed his
Master, put all them to death who were considerable, and of his party; bringing
the whole Empire under his obedience by force, as Taycko had done before him.
The year following Ongoschio died, not enjoying long what his violence had so
quickly got him, his Son Coubo, or Coubosanna, succeeded him, who was Father to
this present Emperor Chiongon, now reigning.

The number of his Soldiers, and their Arms.
THe Revenue which is divided amongst the Kings and governing Lords, amounts
(as is already demonstrated) to 18400000 Coquyns, or Pounds sterling; according
to which account, each of them must, proportionably, entertain a select company
of Soldiers, always in readiness for the Emperor's service; so that he who
has a thousand Coquyns yearly, must bring into the field, when ever he is
commanded, twenty Foot Soldiers and two Horsemen. Thus the Lord of Fiarmor,
who has 60000 Coquyns a year, must entertain, as he easily may, one thousand
two hundred Foot, and one hundred and twenty Horse, besides Servants, Slaves,
and what more is necessary for the Train. The number therefore of Soldiers,
which the Emperor has continually in service, entertained by the aforesaid
Kings and Lords, amount to three hundred sixty eight thousand Foot, and thirty
six thousand eight hundred Horse. Besides these his Majesty has one hundred
thousand Foot, and twenty thousand Horse, which he paies out of his own
Revenue, and keeps for the Garrisoning of his Castles and Forts, and the
securing of his own Person. Most of the Lords, especially the most powerful, do
ordinarily keep double the number of Soldiers, and many more then they are
obliged to by their tax; and all to out vie each other, and the better to
ingratiate themselves with their common Master, as has appeared at large in
the late War. The Horsemen are all harnassed, though the Foot have no other
defensive arms then a Headpiece; the Horse are armed, some with short Guns,
some with short Pikes, others with Bows and Arrows, and all with Swords or
Sables. The Foot have likewise Sables, Pikes, and Halberts, and those that are
divided into Companies Firearms: every five Soldiers have their Commander
armed as they are; five of these Chiefs have likewise those who command them;
and their five and twenty, and twice twenty five, make a complete Company,
commanded by two Heads, who, with their fifty, are commanded by a Captain in
chief: five of these ordinary Companies are again commanded by another; and
fifty Companies have likewise their principal Officer; the same method and
order being held under the Horse. His Majesty may easily and exactly know how
many living souls, how many Soldiers, and how many Citizens he has in his
whole Kingdom; Manie^e van Justitie in Jappon.

for the Houses being built by five and five, and every five having their
Commander who must register all them that are born and die within their
Jurisdiction, and report the same to their Lords, who again are obliged to tell
it their Kings, and they to two Officers appointed by the Emperor for that
purpose.

The Authority of his Counselors and Vassals.
THe Senators, or Counselors, has each his Office apart, excepting only four,
who are the principal and chief Ministers of State; these come daily to Court,
and dispatch all Public Affairs by his Majesty's directions; and are (as
likewise the other minor Senators) highly respected and honored by the
subordinate Kings and Lords: The chief of these have two hundred thousand
pounds a year, the middle half so much, and the lesser thirty, twenty, and ten
thousand pounds per An. Their Authority and Power is confined to the Emperor's
Pleasure, none of them (upon pain of Banishment or worse) daring to advise a
second time, after Answer once received from the Prince. His Majesty chooses
these his Counselors out of those Gentlemen that have served well and long,
having been bred up in the Court with him, and had the address to please him
most. All the Affairs of the Kingdom pass these men's hands; but they are very
circumspect in observing his Majesty's eye and pleasure, before they adventure
to propose advice or answer, and all to continue in his good grace and favor;
nay, they are fo fearfully slavish, that they approve of whatever the Prince
proposes, and though the ruin of a Province depended upon it, will not seem to
have sentiments differing from his.

The quality of his Princes and Lords, and their might.
THe Revenues of the commanding Lords, as appears by their specifications, are
very great, and yet they have, by reason of their vast expenses, enough to do
with their moneys: First, they are obliged, though never so far distant from
Court, to reside six months every year in the City of Jedo, to wait upon the
Emperor. Those of the North and East come one half year, which being expired,
they are relieved by them of the South and West; who depart with his Majesty's
leave, after much Ceremony, Feasting, and receiving of Presents back to their
several Countries. Thus they take their turns at Court, which is infinite
expensive, by reason of their numerous trains, some of them traveling to and
fro with one, two, three, four, five, and six thousand men. The Lord of
Firando, (where our East-India-Company has a Lodge) being but one of the least
among them, travels with three hundred Men, Gentlemen and others; and has in
his two Houses at Iedo above a thousand Persons, Men and Women. Thus each Lord
lives according to his Means and Dignity, rather profuse then sparing; so that
the City swarms with Men and Attendance, which makes the Markets high and very
dear. Their sumptuous Buildings, their gorgeous Clothing of their Servants,
especially their Women and their Attendants, their Feasts, their Presents, and
other extraordinary Expenses of that proud and pompous Court, do sufficiently
keep under these great Men; for their Charges surmount their Revenues, and they
are found most commonly to be much behind hand. Besides all this his Majesty's
orders, the making of several public Buildings, as Highways, Channels,
Castles, and the like, all which are divided amongst the aforesaid Lords then
at Court, each his share; which they cause to be made, without respect of
expense, to the envy of each other, with all speed and industry imaginable. The
chief Lords when they build new Palaces for themselves, do besides the ordinary
Gates and Doors, cause another great and sumptuous Port to be made, beautified
with Statues, and wrought all with hard Wax, or Indian Lack, and richly guilt.
This Entry being finished, it is covered all over with Plancks, to keep the Sun
and Rain from it; and continues so enclosed and shut up, until such time as
the Emperor honors that House with his presence: After his Majesty has
passed and re-passed through the said Gate, it is wholly shut up and never
opened more; no man being afterward found worthy to go in or out at that Door,
which has been graced with the Princes entry. His Majesty does go but once to
feast in one House, all the preparations for his entertainment being made ready
long before, with great care and cost; every thing being adorned with his Arms,
and afterward never used more, but preserved with great devotion, in
remembrance that the Emperor did vouchsafe to eat in that House. His Majesty
is always invited three years before hand, in which time the preparations fit
for so royal a Guest are making. After the Emperor has been there one day,
the Princes of his blood, his Counselors, and the Kings and great Lords are
treated with incredible magnificence three whole Months together. Briefly, the
building of such a Palace, and the treating of so great a Prince, is sufficient
to make a rich King poor; and yet these ruinning profusions are not to be
avoided. When his Majesty goes a Hern-hunting, and has taken some of those
Birds, being of great esteem in those Countries, he sometimes bestows one of
them upon one Favorite or other; which Present costs the Receiver at least a
half years Revenue: for the Gift is so highly valued, having been taken by the
Emperor's Hawks, and given with his own hands, that the whole City seems to
partake of the joy, it being abundantly testified by Feasting and Presents.

The Lord of Satsuma had lately the honor to entertain the Emperor in his new
Palace, but with better fortune then any of his greatest Princes; for his
Majesty was so well pleased with his treatment, that he made him a Present (of
Beans, as he pleased to term it, for his Horses) worth threescore thousand
Pounds a year.

The Emperor disposes of the marriages of his great Lords, who entertain their
Wives which are ordered them by him with extraordinary carresings; they receive
and lodge them in their best Palaces, and allow them ten, twenty, etc. to a
hundred and more Gentle women and Maidservants, according to their abilities,
to wait upon them, when they go abroad to visit their Friends, which is allowed
but once a year. Their Women follow them in shut Pallacquins, forty or fifty in
number, each of them with two Chamber-Maids, on each side of their Pallacquins
one. These Pallacquins are very richly made, wrought with Lack and inlaid with
Gold, carried some nine foot from each other in good order, with great modesty.
The Wife that is given by the Emperor, is the Mother of those Children which
succeed in their Father's honors; but if she prove Childeless, or have no Heir
male, the Kingdom, or Government, is ordinarily bestowed upon a Stranger to
that Race and Family. Every Lord may have as many Concubines as he pleases, or
can maintain, whereby Children indeed are multiplied, though none inherit but
those that are legitimate. These Lords enjoy all the pleasures they can
imagine, in the fruition of their Women, Houses, Gardens, Ponds, Walks, Music,
Plays, and the like. They suffer no Men to come into their Wives Houses upon
any pretense whatsoever, unless it be some few who are next of blood, and that
but very seldom; these are kept close and careful; and all their Women, young
and old, great and of lower condition, must thus spend their time, without any
manner of conversation with men; the least suspicion is punished with death; it
being no less criminal to be thought ill, then to be really so. These
Attendants are choice Maids, bred up in an humble and honest manner, and so
observant of their Master and Lady, that they neither speak nor smile, but as
they are directed by their eye or motion. They are clothed in Silks of several
colors, and distinguished into several orders; some wear red vestments, with
green girdles and green headtires; others yellow, with violet girdles and
tires; others white, with red girdles and tires; and others, other such colors
as they best fancy, most embroydered with Gold. Every order has its Officers,
consisting ordinarily of sixteen Persons, who are seated according to their
quality, and served according to the custom of their Country. Those young
Persons are all of Noble Extraction, fair, well bred, and not entertained into
this service for less time then twenty years; some, nay most, for their whole
lives. Many are received into service at the age of four or five and twenty,
some at the age of twenty eight or thirty; and are bestowed in marriage by
their Lords, upon some of their Gentlemen, or Officers, according to their
merit; whom he then honors with an increase of stipend, besides present sums
of money. Those who arrive to the age of above thirty years in their service,
do ordinarily spend their whole lives there, being preferred to Offices under
their Ladies. All the married Women, of what quality soever, are trained up by
such rules, that they busy not themselves with the affairs of this life, or
trouble their Husbands with unnecessary questions or desires, to avoid harsh
returns, which are the consequences of any demands of that kind, when ever the
Husbands visit their Wives, which is never but for their own diversion; they
divest themselves of all sorts of business, not resuming the consideration of
it till they quit the place, where the whole treatment is entirely relating to
what is amorous, as Banquets, Music, Dancing, Plays, and the like, wherein the
Women have an extraordinary dexterity and address in pleasing their Husbands.
The reason they give (especially the great Ones) why their Wives are kept thus
retired, and sequestered from the company of Men and business, is first, as they
say, Because the Woman is to serve the Man, to divert him, to bring him
Children, to give them education, and for no other end; further, to avoid
jealousy and its consequences, of vexation, blood and war, which they have
gathered from former experience, when their Women had more liberty; as also
from tragical examples, recorded in their Histories, of diverse who have been
deceived and ruined by them. Their Women are ordinarily true and modest, even
to blushing, whereof I shall instance an example or two: There was in the
Kingdom of Fingo a Person of quality, who had a Wife of extraordinary beauty;
the King caused him to be secretly murdered, and after some time sent for his
Lady to Court: She obayed; but knowing her Husband was made away by his
practices, answered his importunities in these words; Mighty Prince, I ought in
reason to rejoice and account my self extreme happy, in being thought worthy to
serve your Majesty; yet permit me to affirm, that at the same instant you
approach me, I will kill my self; but if you shall please to grant what I shall
desire of you, I will give my self up to be your humble Handmaid: Allow me then
the respite of thirty days, wherein I may mourn for my Husband, and cause him
to be interred according to his Dignity; after which, that I may, upon the
Tower of your Castle, make a Feast for my Husband's Friends, with them to put
an end to my mourning. The King condiscended to this request; but wondered at
the curiosity of it. The Ceremony being performed, at which the King was
present, and in a good humor, well heated with wine and his passions) the Lady
withdrew to the side of the Gallery, as if she would have reposed, and upon a
sudden threw her self over the walls, and broke her neck, in the presence of
the King and those that were with him.

The other is of a certain Lord, who sent about through his dominions for some
young Gentlewomen to attend upon his Lady; and amongst others found a poor
Widows Daughter, who was so acceptable to her Lord, that he received her into
the number of his Concubines. Her Mother being reduced to great wants, wrote a
Letter to her, wherein she at large set forth her poverty, and the
miserableness of her condition. While the Daughter was busy in reading of it,
her Lord comes in, and she endeavoring to hide the Letter, he perceived it,
and in great choler would know what the Letter was, from whom and from whence
it came? she, ashamed to discover the poverty of her Mother, refused to tell
him; whereupon he endeavored to force it from her, which she to prevent, put it
into her mouth, and would have swallowed it; but not being able to get it down,
it stuck in her throat and choked her. The Lord, mad with rage and jealousy,
caused her immediately to be cut up, to search for the Letter; but finding the
innocence of it, and that it contained only the discovery of her Mothers
poverty, was so transported with grief and sorrow, that he could not refrain
his tears; and in the sense of it, sent for his Concubines Mother, who at this
present lives in the house with him, in much honor and esteem. The modesty of
these females extends to their private conversation, so that they are very
careful, even in the presence of their next of kindred, not to let fall any
word which may savor of the least lightness or incontinency; not daring to
speak of marriage, though lawful, nor the way to it; and if any unseemly
discourse, though but in appearance, should happen, the youngest arise
immediately and quit the company.

They honor and love their Parents even to devotion, believing firmly, that
those who do the contrary, cannot escape the vengeance of the Gods; this piety
extends to them that gave them their lives after their death; the aniversary of
their decease being ceremoniously observed, by their abstaining upon that day
from eating any thing that has life or motion.

But to return from whence we digressed; the Revenue of the governing Lords is
diverse and various; some Countries produce Corn and Fruit, others Gold and
Silver; some again Brass, Iron, Tin, Lead, and others again curious
Manufactures, Hemp, Cotton, Silk, and the like; all which are calculated,
valued, and perfectly known to the Emperor.

These ruling Princes have each of them a Chancellor, imposed by the Emperor,
presented ordinarily with this following complement: Sir, your Government is
great, and your Subjects are many; and therefore I have thought fit, out of the
care I have of your good, to appoint you an Assistant, being a person wise and
trusty, bred up under my eyes, and in my house; employ therefore his services,
and let it not be unacceptable to you that we study your welfare. This person
is received with great thanks, ceremony, feasting and presents; and (though an
open Spy upon his Master's actions,) treated with much honor and respect.
These Chancellors are men knowing in affairs, and such as the Emperor
absolutely confides in. The more to ensure them to his interest, he causes them
not only to promise and swear, but to sign like wise with their bloods, that
they shall take exact account of every particular, great and small, that may
concern the State; and also keep a daily account, or Diary, of their Lords
lives and actions, and send the same over to him by expresses. None of the
Kings or Lords can or may do any thing of themselves, the Afbeelding van's
Keysers Pa^e^s, mitsgadees de manier van't ver^enen syner Aud^^

Government of their Territories and Affairs being at the disposal of these
men, as their principal Ministers.

Most of these Lords entertain always by them some choice Persons for parts
and understanding, only to observe their actions, and tell them of their
faults; which they must exactly do without respect or flattery, for they say,
no man can see his own errors so well as another, especially those who are
called to govern, as more subject to the transports of passion and pride, they
had therefore rather hear of their faults by their trusty Servants to correct
them, then to be ill spoken of behind their backs; and for this reason these
secret Monitors are always near their Lords persons, especially at Feasts and
public meetings, observing their words and least actions. These Lords though
they have their particular names, yet they are ordinarily called by that of
their Government or residence; further every man has three names, the children
a childish, when they are men a more manly, and being become old get others
suitable to the decays of nature and age: The surnames are first pronounced,
for being their parents were before them, they think it but reasonable that
their names should likewise precede. When one of these Lords die, ten, twenty,
or thirty of his Vassals kill themselves to bear him company: many that do so,
oblige themselves to it during their Lords lives; for having received some more
then ordinary grace and favor from him, and fancying themselves better beloved
then their companions, they think it a shame to survive their Benefactour; and
therefore in return of their thanks they usually add, My Lord, the number of
your faithful Slaves is great, but what have I done to merit this honor? this
Body, which is indeed yours, I offer you again, and promise it shall not live
longer then yours; I will not survive so worthy a Patron. For confirmation of
this they drink a bowl of Wine together, which is solemn; for no covenants thus
made are to be broken. Those that thus bind themselves cut their own bellies,
and do it as follows: They assemble their nearest kindred, and going to
Church, they celebrate the parting feast upon mats and carpets in the midst of
the Plain, where having well eat and drank, they cut up their bellies, so that
the guts and entrails burst out; and he that cuts himself highest, as some do
even to the throat, is counted the bravest fellow, and most esteemed. If the
Lord cause a wall to be built, either for the King or himself, his Servants
often times beg they might have the honor to lie under, out of a belief, that
what is founded upon a living man's flesh, is subject to no misfortune: This
request being granted, they go with joy unto the designed place, and lying down
there, suffer the foundation stones to be laid upon them, which with their
weight, immediately bruise and shiver them to pieces.

His Majesty has several Castles strong and great, whereof those of Osaua and
Iedo are the most magnificent. The Countries belonging to the Kings and great
Lords, are not much traveled by our Nation, so that we have no knowledge of
them; only I am informed that they have mighty Towns and Castles: None of these
Cities are walled, though their streets are regular every one, and equally
long; the ends of them shut with Gates, and guarded with Watchmen by night or
times of danger. The Country ways are marked at every miles end with stones or
stakes, being put up for that purpose. In their Towns and Villages every street
has two Magistrates, who take care for their precinct, and must give an
account for whatever happens in them; and because none through clownishness, or
otherwise, may approach the Lord Governor with disrespect, they have
Prolocutors appointed them, by whose intervention all lesser matters are
compassed, the more difficult being reserved for the decision of the ordinary
Judge.

Their manner of Justice.
THe Cities and Towns have no revenue at all, each of them depending on their
Lord; neither have the Citizens, Merchants, Gentry or Commonalty any Tolls,
Excise, or Contributions; they pay likewise nothing, except it be for the
ground their houses stand upon, which is the Lords; and for that they give from
forty shillings to two yearly, according to the greatness of their houses.
Every house must find a man upon occasion, which happens three or four times
a year, though but for an hour, and sometimes for half a day or so. The King,
or Lord, has the whole product of the Land and Sea; the Gentlemen and
Soldiers live upon that portion their Lord assigns them out of the Country;
the Merchant subsists by his gain; the Citizens and Artificers by their
trades; and the Laborers by that portion which their Lord allows them out of
the fruit of the earth.

What Crimes they punish most severely.
EVery individual, from the Emperor to the meanest Gentleman, has the right
of Justice over his Subjects and Servants. His Majesty has his ordinary Judges
in all his Cities and Towns. When a Gentleman, or Soldier, is condemned to
die, he is allowed the honor to kill himself, by cutting up his belly with his
own hands; whereas the Citizen, Merchant, and meaner persons, suffer by the
common Executioner. A Merchant, how rich soever, is not esteemed at all,
because they say, He lives by his lying, making no conscience to cosen and
deceive the People for his filthy lucre sake: The Citizen and Artificer are
likewise undervalued, because they are but Servants to the Commonalty, and
forced to live by their labors and manufactures: Neither are the Country
People of more account, because of the miserableness of their condition, being
subject to perpetual slavery and toyling. But the Gentlemen and Soldiers, who
are numerous, are honored and feared; and they do nothing, being maintained
and served by the Merchants, by the Citizens, and by the Country Laborers.
Every crime, how small soever, is punished with death; especially theft,
although but to the value of a penny; gaming, and playing for money, is no less
heinous then murder: and all other Delinquents which deserve the rigor of
Justice with us in Europe, undergo the same penalty here. Every one suffers for
his own faults, except the matter be treasonable, and then the Father, Brothers
and Sons must likewise suffer, and their goods be confiscated; and the Mothers,
Sisters, and Daughters be given away and sold for slaves. These confiscations
are not due to the Emperor, King, or Lord in whose Territories they happen,
but are reserved under account for public uses, as building of Churches,
making of Bridges, repairing of Highways, and the like.

It happened in my time, that a proud fellow presented his service to a poor
Gentleman, demanding of him, by reason of his address and parts, more wages
then he knew the Gentleman could give; who vexed at the youths impertinencies,
and perceiving he jeered him, replied with a composed countenance, Friend, you
demand indeed much wages, but being I think you will deserve it, and that you
are pleasing in my eyes, I am content to receive you into my service. Three
days after his Master sent him on an errand; being returned, he was accused
for staying out so long, so as no excuses would save his life; being forced to
pay for his insolency under this colorable pretense. The Lord of Finando did
lately cause three Gentlewomen of his Ladies attendants, to be shut up in
Chests spiked with nails on every side, because one of them had had some
conversation with a certain Gentleman, (who was likewise condemned to die, and
his belly cut up) and that the other two, knowing of their companions
practices, had not discovered them. Who ever finds his Wife in a locked or shut
chamber with another man, may lawfully kill them both; the which, though very
rarely, has indeed happened: If the Husband be absent, then his Father,
Brother, Son, or next of kin, nay a Servant may do it; so that Adultery is
seldom or never heard of amongst them. A certain Gentleman, being jealous of
his Wife, pretended a journey from home; but returning unexpectedly back, found
another Man with his Wife in the chamber; transported with jealousy and
revenge, he instantly kills the amassed Gallant, and binding his Wife to a
ladder, let her stand there thus chained all night. Next morning he sent to
invite all his and her kindred, Men and Women, to dinner; which however
contrary to their customs, each sex feasting and eating always apart, was
through his importunity assented unto. The Women, who sat in a chamber by
themselves, ignorant of what had happened, enquired often for the Lady of the
house; to which her Husband made answer, that she was busy in ordering their
entertainment, she would wait upon them immediately. The Guests being all sat,
Men and Women together, and dinner half done, the Husband went and cut off the
privities of his slain Rival, and putting them into a covered Box of Lack, or
Wax, decked with flowers, unbound his Wife, and clothing her in a winding sheet,
with her hair loose and hanging over her shoulders, gave it her, she not
knowing what was in it, adding, Go and carry it to our Friends at dinner, and
try whether for their sakes I may not pardon you also. The poor Woman, half
dead and distracted with fear, did as her Husband commanded her, and entering
in this dreadful posture, fell on her knees before the company, and opened the
Box, at sight whereof she sunk down in a swound, and being close followed by
her Husband, had her head immediately struck off by him; at which horrid sight
the afrighted Guests ran all out of the house.

Those faults which are accounted criminal amongst them, are the breaking of
the Emperors commands and orders; Peculation, or robbing his Majesty's
Revenues; false coining, burning of houses, rapes, and the ill governing of
those in Authority; he that is guilty of any of these crimes, is punished in
his person and posterity; if it be a Woman that has offended, she suffers
alone; nor shall she die for another sin, only be given away or sold. Their
punishments are rosting, burning, crucifying both ways, drawing with four
Bulls, and boiling in Oil and Water. A man who was to deliver Wood and Stone to
his Majesty's Factours, had corrupted some Soldiers and others appointed for
the service; this being discovered, the Overseers were ordered to cut up their
bellies; but the Merchant was crucified with his heels upward. This man, being
a man of parts, was in good esteem with the Counselors and great ones at
Court, and however it be, that it is not lawful to intercede for a criminal,
yet the aforesaid Grandees, out of pity and affection to the Delinquent, having
consulted together, adventured to supplicate his Majesty in his behalf;
whereupon they received this following answer. I have understood your desires
with wonder; but that which troubles me most is, that the unreasonableness of
the demands obliges me to suspect your judgments; shall not the evil doer die?
whence then proceeds this your request? or are your hearts likewise corrupted
with gifts and gold? change your purposes, and let justice have her course, and
then if any amongst you desire riches, let them go to my Treasure and satisfy
themselves; go, I give you full liberty to do it. This reply did so startle the
Petitioners, that they retired, not daring to make any further instance, or
speak one word more.

They have a peculiar method in punishing of crimes, which I will also relate:
It happened (as it did in my time) that a Gentleman, appointed Governor of a
Lordship near the imperial City of Jedo, had forced his Tributaries to pay more
then they were obliged to by their ordinary Tax and Contributions, with which
surplus he had Lorded it for some time; but this Exaction continuing, the
Inhabitants supplicated his Majesty for relief; whereupon the Gentleman,
together with his whole race, were ordered to cut up their bellies. The said
Governor had a Brother in the service of the King of Fingo, two hundred and
forty Dutch miles Westward from Jedo; an Uncle at Satsuma, twenty miles
further; a Son in the service of King Kinocoumy; another Son in the service of
the King of Massamme, an hundred and ten miles Eastward; a third Son with the
Governor of the Imperial Castle of Inquano; with two Brothers more, that were
Soldiers in his Majesty's Guards at Jedo; his youngest Son was upon
extraordinary solicitations bestowed upon a Merchants Daughter, who was an
only Child and very rich: All these Persons, however East and West distant from
each other, died in one day, and on the same hour; for Posts were sent to all
places where these unhappy men did live, with orders to the Governors, that
they should cause them upon the eighth day of the eighth Month, (the day
limited for their execution) when the Sun was in the South, to cut up their
bellies, according to the usual manner; which was exactly performed. The
aforesaid Merchant, well known to our Society, dwelt at Osaua, but died for
grief; and his Daughter, unwilling to survive her Husband, would (if she had
not been prevented) have killed her self; yet she could not be hindered to
destroy that life, which was but loathsome to her after so dear a loss; for she
abstained wholly from eating, and expired (concluding this fatal Tragedy with
her own) the eleventh day after. The People of this Nation, especially the
Women, die with strange constancy and assurance, without any the least emotion
of sorrow or weakness.

Lies are likewise punished with death, especially if told to Magistrates or
Lords; neither will any Master pardon that crime in his Servant. These
aforesaid manners of putting to death, belong to the Gentry, the Soldiers,
Merchants, Citizens and Peasants; but the Kings and transgressing Lords are
otherwise punished: There is a little Island, three miles in compass, and
distant forty two miles from Jedo, called Faitsnichina, so still and environed
with rocks and precipices, that no ships of burden can approach it: it was at
first attempted in very calm weather by certain desperate fellows, who climbing
up those rocks, made a shift to get on the tops of them; and having pulled up
with ropes materials and necessary instruments for their purpose, fastened beams
and strong posts in the rocks in such wise, that by the help of pullies and
ropes, and strong hanging nets, they can wind the boats up some fathoms out of
the water, and so secure them against the tossing of the Sea; whose least
agitation throws them against the Island, and dashes them in pieces, as it
happened to the loss of many a man before this expedient was found. The Island
it self is very stony and barren, arable but in some few places; it is hither
that the offending Grandees are banished, and close kept from all manner of
communication or correspondency from without with strict guards of Soldiers,
who have their stations upon all the several corners of the Island for that
purpose: These Guards, if wind and weather permit, are relieved every month
precisely, at which time they receive provision for themselves, as also for the
exiled, which is but a little Rice, a few Beans, some Roots, and other such
hard fare: they lodge in little low hutches, which cannot protect them from
either against the Summers heat or Winters cold; and they must work, and gather
Silk from the Worms, which are fed and kept there, as also card, spin, and
weave such a portion as is yearly ordered them by their Taskmasters.

In the year one thousand six hundred thirty one, when his late Majesty died,
all sorts of Prisoners, under the obedience of the Japanish Empire, none
excepted, were all (in one day and hour) set at liberty, and money given to
those that were poor to begin the world again with.

What Divine Service they use.
THis Nation is neither very superstitious nor very devout; they seldom or
never pray; and such are counted for religious, who go to Church once in a
month; they sometimes use the word Nammanda, which is the name of one of their
chiefest Deities. The Priests preach ordinarily three times every year, being
only then attended by those of his Sect; others of another belief, make use of
their Hermits in their sickness, who read and mumble (as if they were
possessed) their Orisons for twenty four hours together over the Patient,
without being understood of any; for all their Divinity, as well as their
Physic, are writ and printed in an elevated style, not to be fathomed or
comprehended but by the learned.

What Churches they have.
THey have many Temples and Churches dedicated to their Idols, every one of
them inhabited by their Priests, two, ten, or twenty, according to their
greatness and revenues.

What Priests they entertain.
THeir Priests do but little, they read sometimes before their Idols, and bury
the dead, who are most of them first burnt, their ashes being afterward
committed to the earth with their usual ceremonies.

What Sects are prevalent among them.
THey have twelve Sects in all; the Priests of the first eleven eat nothing
that has lived, nor may marry: when they offend by transgressing their order,
the Delinquent is buried to the middle in the Highway, every one that passes,
and is no Gentleman, being obliged to give him a stroke in the neck with a
wooden saw, ready for the purpose; so that the miserable Priest is two or three
days, sometimes more, in this languishing condition before he can die. The
twelfth Sect is the most esteemed and most honorable of all; their Priests
marry, and they may eat of what ever the sea or earth produces, according to
their several appetites. This Sect, called Icko, or Ickois, is the most
superstitious of all, and has its Pope, or Head, respected and served with the
same honor with their Kings. When this high Priest passes through the
streets, carried in his Pallaquin, they of his faith, worship and pray to him;
and this indeed is the richest and easiest order amongst them, and most
countenanced. Some of their Churches are privileged and endowed by the
Emperor, or Lords, in whose Territories they stand; but the rest are
maintained by the common people: and as each particular man amongst the Papists
has his particular ghostly Father, so the Inhabitants here have theirs; as
also their Churches, which they assist with their charity to the utmost of
their powers. Each of these twelve Sects has its particular Faith; some
believe that the soul is immortal, that the flesh is earth; and that the spirit
of man shall live in another world, happy or miserable, according to what he
has done in this. Others think that there is no such thing as a separable
soul, and that they need fear nothing but the Executioner; they are ignorant of
the beginning and ending of nature, most of them fancying the world without
beginning, and that it shall be eternal. The best of these Sects make Taverns
of their Temples, which are most commonly built in the pleasantest and best
places, sumptuous, and well planted with trees and orchards: When the
Inhabitants have a mind to rejoice, they assemble here, and in the presence of
their Gods, and company of their Priests, (who are likewise good fellows) they
debauch and do those extravagances, which are the concomitants of excess and
folly; common whores are permitted to enter and dance, the Priests themselves
allowing of this jolity, and a further use, so it be in secret of these
immodest females. I never heard that those people trouble themselves to dispute
or argue in their religion; neither do they break their heads in converting
others to their opinions; but leave every one to the freedom of his own, as
indifferent and reasonable, as being infused into him by their Gods. Their
Priests, as well as many of the Gentry, are much given to Sodomy, that
unnatural passion, being esteemed no sin, nor shameful thing amongst them.

The persecution of the Romish Christians.
THose of this Country which were converted to Christianity by the Romish
Clergy, were them only which were persecuted; At first they cut off their
heads, and afterward crucified them, which seemed then very severe; but when
these cruel Idolaters perceived that death was not formidable to those martyred
Christians, who went to their executions with singing and dancing, as if they
courted their torments, and that the great numbers of them that suffered did no
way discourage or diminish the remaining, but rather strengthen and increase
their multitudes, they resolved to break them by more exquisite and sensible
tortures, to this purpose they bound them to stakes, and roasted them alive,
destroying thousands after this unsufferable manner: But seeing yet there was
no end, and that death in what shape soever was not terrible enough to affright
those resolved Saints to an Apostasy, they intended and practiced other more
dreadful ways and pains, for to oblige them to quit and change their opinions
and religion; they forced the women and more tender maids to go upon their
hands and feet bowing, supporting and dragging them naked in the presence of
thousands through the streets; that done, they caused them to be ravished and
lain with by Ruffians and Villains, and then th^^wing them so stripped and
abused, into great deep tubs full of Snakes and Adders, which crept by several
passages into their bodies, suffered them to perish after unspeakable miseries
in that fearful manner: they thrust hurds into the Mothers privities, and
binding the Sons about with the same combustible matter, thrust and forced
them, as also the Fathers and Daughters, to set fire each to other, whereby
they underwent unconceivable torments and pains: some they clothed with sods,
and pouring hot scalding water continually upon them, tortured them in that
manner till they died, which dured two or three days, according to the
strength of the party; hundreds of them being stripped naked, and burnt in the
foreheads that they might be known, were driven into the Woods and Forests,
all men being commanded by Proclamation, upon pain of death, not to assist them
with either meat, drink, clothing or lodging; many more put into pinfolds upon
the Seashore, and kept there half their time dry and half wet, being every
tide overflown by the Sea; but these were permitted to eat and drink, to keep
them longer alive in this misery, which lasted ordinarily ten or twelve days.
These bloody Executioners put out the Parents eyes, and placing their little
Children by them, pinched and plagued them whole days long, enforcing them
with tears of blood to call and cry to their helpless Fathers and Mothers for
an end of their sufferings, which had no period but with their lives, whilst
their woeful Parents, unable to assist either their Children or themselves, did
often die in their presence, whom they could not see for grief or sorrow. All
these miseries, too long and too many to relate, were borne by the poor
Christians with constancy to a miracle; except some few, who not able to resist
the bitterness of these torments abandoned their Faith, for some relaxation
from pain. Once a year they precisely renewed their Inquisition, and then every
individual person must sign in their Church-books, with his blood, that he
renounces Christianity; and yet all would not do, for many hundreds of
Christians are found every year, and destroyed with variety of torments. At
last they found a more hellish and exquisite way of torturing then before; they
hung these sufferers by the heels, their heads in pits, which to give the blood
some vent, they slasht lightly cross-waies, (but they do that now no more) and
in this posture they live several days, ten or twelve, and speak sensibly to
the very last: The greatness of this torment surpasses all other, being beyond
all human strength to suffer and be undergone, but by such who are
extraordinarily strengthened from above. This extremity has indeed (by
reason of its continuance) forced many to renounce their religion; and some of
them who had hung two or three days, assured me that the pains they endured
were wholly unsufferable, no fire nor no torture equalling their languor and
violence.

The Christians being now almost rooted out, there is an order, that when one
is found and condemned to be hanged by the heels, he shall be pardoned, in case
he informs against and produces another, which is now too much practiced, for
Apostasy helps no more, and they cannot resist the torments of hanging, but are
thus forced to betray one another: neither will this help these miserable
creatures, for I have been assured that they register the names of such who
were permitted formerly to fall off, as also of such who by their discovering
of others saved their own lives, with an intent, that when they suppose that
they have the entire number and catalogue of all them who have and do yet
profess Christ, they may destroy them all in one day. During these bloody and
savage persecutions, it happened that some Christian Children, because of their
beauty, were begged and saved; but many of them of eight, ten, and twelve
years old, etc. refused this grace, protesting with courage, to a wonder, that
they would not live, they did not fear death; but would go where their Parents
went, into that joy where they should be no more tormented: Some of these
Children who had not this force, but desired to live and survive these pains,
were violently hurried to their deaths by their Parents, with these comforting
words; Come my Children, do not live with these wicked wretches, I will bring
you into a land that is rich and beautiful, where we shall continue for ever in
joy and happiness. The common sort of Christians were but simply bound when
they were led to their executions; but the Priests, whether Portugals,
Spaniards or Japaners, had the hair of their heads and beards half shaven off,
the shaven part being colored red; bits were also put in their mouths, to
hinder them from speaking; and their heads being pulled backwards, with halters
put about their necks and tied behind them, they were compelled to hold their
faces directly upwards; and thus sitting upon a lean horse, they were carried
to the place designed for their martyrdom. I should be larger in the
prosecution of these sad relations, but that I leave them to their particular
story hereafter annexed.

How this Nation lives in their Houses and Families.
ALl the houses in this Country are built of wood and timber, which is likewise
their fuel; hence their houses are much subject to burning, one of the plagues
very frequent in their Towns; for this cause each house has its pack-house of
proof against the fire, wherein they keep their best and choice goods. The
houses are all built four foot high from the earth, made of planks closely
covered with thick mats very artificially joined, resembling each other and
uniform; they dwell most below, their upper rooms being employed to keep their
smaller household stuffs; but their best Chambers, where they receive and
entertain their Friends, are neat and sumptuous, according to their several
abilities. The Soldiers and Gentry have their houses divided, one side for
their Wives, and the other for them, for their Friends and their ordinary
vocation. The Merchants and Citizens Wives dwell promiscuously with their
Husbands, governing and ordering their families as with us; but are very
modest, and never spoken to but with respect, none presuming to use any freedom
in discourse with them, although otherwise innocent and harmless, for both the
man that took, and the woman that permitted this familiarity would be equally
slighted, and blamed and looked upon as culpable and scandalous. Their
household stuff consists ordinarily in fine painted gilt dishes, instead of
pictures; the walls of their chambers are also for the most part painted with
variety of figures, and laid with gilt paper so curiously, as if it were but
one large sheet; the boards round about being beautified with lists of black
Wax, very artificially wrought; most of their rooms are divided with shuts,
prepared and painted as the walls are, which being taken out, enlarges the
rooms at pleasure. In the upper end of this partition they have a picture with
a potfull of flowers, which they have ready all the year long; and at the lower
end there is always a gallery, with stairs to descend into their gardens,
which are always green, and so placed, that they in the hall have the full
prospect of it. They do not furnish and adorn their Houses with Chests,
Cupboards, Wax-works, and the like, these are always in their free-Chambers,
or packhouses, where none is suffered to enter, but their familiar and most
intimate Servants and Friends. Their chief furniture which they expose, are
Tsia Cups and Pots, Pictures, Manuscripts, and Sables, which each provides
himself of, rich and goodly, according to his condition and might.

How they receive each other, and of their Hospitality.
THe Japanners are very hospitable and civil to such as visit them, they treat
them with Tobacco and with Tsia, and if the friend be more then ordinary, with
Wine: They cause them first to sit down, and setting a Lack bowl before them,
will not suffer them to depart before they have tasted of it; they sing, they
pipe, and play upon such stringed instruments as they have, to rejoice their
Guests, omitting no manner of carouses and kindnesses to testisie their
welcome, and the value they put upon their conversation. They never quarrel in
their debauches, but he that is first drunk retires and sleeps, until the fumes
of the wine be evaporated. There is no such thing as Tavern or public drinking
House in all the Country; they eat, drink and are merry, but all in their own
houses, not refusing lodging and refreshment for the traveller and stranger.

Of their Conjugal State.
THese People neither make love nor woo, all their marriages being concluded by
their Parents, or for want of such near relations, by the next of kin. One Man
has but one Wife, though as many Concubines as he can keep; and if that Wife
do not please him, he may put her away, provided he dismiss her in a civil and
honorable way. Any Man may lie with a Whore, or common Woman, although he be
married, with impunitie; but the Wife may not so much as speak in private with
another Man, as is already said, without hazarding her life. What is said of
divorce, relates only to the Citizen, Merchant, and common Soldier; a
Gentleman or Lord may not put away his Wife, although she should not please
him, and that out of respect to her quality and his own Person; he must
maintain her according to her condition and necessities; but may freely divert
himself with his Concubines and Women, and when the humor takes him with his
own Wife again. This liberty that the Men have, obliges the Women to observe
their Husbands, and endeavor to endear them to them, by an humble compliance
and submission to their humors, being sure else to lose them, and see their
Rivals preferred before them. Open Whore-houses are publicly allowed of, as
well for the use and convenience of Batchelors, as to prevent the debauching of
young Maids and married Women.

Of the bringing up of their Children.
CHildren are carefully and tenderly brought up; their Parents strike them
seldom or never, and though they cry whole nights together, endeavor to still
them with patience; judging that Infants have no understanding, but that it
grows with them as they grow in years, and therefore to be encouraged with
indulgence and examples.

It is remarkable to see how orderly and how modestly little Children of seven
or eight years old behave themselves; their discourse and answers savouring of
riper age, and far surpassing any I have yet seen of their times in our
Country. None go to School under seven or eight years of age, as being until
then incapable of its rules, and more inclined to play then to learn, unless it
be waggishness and wantonness. At School they begin by degrees, by sweetness
and not by force, the Masters imprinting an ambition and desire in each of them
to out-go his fellow; they lead them likewise by examples, telling them that
such and such learned so much in so little time, whereby his Honor and Family
was so highly advanced. The Children are so accustomed to this way, that they
learn sooner and more then by any correction or whipping; for generous spirits,
and an obstinate Nation, such as this is, are not to be forced, but rather won
with gentleness and emulation.

What Succession ab intestato.
WHen the Parents are grown old, and the Children come to be Men, the Father
then quits his Government, Commerce, Shop or Trade, placing his eldest Son in
his room, and giving him the greatest part of his Estate; the younger Children
are likewise provided for by the indulgent Parents, although their portions
return to the eldest in case they die before them. Daughters have no portions
at all, nor nothing given them at their marriage; sometimes it happens that
rich Parents send a good sum of money with their Daughter, upon their marriage
day, to their Son in law; which present is returned by the Bridegroom and his
Parents with much thanks, being unwilling that the Bride should have any
colorable excuse to raise her into an opinion of having obliged her Husband:
The poorer sort do but seldom return these offers as needing them, and glad of
any augmentation of their Friends. They have a common saying, that a Woman has
no constant dwelling, living in her youth with her Friends, being married with
her Husband, and when she is old with her Child.

Whether they be faithful or false in their dealings.
THis Nation is very trusty, and that out of their ambition, the only mark they
aim at; hence it is that they seldom wrong each other, esteeming their honors
above their lives and hopes: examples of this kind are frequent amongst them,
I will only relate one. During the civil Wars between Ongoschio and his Puple,
the King of Cocora (who followed the Usurper) had left his Queen and Children,
as the fashion is, at the Emperors Court; Fideri having notice of this revolt,
sent for Cocora's Wife and Children to come into the Castle, the better to
secure them; which the Lady refused, excusing her self, That she was married,
and under the obedience of her King, as he was under his imperial Majesty; let
him command her Lord, and she would most readily, upon receipt of his orders,
submit to his Highness pleasure. The Emperor, angry at this denial, sent her
word, if she would not come, he would cause her to be brought by force. The
Queen, who thought no dishonor equal to that of quitting her house in her
Husbands absence, and seeing she could not conserve her self in it against the
Emperors fury, resolved to perish with it; she therefore commanded some
barrels of Gunpowder to be brought into a Chamber, where she retired with her
Children, Nurse, and such of her Women who were resolved to die with her; and
there writing her Will and her own Elegy, she conveyed them by a trusty
Gentleman in her service to her Lord; and immediately thereupon, putting fire to
the Powder, prevented that loss of honor which she feared, and the Emperors
design by that fatal blow. If it happen that a person be in a strait and
engaged, and comes to another for assistance, recommending the protection of
his life and honor to his generosity, this Man will hazard all, without
respect of Wife and Children; for the service of his Friend, and perish or
deliver him out of his distress and misfortune; they will die, nay suffer the
worst of tortures, rather then discover their accomplices, although in evil,
thinking the breach of covenants inexpiable; and the dishonor of not helping
their neighbor, and one that has thrust him into misery, worse then any death
whatsoever.

What Traffic and with what Nations.
THe Trade of this Country (which is but small in respect of the vastness of
it, and it abounds with all sorts of Merchandise) is carried on by Strangers,
the principal whereof are the Chinesses, who from the first peopling of this
Empire to this day, have been constant frequenters of their yearly Marts. The
Spaniards and Portugals have been acquainted with this People above an hundred
years; the English but of late, who finding but little profit and great
expenses, abandoned this Traffic again. The Siammers and Camboiders used also
to arrive with a ship or two, though not now so often as formerly. Lastly the
Netherlander got footing there, where they have seated themselves fast enough,
and traded these forty years. The principal Commodities, as well those which
Strangers bring, as such which are of the growth of the Country, are all
brought to the great City of Meaco, which is the Staple of the whole Empire; it
is here that the Merchants and Factors, from every part of the Land, do
assemble, bringing with them such things as their several Provinces do produce,
which they sell or change for others which they stand in need of. These
Merchandises are carried sometimes two or three hundred miles to and fro, over
hills and dales, all upon horses, whereof they have an incredible number. The
Traffic consists of all sorts of wares, as well for the pride as use of man;
Strangers bring yearly four or five thousand Picols of Silk, each Picol
weighing one hundred twenty five pounds weight, besides a great quantity of
wrought Silks; two hundred thousand Hartsskins; one hundred thousand
Rochvellenskins; a great abundance of Hemp, Cloth, Cotton, and red Wool;
Carpets to sit upon, Pewter, Quicksilver, and all sorts of Drugs; Nutmegs,
Peper, Musk, Sugar, Porcelan, Camphier, Borax, Eliphants-Teets, red Coral, and
all sorts of small Wares, which the Chinese bring thither.

What domestic Trading, and Navigation.
HEre are many very rich Merchants who drive great Trades, these go themselves,
or have Factours at Meaco, where they exchange their Commodities for Silver,
Gold, or other Wares, each according to his fancy and convenience. The
Japanners of old had great correspondencie with them of China, whose Kings sent
Ambassadors yearly to each other, for entertaining their alliance, and the
negotiation of their Subjects; it happened that the Japanners, who were
numerous in China, did mutiny, and in a tumult destroy a whole City,
plundering, ravishing, and spoiling all; but the Chinesses, getting into a
body, fell upon the Japanners again, and put all they could meet with to the
sword. The King of China hearing of these discords, was no less amazed then in
a wonder, that so few could do so much mischief, and therefore resolved to
banish the Japanners for ever out of his Kingdom; in memory whereof he caused a
great stone Pillar to be set up, with the story of their exile in letters of
Gold. He likewise set out a Proclamation, that none of his Subjects, upon pain
of death, should sail any more to Japan; which order was then more exactly
observed then at present, and yet they do not directly go thither; for the
Chinesses. under a color of other voyages, do often slip into Japan. The
Emperor of Iapan does not at all obstruct their traffic, permitting them to
enter and leave his Country when they please, Saying he will not reward evil
for evil; considering also that the reason of this prohibition, on the other
side, came not through any fault of the Chinesses, but by the disorders of his
own People. Since the Iapanners have been banished out of China, they used to
sail to Tayouan, where the Chinesses brought them their Merchandises; but that
being discovered by the Court of China, they were prohibited this Traffic
likewise. Many years after the Iapanners obtained leave to return to Tayouan,
as also to go to Touckien, Cambodia, and Sian; which negotiation was again
disturbed, upon this consideration, that the Emperor of Iapan would neither
offend nor be offended by any Strangers, which had already happened by the
extortions of the Governors of Sian and Tayouan; and therefore none of his
Subjects should any more traffic or deal with Strangers out of their own
Country: Another reason was, because he would have no Arms transported out of
his Empire, (which could not be hindered by no way but this) insomuch that two
Chinesses, Father and Son, were both crucified at Finando, for endeavoring to
convey some away in private; and five Iapanners, who had sold them the said
Arms, without knowing their design, were beheaded. But the chief cause of this
inhabition is, least the Natives of this Country, traveling into strange
places, might be converted to the Christian Religion, and upon their return
infuse those foreign principles into their Countrymen, which they have
endeavored to suppress with so much blood and violence.

The Profits amounting thence.
NEither the Emperor, nor his subordinate Kings or Lords, do gain any thing at
all by the Commerce of their Subjects, the Merchants only profit by it,
although the gain be not extraordinary, by reason of the greatness of the
Country, the charge of transport, and the multitudes of people which must live
by it.

Their correspondency with Strangers.
THe Iapanners hold no correspondency at all abroad, having never yet sent
their Ambassadors into any foreign Countries, except China, which they have
also long discontinued. The King of Spain, the Pope, and the King of Siam, have
sent several extraordinary Ambassadors to this Court, which were indeed
honorably received and feasted, though never any returns made again by this
Prince.

The Commodities which Japan yeildeth.
THere is nothing necessary for the use of Man, but this Country does
abundantly produce, as Silver, Gold, Brass, Iron, Tin and Lead, in great
quantity; also Cotton, Hemp, Silk, Filoselle, Harts-skins, Wooden Manufactures,
Drugs, and whatever can be required to feed and cloth its innumerable
inhabitants.

Their Mint, Measures, and Weights.
THe Iapanners have one Language, one fashion in their Clothes, one Mint, and
one Weight; they have indeed besides their Gold and Silver Coins, a sort of
Copper Moneys, which they call Casies, and is of differing value in many of the
Kingdoms; but his Majesty has resolved to re-coin these Casies into one
fashion, to which end he has ordered all the old ones to be called in, and
bought them of their owners at their full worth and price, where with his
Officers have been busied these four years. They have three sorts of Gold coin;
the first and greatest weighs six Royals, and is worth forty six Tails, each
Tail being valued at fifty seven Stivers, or Pennies: the second sort is worth
six Tails and one half; and the third (being the least) one and one sixth of a
Tail. Their Silver Money is of the Alloy of Dollers, cast into long figures,
of no certain weight, but by guess; they put so many of these together as weigh
fifty Tails, the which being neatly lapped up in papers, are distributed as
occasion serves: They have yet a lesser Silver coin like a Bean, weighing from
one Dutch Shilling to ten; and lastly the Casiens, already mentioned, of
differing worth, from one Doller to three, one fourth, the thousand. Their
Yard, the Measure of their Grain, and their Weights, are equal and not
differing at all.

What Beasts and Fowl they have.
THis Country produces Horses, Bulls, (for they never geld their Cattle)
Cows, Dear, and Swine, both wild and tame, in great abundance: There are
likewise plenty of Bears, Dogs, Cats, and the like; there is no end of their
Fowl, especially Swans, Geese, Ducks, Herns, Eagles, Hawks, Pheasants, Pigeons,
Snipes, Quails, Partridges, and all manner of lesser Birds.

What Medicinal Waters.
THey have several Fountains and Springs of hot Medicinal Waters, proper for
the curing of many Diseases, and succesfully used for that purpose; some are
Sulphurous, some taste of Copper, others Iron, Tin, Allom, and the like Metals
and Minerals, partaking of the qualities of those they pass by. I have seen of
these Springs, one whereof being Tinish, burst out of a hollow in the side of a
Mountain, some ten foot in the round; this ^ole was, by reason of its depth,
very obscure within, its Orifice, or Mouth, being strangely beset with sharp
Stones, not much unlike the short teeth of an Elephant, or those which Painters
appropriate to Devils. The Water flows continually out of this Cavern in a
great quantity, and is not hot, but a man may sit in without disturbance. I
have seen another at the foot of a Mountain near the Sea, which rendered its
Water but at times, ordinarily twice in twenty four hours, but this flowing did
not continue above an hour; when the wind blows East and stiffly, it flows
thrice, and sometimes four times in a day and night: This Water rises out of a
stony Pit, being covered with huge massy Stones of very great weight; when the
time of flowing comes, it bursts out of the earth in so great a quantity, and
with such a forceable wind, that those great Stones are violently moved and
shaken, the streams gushing and spouting three or four fathoms high, with so
dreadful a noise that it equals that of a Cannon, or the falls of the greatest
Rivers: This Water is so very hot, that it is impossible to boil ordinary Water
to its height; it singes where it falls, and left to its self continues hot
thrice longer then any other. This Well is surrounded with a Wall for fear of
harm, little Conduits being made to convey its Streams to the neighboring
houses, where it is used by way of bath, for the curing of all distempers and
maladies.

How the Kings, Princes, and Peers of the Kingdom, receive Audience of his
Imperial Majesty, and what train they must have.
THe solemn and great feasts of this People are manifold, the first and
greatest is New-Years-Day, then the second and third Day of the third Month,
the third and fifth Day of the fifth Month, the fourth and seventh Day of the
seventh Month, and the fifth and ninth Day of the ninth Month. Besides these,
his Majesty gives public Audience twice every Month, at new and full Moon, to
all his Kings, Princes, Lords, and Gentry, who according to their qualities and
orders, do homage and reverence to him. The train and attendance of these
Grandees are appointed, the greatest of them may not exceed an hundred
followers; the lesser being also stinted and proportioned according to their
revenues. Some of these Princes have indeed four or five thousand, as well Men
as Women, in their services, but these they keep in their Palaces, and may not
enter the first ring of the Castle, nor into the City with them: Now such as
are permitted to come into these two places with an hundred Servants, may not
enter the second ring of the Castle with more then twenty Attendants; neither
may they be seen there on horseback, it being the dwellings of the Princes of
the blood, and the Councillors: the great ones are carried here in Pallaquins
or Sedans, others of less quality going on foot; which is no difficult thing,
the ways and streets being finely paved, and the middle of them set with great
flat freestones, which are kept extraordinary neat and clean: But no Man
whosoever is suffered to enter the third ring of the Castle, where the
Emperors Palace is, but on foot, and only accompanied with two Servants, and a
Boy to carry his Shoes; they of the second rank are allowed but one Servant and
a Shoe-carrier; and those of the last rank only a Shoe-carrier. There never
happens any the least disorder, running, playing, bawling, or confusion among
the people at these shows, every one continuing in a serious and silent
posture, as if they were in the Emperors presence. Every one in this
Procession marches in his order and rank, so that there is not the least stir
even amongst the Servants. The Soldiers stand in the Galleries we formerly
mentioned, and certain sworn Commissioners go to and fro, to observe both them
and all others, so that the least stir and noise is capital: This strictness is
not burdensome, but grown so familiar by custom, that the least irregularity
or tumult is not heard of. The same order is observed in all the Towns of the
Country, the streets being all uniform, each end of each of them being shut
with Barrocadoes in the night, and kept with watches; so that no body is
suffered to go out without a Ticket from the chief Magistrate, which is
delivered to the Magistrate of the street, for the convenience of those who
need them, to fetch a Midwife, Physician, or some near Friend in case of
necessity, the Barrocadoes are opened to such messengers as these, and none
else; so that they never have any tumults in their streets, roberies, murders,
house-breakings, or any such unwarrantable disorders.

Their Language, manner of VVritings and Reckonings, and how far they transmit
their History to posterity.
THe Chinese, Iapanners, Corees and Torquains, have their distinct Languages,
wholly strange to each other; neither have their Characters any resemblance,
and yet they have another fashion of Letter common, and understood by the
Studious and Learned of these four Nations; in this their Sciences and Wisdom
are written, although the Contents and Characters be general, understood and
read by each in his own Tongue. They write with Pencils, and ready enough; most
of their Errands are done by Letters, which, by reason of their quickness in
dispatch, is no let to them, and the surer way; A man that can contract much
matter into few lines, and intelligible, which is that which they all practice,
is greatly esteemed amongst them; for such they employ to write their Letters,
Petitions, and the like to great persons; and truly it is admirable to see how
full of substance, and with how few words these sort of writings are penned.
They have not the Italian manner of keeping of Books, and yet fail not in their
calculations; they reckon with little pellets, stuck upon little sticks upon a
board, for the same purpose, after the manner of the Chinese; wherewith they
will add, multiply, and divide, with more facility and certainty then we with
Counters.

They have many Books and Libraries, though the common people are most
illiterate: The Deyro himself writes the Annals of his Country; and all other
Books are written by himself or his Lords and Gentlemen, (which are at least
eight hundred strong) or by their Wives and Women; for these Gallants, as well
Men as Women, being of kin, and married into each other, do nothing but spend
their time in all worldly pleasures, and the studies of humain knowledge. Men
are esteemed and honored with Titles, in this Court, according to the merit of
their understanding, not their births; and it happens sometimes, that the
greatest are by their weakness and folly brought down and unconsidered. These
Grandees, proud with their birth and breeding, consider no body but themselves,
neither converse with any save only their own Comrades; for their dwellings and
streets join upon each other, being environed and shut up from the rest of the
world. They speak a higher style then the vulgar, wherein all their learning is
couched; and many of them esteem themselves more noble then the Emperor, being
indeed dignified with higher and more honorable Titles then their Sovereign.
Printing and Gunpowder was in use in this Nation above one hundred and fifty
years before we in Europe had the knowledge of them: these they learned from the
Chinese, who have had them long, as their Histories and Chronicles (filled
with wonders, too long for this short relation to mention) do abundantly
witness.

An Extract out of the Governor of Indiaes Letter to the Overseers of the
East-India-Company, touching the Traffic in Japan.
THis year trade (as we mentioned in our last of the twelfth of this instant)
has been but little advantageous, by reason of the disasters at Sea, which
has much weakened and put behind hand the India Capital or Stock, which will
without question suddenly change. God preserve the Company from more
misfortunes at Sea. We hope, if your Honors will second us this following year
with fifteen Tonne of Gold and Merchandise, we shall be able to make a return
of thirty, being the Indian Commodities may probably rise more then they are
now fallen: Iapan will in all appearance yield us eleven or twelve Tonne
profit; Persia at least three hundred thousand; and the other indulgent
Cantoors, above three Tonne. The Dutch expenses, which arose this year, will
certainly fall, being the building and fortification of the dwellings and
pack-houses come to cease. There is but little hope of advantage from the
Enemy; nor shall we be able to Cape much this year about Spirito Sancto, by
reason of the Portugals sufficiency. We will endeavor to better all things by
an advantageous negotiation, hoping much from Iapan: It were not strange if the
Chinese were hindered to frequent that Kingdom, or diverted by us: They profit
fifty Tonne of Gold every year and more by the Iapan trade; for they transport
more then for one hundred Tonne yearly; God grant that we may enjoy this trade
alone, and that the Gold Mine in Formosa flourish, that the engaged may once
enjoy the fruits of their charges and pains by rich returns, without sending
any moneys out of the low Countries. I send you herewith a Copy of
Siragemondenne, Governor of the Island Kisma in Naviga-sacki, where the
Companies Servants and Factors do reside and trade; his Letter, which I
mentioned in my last, be pleased to consider of the contents thereof, with such
as understand the affairs of Iapan. It seems if we do not meddle with
Christianity, but behave our selves modestly, they will grant us the more
liberty, and greater freedom in trading: we will order all things to the most
advantage of the Company; and endeavor for as much as it shall be possible,
that we may enjoy all, or at least the principal trading (which God grant) of A
Formosa, a Land enriched with Gold, near China, and lately conquered by the
Castlians.

A short Relation of the Profits and Advantages which the Dutch
East-India-Company in Iapan might acquire, in case they could compass the China
Trade and Commerce: By Leonard Camps.
MAny men are of opinion, and have by experience found, that during the time it
pleased the mighty States General of the united Provinces, and his princely
Excellency, to give their Subjects leave to sail into the East India, for the
increase of Traffic and the common good, that to what place, or by what Prince
soever we come, we were admitted and received for fear of harm, or for hopes of
profit; and yet I believe, as my Predecessors did before me, that his Imperial
Majesty of Iapan suffered us not to harbor and to trade freely in his
Country upon these considerations, but only to show the goodness of his
Nature, the greatness of his Dominions, and his civilitie to Strangers,
especially those Nations who came into his Country as Friends. His Majesty's
goodness to Foraigners appears abundantly in this, in that he still suffers the
Chinese to traffic in his Land, favoring them in his impositions more then
his own Subjects; whereas they persecute the Iapaners in their own Territories
as Enemies, having set a price upon their heads, which by mistake has cost
many a Portugal his life: further his ambition does not extend beyond the
bounds of his own Empire, and contenting himself with those confines God and
Nature has prescribed him; he wages no war against his Neighbors, neither
suffers his Subjects to molest or disturb any out of his obedience. No foraign
Princes fall out by his instigation; neither does he give or demand help or
assistance upon any account. His power and might consists in the vastness of
his Kingdom, and multitudes of his Soldiers; he has arms at will, Castles
that seem impregnable, Provisions in abundance, and Treasure without end. The
plenty of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Lead, and Pewter Mines is great; and the
abundance of Silk, Cotton, Hemp, and thousands other commodities incredible.
Brifley, this Country wants nothing, having no need of its neighbors at all;
whence his Majesty never sought to foraign Princes, and yet received all that
came or sent to him with all imaginable civilitie and kindeness.

The Spaniards and Portugals, not ignorant of the commodious situation, might
and riches of the Japanish Empire, were no less earnest in the enlarging of
their own state, planting the Christian Religion, and advancing their traffic
there, where other Princes seemed to desire. Don John, the first of that name,
and the tenth King of Portugal, was very industrious in this Disquisition; his
Country men having in fourscore years, wherein they continued their commerce
in Iapan, brought it so far, that Manilha was raised from nothing by this
negotiation, and Malacca Goa and several other places bettered and enriched by
it; witness their great Cargasoons, and yearly returns more or less, as it
happens, amounting one with another to near a Million and a half of Ducats;
never gaining less then fifty, and for the most part seventy five in the
hundred, as we found by experience in that time that our East-India-Company
shared in this rich commerce. The Mavaus and Portugals fetched these vast
profits yearly, which they gained in four or five months, whereof they spent
some twenty days in going and coming upon the Sea, the Iapan principal being
but one fifth part. Let every one consider, whether this noble Negotiation and
sweet returns, are not capable to indear these Merchants to this rich Country:
Besides this, their Religion, which by the zeal and industry of their Priests
grew strangely there, so that they had four hundred thousand souls at once upon
a list, which made them in hope to become absolute Masters of the whole
Kingdom; this they purposed, which had been absolutely effected, but that they
wanted an head; and were traversed in this great design by the Netherland
Ministers. If they had brought Iapan to their devotion and obedience, as God be
praised they have not, it is no hard matter to conceive the advantages they
would have gotten by it, and what they might further presumed, upon so mighty
an acquisition. But my design is not to insist upon this matter, only to
undeceive those men who blindly out of prejudice or ignorance, not only slight
the Japanish trade, but have given out, that it is neither useful nor
profitable for the East-India-Company. But to return where we digressed; it is
not imaginable that the Portugals and Spaniards are such fools, as to search
out places to seat themselves in, and to carry on a trade, where there is no
advantage to be got; that they have gained infinitely, and should still if they
were not hindered by us, is visible: It is evident that they of Mavau are at
present rich, that their City is strong, and their Houses like so many Palaces,
wherein they live like earthly gods in pleasure and plenty, whereas they were
before but bare and needy. Neither did the ill treatment they lately received
in Iapan, nor the persecutions of the Women Catholics there, nor the loss of
Andrew Plasoes Caraek, who was assaulted and sunk, by the Emperors command and
forces, before Naugasack, nor the danger they incur by our ships at Sea, can
deter or oblige them to quit this Kingdom: when the danger to sail thither
with great Vessels was too great, they trulked with little ones; which this
proud Nation, who aspire to an universal Monarchy, would never have done, if
it had not been for the certainty and sweetness of the profit: What can our
People allege to the contrary? is it not as we have formerlie said, that the
door is not open for us alone, but for all other Nations who come as friends to
negotiate in his Majesty's Dominions. During our abode in Iapan, we have been
treated with very great civilitie; although we have not profited so much as the
Portugals, yet we have gained more honor then they; we have not lost at all,
and our winnings have been proportionable to our Cargasoons; we have had
several commodities thence, and much useful provisions; we have repaired many
of our old Ships in their Havens, and furnished them with all manner of
necessaries: The Fleets we send from hence every year to the Manilhas against
our common Enemy, return without being questioned by any, and dispose of their
prizes at pleasure, paying nothing but the ordinary rites, which is only a
small present to the Emperor; what Christian Prince in Europe would treat us
so well, and molest us so little? Now that it has pleased the Almighty, that
we by the good conduct of our General I. P. C. do not only bridle them of
Maccau, but likewise hinder them to sail to Iapan, and so keeps them from that
rich trade they enjoyed so many years; it remains only that we still keep them
out, to which purpose especial care must be had to use the Iapaners well and
civillie; to hinder their detriment, and not to despise or misuse them in any
kind, but to suffer every one to pass and re-pass where their business calls
them, aiding and assisting them with all possible endeavor and friendship. We
must not be less careful then the Portugals have been, to furnish this Kingdom
yearlie with all manner of commodities, bringing rather more then lesser; for
if it take according to the Generals design, which God grant, they of Iapan
will be deprived of the Maccan commerce, as also of their trafficking into
diverse others places, Kouthinchina, Kamboia, Siam and Manilha, from which
places they received betwixt two and three thousand picols of Silk every year,
besides several other necessary commodities, which they will be obliged to take
from us, as being nearer and at their own homes. We must above all things
cherish his Majesty's inclination to us wards, and have a special care to
remove all causes of discontent that may arise; for if this mighty Prince
conceive the least distaste against us, and refuse us his friendship and
correspondence, it will be the only obstacle to hinder us to compass our
design; in this case we have more reason to fear the Japanners, then either the
Spaniards or Chinese, as being no less potent and courageous then they, and
powerful enough to drive us out of the Piscadores, or where we should endeavor
to settle; but if it must be so, we should be able to help our selves without
Japan, but not in so convenient a place, as we have mentioned already, which we
shall find true in case we fall out with them, which God forbid. Our Governor
has shown us a way, and recommended it to us, which if followed, we may
easily continue in his Majesty's favor, and once enjoy the long desired sweet
profits which our enemies have had so many years undisturbed; and I doubt not,
but by one way or other we shall be able to get the unvaluable China trade into
our hands.

The China trade being then in our dispose, all we have to do, is to send
yearly into Japan such Cargasoons as we shall hereafter mention; in the doing
whereof, we shall not only please his Majesty, and enjoy the sweet savouring
profits which our enemies will be deprived of, but shall be able to satisfy
our Masters out of the gain, without any expense of theirs, it being more then
probable, that their yearlie return will amount to an hundred Tonne of Gold,
which is ten Millions sterling, or more every year. Japan will be more useful
for us, and more profitable then it has been to the Portugals, if your affairs
succeed according to our Governor Generals meaning; for besides the Silk which
the Portugals brought from Maccan, the Iapanners fetched themselves betwixt two
and three thousand Picols yearly, as we have already observed from
Courchinchina, Courchin Manilha, and other places more, whereof they are
hindered and receive none, but what we bring them, and at such rates as we shall
please to put upon them.

The Cargasoon which I should require, and which would be vented there
infalliblie with profit, out of which our Masters might have so much China ware
as they demanded, without the expense of a penny, is as follows.

3000 Picols of white raw Silk, at 180 Royals of eight the Picol, amounts to R.
540000. 260 Ditto fine sodden Silk, at 200 Royals the Picol R. 52000 500 Ditto
raw Silk, in short and long strings, at 180 Royals the Picol R. 60000. 100
Ditto white Silk, at 290 Royals the Picol R. 20000. 100 Ditto Flos Silk at 190
Royals the Picol 15000 pieces of black Single, at 2 Royals the piece R. 77500.
20000 Ditto colored Armosyne, at one Royal and a half the piece R. 30000. 2000
Ditto black Satin, at 8 Royals the piece R. 16000. 5000 Ditto good black
Damask, at 6 Royals the piece R. 30000.
Transport for the following K.
5000 Ditto ordinary good black even Satin at R. 30000. 2000 Ditto fine black
even Velvet, at 8 Royals the piece R. 16000. 5000 Ditto white even Satin woven
flat, at 4 Royals the piece R. 20000. 2000 Ditto black fine watered Grogrum, at
8 Royals the piece R. 16000. 2000 Ditto white Damask, at three Royals and a
half the piece R. 7000. 3000 Ditto white Cramosy red Damask, at 5 Royals the
piece R. 15000. 5000 Ditto Cramosy red L. at 4 Royals the piece R. 20000. 3000
Ditto painted Calicoes at four Royals and a half the piece R. 13500. 3000 Ditto
white L. at 3. Royals the piece R. 9000. 2000 Ditto painted Calicoes at three
Royals and a half the piece R. 9000. 5000 Ditto fine black Stuffs of all sorts,
worked with Gold and Silver, at ten Royals the piece R. 50000. 105000.
This aforesaid China Cargasoon being sent yearlie to Japan, I engage my self
to my Masters, so long as God gives me health, to serve them for nothing,
unless I return them in four or five months time, in good Silver, One million
eight hundred and fifty thousand Royals of eight; if that be not enough, let
them send more and the gain will be greater. We have taxed the goods at twenty
per cent higher then they will possibly be bought for, and that purposelie, as
knowing well that these goods will first cost us more then the Portugals had
them for at Maccan, by reason of the fort and Cargasoon that we must
necessarily hold for the China trading. I know it will fall heavy for our
Masters, considering their other expenses, to furnish us with so much as is
here required; if it cannot be done at once, let them furnish us with the half;
the business can be so ordered here, that one third part of the Japans, and
another third part of the Portugals principal be employed, so that the Masters
need furnish but the rest, which they may gain back (and all charges paid) in
six months. The Overseers of the Company do intimate by their Letters, their
earnest desires to have great Cargasoons sent yearlie home, for the easing of
those vast expenses they are at; by reason whereof it happens, to the great
grief of our Governor General and Council of India, that many places fail
oftentimes to furnish the desired quota; the which has obliged me to deliver
this by writing to their Honors, if they be pleased to hearken to it, and
furnish our demands yearlie, without delaying; if it cannot be found out of the
China commodities alone, it must be supplied with Europian wares, as also with
some Nutmegs, Peper, Eliphants-teeth, and the like, that we may show that our
givings out to our Masters shall not only reap the aforesaid profits, but
their Servant shall gain praise and thanks, to the honor of the Netherland
Nation. Sixty four Tonnes of Gold and a half may be yearlie gained by these
China Silk Wares, besides other Commodities.

A description of the pompous and magnificent reception of the DEYRO in the
City of Meaco, when he came to visit his Imperial Majesty of Japan, on October.
25. 1626. Written by Coenraed Krammer, deputed from the East-India-Company to
that Court, and then present.
IN the year 1626. having had audience on the twentieth of October, I took my
leave of both the old and young Emperor, four days before the feast; which
seemed strange to them that knew it, being their Majesty's were so intent in
their preparations for the Deyro's reception; but these men did not know how
desirous the Emperor was to dispatch the Hollanders before the feast: however
the Siammer and Portugal Ambassadors had not as yet been publicly received,
and all by reason of the present business, which took up the whole Court, in so
much that they were deferred till that was past; we being therefore dispatched,
had the more leisure and desire to see this solemn entertainment, and the
rather, being invited to a stay by the Lord of Firando and Cackusymondonne. On
the twenty fourth we went toward the Emperors Palace, attended upon by all
our Servants; and having hired a place from which we might see the whole
procession, we were forced to stay there that whole night, by reason of the
great crowds of people that passed that way; on the morrow following, being the
twenty fifth, as soon as the day appeared, we saw an innumerable company of
people, who filled the way up betwixt the Emperors Palace and the Deyro's
Court. The streets were made very even, and strewed with white sand, and railed
in on both sides, and guarded all along by Soldiers of both their Majesty's
and of the Deyro's, all clothed in long white vestments, with head-pieces of
black wax, and armed each with two Sables and a Pike, for defense of the
passage through which the Coaches and Horses were to march; all running waters
and ditches were covered with boards and planks; and scaffols were raised on
both sides the way for the spectators.

The first that passed were Servants that belonged to the Deyro and Emperor,
with many Palanquimos or Porters, who carried the Deyro's baggage, packt up in
great square Wax Chests (the covers whereof were painted with the Deyro's Arms
in Gold) to the Emperors Court: These were accompanied with a great train of
Attendants, who were again followed by six and forty Palanquin Stools or
Sedans, wherein the Women belonging to the Deyro's Wives were carried; these
Sedans were all of them curiously wrought of bright white wood, six foot high,
laid with plates of Copper, and finely painted, each of these being carried by
four lusty follows; after them went one and twenty Sedans or Norimons, (for so
they call them here) covered with black Wax and gilded, and behind them some
twenty seven more whose doors and windows were all gilded; some of the Deyro's
chief Lords were carried in these, each of them having a Quirosol wholly
gilded, and covered with a very rich covering, carried before them; these Lords
were attended by one hundred and eight Pages in white liveries; behind them
marched twenty four Gentlemen on horse back, clothed and armed in their
Habillements of war; their Head-pieces were of Wax, with little black feathers
behind; they were clothed in Coats with great wide sleeves; their Breeches
were long and small, made of even Satin of all colors, embroydered with Gold
and Silver very richly; they had little black Boots, gilded with stripes of
Gold; their Arms were gilded; Sables with Bows and Arrows were girt to them,
with great rich embroydered Scarfes, whose ends hung over on each side of the
Horse; their Horses were goodly and beautiful, with little heads, little ears,
and short bodies; their Saddles were all waxed or gilded, the seats being of
embroydered works or Tigers skins; the maines of these Horses were twisted, or
platted, with Silver and Gold, the breasts and buttocks were adorned with nets
of Silk, whose strings hung low; they had gilded horns on their foreheads, and
were shod with interwoven Silk in stead of Iron; every Horse was lead by two
Footmen, two great Quirosols made of fine linen, and coverd above with red
cloth, with fringe round about it, being born before, and serving to cover the
Horse, which was further attended with eight Pages, or Servants, all in
white liveries, and armed as the manner is, with two Sables or Svvords: And
thus these Horsemen rode by paces, from the Deyro's to the Emperors Palace in
very good order. These were followed by three rich Coaches, in which were the
Deyro's three principal Wives; each of these Coaches were four fathoms high,
two fathoms long, and one broad, being beautified with Wax figures, and
enameled with Gold; there were three windows on each side, and two before,
being hung with rich curtains; the entry was behind the Coach, made like the
gate of a Palace, with chambers on both sides; all under the windows seemed
black Wax; the rands of the wheels were gilded, and the spoakes finely turned
and in-laid with Gold; when they moved, they seemed to turn against a Looking
glass, by reason of the clearness of the glittering Wax, which was goodly to
behold; These wheels were covered with pent-houses very artificially and richly
wrought, every corner of them being platted with fine Gold; the top of all, or
cover, was black Wax, whereupon the Deyro's arms were curiously done in Gold;
every one of these great Coaches, or rather Towers, were drawn with two great
strong Bulls, covered with nets of red twined Silk, which were lead by four
footmen clothed in white; each of these Coaches valued at seventy thousand
Tails, a Tail being full five English shillings. The train of Pages, all
clothed in white, that attended these Ladies, was numerous, each of them having
a gilded footstool, and a pair of Wax slippers carried behind them. Then
followed twenty three Norimons, or Palanquins, being made of white Wood, and
plaited with Copper, wherein were the Servants of these three Ladies, each
waited upon with a great Quirosol, two Pages, and four Porters to carry them.
Behind these followed sixty eight of the Deyro's Gentlemen on horseback,
clothed and armed as the former; they marched by two and two, being accompanied
by a great train of Servants, Slaves, Pages, Footmen and Pike-men.

The aforesaid Cavalry being passed, there followed Two gilded Sables, the
extremities of them being plaited with Gold. One great Vier-werck, rich and
curious. One Peyl Compass, exceeding great and costly. Two great gold
Candlesticks. Two great Eben Pillars. Three small square Tables, or Desks, of
black Eben wood, the corners being plaited with Gold. Four great Tables of the
same. Two great fair Plates, or Dishes, wrought in Gold. One pair of wax
Slippers.


Two beautiful Coaches, equal in form and fineness with the former, followed
these rarities: The old Emperor, Sadosienminano Tonofindelanda, sat in the
first; and in the other the young Emperor, called Oeudesienminano
Tonoyuemytsamma. Fourscore pairs, or couples, of Gentlemen marched on foot
before these Coaches; they were armed each of them with two Sables and a Pike,
being all proper stout men, and serve for the Emperors guards; four rich
Quirosols were carried before their Majesty's, and four men with Pikes cleared
the passage; two beautiful Horses, richly trapped, were lead before the
Coaches, on whose sides eight Men, armed with Bows and Arrows and long Pikes,
did march in order to wait upon them. The Emperors Brothers, and all the
Princes and great Lords of Iapan, followed on horseback, clothed and armed as
the former, save that some were richer then other, according to their births
and qualities; there were one hundred sixty and four of these Grandees, the
chief whereof, and those who immediately followed the Emperors, were Owarny
Cammy Samma, the old Emperors Brother. Quyne Deymangon Samma, another of his
Brothers. Massammenemoet Nocammy Samma, yet another Brother. Matsendeyro
Thuykesnocammi Samma, Lord of Canga. Matsendeyro Montsnocammy Samma, Lord of
Satsuma. Matsendeyro Iondonne. Matsendeyro Symoutsquedonne. Matsendeyro
Quonnenochwuchoo. Turogano Deynangono Cammy Samma, the young Emperors eldest
Prince. Myttotchonango Samma, the old Emperors Brother.


These ten Lords rode immediately behind the Emperors Coach, each by himself,
attended with a numerous train of Gentlemen, Pages, Pikemen, etc. according to
their state and quality: The rest of the Lords followed by couples, two and
two, the best of them taking the left hand, which in this Couutrey is the upper
and best place; Ouwaydonne, the old Emperors chief Councellor, and
VVoutadonne, the young Emperors chief Councellor, led the van of the
remaining one hundred and fifty four Lords, all of them marching in good order,
great state and magnificency and rarely mounted upon brave Horses, which
pransed and curvetted all the way. Four hundred armed Soldiers, all in white
Liveries, followed after these, two by two; and after them six new fair
Coaches, though not above half so great as the other, and only drawn by one Ox,
but proportionably beautiful; the Deyro's Concubines sat in these, who were
again followed by thirty four pair of Gentlemen on horseback, attended with
many Servants and Slaves. There was yet another Coach wherein the Deyro's
Secretary rode, accompanied with thirty seven Gentlemen on horseback; then
followed the Norimons, which carried several of the Deyro's Grandees, whereof
fifteen were of black Wood, inlaid with white Ivory; thirteen of black Wood,
adorned with Wax and Gold; and eighteen wholly done over with black Wax. Forty
six great gilded Quirosols, with their attendants, followed these Norimons; and
behind them fifty four Gentlemen, being the Deyro's Musicians, with several
Instruments, as Pipes, Tabours, Cimbals, Bells, and some stringed ones which
are not known amongst us. The Deyro himself followed these Musicians, siting in
a great square Edifice, surrounded with drawing doors and windows on each
corner; this lodge was about nine foot high, its cover being round, and in the
middle a gilded Ball, whereon stood a Cock with his wings spread, of pure Gold:
This structure was very beautiful, being adorned on all sides with carved
Images, its angles plaited with pure Gold, and the roof of it intimating the
Heaven, with Sun, Moon and Stars. There were fifty Persons, all Gentlemen
belonging to the Emperors, clothed with long white Robes, and Wax Head-pieces,
that carried this ambulatory Palace: Forty Gentlemen antickly dressed,
although armed with Europian Head-pieces, and Pikes gilded at the ends, went
before the Deyro, and these were of his Lifeguard. One of his principal Lords
did immediately follow him, armed as the other, bearing in his hand a Shield
stuck full of Arrows; then came forty great Quirosols, all covered with fine
white linen, and belonging to the aforesaid Guards: These were again followed
by thirteen great Wax Chests, carried by the Palanquyn Porters: And lastly, the
whole procession was closed with four hundred persons all in white vestments,
marching six in a rank in very good order. The Deyro and his Train were no
sooner past, but the evening came on, and an innumerable company of people of
all sorts: the Stages and Houses which had been filled with Spectators, had
disgorged their burdens in the Streets; so that the multitude was so immensly
great, that very many disorders happened, as cutting of purses, stealing,
murdering and robbing each other; very many were stifled in the crowds, and
such as but once fell, were sure never to rise, being trodden to death: The
noise all night was so great, as if the City had been in an uproar; and the
insolences grew to that height, that many persons of quality, who could not
get out of the throng, or were retiring to their houses, were set upon, and
very many of them spoiled and murdered: among others, the Lord of Firandos
Secretary saw his Servant robbed, and a rich Cabinet of his taken from him,
before his own face, whilst he himself had much ado to defend himself from
the violence of these assaulters. We were forced, with our Servants, to quit
our stage, and put our selves into the crowd, because of the night, and the
danger to continue where we were, which we durst not do without running the
hazard of being murdered; the preass was so great, that we were borne up by
the people most of our way, being but seldom able to put a foot upon the
ground; yet at length, by Gods great blessing, we got all (without any
considerable loss) safely to our lodgings.

The Deyro and his Wives were lodged three days and three nights in the
Emperors Palace, being served by their Majesty's and their Brothers, and the
greatest Princes of their Court, every meal consisting of one hundred and
forty services. This feasting being done, the young Emperor gave the Deyro
these following presents: Three thousand Boats of Silver, each of four Tayls
and three Marses. Two rich Sables. Two hundred Iapan Gowns. Three hundred
pieces of wrought Satin. Twenty picols of raw Silk. One great piece of
Calombacq. Five great Silver pots full of Musk. And ten beautiful Horses with
their accoutrements.


The old Emperor gave him
Two hundred pieces of Gold, each worth fifty four Silver ones. One hundred
Indian gowns richly wrought. Two great Silver pots full of Musk. Five Catti
Calombacq. Two hundred pieces of red Silk. Five Silver pots full of Amber
Greece. And five brave Horses with their accoutrements.
His Secretary had given him
Three hundred Boats of Silver, equal with the other in worth. And twenty
Indian Gowns.
A Description of the Government, Might, Religion, Customs, Traffic, and
other remarkable Affairs in the Kingdom of SIAM: Written in the Year 1636. by
Joost Schouten, Directour of the East-India-Company in that Country.
SIAM is a famous and potent Kingdom, situate upon the continent of Asia
eighteen degrees Northern Latitude, where it bordereth upon the Countries of
Pegu and Ava twelve degrees; it extends it self Westward to the Bengasche
sea of Martavan to seven degrees, where it borders upon the Kingdoms of Pay
tany and Queda; Southward from the Bengasche to the Patanys Ocean, this Coast
turns Northward to thirteen degrees, making with its bowing the Gulf of Siam;
thence the Coast runs again Southward to twelve degrees, and leaving the Sea
terminates Eastward upon the Desert of Cambodia, and the Kingdoms of Iangonia,
Tangou, and Langjang to eighteen degrees, even to Ava and Pegu; so that the
form of this Land is like an half Moon, and contains in its circuit four
hundred and fifty Dutch miles, one Dutch mile makes six English. This Country
(which is in many places mountainous, woody and moorish, especially toward the
Sea, although for the most part even and clay, and is likewise full of all
sorts of Beasts and Fowls, and Rivers replenished with abundance of Fish) has
where it bordereth upon the Benga and Siams Seas many Islands, Bays, Havens and
Rivers most commodious for the receipt of great and small Vessels; I shall not
particularize all, only mention the chief River, as the most frequented Haven
of the whole Kingdom: This River (called by the name of Menam, or the Mother of
Waters) is great, wide, and very long, its course being not known unto them. It
passes from the North Southward very swiftly through the Land of Ava and Pegu,
and several Provinces of Siam, until that it discharge it self by three mouths
into the Sea of Siam; it partaketh of the nature of those famous Rivers Ganges
and Nilus, flowing once a year so high that it covers most part of the
Country, making it incredibly fruitful, and destroying by this innundation
(which continues four or five months) all obnoxious vermin and creatures. The
greatest mouth of this River, is that which lies most Eastward thirteen degrees
and a half Northern latitude; and in the middle of the inlet, there is a great
flat, or sand, a mile long, that crosses the entry of the River five or six
foot deep at low water, but at height is fifteen or sixteen, and in the Winter
months, when the the floods are great, there is ordinarily seventeen or
eighteen foot and more; great Ships that go deep, are forced to anchor at four,
five, or six fathoms water without this banck, the ground being clay and good;
but those that pass this flat at high water, enter the River without any more
danger of running on ground till they come to the Town of Banckock, six Dutch
miles upwards; then the River grows narrower and more shallow, Ships drawing
eleven or twelve foot water, being scarceable to mount to the City of India,
where they are sometimes forced to stay till the months of September, October
and November, for water to return. The Country is generally well peopled,
especially the lower part of it, being full of Villages and Towns; the
principal whereof are Iudica, Picelouck, Sourckelouk, Capheng, Soutcethay,
Kephinpet, Conseywan, Pytsyay Pitsidi, Lydure, Tenou, Mormelon, Martenayo,
Lygor, Bordelong, Tannassary, Banckock, Pypry, Rapry, Mergy, and several other,
all which are governments and heads of Provinces; besides these there are many
Cities and Buroughs full of people, which I omit as superfluous. The City of
Iudica, the Metropolis of the Kingdom, and seat of the King and his chiefest
Nobles, is situate upon the River Menam, in a little round Island, encompassed
with a thick stone wall, about six English miles round; the Suburbs are on the
other side of the River, closely builded, and full of Temples and Cloisters,
lying in a flat and fruitful Country. The Streets of the walled Town are many
of them large, straight and regular, with channels running through them,
although for the most part of small narrow Lanes, Ditches, and Creekes most
confusedly placed; the Citizens have an incredible number of small Boats or
Prawes, which come to their very doors, especially at floods and high water.
The building of the Houses is according to the Indian fashion, slight, and
covered with Tiles; but the City is beautified with more then three hundred
fair Temples and Cloisters, all curiously builded, and adorned with many
gilded Towers, Pyramids, and Pictures without number. The Kings Palace is
seated upon the River, resembling a little Town apart, great and magnificent,
many of its Buildings and Towers being entirely gilded. This royal and
admirable City is perfectly well seated, and populous to a wonder, being
frequented by all Nations; and is likewise impregnable, as not to be besieged
but six months in a year, by reason of the innundations of the River, which
covers the Country round with its overflowings. The Soveraignity and
Government of Siam is in the King, a Prince of a Noble and ancient family, who
has been in possession of this Kingdom, and the neighboring Provinces, many
hundred of years; this Prince is absolute in his Dominions, disposing of War
and Peace, Alliances, Justice, Pardons and Remissions, etc. at his pleasure; He
makes Laws without any advise or consent of his Council, or Lords, his will
being the rule he walks by, unless his goodness descend sometimes to counsel
with his Mandoryns, them of his Council; these sometimes deliberate upon his
Majesty's propositions, and present their result to him by way of humble
supplication, which he confirms, changes or rejects, as he thinks good. He
disposes Soveraignity of all the Dignities and great Offices of his Kingdom,
without respect of persons, noble or otherwise, (except some of the Antientest
and greatest Families) to such as have or may serve him well, whom he again
deprives of their honors for small faults; so that they are all his Slaves and
Vassals, which the Great ones esteem an honor, and put in their titles. The
King thus soveraignly disposing of all things, does notwithstanding nothing
without some appearance of reason, and conformity to the Laws of the Kingdom,
which however ancient, he by his usurped prerogative and power, does interpret
and bow to his Arbitrary will and pleasure. His Majesty's Court and Train is
exceeding great and glorious; He seldom shows himself to the People, and very
sparingly to his Grandees and Officers of the Kingdom, which happens at certain
appointed times and days; when he gives them Audience he is richly clothed and
crowned, sitting upon a golden Throne, at whose feet his Gentlemen and
Attendants reverently kneel, accompanied with three hundred armed Soldiers of
his Lifeguard: All, as well Strangers as Subjects, who have audience of his
Majesty, whilst they are in his presence, must continually kneel, with folded
hands and heads hanging down; when they speak to him, it must be in this humble
posture, loading him with titles and praises; his Answers are esteemed Oracles,
and his commands unchangeable; so that he lives happy in all imaginable worldly
pleasures, having many magnificent Houses up and down the Kingdom, as also
other places, Tents and Pavilions: He eats highly, but his drink is simple
water, or Coco, all strong drinks being prohibited by the Clergy and the Laws,
and esteemed scandalous. His Majesty goes ordinarily by water with eight or
ten very costly and fine Barges, each with eighty or a hundred rowers; he sits
under a gilded Pavilion upon a Throne, accompanied with his Courtiers and other
Barges, to the number of three or four hundred, with his Train and Guards
waiting upon him; most of the great Ones follow the Court at such times, each
in his rich gilded Barge or Praw; so that the whole train of them is twelve or
fourteen hundred, and sometimes more. When he goes by land, he is mounted upon
a gilded seat, and carried upon men's shoulders, the train being ordinarily the
same, all marching in order and great silence; no body is seen in his way or
sight, but upon their knees, with folded hands, and bowed heads and bodies;
this reverence better becoming a celestial Diety, then an earthly Majesty.

Once every year, about the month of October, the King of Siam shows himself
by water and land in state to his people, going to the principal Temple of the
Gods, to offer there for the welfare of his Person and Kingdom, the manner
follows: When he goes by land, the procession is led by two hundred Elephants,
each attended with three armed men; these are follovved by many Musicians
with Gomnies, Pipes and Drums, and a thousand men richly armed, and provided
with Banners: Then march the great Lords of the Kingdom on horseback, many of
them vvearing Crowns of Gold upon their heads; and every one vvaited upon by
sixty, eighty, or an hundred men on foot: Two hundred Iapan Soldiers follovv
these with bright Arms and rich Colors, and much noise of Instruments; then
comes the Lifeguard with the King's Horses and Elephants, richly adorned with
precious Stones and Gold furniture; which is follovved by many Servants laden
with fruits and presents for the Sacrifice, accompanied with a svvet consort
of Music: These are again follovved by many of the great Ones on foot, with
folded hands; as also some Crowned Grandees, whereof one carries the gilded
Standard, and the other the Svvord of Justice; his Majesty follows next in
person in his royal Robes, sitting upon an Elephant, or else a gilded Throne,
carried upon men's shoulders, and vvaited upon by many Lords and Courtiers; the
Prince, or Heir of the Kingdom, follovveth him; and then in order the Kings
Wives and Concubins, seated upon Elephants in little enclosed Cabinets: lastly
the ordinary Courtiers follovv; the whole provision consisting of fifteen or
sixteen thousand persons, having its rear brought up by six hundred armed men.
But if the King go by water, then two hundred Lords, each in his Barge,
seated in a gilded Cabinet, with eighty or ninety Rovvers, lead the van; these
are follovved by ten extraordinary rich figured Pravvs, or Barges, the which,
as also the Oars, are all gilded, each having ninety or an hundred Watermen:
The King is in the richest of them, sitting like an Idol upon a golden Throne,
with his Lords in their humblest posture at his feet: the royal Banner is
borne by one of these Grandees, at the head of the Barge, in state. The King's
Brother follovveth next with his Train; and after him his Majesty's Wives and
Concubins, in gilded Cabinets and Tents, each in their Barges apart: lastly the
Gentry, Courtiers, Guards, and other Attendants follovv, the whole amounting
to five or six and twenty thousand persons. The River is bordered on both
sides with Boats, and an infinite number of People, who reverence and adore
their King in his passage, with bended heads and folded hands.

The Dominion and Revenue of the Crown is great, amounting yearly to many
Millions, arising out of inland Commodities, as Rice, Sappang, Tin, Lead,
Saltpeter; as also the profits of the Sand and Mountain Gold, which are only
sold by the Kings Factors to foreign Merchants: He has also his Customs for
outlandish Wares; his Tributes and Presents from Subject-Princes, and
Governors of Cities and Provinces, who know how much they must contribute; as
also the profits of his Traffic with Chormandel and China: add to these the
inland trade, carried on by his Factours in the City Iudica, or elsewhere, and
his Majesty of Siam will be found to be one of the richest Princes of India.
There are several Officers appointed for the receipt of incomes, who must
account every year, and that exactly: Most of these moneys are expended in
building and repairing of Temples, in rewarding of merits, and defraying the
public charges of the Kingdom; the residue being brought into the Treasury,
which is esteemed rich and great. The Laws and Customs of Siam are strange
(though orderly) in the succession of their Princes; when the King dies, it is
not his Son, but his Brother who is Heir to the Crown; but in case he have no
Brother, then indeed his Son steps in by course, whose Brothers do succeed
successively; lastly all the Sons of the eldest Brother, who has reigned,
follow by turns, the Daughters being wholly excluded any pretense to the
Government. But this order is not always observed, the Scepter being sometimes
usurped by him of the family who is most powerful, and most gracious with the
people, which is the present Kings case; who having raised himself before his
turn, caused all his Competitors, and their Adherents, to be slain, to the end
he might peaceably enjoy what he had unjustly got, and leave the Crown to his
Brother or Children after him.

The ordinary Justice, both Criminal and Civil, is administered through the
Kingdom according to their ancient Customs and Laws, by Officers purposely
appointed: But in the City of Judica they have (besides the ordinary Courts of
Judicature) a College of twelve Councillors, with one principal President,
which does definitively decide all Appeals, and other businesses, whether
Criminal or Civil. It is indeed permitted, though with extraordinary expense
and cost, to appeal to the King and his Council, who ordinarily confirm and
cause the former sentence to be put in execution. In this and lesser Courts,
all Civil disputes are brought in by Lawyers; and the cause being pleaded, and
witnesses examined on both sides before the Commissioners, the Secretary makes
an extract of the whole, which being writ in a Book, it is signed by both
Plantiff and Defendant, or others deputed by them; that done the Book is sealed
up, and kept by the Judge till next Sessions; at which time it is again opened
in the presence of both parties, and their debates heard, noted, and sealed as
before: So that the Lawyers, by their several exceptions, demurs and practices,
do very often delay and keep up the parties for many years; until at length,
after much sollicitings and expense, the cause is anew opened and examined, and
finally adjudged and ended by a full College. But in Criminal matters, as
injuries, robberies, murder, treason, or the like, the guilty, or suspected
person, is apprehended, imprisoned, and examined; if he deny the fault against
witnesses, or great presumptions, he is forced by torture to confession; all
which being noted in a Book, and presented to the Judges, they immediately
proceed to Sentence and Execution; except in Capital crimes, such being
reserved for the Kings pleasure, who either pardons, banishes, or causes the
condemned person to be put to death, according to the sentence. Offenses are
ordinarily punished as they are more or less heinous, with cashiering,
banishments into Deserts, slavery, confiscations, mutilation of hand or foot,
burning in oil, quartering, and other severe executions. Where the case is
doubtful, no witnesses appearing, nor no strong presumptions against the
accused, so that the Judge knows not how or what to do, he then permits both
parties to try it out by common purgation; either by ducking under water,
holding their hands in boiling oil, to go barefoot upon hot coals, or to eat
a mess of charmed rice; this conjured mess being made up into balls, is given
them by the Priest with much ceremony; and he that can swallow it without
casting it up again, and behaves himself in this and the other trials with most
courage, is esteemed most innocent and acquitted, whilst the other, whether
accusor or accused, is most severely punished, according to the nature of the
crime.

The Kings power and military force by water and land, consists most of his own
Vassals and Natives; he has indeed some few Strangers, as Moors, Malayers, and
some five hundred Iapanners, the most esteemed for their courage and fidelity,
although the Prince now reigning drove them out of his Country, but they are
now crept in again; so that most of his forces are Siammers, who must serve
without pay, and be always in a readiness, the hundredth, fiftieth, twentieth,
tenth, or fifth man being levied, according to the Kings pleasure and
occasions. Besides these, the Grandees have ordinarily some hundreds of men in
their service, who wait upon them in the field; so that his Majesty can raise
an Army when he thinks good, of two or three thousand men, with two or three
hundred Elephants, Victuals, Ammunition, and other warlike Instruments; for all
this his Armies seldom exceed one hundred thousand men, and not ordinarily
forty or fifty thousand, as his affairs require, either for offensive or
defensive. His foot are in reasonable good order, though merely armed with Bows
and Arrows, Shields, Swords, Pikes, and a few Guns: the horse are not better,
though generally armed with Swords, Shields, Bows, and Lances. Most of their
force consists in some hundreds of tramed Elephants, each of them furnished
with three armed men; and they have a good quantity of Cannons, but do not
well know how to use them. At sea his Majesty has several Galleys and Frigots
well provided with great Guns, though the Seamen and Mariners are but
pitiful. The Pravvs, vvherevvith the Siammers can stoutly scuffle, are without
number, but ill ordered and armed, and yet sufficient to deal with their
neighboring enemies as unskilful as they are, though far short of our Europian
Vessels and Mariners either to fight or sail. These Mariners, especially when
their Princes have been brave, have conquered many of the neighboring Kingdoms
and Provinces; but being all human things, they have their vicissitudes, these
victories did but follovv the fortune of their favorites.

There has of old been great wars betwixt them of Pegu and Siam, with
various success: the King of Pegu pretending to the Monarchy of the
neighboring Kingdoms, which he has formerly had, and as yet possesses in
part; so that the borders of these Kingdoms are quite ruined and unpeopled, and
these Princes of late years content with inroads and sudden invasions, with
small flying Armies of twenty or thirty thousand men, which they have
ordinarily for defense of the frontiers. The Siammers have had likewise wars
against other Princes, as the Kings of Jangoma, Tangou, Langhs-ja^gh^, and
lastly against the King of Siam, and stoutly defended himself against those
great Armies which were sent to reduce him; of late the Kingdom has been in
peace until the usurpation of the last deceased King, who having destroyed the
true Heirs, and possessed the Government contrary to order, was likewise
himself slain, together with his Brothers, and the Crown seized upon by another
of the blood, who after several civil and foreign broils enjoyed it peaceably,
and governs at present with great reputation and honor, continuing still his
wars with them of Pegu, and the Rebel Cambodian.

This Prince, as well as his Predecessors, is kind to Strangers, but respects
and esteems the Netherlanders more then the Portugals; which the late King
sufficiently testified, when upon the taking of a Holland Yacht in the River,
Anno 1624. the Spanish Gally of Don Ferdinando de Silva was violently seized
upon by his command, and restitution and satisfaction made to our Company;
hereupon he was forced into a war with them of Manhila, and suffered much in
his China voyages, which was well recompensed by the seasonable assistance of
six Dutch men of war, which were lent him to be employed against his Rebels of
Patany.

The King has more then three thousand tame Elephants in several parts of his
Kingdom, each attended by two or three men, wherein much of his greatness does
consist; for these Beasts are very much esteemed in India, especially when
trained up to the wars, the rest are employed to carry Ordinances, Tents, and
Provisions to the Camp. These creatures being great, very strong, and strangely
docible, are taken in several parts of the Country, and disciplined as
follows: A Troop of fifteen or twenty tame she Elephants, which were taken
when they were young, are driven into the Wilderness, with two or three fellows
to observe them; the wild ones upon sight of them, associate with them, one or
two at once, which are driven with the rest insensibly into a great square
building with high stone walls, and encompassed on the outside with trees which
cover them; as soon as these Beasts are decoyed in, a great turn pike is shut
behind them, and gates to hinder their return; when they are entered further
into the square place, the tame Elephants being brought up to it by their
teachers, upon notice from them, slip away through other gates for the purpose;
so that the wild ones being left alone, are out of other little squares,
whereof one is in the middle, vexed and tormented with all manner of inventions
to make them angry and furious: the above mentioned squares are made of great
thick posts, well nigh two fathoms high, but so far distant from each other,
that a man may creep betwixt them; so that when the Elephant with his running,
turning and winding, seeks to revenge himself upon his tormenters, they save
themselves behind these posts; at length, when the beast is weary, and
sufficiently tormented, thee is a great door opened, into which he runs to save
himself, which is immediately shut upon him, and he restrained to a narrower
prison, and is there bound to two or three tame Elephants, placed for the
purpose; this done, they are led into a covered house, where cross planks being
contrived under the wild ones belly, they are hoyssed up with pullies, and
left as it were half hanging for some time; so that with this invention, and
help of the tame ones, they are wholly tamed in three or four months, and
rendered supple and useful. The Court is for the most part present (Galleries
being builded for the Spectatours) at the taking and tormenting of the
Elephants, which is most pleasant to behold. These Beasts are sometimes taken
in the open fields, being environed with tame ones, and caught in snares and
jins; but this way is dangerous although often practiced; and both show how
fabulously Writers have informed the World in this particular.

A white Elephant (esteemed by the Indians a wonder in Nature) has been found
in Siam, and no other known Land; it is esteemed by the inhabitants as the
Prince of the Elephants, and has been so treated by the Kings of this Country,
who have had of them in the Palaces many times, and caused them to be served in
state, often visited them, and honored their Vassals with more then ordinary
respect. These white Elephants have formerly occasioned great wars betwixt the
Siammers and their Neighbors; and some sixty years since against the King of
Pegu, who proving victorious, did not only take the white Elephant prisoner,
but obliged the King of Siam to become his Tributary; which yoke the following
Princes did not only cast off, but gloriously revenge their Predecessors
misfortunes. During my first residence in Siam, the then King took two young
white Elephants, but both died shortly after to his great grief. This Nation
believes somewhat more then humain natue of this creature, alleging they do
not only respect him for his whiteness, but for his divine understanding; which
appears in his pride and glorying when he is treated in state, and of his
melancholy and sorrow when those honors are denied him, or that the black
Elephant refuses him his obeissance.

The Siammers, as also the Neighboring Nations, are all Idolaters and
Heathens, so that they have every where great and little Temples and Cloisters
for the service of their Gods; and the dwellings of their Priests. These
Edifices are builded of Wood and Stone very Artificial and sumptuous, with
gilded Towers and Pyramids; each of the Temples and Cloisters being filled
with an incredible number of Idols, of diverse materials and greatness, gilded
adorned and beautified very rich and admirable; some of the Idols are four,
six, eight, and ten fathoms long; amongst the rest there is one of an
unimaginable greatness, being one hundred and twenty foot high. In these
Temples and Cloisters there are many Priests and religious Men disciplined, and
very obedient to their superiors, being all subject to the Arch Flamin, or
Prior of the great Temple of Iudica, whose spiritual power is vastly great,
though subordinate to the Kings. All the Clergy (whereof there are in Iudica
alone at least thirty thousand) are clothed, without any remarkale difference,
in yellow linen clothes, having their heads all shorn. The learned amongst
these are professed Priests, out of which the Regents of their Temples are
chosen, (who are held in great esteem and reverence by the People) preaching,
teaching, and offering upon their Feasts and Holy days. These are prohibited
the natural use of Women, upon pain of being burned; but they may always, and
at pleasure, upon declaration of their frailty or weakness, quit their frocks,
and betake themselves to another life, which happens often amongst them. They
have their morning and evening Song, Readings and other Services, celebrated in
their Cloisters every day, and frequented by their society. They live upon the
Alms and bounty of the King and great Ones, as also on the fruit which their
Church Lands bring forth; but principally out of the sweet and labors of the
Commonalty, who unanimously share with them, they sending every morning some
Priests and Clerks out of their Cloisters, with begging bags to receive these
donations and charity: Besides these Priests, there are a sort of old Nuns
shorn, lodged in Chapels near the greatest Temples, who assist very devoutly
in all their preachings, singings, ceremonies, and other Church services, but
all voluntary, being tied to no rules or prescriptions. These Heathens do
generally believe, (however differing in many particulars) that there is one
upper God, with many lesser Deities in Heaven, who created all things: that the
Souls of Men are immortal, and shall be rewarded or punished according to their
merits and actions; the good dwelling with the God in bliss, whilst the wicked
are tormented by the Devils that seduced them. Their Religion is principally
founded upon these points, which have been delivered to them in writing many
hundred years since, and confirmed with the testimony of many holy men, (whose
memory they worship in their Images, which they have set up like so many lesser
Deities) who by their charity to the Church, to the poor, and to all things
that had life, they endeavored to merit Heaven, and avoid the dreadful
punishments of the Devils. Those that are religious and superstitious in these,
buy ordinarily upon Feast days, multitudes of Birds and living Fish, bringing
them to the Temple, and there give them their liberty; esteeming it a great sin
to kill not only men, but the more rude creatures, fancying the souls of
deceased persons to be transmigrated into them: all other evils which Nature
teaches us to be sin, they account so too, and are much preached against by
their Priests. The chief Ceremonies of this Idolatry are, as we said,
preaching, teaching, singing evening and morning Prayers, and offering of
Sacrifice, which is done with torches, candles, incense, spices, and flowers at
the altars of their images, which in their opinion represent the great God, the
lesser Deities, and holy Men, whereby they think their wrath is appeased; to
which end they celebrate with much solemnity at the new, full, and quarters of
the Moon, as also several other extraordinary Festivals, with a fasting from
any thing which has had life, for three months together, they pray for the
sick, and also the dead, who being first superstitiously shaven, anointed,
charmed, and with much ceremony, as weeping, cutting of the hair of the head by
the next friend, alms, prayers of the Priests, music, plays, fireworks, and
other shows (according to the quality and ability of the deceased) burnt with
fire, their collected ashes are afterward anointed and buried near the
Temples, a Pyramid rich and magnificent being erected over them; so that these
funerals are extremely expensive to the survivors, as well as honorable for the
deceased. The Priests carry themselves very moderatly to those of a contrary
Religion, condemning no opinions, but believe that all, though of differing
tenets, living virtuously, may be saved, all services which are performed with
zeal being acceptable to the great God, especially theirs, they being convinced
of its truth and innocence. This constancy of theirs makes them not easily to
be drawn to any other persuasion, which has been sufficiently attempted by the
Portugals, whose industrious Priests omitted nothing for their conversion, and
by the Mohometans who are no less zealous in their way, though with little or
no success by either of them, and yet the Christians, as also the Mahometans,
are both permitted the free exercise of their Religions in their Country.
However these Heathen be thus religious, yet they fear and serve (although
contrary to the opinion of most of their Priests) the very Devils, whom they
believe to be the authors and causes of all evil, as the Gods are of every
thing that is good and virtuous: They adore these unclean Spirits in their
sicknesses and misfortunes, celebrating their feasts with instruments playing,
and offering attoning sacrifices of fruits and living creatures: They are so
strangely abominable in their gestures and actions, that it is not fit for a
Christian either to see or write them; thus fondly searching his favor, whose
indulgences do but plunge them deeper in their unhappy mistakes and errors.
The people of this Country are reasonably well proportioned, brown and tawny;
they are none of the best Soldiers, though proud and insolent in their
victories; they are modest enough in their civil conversation, though naturally
light, fearful, incredulous, dissimuled, deceitful, and very lying. The men are
lazy and slow, insomuch that the women, with their slaves, are forced (contrary
to the customs of other Nations) to labor the earth, and do most of their
husbands work, besides taking care for their families and houses, whilst the
men follow their pleasure and divertisements abroad. They clothe themselves
(both men and women) thin, according to the hot climat they live in; both sexes
wear painted petticoats, the men covering their upper parts with a short shirt
with half-sleeves, and the women with a thin cloth, both ends hanging over
their shoulders to hide their breasts: They wear for ornaments gold pins in
their hair, and rings of the same metal on their fingers: This is the ordinary
wear, high and low being all of a fashion, and not distinguishable but by the
richness of their vestments, and the greatness of their trains, which they much
glory in: The Gentry and Nobles have many slaves attending them when they go
abroad, some ten, twenty, thirty, or more, according to their abilities and
greatness; and not a Citizen, or his Wife, stirs in the streets without one or
two of these slaves to wait upon them. Their houses are builded according to
the fashion in India, of wood and reeds, and covered with Coco leaves, or
tiles; the floors are raised three or four foot high, their appartements being
commodious, though but slenderly furnished, only for sleeping, and dressing
what is necessary for their refection. Their diet is but mean, as rice, fish,
and herbs; they drink water, though on Feast days they indulge more the common
people, drinking ordinarily Arak, or Brandy-Wine.

They differ very much in their customs about marrying; great Persons need
nothing but the consent of their Parents or Friends, (the Priests not
intermedling at all) the ceremony ending in feasting and rejoicing. Husband and
Wife may part again at pleasure, dealing their goods and children without
further circumstance, and may re-marry if they think good, without fear of
shame or punishment. A man may keep as many Concubins as he pleases, besides
his Wife, though they are in some subordinacy to her, whose Children only
inherit, the other being contented with small portions for their subsistence.
Great men's goods are divided after their deaths into three parts; one part for
the King, the second for the Priests and their Funerals, and the third for
their Children. The common People have other Customs; the Bridgroom buyeth his
Bride for a sum of moneys of her Father or Friends, whereupon the marriage is
made and concluded with a little feasting; but they may divorce, like the great
Ones, at pleasure, and marry again with the same liberty. The Children deal
their deceased parents goods equally, except some little advantages for the
eldest Son. They have many other Customs in marriage and succession, too long
and tedious to write. As for their Children, they send them to school at five
or six years old, where they are taught to write and read, and rendered fit for
Trades and other employments; some are continued in their studies by the
Priests their Masters, until they are called to Offices and advancements in the
State, and then they cast off the yellow frock; others continue there out of
hopes of being one day Heads of Temples and Schools, or sharing in the
Priesthood.

The Siammers, who live in Towns and populous places, are either Courtiers,
Officers, Merchants, Watermen, Fishermen, Tradesmen, or Artificers, each one
containing himself in his vocation: The Country people brew, till, plant, and
bring up fwarms of Cattle, as Horses, Kine; Swine, Deer; and domestic Fowl, as
Geefe; Peacocks, Ducks, Hens, Pigeons, and other tame creatures, insomuch that
provision is very cheap, notwithstanding the abundance of at which is sent into
the neighboring Provinces for their supply and use: They have Brick, Lime,
Wood, and all materials for building of Churches, Forts, Houses, Ships, Prawes,
Jonks, and other vessels in great quantities. The diverse Towns of this Country
have their several Trafficks and Commerce; in the chief City the trading is
very good and free in its course; the principal commodities are Choromandes and
Sura vestments, all manner of China wares, Jewels, Gold, Benjamin, Gumlack,
Wax, Sappang, Agerwood, Tin, and Lead, etc. as also vast numbers of
Harts-skins, one hundred and fifty thousand of these creatures being caught
yearly in this Country, and fold with much profit to the Japanners. They drive
a great trade with all eating provisions, especially Rice, many thousand Tuns
being transported yearly by forraigners. This City, by reason of its great
traffic, is frequented by several Nations, as the Indians, the more Western
Asiaticks, European Moors, and Christian Merchants. The King himself is also a
Merchant, and has his own Ships and Factours trading to Choromandel and China,
being for that cause more favored and privileged then any other Prince; he
likewise trafficks to Pegu, Ava, Jongoma, Langs-jang, and other places, besides
his negotiations at home, all which bring him incredible profit, and no small
disturbance to private Merchants, all which do certainly manifest the great
trade that is carried on in this Country. The Moneys current is of very fine
silver, of a round figure, and impressed with the Kings picture; the kinds are
a Ticlas, a Mase, and a Fong, worth thirty pence, seven pence half penny, and
four pence English, or near upon. They reckon ordinarily by Cattys, each being
twenty Tayls, or forty eight Royals of eight; and it is with this and no other
coin that they handle and trade with, save that there is a lesser called
Schulpkens, or little Sheels, whereof eight or nine thousand go to a Fong, being
brought out of Manilha, Borneo, and Lequeo, very useful for poor people.

Before the coming of the Netherlanders into the Indiaes, the Portugals had
great correspondence and amity with this Kingdom, being in such esteem and
honor by the King, that the Ambassadors sent from their Viceroys,
Governors, and Bishops of Malacca in India, were not only well received by his
Majesty, but richly presented by him, and many of the residing Portugals in
this Country advanced to great Offices and preferments; they had not only the
free exercise of their Religion, but their chief Priest had also a monthly
pension allowed him for his more splendid subsistence; thus they prospered here
for many years, until the Dutch Company got footing amongst them, and gained
upon them from time to time, by taking their Ships and interrupting their
trade, with Santhome and Nevagatain, insomuch that they are at present very low
and out of credit, occasioned more particularly by their taking of a Dutch
Yacht by a Spanish Gally in the River of Siam, which the King took so highly,
that he revenged it with his Arms, which produced a war between him and
Manilha; and however the Portugals seemed unconcerned in this quarrel, yet they
wholly lost their credit at Court, insomuch that the Bishop of Malaccas Vicar,
their chief Resident there, is debarred of his usual access to his Majesty and
his Ministers, whereas in former times they were esteemed the only and chief
Merchants of the whole Kingdom. This breach and difference between these two
Nations, was fomented by the Dutch, and increased by several acts of hostility
on the Portugals side, who took many of his Majesty's Ships and Vassals at Sea;
in revenge whereof, the Portugal Vessels were seized on in India, and all the
present Portugals natives clapped up in prison, who were after two years
restraint, upon a fictitious embassy, restored to their liberty; but this
practice coming to light, occasioned the seizure of a Castilian and a Portugal
Vessel in the Havens of Ligoor and Tanaslary, the men whereof were not released
till after a two years restraint; but then indeed returned with his Majesty's
Letters to the Governors of Manilha and Malacca, with invitations of their
former peace and traffic, where it is probable they may return, but
questionable whether they shall ever recover their former credit and authority.

It is more then thirty years since the Netherlanders came first to Siam, and
were admitted of by his Majesty; so that the Company have judged it necessary,
for the cherishing their traffic and alliance with so mighty a Prince, to
settle there; to which end they builded a house, or lodge, of wood in the City
of India, where they trade in in land commodities, and selling of clothes, as
also buying of Harts-skins, Sappang, etc. which are sent yearly to Japan: the
Company indeed has not profited much, by reason of several misfortunes by this
traffic; but they have gained more reputation then any Europians besides, by
the great friendship and correspondence which is betwixt them and the King; and
also have had the benefit of transporting great quantities of all sorts of
provisions in Batamia, which friendship, notwithstanding the several
successions of the Princes, disturbing the Companies Cantore and Servants, is
yet sufficiently conserved and continued, and ought in my opinion to be
cherished, as absolutely necessary for the good and welfare of our Company, as
also in regard of the Kings civil usage of us, and his aversion to the
Spaniards, our common enemy; finally our factory established there in the year
1633. and trading during my four years direction, are so much corrected and
increased, that the Company has remarkably gained by them, with probability,
with good mannagement of more signal advantages: To which end the General and
Council of India caused in Anno 1634. a stone lodge, with fit pack-houses,
pleasant apartements, and a commodious landing place, to be builded on the
borders of the River Menam, being one of the convenientest and best situated
of any that is unfortified in all the Indiaes.

And thus much we found good to discover of the customs and manners of the
Kingdom of Siam, being my observations during my eight years residence in the
chief City of the Country. I have followed the exact rules of truth, according
to my best knowledge and diligence, in this short relation, remitting the
curious to the more large and more particular discourses of better and more
exact judgments.

FINIS.

