A BLOW at the SERPENT; OR A GENTLE ANSWER FROM Maidston Prison to appease
WRATH, Advancing it self against Truth and Peace at ROCHESTER.

Together with the work of four days DISPUTES, in the Cathedral of Rochester,
in the County of Kent, between several Ministers, and Richard Coppin,
Preacher there, to whom very many people frequentlie came to hear, and much
rejoiced at the way of Truth and Peace he Preached, at the fame whereof the
Ministers in those parts began to ring in their Pulpits, saying, This man
Blasphemeth, to deter their Parishioners from hearing him.

Whereupon arose the Disputes, at which were some Magistrates, some Officers,
and Soldiers, peaceable and well-minded, and very many people from all parts
adjacent, before whom the truth was confirmed and maintained.

The whole matter written by the Hearers, on both sides.

Published for the confirmation and comfort of all such as receive the TRUTH in
the love of it.

By Richard Coppin, now in Maidston Prison for the Witness of Jesus.

Twenty five Articles since brought against him by the Ministers, as
Blasphemy, and his Answers to them, how he was committed without Examination,
and by whom.

Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer; for behold, the
Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be tried, and you shall
have tribulation, but be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown
of life. London, Printed by Philip Wattleworth, and are to be sold by William
Larnar at the Black-moor near Fleet-Bridge, 1656.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Friends and Brethren,
BE it known to you all that know me, and can in any measure witness with me
the hidden mystery of God, and of the Coll. 2. 2. Chap: 1. 27.
Father, and of Christ, which is Christ in you the Hope of Glory, how that
according to the measure received, I have been faithful in the acknowledgment
of this mystery, whereby your hearts might be comforted, and you knit together
in love, unto a full assurance of the understanding of this mystery in your
selves, an(...) discover and lay open to you the loose, sandy, and rotten
foundations, and buildings of all men's pretended Religions; in form, and not
in power, as things below Jesus Christ, to have an end, which has been my
work in the Lord, and to make known that Rock, the Lord Jesus, as the true
sound and unmovable foundation of our Religion, and undefiled, laid by God the
Father from all eternity, as that which will stand and endure for all men to
rest upon, walk in, and be saved by, which things to declare, I have not been
partial in, toward God, nor toward man, but have given to each one his due,
both as they are one, and as they are distinguished, that is, first for God, as
God to be all in all in every thing, to every creature of mankind manifest in
due time, as to himself, he ever was, is, and will Tim: 2:
be, and for man, as man, to be nothing but a poor worm, a weak, empty,
passive, nothing creature, as he ever was, is, and should be, and to have all
strength, wisdom, and fullness of knowledge and understanding in life and
glory with that one Almighty God, the all of all things.

And in which work the Lord has been with me to support me, to make sweet,
pleasant, and delightful unto me, all his ways of sufferings, persecutions,
and trialls for the truth, through which the enemies thereof are confounded;
and now last of all, my present imprisonment, all which are things that
accompany truth in the manifestation thereof to men, and to the advancement of
it self over all its enemies, by discovering them in the way of their
opposition against the truth, where they are taken in their own Net, and
destroyed: For the Devil was never known to be a Devil, and to be cast out
as a Devil, till he made war with Christ and Rev. 12: 7: 8: 9:
his Seed, and seeking to be something, became nothing, was cast out of heaven
to the earth, that is, all his ways and actions was made appear to be but
earthly, sensual, and devilish, as having no part in Christ, and so was cast
out of heaven, and as with him, so with all in him, that are found Fighters
against God, and that act in the way of the Devil, against the appearances of
truth by the Lord Jesus, which in those following discourses you will find to
be acted by those who set themselves in malice against me, to betray me, and to
quench the appearances of truth which had been delivered by me, for which they
in their Pulpits did often revile me, as a Blasphemer, and a devil, telling the
people their own empty pues would rise in judgment against them, for coming
from them unto me, wishing confusion to that power that should tolerate such
Doctrine, by which the love of God to all men appeared, and which in these
Disputes they opposed against me, contrary to the practice of a Minister of
Christ, but the Lord still appeared beyond the expectation of man, in which he
did enable me with faithfulness and boldness to make known to the people this
mystery of the hidden wisdom and counsel of God for the salvation of mankind
in the Lord Jesus, though for the same I my self now am a Prisoner, but the
truth which cannot be imprisoned is free, which is my joy and Crown of
rejoicing, and which in due time will be the joy of those that oppose it
(though it be now their sorrow) when it shall have made them free, as it has
done me, by destroying the enmity that is in them against it.

And now my friends and brethren, you that know this truth, and are set free by
it, I desire you may be an ornament to it in the exercise of it, for which I
leave you all to the Lord, and rest together with you in the Lord, who only is
able to make us stand, farewell.

Richard Coppin.
From my Prisonhouse at Maidston in Kent, Feb. 12:
To Mr. Richard Coppin on his Sufferings, by some Priests of Kent.
REnowned Friend, bear up thy mind,
Thy light it is profound,
It will Sin, Hell, and Devils bind,
And all their cheats confound.
What though the For the word Chimmerims read Bezaes Translation, Zephany 1. 4.
Hosea 10. 5. 2 Kings 23. 5. with notes on the Margent.
Chimmerims conspire,
As always they have done,
Against Gods life, which is as fire,
To burn their Babel down:
But go thou on, for truth contend,
And Christian liberty,
Though blinded minds against it bend,
Yet God at last shall free
Us from the hellish snares of Priests,
And formal Whiners too,
Although they now do what they lists,
That rope will them undo:
For surely they themselves will hang,
If they are let alone,
For most they do is but to bang
Themselves; but when they moan,
Who shall them pity, or respect,
Reward, reward them double,
Who naught but cruelty assert,
And fill the world with trouble:
But thou brave soul, whose life is love,
To all the whole Creation,
Go on, be brave, thy mind's above;
Preach still the great Salvation;
And Christ within, the life of all
That is, or has a being,
The Eye Eterne, and yet Mental,
Whose work is always freeing
Us from all enemies within,
And raising us with Christ,
And clearing us from fancied sin,
To live with God the highest.
What shall I say, time would me fail,
Thy sufferings to relate,
Yet all thy enemies cant prevail,
God still does dissipate As they were at Oxford, Worcester, Gloucester, and
elsewhere.

Men to their shame, their horrid lies
That they have still invented,
To cloud Christ's real mysteries,
By truth they are tor mented.
An Hirogliphical, Astrological causion to all sable learned Priests, and
others that persecute the life of Christ, and speak evil of things they know
not.
OLd Saturns persecuting mind
Has sometimes rampant been,
And lately couchant, and as blind,
Though now he is passant seen:
But have a care, go not too fast,
Joves splendor to distress,
Lest Mars and Sol agree at last
To curb thy cruelnesse.
By J. L.
The Names of such Books published by R. Coppin, and are to be sold at the
BLACK-MOOR.
1. DIvine Teachings. 2. Man's Righteousness examined. 3. Saul smitten for not
smiting Amalick. 4. A Man-Child borne. 5. Truths T^stimonie. A Dialogue
between Nimrod Policy, and Nathanael Innocence, by J. Lane. Twelve Songs of
Sion, by J. L. One other book of the same Doctrine, by W. Foxon. Truths
Champion, first and second Part, concerning General Redemption, Ministry, and
Ordinances, by R. Stooks.

Truths Triumph, OR The Triumphing of TRVTH, OVER The Enemies and Aspersers
thereof.
In several Disputes holden at the Cathedral Church, of the City of Rochester,
in the County of Kent, between several Ministers, and Richard Coppin, on
several days.
DISPUTE. I. Between Walter Rosewell, then a Preacher at Chatham, and Richard
Coppin, then Preacher in the Cathedral of Rochester, being on Monday, the third
day of December, 1655.
THe people being come together into the Cathedral, Richard Coppin began in
prayer, after which, the Mayor of the City, and Captain Smith, Captain of the
Guard, desired the people to keep silence, and none to speak but Rosewell and
Coppin, if any else did, they should be apprehended, and proceeded against, as
Disturbers of the Peace.

Then spoke Coppin, saying, I desire also that the people will all keep silent,
and none to speak a word, but those who are in dispute: I know you are a people
divided some for the one party, and some for the other, and I shall speak to
you all. First, to you that are on the contrary party to me, and that have any
desire to speak, not to speak above one at a time, and so speak as many as
will, provided the one has done before the other begin. And to you that may
have any desire to speak on my behalf, I entreat you all to be silent, and not
to speak a word, but to leave all to the Lord and my self.

Rosew. M. Mayor, I thought none but you, and the rest of the Magistrates and
Officers of the Army, should have had the mannaging this Dispute, and I to have
began first, that so this man's discourse might have been spared: And as for the
plausible prayer he made at my coming in to delude the people, I confess my
Conscience would not give me to join with him, not but that the matter thereof
was good, but I knowing his Principle to be corrupt, could not say Amen to it:
And now, if you please, I shall first make a short Prayer, and then go on to
the work, for I cannot undertake a business of such weight, for the
suppressing of such damnable errors as here has been vented, without calling
upon God for assistance, both to Magistrates, Officers, and Ministers in this
work.


CHAP. I. That Christ, who knew no sin, took part of man's flesh and blood which
was sinful, weak, and punishable, how in it he was made the same, and for what
end.
ROsewell. There be three things which I shall charge you withal at present,
the which you should endeavor to clear your self of if you can, and that I
shall propound in a Logical way, yet so plain, that that little reason you are
endowed withal may understand it; as for Art, I presume you have none.


Proposition. First, he that is a perswader of the people to believe that Jesus
Christ was a sinner, and that the Humane Nature of Christ was polluted with
sin, he is a Blasphemer of Christ, a Perverter of Scripture, and a venture of
damnable errors.


Coppin. Sir, you have here laid down a Proposition, the affirmation of which
you say is Blasphemy, and he a Blasphemer that shall persuade men to believe
it: But Sir, who do you charge with it, me, or some other, or did any man else
ever hear me say these words, if any did, let him speak, and I will answer it,
for there is no reason for me to answer to that which is not laid to my charge,
and I came not here to charge my self, but do now expect something of
accusation from you, else why have you, and the rest of your Brethren, so often
railed against me in your Pulpits?


Rosewell. I desire the Soldiers and Magistrates to declare if I have any
reason to speak any further, till this Proposition be answered.


Coppin. Do you charge me with any thing in this Proposition, or not? if you
do, I will answer you, else I may say to you, as Luke 22. 70. 23. 3.
Christ my Elder Brother sometimes said to his Accusers, Ye said these words, I
said them not.


Rosewell. Oh horrible Blasphemy, to call Christ your Elder Brother! I profess
I dare not say so; no, you will find him to be your Judge at the last day, to
condemn you for your Blasphemy.


Coppin. He is your Elder Brother also, though you do not know him: But Sir, I
perceive you for your part have yet nothing against me, and therefore you urge
these things, endeavoring to draw something from my own mouth to accuse me,
which is not a Disputing in love (on your part, to edify the people, as you
pretended) but to charge me with Blasphemy, Luke 11. 53. 54.
as the Jews, and Scribes, and Pharisees did Christ, which you cannot prove:
Yet to give the people satisfaction, I shall not hide any thing from them, but
shall be free to declare such things that God has made known to me, that so he
might be glorified, and their souls comforted, which I shall also do according
to the Scriptures, and then catch what you can.

Therefore first I declare, that the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the living
God, and Savior of the World, (that proceeded John 16. 2^.
forth from the Father into the world, to take on him part of the same flesh
and blood of men, and to live in it) was himself, holy, harmless, and
undefiled, in whose mouth was found 1 Pet. 2. 22
no guile; as says the Scripture; yet this Lord Jesus, and Son of the living
God, who was so holy and harmless, was himself pleased to take man's sinful
nature (so called) to live in it, and cleanse it; he was made in the likeness
of sinful flesh, and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh, as also says the
Scripture, nay, he was in all things made like unto his Brethren, sin known and
(committed) excepted, that as we had in us the knowledge and actings of sin, so
God made him to be sin for us, who himself knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in 2 Cor: 5. 21:
him.


Rosewell. Though you say he committed none, yet you do here intimate that
Christ's nature was tainted with original sin, which I prove to be blasphemy,
for now I have it from your own mouth; indeed, he was made a Sin Offering for
sin, the Scripture says. But Mr. Mayor, and Captain Smith, you may plainly
see how his argument is corrupted, which will go about to make men believe that
Christ was a sinner, and that his nature was tainted with original sin.


Coppin. It Is you that say so, and not I, as the people canwitnefs.

Head the Lawer. But you have said it, and I have it here in writing.


Coppin. Have you so Sir, pray let me hear what you have written, for now I see
you still lie upon the catch, therefore you people pray take notice, and I will
repeat the words again, and see if I speak any thing that the Scripture will
not bear me out in.

I say the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, and Savior of the
world, knew no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; yet was all the sins
of all men in the world laid upon him, and reckoned to him, to be no longer
ours, but his, that Isa: 53:
he might suffer for them.


Robison a Justice. Will you say that Christ suffered for his own sins?


Coppin. Not as acted by him, but reckoned to him: But Sir, pray answer me this
question, seeing you have spoke, Is the body of Christ part of himself, or not?


Robison. Yes, his body is himself.


Coppin. Pray then whose body are all the men in the world which Christ died
for?


Robison. Whose, why they are the body of Christ.


Coppin. Then people take no^ice, if the whole world of men which Christ died
for, be the body of Christ, then Christ dying for their sins, died for the
sins of his own body, whose body we all are, and members in particular, as
it is written, We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones; and
so Christ 1 Cor: 12. Ephesians: 5. 34:
in his body of flesh, as part of ours, did bear our sins and infirmities, 1
Pet. 2. 24. whose his own self did bear our sins in his own body on the Tree;
and in Mat. 8. 16. himself took our infirmities, and bear our sicknesses, and
Isa 53. 3. 4. 5. He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief; and we hid as it were our faces from him, he was
despised, and we esteemed him not: Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried
our sorrows, yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted: He
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, and the
chastisements of our peace was upon him: We all like sheep have gone astray,
and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all. So that whatsoever
sins, whatsoever sicknesses, weaknesses, infirmities and punishments was in the
flesh of men, Christ taking the same flesh and blood of men upon him, took all
this, that so he might overcome it for men, according to those Scriptures.


Rosewell. You pervert Scripture, for the meaning is, he took our punishments,
and not our sins.


Coppin. Nay, then you pervert Scripture, for the words are, He bear our sins.


Rosewell. Mr. Mayor, and the rest, you may see with what a Brazen-face this
Blasphemer stands to maintain his damnable errors.


Coppin. And it is well I have such a face, and such patience, else it were not
for me to stand here before you, to hear such railing and reviling, which you
never learned from Christ; for when he Disputed with the Devil about the body
of Moses, he brought no railing Accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.
Jude 9:



Rosewell. Then the Lord rebuke thee Satan: But you must not think to shift it
off so, for you have perverted Scripture, and you must give satisfaction in it.


Coppin. Sir, what do you mean by satisfaction? It may be if I stand here till
to morrow you will not be satisfied, but my desire is to satisfy the people,
and you, if I may.


Rosewell. You are before a juditions Auditorie, which may well understand you.


Coppin. It is well you do now confess they are a juditious Auditorie, you did
say the other day to the contrary.


Rosewell. You do not answer any thing to this Proposition, but do pervert the
Scripture, by saying the nature of Christ was polluted with sin.


Coppin. I do not say, that his nature was polluted with sin, but that our
nature was polluted, till Christ was manifest in it, to destroy the pollutions
of it, as it is written, For this purpose was the Son of God manifest, that he
might destroy the works of 1 John 3. 8: Isa 53: 6: 1 Pet: 2: 24.
the Devil: And the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all; and he did
bear them in his own body on the Tree.


Rosewell. I say again, he that does teach people to believe that Jesus Christ
was a sinner, and that his nature was polluted with sin, is a Blafphemer of
Christ, and a venture of damnable errors, but you do teach people to believe so;
ergo.


Coppin. I still deny your minor, and did never say that Christ was a sinner,
as all the people can witness; but I say, He was made sin for us, and yet knew
no sin, but did bear our sins in his body.


Rosewell. He that does attribute any thing to Christ that is a dishonor to
Christ, he is a perverter of Scripture, and a Blasphemer of Christ; but you, by
saying the nature of Christ was polluted with sin, have d^ne so: ergo.


Coppin. I have denied your minor, which you cannot prove, and do des^re you to
declare what nature of man it was the Scripture says Christ did take on him,
Was it a holy nature, or a sinful nature?


Rosewell. The nature of man, when Christ did come to take it on him was
polluted, but that part which Christ did take on him was holy, for it was the
nature of a Virgin, Luke 1. 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the most High shall overshadow thee, therefore that holy thing which
shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. He did take man's nature
on him, but not his sins, and this I declare, and am not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ.


Coppin. The nature of the Virgin Mary, which you say was holy before Christ
took it on him, I say was the same with all other men's nature for sinfulness,
for all had sinned, and Christ took on him the sinful nature of all which
sinned, before he could undergo the punishment due for sin, as I have proved by
several Scriptures and Arguments in answer to this Proposition, and therefore
if you, or any man else, have any thing more to say, speak now, or else ever
hereafter behind my back hold your peace.


CHAP. II. That all men shall be saved, of Redemption out of Hell, and in what
sense a man's good works does him no good, and his bad works no hurt.
ROsewell. He that does persuade people to believe that all men shall be saved,
he is a perverter of Scripture, a Blasphemer of Christ, and a venture of
damnable errors; but you do so: ergo.


Coppin. I deny your major Proposition, as to the Blasphemy, therefore prove
it.


Rosewell. By the way, take notice, he does go about to maintain that all men
shall be saved.


Coppin. I do not yet tell you what I maintain, but I put you to prove-that
part of your major Proposition.


Rosewell. He that persuades people to believe that which the Scripture does
flatly contradict, he is a perverter of Scripture; and a Blasphemer of Christ;
but this, that all men shall be saved, is flatly contradicted by Scripture,
Mark 16. He that believes shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned.


Coppin. I shall answer your Proposition by another, whatsoever is the will of
God, is not Blasphemy to affirm, but the will of God is the Salvation of all
men, therefore to say that all men shall be saved, is not Blasphemy; and I
prove it in the first of Tim. 2. 3. I will, says God, that all men shall be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. And it will be necessary for
you to declare what this Salvation and Damnation is, which you speak of also,
when it is, and whete it is, for I acknowledge that he that believes shall be
saved, and he that believes not, is condemned already.


Rosewell. This damnation is that of the soul, when it is separated from the
body: Secondly, when Christ shall come generally at the last day, when the
whole world of Rebrobates shall be cast into that lake of fire, which does burn
with brimstone, out of which there is no Redemption.


Coppin. Pray prove that from thence there is no Redemption.


Rosewell. Mat 25. The blessed shall go into everlasting life, and the wicked
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and Redemption from hell.
his Angels.


Coppin. I do also say, that the righteous shall have everlasting life, and the
wicked shall have everlasting torment, but that does not prove that there is no
Salvation or Redemption out of hell, for the word everlasting, does signify
for the time during, such a dispensation or administration of God to man;
therefore if you have any Scripture to prove that there is no Redemption out of
hell, as you have often made the people believe there is not, produce it now,
or else friends never believe him, nor any of your Teachers more when they tell
you so, except they can prove it by Scripture: And truly Sir, I had thought
you had been a man better learned in Scripture, then you are, and seeing you
cannot bring any proof for what you have said, I shall go on, and prove by
Scripture, that from that hell (the Scripture makes mention of) there is
Redemption.


Rosewell. You do bring Scripture but to little purpose, only to gloss your
errors.


Coppin. David says, Thou have not left my soul in hell, neithor will thou
suffer thy Holy One to see corruption; which shows, that there is a coming out
from thence: And in Amos 9. 2. Though they dig down into hell, thence shall my
hand take them, though they clime up to heaven, thence will I bring them down:
So that the Lord will have men to come in his way, and not their own, they
shall come to heaven, but through hell.


Captain Smith. Mr. Coppin, pray prove how the word everlasting shall have an
end, before you go any further.


Coppin. I shall do it from the 17. of Genesis where God says to Abrabam, I will
make with thee an everlasting Covenant, and says God, this is the Covenant I
will make with thee, Every male shall be circumcised: And this Covenant upon
these conditions did last but for a time, for we read, that God did afterward
make a new Covenant with us, that should never be ended. So in like manner the
Priesthood of Aaron and ^is Sons was called an everlasting Priesthood, and yet
that had a^ end, and was changed into the Priesthood of Christ, that abides
for ever and ever, and we are said to be changed from one everlasting to
another everlasting, which shows there are more everlastings then one, so that
one everlasting is but the time during, of the same dispensation, under which
we are for a time, until our change comes.


Rosewell. We do speak concerning continuance in the place of torment and hell,
in Scripture it has several acceptations, the place you brought in Amos, I did
intend to charge you with it for perverting it, for it is meant, that though he
do clime never so high from God, he will bring them down, and dig never so deep
to hide themselves, yet God will find them out, and at the day of Judgment
cast both body and soul of Reprobates into hell to be tormented; but Mr. Mayor,
and the rest, may see your prastise is to pervert Scripture.


Coppin. I conceive also that the place in Amos, of climing up to heaven, and
digging down to hell, is meant, that whatsoever any man of himself can do, to
save himself, or to bring himself to heaven, will not bring him thither,
neither save him, but God will pull him down with all his works, and make them
unprofitable to him; for he that goes any other way then by Christ, the door of
life, he is a Thief and a Robber: Also John 10: 14
whatsoever any man can do against himself to carry him to hell, shall not
continue him there, but God will fetch him back again, and destroy all those
wicked works that he has done against his own salvation, according to that
Scripture, Hosea 13: 9^
Oh man thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help: So that
destruction is to man for the time present here, while man is unacquainted with
God.


Rosewell. You say no good any man can do can help him, or do him any good, nor
no evil he can do, can do him hurt; this opens a gap to all manner of
wickedness, so that he may be as well in the bosom of a Harlot, as in holy
duties toward God; but the contrary I do affirm, that good deeds do good to
men in life and death, and after death it is said, man does rest from his
labors, and his works do follow him.


Coppin. Man does rest from his labor, and his works does follow him, when he
does rest in Christ from the works of the Heb: 4. 10.
Law, and is become dead to them: But Sir, I believe you have forgot that
Scripture, who when ye have done all that you can, ye are unprofitable
servants; and therefore I say, that all that Luke 17. 10.
man can do for or against himself, cannot further nor hinder his salvation by
Christ, for Christ will have nothing to join with him to save a man, neither
shall any thing be able to keep us from him, but though for a time man has
destroyed himself, yet in God is his help; and this does not thereby give any
toleration to sin, for though their good works brings them not to heaven, yet
they are profitable unto men Job 35* 6. 7, 8.
as they are, and their bad works unprofitable; but the love of God in Christ
Jesus manifested to them, keeps and constrains them from that which is evil.


Rosewell. I am glad this Auditorie does see sufficiently the carriage of this
man in this thing, you may take notice he has been before five several Judges
of Assizes already.


Coppin. Then I have been like to my Elder Brother Jesus Christ, who said, that
as he was, so should we be brought before Judges and Rulers for his Names sake,
and yet I shall, while I may, still continue in speaking and writing, to
testify to the world what the Lord for their sakes has made known in me for
truth.


Rosewell. Those things you call truths of God, are nothing else but the lies
of the devil, and if Mr. Mayor, and the rest think fit, I shall proceed no
further, but conclude, for I could employ my time far better in my Study; and I
shall meet with you in my Catechisical Exercises, which I intend to begin next
Saturday, and Mr. Mayor, and the rest, and Soldiers, I shall present to you
several Catechismes to keep you from those damnable errors.


Coppin. Have you been a Teacher of your people so long, and now do you begin
to Catechize them, it seems your design is to keep them still in ignorance, to
have them always learning, but never come to the knowledge of the truth; and
truly you that have been his hearers all this while, it has been to little
purpose, that now you must turn back to be Catechized at last. Well Sir, if you
have any more, go on.


Rosewell. Yes, I have many things against you, but time will be but lost here
to discover them with you, yet take one thing more.


CHAP. III. Christ at the left hand of God, bearing sin, shun the curse and
condemnation for all men, what the right and left hand is, also the Sheep and
the Goats, that the way to the right hand is by the left, and how.
ROsewell. He that will persuade the people to believe that Jesus Christ is a
sinful Goat, to whom God will say, Go ye cursed, he is a perverter of
Scripture, a venture of damnable errors, but you do; ergo


Coppin. Let me ask you one question, the Goats that are spoken of, Are they
believers? Or are they unbelievers? Or are they part of both?


Rosewell. The Goats on the left hand are unbelievers, and the Sheep on the
right hand Believers.


Coppin. It is also necessary for you to show, what is to be understood by the
right and left hand of God, and then we shall know the better how the Sheep and
Goats are there, and when, for in this there is an Allegory, which if you know
not, I will tell you.


Captain Smith. Mr. Coppin, It is referred to you, to declare your judgment
upon it.


Coppin. I will: There is mention made of a right and left hand of God in
Scripture, the sheep and the goats, Believers and Unbelievers, they on the
right hand are the sheep blessed, and they on the left hand are the goats
cursed; but to understand this, the left hand of God where the Goats are
cursed, is the Law, and the right hand of God where the Sheep are blessed, is
the Gallat. 3. 10. Psa. 89. 13. 14, 15:
Gospel; the left hand of God is also his wrath, and the right hand is his
love, and he says to those on the left hand, as under wrath, manifested by the
Law, Go ye cursed, for ye believe not, and are damned; and he says to those on
his right hand, as under love, Joy and peace manifested by the Gospel, come ye
blessed, for you believe, and are saved.

Now all men for a time, before they believe and are regenerated, are at the
left hand of God under the Law cursed, For he that breaks but one Commandment
is guilty of all, and all have sinned; and God has concluded all men undersin,
and unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all: Now all men Rom: 11: 32:
being so under the curse, and under the Law, at the left hand of God, cannot
be said to come from thence to the right hand, to receive the blessing and
mercy, but by his stretching forth his right hand to take them from his left,
as it is written, All the day long have I stretched forth my arm to a
disobedient, rebellious, and gainsaying people. Now what is this Arm of God,
Romans 19. 21.
but the Lord Jesus Christ, freely and in love held forth by the Father to the
worst of sinners, and that would not receive him, For he came to his own, and
his own received him not; therefore says the Prophet Isaiah, Who has believed
our report? John 1^ 11: Isa: 53. 1:
and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? even to sinners, and them that
were out of the way, to them is Jesus Christ manifested for the knowledge of
those things.

And according to this did Jesus Christ come and put himself under the Law, and
under the curse, at the left hand of God, to receive the wrath and the curse
due to us, and all this he did for us, to bring us to the right hand of God,
that we might receive the forgiveness of sins through him and so be blessed
for evermore in him, for whatsoever we were, Christ made Gall: 4: 4: 5:
himself the same, and all to redeem poor man from the curse he lay under: Was
man under the Law? so was Christ: Was man accursed for sin? so was Christ: In
Leviticus 16. 21. you may read there of a Escape Goat, on which Aaron laid both
his hands, and confessed over him all the sins of the people, and all their
transgressions, laying them on the head of the live Goat, and the Goat was to
carry them away into the Wilderness, into a Land not inhabited, from whence
they should appear no more.

Now this live Goat was a livelie tipe of Jesus Christ, who was to carry away
our sins, and was he indeed under that tipe that did carry the sins of all the
people, as in Isa. 53. 6. We all like sheep have gone astray, and the Lord has
laid upon him the iniquities of us all; and he has carried them away into the
Wilderness and lost them, buried them in the grave, cast Micah 7: 19: Jer. 31:
34.
them behind him, drowned them in the Sea of forgetfulness, never to be
remembered any more: So that all people were cursed, and at the left hand of God
bearing their own sins, till Jesus Christ did go there himself to redeem them
from thence, by taking the curse on him, and bearing their sins for them, and
so sets them at liberty from under the curse and wrath due by the Law, he
being both God and man fitted for the purpose, Heb^ 10: 5: Joh. 10: 17: 18
having power to lay down his life, and to take it up again: And this
Commandment he received from his Father, to do for us: Now he that must take on
him the sins of the people, must take the curse on him also, therefore was
Christ accursed for us, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the Law, by being made a curse for us, as it is written, Cursed is every one
that hangs on a Tree, but Christ his own self did bear our sins 1 Pet: 2: 24:
in his body on the Tree.

And friends, I call you all friends, though enemies, and brethren, though
strangers, for I hate no man, but do love all, as Christ my Elder Brother has
given me Commandment, and showed me an example that I should follow his steps:
I say there is no believer now, but once he was an unbeliever, and there is no
sheep now, but once he was a Goat at Gods left hand, and under the curse, till
Jesus Christ the blessed Redeemer freed you from it, and blessed you by it, at
his Fathers right hand: Now while man is an unbeliever, the Scripture says he
is condemned, He that believes not is condemned already: so John 3: 18:
that the best of us all are in a prison, in the state of condemnation, and in
hell under the curse, one as well as another, till Christ the Lord Jesus does
free us from it, by breaking open the prison doors, and putting himself into
this prison, hell, and condemnation with us, standing there in our steeds, to
receive that curse and condemnation which by the law is due to us without him,
and so deliver us and himself together as one man, according to those
Scriptures, he was himself taken from prison, Isaiah 53 8.
and from judgment, he was given for a Covenant of the people, and for a light
to the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the
prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house, that they might
be where he is, all comes (...)h 42: 6: 7
out with him, he leaves not one behind, but delivers himself and them
together, and then shuts up the doors, and locks in the devil, and so keeps
the keys of death, and of hell, saying, Fear not. R^v. 1. 17. 18



Roswell. Christ was never in hell.


Coppin. Sir, will you deny your own Faith, which you have so often confessed
in your Creed, that he descended into hell.


Robison. What do Christ go into hell to turn us out before him, and then
come out himself.


Coppin. As we are first in hell before we are in Heaven, so he comes into hell
to us, and with himself brings us out, and carries us to Heaven, according to
those Scriptures, He has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
Heavenly places ^^aiah 26. 19.
in Christ Jesus, and together with my dead body shall they arise; and I (says
he) if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me. But John 12. 32.
take this with you also, as a bone to pick against the next time, that as you
are unbelievers before you are believers, so are you to be damned before you
are saved, and in hell before you are in Heaven, for the way to Heaven is
through hell: He that has an ear to hear let him hear.


DISPUTE. II. The Heads of a Dispute between Daniel French, Minister of Stroud,
and Richard Coppin, on the nineth of December, being the Sabbath Day, after
Morning Sermon, in the Cathedral of the City of Rochester.
Mr. Coppin coming into the place to Preach his Morning Sermon, and Mr. French
having left his own Congregation, and being there, did before Sermon propound
to Mr. Coppin a question, as follows.

FRench. Sir, on Monday last, in the Dispute with Mr. Rosewell, I did hear
something from you which did seem very strange to me, and I came now, desiring
to be satisfied.


Coppin. The Truth is always a stranger to those that are strangers to that,
and know it not, till the Truth has made them free, For I was a stranger,
says Christ, and ye took me not in; and it is the Truth it self that must
satisfy you, and not I.


French. I desire to speak something to the people after you have done.


Coppin. Truly the time will be but short after I have done, therefore if you
have any thing to say to me, you had better take a day to your self some other
time, and I shall be willing to give you a meeting, provided it be in love, and
for edification to the people.


French. I profess before the Lord I have no hatred nor prejudice to any man's
person, but their opinions.


Coppin. Then it seems those opinions which are not one with yours, you hate,
and judge to be wrong, and your own only to be right; but I must tell you, I am
not of your spirit, for I hate no man's person nor opinion, but am reconciled to
all men in their several judgments and opinions, leaving them all to the Lord,
knowing that the manifestations of God are various, to some more, and to some
less, but as every man has received Jesus Christ the Lord, so let him walk,
speak and act, standing still in that light which the Lord has enlightened him
withal, and be content with his wages, till the Lord shall give him more.


French. 'Twas never well with us since there were such new lights.


Coppin. It Is true, that which you call new light, will outshine your old
lights, and yet no new light, but the same that ever was; so he proceeded to
Morning Sermon.


CHAP. IIII. Christ no sinner, man's nature redeemed, what is meant by the grave,
death, hell, and hell fire, how man is in it, and how long.
FRench. Having some opportunity, I shall declare semthing among you, to show
you the errors of this man Mr. Coppin, how he has abused Jesus Christ, by
saying, he took on him our sinful nature, as has been delivered from his own
mouth in the last Dispute and now, which I shall show to the contrary from
several Scriptures, that there was no sin in him, and endeavor to undeceive
you of this error; first in Heb. 7. 26. For such an High Priest became us, who
is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the
heavens: Here you may see he had no sin; so in 1 Pet. 1. 19. We are redeemed
with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without
spot; still you see he was without sin, verse 23. Being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God; therefore there was
no sin in the nature of Christ, as appears by these Scriptures, and I think I
have given you Scriptures enough now, and yet I have more.


Coppin. But Sir, let me answer this first, you said you came for satisfaction,
and not to preach, therefore pray let me answer; as to the holiness of Christ
himself, as he is in himself the Son and Seed of God, so he is holy and
without sin; but our nature which he was to offer up and make holy, was sinful
and unholy before he took it on him, and he by offering it up, (as taking it to
himself) and by his being slain (to live in it) as a Lamb without blemish; our
sinful nature is redeemed from sin to holiness by Jesus Christ the
incorruptible seed living in it, and by which we are redeemed to the same holy
Priesthood with Revel. 1. 6.
him, to be as Lambs without blemish in him.


Captain Harrison. Mr. French, You may do well to one answer another briefly,
or else you have a great advantage one of another, and it will be more
advantage to the Hearers.


French. Whereas Mr. Coppin was pleased the last Dispute, that out of hell
there was redemption, and he brought the words of the Prophet David, when he
says, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, nor suffer thy holy one to see
corruption; This is not meant hell, but the grave, for hell has several
acceptations; sometimes it is taken for the grave; as in this place, and not of
hell; as you would have it; another Scripture you brought in Amos the 9. 2. in
which I am of my Brother Rosewells opinion, and not yours, for that does not
prove redemption out of hell, but a coming to judgment soul and body at the
last day, to receive the sentence of eternal damnation in hell, where the worm
never dies, from whence there is no redemption.


Coppin. Prove that out of hell there is no redemption, your Brother Rosewell
could not.


French. I prove it Matthew 25. These shall go into everlasting punishment,
but the righteous into life eternal.


Coppin. That proves it not, for they may go into that which is everlasting
punishment, and yet come forth.


French. I deny it, though you say the word everlasting has an end, and that
Scripture which you brought in Genesis 17. concerning the first Covenant, that it
was everlasting, and had an end, when the second came, I deny, for it was all
but one Covenant, and everlasting is for ever; but I am sorry to see so many
people here deluded with such errors.


Coppin. Sir, you say but what your Brother Rosewell have said already, which
I then answered, and you understand not; for the first Everlasting Covenant, as
to the conditions thereof, which was the work; of the Law, had an end, as to
us, when God made with us a New Covenant, upon better conditions, without end,
though to him the first and the last is all one, and Ier. 50. 5:
where you have the word everlasting, or for ever, go single, there it may
sometimes be said to last but for a time, age, or dispensation, but where it is
from everlasting to everlasting, and for ever and ever, there it is world
without end.


French. I say there is no end of the punishment in hell for the wicked, where
the worm never dies, nor the fire goes out, but the wicked persons of men shall
be tormented eternally in the flames, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.


Coppin. I deny that men shall be eternally in it, though the fire it self be
as eternal as God, for God himself is this consuming fire, when it meets with
that which is to be burnt, and this fire is to try every man's works, of what
sort it is, and he Heb. 12: last. 1 Cor. 3. 13. Isaiah 4: 4.
being refined, as having all his sins burnt up within him, by the spirit of
burning, he shall come out of the fire of Gods anger, as one purged and made
white, yet the fire remains the same still in it self, as in God, and man while
in it, is said to suffer the vengeance of eternal fire, as of God, so long as
there is any thing of dross, wood, hay, or stubble in man, for the fire to take
hold of, till all be consumed; as the Sea, it is always full of water, and
never empty, and man may go into the water to wash himself, and after come
forth, yet the sea remains still the same, as before, as that which man was in,
but now is forth, so is this eternal fire, which every man is to pass through
before he is refined, and it were well with you if this fire had laid hold Jude
23:
on you, for then you would be the purer, and the sooner come forth.


French. I do not believe that he that is once in it, shall ever come forth,
for out of hell there is no redemption, and it is horrible blasphemy to say it.


Coppin. You have no Scripture to prove it, and I see you understand it not,
but I prove that David while he lived was shut up in it for sometime, and could
not come forth, the wrath of God lay so hard upon him; as you may read in
Psalms 88. beginning at the 6. verse, Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in
darkness, in the deep, thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted
me with all thy waves, thou have put away mine asquaintance far from me, thou
have made me an ab^mination unto them, I am shut up, and I cannot come forth:
This was David's hell here on earth.


French. But hell in some places is taken for the grave, and some for hell, and
David speaks of the grave.


Coppin. What do you mean by grave?


French. Why, the grave of earth that men's bodies are buried in.


Coppin. But David was in this grave when he said it, and y(...) in his body
on the earth, and not in the grave as you call so, therefore pray let me ask
you one question, If hell in some places be taken for the grave, as you say it
is (though hell and grave are but differing terms in Scripture) pray what is it
taken for in Hos 13. 14. where God says, I will ransom them from the power of
the grave, I will redeem them from death: O death I will be thy plagues, O
grave I will be thy destruction, repentance shall be hid from mine eyes: Pray
tell me what is it meant here.


French. I am not minded to tell you.


Coppin. Then it is because you cannot, therefore I will tell you, by the grave
is here meant hell, which God will destroy in redeeming us from it, For, says
he, I will ransom them from the grave, I will redeem them from death; O death
I will be thy plagues, O grave I will be thy destruction: God will destroy that
death and hell which destroyed us, which we through fear thereof were all our
life time subject to bondage, for they came together, and shall end together,
as two companions, Revel. 20. 14. and death and hell were cast into the lake of
fire, this is the second death, and the last enemy to be destroyed; but what
this lake of fire and brimstone is, the Prophet Isaiah tells you, Isa. 30.
last. Tophet is ordained of old, yea, for the King it is prepared, he has made
it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, and the breath of
the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it.

This Tophet is the Lake or Vallie of Slaughter, prepared only Ier: 7. 31. 32.
for the King, the fire thereof is God himself, our God is a consuming fire,
the fuel to be burnt is the devil, death and hell, with all man's works, good
and bad, that he has made his foundation to build upon, besides Christ,
whether it be gold or precious stone, wood, hay, or stubble, all shall be burnt
up, and he 1 Cor. 3. (...)
shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, so as by fire, which fire
is the Lord, and the stream of brimstone that kindles it, the breath of the
Lord, to burn up, consume, blast, and weather whatsoever is not of God in man,
but man shall be saved, and so says the Lord, Fury is not in me, but if the
wicked set briars and thorns against me in battle, I will go through them, and
consume them to together; but this is all the fruit thereof to Isaiah 27: 4.
(...)e away their sins.


CHAP. V. Christ coming in the Clouds, the place and manner of his Throne, how
he as a man, body, flesh, and bones, is not in a place above the Skies, that
the Christ of God is no where contained.
FRench. But Christ shall come in flaming fire at the last day, at the end of
the world, for he shall descend from heaven in the Clouds, with a shout, with
the voice of the Archangel, at the sound of a Trumpet, and he shall sit upon a
Throne, and before him shall be gathered all Nations.


Coppin. All this I know, and see to be now, for now is he upon his Throne, and
have all Nations before him, and ever had, though you may not see it till it be
manifest in you, therefore Heb. 4: 13:
you should define what is meant by the Throne, and his siting upon it, and the
place where it stands, and the Clouds in which he comes, for all people do
believe that there are such things, but you should declare what, and when, and
where it is, that people may know it, else how are you a Teacher of the people,
if you know not thofe things.


French. It is a Throne that shall stand upon the earth, and the clouds are the
clouds of heaven above, overhead, in which he shall come, where we shall be
caught up to meet him.


Coppin. But define this Throne, what it is made of, and the manner of it how
it stands, else you speak the things you know not, and that which you have not
seen, nor heard from the Lord, but from your own imagination, as appears, for
the Scripture says, His Throne is in heaven; And how is it then on earth, if
heaven be above, overhead, as you say it is? But I do believe he is come, and
coming daily, and do set up his Throne in the hearts of men, where he is
judging and condemning all things that is contrary to himself, and when you
see it to be in you, then you shall acknowledge it also, in the mean time you
must be silent.


French. I do be lieve he shall come from above in the clouds, overhead, with
thousands of Angels, as a man in a bodily shape, with flesh, blood, and bones,
for Job says, he shall see him with those eyes stand upon the earth.


Coppin. And Job in his life time did see him stand upon the earth in him, as
he confesses in his last Chapter, For now do mine eyes see thee, says Job:
And if you do but read Job from the beginning to the end, and understand what
you read, you may see of Jobs state and condition, what it was, both before his
change, and after his change.


French. You abuse the Scriptures, and turns it which ways your list, into an
Allegory, as a Nose of Wax.


Coppin. The Scriptures are an Allegory, and a great mystery, For great is
the mystery of godliness; and there is a spiritual meaning to be understood
in it all along, for the sum of the The Scriptures an Allegory.
whole Scripture is included in Law and Gospel, the first and second Covenant,
as in Gal. 3. 24. speaking of the Son of the Bondwoman, and the Son of the
Freewoman, which things, says Paul, is an Allegory, for these are the two
Covenants, the one from Mount Sinai which gendereth to bondage, and under which
all men are Bondmen, the other, which is Agar, from Mount Sion, or heavenly
Jerusalem, which is Sarah, and under which we are all Freemen, for Jerusalem,
which is above, is free, which is the mother of us all, and this also is an
Allegory, and a great mystery.


Capt. Harrison. Ye pervert the Scriptures, and are a Blasphemer, and I will
prove you so.


Coppin. What is that you call Blasphemy?


Capt. Harrison. I am not to tell you now, speak not to me.


Coppin. If you speak to me, I must speak to you: But Sir, How will you prove
me a Blasphemer, by the Law of God, or the Law of man?


Capt. Harrison. First i will dispute with you, and do it by the Law of God, and
then i will take another course.


Coppin. Then it seems what you cannot do one way, you will endeavor to do
another.


Lieutenant Scot. There is no body here that intends any hurt against you to
entrap you.


French. But he denies Christ's body to be in Heaven above, and that is horrible
blasphemy.


Coppin. Prove that Christ is now in Heaven above, over head, as you say, in a
body of flesh, blood, and bones, and that he shall so come, for the Scripture
says, flesh and blood shall not 1 Cor. 15: 50. 2 Cor. 5. 16.
enter into Heaven, and though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet
henceforth, known we him no more so.


French. I prove it in Acts 1. that he did ascend up to Heaven in a body of
flesh, blood, and bones, 8. Verse. But ye shall receive power after the Holy
Ghost is come upon you, etc. And when he had spoken these things, while they
beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight, and while
they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, behold two men stood by
them in white apparel, which also said, ye men of Galilee why stand ye gazing
up into Heaven, this same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall
so a come in like manner as you have seen him go into Heaven: And this is up
above overhead, and not within man, as Mr. Coppin would have it.


Coppin. The Disciples here had but a carnal knowledge of Christ, for the
Spirit was not yet come upon them, because Christ was not yet ascended, and
they beheld him only as he was talking Acts 1. 4. 5.
with them in his suffering body, which he for that time assumed to himself to
appear to them in, to confirm them of his resurrection, and his being taken up
in a cloud, was his swift vanishing out of their sight into the Spirit, from
that fleshly appearance (as formerly he had done, the doors being shut) and in
which they were to see him no more, and were also reproved for so looking after
him, for why stand ye gazing, ye men of Galilee, up into Heaven, this same
Jesus, as you have seen him go, so in like manner shall you see him come,
that is, he grew invisible to their carnal eye, and they were to see him no
more till they saw him in them; So also his coming should be to them suddenly
in the Spirit, as of a rushing mighty wind, and so it was, Acts 2. 1.

Therefore this Ascension of Christ is not to be understood carnally, but
spirituallie, even as his descending was at first, for he that ascended, is the
same he that first descended; and we Eph^s. 4. 9. 10:
read not of a body of flesh and bones that descended, but the Holy Ghost came
down upon the Virgin Mary, and the power of the most High overshadowed her; and
this coming (only) Luke 1: 35.
his Disciples were to look for on them, as Christ told them, Acts 1. 4. but
wait for the promise of the Father; which says, Christ you have heard
concerning me, and which you shall receive when the Holy Ghost is come upon
you, and which they also did receive, as in Acts 2. and therefore to look for
such a fleshly Christ as you declare, you may look long enough before you see
him.


French. But he was caught up above, overhead, and shall so come again in the
very same fleshly body.


Coppin. This word overhead, there is none written, and this What'(...) meant
by above.
word above you know not, for Christ may be said to be above, and yet in man,
for the word above signifies heaven, or heavenly things, which the Scripture
says is in man; For if you be Coll. 3: 1.
risen with Christ, seek the things that are above, which is beyond the reach
of a carnal capacity, being spiritual things, as love, joy, peace,
gentleness, goodness, meekness, faith, etc. and so carries that name of things
above, as the same with God, being things of a purer nature then the things
that are below, as division, wrath, envy, malice, and evil speaking, which are
the Gall: 5. James 3. 14, 15^
fruits of the flesh, and are said to be earthly, sensual, and devilish, and
so goes under that term below, or inferior, as one with the devil, and not to
be esteemed of as the fruits of the Spirit, which are always in God, and so
above all, as God is above the Devil, and Light above Darkness; and this is
that heaven above, into which Christ is ascended far above all heavens, and
into which we all shall be carried by him, to be for ever with him in the
Fathers glory. And now pray tell me where is your heaven, which you call above,
that you say Christ is in, in a body of flesh.


French. It is the third Heaven, above the Stars.


Coppin. How do you prove it? when the Scripture says, That the heaven of
heavens cannot contain him. 1 Kings 8. 27.



French. I prove it from Paul, for he was caught up into the third heaven,
where he saw Christ, as before, and knew him, and saw things unspeakable, and
full of glory with him.


Coppin. But Paul was all this while living on the earth, and said, Christ was
no more to be seen in the flesh after he ascended, 2 Cor. 5. 16.
and he being caught up into the third heaven, was his being carried up out of
himself into high Revelations of glorious manifestations 2 Cor. 12. 1.
of God in him, which is Christ in us the hope of glory.


French. But he saw Christ there personally in a body, flesh and bones, the
same which he had before his death, at Gods right hand, now in glory.


Coppin. If Christ be at Gods right hand in a body of flesh and bones, after
that manner, as you say he is, then this is to make God to be a body of flesh,
and bones also, and such a one as your self, that must be confined to a local
place, when the Scripture says, he is unconfined to any time, place, or
person, but fills Heaven and earth with his fullness, therefore when you speak
of God and Christ, you should declare what they are, and what his right hand
is, but because you know not, I will tell you.

God and Christ is one and the same in Spirit and glory, and Christ being in
Heaven at Gods right hand, is his being in God John 10. 30.
far above all Heavens or created things, enjoying the same fullness Coll. 2. 9.
of God, as one whom God cannot be without, he being that eternal wisdom and
power by which he does all things, and 1 Coll. 16. 17.
by whom all things consist, therefore if any blasphemy has been spoke, it is
you that has spoke it, and not I.


Captain Harrison. Sirrah, you brazenface Rabshackel, what, do you get up here
to declare your blasphemy? come down, or i will pull you down.


Coppin. I thought you had come in love, and not in malice, but now I see your
end is to catch what you can to accuse me, and because you cannot have your
end, you are angry.


Captain Harrison. We came here on purpose to hear you, and now we have heard
blasphemy enough from your own mouth, and that you shall know e're long, and
so the dispute ended; but Mr. Coppin desired the people to come again an hour
after, for he was to Preach.


DISPUTE. III. Between Walter Rosewell and Richard Coppin, in the Cathedral of
Rochester, on the eleventh of December.
ROsewell. I shall not fear this man, though he were never so well armed with
gifts to maintain his damnable errors.


Coppin. I acknowledge my self (as I am a man) to be as the weakest and worst
of men, nay, a poor worm, yet strength may be manifest in weakness, and
wisdom in foolishness, For God has chosen the poor, weak, despised, and base
things of the 1 Cor. 1. 27. 28
world to confound the wise, and things that are not, to confound the things
that are.

And friends and Brethren, I came here as a stranger into those parts, yet
through the desires of many of you here present, therefore I am my self
unacquainted how the actings of men have been, according to the present times,
but I am informed that some of the chiefest of the Promoters of these Disputes,
have been, and are enemies to the present Power; I shall therefore desire that
the Public Peace, according to the present Government, may be kept and
preserved.


Rosewell. I know you speak something of this to me, as well as others, though
you might have spared it; but I confess you have made a fair speech, as a
prepara^^e unto your business, but let that pass, I shall begin.


CHAP. VI. That the whole nature of man was sinful, how Christ took our sins
with our nature, and offered it up with himself without sin to the Father, that
he still lives in it in us, and how.
ROsewell. In the Name of the Lord Jesus, whom you have blasphemed, I shall
charge you, and let none be affended that I do begin where I did begin the last
day.


Coppin. Let us not be always on one thing, but if you have any thing else to
say, proceed to that, for Mr. French did speak also the same things which you
had spoke before, but the other day.


Rosewell. You said, I had no more the other day, but you shall find I have
enough now; what my Brother French spoke the other day, I had no knowledge of,
but I think it was unseasonable at that time, and it had been better let alone.

I say, he that from Scripture shall labor to persuade people to believe that
Jesus Christ was a sinner, and that his humane nature was tainted with original
sin, he is a perverter of Scripture, a blasphemer of Christ, and a venture of
damnable errors and heresies, and on this I do desire to build the future
structure, but then there was some things hinted for the undermining of this
Proposition. Now if Christ be polluted with sins, then is our preaching vain,
and your faith in vain, therefore if I do make this my main Proposition, it
will not be impertinent to the business, therefore let every one turn to the
Bible, they may all see to how little purpose those Scriptures was brought by
him the other day: First, this is to pull the Crown from the head of Christ, to
say he was a sinner: Secondly, I say it is a perverting of Scripture, and a
seting Scripture in opposition against Scripture, 1 Pet. 2. 24. He bear our
sins, Heb. 4. 15. He was in all things like us, sin only excepted, John 14.
30. The Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me, If there had been
sin in Christ, he could not have withstood the temptation of the devil, 2 Cor.
5. 21. But you see Jesus Christ was made sin for us, that is, he was made a
Sin-offering for us; I will appeal to all that is skilled in Tongues, for the
same word which is here translated sin, is in Exodus 40. Sin-offering; where
there is a dark saying in the body of the Text, there is a remedy in the side,
for it is said, He was made sin for us, which knew no sin in himself: And where
Christ is said to bear our sins in his body, it is not in a proper sense, for
sin cannot be, and not be, in one and the same person, at one and the same
time, as you say, in 1 Pet. 2. 24. He bear our sins, Isa. 53. 6. The Lord has
laid on him the iniquity of us all: I will grant you in a sound Orthodox sense
he may be said to bear our sins, and as his righteousness is imputed to us, so
is our sins imputed to him: And now I hope I have abundantly satisfied all that
are intelligible in making good this Proposition.


Coppin. You did say the last Sabbath day in your Sermon, that this day you
would make me ashamed ever to show my face any more in this place (as I was
informed) and this is the way indeed, for you to take up all the time, and let
me have none.


Rosewell. I do despair now of ever making you ashamed, but I hope to make your
Auditorie ashamed.


Coppin. Pray give me leave to speak now.


Rosewell. I will give you rope enough.


Coppin. You have spent a great deal of time to little purpose, to make good a
Proposition, which by me was never denied; for neither you, nor any one else,
did ever hear me say, that Christ was a sinner, but was holy, just, and
righteous, only (as the Scripture says) he was made sin for us, and did bear
our sins in his body, which you understand not: But to proceed, let me ask you
one question; What flesh and blood was that of man that Christ did take on him?
Was it holy flesh, or sinful flesh?


Rosewell. I say that the flesh and blood of man, for the substance of it,
which Christ took, was holy; now Christ took our nature, but not our
pollutions.


Captain Smith. Sir, I conceive that Mr. Coppin has given you satisfaction to
this Proposition in the last Dispute, therefore if you have any thing else Mr.
Rosewell, you may please to go on.


Rosewell. I do but prove now that Christ did not take our pollutions, Luke 2.
35. That Holy thing that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of
God, he took the nature of a Virgin.


Coppin. Was the nature of the Virgin Mary without sin when Christ took it on
him, in that she was a Virgin, if it were, then in what sense was she called a
Virgin.


Rosewell. In that she did never know man.


Coppin. And so there are thousands in the world that may be Virgins, upon that
account, as not knowing man, and yet be never the less sinful, for all have
sinned, therefore you say you know not what.


Rosewell. Pray take heed of his Juggles.


Coppin. If man was a sinner, and the nature of man which Christ took on him
was holy, then to what end did Christ take on him the nature of man, and leave
man still in his sins.


Rosewell. I did not say men's nature was not sinful. Then the people burst out
into a laughter, saying, He did.


Captain Smith. If any do laugh, it will be taken notice of.


Coppin. Friends, seeing sometimes you cannot choose but laugh, henceforth laugh
inwardly, and make no noise.


Roswell. I have not to do with children, I suppose this laughter was at the
folly of this man, not at me: Now, I say, that the nature of man which Christ
did take part of, was polluted with sin, but that part which Christ did take
was holy.


Coppin. You say then, that some part of man's nature was sinful, and some part
holy, but you will say anon, that all was sinful.


Rosewell. I say, all but that part which Christ did take was polluted.


Coppin. You know not what to say your self, for sometimes you seem to say that
all man's nature is sinful, and that Christ took on him man's nature, but not his
sins and pollutions: Again, you say he took part of man's nature, which was
holy, and left that part which was sinful; but I say, the whole nature of man
was polluted, for a little leaven, leavens the whole lump; one sin makes all
sinful, and Christ took on him the same, or none, even our sins 1 Cor. 5. 6. 7.
with our nature, and so it is written, He took our nature, and bear our sins,
therefore friends, take notice, how this man have lost himself, and know not
how to prove any thing.


Rosewell. I say, this man will still labor to maintain that Christ's nature
was polluted with sin.


Coppin. I say, the nature was ours, but it was no longer polluted, when once
Christ lived in it: But I perceive you labor to maintain Christ to be only
that individual body of flesh, which was part of our flesh, and was sinful,
and not as one living in it, and so you deny the Christ of God, which is our
life and light; and you do but pass away time in repeating over one thing so
often, therefore pray have done, that I may go on, to clear it up.


Rosewell. Yea, I will give you rope enough to go to the end of your ladder.


Coppin. That the whole nature of man was polluted throughout, the Prophet
Isaiah witnesses, For from the soal of the foot, even unto the head, there is
no soundness in it, but wounds, and bruises, and putrified soars, they have not
been closed, neither bound up, nor mollified with ointment, Isa. 1. 6. So that
before the coming of Christ into man, to bind up his wounds, to anoint him
with oil, and to sanctify him he is polluted throughout, Ezekiel. 16.


Rosewell. Rub your Brazen-face, and go on.


Coppin. If the nature of man had been holy before Christ took it on him,
then Christ need not have come to make it holy, but because it was polluted
with sin, therefore did Christ come and take part of the same sinful nature,
that he by living in that nature, might sanctify and cleanse it all, and
thereby present the whole nature of man pure, spotless, Ephesians. 5. 26. 27.
and blameless to the Father, making it to be accepted in him the beloved
Jesus, for without him there was none righteous, no not, one, but all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God: And he has concluded all men under
sin and unbelief, that he might Romans 11. 32.
have mercy upon all; and this mercy is manifested in Heb. 2. 14. That
forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, which is the Devil, and deliver them, who through
fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage: For before Christ
did take our flesh on him, the Devil and Sin did dwell in it, but because
that men should not for ever remain so under the Dominions of sin, death,
hell, and the devil; God himself did manifest himself to live in our nature or
sinful flesh, that he might destroy both his and our enemies, even sin, death,
hell, and the devil in our nature, which devil had no part in him, 1 John 3.
8. For this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the devil, without which no man could live to see the face of God in
right eousnesse; as it is written, We must needs die, and are all like water
spilt upon the ground, which could not be gathered up again: 2 Samuel 14: 14.
And God, without respect of persons, did find out this way in his Son to
redeem us again to himself, even by his being manifest in our flesh, yea, in
our sinful flesh, not that he was that flesh, but did live in it, to destroy
the pollutions of it, and so present it to his Father, as blameless, and as
holy as himself, For he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all
of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren, saying, I will
declare thy Name unto my Brethren, in the midst of the Church will I sing
praise unto thee: And again, I will put my trust in thee, and beh^ld I and the
children which God has given me (are with thee) Heb. 2. 11.


Rosewell. Cannot every one read this as well as you?


Coppin. Pray interrupt me not, I shall yet go on, verse 17. 18. He was in all
things made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful
High Priest, to offer up for the sins of the people, which till he had taken
them on him in our likeness, he could not do; and in that he himself has
suffered for them, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted,
but if our nature were holy before Christ took it on him, to what end did he
take it to suffer in it? and yet, I say, this Jesus which did take our nature
on him (and still lives in it, now in us, and will also in those that shall
come after us) was not himself sinful, but righteous, and the sinfulness of
it was ours, and is known only to us, and not to him living in us, for he knew
no sin, and yet he in our nature did bear all oursins, and it was the sins of
all men that did crucify him, which he did bear in (their nature as) his own
body on the Tree, for the same nature that sinned, did suffer for sin, and John
11. 50
not another nature, and he being both God and man, as having the nature of
both, so he had power to die, and to live again, to lay down his life, and to
take it up; and so he became our Holy High Priest, to offer up us and our
nature in himself, and his nature, Heb. 10 14. 15 Chap. 7. 27.
by one offering to the Father (to reconcile us to God) when he offered up
himself once for all: And now answer me one question, What High Priest is that
spoken of in Heb. 5. 1. 2. 3. And that you may know, he is there said to have
compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way, for that he
himself also is compassed about with our infirmities, and what High Priest is
this say you?

Then answered one Mr. Wife a Minister, It is spoken of Jesus Christ.


Coppin. It seems you cannot answer your self, you must have some other to
answer for you.


Rosewell. I will fetch one Oyster-Wife from Billingsgate shall answer you.


Coppin. Well, you deny not this answer made for you, concerning this
Scripture in Heb. 5. that the High Priest there spoken of was Christ, which if
it be as you say, and not I, then read the next words, ver. 3. and by reason
thereof he ought, as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins.


Rosewell. You have confessed confessed what I charged you with.


Coppin. I have only read to you the words of the Scripture; Also if Christ be
our Surety to pay our debt, as in Heb. 7. 22. then the debt became his, as
well as ours, which he paid for himself, as for us, after he had taken it to
him; and so he may be said, to offer for his own sins also, as for the peoples,
according to these Scriptures, Isaiah 53. 12. He was numbered with the
transgressors.


Rosewell. Now I desire all to take notice, and they may plainly see you are a
Blasphemer, I shall now follow you in your Wile-Goose-Chase; He that shall
pretend Scripture, that Christ did offer for his own sins, as also for the
peoples, he is a Blasphemer; but you have; ergo


Coppin. I have not pretended Scripture* but have proved all things that I have
said plainly by Scripture; and concerning that in the Heb. I did ask you what
was meant by that High Priest, and because you did not answer your self, some
other body did for you, saying, it was Christ.


Rosewell. But you did affirm that Christ in our nature did offer for his own
sins, as also for the peoples, and how can there be salvation in him that must
offer for his own sins? therefore all that hear you, must conclude this to be
high blasphemy against Jesus Christ, and it is dangerous damnable doctrine.


Coppin. You say it is dangerous, and so it is to you, because it is contrary
to your doctrine, and does overthrow it, but it is not dangerous to the truth,
but to that which is a lie, and that cannot stand before it, and therefore you
rail against it, because you can no way overthrow it.


Rosewell. I say he that says Christ did offer for his own sins is a
blasphemer.


Coppin. Is that all you can say, if it be, you were best go back to School
again, where you learned this, and learn some more.


Rosewell. I have enough, and that you shall see, if I had but your book here


Coppin. Why did you not bring it with you, seeing you can say nothing without
book, I said you wanted help, and so it is true


CHAP. VII. Of Christ, the Resurrection from the first Adam to the second,
proved, with the manner how, and the time when, what body it shall arise, and
from what death; also how it was signified, by what, and when.
ROsewell. He that from Scripture does labor to persuade men that there is no
Resurrection of the body to be exspected, and that no body shall be raised at
the last day, he is a perverter of Scripture, and a venture of damnable errors,
but you are one, ergo.


Coppin. I deny your minor, therefore prove it.


Rosewell. I prove it thus, 1 Cor. 15. That as Jesus Christ was raised from the
dead, so all they which have been, are, and shall be, shall be raised up at the
last day, which you deny.


Coppin. I do grant the Resurrection of the body, and do not deny it, though
you say I do.


Rosewell. You did deny that the words in Job did signify any Resurrection of
the body; and also that in 1 Cor. 15. which I can prove.


Coppin. Is that Resurrection a mystery, or no mystery?


Rosewell. Yes, a great mystery, and such a one as I do believe you do not
know.


Coppin. If you do know, pray declare it.


Rosewell. I am not minded to declare it to you at this time.


Coppin. Then I will tell you what it is.

Friends and Brethren, I do own a Resurrection according to the Scriptures, and
such a Resurrection as you all must partake of before ye can see the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 15. There is a Resurrection spoken of by the Apostle, which is
the Resurrection of Christ, and of our rising in and with him, from the state
of the first Adam, to the state of the second Adam; but there were some then,
as well as now, that did think the Apostle had meant carnally the rising again
of the same body of flesh and bones, and therefore did ask the question, with
what bodies they shall arise, not knowing what the Dead was, nor the life it
should be raised to, and how God gives it a body as pleases him. Now to
prove this Resurrection, Christ says, I am he which was alive, and was dead,
and am alive again, and lives for evermore.


Rosewell. Do you hear, he says Christ was alive, and dead.


Coppin. There is nothing can be said to die, but first it must be alive, nor
made to live, but it must first die: Now Christ is he which was alive, was
dead, and is alive again; the first that was living, and the last that lives.
Revel. 1. 17: 18


In John 11. 21. Martha comes to Christ, and says, Lord, if thou had been
here, my Brother had not died: Christ said, Thy Brother shall rise again: I
know, said Martha, he shall rise at the Resurrection, on the last day: Jesus
said unto her, I am the Resurrection, and the Life, he that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live, and he that lives and believes in me
shall never die, Believe thou this? Now she had Faith to believe that he was
Christ, the Son of God, but could not believe the truth of her Brothers
Resurrection in Christ: therefore did-Christ blame her, saying, Had thou but
believed, thou should have seen the glory of God, John 11. 40.

Now if Christ be the Resurrection, and the Life, then there is nothing in this
Resurrection, but what is himself, for he is the dead raised, the raiser of
this dead, and the life raised too, as he says, I am the Resurrection, and the
Life. Now take notice that I do not deny any thing of Christ all this while,
but do advance him, and also our Resurrection in him, as the Scripture says,
We are raised up together with him, to sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
and this is the mystery of the Resurrection, which you say is a great mystery.

Now says the Apostle to those carnal enquirers that knew not this mystery of
the Resurrection, but asked with what bodies they should arise, Thou fool,
says the Apostle, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die, and
thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of
wheat, or some other grain, so it is not, says be, the same body which thou
sowest that is raised, but God gives it a body as pleases him. And why then,
say you, that the same body shall be raised again?

Now Paul to prove this spiritual Resurrection, tells us, that there is one
glory of the Sun, another glory of the Moon, and another of the Stars, and
one Star differs from another Star in glory; so also is the Resurrection of
the dead, it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in
dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in
power, and all in us, that I may know him, says Paul, and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to
his death, if by any means I might attain unto the Resurrection of the dead,
for which I press forwards, Phil. 3. 10: 11.
says Paul: So that this Resurrection is to be within you, and you are to know
it while you live in this body, for it is your rising from faith to faith,
from glory to glory, as from one administration of God to another, Behold,
says Paul, I show you Rom: 1: 16: 17 2 Cor: 3: 18:
a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall be changed; that is, changed
from the state of the first Adam, to the state of the second Adam, and so he
tells us, It was sown in Adam, it was raised in Christ, it was sown a natural
body, and it is raised a spiritual body, even as you see your change, for the
first man Adam is of the earth earthy, a living soul, the second is the Lord
from heaven, a quickening spirit, and as is the earthly, so are they that are
earthly, and as is the heavenly, so are they that are heavenly; wherefore
examine your selves, and you will now find it so, for you are all of you either
in the state of the first Adam, or in the state of the second Adam, and your
change is from the first to the second, that as you have born the image of the
earthly, so you shall bear the image of the heavenly, for there is a body
natural, and a body spiritual, all which are proper to us in this life: And
thus Paul tells us of the Resurrection in a mystery.

Now take notice that I do not deny any Resurrection in all this, which by any
man may be proved, but I do declare to you the mystery of this spiritual
Resurrection, which I know, and which you say is a mystery: Secondly, consider
the death you are to be raised from, and that is the death that all men died in
the state of the first Adam, and do still die, by reason of sin, from which
death all shall be raised to life in Christ, the second Adam: Now the wages of
sin is death, and that death which sin does bring on man, is the same death
that Christ does raise him from, For you who were dead in sins and trespasses,
has he quickened, Ephesians: 2: 1: Coll: 3: 1:
and if ye be risen with Christ, seek the things which are above, where Christ
siteth at the right hand of God, which is spoken in the Presentence, and not in
the Future, and cannot be meant of the rising of our corporal bodies, after
laid in the grave, which I question whether those that talk so much of that, do
yet know this spiritual Resurrection, which I hereby declare to you all; and if
any one can tell us of another Resurrection of the same body of flesh, blood,
and bones again as it was, let him declare that, as I have declared this, for I
deny nothing which by any other can be proved, but the Scripture says, That
flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does corruption
inherit incorruption; therefore blessed and happy are all they Revel: 20: 6:
which have their part in this first Resurrection, for of such the second death
has no power, but they live and reign with Christ.

Thirdly, As there is a body to be raised, so there is also a body to be
destroyed, and that is the body of sin and death, which is to die, and no more
to live, For if Christ be in you, the body is Rom: 8: 10:
dead, because of sin, but the spirit is life, because of righteousness, that
is of Christ: And in Rom 6. there is a Resurrection from sin, to newness of
life, spoken of by the Apostle, that like as Christ was raised from the dead,
by the glory of the Father, even so should we walk before him in newness of
life; for if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we
shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection, knowing this, that our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin.


Rosewell. 2 Timothy 2. 18. But there were false Prophets among them, as there are
false Teachers among you, which say, the Resurrection is past already, and so
bring in damnable errors to overthrow the says, and we see there were some in
the Apostles days which did deny a corporal Resurrection.


Coppin. Do you instance that Scripture as to a corporal Resurrection, which
speaks nothing of it, you do add to that Scripture (the word corporal) and you
know the punishment of him that adds thereto, or diminishes therefrom.
Again, I do not say the Resurrection is past already, for it is not yet come to
you, nor many more, therefore your Scripture is to no purpose against me; for I
say, it is to come, as well as already come, and that it shall continue until
the Day of Judgment be ended, or till all that shall be, are raised, and set
free in this spiritual Resurrection, from death, hell, or the grave, in which
they lie imprisoned and buried, by reason of sin; but the Sadduces, who deny
the Resurrection, hold there is neither Angel nor Spirit, and that do not I.


Rosewell. I shall prove the Resurrection of the body, from Job 19. Where Job
says, He shall see God with those eyes at the last day: 1 Cor. 15. Paul says,
If the dead rise not, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is vain, and
you are yet in your sins: And Job says, Though worms destroy his body, yet
in this flesh, in this body, shall I see God, which does clearlie prove a
corporal Resurrection, but I shall give him rope till night.


Coppin. Add not to the Scripture, for there is no such bodily Resurrection
spoken of, as you declare, 1 Cor. 15. 12. so on, pray see friends, Paul does
not speak of a corporal Resurrection, but tells them of the Resurrection of the
Dead, and says, That if Christ be not risen, then all our Preaching and
Believing is in vain, and we are yet in our sins: Clearlie intimating, that the
Resurrection of Christ does assure them of their being raised from sin, to walk
with God in newness of life, For, says he, you are sown a natural body, but
you are raised a spiritual body; and a spiritual body is not flesh and bones,
therefore not the same body, as you say it is, and would have it to be.


Rosewell. There shall be eyes, hands, and feet.


Coppin. That there shall be eyes, hands, and feet, you are yet to prove.


Rosewell. Job says, He shall see God with those eyes, and that in this his
flesh he shall see God: Again, the Scripture says, That they which are alive,
and them which are dead, shall be raised, and all of them shall meet the Lord,
only this corruptible must put on incorruptible, and this mortal must put on
immortality: Again, the bodies of Believers are the Temples of the Holy Ghost,
1 Cor. 6. and the Temples of Jesus Christ, therefore the same bodies shall be
raised at the last day.


Coppin. You also bring Job to prove a Corporal Resurrection, of flesh, blood,
and bones, and that this Resurrection, and seeing God with those eyes, was not
to be, till after the death of his visible body, as you say; but I say here is
a mystery* and a spiritual sense to be understood in these words, Job. 19.
where he says, I know my Redeemer lives, and that at the last day I shall s^e
him stand upon the earth; and though after my skin, worms destroy this body,
yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see, for my self, and mine eyes
shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed within me. But to
understand this, you must know how he is the Redeemer, and when, also what is
meant by the last day, and the earth which he shall stand upon, and what eyes
shall behold him, etc.

Now his Redeemer was the Lord, and did then live in Job, though he knew it
not, and that he should see him at the last day, is a truth, but what this last
day was, and the manner how he should see him, that he knew not, till the time
came that he saw him in himself; therefore you shall find that Job was then in
darkness, and under much affliction, uttering words without knowledge, for which
he was reproved, first by the Prophet Elihu, secondly by Job 33.
the Lord, thirdly he confessed it; first the Prophet reproved him, Job 33.
Chap. 35. 16. Therefore does Job open his mouth in vain, he multiplieth words
without knowledge, Job 38. 1. 2. Then the Lord answered Job out of the
whirlwind, and said, who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without
knowledge, gird up now thy loins like a man, for I will demand of thee, and
answer thou me. And so he goes on to reprove Job of his ignorance of God, and
in Chap. 40. 3. Job answers the Lord and says, bebold I am vile, what shall I
answer thee, I will lay my hand upon my mouth, once have I spoken, but I will
not answer, yea twice, but I will proceed no further, and in Chap. 42. 3. he
acknowledges his error and ignorance of God, and answers the Lord, saying, who
is he that hides counsel without knowledge, therefore have I uttered that I
understand not, things too wonderful for me, which I knew not, but now hear, I
beseech thee, and I will speak, I have often heard of thee by the hearing of
the care, but now mine eyes sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self in dust and
ashes. Thus did Job in his life time see the King, the Lord of Hosts, his
Redeemer, standing upon, (and was a conqueror of) that earth, the first Adam
which he first lived in the Image of, till the second Adam appeared, as at the
last day of the first Adam in him, which he before said should come, and wa^
now come to him, For now do mine eyes see thee.


Rosewell. Pray read a little further, and ye shall find that God says, his
friends had not spoken right of him, as his servant Job had done; and again,
this cannot be meant of his seeing his Redeemer, for now ^is (...)ynes and
reins was not consumed.


Coppin. It Is true, Job never spoke the things that was right of the Lord, till
he said, Now do mine eyes see thee; and this his friends could not say, for
they had not seen the Lord, as his servand Job had; therefore, though after his
skin worms had destroyed his body, yet in his flesh he did see God.

Th^s skin was the good esteem he had of his own righteousness, the pride and
glory of his own flesh, which he was stripped of, for boasting in it, and so
says Job, He has stripped me of all Job 27: Ch^p: 19: 9:
my glory, and taken the Crown from off my head; and the body that must be
destroyed, was the body of sin and corruption which was within him, and is in
all men for a time, while they live in the corrupt state of the old Adam, and
the worms are the terrors of the troubled mind, which as Troops of Robbers
feeds upon the flesh of the earthly man, and Job had many in his flesh, For my
flesh, says he, is clothed with Worms, my skin is broken, and become
loathsome, the arrows of the Almighty sticks fast Chap: 7: 5: Chap: 6: 2: 3: 4
Chap: 16: 13:
in me, his Archers compass me round about, and he cleaves my reins in
sunder. Here was the destruction of Jobs body in his life time, all his
comforts were taken from him, and all those things were fulfilled upon him, and
appeared in him, and yet, says he, after all this I shall see my Redeemer, and
so he did, for when through the manifestation of God to him, his soul within
him was revived, his knowledge and understanding enlightened, and his reins,
with the girdle of says strengthened, then, says he, Now do mine eyes see
thee, and I am no more my self, but a Isa: 11: 5:
new man in thee, for now is my change come, therefore cannot be meant of the
body after a natural death, as you say it is.


Robison. Of all Religions, this is most damnable, to say there is no
Resurrection of the body.


Coppin. I deny not any thing which any man can prove to Christ a sign.
be true, from Scripture.


Rosewell. I prove a corporal Resurrection of our bodies, from the example of
Christ's Resurrection of his Body.


Coppin. That was a sign to us of our rising with Christ to a newness of life,
both toward God and man.


Rosewell. I deny the Resurrection of Christ's body to be a sign.


Coppin. You say the corporal Resurrection of Christ is no sign, and yet you
say again it does signify the Resurrection of our bodies, but the Scripture
says not so, but says, That like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the Father, even so we Romans 6. 4.
also should walk in newness of life, and so will he change our vile bodies
here, and make them like unto his glorious body, by subduing Phil. 3. 2^.
all things to himself in us, which is the spiritualty and glory of our bodies.


Captain Smith. We grant you that.


Coppin. Then give me leave, Christ being born of the Virgin Mary, Was it also
a sign to us, or not?


Robison. Was it but a sign to us, and no substance.


C^ppin. I do not say so, but I say it was a sign which I prove, Isa. 7. 14.
Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign, behold a Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Emanuel. Now what did this
signify, but that as the Virgin did bring forth Christ in our nature, flesh,
blood, and bones, so should Christ bring forth himself in every one of us, in
Spirit and truth, Gal. 4. 14. My little Children, says Paul, of whom I travel
in birth again, until Christ be formed in you, not as a body, flesh, and
bones in us, for that were to make many Christ's, as for every man one, but he
shall be formed in us in Spirit and power.


Rosewell. I do not believe, but Christ is here said to be a sign, but what
is the thing signified, that King Ahaz should overcome his enemies, and that
the Scepter should not depart from Juda, till Shilo come.


Coppin. That is till Christ come Spiritual in us, or else what benefit is it
to us to look back upon the birth and death of Christ as signs, and do not
see the things signified; For a wicked and adulterous generati^n seeks after
a sign, and never looks on the thing signified, which is the birth, death, and
Resurrection of Christ in them, which should all be made manifest in our
mortal flesh, and so says Paul, I do always bear about in the body, the
dying also of 2 Cor 4 7. 8: 9. 10. 11. 1 Coll. 24^
the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus might be made manifest in our body,
and now do I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and do fill up the measure of
the sufferings of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church,
whereof I Paul am made a Minister, according to the dispensation of God, which
is given to me for you to fulfill the word of God, even the mystery which
has been hid from all ages, and now is made manifest to his Saints, to whom
God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery, which is
Christ in you, the hope of glory.


CHAP. VIII. The Mystery of the Trinity in relation to man, of the state of
Reprobation, when, how long, and how.
ROsewell. I desire you may go on: How is Christ in you the hope of glory?


Coppin. Tell me, what do you mean by Christ, and then I will tell you, how he
is Christ the hope of glory in man.


Rosewell. I do mean by Christ the Son of God, the second person in the
Trinity, God our All-blessed for ever, he that did take our nature of his
Virgin Mother, and does in our nature sit at the right hand of God, and will
come again at the last day to judge the quick and dead.


Coppin. I do not deny the three persons, according to the Scripture, but you
do deny Christ to be within us, and would Of the Trinity.
subscribe him to a place above our heads, with another person; therefore I
will tell you what the Trinity is. First, there is God the Father that did
create all things, and in whom all things live, when yet unknown to man, and
that men might know him that is true, he did appear as a son amongst men, to
manifest himself 1 John 5: 20:
to men, and so he is said to be Immanuel, God withus, which is also Christ in
us the hope of glory: Thirdly, there is the Holy Spirit, and that is the
complete manifestation of the fullness of all things brought home to man's
understanding, wherein God, Christ, and man appears, all but one in one God, as
Christ says, I in them, and thou in me, that we all may be made perfect in
one; and John 17: 23: John 14: 26:
says he, The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my name, he shall come, and teach you all things.

Now so long as man is without this manifestation of God, which What is
Reprobation.
is Christ in him, he is a reprobate, and knows not God; but when Christ shall
so appear in man to show the Father plainly, then is there a perfect knowledge
of the true God in man, John 14. 20. At that day ye shall know that I am in the
Father, and you in me, and I in you, and then know you not but that Christ is
in you, 2 Cor. 13: 5:
except you be reprobates: And now what is a reprobate, but not to have Christ
in you, which is God manifest in flesh, therefore, I say, Reprobation is the
not knowing of God to be in you, Romans 1. 28. for because they did not like to
retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind; but
where there is God manifest in flesh to the knowledge of any, there is Christ,
and that man is no longer a reprobate, for then is God said to walk in him, as
being no longer still and silent, but is seen and known to him; as when a man
dwells in a house, shuting the windows to him, and will not be seen; so when
God does not only dwell in man, but also walk in man, discovering himself to
man, by opening and leting in the light through the understanding of man, then
is Father, Son, and Spirit, all three as one God, dwelling, walking, and
manifesting himself in man, For, says he, I will dwell amongst you, and I will
walk amongst you, I will be your God, and you shall be my people.


Rosewell. You have confounded the three persons.


Coppin. No, I have united them together in their proper places, as all
agreeing in one, when as they were three manifestations of that one great and
glorious God, Father, Son, and Spirit.


Rosewell. It is high time for Magistrates, Ministers, and people to look about
them, when such damnable errors are uttered with so impudent a face.


Captain Smith. Mr. Rosewell, It is the plain Scripture, I conceive, Mr. Coppin
has given the people satisfaction in those things; for he says, that Jesus
Christ is in no reprobates, nor in no man, till they know God; and that where
God does manifest himself to a soul, there is Christ.


Rosewell. But Sir, he, I know, does mean, that there is no reprobates ordained
to wrath; now tell me, will Christ be in them you call reprobates, first or
last?


Coppin. There is no man now come to know God, but first he did not know God,
and so long he was a reprobate, which that all men are, till Christ be dwelling
in them.


Captain Smith. Till Jesus Christ be manifested in them, he says, they are
reprobates.


Rosewell. But I have a new question, that is, Will Christ be manifest in them
all, first or last? answer that.


Coppin. I will give you a plain Scripture for an answer, 1 Timothy 2. 4. 5. Who
will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, for
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, even the man Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all men to be testified in due time,
whereunta I Paul am ordained an Apostle, I speak the truth in Christ, and lie
not.


Rosewell. You see ^e affirms that God will save all men.


Coppin. I have answered you in the plain words of Scriptures, which is an
answer sufficient; And Paul says, He does speak the truth in Christ, and lies
not; pick what you can out of that; and of this Gospel truth, says he, I Paul
am made a Minister.


Rosewell. You do not say that Christ shall appear in all, but you bring this
as a proof; now no Scripture does contradict another, now this is meant, he
will save some of all sorts of men of places and authority.


Coppin. The Apostle says all, and you say some, who perverts Scripture now,
you or I?


Rosewell. You are not to pray for all men, therefore all shall not be saved.


Coppin. If all shall be saved that are to be prayed for, then there is none
but shall be saved, for prayers is to be made for all men.


Rosewell. But the Apostle means all sorts of men, and that some of all sorts
shall be saved.


Coppin. Then by your own words there is no one whole sort of men in the world
left out from salvation, but some of all sorts, and not all of any sort, (you
say) shall be saved; and the Scripture says, all men of all sorts, for both
the fullness of Jews and Gentiles shall come in, therefore name any of any sort
that shall not.


CHAP. IX. The sin against the Holy Ghost not forgiven, what it is, who commits
it, and when.
ROsewell. He that has committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, The sin
against the Holy Ghost.
that after strong conviction of truth, do fall away, and are perverted, they
shall not be forgiven in this world, nor the world to come.

(...) and whosoever commits sin is of him, but he that is born of God sineth
not, neither can he, for his seed remains in him.


Rosewell. He that is born of God sineth not, that is, willingly to make a
trade of sin, yet in the best of Gods people there is sin.


Coppin. Then he that commits sin is of the devil, and shall be destroyed, but
if he that commits sin, and is of the devil, be meant of men, there is none
shall be saved, if all commits sin, as you say.


Rosewell. No, I do not say so.


Coppin. But you do, therefore hear, if he that commits sin is of the devil,
as the Scripture says, and that as you say, all men do commit sin (for you say
in the best of Gods people there is sin) and that God will destroy the persons
of men for their sins committed by them, who is that sinner then in the world,
that shall be saved? and what is that sinner which shall perish? if you know,
declare it, what, and who that sinner is.


Rosewell. I do think there is one in the Pulpit, which does sin against God,
in blaspheming his Name.


Coppin. There is one then, but is that all, well, you say I am a sinner, but I
hope you think your self to be a righteous person, I say then let him that is
without sin, cast the first stone, the Scripture ^aith, he has concluded all
men under sin, that he might have mercy upon all, and it is well for me that I
am a sinner, for then I am sure to have a part in Christ, for he came not to
call the righteous, Romans 11. 32^
but sinners.


Rosewell. If none shall be saved, but the Elect, then all shall not be saved,
but it is clear, none shall be saved but the Elect, when he is revealed from
heaven, he will take vengeance on all that know not God, Isa. 27. 11. Also 2
These. 1. 7. 8. And indeed the whole Chapter, read and consider it seriously,
and be not led away by these Imposters.


Coppin. The Lord Jesus is now revealed from heaven in flameing fire, taking
vengeance on all that know him not, neither own him in his people, as al
unrighteousness of men, which hold the truth in unrighteousness, do not, and
against this the wrath of God is Romans 1. 18.
revealed, and not against the persons of men; yet those men, so long as this
unrighteousness is in them, they appear not as men, yet saved by him, but do
suffer the vengeance and terror of this fierce fiery appearing of God to them,
till the enemy; the devil in them is destroyed, that made them sinners, by
commiting sin in them.


Rosewell. Take notice he does deny a general coming of Christ at the last day,
in flaming fire, rendering vengeance on the persons of men.


Coppin. I do not deny the coming of Christ to render vengeance to whom it
belongs, for vengeance is mine, says the Lord, and I will repay; therefore I
believe some has it now, and he is come, and does come and will come, to take
vengeance on all that know him not (and is of the devil) in me, you, and every
man else, and when he is so come to any soul for that work, he will then let
them know, that he himself is that flame of fire that will devour his
adversaries, (to wit) the briars and thorns with which we fight against God in
the time of our ignorance, persecuting Isa. 27* 4:
the truth: For what was Paul when Christ came to him, was he not a great
persecutor of the Church and people of God in those days? and Christ came to
him in a flame of fire, to take vengeance on that in him which knew not God
(but had fought against the truth) saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
Acts 9: 1: 2, 3, 4, 5.
and yet he, in that person, after that, lived and Preached the Gospel which he
once destroyed.


French. You had need go and be a Schoolboy again.


Coppin. I am indeed a Schoolboy now in the School of Christ, and 'twere well
if you were one there also.


French. The Lord stop thy mouth.


Rosewell. He does say the day of Judgment is past already.


Coppin. I say it not, but do say that it is come, and coming, and therefore
answer me to the former Scripture, which you would pass by, He that commits
sin, is of the devil; for there is yet more to be said to that before we leave
it.


Rosewell. That is, every one that continues to be of the Devil, he shall be
destroyed, and there is whole heaps of them in hell now, and there for ever
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone.


Coppin. If this be all you know, I will tell you more, He that commits sin,
is of the devil; and there is no man but does commit sin, and so long the devil
raigns in him; but when the Lord Jesus Christ does manifest himself in that
man, to destroy the works of the devil, he then binds the devil in that man,
disposses^es him of his place, throws out all his goods and houshol dstuff,
and sets them on a fire together, according to this Scripture, Mark 3. 27. 28.
No man can enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods, except he
first bind the strong man, and then he will spoil his house.

This house is man, the strong man that keeps it, is the devil, (or man in his
strengh) but when the Lord Jesus Christ, who is stronger then he is come, then
is the devil bound, his goods spoiled, and all that man's sins forgiven him.


Rosewell. I do confess all by nature are sinful, but all do not sin in
that sense, so that all that has been said is to no purpose.


Coppin. You did say at first, you would make me so ashamed that I should not
show my face here any more; and indeed all that has been said by you yet, is
little to that purpose.


Rosewell. Indeed I did always dispairof making your brazen-face ashamed.


Coppin. Then give me leave to proceed, I say there is for a time in every man,
the old man living and sining, and also the new man that sineth not, and those
are at difference one with another, until the one has overcome the other, as
Paul says of himself after he was first converted, Romans 7. 22. I delight
(says he) in the law of God after the inward man, but I see another law in my
members warring against the law of my mind, that I cannot do the things that I
would, for with my mind I serve the law of God, but with my flesh the law of
sin, so it is no more I that sins, but sin that dwells in me, not the new
man, but the old man that sineth.


Rosewell. And this you do affirm to be in every man.


Capt Smith. Mr. Coppin, many people desire to know if you speak this of the
regenerate state of man, or if it be the state of all men.


Coppin. I say this, that all men so far as they are regenerated, does not
commit sin, but the wicked one, which is called the unregenerate part, does
rule in all men for a time, more or less, until he be wholly thrown out, but
when the Lord Jesus by manifesting himself for that work, does begin to seize
on that wicked part, then the work of regeneration begins, and then man is not
all wicked, nor all righteous, but part of both, as the Apostle was, in his
first conversion, and so long there is a warfare in man, till the old man be
wholly subdued, according to this Scripture, he that is in Christ is a new
crature, old things are past away, and all things are become new.


Captain Smith. And concerning this, Paul says, I thank God through Jesus
Christ, with my mind I serve the law of God, though with my flesh the law of
sin.


Rosewell. He speaks there of a regenerate state.

People say, let Mr. Coppin speak.


Rosewell. Pray let me speak, you see with what a bundle of words this man has
heaped up a discourse, as that the wicked one in man does commit sin, and that
when Christ does come, that is but the beginings of his regeneration, and you
know that when Christ does lay hold on any soul, there is a work of
regeneration wrought on that man, and this work of regeneration, Christ does
work only in his people, not in all men.


Coppin. It is manifest that all men were, and are, the people of God, though
til this work of regeneration is wrought in them, they do not appear to be of
God, but of the devil, having not the knowledge of God within them.


CHAP. XI. A brief hint of general salvation by Christ, of the people called
Jews, Gentiles, and Heathens, etc. that it is the only doctrine to keep men
from sin, and to be assured of their own salvation, how, and when.
ROsewell. The whole Scripture puts difference between the seed of the woman,
and the seea of the serpent, and between them that shall be saved, and them
that shall be damned, and if the devil should come from hell, and preach a
doctrine to bring men to the broad way of destruction, this is the only thing
to make them believe, all shall be saved, and that whatsoever good deeds man
do, can do them no good, and whatsoever evil deeds they do, can do them no
hurt.


Coppin. You say there is no greater thing in the world to bring men into the
broad way of destruction, then to tell men that all shall be saved, and that it
is doctrine of devils, therefore shall I go on, and prove how God will save
all men, and destroy only the seed of the serpent in them, which is no
doctrine of devils, but of Christ and his Apostles, which they preached for to
call men to salvation from the broad way of destruction, into which they were
led by the doctrine of damnation (or damnable doctrine) the doctrine of
devils, For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that
the world through him might be saved, and it is God that justisieth sinners,
who the^ shall condemn? Not I, John 3. 17: Romans 5. 8: 18: Cha: 8: 33: 34: 1 Timothy: 2.
says the Lord, for I will that all men shall be saved; and of this, says
Paul, am I made a Minister, I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not, my
conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, that I have great
heaviness for my Brethren, according to the flesh, who are Israelites, and yet
ignorant of this mystery, their own salvation; (...)and therefore Brethren
consider seriously of the Doctrine of the Apostle in Romans Chap. 9. 10. 11.
First, he goes on and tells them, that though Israel be as the sand in the sea,
yet a remnant shall be saved, meaning of the Jews at that time, to whom the
word (Election) only belongs, for a very small number then believed, the rest
were blinded, yet he tells them it shall come to pass, that in the same place
where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there shall it be said, Ye
are the children of the living God; what says the Apostle, though Israel be
cut off for ^om: 9: 25: 26
a time, has God therefore cast away his people which he foreknew, God forbid?
God has not cast away his people for ever, though at this present time there
remains but a remnant, according to the Election of grace, that is now, says
he, but does not tell them it shall be always so, but to the contrary he
affirms, for the holy seed was still in them, though they were blind and
Isaiah 6: 10: 13
saw it not; and of this he would not have them ignorant, that blindness in
part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and
so says he, (which said before a remnant should be saved, says now) all
Israel shall be saved (as it is written) A Deliverer shall come out of Sion,
and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, and this shall be my Covenant when
I take Ier: 31: 1: Rom: 11: 26:
away their sins, for the people shall be all righteous, a little one shall
become a thousand, a small number shall become a great number, I the Lord shall
hasten it in due time, that it shall no more be said, a remnant, but all Israel
shall be saved, yea, Jews 1 Cor: 12* 12:
and Gentiles, bond and free, all have been baptized into Christ, and shall be
saved by Christ, who is all, and in all; And the Heathen also has he given to
his Son Christ for an inheritance, and the Psa: 2: 8. 1 These: 5: 1:
uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, to be possessed by him, but of
the times and seasons, Brethren, I would not have you ignorant, for he comes as
a Thief in the night.

And whereas you say, that this Doctrine of Salvation to all men gives men
liberty to sin, I tell you no, for when once this love of God, which is so free
to all men, has appeared to my soul, thy soul, and any soul in the world, it
will keep him from the liberty of sining, and bind him fast to the liberty of
Christ, as it is written, The grace of God, which brings salvation to all men
has appeared; what to do, to give them liberty to sin, no; but does Titus 2.
11: 12
teach them to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly
and righteously in this present world; no more according to your own wills, but
the Lords will, for now they are in the power and hands of the Lord, and he
does act them which way he please for his own glory, and their good in him, and
then what art thou, O man, that judge thy Brother, thou therein judge the
Law by which he is kept; and thou art not then a doer of the James 4: 11:
Law, but a Judge; for man cannot do any thing of himself, but by that Law
which he is kept, and therefore all men are to say, If the Lord will, we shall
do this or that, for the Law of love, which is in Christ, constrains men to
that which is good, from that which is evil.

And therefore to the contrary of what you say I declare, that by your
preaching of wrath, hell, and damnation, to poor souls that are weak in the
faith, it does but cast them down from the knowledge of the love of God,
through which they should s^^ themselves saved, and they can never see the love
of God in Christ after that way which you preach unto them, and therefore pray
see friends, who say they Preaches Gospel, know what Gospel it is they Preach;
the Apostle says, The Gospel which they preach, is not after man's wisdom, but
by the demonstration of the spirit, and 1 Cor: 2: 4: 5. Chap. 1. 23.
of power; For we Preach, says he, Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling
block, and to the Greeks foolishness, because they know not the mystery of
godliness, which is Christ in them, the wisdom of God, and the power of God;
and we preach Luke 2. 14.
peace on earth, and good will toward men, and to God, glory in the highest:
And O how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of Isaiah 52. 7. Isaiah 40
1: 2.
those which bring tidings of peace, and say to Sion, thy God reigns, thy
warfare is accomplished, and thy sin is pardoned; and this Gospel did Christ
preach, and command to be preached to every creature under heaven, as the work
of his Ministry.


Rosewell. He does maintain the salvation of all, and does condemn others which
do not so, you may plainly see now how you are misled, and I hope you are all
abundantly satisfied in it; if it were not to give satisfaction to some, I
would not have put my self to this trouble to have discoursed with such a man,
in whose forehead Blasphemy is written in Capital Letters, he that runs may
read it.


Coppin. Seeing you cannot tell how to call me bad enough, as you think,
therefore I will give you a little more before you go, and catch what you can,
that is, that no man can be assured of his own salvation, except he see the
same salvation in the same Savior, for all men, as well as for himself, which
is to love his Neighbor as himself.


Rosewell. Better and better.


Coppin. For Jesus Christ did die and pay a price for all men, one as well as
another, and if there be but a few men saved, and Heb: 2: 9:
the greatest part damned to eternity, as you say, there is, what assurance
then can there be to any, for all were sinners, and if there were but one man
to be so damned, how could any man assuredly know (except he believe this) but
that he himself might be that one man.


Rosewell. Blessed be God which does so discover him to us, his Elder Brother
which went before him was more subtle, not to discover those Blasphemies which
lay hid in him, but in you, the devil appears in his colors; and in his
Stage Play terms.


Coppin. I have not yet said any evil of you, though you are pleased to rail
at me for speaking the truth freely.


Rosewell. It is not judging nor railing, to call a Blasphemer a Blasphemer,
though I will not deny but there may be something spoken of a weak Brother; and
also that Scripture in the Romans by you mentioned, when he speaks of a remnant,
and that they shall be grafted in again; and whereas you say, that all shall be
saved, Matthew. 22. 14. Many are called, but few are chosen. I am sorry I must be
so brief, but straightened in my body; the truth is, his lungs are better then
mine, but I hope must here are satisfied in what has been here stoken.


Robison. We are well satisfied; pray God keep us from this damnable Doctrine.


Coppin. It remains damnable to all that believe it not, for though it be a
truth, that God will save all men, yet till man does see this salvation within
him, there is no satisfaction unto him, but he still remains only as one called
with the multitude that shall be saved, but being not yet chosen, he remains as
one unsaved; until his time appointed comes, that he see himself Isaiah 45: 22^
saved, which will then be his choice or election to the faith by the spirit of
adoption, so that many are called, but few are chosen, but the called shall all
be chosen, for it is written, That the promise of salvation is to all that are
afar off, and as many as the Lord shall call, Acts 2. 39.


CHAP. XII. Of the Day of Judgment, and all men's coming to it, with the time
when, the place where, the manner how, the matter judged, and for what.
ROsewell. You say we preach damnation, and so do cast men down, we do preach
it to such as do go on in their sins; and live and die in their sins, that hell
is their portion; and as for thousands which die in their infancy, the
corruption of their natures is enough to damn them in hell to all eternity, I
can but hint at those things, indeed if we did preach only damnation we were
too blame, but when we do Preach comfort to Believers, we preach damnation to
unbelievers, as Christ says, He that believes shall be saved, and he that
believes not shall be damned at the Day of Judgment, Romans 2. who after their
hardness of heart, treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation
of the righteous judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his
deeds, to them that are contentious, and obey not the truth, indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish, to every soul of man which does evil, to the
Jew first, and also to the Gentile.


Coppin. Sir, you have run through many words of wrath and judgment, but
nothing is proved by you, what it is, nor when it is; and whereas you say,
there is a day of wrath and judgment, I do acknowledge the same, and that it
is both to Jews and Gentiles, and all that obey not the truth; but whereas you
also say, that some Jews which are dead already shall not be grafted in again
I deny, for the promise that they should come in, was then made for all the
stiff-necked Jews, that were also then, and before living, though their bodies
fell in the wilderness, yet their Spirits are living, and shall again be
grafted in, When the earth shall be full of the knowledge of God, and though you
from Romans Isaiah 11: 9:
2. do say they are under wrath, you do not from thence prove that it shall
abide on them, for ever and ever; now I say, that that man which is under wrath
must there remain, till the Lord Jesus does come to him, to manifest himself
in him, to turn his wrath away from him, and so judge that in him for wrath,
which is for wrath, and that for mercy which is for mercy; but because you
Isaiah 57: 16:
have not declared what this day of wrath and judgment is, I will, for a day of
judgment there is, in which all men shall be judged, and receive according to
their deeds, and if there be more then one day of judgment which I shall show
you, then do you declare it, for I deny nothing which can be proved by any
man from Scriptute.

Now the Scripture says there is judgment appointed for all men, as it is
written, It is appointed for all men once to die, and after that the judgment;
and this death is adying into sin and trespasses, for the wages of sin is
death, which none can be delivered from, but by judgment, and the Lord Jesus is
to be the Judge of all, For the Father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment to the Isaiah 11. 2. 3: John 9. 39.
Son, who will not judge by the sight of the eye, nor hearing of the ear, but
will judge righteous judgment; and Christ says, for judgment am I come into
this world, and now, says he, is the judgment of this world is come; now shall
the Prince of this world be cast out; and as it began then, so it is not ended
yet, but goes on still, and shall continue so long as there is any sin, death,
hell, or devil, to be judged, or condemned in man; And that every ear and
eye, that hears and sees any thing besides Christ, shall be made deaf and
blind, and every mouth that speaks any thing besides Christ the truth, shall be
stopped, that so the Lord himself may be all in all, and says Peter, The time
is come that judgment must begin at the house of God, and if it begin at us,
what shall the end be of them 1 Pet: 4. 17:
that obey not the Gospel of God? why, all shall come to judgment, every man in
his order, at the time when the Lord shall appear unto them.

And this is not a visible temporal Judgment on the bodies of men, but
invisible in the hearts of men, which is the Temple unto which God will come
and dwell in, for the Lord, whom you seek, will suddenly come to his Temple,
and there sit as a Refiner Mal. 3. 1. 2: 32*
and Purisier of silver, and will take away his dross and tyn, and try them as
gold is tried, therefore he says, he will send the Spirit, and he shall
convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and judgment, and when the Lord
does so come to judgment, then shall every man's book be opened, and they
shall be judged according to the things written in their books, which books are
Revel. 20: 12:
the consciences of men bearing witness, either for them, or against them,
accusing, or else excusing one another, in the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according Romans 2. 15. 16:
to his Gospel; and this is the manner of the Lords proceeding to judgment in
the day of the Gospel, which to the Lord is 2 Pet: 3. 8.
but as one day, though thousand of years.

Head a Lawyer said, This is damnable Doctrine, what need a coming to
judgment, if all shall be saved, you are a Blasphemer, and destroys the
Fundamentals of Religion by your impudency.


Coppin. Though all men shall be saved, yet not without judgment: But Sir, I
perceive you are a Lawyer, and it may be has a fee given you, then plead Law
for it, the Gospel allows of none, but though you may know the Law better then
I, it may be I may know the Gospel as well as you, and you see I have declared
a judgment according to the Gospel, and have proved it all along, if you
understand it, and if any man can prove any other Judgment day besides this
which I have proved, let him declare it.

And I also prove, that this Judge the Lord Jesus does accuse no man, but he
that is the accuser of the brethren, is the devil, Rev l: 12. 9. 10
who shall be cast out, and his accusation made void, for man, while he lives
under the law, lives under wrath, and is accused by the law, but when the Lord
Jesus comes to any soul, as a Judge, to fulfill the law, he declares himself
accused and condemned for that soul, and so frees him from the law, and
quiteth him of the accusation, and now Christ accuses not, but Moses; and yet,
says he, You will not come to me, that you may have life, but though you
receive another that comes in his own name, father then me that comes in my
Fathers name, yet do not think that I will accuse you to the Father, no, but
there is one that does accuse you, even Moses, in whom you trust. John 5. 40:
45:



Rosewell. John 5. is meant, Christ will not accuse them to the Father; yet
Christ does accuse them which does oppose his Gospel, and will do it, and will
throw them to the nethermost hell, at the last day, in everlasting torment,
soul and body; and therefore I desire you all, as you tender the glory of God,
and the good, of your own souls, have a care of such a dangerous blasphemer as
this, which in such a high nature does blaspheme the great God of heaven, Isa.
26. Thy hand is lifted up, and they will not see it, but they shall see it, and
be ashamed for their envy at the people; the fire of thy enemies shall devour
their persons at the last day.


Coppin. You may apply this unto your self, for your own envy that has
appeared at this, and other times; but do you bring this to prove destruction
of persons eternally at the last day, which is no such thing here meant.


Rosewell. I do confess a Spiritual Judgment Day.


Coppin. That have I affirmed all this while, for the which you cry out
against me to be a blasphemer, etc.


Rosewell. But there is another day of judgment, which will be at the last day.


Coppin. Pray do you prove a second day of judgment, you have confessed the
first, which I proved to you, and I deny not your second, if you can prove it
to me also, prove the destruction of persons, as you say.


Rosewell. Faelix did tremble when he did hear of judgment to come.


Coppin. This judgment was to come on him then, and is to come on all now, on
whom it has not yet appeared for the destruction of sin.


Rosewell. It does appear there is no such judgment known unto you, Jude 15.
but the Lord will come visibly, as a man from heaven, and all his Saints with
him, to sit upon his Throne, and to execute judgment, and to convince all that
are ungodly.


Coppin. You should declare where this place of Judgment is, and when it is,
and what this Throne is on which he sits.


Rosewell. I will not tell you, you shall know it when it does come, and
therefore cease to pervert Scripture.


Coppin. I do not at all judge or condemn you for speaking your judgment in what
things you know, though you do judge me, for you can but speak as you have
received, according to your measure, and so do I.


Rosewell. He does mainly labor to deny any Judgment to come on any man's
person.


Coppin. I tell you again, I deny nothing which you can prove to be true, it
is your work now to prove this Judgment Day you speak of, as I have done mine.


Rosewell. There is a Hell of fire and brimstone for ever.


Coppin. You would do well to prove what you mean by it, now before this people.


Rosewell. You have here said that Christ was a sinner.


Coppin. You said these words, I never said them, but said, that he was in
himself holy, harmless, just, and good.


Rosewell. You said the nature he did take was sinful, and you have denied the
Resurrection of the Body, and do affirm, that all men shall be saved.


Coppin. It is a sign there is no more in you to declare, because you go over
with the same things again, and again; But how are you assured of your own
salvation, tell me that?


Rosewell. I do believe he has saved me, and that one day he will do it.


Coppin. If he has done it already, then it is no more to do, and it is
better to believe that you are saved, then that you shall be saved.


CHAP. XIII. The practice of Magistrates and Ministers discovered, how they one
uphold another, to serve not the Lord, but themselves.
ROsewell. I hope those things need not proof, they are so clear to every
intelligible man, I desire that we may be all humbled for these things, and I
desire to have nothing to do any more with this man, except I shall be called
to it before a Magistrate, or the like, and then I shall labor to the utmost
to vindicate the truth of God, and in my Preaching and Catechistical Exercises,
I shall endeavor to meet with those damnable errors of his: And by the way,
take notice of those which do sow errors among you, they be such as serve not
the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, Romans 16. 17. 18. Mark them which cause
divisions, and avoid them. Now when men shall teach a Doctrine contrary to what
the Church of God has received in all Ages, and contrary to the judgment of
hundreds in this place, which are juditious, we may account him a Blasphemer,
he has blasphemy in his forehead, woe be to them which testify lies in the
name of the Lord.


Coppin. I shall return this back on your own head, and thereby kill Golia with
his own Sword, from these words, Romans 16. Mark them which cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and avoid them, for they are such
who serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies. Now let the people judge
who they are, for which consider, that the Doctrine of Christ is a Doctrine of
unity, love, joy, and peace, amongst men, but some there are who have caused
divisions, and offenses, railings, and revilings, at this and other meetings,
now and at other times, contrary to this Doctrine of Christ, and who those
are, I appeal to the people, as for my part, I know no man I have wronged
amongst you, nor spoke evil of any, but in love to the Lord, the truth, and
your souls; I have only defended my self in the truth I delivered, it being
so failed against.


Rosewell. Capt. Smith, Let Us conclude, there will be no end.


Coppin. I must speak a little more, therefore observe, they which preach for
hire and lucre of worldly profit, serve not Christ, Ez. k: 34:
but their bellies, not the people, but themselves; See Micah 3. 5. 6. 7. Thus
says the Lord, concerning the Prophets, that make my people err, that bite
with their teeth, and cry peace, and he that puteth not into their mouths,
they even prepare war against him, therefore night shall be unto you, that
you shall not have a vision, and it shall be dark unto you, that you shall not
divine, and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be
dark over them, then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the Diviners confounded,
yea, they shall all cover their lips, for there is no answer of God: The
Prophets are the Priests, the Seers are the Magistrates, and those join
together, one to keep up another, till the one shall be ashamed, and the other
confounded, and so fall together.


Rosewell. But read the 10. 11. verses, They build up Sion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity, the Heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests
thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets divine for money.


Coppin. Truly I need not read it, you have read it for me, and it fits you
well, the Seers and Heads thereof judge for reward, and you the Priests divine
for money, and if they will not pay you, then prepare war against them, sue
them at the Law, have them before Magistrates, and cast them into prison, as
you do, and have done, and so serve not the Lord, but your own lusts, and for
ten pound advancement in one place more then in another, you will sell any
people, or Parish; for which take one Scripture more, 2 Pet. 2. 1 But there
shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, denying the Lord that bought them, (ye them that deny him) and bring
upon themselves swift destruction, and many shall follow their pernicious
ways, by reason of whom the truth shall be evil spoken of, and through
covetousness shall they with fained words, make merchandise of you (sell you
for profit) whose judgment of long time lingereth not, and their damnation
slumbereth not, and are not those your Tythe-mongers, I shall leave to you all
to judge?


French. Do you speak this by me, we have seldom half our Tithes paid us.


Coppin. What are ye guilty? Do your conscience accuse you? I name no man, but
the Priests teach for hire, they bear rule by reason of their means, and let
the people, who love to have it so, judge who they be. Ier. 5. 30: 31:



Rosewell. I bless God I am guiltless of this thing, of preaching for hire;
but you do see many errors have been broached here, let me crave liberty for
one word of prayer, and I have done.


DISPUTE. IV. Began by William Sanbroke Minister, and carried on by Walter
Rosewell Minister, against Richard Coppin, in the Cathedral of the City of
Rochester, in the County of Kent, December 13.
CHAP. XIV. What is a Gospel Message, and what is not, that damnation to
mankind is not eternal, how the Gospel is preached to every creature, by whom,
and when.
SAnbroke. You know the business of this time is to state a question, about
the great business of Salvation, and Damnation, and I shall fall briefly do
the business in hand.


Question. Whether such persons, meaning the Priests, and namely such of them
as tell people of damnation, be evil spirits or no, as you did hint the last
day; I shall now give you the History of this Question: It is a rule in the
Schools, that when any one will begin a question, that it is necessary they do
first dive into the original and bottom of such a question, to see whether it
runs, and to what it tends; but this is a question I did never know till these
times of ours, in this later Ages, in which we have shuffled our selves out of
a Church-form, Episcopacy to Presbytery, from thence to Independency, from
Independency to Anabaptisme, from Anabaptisme to Seeking, from Seeking to
Universal Liberty, and so we have lost our selves we know not where: 1. We will
see what is meant by Damnation, and that is in the Word, signified to be either
temporal or eternal: 2. What is the evil spirit, and that is in opposition to
the good spirit, that is the devil: 3. Consider the persons which he does say
are evil, and they are the Priests; now this word Priests was put into the
Original Copy, those are the Ministers of the Gospel lawfully called by God and
men, and settled, by laying on of hands, and the Spirit, into a Congregation.
Now that Proposition that does affirm, that the Ministers which do tell people
of damnation are evil spirits, he must of necessity be a Blasphemer; That
Proposition that does say Christ is an evil spirit, that is blasphemy, ergo:
For Christ did preach this Doctrine, He that believes shall be saved, he that
believes not, shall be damned.


Coppin. Your question is far fetched, and to little purpose, and I shall answer
you thus, That those Ministers that do preach the Doctrine of Damnation,
telling people they are eternally damned, are no Gospel Ministers, and do
preach from an evil Spirit; but Christ did not preach this Doctrine of Eternal
Damnation to any, for he did preach salvation to all men, and the Luke 4: 18:
John 3. 17:
acceptable year of the Lord, For he came not to condemn the world, but that
the world through him might be saved.


Sanbroke. Mat. 23. 14. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, how will
you escape the damnation of hell, and therefore you shall receive the greater
damnation.


Coppin. Christ was then a fulfilling the Law, which the Scribes and Pharisees
did exercise upon the people, as a burden too heavy for them to bear, for
which several woes of damnation Mat: 23. 1. 2. 3. 4. Verse 36:
were pronounced against them, and to be fulfilled upon them in that
generation; and Christ speaks not of eternal damnation, but of degrees of
damnation, as of greater, and lesser, that should come upon them for their
hypocrisy among the people, and their not believing the glad tidings of the
Gospel of the Kingdom of God, which Christ told them was to be revealed in
them, and which would suddenly come unto them, yea them in that generation to
whom damnation was then threatened; and they hearing of this, demanded of
Christ the time when Mat: 16. 27: 28
the Kingdom of God should come, for which they then waited and hoped for, and
Christ answered and said, The Kingdom of God comes not with observations,
neither shall they say lo here, or lo there, Luke 17. 20: 21
for behold the Kingdom of God is within you, yea, within you Scribes and
Pharisees, though you shut it up against your selves, and others, which many
people also now do, for which their judgment of long time lingereth not, and
their damnation slumbereth not, M^^: 23. 13. 2 P^t. 2. 3.
but is so much the sooner, and the greater unto them.

And therefore that forenamed place you quoted, to prove the Doctrine of
Damnation, cannot be meant of eternal Damnation, since he tells them, The
Kingdom of God is within them: And this, says he, is life eternal, to know
God, the true God, and Jesus John 17. 3:
Christ whom he has sent; therefore how does this prove your Proposition, you
say, they were finally damned, and yet Christ tells them, the Kingdom of God
was within them.


Sanbroke. Were they Believers, or Unbelievers?


Coppin. They were then Unbelievers, not knowing the Kingdom of God to be
within them, and therefore did oppose it, but your Schools will never teach you
this lesson of knowing Christ within you, which will confound all the wisdom
and 1 Cor: 27. 28:
knowledge you there learn, for in the School of men you learn the things of
men, but in the Schools of Christ the things of Christ; and you shall never
learn this mystery of Christ in you, Gall: 1: 11: 12:
till you become Christ's Scholar.


Sanbroke. How long does this Damnation last on them?


Coppin. So long as they do continue unbelievers? John 3: 18: Rom: 11. 32:



Sanbroke. You do not understand the Text.


Coppin. You will never say that I, or any man else, do understand in, but your
selves, unless they would understand it in your sense, for you would have
people learn no farther then you teach them, but God will destroy all the
teachings of men.


Sanbroke. But if Christ did give his Ministers a Commission to preach
Damnation, then it is good and sound Doctrine so to do, and they are not evil
Spirits which do it, as you do say.


Coppin. But Christ did not give any such Commission to any of his Ministers
that he sent forth to preach the Gospel, to preach Damnation, neither did they
do it, nor did I say so by them, but by those that run, and were not sent by
him, of which I also Ier. 23: 32.
said something to this purpose in a book of mine, called, Truths Testimony,
from whence I suppose you had those words, but produce but the book, and I will
warrant you there is an answer to it, sufficient to prove it.


Sanbroke. Indeed I had one of the books, but I burnt it, but to the
Proposition, Christ bids his Ministers preach the Gospel to every creature, He
that believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned.


Coppin. But pray mark you, Christ does bid his Discipies go into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, which is life and salvation to
all by Christ, and not damnation to any, but salvation to every creature, and
he that believes not this Doctrine, has damnation in himself already; and
this Gospel was to be preached after Christ was risen from the dead, and had
compleatlie fulfilled the Law, which before did condemn them: Mark 16.
Now, says he, Go preach that Gospel of peace, and of reconciliation to to
every creature in the world, that God is in me, reconciling 2 Cor: 5. 19:
them all to himself, for now am I risen to be the life and light of all men,
and you are not to preach death and damnation, but that I am come, who is their
life and salvation; and this is their condemnation, that I am come, says
Christ, and they believe it not, or that this Gospel is preached, and men
receive it not.

And now do I question whether some of you have received this Gospel Commission
from Christ yet or no, and do preach the same Gospel, for the same end, after
the same manner as they did, for he bids his Disciples preach the Gospel, which
will save Mall: 2: 7: 8. 9:
men, and you preach the Law, which will condemn men; their salvation by Christ
without works, and you damnation without works, they preach it to every
creature, and freely, and you preach it but to some, and for hire, and so
instead of preaching unity, peace, and love amongst men, you preach division,
wrath, and eternal damnation, which is no Gospel message, and such are Isaiah
52. 7.
in no Gospel way, have no Gospel Ministry committed unto them, and therefore
no Commission from Christ to preach.


Rosewell. If the Gospel be to be Preached to every creature, then it must be
Preached to stocks and stones, for they are creatures.


Coppin. Such things are not capable of hearing and receiving the sound
thereof, but to every man, to every rational creature, the Gospel was to be
Preached, and is Preached, and the sound thereof has been heard amongst them,
to all the ends of the Psalm. 19: 3. 4
earth.


Sanbroke. The time shall come, that the Gospel shall be Preached to all men,
and they shall all hear of this Gospel.


Coppin. But when shall they have it Preached say you, I say it is Preached to
all the world already.


Sanbroke. I deny it.


Coppin. I prove it, Col. 1. 6. The Gospel which we Preach, says the Apostle,
is the same which is come unto you, as it is in all the world, and, says he,
be not removed away from the hope of the Gospel Co^. 115: 6: 23.
which you have heard, and which was Preached to every creature in the world,
which is under Heaven, whereof I Paul am made a Minister; yea, of that Gospel
which was Preached, and which is Preached, which is Christ in you the hope of
Glory, Christ Revel: 14: 6: 7:
the Wisdom and Power of God in every creature, as almost all this Chapter does
testify.


Sanbroke. To what purpose do you bring this Scripture.


Coppin. I bring it to prove, that whereas you say all men should have the
Gospel Preached to them, but you know not when, I tell you, it has been
Preached already, is Preached, and will be Preached, so long as there is a God
to be manifested, it being as everlasting as Christ, and this I have proved by
plain Text of Scripture.


Sanbroke. That which has been done already, that is not to be done hereafter,
but you say the Gospel has been Preached already to all men, ergo.


Coppin. There is nothing done now, nor to be done, but what has been done
already, so says Solomon, That which has been, is that which shall be, and
there is no new thing under the Sun; and Eccles: 1: 9: 10.
Christ who is himself the Gospel, and the Gospel-Preacher, is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever; and upon this Sanbroke gave Heb. 13: 8.
off the dispute, and Rosewell succeeded.


CHAP. XV. The Whore of Babylons rage, with her names of blasphemy against the
truth, her seat and work discovered.
ROsewell. I am sorry I must take my learned Brothers place, for I did not come
here to day to speak, but to be a hearer, nor shall I desire to enter into
discourse any more with this man, except the Magistrates shall call me to it,
it is to no purpose, he does but insinuate into the people, to get a party for
himself, therefore as a Minister of Jesus Christ, I desire to give the people
satisfaction to all that love the truth: I could say much more for my learned
Brother, and I do pity him that his strength failed him, if he had his lungs
and his ears as this man have, he would be able to deal with him, but I thank
God I have another opportunity to speak to the people.


Coppin. You will rail now as you did before, and that is all you can say.


Rosewell. I do not speak to you, I speak to the people, and to the Magistrates
and Officers of the Soldiers, if they will give me leave, to speak to
something which slipped without answer the other day, when as he had most
falsely introduced many places of Scripture, and wrested them notoriously to
serve his own turn, to prove that all should be saved, tag and rag, and all,
then he goes on to affirm that this Doctrine of the love of God, is the only
means to keep people from sining, and to provoke to an holy walking, and if I
do not overthrow this, then I desire never to be believed more, and though God
can cast both body and soul into hell, yet he tells you, that God will destroy
no man's person, but their sins that only shall be destroyed, this Doctrine is
quite against the whole bock of Scripture, from the beginning to the end, there
are some said to be beloved of God, and some hated, Jacob have I loved, and
Esau have I hated, this is spoken of persons; indeed the Doctrine of the love
of God in Christ is excellent to some, but not to be preached to all, but to
only the vessels of mercy; but now to say that God has an equal love to all
mankind, one as well as another, tag and rag, to unbelievers, as well as
believers, to them which never had the Spirit of Faith and of Grace, to tell an
Adulterer and a Drunkard, that notwithstanding his whoredoms and drunkenness,
yet he shall be saved as well as the best, this is abominable doctrine and
blasphemy against the true meaning of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, and is no
better then the doctrine of devils; and we have another sort of people which
come not far short of this man, namely, the maintainers of Universal
Redemption, for if all be redeemed by Christ, undoubtedly all must be saved;
but I have done, only one word more.


Coppin. Pray Sir let me speak as well as you, for though you said you would
not direct your discourse to me, yet exspect an answer from me.


Captain Smith. Let him have done, and we will promise you to speak.


Rosewell. This man did say the last day I was an enemy to the State, the more
to insinuate into the hearts of the people; I do believe it will be taken
notice of by some in this present Government, that it will be much to their
dishonor, to discourage a faithful godly Minister, and to countenance such a
Blasphemer, who is an enemy to the States, by his Preaching Blasphemy, Acts 17.
10. 11. I may say to you, as Paul did to Elimos the Sorcerer, Will thou cease
to pervert the Word of God, and the ways of God.


Coppin. Friends and Brethren, this man said he had nothing to say to me, and
yet his whole discourse has been of me, and raising against me, but I know
from whence all railings and revilings, The Seat and work of the Whore.
and the calling of truth blasphemy does proceed, in Rev. 17. 3. You shall
read there of a woman siting upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, full of the names
of Blasphemy; this woman, is that Whore of Babylon, the Mother of Harlots,
siting on this Beast, as on many waters, decking and triming her self with
men's pretended forms of Religion, having her mouth full of the names of
Blasphemy, calling all things blasphemy and heresy which is not in her way,
and like her self, and this has been in all Ages her work, to advance her own
honor, pride, and self righteousness, above the truths of the Lord Jesus, in
which truth is unity, peace, and love toward all men, but in this Whore there
is no such thing, for from whence has all those divisions, railings, and
persecutions risen, but from this Sea of troubled waters on which the Whore
siteth, for in her was found the blood of the Saints, and the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, which has always suffered under this notion of blasphemy,
and so the carnal world, and blind righteous Scribes and Pharisees said of
Christ, that he was a Blasphemer, a madman, a devil, nay, the Prince of
Devils; and great Deceiver of mankind, and why John 8: 4^:
hear you him, said they, and so he was put to death as a Blasphemer and
Deluder of the people, though in his mouth was found no guile; but because by
his Doctrine the people were drawn away from the world to believe in him, yet
in all this you do not find that Christ nor his Apostles thus suffering for the
truth, did ever rail against any of them that were instrumen^s of their
sufferings, for they did well know, as I do, through the wisdom of Christ,
that all men did speak and act as they knew, and were acted, and so left them
and all things to him, who would glorify himself in all things that himself
does.

And whereas he was pleased to say I would be found an enemy to this present
Government, let any man judge what I have spoken or acted at any time against
this present Government, but I shall prove that he has, for he that shall
oppose, contend against, The freedom of the present Government.
or speak evil of any Law, or thing contained in this present Government, he is
an enemy to it, but this man Mr. Rosewell does contend against, speak evil of,
and stand in opposition to that freedom and liberty of the people, in the
exercise of their Religion toward God, which this present Government does
allow them, therefore is he an enemy to the present Government, which I prove;
for the Lord Protector in his Instrument of Government, signed by him in the
Year fifty three, does declare, That all persons professing Faith in God by
Jesus Christ, though they differ in judgment from the Doctrine, Worship, or
Discipline publicly held forth, shall not be restrained from, but protected in
the exercise of their Faith, and practice of their Religion, so far as it
extends not to Popery and Prelacy, nor to the disturbance of the Public Peace,
nor licentious practices: To all which your judgment have extended, and
therefore this liberty do you oppose, and speak evil of, as the people all may
witness.


CHAP. XVI. The return of all men home to God by Christ, the broad and narrow
way, and who finds it; that the Doctrine of Gods love in saving all men, is the
only means to keep men from sin.
AGain, whereas you did declare, that this Doctrine of the love of God to all
men, did give way to licentiousness and wickedness, I deny, and this I have
before sufficiently cleared to you in these Disputes, that it is the only
means to keep them from sin, and this was that which Christ did command his
Disciples to declare to all the world for that end, even Gods eternal love in
Christ to poor sinners, as the way and means that God had appointed to bring
home to him all that were banished from him, according as it is written, 2 Samuel
14. 14. For we must needs die, and are as water spilt upon the ground, which
cannot be gathered up again, neither does God respect any person, yet does he
devise means that his banished be not expelled from him; and this way and means
is the Lord Jesus, who was set up from everlasting, to be the way, the truth,
and the light, yea, a witness, John 14. 6. Isaiah 55. 4: Ephesians. 2. 5: Coll: 1:
21:
a Leader and a Commander to all people, that when we were enemies to him by
wicked works, and so dead in sins and trespasses, yet then did God in his Son
reconcile us all to himself, and made us accepted in the beloved Jesus, that as
there was a broad way in which all men did fall from God, and did become
strangers Romans 5: 10: 18.
to God, so there is also a narrow way, and a living way, even Christ himself,
in which all men shall come to God again, and indeed there is but few, a very
small number that can find this way, nay, so few, that it is but only one,
and that is God in Christ, who is himself, as a Son, the way to himself, as the
Father, which none can know or find, but himself, for so it is written, That no
man knows the Son, but the Father, nor no man knows Matthew. 11. 27.
the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal him; and so there
is but only one, even Christ in all men, that is the way for all men to come
to God by. You read of ten Lepers that were cleansed, and but one which did
return to give glory Luke 17: 17. 28.
to God, then said Christ, Where are the other nine? Now they were all
cleansed, and but one that saw it, and he glorified God, and that one was
Christ in him that did see it, that gave glory to God for him, and all the
rest that were cleansed, and so there is none but Jesus Christ that can
glorify God in all, or that can truly pray and give thanks to God for all,
for he only is accepted of the Father, and all men, as one in him, are
accepted of the Father with him, for he that sanctifies, and they who are
sanctified, are all of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
Brethren, and that he H^b. 2. 11.
might gather together in one all things in Christ, of things in heaven, and
things on earth; even in him, and I in them, and thou in me (says Christ) that
we all may be made perfect in Ephesians. 1. 10: John 17. 23.
one.

Rosewell. Captain Smith, will you let him go on any further.


Captain Smith. We cannot deny him, he will claim a promise for it.


Coppin. Hear I beseech you, for I am now declaring the gathering together of
all men in Christ to be by him brought home to the Father, and therefore mark
what the Scripture says, I will, says Christ, seek that which was lost, and
bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken,
Ezekiel. 34: 16:
and will strengthen that which was sick, and so bring them health and cure,
and I will cure them, and will cause their captivity Ier. 33: 6. 7. 8.
to return, and will build them up as at the first, and so cleanse them from
all iniquity.

Now that all men sined, fell, and were lost in Adam, none will deny, because
the Scripture says it; but that all men that sined, and were lost in Adam,
shall again be redeemed and made righteous by Christ, that you call blasphemy,
though proved by Romans 5: 18:
the same Scripture and let the people judge who perverts Scripture of us two;
Christ tells you, he came to seek and to save that which was lost, then as in
Adam all die, even so in Christ Luke 19. 10.
shall all be made alive, yea, the same all that were lost in the one, are
found in the other; and the Lord Jesus did declare himself to all men for this
purpose, and did pray for them which were enemies to him, and had imbrued their
hands in his blood, Father forgive them they know not what they do, and my
little children, says John, these things I write unto you, that you sin not;
and if any man sin, we have an Advocate with 1 John 2. 1: 2.
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is a Propitiation for our sins,
and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world; and this, says
Paul, is good and acceptable to God the Father, who will have all men to be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2:
woe, but will God have all men saved, and will he save all that was lost? woe,
but man will not have it so, for he would have but some of them saved, though
the Lord says, he will have all; and now for shame say no more, that Coppin
only will have all men saved, but say also that the Lord will have all men
saved, since the Scripture is so clear for it; and then Lord who has resisted
thy will, Lord let thy will be done, for of thee, and through thee, and to
thee, are all things.


Rosewell. He says all men shall be saved, but does not know when.


Coppin. I say in due time it shall be manifest to all, for there is but the
want of faith in men to believe it, which is the substance of things hoped for,
and the evidence of things not seen, by which all men are assured, and draw
nigh unto God, which in due time shall be manifest to all men. 1 Timothy: 2:


Now if this Spirit of Faith, and faithful Witness, the Lord Jesus, thus
manifest in men for the salvation of their souls, will not keep men from
licentiousness, there is nothing will, for which seriously consider the
Apostles words, in Titus 2. 11. We were wicked and sinful, says he, as well
as others, but when the grace of God, which brings salvation to all men, had
appeared to us, teaching us, that denying all ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
we should live soberly and righteously in this present world, speaking evil of
no man, for we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived,
serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, and hating one
another as well as others, but after that the kindness and love of God our
Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness, which we have done,
but according to his mercy he saved us, how, why by the washing of
regeneration and renewing of the holy Ghost, and so Titus 3: 2: 3: 4: 5:
says Peter, see that you lay aside all malice, guile, and hipocrisies and
envyings, and evil speakings, and as new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the Word, that you may grow thereby, if so be you have 1 Pet. 2: 1: 2: 3.
tasted that the Lord is gracions.


CHAP. XVII. The complaint of Ministers to Magistrates, against those that
Preach without Orders from the University, the duty of Magistrates not to
forbid any, but to reprove such complainers.
Again, you say, you would have men learn and study the Scriptures, but not to
Preach of them, but sure that is for fear your trade of Preaching should go
down, and you to keep it up, will cry out to the Magistrates, to forbid and
suppress all that declare any thing of the love of God to their souls, and
have not the like Orders from the Universities as you have, concerning which,
read Numbers 11. there was Moses a Magistrate of the Lord, and the Lord
commanded him to gather unto him seventy of the men of Israel, to assist him
in the work of the Lord, and to bring them up to the Tabernacle where they
should receive the Spirit, and to prophecy. Now there were two men which did
not come up to the Tabernacle as the rest did, but tarried behind in the Camp,
and there received the Spirit, and Prophesied, whereof Numb: 11. 16: to 29.
complaint was made to Moses of them saying, Eldad and Medad do Prophecy, in
the Camp, my Lord Moses forbid them; why, says Moses, enviest thou, for my
sake, I would all the Lords people were Prophets, and that he would power his
Spirit upon them, though they came not up to the Tabernacle, yet having the
Spirit, let them prophecy.

So now if any man do declare any thing of God, which has not been at the
Universitie, woe, he is immediately cried out against to the Magistrate as a
blasphemer, to be forbidden, but God is not tied to place nor persons, nor
learning, it is not your your Schools will make you Ministers of the Gospel,
no, it is the Spirit of the Lord that does make a Minister of the Gospel, and
it was the Spirit that made Christ a Minister, for, says he, the Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, therefore will I preach glad tidings of the Gospel, and as
every man has received the Spirit, Luke 4: 18: 1 Pet. 4. 10:
so let them administer without any forbiding.

Now you Magistrates, you are set up for the punishment of evil doers, and for
the praise of them that do well, but are you like that godly man Moses, a
Magistrate of the Lords, to discern the good which is to be praised, and the
evil which is to be punished, and so to do justice and righteousness, to
countenance Godliness, if you were, you would fordid none to Preach that speaks
their experience of the things of God, but would encourage all men; and wish
all the Lords people were Prophets, and that he would power his Spirit upon
them, and so like Moses, reprove any that would have them forbid, and then you
would appear to be Magistrates of the Lord, as Moses was, and to do the work
of God as Moses did, for which the Lord instruct* you all.

CHAP. XVIII. A child's condition is Christ's Kingdom, their coming to him, his
hand laid on them, they blessed by him, of his arm to all men, and when.
Again, there is one thing more, which you have said, and that I must open,
That is; you say that thousands of Children are now in hell for their original
sin, which is a trouble to many people to hear such things asserted, therefore
what the Lord may discover to me at this time concerning this thing, that will
I declare to you; That when the Lord Jesus would declare unto his disciples,
who were subjects fit for the Kingdom of God, he takes a little child in his
arms, and sets him in the midst of them, saying, except you become, as this
child, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, to become a child
in the knowledge of things below Christ, to know no more sin nor devil then a
child does, and to be as meek and as humble, as innocent and as harmless as a
child is, now Christ tells them, they must be borne again into a child's
condition, that is, to be little. even as nothing in their own wisdom, and
not to know themselves, able to act themselves forth in any thing; neither in
thought, word, or deed, but in all things to be acted by another, even God, and
this Spiritual birth, Nicodemus, a Ruler among the Jews, was ignorant of*
saying unto Christ, How can a man be borne when he is old, can he enter the
second John 3. 4:
time into his Mothers womb, and be born, no, says Christ, not so, but except
you be borne of the Spirit, of Regeneration, and the new birth and so become as
a little child to know no evil, sin, nor devil, nor any thing of self
wisdom, knowledge, or righteousness which he was concieved in by that Mother,
the flesh, or carnal mind, but to be as one dead in all old things borne Job
17: 14*
by that Mother, and liveing again in a new life, to behold all things made
new in him, and Christ knew that a little child was the fitest subject he could
compare a soul unto, whereby he might know himself a subject fit for the
Kingdom of God, free from all sin.

Again, there were some that brought little children unto Christ, that he
should touch them, and his Disciples reproved those that brought them, and
Christ said suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of
such is the Kingdom Mark 10: 13: 14, 15, 16.
of God, this Scripture I know is brought by the Ministers to prove the
baptizeing of children with water, though I deny it not to them that are free
to do it, though here were none of them baptized by Christ, for he baptized
not, but his Disciples, and they baptized no children, but only such persons
as would then be John 4. 2:
under John's administration of water, which was only to last John's time, and
then to be made void, and people did think then, as some do now, that unless
their children did recieve baptism, they shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God, therefore would say, Oh give them that they come for, lest they should die
before they had it; Now, says Christ, who will forbid a little child that he
should not inherit the Kingdom of God, I say let such come to me, for of such
is the Lords Kingdom, and they come to me as to their Savior, their Lord, and
Master, therefore forbid them not, though they were never baptized with water,
for they are subjects already, fited for the Kingdom of God, as a Kingdom of
righteousness, meekness, truth and love, having in them no unrighteousness, as
pride, lying, and hatred, but they, like Christ, do know noe sin, being not
borne in sin, till they have Jer. 1: 5:
the knowledge thereof, and oh that all men were become such children, free from
all sin, and so receive the Kingdom of God as a little child.

Again, he took them up in his arms, laid his hands on them, and blessed
them, and this he did to let the people know that they are the blessed of the
Lord, and that they are within the compass of his arms, as being never out,
but always lodging in his bosom of goodness, mercy, love and favor, as being
heirs of his Kingdom.

And of this arm, God says, all the day long have I stretthed it forth, to a
disobedient and gainsaying people, to bring them Romans 10. 21.
to this state of a little child, into meekness and love, from sin and
rebellion, and when this hand of the Lord shall thus come to be laid on any of
you, then shall you be as a weaned child from the breast of your own haughty
and laughtie Spirit by which you were nursed up into the state of rebellion
against God, and of Psa: 131: 1. 2: Isaiah 53* 1. 6:
this the Prophet says, who has belived our report? and to whom is the arm
of the Lord revealed? speaking of Jesus Christ, the arm of God, that took from
us all our sins and laid upon himself, as it is written, he has laid on him
the iniquities of us all, and by which arm Daniel when he lay with his face on
the Dan: 10: 10. 11
ground, was raised up upon the knees and palms of his hands, and from thence
to stand upright upon his feet, and when he knew it was by the hand of the
Lord, he stood trembling, that is, all things of himself trembled in himself,
when he stood upright in the Lord.

Now when this hand is laid on you, and do but touch you the first and second
time, which is the first and second coming of Men cast in (...)ison by the
Devil.
Christ in manifestation to the soul, then shall you stand upright in the
Lord, and be for none but the Lord, and says Christ, fear not, for I have the
keys of the house of David, which is Heaven, and I have the keys of death and
of hell, and I can open, and none can shut, and shut, and none can open,
therefore fear none of those things which thou shall suffer, for behold, says
Christ, I know thy works and tribulation, and the devil Revel: 2: 9: 10:
shall cast some of you into prison, that you may be tried, and you shall have
tribulation for a time, but be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee
a Crown of life, therefore fear nor, for I having the keys, will not suffer
you to be shut up any longer then I please, but will break open prisons, and
prison doors, says the Lord, and all this is done by his laying his hand upon
us, and blessing of us, therefore henceforth judge charitably of all men in all
conditions; and no more judge any child to condemnation that knows no sin nor
Devil, but rather this, that the Lords mercy is over all his works, and will
lose nothing of his own.

Rosewell. I desire to have no more to do with this man, you see I hope what
his aim and end is in all his discourse: You say we would hide knowledge from
the people, but I wish all men did know as much of good as I do, provided I
did know no less then I do; and I have taken a great deal of pains in my
private Studies, and public endeavors, for that knowledge I have, and if I
know any easier way, I would spare my pains: You labor to bring all men off
from our principles of Religion, therefore know there is many hundreds of able
Ministers, and thousands of good Christians, which are furnished with arguments
against you, and all the Jesuits in the world, for my part I am not worthy to
carry their books after many of them, and I say you are a shame to the world,
and the Turks and Papists may laugh at us to see our division in our Church,
and I would not have this Auditorie juggled out of their Faith; and if any man
has given any encouragement to such a Blasphemer as this is, let them be
humbled for it, and do so no more, and I shall Preach against it to my utmost
endeavor, for he does overthrow all Ordinances of Baptism, and Sacraments,
which our Ancient Fathers have used, which he says are not necessary to
salvation since Christ; and so is an enemy to God, Psalm 21. 8. I will end
with this, Thine hand shall find out thy enemies that hate thee, thou shall
make them as a fiery Oven in the time of thine anger, the Lord shall swallow
them up in his wrath, and the fire of hell shall devour them.


CHAP. XIX. Of Baptism, how man is a fiery Oven, of the fire and fuel that is
to be burnt, the Oven cleansed, man living in it, and how.
COppin. That which I declare concerning Baptism; is that they have no ground
from the Lord Jesus Christ, by precept nor example, to baptize with water.


Gaman a Anabaptist. Let me speak now a word or two, because you deny all
Water-Baptisme.


Coppin. Pray let me make an end with one first, and then if you have any thing
to say, speak on, but I say Baptism with water, upon any subject, has no
ground from Christ, whether by example nor command to be used, since the Death
of John, being then fulfilled by Christ; and yet I deny it to none, whose
tender conscience does desire it, for I am become all to all, that I win them
to the truth, as it is in Jesus, through my love to them, and the manifestation
of Christ in them.


Rosewell. Capt. Smith, Pray let us have done.


Robison. I think you will never have done.


Coppin. So far as you speak I must answer, and there is one thing more,
therefore pray have patience, for I must answer to this Scripture by him hinted
in Psalm 21. 8. 9. Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies, thy right hand
shall find out those that hate thee; thou shall make them as a fiery Oven in
the time of thine anger, the Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the
fire shall devour them: There is no man so wicked, nor so righteous Hosea 7. 6
7:
in himself, but the Lord will find him out, and will make him as an Oven, in
which he will kindle his fire; to burn up the briers and thorns, to wit, man's
sins and iniquities which man is full of, and against which the fire of his
anger is revealed, that he may devour them, but not man, for all man's works
shall be burnt, and he himself shall be saved, so as by fire, as it is written,
Jacob 1 Cor. 3. 15:
have I loved, and Esau have I hated, though they tumbled both in one belly,
Jacob is the good, even the spirit; Esau is the evil, even the flesh, and
every one has this Jacob and Esau within them for a time; but Esau which is
flesh, shall be burnt by Jacob which is the spirit, the flesh shall be
destroyed, but the spirit saved, and so says the Lord, the house of Jacob
shall be a fire, Isaiah 4: 4:
and the house of Esau shall be for stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and
devour them, and there shall be nothing left of the house of Esau, for the
Lord has spoken it, and anger is not in me, says the Lord, against the
persons of men, but if they Obad, 1. 18: Isaiah 27: 4 9:
set briers and thorns in my way against me, I will pass through them, and burn
them up, by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this shall be the
fruit thereof, to take away their sins, that the Lord may dwell therein, and
says the Prophet, I saw the Lord upon his Throne high, and lifted up, and his
Train filled the Temple, and behold an Angel came with a live coal in his hand,
which he had from the Altar, and he laid it on my mouth, and said, Isaiah 6:
Lo this has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin
is purged; so God is said to sit in his Temple man-like, a Refiner of silver,
to purge away the dross and tyn, and to destroy all together for ever. But
while this fire is a kindling in man, Mat: 3.
so long is man full of the smoke thereof, that he is not able to look into his
own Temple, to behold the glory of the Lord, until his indignation be overpast,
and so it is written, the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God,
and from his power, and no Isaiah 26: 20.
man was able to enter into the Temple, till the seven Plagues of Revel. 15. 8.
the seven Angels were fulfilled, and then his wrath being over, the fire being
quenched, his sins purged, and the Oven (man) being cleansed of all the fuel
and the ashes, he shall return into his Tabernacle in peace, he shall visit his
habitation, and shall not sin, he Job 5. 24:
shall not be afraid to look into his own heart, but shall possess himself
with joy, and with peace, for all sin and iniquity shall be done away, and
then the Lord alone shall be exalted in his own Temple man, and man in the
Lord, for ever and ever.


Captain Harrison. Is there any man without sin? Paul says; He was compassed
with a body of sin and death.


Coppin. The body of sin and death was to be destroyed, and he to be without
sin, and though Paul was sanctified and justified in the spiritual part or new
man, yet he was subject to sin, Romans 6. 60.
so far as he was in the flesh, as all men are, which is still waring against
the spirit, till the spirit has overcome it.


Gaman. Let me speak now, etc.


Coppin. Let him speak.


Robison. We cannot stay, I have no patience.


Coppin. Then the Lord grant you patience, if you have none.


Captain Smith. You had better take a day to your self, Mr. Gaman.


Gaman. Well, I see you Priests are all carnal, and your weapons are not
spiritual, seeing you cannot deal with this man, therefore go you and your
Priests together.


Coppin. If the Presbyterians Sect have done, then Anabaptists may begin, and
take your day also, for though you are one against another, yet I see you will
both join together against me; and this makes good that Scripture, there is
Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, but both against Judah;
yet point your day when you will.


CHAP. XX. The malicious and illegal proceedings of some Ministers and
Magistrates of Kent, against Richard Coppin, in the City of Rochester, with his
Commitment to Prison, how, and by whom.
THe Disputes being ended, and the Ministers not relieved, but having suffered
in their principles, and losing many of their Hearers, they to regaine them
again, have with themselves, and some men called Justices of the Peace,
Members of their Churches, had several private consultations together, how they
might do to dismiss me from thence of preaching any more to the people, for
which, through their false information, they obtained a Warrant against me from
the Committee of Kent, but I was then at London, and having notice of it, did
nevertheless appear to the Warrant, being willing to answer to any thing that
should be laid to my charge, being also clear and innocent in my own spirit,
of any thing that I had said or done contrary to any Law of God or man, and I
being in my lodging at Rochester, on the Eve of the Sabbath at night, intending
to preach on the morrow, came an Officer of the Souldierie unto me from
Captain Smith, a Captain of the Company there quartering, that I should come
before him, into whose hands the Warrant was committed, and whose Order was by
the Warrant, that I must not preach on the morrow, but to continue his Prisoner
till Monday, only I had liberty in the mean time to go to my lodging, but the
Sabbath being come on the morrow, and the people assembled together at the
Cathedral, according to their former custom, I came amongst them, but a Guard
of Soldiers being set in the Cathedral, I preached to the people in the
Colledge-yard in the Morning, and in the Fields in the Afternoon, until we
were disturbed by the Soldiers, who did but their duty which they were
commanded by the authority of the Justices, Major General Kelsie, and others
for that County.

On the morrow, being Monday, and twenty fourth of December, the said Major
General Kelsie, John Parker, Charles Bowls, and Richard Watson, as Justices of
the Peace for that County, also Captain Harrison, and several Ministers, (as
Informers) met together in the Crowne-Inne of the City of R^chester, where they
examined Witnesses, and received what informations they thought fit against me,
in my absence, and having before determined amongst themselves what to do with
me, they sent for me to come before them, where Major General Kelsie, told me,
that he had received information against me upon oath, that I was an enemy to
the present Power, and of several Blasphemies that I had delivered in the
Cathedral, to the great dishonor of God, and the seducing of many people, for
which cause they sent for me: I answered, that for what might be informed
against me, I knew not, but I do know nothing that I have at any time spoke,
to the dishonor of God, or against the present Power, but has ever been, and
still am more for it, then those that do accuse me: No, said he, you did,
contrary to our orders Preach yesterday, though you were forbid: I answer, that
I know no Law by which they Acts 5. 27, 28, 29:
could, as yet forbid me to Preach any thing of God, that I did know, neither
should I be silent so long as I had liberty, and my mouth were open; then said
he, by what authority do you come to Preach here? I answer, that I Preach by
the same authority, that he himself has pretended to Preach by, which is, by
the power of God, and the authority of the present Government, and also in this
City, by the desires of the people, and I Preach not for tithes and yearly
maintenance to be settled on me, as the Ministers of England, and of Antichrist
does, but in love to the Lord Jesus, and his people, and then the Articles
against me being read, which were very many, I defired to know my accusers, and
they that had sworn against me, and I to answer to the articles: No, says
Major General Kelsie, we shall hear no answer to them at present, and so said
all the said Justices, for we shall not judge of the business now, says they,
but what we do at this time is only in order to a trial: I answer, that if
they would not hear a answer now, I did not question but whenever I did
answer that by the wisdom and power of God which lived in me, I should be able
to clear my self upon them all: No, said the Major General, I hope not: I
answer, do you hope not, but if there were in you any true love, you would
rather desire that I might, and assist me in it: for (said I) where do you
read in all the Scripture, that ever Christ and his Apostles, or any for them,
that did ever persecute any for their judgment, or make use of any outward Law
therein, but were themselves persecuted by the false Prophets, and enemies to
the truth, and the truth does Luk 19 47. 48 John 15: 20:
always suffer, by those that know it not* but said the Major, in the times of
the Apostles, there were no godly Magistrates, or Governors, as be now, nor
Laws established as we have: I answered, that there were Magistrates then, for
the Apostles said, be subject unto the higher Powers; and there were some that
did persecute the truth, as well then as now, for they were brought before
Rulers and Governors for the truths sake, as now they be, and as Christ says,
they should be for his Names sake. But said the Major, we are not come here to
Dispute with you about those things, for you will word it out till to morrow
night, if we let you alone, therefore withdraw the room; then one Major Brown
of Chatham-Dook, who never saw me, nor heard me before in his life, railed
against me, and said that I deserved to be hanged, that I was the greatest
instrument that ever the Devil had in England: I answer, that an instrument
indeed I am, to discover what, and where the Devil is, as an enemy to God, and
therefore am I my self called Devil, by the Devil; but being commanded to
withdraw the room, I and my friends that were with me went aside into another
room by our selves, and after a while came some Officers of the Soldiers with
an order from the said Justices, and horses ready provided to carry me to
prison to Maidstone, which was from thence about nine miles, and where I should
be from my friends, that none might come to me; and amongst those that they
supposed were my enemies, upon which some of my friends then present, went unto
the Justices, and offered for my Bail thousands of pounds, and whatsoever
should be desired, but no Bail would be taken, whereupon I desired before I
went, to speak with them my self, they sent me word if I would come alone I
might, of whom I demanded a reason why I was sent to prison without a hearing,
and no Bail to be taken, the Major General said, they were not to give me an
account, upon which I pleaded the privilege of the Act of Blasphemy, by which
they accused me, and that I was not ways guilty of it; I also produced the
Instrument of Government, signed by his Highness the Lord Protector, how
contrary also to that they had acted against me, whereby it no man professing.
Faith in God by Jesus Christ, though differing in judgment from the Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline of other men publicly held forth, yet should not be
restrained from, but protected in the exercise of their Faith and practice of
their Religion, so as it extended not to Popery and Prelacy, nor to a
lice^tious walking, and the disturbance of the Peace, and that all Laws, Acts,
and clauses in any Law, Act, or Statute whatsoever, contrary to the foresaid
liberty, should be ^ull and void: And now unless you can prove me guilty of
the breach of something in this Instrument of Government, to bring me under
those exceptions (to which Instrument I appeal) you have nothing to do with me,
and therefore what you in this have done against me, is contrary to the Law of
the present Government, yea all Laws of sound reason, and the Scriptures, but
your own wills, but it is not a prison, nor any thing else that you can do
against me that I fear, knowing my self clear both before God and man, from
what any one can justly accuse me of, but this I find, that those that are
enemies to the present power, and that hate it, are suffered to make use of it,
unjustly to persecute those, who to their power are the greatest friends to it,
and there is none has more contended for it, so far as our freedom and
liberty in the truth has been protected by it, then I have done, and for that
am I a sufferer under it, though contrary to it.

And you M. Wise of Chatham, that Preach General Redemption, and as your friend
Mr. R^sewell said (whom you assist here against me) that if all were redeemed,
all must of necessity be saved, therefore, said he, that your judgment of
General Redemption was as erroneous as those of General Salvation, and you to
clear your self, as you thought, of that aspersion, did the last Sabbath day
before declare in your Sermon, that though you held General Redemption, yet you
did believe that not one of a hundred in all England should be saved. Then said
the Major General unto me, Do you know who you are before, methinks you should
not dare to be so bold in another man's room: I answered, Sir, I do know, for I
am in the presence of God and man, where I am not ashamed to speak the truth,
and now is my time to speak, being accused for the truth, and Sir, you were
once accused your self for Blasphemy, said he, What is that to you if I were,
the Law freed me: Said I, I doubt not but that it will me also, when I come to
have Law, in the mean time do you do unto others, as you would others should do
unto you: Then said the Major to Captain Smith, Take him away, let him not stay
here to retort his words upon us: I answered, that what I speak is the truth,
and am not ashamed of it, though others may of what they do. And now Gentlemen,
I thank you for what you have done, for in this you will bring much glory to
God, and confusion to his enemies, though which way you know not, but I do, and
so farewell.

CHAP. XXI. The confidence, joy, and freedom of a Prisoner, for, with, and in
the truth; Christ and his Generation owned, denied, imprisoned, judged, and
freed, by whom, and why, of the power, life, and light of truth, most advanced,
when most opposed, and how.
ANd now my jorneuy to prison, the same night, was with so much joy, and
cheerfulness, as ever I had in any thing in my life, I seeing the end with the
beginning, the last with the first, and the first with the last, even God, which
is but according to my principle, and the sum of my doctrine, which I always
declare to the world; That if I go to hell thou art there, if I go to Heaven
thou art there, if I go to the ends of the earth thou art there also, and thy
right hand does lead me, that is, he is always Psa: 139. 7: 8. 9.
with me sweetening, and refreshing, making joyful, pleasant, and delightful
unto me, all times, places, and things, with his presence, for his own glory
and my peace, though with much sorrow to many of my friends, that a prison to
me in my cause is a palace, where I sweetly enjoy the Lord, my self, and my
friends, all together in one unconfined Spirit, that in the company of one I
enjoy many, for when I am alone then are all with me, yea you all, in all
parts of the world, whose Spirit is my own, the Spirit life and power of all
accompaning of me in the same work it has done, and is to do by me, for the
perfiting of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of
the Ephesians: 4. John 10: 30. John 5. 19. John 10. 16.
body of Christ, till they are all come into the unity of one spirit, to the
knowledge of one God; in which word, Christ says, I and my Father are one, he
works, and I work, says Christ, and I am not alone, for the Father is with me,
and Christ, when he was in prison, yea, when he descended into hell, enjoyed
the company of his Father with him, which was a Savior unto him, and forth of
a prison does our Savior come, Ah poor prisoners that are in prison, and know
not that their Savior is with them, that makes a prison, a prison unto them.

It is written of Christ, that he was taken from prison and; from judgment, and
who shall declare his generation, who can pity Isaiah 53: 8: H^b. 5. 2.
prisoners, but he that has all pity, and is prisoner with them, who can show
mercy in judgment, but he that is all mercy, and himself under judgment, with
those that are judged, this is Christ and his generation, and no pity, nor
mercy is showed unto them, but by him that is in prison, and in judgment with
them, even the Father in Christ, taking pity of, and showing mercy to his own
Children, generation after generation; therefore a poor despised, rejected,
cast out, imprisoned generation Isaiah 53: 3. Luke 10. 16: Isa: 52. 14: 15.
John 5: 43.
to the world, is the generation of Christ, for in him is no form nor
comeliness. his visage is more marred then any man's, so is his generation, and
who will own it, and declare to be for it, to manifest this generation, but
only he that can be with all, that can lay down his life, and take it up
again, nothing of the world, of man, or the nature, in its own outward
excellency and glory of righteousness and Religion, will acknowledge it, but
make it self a stranger to it, though it be its own flesh, only a poor
despised scattered seed of the same Generation, that has nothing, nor know
nothing, but the Lord to trust upon, Isaiah 50. 10: Romans 9: 29:
that will own it; no, it was that seed that men now seek to kill, flay, and
bury, and would not have grow or increase, that did own them when they were in
their blood, and yet they will not own him, because they did not know him, He
came to his own, Ephesians: 16. John 1. 11.
and his own reteived him not, and why was it? but because he came not to give
them a Kingdom of worldly glory, riches, and honor, but rather to take it
from them, to strip them of all their esteem among men, and to make them deny
Luke 9. 23.
themselves, the world, and all things therein, to take up his cross and
follow him, but this is a heavy burden to bear, a weary step to tread, a
narrow path to go, and few there be that find it, this is the burden that I am
made to bear, the steps I am made to tread, and the path I am made to go, but
having always with me the company of the Lord, I can never faint nor be
weary, but be refreshed, and at rest in the Lord, and so through him become a
Conqueror over those things, rejoicing with joy unspeakable, and which is
unlawful to be uttered unto men by the Laws of men, that now let men confine
me, banish me, or do what they can unto me, the Lord, in whom I live, will not
leave me, nor forsake me; and now, though my body be confined, my spirit is at
liberty, contrary to the will of my enemies, who have sought to deprive me
both of company and comforts, pen, ink, and paper, as they themselves has
declared, to weary me of my principle, to make me recant my judgment, and to
draw the peoples affections from it, but the more by their endeavoring to make
good their intentions, the farther off is it from fulfilling, that I freely
forgive them, and leave them to the Lord, who will render to every man
according to his deeds, and bring glory to himself through all things, for
the wrath of man shall turn to the praise of God, and by imprisonment, is
Truths enlargement, for it shall spring out of the earth, and overflow the
refuge of lies, and the Lord will ride prosperously Psalm 45: 4: Isaiah 35: 67:
because of truth, of meekness, and of righteousness, that the more you seek
to stop it, with the greater current it will run, till the parched ground is
become a poole, and the dry land springs of water, for in the wilderness
shall waters break out, and streams in the Desert, and as fire among thorns, so
is truth I^r. 5. 14.
among the enemies of the Lords people, and the more you seek to quench it,
with the greater flames it will burn, till it has burnt up all the
foundations and buildings of men, in their several 1 Cor: 3 11. 12. 13.
forms and Religions, that are not founded upon Christ, the Chief Corner Stone,
and this will be a Chaos and confusion, and an end of the world to men.

And now what are you? and what do you do? when you seek to imprison or banish
this truth away from you, which you know not, and to stop those cleansing
floods which the Lord has opened in dry places for you, and to quench those
fiery coals Ca^ 8: 6. 7:
which the Lord has kindled amongst you to refine you, you do but add a
greater increase to the truth, for all that which is ungodlie, selfish, and
wicked within you, that has opposed the truth, shall be imprisoned by it, and
drowned with it, yea, it shall be burnt with the fire, and melted with the
heat, until all be consumed, and you dissolved into the nothingnesse of all
things below God, where you are all lost, and you again swallowed up into his
own Almightinesse, where you are found in your true and everlasting Center,
that sends you forth, and takes you in at his pleasure.

And this is the beginning and end of the world, and of all your fighting
against the truth, to be lost, and to be found, to be, and not to be, and
therefore look about you, you that talk so much of the end of the world, when
Christ shall come, do you know this end, and when it shall be? I will tell you
my experience, it is to your end, and at your end, that Christ does come, and
therefore would you prolong his coming, for his coming in, will be your going
out, overturn, overturn, his rising will be your falling, and his life will be
your death, for you are a lie, and he is the truth, therefore stay Lord Jesus,
and come not yet, say you, that know not his coming to be in you, stay till the
time of the end of Romans 3: 4.
the world, which you would not have to be yet, because your end must come with
it, but come Lord Jesus, come quickly, say I, and all those that know his
coming to be in them, that the world of sin, death, hell, and all
Devillishnesse may have an end Iam^s 3: 15. Dan: 9. 24.
in all men, as in them, that there may be no more wrath nor hatred, no more
fighting nor quarrelling, disputing nor contending, for the truth, nor against
the truth, but that heaven and earth, righteousness and truth may meet
together, and imbrance each other in all men, and at all times, places, and
things whatsoever, according to the word and will of the Lord, that there may
be no more any thing at a distance, neither truth nor error, light nor
darkness, day nor night, but that in the evening there may be light, and so
but one day known to the Lord over all Zech 14. 6 7, 8, 9:
the earth, one King, and his name one. But in the mean time you have here
following Articles against the truth, and answers for the truth.

The twenty five Articles, called Blasphemy, brought against Richard Coppin by
the Ministers of Kent, and for which he was sent to Prison, with his Answers to
them.
COppin. First, I deny all their Articles to be spoken by me, as they are here
laid down by them, they having much abused my words, and also my sense, by
their adding and diminishing; yet for satisfaction to many people of the truth
of that which may be in them, I shall give a brief answer to them, according to
the plain sense of Scripture, and the manifestations of God to men here on
earth, which so far as I ever knew in my self I always declared, and hid
nothing of the counsel of God made known to men; but for what God will do by
man at the end of this life beyond what is revealed, I leave also with him,
till he shall more reveal it.

Article 1. That all the Scriptures is but an Allegory, that is all, said he,
both Law and Gospel; and that it is but an Allegory, said he, it is clear from
Gal. 4. 24.

Answer. The whole Scripture of Law and Gospel, the son of the Bondwoman, and
the Son of the Freewoman, are the two Covenants in an Allegory; so says
Paul, Gal 4. 24. which things, says he, are an Allegory, for those are the two
Covenants.

The Allegory is in this,, Abraham had two sons, the one by a Bond-maid, the
other by a Freewoman, the Bond-maid is the Law, or first Covenant, the
Freewoman is the Gospel, or second Covenant in a mystery; and these also are
the two Jerusalems, Sina and Sion; the one which is below, as in bondage, Gall.
4. 21. end
the other which is above, as in freedom, which are also the two mothers, of
the children after the flesh, and the children after the spirit, they who live
by the works of the Law under the conditions of the first Covenant, and so not
all their sins to be forgiven them, are the sons of the Bondwoman after the
flesh, and are in bondage with their mother to this day, persecu^ing the sons
of the Freewoman born after the spirit, that lives by free grace, and sees
their sins pardoned.

Secondly, the carnal mind of man is the son of the Bondwoman after the flesh,
minding the things of the flesh, which is death; the spiritual mind is the son
of the Freewoman after the spirit, minding the things of the spirit, which is
life, for so it is written, To be carnally mindad is death, but to be
spiritually minded is life and peace; and this son of the Bondwoman is to be
cast out, as no more to be remembered, for he shall not Romans 4. 5. 6.
be heir with the son of the freewoman, for he understands not the things of
the spirit of God, but they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned; but the spiritual man knows all
things, yea, the 1 Cor. 10: 14: 15:
deep things of God, and therefore lives in God as in peace and freedom, and
is no longer in bondage.

Thus is the Scripture an Allegory, and a great Mystery, for great is the
mystery of godliness; and says Christ, you err, 1 Timothy: 3: 3. 16 Man: 22. 29:
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.

Article 2. That our Jesus took our defiled nature with sin, and was a sinner
in that nature.

Answer. That Jesus Christ took on him our sinful nature, and in it destroyed
the sinfulness of it, is a truth, according to these Scriptures, Forasmuch as
the children are partakers of flesh and blood, Jesus Christ himself likewise
took part of the same, H^b 2: 14:
that through death he might also destroy him that had the power of death,
which is the Devil, etc. and God made Christ to be sin for us, laid upon him
the iniquities of us all, and he did bear them in 2 Cor: 5: 21: 1 Per. 2: 24:
Isa: 53: 6:
his own body on the Tree, which is no blasphemy to say, but that he should
be a sinner in that nature, I never said it, neither do affirm as you would
have it.

Article 3. That he was a cursed Goat for the Goats on the left hand, Mat. 25.
35. That by the left hand we are to understand nothing but the Law; as by the
right hand nothing but the Gospel.

Answer. First, they under the Law not believing the pardon of their sins, are
at the left hand of God, as Goats cursed, for cursed is every one that is
under the law. Secondly, they under Gall: 3: 10: 13:
the Gospel, believing that their sins are pardoned, are at the right hand of
God, as sheep blessed, For blessed is the man Rom: 4: 7: Psa: 89. 13: 14. 15:
Psa. 16. 11:
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sin is covered; and blessed are they
that know the joyful sound of the Gospel, for they are at the right hand of
God, in the way of life, where they hear his voice, and behold his face, and
have pleasures for evermore; and Christ to redeem man to this state of
blessedness, from that curse, and Goatish nature, which man by reason of sin
lay under at the left hand of God, did himself bear our sins in our steeds, at
the left hand, and was cursed for Levit: 16: 21:
us, signified by the Escape Goat on whom Aaron laid the sins of all the people,
sending him away with them, to lose them* so did God on Christ lay the sins of
all people, and as the Goat in the tipe did, so did Christ carry them away
from us, no more to be remembered to us, which is blasphemy to say.

Article 4. That the Lord Christ was the High Priest spoken of in Heb. 5. 3.
and that he offered for his own sins.

Answer. As concerning this, I only asked the question what High Priest was
there meant, and the answer was given by one of the Ministers that it was Jesus
Christ, but read and consider the Scripture, and you may be better satisfied,
for he was one that could have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that
H^b. 5. 2, 3
are out of the way, and who this is, I will leave for the Reader to judge,
compared with Chap. 7. 27. Christ is there said to do that by one offering,
which the Priests under the Law did at twice, that is, they offered first for
their own sins, and then for the sins of the people, but this did Christ once,
when he offered up himself, not that Christ could offer for his own sins, as
known to him, but for our sins, as reckoned to him in our nature, and so all
our sins became his, till he by death discharged both himself and us of them
together.

Article 5. That the Human: Nature of Christ is not ascended to heaven, and
brought this Scripture to prove it, that flesh and blood shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 13. 50.

Answer. The Humane Nature of Christ was of the same nature of man, which was
of the earth earthie, and Christ by living in it did sanctify and cleanse it,
and so made it heavenly, which may be said to be its Ascension into heaven,
but Ephesians: 5: 26: 27.
that a humane body of flesh, blood and bones should be in a local place above
the Stars, as M. French and others would have it, I find not any where proved
from Scripture, for then it would be also out of its element, and then heaven
were to be understood as the earth, and not as heaven, and so one contrariet^e
would be in another; but John says, That which is of the earth is earthy, and
that which from heaven is heavenly, and flesh and blood never came from heaven,
therefore shall not enter into heaven; but the Holy Spirit and Power was said
to descend down upon the Mother of Christ, and not a humane John 3. 31. 1 Gor.
15. 50. Luke 1. 35. Eph^s. 4. 10.
body; and Paul says, He that ascended up to heaven is the same, he that
first descended from heaven, and not another.

Article 6. That he that looks for the humane nature of Christ to come from
heaven, may look long enough.

Answer. He that looks for such a coming of Christ in his second coming, as is
contrary to the Scripture, and not as God himself, which is the Lord from
heaven, may look long enough before he see him, but the Scripture says, That
though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him so no
more, but in spirit, and in glory to be revealed in our flesh: And this coming
of Christ, is the coming of God, to take a Kingdom to himself in man of that
which is himself, which coming must be as God to man, and not as man to man,
for he shall come in the glory of his Father, and this coming I know, and
therefore speak, not denying any other.

Article 7. That there shall be no Resurrection of any body that dies; and when
that of Job, the 19. 23. to 28. was urged, he returned; that Job said he knew
not what, and proceeded most abominably to Allegory the Scriptures.

Answer. First, I deny not what may be proved by another, but the Apostle
says, That the same body buried, is not the same body raised, but God gives
it a body as pleases him, that is, to 1 Cor. 15. 36. 37.
be like himself, for so it is written, He will change our vile bodies, and
fashion them like unto his glorious body, whose body is not Phil. 3: 21.
Isaiah 40. 18. Psa. 17. 15. 1 Cor: 15. 28. Mat: 22. 31. 32
as man's is, and David says, When I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness, which is, for all things in man to be subdued unto the Lord, that
God may be all in all, who is not the God of the dead, but of the living; and
when Job said, His Redeemer lived, and that he should see him stand upon the
earth at the last day, was a mystery, which Job did not then know, until he
saw it fulfilled in himself, which afterward he d^d, and then saw his last
day, and confessed that he had before uttered words without knowledge, things too
wonderful for him, which Job 42. 3 4. 5.
he understood not; But now (says he) hear I beseech th(...), and I will
declare unto thee, for I have often heard of thee by the hearing of the ear,
but now do mine eyes see thee, and then was Jobs Resurrection come, when he saw
God to be risen within him, and we rise not, but as God rises with us, For,
says he, the dead men shall live together, with my dead body Isaiah 26. 19:
shall they arise: Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as
the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead, and blessed are they
that has part in this Resurrection.

Article 8. That there shall be no day of Judgment, and that the Scriptures
warrant it.

Answer. This I never said, but that a day of Judgment, according to the
Scripture, there is, which had its beginning with Christ manifest in flesh,
after the fall of man, to destroy sin, which Day of Judgment was then, is now,
and ever will be to man, so long as sin remains in man unjudged and uncondemned
by Christ; and so says Christ, For Judgment am I come, John 9. 39. John 12.
30. John 16: 7. 8.
and now is the Judgment of this world, now shall the Prince of this world be
cast out, and now will I convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and of
Judgment, which day of Judgment was, is, and is to come spiritually; but
whether there be such a manner of Day of Judgment as some men would have, is
not by me denied, nor yet by others proved.

Article 9. That there is no local hell nor heaven, all the heaven or hell that
he will acknowledge, is within man.

Answer. That there is hell and heaven in man the Scripture declares it, and I
know it, but this denies not any other which may be proved by another; as for
hell, it is for man to be out of the presence of the enjoyment of Gods love,
under wrath, and terror of conscience for sin and wickedness, which hell Cain
was in, when he said to God, my punishment is greater then I can bear; and now
shall I go out from thy presence, and from thy Gen 4 13: 14:
face, shall I be ^id: And David says, Thou O God have laid me in the lowest
pit, in darkness, in the deep, where I am shut up, and Psa: 88. 6: 7. 8:
cannot come forth, thy wrath lies so hard upon me; and this is hell and great
terror to those that are in it, and for any other I know it not, but leave it
to God.

Secondly, Heaven is a souls rest, peace, joy, and content in God, it is a
continual enjoyment of Gods presence with a soul in mercy, love, and favor,
through Christ, free from sorrow and shame, which is righteousness, peace, and
joy in the Holy (...) 14: 1^: Psa. 16. 11:
Ghost, and where are pleasures for evermore, and which Christ says is within
us, For behold, says he, the Kingdom of God is within you; and then needs
must we be in that, so far as that is Luke 17: 21:
in us known to us, and enjoyed by us, which Kingdom is the Ephesians. 2: 6.
Lord himself given to us, to be a Kingdom for us, into which Kingdom we
arise with him, to sit in heavenly places in him: And this is our Kingdom,
heaven, and happiness, which none can know, but he that has it.

Article 10. That God will never destroy any creature that he has made.

Answer. That none of the works of God can perish eternally, being all very
good, but the works of the Devil, for all things that God made, was made by
Christ, and for Christ, Genesis 1: 31* Coll: 1. 16. 17: Ephesians: 10:
and still to remain in Christ, as everlasting as Christ, for that which has
been is, that which shall be, and there is no new thing under the Sun as to
God, but whatsoever was once of God, is still of God, and shall stand for ever,
but whatsoever is of man, shall come to naught; and therefore, though man by
sinning has destroyed himself for a time, as to himself, yet in the Lord is
his help, and let God alone with his own works.

Article 11. That he will destroy sin in all, but not any sinner that shall
ever be destroyed.

Answer. Sin is the work of the Devil, which in due time shall be destroyed in
all men, as Christ shall be manifested in them, ^^r this purpose was the Son of
God manifest, that he might destroy (...) 8:
the works of the Devil; and therefore that no sinner shall never be destroyed,
I never said, for there is the great Sinner and Liar the Devil, that sins and
lies in all men, seeking to destroy the works of God in them, but is not able,
and he shall be destroyed, and all men sinning in him are so long destroyed by
him, till Christ be manifest to destroy the Devil in them.

Article 12. That there is not a Jew that ever died in his unbelief, and
renounced Christ, but is saved.

Answer. This I never said, however take this answer, that the Jews as well as
others are all the people of God, and all men, without respect of persons, have
sinned and renounced Christ, and yet he never accused them to the Father, but
died for John 5: 40 45: 2 Cor: 5: 15: 2 Peter 2: 1:
all, to pardon the sin of all, yea them that deny him, that so he might save
them, by living in them, and damning that which made them deny him, though
till then they believe it not, and so enjoye it not; but whether any man die in
this unbeleife I dare not say, neither may any other; for Christ to give faith,
comes in the twinking of an eye, to some at the last gasp, for ought any know;
however that of God, returns to God, and Job 34: 14: 15: Genes. 12: 7:
that of the earth to the earth in all men, and being once in God, it is safe,
Who will have all men to be saved, and come to 1 Timothy 2: 4
the knowledge of the truth, even of that Jesus that died for them, and lives
in them; rest then on Godw, hose word and will shall stand, and he will do all
his pleasure.

Article 13. That all mankind, Jew or Gentile, and what ever they are, how ever
they live, or dye, shall be saved, for the Jews he brought the Text, all
Israel shall be saved, Romans 11. 26. for the salvation of all heathen
whatsoever, he brought Psa. 28.

Answer. The word how ever they live, or die, I never said, but take this
answer also, That all men by the law are sinners, a like, for he that breaks
one, is guilty of all, and as in all men, is the seed of the serpent, so in all
men is the seed: of God, Isaiah 6: 13:
though for a time it may be hid, end there is nothing can be too hard for
Christ when he rises in Power, in any soul, to hinder the salvation of that
soul, but he will overcome it, and however they lived before they are now made
new creatures, and God 1 Cor: 6: 11:
having loved them so as to send his Son, to die for them, cannot but love them
still, to cause his Son to rise in them, from which love nothing is able to
separate, or pull them out of his hands, though it may darken the manifestation
of it for a time, as to Rom: 8: 38: 39
them, so that all the Jews shall be brought in, and God will be merciful to
their unrighteousness, though for a time blindness Rom: 11. 25: 26:
and hardness of heart is happened unto them, but it is that the fullness of
the Gentiles might come in with them, and then all Jews shall be saved, as
well as all Gentiles, and likewise the heathen has God given to Christ for his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his Possession, that he
should break, briuse, and consume all self in them, and therein save them,
but great is this mystery, and so good is this work, that (...) 9:
none should be offended, and yet says Christ, many shall be offended, because
of me.

Article 14. That no soul can bel^eve, with an assurance that he him self
shall be saved, until he bel^eve that all men what soever shall be saved.

Answer. 1. He that saves one, saves all, and there is no one man, till he see
that one Jesus, who is the Savior of all men, that does see his own Savior,
and then has not a full assurance of his own salvation; and he that does see
Christ, and believe in him, as the Savior of all men, his salvation is more
especially confirmed to him, then the others is that does not so believe and
such a one enjoyes it as possessingly, and the other does not, and that makes
it more especially unto him, and so he have a greater assurance then the other
has, because he trusts in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, of
which all he knows himself one, and so believes it upon a sure 1 Timothy: 4 9: 10,
11.
ground, till which time I could not assure my self.

Article 15. That if there be but one man of all that ever were or shall be in
the world damned; no man can assuredly know that his soul shall be saved.

Answer. And if Christ were not the Savior of all men, and I hear but of one
man that shall be damned to all eternity, and this man not yet pointed out, as
known from all the rest, to be the man, and Christ come to save the worst of
sinners; what full assurance then can I have of my savlation more then another
of his salvation, but some doubts, and some fears will arise within me, who
shall be that man that is to be damned, till I see a pardon come forth for all
men to be saved, and then I knowing my self to be one of that all cannot but
have a good assurance of my own salvation, this axperince-in me does witness,
as also says the Scripture, that I can no more judge any man, to eternal
damnation, but that which is not of God in man.

Therefore who art thou O man, that judge another, and do the same things
thy self, for wherein thou judge another, Rom: 2(...)
thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge, do the same things; and
who has made thee to differ from another, that thou should be saved, and
not another? wherefore think not better of thy self then of another, for there
is no respect of Gall. (...)6:
Persons with God, that is more accepted with him, but only Christ in all, and
all in Christ, for he has concluded all men, (as men) under sin and unbelief,
that he might have mercy upon all, and then O the depth of the riches, both of
the wisdom, and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgment and his
ways, past finding out, for who has known the mind of Rom: 11: 32^ 33, 34,
35, 36:
God, or who has bin his councellor? for of him, and to him, and through him
are all things, to whom be glory for ever.

Article 16. That the unpardonable sin of the Holy Ghost, is nothing but flesh
opposing and quenching the spirit, till Christ come into the soul, and destroy
the flesh.

Answer. To explain this, the Holy Ghost is the spirit; the sin against the
Holy Ghost, is the opposition and war that is made against the Spirit, by the
fleshly carnal mind, for the flesh wa(...) against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary one to another in man; and so says
Paul, I find, says Gall. 5: 17:
he, a warring within me, that when I would do good, evil is present with me,
and it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me, for with my mind I
serve the Law of God; though with my flesh the Law of sin, and this flesh
opposing the Spirit, is for a Rom: 7: 18: to end.
time in every man, (as a man of sin ruling in them) till Christ come into the
soul and destroy it, which shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in the
world to come; but is the only enemy that God will destroy in man.

Article 17. That when a soul is once regenerated, then he is free from all
sin, that the flesh is quite destroyed.

Answer. Regeneration is a new birth, and the new birth is to be in Christ a
new creature, free from all sin, without which, Romans 6 ^8
man, nor his prayers, nor any thing is accepted of God, for he hears not
sinners, and without holiness no man shall see God, but if the Son shall make
you free, then are you free indeed, and him John 9: 31 John 8. 3^ 2 Cor. 5: 17:
Titns 3: 5
that is in Christ, is a new creature, old things are past away, and all things
are become new, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.

Article 18. That no man shall receive any good, by any good that he does; that
it shall no way further his salvation.

Answer. If man by his good works could merit heaven, then salvation by Christ
were made void, or if any thing of man, which is imperfect, were to join with
Christ in the work of salvation, then man's salvation were not all by Christ,
but by man, and Gall 2: 16
would so far be imperfect; and then man might boast and say, he was able to
help Christ to save his soul; and so robing Christ of his work, would rob him
of his honor also, but not of works, says Paul, lest any man should boast,
neither by any other name under heaven, but by Jesus Christ is any man saved,
that no flesh Eph^s. 2: 8 9: Acts 4: 12: 1, Cor: 1. 29: 30, 31:
might glory in his presence, but he that glories, let him glory in the Lord,
that his soul was saved by the Lord.

Article 19. That no man shall receive any hinderance by any sin he commits,
that shall do him no hurt.

Answer. If any sin of man should hinder man's salvation by Christ, then that
sin would appear to be too strong for Christ to conquer, and then no man could
be saved, for there is no sin but every man is guilty of, for all have sinned,
and all are guilty; but this I say with the Prophet Elihu, that his bad works
may hurt a Job 35: 6. 7, 8:
man as he is, and his good works may profit men, but shall no way profit the
salvation of his soul: But because good works are good to men, therefore would
I have all men observe and do them, doing unto others, as they would others
should do to them, which is Romans 13: 9. 10
the sum of the whole Law, for he that loves God, will also love his Brother.

Article 20. That our Lord Jesus Christ is the three persons in the Trinity,
God blessed, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and that the blessed Trinity is but
three manifestation of God.

Answer. The blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Spirit I acknowledge, the Father
as begeting, the Son as begotten, and the Holy Ghost uniting, as being the
complete union of all three together in one spirit, where they all meet as
copartners together in one work, that what the one is, the other is the same,
and what the one does, the other does the same, as all but one God, manifesting
himself under various appearances, of Father, Son, and Spirit, to the creatures
apprehension.

Article 21. That our Lord Jesus Christ himself was the Leper that was
cleansed, and returned to give thanks, Luke 17. 15.

Answer. I say not that Christ was a Leper, but there were ten, Lepers that
were cleansed, and one of them when he saw himself cleansed, turned back, and
glorified God, and Christ says, Where are the other nine? There are not found
that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger; and who was this
stranger, but Christ in that man, that gave glory to God for the work done (as
Christ says) Father, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work
which thou gave me to do, for I have raised the dead, and cleansed Luke 11:
5: John 17: 5:
the Lepers, and now, O Father, glorify thou me; and to whom was Christ a
stranger, but to the other nine? for though he had healed them, yet he was not
manifested in them, as an eye to enlighten them, whereby to see themselves
healed; so that there was but one to give thanks for the cleansing of ten, and
this one was Christ giving thanks to the Father for accepting of him for their
cleansing, who as yet was a stranger unto them, the manifestation of the spirit
not yet being given them, for which all men come unto him, as it is written, Ten
men shall take hold (out of all languages of the Nations) of one man, even of
the skirt of him that is a Zechar: 8: 23:
Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you; and
look to me all ye to the ends of the earth, and be ye saved, says Christ.

Article 22. That Baptism is of no necessity, nor use.

Answer. That that Baptism which is necessary to salvation is of necessity to
be used, but Water Baptism was but the Baptism John 3. 11. 13: Gall: 3: 27 1
Cor: 12. 13: Mark 11: 16:
of John, and was to end with John, being as it was fulfilled by Christ, that
so Christ's own Baptism might take place, which was by Fire and the Holy Ghost,
and of this Baptism there is great necessity, because without it no man can be
saved.

Article 23. That there is no place in the whole Word of God, that says, there
is no Redemption from hell.

Answer. That from that hell which the Scripture speaks of, Psa* 16. 10:
there is Redemption; so says David, Thou will not leave my soul in hell; and
David while he lived, was for sometime in it shut up, and could not come forth,
the wrath of God lay so hard upon him, in his not seeing the pardon of his
sins, which is hell to all made Psa: 88: 6: 7:
sensible of it, and from which hell there is redemption, else what Coll. 1: 14
Hosea 13. 14. Revel: 20: 14.
is man redeemed from, if not from death and hell, which the Scripture says
shall be destroyed, and a man must first be in it, before he can be redeemed
from it; but if there be any Scripture in the whole Bible, that says, out of
hell there is no redemption, let it be but by any produced, and I shall believe
it, till then give me leave to believe what I know.

Article 24. That hell torments are not for ever, and the Scripture warrant it.

Answer. That if hell shall have an end (as the Scripture says) then needs
must hell torments and hell (according to Scripture and men's experience) is the
not enjoyment of Gods love and Psa: 16: 10, 11. Gen: 4. 13: 14. Z^^har: 14. 12:
favor, and the torments, is ignorance of God, terror of conscience, sorrow of
heart, trouble of mind, being discontented and unsatisfied in his condition,
all which are hell torments, taking place in man for a time, until Christ has
overcome them, and chased them away, by placing in their rooms the joys of
Isaiah 35: 10: R^vel. 21. 3: 4
heaven, as it is written, Sorrow, sighing and mourning may continue for a
night, but joy comes in the morning, and then sorrow and sighing shall all fly
away, and be no more seen.

Article 25. That Jesus Christ is not in heaven above.

Answer. That Jesus Christ is the fullness of God, and this fullness cannot be
subscribed, limited, or confined to any one place or ^erson (locally) for it
fills heaven and earth, and all things Coll 2: 9:
therein, of its fullness, that the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, but he
is ascended far above all heavens into God 1 Kings 8: 27: Ephesians: 4: 10:
himself, that he might fill all things with himself, and therein contain
all things in himself, of high and low, of things in Coll: 1 18, 19, 20:
Ephesians. 1. 10. Ephesians. 4: 6.
heaven, and of things on earth, even in him, that in all things he might have
the pre-eminence as one God over all, through all, and in all, therefore to
honor Christ with a heaven, this is the highest heaven, and the greatest
honor that can be given to him, all which I know him both to be, and to have,
by the witness of the Spirit, with the Scripture, and my own experience, and he
that honors not Christ with this heaven, he honors him with none at all, but
dethrones him of his Throne, and detains from his glory, and such a one as this
denies Christ to be in heaven.


A POSTSCRIPT by friends to comfort the Author of this work in his present
Troubles, by R. W. L.
It Was bravely ventured, what, three to one,
And he to keep the field till all were gone:
But some few men with Swords, and Generals,
Justices of the Peace, and men with mauls,
Consulting the Black-guard, their Snakie Den,
A lodge, from whence that cruel Serpenten
Spirit of Persecution does arise
Again, as 'twas in the old Marian days;
Else, what means it? in this our weekly news
From all quarters, such dolours to infuse
Into our ears, which makes us surely think,
Cruelty shall enter, and Justice wink
A while, to give this bloody Serpent string,
That so they easy may pluck out his sting:
From Esam, Colchester, and this of Kent,
Tells, the Whore rides, as though the Skies she would rent
With her myst'rious, fornications, gain,
As though over the whole world she meant to reign:
Her Seas naught but mire and dirt cast up,
To make all drink her filthy wrathful cup;
Her Merchants roaring, bring all to their ways,
As French, sometime Felt-maker in the Mays.
Rosewell, from West to East, did rage about,
Against State, when Love by's sin was rooted out.
But when thou at Oxford, and Gloucester, tried,
Truth then advanced Justice on thy side,
And quail'd the haughtiness of Chim'rims pride,
Whose malice 'twas at first to have thee did
In crimson blood, and so keep up their trade,
For which again you are now a Prisoner made:
Go on brave heart, let thine enemies know
God will them in his fi'ry Oven throw,
And there perhaps make them his truth
Keep Lent for sins, or break them on th(...)
FINIS.

