Christian Supports UNDER THE TERRORS OF DEATH.

(...), Epict.
LICENSED,

June 11 th. 1691. Z. Isham.

LONDON; Printed, by B. Griffin, for Sam. Keble at the Great Turks Head in
Fleet Street over against Fetter-Lane-end, 1691.

Christian Supports UNDER THE TERRORS of DEATH.
PSALM. XXIII. 4. Yea tho I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I
will fear no evil, for thou art with me.
THat mighty and continual care which the Divine Providence has over us, is
very gratefully represented by such soft and tender expressions, and characters
of God, as do bespeak an abundant Affection and regard for us, giving us all
the assurance and security imaginable of an infinite kindness and compassion
constantly engaged for us.

So when our Lord does comfort his Disciples with the Doctrine of Providence,
he thus expresses it, Your heavenly Father knows, that you have Mat. 6. 32.
need of all these Things. What can be dearer and and more sollicitous than the
Affections and concernment of a Parent? Another of the like kind to the same
end and purpose, is here mentioned and applied by David, who seems to assure or
challenge to himself, the extraordinary care and protection of God, under all,
the very worst circumstances, from the suitable character of Kindness and
Indearment he ascribes to him, ver. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd, and thence
makes this natural Inference, I will not want. He will most certainly take care
of me, for to continue the Parallel or Similitude here before us, ver. 2. He
makes me lie down in green Pastures, or Pastures of tender Grass, he leads
me beside still Waters, or Waters of quietness: Which is spoken with allusion
to the most grateful things or conditions, that God will bestow upon, or
provide for his People; his goodness will take care, that they shall have what
is most proper and convenient for them. And when they are brought to any
distress, he will deliver them out of it, reduce them to a happy condition, and
set them right and safe in their ways, ver. 3. He restores my Soul, he
leads me in the Paths of righteousness for his Names sake, and which is more,
when they are under the most unpromising circumstances, in that sad and doleful
condition, which we must all come to and lie under, the dismal pressure and
stroke of Death; even herein the People of God are relieved and supported by
this extraordinary Divine care and goodness; Yea, tho I walk through the Valley
of the Shadow of Death I will fear no evil, for thou art with me.

In which words are two things considerable:

First, The terror or severity of a dying State, Yea, tho I walk through the
Valley of the Shadow of Death.

Yet Secondly under such dismal circumstances God does most abundantly comfort
and support us; Yea, tho I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death I
will fear no evil, for thou art with me.

First, It Is observable, that holy David does here remember us of the terror
and severity of a Dying State or Condition; Yea tho I walk through the Valley
of the shadow of Death; which is greatly signified by almost every word in it,
Yea (...) etiamsi, Notwithstanding, implying the utmost distress or extremity,
I walk (...) ambulavero, I shall walk; intimating a leasurely, and so a more
tormenting passage. (...) in Valle, the Septuagint (...) in the middle, the
depth or extremity of the shadow of death (...), in Valle umbrae lethalis, in
the thickest of the deadly shade, i. e. in ipsissima and profundissima mortis
umbrd, in the deepest and utmost shade or sorrow of death. The Word here,
Bithner.
says one, Notat horribilem quandam mortis speciem and figuram (qualis
morientium oculis observatur) tristi^^iman^. It denotes a very horrid
appearance of death, and that most dismal apprehension of it, which Men usually
have when they come to die, every way beset with horror and distraction, in a
word, a terrible and approaching destruction (qui ^nim ad umbram accedit non
long a corpore abest) He that is in the shadow, is not far from the substance
or thing it self,

Thus the Psalmist represents a dying State as most severe and terrible,
agreeable to what he Pst. 55. 4, 5.
tells us of it from his own experience, My heart is sore pained within me, and
the pains of death are fallen upon me, fearfulness and trembling are come upon
me, and horror, or as it is in the other Translation, an horrible dread has
overwhelmed me.

Death, or rather the preliminary passage to it, and the way into the other
World, is attended with great horror and affliction, and is beyond expression
harsh and terrible; to which Job may Chap. 6. 2, 3, 4.
have some reference, when he faith, O that my grief were thoroughly weighed,
and my calamity laid in the balances together, for now it would be heavier
than the sand of the Sea, therefore my words are swallowed up (that is, I want
words to express my grief) for the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the
poison whereof drinks up my spirit, the terrors of God do set themselves in
array against me. And that this was the utmost extremity of distress or
afflictoin, he could think of, appears from that Standard of Sorrow* which he
makes it Chap. 24. 17, If one know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow
of death, which he therefore calls The King of Chap. 18. 14.
terrors. The greatest of all humane Evils or Miseries. And now that great
terror and severity, which does accompany a dying State or Condition, may be
occasioned;

First, From the pains or agonies of it.

Secondly, Men's misgiving thoughts of their future State.

Thirdly, Their foregoing all the Pleasures and Enjoyments of this World.

Fourthly, The sense of Guilt or Sin, that will then crowd in upon us.

Fifthly, The more and greater Assaults of our Spiritual Adversary.

Sixthly, The thoughts and conviction of an ensuing Judgment. Upon all which
accounts our dying Circumstances will appear sufficiently dreadful and terrible.

The first great terror of Death does arise FROM THE PAINS OR AGONIES THAT
VSVALLY ATTEND IT* For however it is to appearance, there may be, its very
likely, even in the smoothest passage from this to the other World, some rugged
and uneven paths which can be perceived by none, but those that tread them,
certain it is that in the general, there is a great deal of hardship and
difficulty at such a time and in such Circumstances as these, from those pains
and sorrows which do naturally attend that condition, for in loosing that knot,
in dissolving the close Conjunction of Soul and Body, there must be, and we
have reason to say there is, a great deal of unconceivable Anguish and
Affliction, it is an extreme violence to Nature, and the utmost contradiction to
it. And therefore must mightily fret and molest us, for whence (but from the
most horrid pain and uneasiness) can proceed such extravagant convulsions, cold
sweats, deadly faintings, short breathing, distraction of the Eyes, and other
dreadful Agonies that attend it? For if these and the like, which we observe in
daily Spectacles of Mortality are dreadful to behold; What must they be to
those poor Creatures that do, and to us that shall suffer under them? And
therefore a good man, that is not afraid of death, cannot but shrink and tremble
to think of the way to it, that is beset with such horror and distraction in
every particular; O my God may be the language of the most pious Soul, I am
willing to die and prepared for thee, being desirous to depart and to be with
Christ, which is better than a continuance here, but my greatest concern is,
how to come to thee on the other Shore, there is a great Gulf between us, I
must be tossed on a boisterous Sea, and wracked by dreadful Waves, and
Tempests. Is there no way to Canaan, but through a desolate Wilderness, and
must I go through the valley of the Shadow of Death, to that Land which flows
with Milk and Honey, that Heavenly Jerusalem? These are things contrary to Flesh
and Blood, and such as will make the stoutest courage faint and tremble, the
pains and terrors of death cannot be expressed or conceived by any but who are
past or under them. And doubtless the holy Spirit of God does in some measure
intimate to us the sadness of them, when it mentions it as a great blessing to
men that it is appointed to them, but once to die, Heb. 9. 27.
and that there shall be no more death in the other Rev. 21. 4.
State. One undoubted privilege whereof, is, that there shall be no more of
those dreadful forerunners or concomitants of it, where are sorrows so severe
and terrible as endanger the safety of our Souls as well as Bodies, by urging
us to impatience, distrust, and the like; thence says our Church, suffer us not
at our last hour through any pains of death to fall from thee. Our greatest
troubles and most dangerous conflict in this World is usually our departure out
of it, so that to this case also we may apply Zeph. 1. 14, 15.
that of the Prophet, The great day of the Lord is near, it is near and hastes
greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord, the mighty Men shall cry
therein bitterly. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a
day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of
clouds and thick darkness.

Thus the Pains and Agonies of a dying State render it most terrible and
dreadful.

Secondly, It will appear again to be so, FROM MEN'S MISGIVING THOVGHTS OF THEIR
AFTER STATE. I do not mean their doubtfulness of it, for I am apt to think,
that the greatest pretenders that way are sufficiently convinced when they come
to die, and the sense often hat their languishing Condition will soon rub up
their belief of another Life; but now most or all Men are under no small
distress and perplexity from the conviction and consideration of that future
Life, for which none is sufficiently fitted and prepared, but has reason,
especially from himself, to have some diffidence, some distrust or suspicion of
his condition in it, and it is what becomes a prudent and a good Man; for an
overweening opinion of our selves, and a confident presumption of our
preparation for Heaven may be ill grounded and mistaken, and seems to be
inconsistent with a truly devout and penitent Soul, Be not high minded but fear
is the Rule that such go by even in these circumstances. We must be sensible,
and ought to be especially so, when we come to die, That we have had a great
work to do in a little time, and being that God now calls us to give up an
account of our Stewardship, it must put us into very great fear and
consternation to think with our selves what we have done, and whither we are
going, and how can we but suspect our condition, when we consider that we are
not able to answer God one word in a thousand; must it not then most deeply
concern, and mightily affect our Souls, to consider that near approach to their
endless and unalterable State, and the best of Men may have some fear or
suspicion at least of their Condition in it. This now is their grand Affair,
and if they fail and miscarry here they are irrevocably gone and lost for ever:
Who then can avoid being concerned at this great and weighty change, when he
thinks with himself, that he is now hasting into another world, and at the gate
of Eternity, tho he fears not death, yet the apprehensions of another State
must strike a damp into his Soul, and make him hugely ferious and perplexed in
his thoughts; Men's hearts failing them for fear of what may become of them in
another State. Nor is it blamable or unchristian to be so, for besides what
Reason the best of Men may have to suspect themselves, such a temper as this,
will dispose us for all due care and circumspection in that most solemn time
and season, and such an humble distrust of our selves may and will have better
effects, than a very daring confidence and presumption: For the comfort of good
Men, at the most depending upon hope, does show that at the best they lie under
some donbtfulness and insecurity: And therefore as you see Men's misgiving
thoughts, as to a future State, is no small trouble and perplexity to them in
their dying circumstances.

Thirdly, Their trouble herein does further arise, FROM THE THOVGHTS OF PARTING
WITH ALL THE PLEASVRES AND ENJOYMENTS HERE BELOW. Men that have lived in the
World must needs have some interest and affections fixed in it, and there is
scarce any that do or can sit so loose to these secular Affairs, as to bear the
removal from them with an even and undisturbed Spirit; nay so far is it from
this, that these frequently prove the most pungent considerations or reflections
in that dismal state: Have I, says one, labored all my life time for nothing
but vanity and vexation of Spirit, for I find it to be so now; I am to be
removed, and to be taken from it: For this have I beat my brains, wearied and
molested my self, for this have I cheated and purloin'd, for this have I
overreach'd or supplanted my Brother, wronged or oppressed my Neighbor, and
must I be deprived of all in a moment? What sorrow like to my sorrow will the
Worldling say? And those pleasures that others have too much in dulged, will
but the more perplex their thoughts when they are thus forced from them; nay
even the moderate and lawful enjoyment of these things, will occasion in us no
small trouble and vexation of mind, at this final parting with them: Tho it
behooves us to do it with Christian courrage, and Resignation, yet we cannot
without extreme sorrow and concernment say at that time, Farewell Wife, farwell
Children, farewell Friends, farewell the World finally farwell whatever was here
dear and valuable. And give me leave to add, the more have been Men's comforts,
and those of good Men have been the most and truest, the more and greater must
be the grief and concernment, for that utter removal, and dismal separation
from them.

Fourthly, The troubles of a dying State must be again very great, FROM THE
SENSE OF SIN OR GVILT THAT WILL THEN CROWD IN UPON US. However we may forget
God and our selves in a time of Health and Prosperity, when these decline or
for sake us, we are usually brought to a sober sense, and in such a languishing
State and Condition can hardly avoid it; Conscience, if ever, will certainly
awake when we come to die, and we may have observed the greatest Affliction
that Men have then suff er'd under, was their not being able to avoid their own
thoughts, which are now more bitter and terrible than ever, (and by the way
it is not only justice but withal goodness in God to make it so.) Now the mind
has quick and unbiased Reflections on its own Actions, and sets forth its
Guilt in true and proper Colors, and therefore the Apostle may well say, The
sting of Death is Sin. No terror in this State like that which does redound to
us from our guilty Consciences which have now got us under hold, and will lash
us severely. We cannot now disguise or dissemble our guilt, there is no stifling
of it by Riot or Intemperance, lewd and loofe Company can divert us no longer;
all the live-long day our sins will plague and fret us, and in the wearisom
nights, when we count every minute, our guilt will rush in upon our thoughts,
attend us in every Isa. 57. 20. 21.
turn and motion, and render our Souls as restless and uneasy as our Bodies; if
what the Prophet says of wicked Men be true at other times, it is much more so
at this, That they are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. When we
come to die, the greatest melancholy that shall then seize our spirits, will
be from the heavy load and burden of our sins, that will be ready to oppress
and sink our Souls. Then we shall find that threatening verified in us, I will
reprove Psalm. 50. 21.
thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. And what grief or anguish can
be comparable to that, which redounds from this? When we are going hence, and
God gives us Warning to remove, must it not concern and afflict us beyond all
thought or expression, to consider the danger our Sins have now brought us to?
They hide God's face and mercy from us, and in our greatest Distress and
highest need of Comfort, threaten us with utter Ruin and Destruction; and
nothing now can be so cutting and intolerable as the thoughts of a displeased
and angry God. And well may that be so to us which was the greatest of our
Saviors troubles, for at his dying hour, the guilt of our sins that lay on
him, occasioned the bitterest agony of his Soul, and that dismal exclamation,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Most certainly the sense of guilt
will be the bitterest Potion, and the very dregs of that Cup of trembling, Our
Hearts will faint, and our Souls will sink within us, and we shall shake and
fear, and cry mightily, and have on us such passionate concernment as is
inexpressible, from the dismal apprehension of the Divine Wrath and Indignation
which our sins have kindled and provoked against us. So that Genesis 4. 13.
hereupon it may be said with Cain, My punishment is greater than I can bear.

Fifthly, The troubles of a dying state will appear further considerable, FROM
THE ASSAVLTS OF OUR SPIRITVAL ENEMY, WHICH WILL BE THEN MORE AND GREATER THAN
EVER. For to this we may Rev. 12. 12.
apply what is said of him, Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth, for the Devil
is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knows that he has but
a short time. And accordingly we may expect that he will apply his temptations,
now more closely and vigorously than ever, for if he discharges this last part
effectually, they are utterly lost and gone, and he has gained them for ever.
Wherefore he may be supposed now to set all his Engines on work, and to ply it
closely. He takes all the advantages that may be of these extreme and difficult
circumstances; herein he tempts us to fretfulness and impatience under God's
hand, to a destrust or despair of his goodness. Do thou still retain thy
Integrity? Curse God Job 2. 9.
and die. If this will not do, he tempts us with too great presumption on the
Divine goodness, to a neglect of due Examination and Repentance of our Sins, or
distracts our thoughts with Secular Affairs. One way or other, he either keeps
us from the duties requisite for that State, or endeavors to make us increase
our sin in it. Most certain it is, that the Devil does now hope, and
industriously watch, for his Prey; the last effect of his Malice and Revenge.
The case here may be somewhat liken'd to that mentioned of him, Rev. 12. 4 The
Dragon stood before the Woman that was ready to be delivered, for to devour the
Child as soon as it was born. But may our Souls escape like that, and be caught
up unto God and to his Ver. 5.
Throne.

Sixthly, A dying State or Condition, is rendered very dreadful and terrible
FROM THE THOVGHTS OR CONVICTION OF AN AFTER-ACCOVNT OR JVDGMENT. The Prisoner
when going to his Trial, has all along every step he takes, very strange and
perplexing thoughts, and is beyond expression troubled and uneasy within
himself. And what must the case be with Men, when on the confines of another
World, to think of that great and impartial Judgment and Tribunal, before which
they are now summoned to appear? And how must it affect and cut them, to
consider that they are now hasting to the presence of that Rightoous and
Almighty Judge, who shall strictly examine every thought and idle word, before
whom all things are naked and open? To consider that after Death comes
Judgment, is that which makes a dying State the most serious and weighty matter
in the whole World. What concernment and anxiety must a man truly considerative
have at such a time? I am dying, I am departing; that is, in other terms, I am
called to give up my Accounts, I am going to be Judged before the great God;
behold, what matter so weighty, what concernment comparable to this? This
single consideration duly weighed, renders such circumstances very straight and
terrible* No other can be the genuine effect of Men's thorough belief and
conviction (at that time) of an approaching Judgment.

But we have sufficiently represented the black and tragical part, it may be
high time now to draw the Curtain, and set forth a fairer Seen. Well then,
notwithstanding a dying condition is thus severe and terrible, yet we have
particular, extraordinary supports and comforts under it. Yea, though I walk
through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I WILL FEAR NO EVIL, FOR THOU ART
WITH ME, to assist me in these straits and necessities, and to afford suitable
helps and advantages under them. And now those great supports which God does
give us in these most difficult circumstances, may be considered under these
following particulars.

First, The thoughts of this State; as the appointment of God.

Secondly, That God is therein peculiarly present with us, and gives us
extraordinary helps and assistances of his Divine care and goodness.

Thirdly, The near approach to Heaven and Happiness.

Fourthly, The consideration of Christ's Death and Sufferings.

Fifthly, The belief and expectation of a future Resurrection.

Sixthly, The promise and assurance of pardon and forgiveness.

Seventhly, The attendance of God's Holy Angels that are ready to receive our
Souls.

Which duly and seriously considered, will abundantly qualify and remove all
the terrors and difficulties of a dying State.

First, It is a very great support at that time to consider, That the STATE WE
ARE NOW BROVGHT TO, IS ACCORDING TO THE DETERMINATE ORDER AND ALLOTMENT OF GOD,
in whom we live, and move, and have our being. He is the breath of our
Nostrils, he put our Souls into these Tabernacles, and we are here only Tenants
at Will, liable to be dispossessed at Pleasure. And when we consider, that it is
appointed for all men once to die, and that it is an irrevocable decree of
Heaven that we MVST all walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, why
should we fear any evil? be dismayed or terrified, at that which is the will
and pleasure of the Almighty, as if some strange and unexpected accident did
befall us? For may we not hereupon 1 These. 3. 3.
say with the Apostle, That no man should be moved with these afflictions, for
your selves know that we are appointed thereunto. Is not Gods hand in my
suffering? Is it not in my death? It Is an undoubted mitigation even of this
sorrow and affliction to consider that God has appointed it as the unavoidable
Lot and Portion of all men living* so that, on this account, we may say, I will
fear no evil, for thou art with me.

Secondly, In our dying State or circumstances, GOD IS PECVLIARLY PRESENT WITH
US, AND GIVES US EXTRAORDINARY HELPS AND ASSISTANCES OF HIS CARE AND GOODNESS.
Thou art with me. That Providence which is always vigilant over us, has then a
more deep and special regard and concern for us. Are the very hairs of our head
all numbered? And does his care extend so far, as that one of these shall not
fall to the ground, but by the permission of our Heavenly Father? May we not
hence justly conclude, that he is peculiarly careful of us in such danger and
extremity as this? Thou art with me; it is rendered Penes me, in loquo quo sto,
Thou art near at hand, in the very place where I am, not as an indifferent
unconcerned Spectator, but to be a very present help in trouble. Then this our
good God is with us, to comfort our Souls, to support our Spirits, to ease our
Pain, and give us patience under it, to soften our cares, to mitigate the pangs
and terrors of Death; then the Eternal Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting Arms. Such a mighty care
of God over us, holy David was abundantly sensible of, and does express very
passionately, Thou art about my path, and about my bed. The Lord will deliver
Psalm. 41.
him in time of trouble. Thou will not deliver him into the will of his
enemies. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou will
make all his bed in his sickness. The Hebrew word signifies turn, Thou will
turn all his bed in his sickness, as it were to make him lie more soft and
easy. And he seems to have an undoubted reference hereunto, by what presently
follows in this verse: Thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me. At
quid adserunt solatis virga and baculus? adferunt and quidem plurimum, says
Erasmus ingeniously upon it, What comfort does the rod and staff here import? A
great deal; adversus latrocinia daemonum hoc Molientium, They are those
Instruments whereby this great Shepherd does defend his Flock from the rage and
malice of the Devils, that wait to devour us. I am not ignorant, says he, that
some of the Ancients, by the rod here, understand some light affliction,
wherewith God does Chastize; by the staff some more severe and heavy Judgment,
whereby he does punish his people. An opinion, though very pious, yet not so
proper for this place; for observe, says he, the Psalmist does not say, My rod
and my staff, but thy rod and thy staff, and therein speaks more agreeably, to
the Metaphor here of Gods being a Pastor; and so we may take the rod and the
staff here according to what is usual in Scripture, the rod may be his
assisting Grace, the staff our Defense against our ravenous enemy. Haec virga
pastoris Jesu hic beculus solatio sunt gregi imbecilli adversus terrores omnium
malorum. This rod, this staff of the shepherd of our souls, Christ Jesus, will
be our protection and security against all kind of evil. St. Paul, says he,
mentions the fiery Darts of the Devil; these Christ keeps from us with his
staff here mentioned: Hoc an non magnum interim militaris itineris solatium.
And is not this by the way a great encouragement of our Warlike State? How
dearly does our Lord Jesus love us, who, as you see, will neglect nothing that
may any wise conduce to our protection, our refreshment, and our comfort? Thus
far he, which I have the longer insisted on, because it is such a genuine,
though unusual Interpretation, and a seasonable representation of Gods so
great, and peculiar care, and regard for us, in this most straight and
difficult condition.

To sum up this Head; as nothing is surer than the day of Death, and our
departure out of this earthly Body, which very likely may be attended with
blackness and terror, with dreadful pains, and Agonies, too great to be
expressed; yet I may comfortably say, that herein the Lord is my helper; yea,
though I walk through this Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no evil,
for thou art with me. Tho the Arrows of the Almighty stick fast in me, and his
hand presses me sore tho my condition be painful and tormenting, and I be
stretched upon my Bed with grief and anguish, and my friends about me lament to
think that the place which now sees me, shall see me no more, notwithstanding
the Dan. 5. 26.
decree is past. That God has numberd my Life and finished it, and I am now
befet with gloominess and darkness, mine eye bals roll, and my Soul is just on
the wing, ready to take its flight into the unknown Regions of the other World,
Psalm. 73. 23.
Nevertheless I am continually with thee, thou have holden me by my right hand,
Thou shall guide me with thy Council, and afterward receive me to glory; Whom
have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides
thee. My Flesh and my Heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart and my
Portion for ever. Which brings us to another thing that will relieve and
comfort us, in a dying State and Condition, and that is

Thirdly, THE THOVGHTS OR CONSIDERATION OF OUR NEAR APPROACH TO HAPPINESS AND
GLORY. Having hitherto run the race that is set before us. We may expect
greater sweets and troubles, and to be more tired, the nearer we come to the
end of it. But this is the last Stage, if we can bear up under this only
remaining difficulty, the day and the prize is ours, we may go on with patience
Looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith. How must it encourage
our endeavors, and support our spirits, under the sorest pressure of Death it
self, to behold, with an eye of faith, the glory ready to be revealed, and to
see our Lord, with open arms, ready to receive us? Come, bear up under this,
and as it is your worst, it is your very last trial. There are blessed Mansions
prepared for you, where there shall be no more Rev. 2. 4.
death, neither sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain, for
the former things are passed away. Tho it may not seem consistent with what I
have already delivered, to lessen the sad and sorrowful circumstances of our
dying hours, yet I may say, that if our Souls be duly fixed on Heaven and
Eternity, it must in a great measure abate, and will, I Am sure, outweigh the
worst that can be said or conceived of that State. This is able to outballance
the utmost tyranny of pains and agonies, and to dispel all clouds and
melancholy from our minds. The Night is come, but it brings us to the dawn of
Eternity, and that shadow of Death is the confine of the days of Heaven. Yet a
little while, and we are gone into YONDER World; and must it not be a mighty
satisfaction to us now, to say with the Apostle, We know that if our earthly
house of this tabernacle 2 Chro. 5. 1.
were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens. To think that the pain will be over in a short time, is
some ease to my mind in the greatest affliction; but to add, and consider
withal, that it will be presently succeeded with joy unspeakable and full of
glory, must administer to our Souls the highest consolation. I will fear no
evil, for thou art with me; to say farther, and I shall be with thee, be
transferred to that blissful State, to the Psalm. 16. 11.
presence of God, where there is fullness of joys and pleasures for evermore, is
my most unspeakable support, and the very height of comfort and satisfaction.
Eccles. 12.
The years draw nigh in which thou shall say I have no pleasure in them, while
the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars, are darkened. In the day when
the Keepers of the House shall remble. Also when they shall be afraid of that
which is high, and fears shall be in the way. The silver Cord is loses*
Observe, upon that melancholy, and tho elegant description, of our dying
condition, Solomon subjoyns us a comfort against the dismal thoughts of those
sad circumstances, and against Death it self; the consideration of our
acceptance with God in the Immortal State. Then shall the dust return to the
earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to God who gave it. In a word,
this single consideration, that we shall ever be with the Lord, duly weighed
and relied on, will abundantly relieve and support us against all the Powers of
Death, in its most horrid and ghastly, appearances, and sufficiently subdue the
great difficulties of the dying State.

Fourthly, This is again rendered further easy and supportable FROM THE
CONSIDERATION OF CHRIST'S DEATH AND SVFFERINGS; not only as they do expiate our
sins, and so bring comfort to our Souls, as we may have occasion to show
presently* but withal, upon the account of his great and glorious conquest over
Death and the Grave, which he vanquished and subdued, in the very worst, and
most horrid circumstances, that they might have less power, and exercise less
tyranny over us. Whereupon the Apostle triumphantly speaks, Death is swallowed
1 Cor. 15. 54.
up in Victory. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory?
Thanks be to God, which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

To consider that Christ our Lord under went the same before us, and in a more
dismal manner than we are able to bear or imagine, is some mitigation in this
most sorrowful condition; considering withal, that in doing so, he has made
the way more smooth and passable for us. Death spent his most fiery Darts on
him, and he has so subdued his greatest strength and utmost power, that he
either cannot, or dare not be over severe and rigorous with us; at least, he
can go no further than he will permit him. I am he that lives and was dead,
and behold I am alive for evermore, Rev. 1. 18.
Amen: And have the keys of Hell and of Death. Death is now purely under Christ's
command, and can do nothing but by leave from him; and therefore, we may justly
hope that our gracious Lord will not suffer him to exert his utmost fury upon
us. How suitable then is that pious Prayer Visitation of the Sick.
of our Church at this season: O Savior of the World, who by thy Cross and
precious Blood have redeemed us, save us and help us, we humbly beseech thee, O
Lord.

Fifthly, The troubles and sorrows of a dying State, are again very much abated
and subdued FROM THE THOUGHTS OF A FUTURE RESURRECTION, which will satisfy our
minds, and make abundant amends for all the doubts or troubles that do now
attend us. What though we suffer under pains, and may be grieved to think that
part of us shall be the prey of Worms and Corruption, yet the belief of this
truth will soon dispel the sorrows that arise from thence. The time is coming
(and Lord, what joy is it in these straights*) when my Soul now returning to
God, shall meet this body again glorious and refined; never more to be vexed
with, or separated from it. This shadow of Death, and that sorrowful Night,
that is now beset with clouds and horror, will conduct us to the morn of our
Resurrection; and how can we be sorrowful as Men without hope? This our Church
looks upon as the most comfortable support, for the consideration of our own,
or others dissolution, when in its great Prudence and Piety, it appoints that
Lesson concerning the great Article of the Resurrection in the Burial Service,
a Doctrine if rightly fixed and believed, that will render us steadfast and
immovable in the deepest sorrows. Thy Brother shall rise again, was the
comfort our St. John 11. 23.
Savior gave to Mary, and is such as will be able to bear up our spirits, even
in the heaviest trials of a dying State. For how must it support me and others,
at that time, to speak after this, or the like manner? You behold me, Brethren,
seemingly forsaken and distressed; and, indeed, My complaint is bitter, for my
soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, and my stroke is heavier than my
groanings. But yet I would have you believe and think as I do, that I am only
to withdraw for a small season; and as the Prophet Isai. 26. 20.
speaks, to enter into my Chambers, and shut my Doors about me, and to hide my
self, as it were, for a little moment, for thy dead men shall live; together
with my dead body shall they arise. And thereupon, observe what follows:
Awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust. This long and solemn parting may
cause grief in our hearts, and tears in our eyes; but shall we not be
comforted, St. Matthew. 5. 28.
considering the time is coming, in which, All that are in the Graves, shall
hear the voice of the Son of God, and shall come forth.

Sixthly, The Terrors of a dying State are mightily qualified and abated, FROM
GODS MOST COMFORTABLE PROMISE AND ASSVRANCE OF PARDON AND FORGIVENESS. The
greatest and the truest sorrow of a dying State, is that which is occasioned
from the sense of Sin and Guilt* Hinc illae lacryniae. This is the cause of our
chiefest trouble and uneasiness at that time, and very justly too, for it is
the most dismal rate as ever was threatened; St. John 8. 24.
Ye shall die in your sins. But when I come with a message of Pardon and
Forgiveness, and this be St. Matthew. 9. 2.
rightly received and well grounded, then it is Son be of good cheer, thy sins be
forgiven thee. To be convinced that I have made my peace with God, and that my
Pardon is sealed in Heaven, this will strengthen us in the midst of sorrows,
even to the defiance of all pain and anguish: Instead of complaints, we may
hereupon joyfully say, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace. I do
neither care nor value what I suffer, so I be reconciled, to God, and have my
sins washed away by the Blood of Christ. And such may be the state of every one
of us, for upon a sincere Faith and Isa. 55. 7.
hearty Repentance, God will have mercy upon us, and abundantly pardon. Though
your sins be as scarlet, 1 18.
they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be
as wool. This blessed promise takes away the sting of death, and puts us beyond
the reach of its terror and malignity; and therefore our Church may well
prescribe it as the great, or only comfort, and security, in such a state or
condition. Thus saying, The Almighty Lord, Visit. of Sick.
who is a most strong Tower to all them that put their trust in him, to whom
all things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, do bow and obey, be now
and evermore they defense, and make thee know and feel, that there is no other
name under Heaven given to Man* in whom, and through whom, thou may receive
health and salvation, but only the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Seventh, and last comfortable Consideration that we have against the great
sorrows of Death is. THE ATTENDANCE OF GODS HOLY ANGELS READY TO RECEIVE OUR
SOULS AND TO CONDVCT THEM INTO THE MANSION OF THE BLESSED. For he Psalm. 91. 11.
will give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways, certainly
then in these, the most difficult of any. For are they not all Ministering
spirits Heb. 1. 14.
sent forth to Minister (...) for them that shall, or are ready to inherit
Salvation?

The blessed God whose instruments the Angels are (and who is therefore alone
to be adored for it) has out of wonderful condescension toward us, assigned
those glorious happy Beings, for our safety and protection in our dying
Strength and Difficulties. For the holy Scripture St. Luke 16. 22.
tells us, They carried Lazarus his Soul into Abraham's bosom. And in our
Saviors dreadful St. Luke 22. 43.
Agonies there appeared an Angel unto him from Heaven strengthening him. And if
such were able to bring him relief in his Circumstances, they may well do it to
ours, which at the worst, come vastly short of his sorrowful Death and Passion.
Why now should we be amazed, and terrified at the thoughts or approach of that
most serious and solemn hour. Psalm. 43. 5, 6.
Why art thou so heavy, O my soul? And why art thou so disquieted within me? O
put thy trust in God. He and his blessed Angels continually watch over us Rev.
3. 10.
for good. God in the ways we have heard, or others, as he knows best, Will
keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come on all the World. Psalm.
46. 1.
God is our refuge and strength; a very present help in trouble: Therefore will
we not fear, tho the earth be moved. The Lord of Hosts is with us; the God of
Jacob is our refuge.

In all time of our Tribulation, in the hour of Death, and in the Day of
Judgment, Good Lord deliver us.

FINIS.

