MONARCHY No creature of Gods making, etc.

Wherein is proved by Scripture and Reason, that Monarchical Government is
against the mind of God. And that the Execution of the late King was one of
the fattest sacrifices that ever Queen Justice had. Being a Hue and Cry after
Lady Liberty which has been ravished and stolen away by the Grand Potentates
of the Earth.

Principally intended for the undeceaving of some honest hearts who like the
poor Jews cry, give us a King, though they smart never so much for it.

By JOHN COOK late of Grayes Inn Esquire, Chief Justice of the Province of
Munster in Ireland.

Hosea the 8. and 4. They have set up Kings but not by me, they have made them
Princes but I knew it not.

O Israel (O England) Thou would have destroyed thy self but in God is thy
help, he will be thy King.

Hos. the 13. 9-10. I gave thee a King in mine anger and took him away in my
wrath.

Printed at Waterford in Ireland, by Peter de Pienne; in the year of our Lord
God, 1651.

To the Supreme Authority of the three Nations the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England.
Most Renowned Senators, who like the Heavenly bodies, having for many years
been in continual motion for your Countries good; have by Gods blessing upon
your unwearied labors after so many Hericanes by virtue of the Act of May 9.
1649. brought the Ship of State to Anchor into its desired haven, and settled
that form of Government which was appointed for Gods peculiar people who chose
a man of every Tribe, a head of a house, Captains of Thousands, and of
Hundreds, famous, Choice and mighty men of valor; Chief of the fathers of the
Children of Israel, to assemble at Ierufalem in public Counsels (1 Numb. 4.
2 Chronicles. 1. 2. and 5. 2.) a Commonwealth and free State; governed by their
Representatives in Parliament, and such whom they shall appoint for the good of
the People; of which blessed Statute (...) only say this, that since the
Apostles days there was never more Divinity, Reason, and Eloquence, in any
writing, for (as it is said of humility) it is not only a virtue but a ground
work for, and a vessel that contains all the rest, so this Statute is that
only Law (of the Medes and Persians) that is unchangeable and consequently
above the Law makers, for a free people may not make themselves subject to any
mortal man, that rule of my Lord Bacons, that the supreme power may not bind
but dissolve it self, being to be understood from Monarchy to a free State,
but not from liberty to slavery. But I observe that few understand the true
ground and reason of it, looking no further then at the wickedness of Kings,
their oppressing; burdening, impoverishing, and enslaving the people, and so
make it an Act of self-love to ease themselves in casting their riders, as if
good Kings might be tolerated, who giving the people many good words and some
few good Acts of grace enslave them faster (as the Sun sooner takes away the
travelers cloak then the wind) like those which we call good witches, that
seem to cure one that they may without suspicion bewitch twenty, whereas if
any man shall ask why has the Parliament abolished the Kingly office in
England and Ireland? the answer is, because God commanded them so to do, that
it was not out of any affection of change, nor yet only for the ease of the
People, but from a Divine precept and conscientious principle in the faithful
discharge of their duty to God and man* that for any people willingly to suffer
Monarchy is to make themselves wiser then God who has told us that there are
no Laws so righteous as those which it pleased him to give to his Elech People
to be governed by Deuteronomy. 4. 7. For what Nation is there so great that has
Statutes and Judgment so righteous as all this Law that I set before you this
day, the very first of which Laws was that wise men and understanding known
to be such among the Tribes should be Rulers and heads of the people Deuteronomy. 1.
13. An Elective Aristocracie being a principle in nature for wise men to
govern ignorants, as parents their little children that cannot order
themselves* for I can find no other ground whereon the conscience of a
Christian can rest with any satisfaction, but the Law of God, he whose
Conscience bears him witness that he would have had no hand in the Kings
Death, no finger in the change of the government, but in a dutiful conformity
to the Law of God, from the Divine authority (which not to have done had been
flat Rebellion against God, and a contempt of his holy Law) sleeping and waking
will be at rest; that to have made an agreement with him had been but to put a
Crown of Gold upon him and a Crown of thorns upon Jesus Christ, the saving
of him had been the beheading of all holiness and righteousness, the sparing of
him would have been of far more mischievous consequence then the sparing of
Agag, and if the life of the Parliament and therein the lives of all honest
people had not gone for his; Certainly never can any true Christian that would
have taken in his interest be quiet in his Conscience without repentance: Judge
Fortescue (chap. 5. has a story of a Gentlewoman at Salisbury, who being
accused by her own man for murdering her husband, was upon his oath without
any further proof condemned and burnt to ashes, but within a year after it
was discovered that the Accuser was the murderer, who cleared his Mistress,
though too late; but the Judge who suffered the Jury to find her guilty upon a
single proof (not informing them what proof was necessary, the Law of God
requiring two witnesses at the least, in such cases, Number. 35. 30. who so
kills any person, the murderer shall be put to death by the mouth of
witnesses, but one witness shall not testify against any person to cause him
to dye) was so troubled in mind that he confessed that he should never be able
to clear his conscience of that fact; You that profess your selves to be
Christians and yet would have taken in the Interest of a murderer who was the
principle Author* Contriver, Abettor, and Countenancer of the effusion of
so much Innocent Blood, Rapines, devastations, depredations and desolations in
England, Ireland and Scotland, for an unjust prerogative, read the next verse
31. ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer which is guilty
of death but he shall surely be put to death, and know that it is only the
blood of Jesus Christ (which cleanses us from all sin) that can purge you from
that sin; which calls for repentance in all sorts of people, Levit. 4. 2. 27.
And certainly if that Judge was haunted with the Ghost of that Gentlewoman for
an omission in his duty in manner as aforesaid, or per adventure for not
giving strict charge to the Jury to enquire diligently into all the
circumstances; how can any Christian hope to sleep in quiet, so long as he
murmurs and complains against the Justice done upon such a murderer, and God
being as infinitely Glorious in Justice as in mercy, all that are for Christ
are commanded to rejoice that he has avenged the blood of Barrow, Greenway,
Tisdall, Coppinger, Mr. Burton, Mr. Prin and Dr. Bastique, and other his
persecuted servants upon that state of men which were most guilty thereof
Revel. 18. 19. 20. and to bless God that the, roaring of the Lion, the voice
of the fierce Lion, and the teeth of the young Lions are broken* the old Lion
perished for lack of prey and the stout Lions whelps scattered abroad, Job the
4. 10. and Psalm. the 58. 6. 10. It is not my private interpretation but the
learned Divines and their anotations, that by Lions are meant Tirants, and by
whelps their children that Antichristian state of men that would be obtruding
and enforcing Liturgies and Directories upon Gods people. Elay 14. 13. 14. that
will be like the most high, making their will a Law, giving no reason or
account of their actions, he that opened not the house of his prisoners must be
cast out like an abominable breach verse 17. 19. and verse 21. prepare
slaughter for his Children for the iniquity of their Fathers that they do not
rise nor possess the Land, nor fill the face of the world with Cities for the
name, Son, and Nephew must be cut off, and that 58. Psalm. compared with Esaias
7. 5. 6. seems as it were to prophecy and point at the third of September
last that what ever evil Council should be taken against the good people in
England, to set a King over them even the Son of Tabeall, thus says the Lord
God, it shall not stand neither shall it come to pass the great teeth of the
young Lions are broken, those wicked Instruments whereby they would hurt shall
melt away and be cut in pieces, therefore shall the righteous rejoice with
Anniversary solemnities, for that there is a God that has Judged in the earth,
I have endeavored to satisfy the people that the great Gorgons head that has
so long enchanted them, was Sacred Majesty, and to evince it by Scripture and
reason that Monarchical Government was never of Divine Institution ordained in
love to any Nation but by a Divine permission hateful in its nature, as
Adultery or Murder, and most unnatural for fools to govern wise men, and
that in matters of Justice the Law must not be set by the Scripture and not
repugnant to it, otherwise we set the Sun by the Dial, which must not be
understood as if there were a president or example to be found in Scripture for
every case, for men's actions are so infinite, that there will be different
cases as differing faces not alike in all particulars; but the principal cases
of moment are to be found in Scripture, and such general rules, exemplars, and
Idaeus, are there laid down that every man may thereby be assured of the
Justice of any partitular case that has a mind studious therein, and Animum
verbi Divini studi osum
that no law ought to be made till it be examined by the word of God. And
because I know that nothing is more welcome to your Honorable wisdom then
truth and nothing more honored then sincerity in the Inner parts, therefore I
humbly crave leave to speak a few words concerning this weighty and Important
matter of the Rule of Justice, I have seen some Treatises wherein the Spirit
of God (who is Justice and Truth) is much breathing concerning a Reformation or
rather a new plantation or foundation of Laws proceeding, I am confident from
conscientious principles, and a pure love to Justice and the public good; but
its possible that there may be some spots in the face of Venus; I conceive in
general that Civil prudence for governing of a State and Commonwealth, is to
be fetched and drawn from the sacred fountain of Scripture rather then the
puddles of history, the Law of God being the general directresse of all laws
as the NorthStar directs the Seaman to his Port, not that we should despise
human learning* for Moses and Daniel were learned in all the wisdom of the
Chaldeans and Egyptians, and the least sparks of the Image of God are not to be
neglected; this I say of learning that it is a Jewel so excellent in it self
that it shall never have but one enemy which is the ignorant man; It is most
true, that human wit and policy has been much of that smoke of the
bottomless pit that has blinded the eyes of many Nations, but God grant (I
wish it from my heart) that England which twelve or twenty years since so much
Idolized learning be not in another age as much plagued with ignorance; as it
is a mistake on the one hand to confine the attainement of learning to places
that no man should be a Magistrate or Minister that has not been educated at
the Inns of Court or Universities, for provided men have parts, and abillities,
the place where or manner of acquiring them is not material; so on the other
hand to hold that all honest, godly men, are fit to be Magistrates or Ministers
is as unsafe, for though it is fit that every Magistrate or Minister should be
an honest man, yet every honest man is not fit to be a Magistrate or a
Minister, I am persuaded that there are fewer, converted and regenerated in
this last ten years notwithstanding the multiplicities of Sermons and glorious
freedom of the Gospel, then there was in ten years before; though there was
scarce then one Sermon for many since, because the generallity of people
neglect a soul searching powerful, learned Ministry and follow others who
though they may be Godly, yet are but a voice in comparison; there may be some
persons which are not called to the Bar that are fit, and able to be Judges,
men famous for Godliness and excellent in wisdom and reason, which must be the
life of all human laws without exception, but that any man should be fit for
such an employment that has not a good stock of learning and discretion, as
some men seem to insinuate; I confess it is above my apprehension; I do
exceedingly honor the whole fabric and form of the Israeliticall policy;
and certainly no Council can well govern any State, where Christ is professed;
that neglecting that sacred Law, shall fetch the Rules and limits of Justice
and equity from other histories, for human prudence is in many things blind,
and in others perverse; and he is but a profane estimator of Gods Word, that
shall think any human Laws to be as good as the Laws of God; it is true that
since Christ's time the Scepter is departed from Judah, and the Lawgiver from
among his feet, but the Equity of that Judicial Law which shines in those
Institutes is Moral and perpetual; Circumstances only being changed, and some
particular cases excepted* according to the nature or disposition of several
people, some requiring a straiter bridle then others; for was there ever such
wise Kings in the world as Moses, David, and Solomon, whose famous Acts
recorded in Scriptures, are not only propounded to us as examples of Piety;
but of true Prudence and Wisdoms; and the Gentills, even the wisest amongst
them as Solon and Plato acknowledged Moses Laws, to be the best and most
learned and travailed into Phaenicia Syria, and Egypt, to be acquainted with
the people of God; and their Laws; and because Plato borrowed so much from
Moses therefore he is called Mosen Atticum, and Pythagoras spent two and
twenty years with the Priests and Prophets, and then went into Italy where he
instructed six hundred Scholars in the wisdom of Moses and the Egyptian
writers called Moses, Andra, Daumaston ki deion, Virum admirandum ac divinum,
certainly the Platonists were therefore counted the best Philosophers, because
they came nearest to Moses Law, and had it not been for Monarchical Government
all the world had long since been governed by the Laws of God in matters of
Civil Justice; that high commendations which is given of our Laws, that if
Adam had not sinned in Paradise all the world should have been governed by the
Common Law of England, is either Complementall and Poetical* or else must arise
from that Maxim, that the Law of England is grounded upon the Eternal Law of
God, right reason and pure natural principles and that sentence of better it
is to go to the fountain then to follow the streams, is very excellent, if it
be rightly understood, of the Law of God; which is the fountain of all true
Justice, Josephus says, that Ptolomy Phyladelphus, the most prudent of the
Egyptian Kings, when Theoprast had sent him Moses Law in Hebrew, he sent
Ambassadors to the Jews to entreat them to send men skillful in Hebrew* and
Greek to translate it into Greek, which being done he made it in force
throughout his Dominions; but how little do Christians prize this good Law of
God, 1 Timothy 1. 8. which place must needs be intended of the Judicial Law, as
my honored friend Mr. Peter's has rightly observed, for he speaks of the Law
against Murderers and Whoremongers; did Plato and those famous Law givers
light their Candle at Moses Law, making use of Scripture for Civil wisdom,
though not for their Religion? and shall Christians that have such a Treasure
in their hands as the holy Laws of God, make no use of it for the Civil
policy of States for which the Judicial Law was principally intended? I
never understood any other Reason of Clergy men's sitting in great Counsels,
but that no Law might be enacted till it were examined by the Law of God, and
the Levites being Judges amongst the Jews does not prove that one man may have
several callings, for all true reputation consists in the discharge of a man's
proper profession, but that the Law of God was as their Civil or Common Law,
Justice is the end of the Law, the Law is the Commonwealths servant; the
Magistrate is Gods Party, and the Image of God; therefore the Law must be in
substance according to the model of the Law of God. Blessed be God for the
many good Laws that have been made since January 30. 1648. yet still I hear
that the great cry in England is Reformation of Reformatio Legum.
Laws no doubt there may be abuses and errors specially in the practical part
of the Law, and I know, it is and has been long in your Honors Breasts to
Rectify and Reform them, and to settle an expedient for speedy, cheap, and
sure Justice to run down, not by drops, but like a mighty stream, Amos 5. 29.
in a quick, constant and invariable way; I confess I am something troubled at
the diversity of honest men's opinions in this particular; some look upon it
as a more difficult work then abolishing the Tirannicall Government, that
Lawyers will struggle as much for their interests, as Bishops did, that many
honest men must be disobliged who have been cordial to the State, and must
suffer Diminution in point of Fees, and so conclude that the work is not done,
because it cannot be done, though it be the earnest desire of all honest men,
yet the difficulty of the work discourages the enterprise, as Columbas and
others who discovered the western Plantations knew that there was Land there;
but looked upon the voyage as insuperable, whereas (to my weak apprehension)
there will be no such great difficulty in the thing, for first as to suites
already depending either they are for weight and number like the sands of the
Sea, in comparison or may be all ended in a few mouths; indeed after Civil
wars, what by reason of former obstructions in Courts of Justice; and
personal Animosities there must needs be abundance of suites, and therefore
in Germany, France, and other Nations upon the settlement of a Peace, they
usually pass an Act of Oblivion or grant Commissions for determining them in a
summary way, dispensing with the solemnities of their Imperial Constitutions
and municipall ways of proceedings, the people having been so exhausted by the
wars, being not able to undergo tedious Circucularities in their Law-matters;
for the remedy would prove worse then the disease; and then for the future, men
will not be so contentious, when they see that it is in vain to begin or
defend unjust or vexatious causes when delatorie and declinatorie pleas and
exceptions (like the Sea-marks) are to be avoided and will not be allowed; for
this I observe, that no man wages Law, but in hopes to cast his adversary, if
not by the merit of the Cause, yet by cross suites and clapping great Actions
upon him who is not able to give Bail thereunto, or by the Defendants wearying
out the Plaintiff, and forceing him to become Recreant, like the Trial by
battle, if the Defendants Champion can hold out so many hours his innocence
is presumed, or like the Tyrant that threatened Death to one, unless he would
make his Ass to speak as Balaams did; which he undertook to do in three
years; and his friends judging him to be in a desperate condition, he said,
that within that time, either he or the Tyrant, or the Ass would be dead; but
when men shall peeceive that it is but an expense of time and of coin to
defend unjust suites or to Comence frivolous or malicious Actions; the parties
will agree, and there will not be one suite of twenty, and for difficult
matters experience shows us that special verdicts are very rare, and not one
Exchequer Chamber cause of one hundred; As for the time of this Reformation, no
doubt but the sooner the better, matters of safety and security against common
Enemies, and dangers, being in the first place looked after and thoroughly
provided for; otherwise it is but to look after the booty before the victory
be wholly obtained, but then with all possible expedition because as to the
malignants in England, specially such as make any Conscientious scruples about
great Mutations there is nothing will so soon win their hearts and settle
their minds in conformity to the present government as the Regulating of the
Course of Justice which belongs to all men as men only, and not as Christians;
it is not the force of power but the force of reason that conquers hearts, and
certainly as the spring is best for purging natural bodies, so is the spring
of a Commonwealth the most proper season for rectifying bodies politic, when
the wheels of Reformation are well oyled, and in a true motion, no man thinks
himself a looser, though he suffer in his particular, because the public is
a gainer, and it is but the Law and necessity of the times, but let that motion
cease and the clock stand a while there comes a rust; and it is difficult to
raise the Bell in ringing, and that which before would have been counted a just
and necessary reformation will be called (by persons interested in point of
lucre) a dangerous innovation. But it is not in Law as it is in Religion; It
was great wisdom to put down and extirpate the Hierarchy before any order or
government was agreed upon, but if there were ten grievances for one in the
Law, it would be less mischievous to Continue them all then to have no Law at
all, for should the force of the Law be suspended but one day scarce a man
living but has some enemy or other that would destroy him in body or estate in
that time; Nor is it lawful for any Judge but only for the supreme authority
to remove a stone which is ill placed in the building; Laws that are made by
public consent are not to be judged or censured by any but the Law makers,
because by them all judgment is made; as Justice (which is to do reason to
every man) is the end of the Law so the Law must be the rule of that Justice; a
Judge must not judge of Laws, but according to Laws, and no man must be wiser
then the Law, are excellent maxims, the Law is the hedge of every State, and
he that breaks down the hedge shall be bitten with Serpents: I consesse it
would be most honorable for the Reverend Judges and learned practisers of the
Law to present an expedient to that good effect, and to do it so effectually
as to challenge all rational knowing men to find out a better; Men that
travail a Road daily can the best tell every deep and dangerous step in it, it
is no such hard matter to observe where and how honest causes many times
miscary and dye for want of formal and Regular proceedings occasioned through
the want of friends or money as many poor sick people dye for want of looking
to; it is no such hard matter to discover the defects and errors in a man's
profession, nor to propound an expedient for Civil Justice, to satisfy every
honest man without hurting any man's person, or destroying him in his livelihood
only pareing the nails of some superfluities, but as there was no light in
the beginning till the Lord was pleased to say, Let there be light, which was
not only an imparative but an operative word, so in the infancy of a
Commonwealth every thing is to be done in order; as many a man may lie long
sick without any fault in the Physician, physique, or patient, so may it be in
a body Politic, weighty stones require a long time to be laid in a building,
and sometimes the impatience of the sick Patient records and hinders the cure.
I crave leave to say a word in faithfulness to the Reverend and learned
practisers of the Law my honored Fathers, and beloved Brethren, this is my
opinion of us* if we be like the willow that will bow and bend and help forward
a reformation purely to purge the dross, and to take away all the Tin that is
in our profession by rooting up those unnecessary delays which are like
pricking briars and brambles about the Vine of Justice retayning but what is
moral and rational; Judging that to be Law which is a decree of practique,
reason agreeing with the Law natural and eternal, then shall we be Judges as
at the first and Counselors Vivimus.
as at the beginning, I say in that case we live; but if we be like the Oak
that will rather break then bow* if we stand upon the Excellency and the
Antiquity of our Laws because they came in with the Romans and were never
altered by Danes, Saxons, or Normans, then it is Morimur.
death, and so it will be of all other professions or mysteries where people
find themselves grieved and straightened in their liberties what ever questions
may be made* as what will you destroy the Law? if they cannot untye the knot
they will cut it, they will have a Law but it shall be for their own good and
so plain that they may understand it, else they will not be bound by it; the
Law is but a servant to the Commonwealth if it be found inconvenient or
mischievous in Theorie or practice it must be changed, and no doubt but many
formalities and ceremonies must be buried in the sepulcher of Monarchy, many
old forms and cursary observations which exalt themselves must like the
Ceremonial Laws of the Jews vanish and dissolve; a learned Judge shall not
be directed in making Orders, or giveing Rules by the ancientest Clarke* but
what is moral, rational and equitable according to the judgment of Godly
learned men shall be the Tract and Course of every Court; and Law and Equity
(which are the greatest antagonists in the world) shall be made friends and
look the same way, I say not in substance but many ceremonies and formallities
in the practice of the Law must vanish upon the settlement of the Commonwealth
upon its true Basis even as the old shadows and Legal ceremonies of the Jews
did disappeare and vanish at the coming of the substance, but we know that
there was much struggling to maintain them, and the Apostles did not absolutely
condemn such as were zealous for their old practices, they thought it better
to temporize a little, and to give the Ceremonies a decent funeral gradually
as the people were able to leave it rather then to struggle too much and
destroy all that are contrary minded, and Paul's council in the 15. of the Acts
is full of divine wisdom, that where God has put no difference between
Christians, but purified their hearts by faith they should not oppress one
another through difference of opinions, though it was about a great ordinance
(a Scripture that should make many Christians ashamed for refusing to join and
walk with such in Christian societies that are not in every thing alike minded
with them) all honest Patriots and faithful servants to the Commonwealth are
not happily of the same judgment about the Reformation of the Laws and
settling the course of the practice, yet are not therefore to differ in
affection, but being intent upon the popular utillity, and therein all
agreeing, there is much prudence required, not to disoblige honest men so to
reform for the public good as not to destroy private Relations, the Monks
and Friars had a maintenance upon the dissolutions of Monasteries, and God
forbid that any man that has an office or employment which is not evil in it
self but by accident, should be destroyed and turned a begging I hope we are
none of us possessed with that perniciousiprinciple of the Popes infallibility,
nor much taken with that tale of Counsel given to our late King in Spain upon
a set of Diamond buttons that he had in his dublet all fastened by one thread,
one of them slipping they all fell off, says a Grandee there, so it will be
Sir in England if you part with an inche of your prerogative, if you suffer any
reformation it will be your destruction, we see what became of it; I presume
better things of my honored brethren in England: Let us not be like that
generation of men the Bishops that hated to be reformed; so the Commonwealth
flourish it is no matter what becomes of our practizes; we are members of that
Body, and if it go well with the State it cannot go amiss with us; God
forbid that any one of us should be counted of so bad and corrupt a principle,
as rather to keep three Nations in a lingering consumption then deny our selves
in point of diminution of gain, it is not necessary that we should live, much
less exact great matters, but that Justice be easy and speedy, and mercy
shown to the poor is the only thing necessary; Indeed the the greatest part
of my fear is, that many Godly honest hearts are possessed with an opinion that
knowledge is not requisite in a Commonwealth as under a Monarchy, as if
learning was only for a Court and for the splendour of Majestic, which indeed
is the glory of all Nations.

The Lord deliver England from three sorts of Mountebancks, Judges, Ministers,
and Physicians, that have but one saddle for all horses, that getting upon a
bench talk of great cures, and if they cure one for a hundred that miscarie;
they are admired, like some old witches; not knowing the reason or cause of any
effect or operation, which is the only current learning, one man's reason (like
his money) being as good as another; the grand reason why the learned Judges
in E. 3. and H. 6. and E. 4. times, and since, have not endeavored a
Reformation of the Laws has been for want of consideration to what end the
Law was ordained; they have been very learned in book cases; in the historical
part, that such a Case was so adjudged; but the reason of that Judgment,
whether for the public good or to advance prerogative they looked not after,
neglecting the polliticall part and end of the Law: And not tracing the Kings
of England, in their foundations and footsteps of Tyranny; in so conferring
all places and offices of Justice in the several Courts that it might mount
(like a Piramis) to advance prerogative; but certainly the greatest misery to
an Innocent is the ignorance of the, Judge for what conscience can there be
where there is no science, what Justice can be expected from such (though
honest and godly men) that neither know what Justice is, nor what Law the rule
of Justice is, nor why such a Case is Law, but do Justice right or wrong, as
we say Proverbially, if the Plaintiff demand a hundred pound give him fifty
pound to make them friends; and if a tall man have a short cloak, and a low
man have a long cloak let the tall man have the long cloak for conveniencie;
and truly Title Convenience will be very large; indeed the Law ought to be
plain and easy, obvious to every man's sense and apprehension; but if every
man did know the Law, that is not all that is requisite in a Judge.

There is first, Patience; to hear all that can be said, which men that know
but little (though never so honest) will not have, for those that have but
little science quickly pronounce sentence; a wise man never thinks he has
heard Pauca recensentes facile pronunciant.
Parties and Council speak enough. There is doubtless much learning required
in a Minister to be able to speak to a Case of Conscience, to compare
Scripture with Scripture, and to search for Truth as in Mines, which is a
laborious work* indeed if there were a plain Precept for every duty, and a
litter all express prohibition against every sin, there would be the less
need of learning in the Ministry; but many truths lying deep, (though every
believer has the Spirit of God, to apply the Blood of Christ to his own
soul) yet without the bucket of human learning* and strength of reason, he
will draw but little for the good of others; the not understanding whereof has
already introduced a grand error, that many gross sins are no sins, because
not literally forbidden, and many duties neglected, because not commanded in
express te arms in Scripture, though by necessary deductions made manifest by
the help of reason; though Lea, Rachell, and Sarah furnished their husbands
with other women, and that many of the Patriarks had many wives, yet there is
no such Law now; though the Scriptur say, we are to give an account of every
action, yet we shall be accountable as well for our idleness; it is not the
words but the meaning of the Scripture which is Scripture, if otherwise, the
Papist has as much to say for his Transubstantiation, and Arminians for
general redemption, as we for any Article of our faith: It is not for bunglers
to take upon them the charge of souls; Cura anima rum est cura curarum.
And there is much learning requisite in a Physician to know the principles of
man's Composition, the nature of Spirits, the nature, causes, Symptoms, and
differences of the several diseases, and the method and manner of curing them;
the knowledge of herbs, flowers, plants, roots, trees, mettles, mineral,
druggs; and how to choose and prepare medicines, with infinite other perticulars
which require a whole man to attain a competent measure or knowledge therein;
and God forbid that any Empericke should be suffered to try experiments upon
so noble a subject as the body of man, and though sincerity of affection may
counter veil depth of Judgment in private matters; and advises; yet in things
of public concernement, it will be but a blind zeal to judge according to
events, for hard and great matters will arise in Judgment, Exodus 18. 26. but
the part of a Judge is more difficult in some respects specially in point of
time. A Minister has a week happily for his Sermon, and seldom any disease
so violent, but the Physician may consult about it; but where many people
demand Justice at an Assizes, there is not only a promptitude of elocution,
but much science requisite to give quick dispatch, which is the Clyents joy,
and Judgment is something more then science. Be instructed ye Judges of the
earth! but be Erudimini.
conscientious for learning* and a good Conscience are two of the bravest
supports in the world; because a man cannot be deprived of the first in this
world, nor of the other in the world to come, and Judges are so far to be skild
in the Law of God, that in all causes coming before them they are to warn the
Clyents that they trespass not against the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 10. If this
learning should fall (which I hope I shall never live to see) then farewell to
Ministers, and after that, no more Magistrates.

Secondly, Prudence; 10 answer all objections and cavillations that will be
brought to put life into a dead Cause; for in most great suites the parties
Litigant commonly think that they are both in the right, and if the matter be
heard by no wiser men then themselves, how shall he that is in the wrong ever
come to see his Error? and this Prudence in a Judge consists principally in
giving satisfaction to the hearers, that the sentence is Just, and if possible
to satisfy him against whom Judgment is given, that he has no wrong done him.

Thirdly, Justice; which must respect the cause and not the person; Judges were
pictured blind and the Areopagites gave sentence in the dark; Thou shall not
pity the poor in Judgment (though it be plausible (and natural for tender
hearted men especially so to do yet) God abhorrs it.

Fourthly, There is required Mercy; after Judgment, the poor man's condition
is to be considered, for, if Justice be wound up a peg too high in the
Execution of it, it breaks Summa Iusticia is the degeneration of it.

But by this learning I am far from understanding any Craft or Artificial
subtillities in taking legal exceptions for the quashing of Inditements and
thereby to save a witch or a murderer from the Gallows, or to arest the
Judgment when the money is conscionably due to the Plaintiff, this is none of
that wisdom which Solomon desired, I Kings 3. 9. which is requisite in a
Judge; it is a wise and understanding heart to discern Judgment between good
and bad, truth and falsehood, a righteous and just cause, from that which only
is so in appearance the simplicity of the Dove in doing wrong to no man, and
the wisdom of the Serpent, to see that by subtillitie in pleadings,
unnecessary delays, captious interpretations, and clamorous importunities, an
honest cause be not delayed* or overthrown; mark I beseech you, what a Judge
Prince Job was Chap. 29. 11. when the ear heard me, then it blessed me, and
when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me, hearers had not words enough to
praise my eloquence, he was so admired, that any one but Job would have been
proud of half so many acclamations. Ver. 12, 13, 14. Because I delivered the
poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him; the
blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widows
heart to sing for joy. I put on righteousness and it clothed me, my Judgment
was as a robe and a diadem, the poor oppressed ones gave him 10000.
benedictions, the widow owed to his care, the conservation of her children; and
by banishing sadness from her looks he made her life comfortable, and her mouth
published his praise; the fatherless, being virtuously educated, were in a
better condition, then when they had a father; though Kings adorn themselves
with purple, yet they mind their pleasurs and honors more then doing Justice
to the friendlesse; but Jobs principle ornament and garment, Crown, and
Diadem, was Justice. I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame, I
was a father to the poor, and the cause which I knew not, I searched out, he
mixed the quallitie of a father with that of a Judge, granting executions
against poor men with a bleeding heart; melting to think that such as are
lame, and blind, should be ordered to run, and see like those who are to lie
in prison for one hundred pound when they are not worth twenty pounds;
certainly the most honorable title is to be styled a father of the poor (for
what need is there of rich men, but only to do good to the poor?) and though
a ludge must not pity the poor in Judgment, yet after Judgment pronounced
there is place for mercy, which is but Justice; and before sentence the poor
man's interest ought to be so dear and precious to the Judge as not to
pronounce any sentence against him till his cause be thoroughly not only
opened, but studied* and when the poor had none or but little Council, Job
was as well their Advocate as their Judge; As by the wisdom of the Law of
England the Judge is to be a Council for the prisoner in matter of life and
death, so was Justice Job a Council for poor men in all Civil Causes; and
would not let any man lie in prison for a debt until he had examined the
justnes of it, and that it was clearly due as well in equity as by Law, and
his justice is most conspicuous. Job 31. 13. If I did despise the cause of my
man servant or of my maid servant, when they contended with me; he heard the
complaint of his slaves, he permitted every man to speak for himself before
he be hayled to prison, to allege reasons why he ought not to be carried
thither, and the ground of such his supereminent Justice was ver. 14. 15. What
then shall I do when God rises up, and when he visits, what shall I answer
him? did not he that made me in the womb, make him? and did not one fashion us
in the womb? that though he was a Judge upon earth, yet he was a servant to
the God of heaven; who would enter into judgment with him, that though the
condition of the Judge, and the Client be different, yet their birth is alike,
God is Father of them both, the Clients body molded of dirt, and the Judges not
formed of any nobler matter, and that both of them had the honor of being
formed by the hand of God, and both their souls made after his Image, as if
Judge Job and his slaves were Copartners or Tenants in Common; that Princely
spirit goes on, and from ver. 16. to ver. 25. makes the most incomparable
challenge that ever the people heard of; If I have withheld the poor from
their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail; Or have eaten my
morsel alone, and the fatherless has not eaten thereof: (for from my youth
he was brought up with me, as with a father; and I have guided her from my
mothers womb.) If I have seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor
without covering; if his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed
with the fleece of my Sheep; if I have lift up my hand against the fatherless*
when I saw my help in the gate; then let mine Arm fall from my shoulder blade
and mine arm be broken from the bone; for destruction from God was a terror to
me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure; if I have made gold my
hope, or have said to the fine gold, thou art my confidence; if I rejoiced
because my wealth was great, and because mine hand had gotten much; if I
rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me, or lifted up my self when
evil found him. The stranger did not lodge in the street, but I opened my
doors to the traveller. If I used to keep guard at my study-doore that suitors
could not speak with me without a fee; if I sent a man back with a shameful
denial; if I did not minister speedy justice to the poor for the love of
Justice; and to the rich for a small matter; when I sat in the City-gate where
the Court of Justice were kept that every man might see and hear the reasons
of my proceedings, if I were not as tender of Clients and Petitioners as if we
had tumbled in one belly together, and sucked the same milk; if I have not used
my power to tame the insolence of proud spirits, making them examples by death
or other penalties, where their wicked lives had given scandales, if the wool
of my flock has not defended the poor from the storms and rigor of winter;
if I have ill treated the Orphants and let one brother feast and brave it, and
the younger children to be all beggars, or be fed at the charity of the elder
brother; if I have confidence in the merit of the person and not in the justice
of the Cause; if I have more esteem of birth then virtue, and preferred
greatness before piety; I then wish that that guilty part may be torn from my
body and that to terrify all Judges that abuse their power; then let my arm
be broken from the bone by the infamous hangman; for Mariners are not in so
much fear of the Tempest in winter as I stand in awe of the anger of the great
Judge. If mine enemies misery have been any pleasure to me; if I have thought
my self better then my neighbors, because I was richer, if I were ever
overcome by threats, or corrupted by presents, to pervert Judgment; if my
constancy was ever shaken by any bribe; or if ever money had more power over my
mind then reason; if I were ever cruel to any man and made dice of his bones;
though the men of my tabernacle said ver. 3. Oh that we had of his flesh, we
cannot be satisfied; I had servants and officers enough, not only to have
hurried any man to prison to have repaired my honor, or contented my passion,
but such as also would have cut them in pieces, and devoured them; if I have
not help every man to his Lands that had right to them without drawing tears
from their eyes by tedious attendances, then I am content not only, that heaven
should curse my lands (that for wheat which I shall sow I may reap but
thistles) but to be tormented with an eternity of miseries! May I crave leave
to insert an historical observation?

In Holand after they had given a wrtt of Ejectment to Monarchy and the Mass,
the Courts of Justice for a time went on in their tedious formallities; which
so discontented the people (their Law suites taking them off from their trades
with dilatorie and costly attendances) that they began to repent themselves of
their so dearly purchase liberties; Doctor Walaeus professor then at Leiden, a
grave, judicious man, having by Scripture and reason satisfied and quieted many
exasperated minds, that the chief Magistrates of the Provinces, ought in the
first place, principally to intend securety, and laying foundations (where the
super structures will be easy) then applied himself to the Senators in an
oration, which though I do not affect the mixing of Latin in an English
discourse, yet least the liquor should be viciated by pouring it out into
another vessel, I think fit to give you his own words, speaking of Judges
and Advocates, by way of interrogation, or admiration he says; Nos qui sumus
Reipublicae Christianae Candidati; tales respiciemus and retinebimus Iudices ac
Legulares, quos Cicero vocat, praecones Actionum, Cantores formularum, and
Aucupes syllabarum; ut qui cadat, in litera, cadit in causa. Absit; long
absit; nos tales habebimus Iudices and Advocatos qui Deo noverint dare quod
suum est, and populo quod suum est; plana vera; and immota praescripta
Iusticiae Deo placent, si aliqua consuetudo fit in contrarium, praeferatur
antiquus ille dierum; nulla debet praescriptio praevalere contra Verbum Dei,
quia veritas antiquior est falso; vera and suprema Dei Lex architectonica,
omnibus Legibus municipalibus est praeferenda; quia hec sola omnibus alijs
praescribit modum, ac formam; necesse enim est aut leges vestras praescribere
legibus Dei; aut leges Dei praescribere vestris; si priori modo, non estis Dei
servi, Ejus etenim servi estis cui estis obedientes, scitote vero
administratores Reipublicae rationem Legum suarum summo moderatori Deo reddere
teneri nee valebit argumentum patribus Reipublicae uti invenimus leges, and
statuta, sic ea reliquimus; quia boni Concilij est, aut leges corruptas mutare
aut eorum officia deferere quomodo enim pertinet Romana lex ad Christianum,
nisi a Deo approbetur? Pontificij sublevant and reformant Leges Civiles per Ius
Canonicum non a scripturis, sed Paparum decretis, Concilijs, ac Patrum
sentencijs, desumptis, nos vero nullum agnoscimus Ius Canonicum nisi quod ex
sacro Dei Verbo aut ex ejus certa and constanti analogia colligatur; absurdum
est dicere, leges priores esse puriores, aut antiquiores, meliores, quomodo
enim Mancipij leges salubres condere valiant, and nolunt Monarchae Cedere
populo in materia libertatis; quaelibet bona lex est precium sanguinis, and in
Regione and Religione Catholica impossible est Leges Civiles esse puras, quia
Religio and Lex inter tolares fiunt ac in permixtae, ubi pura Religio ibi pura
Lex Civilis; Corrupta Religio Tirannica Lex, reformatio Religionis necessario
ergo inducit mutationem legum Civilium, non quoad fundamentalia vitae;
membrorum ac proprietatis, sed quoad formulas ac solemnitates Iuris, quae
formulae Legis non suntipsa Lex; And much more to the same effect by learned
Walaeus; which oration of his, took such impression, that within a month
after, the form of Legal proceedings received such an alteration and
abbreviation, that whereas before according to Imperial constitutions, a suite
in Law continued three or four years, and the best purse at last prevailed,
causes were ordinarily ended in a month; and if the Plaintiff cannot bring his
cause to a period in three months he is dismissed of course, unless it be
necessary to send Commissions beyond seas between Merchant and Merchants, or in
very difficult cases, and where the witnesses are in foreign parts rare; The
contrary practice whereunto is but as a sweet harmony to Satan, for does not
he laugh to see a murderer escape through a misnaming or mistake in the
Indictment; and a poor man that cannot read hanged for a sheep, or some corn
taken to relieve his poor wife and children; to see a man that has an estate
to walk abroad and confront his creditors (though a prisoner in execution) and
a poor wretch not worth ten pounds thrust into a hole until he pay one
hundred pounds, which he is no more able to do then the Philosopher to dry the
sea with an Oyster shell; It is not Cor gaudium to him, to hear learned men
say, that the Plaintiff has a clear right and title to the Land or money
demanded, but because of some mistake in the bill or proceedings he must pay
costs to the Defendant, that is the wrong doer; Blessed God! did thy sacred
Majesty dispense with the breach of thy holy Law, to save the life of an Ox
or a Sheep, that should fall into a pit on the Sabbath day, and shall not thy
servanti dispense with a circumstance (where the right plainly appears) to
save the life of a family; nothing is substanciall in a course of Justice but
what is equal, reasonable, and good, all other forms or methodes are but in
effect Popery, or Turcisme, as being a slavery to men's persons, or estates,
and to be abolisht by virtue of the Covenant which in the equity of that branch
of the Hierarchy I speak of the Ceremonial and Circumstanciall forms and
proceedings which are costly, delatory, and mortiferous; but the essence of the
Law like the substance of the doctrine of the Church of England (truly so
called, not as Constituted in a Gospel order, but in opposition to Rome as
Antichrist is said to sit in the Temple of God, and Rome called a Church in
opposition to Turks and Pagans) is in most things inviolable, inalterable, and
immutable, for indeed the Law of England is ancienter then Dr. and st*
books, the maine pillar whereof is the righteous Law of God, according to
which the reformation must be, otherwise it is impossible to have any settled
peace in a Commonwealth, where every one does or may study Scripture; it is
pure sollid reason whereof to deprive any Law, Custom, or Course of a Court,
is to take away the soul from man, for where the Law or any Course of Practice
is taken upon trust by tradition and not upon election and choice of reason,
the greatest tyranny and oppression is exercised by color of that Law which
puts oppression both into one Act and an Art, but then this Law must be
public reason, that which the Judicious and most learned men judge so to be,
not the sense or Judgment of any private man, for that will be as dangerous to
the Commonwealth as the private interpretation of Scripture arising out of some
men's brains, and not out of the Scripture it self, is to their souls. 2 Pet.
1. 20. and 3. 16. by misinterpreting and drawing them violently from the true
sense, to a false one; to uphold their errors as it is possible some may uphold
old errors against new truths for advantage sake; for there is a remnant of
old Adam in the best man. The two great enemies that S. Paul had, were two
Smiths, the silver Smith, and the Copper Smith that got much money by making
silver and copper chains, or Image to the Heathen Gods, and Goddesses, Acts
25. 24. to the 28. great is Diana: and 1 Timothy 4. 14.

Now because it is of very high concernement for all that are servants to the
Commonwealth in public employments, to live in the opinion of all good men as
the best and strongest fortification and engagement to faithfulness and
diligence, therefore having received some loving advertisements from some
faithful friends in England, as if we proceeded here irregularly or
arbitrarily in matters of Justice; that some turned the Law into Preaching that
had other business to do; and that Ministers are harshly dealt with, or to that
effect, knowing that truth is very welcome and reason very prevalent with your
Honors. I crave leave to answer, first, as to the administration of Civil
Justice in this Province, thus it stands; my Lord Lieutenant (the days of
whose life, the Lord of life multiply and sweeten to the further Terror of his
Enemies: and greater comfort of his dear servants) upon many petitions from
the Inhabitants of the Province of Munster was pleased to revive the
Presidencie Court there as formerly; consisting of the Lord President, two
Gownemen, viz* a first and second Justice, and other Commissioners.

My Lord Deputy (who is a blessed Instrument and indefatigable in the works of
holiness and righteousness) for the great ease and safety of the people, has
altered the Provincial Court into County Courts, that whereas before the
people travailed forty or fifty miles, now their differences are ended at home
in the nature of Assizes or sittings; And the Honorable Commissioners of
Parliament promoting the true liberties and freedom of the people, have given
great ease to them in taking away some needless offices and in matter of Fees,
there being seldom twenty shillings spent in a cause by all parties, unless
it be in Counsels Fees, which are ascertained, and but very small in
comparison; I do not in the twenty shillings include the charge of witnesses
which yet is very small, not goeing out of their own County; but the Fees
usual which are allowed to the officers, Jury, Clarks, and Attorneys (for the
Court has not any) every man pleading his own Cause, which I observe to be a
good way for discovering the truth; The form and method of proceedings has
not by me been altered in any point considerable; but indeed the original
constitution of the Court seem to me to be excellent in four particulars.

The first process of the Churt has ever been a summons in the nature of a
Subpena, then an attatchement or distress of the defendants goods, not
restraining his person but for matter of Contempt, or upon very just and
reasonable cause.

Secondly, It is a mixed Court, and the Bill may contain both Law and equity
whereby half the suites in the Province are ended or prevented, but has no
Cognizance of Pleas real concerning titles of Land.

Thirdly, The Cause is heard and ended as soon as it is ripe for hearing;
indeed herein is some alteration, for whereas formerly there were but two or
three sittings in a year; the Justices and practizers attending the upper
Courts at Dublin, in the Terme-time, and so causes depended long; Now (having
no other business to do) we end the difference as soon as it is prepared for
a hearing, which some (how Justly let wise men Judge) have censured to be an
inovation and precipitous Justice; indeed precipitancy is the Stepmother of
Justice, and must as carefully be avoided as falling from a Rock, but that is
to hear and determine before both parties are ready or had convenient time so
to be; otherwise when a Cause is ripe for sentence why should not the Court put
in the Sickle? a speedy trial is the Plaintiffs joy and just Judgment delayed
may prove worse then an unrighteous sentence speedily pronounced.

Fourthly, There is a great difference between the proceedings in England, and
the ancient course of this Court in point of payment of debts; for debts are
paid by instalment as the Defendants are able to pay them (a most excellent and
admirable composition of a Court) for the case of poor Ireland stands thus;
the poor English who through Gods mercy saved their lives, but lost their
estates by the Rebels; begin now (blessed be God) to return to their
possessions, and the protected Irish make a hard shift to live, paying great
Contributions; and many a poor man has got a plough of five or six garrons,
as many cowes, forty or fifty sheep, all worth about fifty pound; this poor
man pays for horn and corn, and begins to grow warm in his business, but
comes an Action of debt (like an armed man) upon him, for fifty or a hundred
pound, contracted before, or for his necessary subsistence during the
Rebellion; the Plaintiff having been long out of his money, is very
stomack-full (blame him not after so long fasting) and prosecutes with all
rigor; Judgment cannot be denied him; an execution against goods in other
Courts Issues of Course, and what follows? the goods are sold at under rates,
at 25. or 30. l'. (for who will buy his neighbors goods so taken from him but
will be sure of a good pennyworth?) and the fees and charges of the execution
are so great, that the debt if it were but 50. P. is not half paid, and for
the remainder, the defendant is taken in execution where he starves to death,
and his wife and poor children beggs from door to door, unless relieved by
the parish; but by the course of this Court the defendant comes in, and prays
an Instalement and a Jury of indifferent and impartial neighbors install the
debt to be paid by several gales and days of payment, as in the Defendant
shall be thought able, and if the Jury (who certainly are the proper Judges in
such cases, for it may be their own cases the next day) finds any fraud,
deceit, or violence, the Defendant is imprisoned, as he well deserves, by which
means (it is an observation to me very admirable) though the people be
extremely indigent, there not being scarce a tenth part of the money here that
is in England, debts are I believe ten times better paid here then in England
for of 5. or 600 l'debts that have been here sued, for in some one County
scarce know ten of them but are paid, or secured, whereas if the Reins of the
Law had been let loose here, as in other Courts in all probability, there had
never been ten debts of a hundred satisfieed; for not one Defendant in twenty
has so much money by him, and if either his person be restrained, or his
little flock taken away, his friends leave him, and so misery quickly finds
him; but give him time, he works like a mole to keep himself or his goods
from Arrest; one friend like one hand helps another; he recovers some other
debts due to him, and in a short space becomes a noune substantive; I could
instance in many that had Actions against them of 2. or 3000 l'. value (it
would pity a man to see more load still laid on, as if they would be pressed to
death; yet by this way of Instalment, the man having a breathing time agrees
first with one, then with another, and in a short space grows into as good
credit, as any of his neighbors, the contrary practice of not instaling debts,
as men are able to pay, has been the ruin of many families that might have
flourished to this day; and by this means the Contribution to the Army is
paid, Agriculture increased with many families) would all be quickly ruined if
the Farmers should be unstocked by such executions. The practice of this Court
has likewise formerly been very profitable and easy to the people in matter
of Executorships, and Administrations, as to end ten or twenty suites upon one
bill filed against an executor, or administrator, the creditors are all called,
and every man's part proportioned according to the conscionable demerit of the
debt, and not the whole estate swept away upon a dormant Judgment, to the
defrauding of many poor Creditors, with some other equitable practices too
long for an Epistle.

As to the second censure that many preach uncalled, or that have other
business to do, we know that until there was a standing office of
Priesthood, Moses who was the chief Judge of all Civil Controversies
exercised, the Priestly office, Psalm. 99. 6. Moses and Aaron among his Priests,
and Samuel among them that call upon his name. It was Moses that consecrated
Aaron; but we do not read that he was consecrated himself; Magistracy and
Ministry are distinct bodies, but in the absence of a Minister, every gifted
man, not only may, but ought to speak to the people, as a good steward of the
grace of God under penalty, not only to have the Talent taken from him (which
human prudence would think sufficient) but the unprofitable servant is to be
cast into utter darkness, in which sense doing all that we can, I hope we are
not unprofitable servants; If such an objection should be regarded here, we
had long since been Atheists, without any face of Religton upon the Sabbath
day, and without any form of godliness; surely if in Law, much more in
Religion; Necessity makes that not only lawful but comendable, which otherwise
would not be so; besides there are some that can give an account of their faith
Latinaliter; and so by the Statute of the 13. Eliz. cap. 12. may preach, and so
may any other, by virtue of that Statute, that has a special gift and ability
to be a Preacher; but there is something of more particular concernement. In
suites depending between the English and Irish; when Irish witnesses are
produced, the English object (which indeed is one of the greatest difficulties
I meet with) that they make no Conscience of swearing upon our Bibles, but will
speak truth upon a Ladies Psalter, or by St. Patricke; now they will not come
to our Sermons to hear their gross Idolatries and superstitious fopperies
reproved, but are very constant auditors in Courts of Justice, where some of us
take occasion to inform them of the nature of Oaths, and endeavor to convince
them of the ridiculousnes of their bread God in their transubstantiation; that
they commit adultery with their Images, and are so impudent in crossing their
foreheads that they cannot blush at it; of the danger, infamy and horror of
perjurie remembering them of Ananias, and Saphira, who for telling a lie
(without any oath) were stricken dead upon the place; that their Popes have
been monsters of mankind, conjurers, witches, and devils in a humane figure;
that Priests and Friars are very cheats and thieves in robbing poor deluded
simple people; that their Priests by their Law are not to marry, and by custom
not to live chaste; that the pretended miracles they brag on, are mere
impostures; that their true miracles are only such as these their Priests to
have no wives, and yet many children; Friars to have no ground and yet most
corn; no money nor vineyards yet the best Sellars of wines and provisions;
that it is a miracle that they do not all rise as one man against the Pope for
his cruelty, that having power (as they hold, and himself confesses) to let
out and discharge all their ancestors and friends from Purgatory (which they
say, is as hot as Hell fire) yet will not do, because they have not money
enough to give him, and his Priests for it; that their Religion is wholly
composed and patcht up of Iudaisme, Paganism, and Turcisme, and as many
absurdities in those points they differ from Protestants, as there have been
minutes of time since they crept in amongst them, which some call preaching and
Innovation, though in effect it is no other then what some of the Reverend
Judges in England have mentioned in their charges in the Circuits upon the
Statutes of Recusancy, which expressions, though for the matter of them they
must seem to exasperate, yet the manner of delivery may much mollify and
salve it; we pity their blindness, that their souls should be so deluded, and
they perceiving that it is so spoken in love, and that we would not displease
them, but inteutionally for their own good, they are not angry with that
Surgeon that cuts and lanches the patient, desiring to cure him; but concerning
the last part of the objection that we have silenced the Clergy in Munster,
to make way for our selves to vent our own opinions because I understand that
the matter of fact concerning that particular, has been untruly represented,
and a false disguise put upon it; as godly, learned Ministers were thereby
discouraged from coming over hither, where they are so much wanting, and should
be so cordially welcome; I presume briefly to report the true state thereof;
at my coming into Munster, I found the Clergy there generally sequestered for
delinquencie against the Parliament, in having adhered to the Lord of Ormondes
and Lord Inchiquines illegal authorities, after their being declared Traitors*
which resolutions were printed with their names thereunto, which was not denied
scarce by any of them; my Lord Lieutenant, looking upon it something like the
general case in Adam, that man who was the master piece of the creation was
wholly lost, was pleased to refer the said Clergies Petition to Sir William
Fenton, Colonel Phaier, and my self, to proceed against them in like manner
as the Honorable Committee at Westminster proceed against scandalous
Delinquents, or insufficieut Ministers; which we did accordingly and (in his
Excellencies absence) attended my Lord Deputies pleasure therein, who joined
Esquire Gookin, Dr. Harding, Colonel Hodder, and Capt. Baker* with us, and as
in all his Actions having in his eye the glory of God, and the goodtof poor
Creatures, required us to Act therein as might most conduce to the public
good we endeavored what we could to separate the precious from the impure, and
to distinguish between murder and manslaughter; viz. though they had all
contracted, and were involved in a general guilt by that subscription; and
consequently obnoxious to Justice; because a greater difference could not
possibly have been done to the Parliament, then for the Provincial Ministers
to declare their Judgments and resolutions to assist and adhere to those
Traitors, for no doubt but thereby many of the English which had so much
suffered by the Rebels were taken off from their former good affection and
faithfulness to the Parliaments just authority, being like so many poor sheep,
ruled by those whom they call their spiritual Sheepheards; yet becanse many of
them might be drawn thereunto for their own preservations (as the case then
stood with them) and upon the matter forced to subscribe rather to save their
livings then out of any disaffection to the proceedings of Parliament; such of
them as did acquit themselves from scandal in life and doctrine, and were
gifted for the Ministry are continued, and enjoy their benefices without
diminution, unless it be in case of pluralities: and truly for my own part, I
found much Ingennitie in many of them; and wherein they differ from us, I take
it to be from a conscientious principle; and hope and daily pray that there may
be a right understanding and better agreement between all honest and
conscientious people that fear the Lord, that we may all as one man with one
shoulder, labor to exalt the Kingdom of Jesus Christ* and to advance holiness
and rigbteousnes in our several Actions; but indeed, the harvest is like to be
very great in this Nation, and the laborers in Christ Vineyard are very few,
many poor English here are like corn, ready to be brought into Gods Barn by
Conversion, but there are very few painful, skillful, harvest-men, pray we
therefore the Lord of the Vineyard, that he will send forth Laborers unto his
Vineyard, or as the words are, cast them out, for men are very slow in so holy
a work, Preachers that have the tongue of the Learned, that know how to speak
words in season acceptable and delighfull Esaias 50. 4. Ecles. 12. 10. able
Ministers of the new Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. who by an ordinance of heaven
ought to have a comfortable maintenance, 1. Cor. 9. 14. Gal. 6. 6.

And as I was concluding, came the sad news of the translation of our
incomparable Lord Deputy, the truly Honorable Henry Ireton Esquire; therefore
though I fear I have already exceeded the limitts of an Epistle, yet my heart
being so brimfull of grief, I humbly beg Your wonted Clemency, and much Honored
patience, that it may a little vent and run over in a few broken words, though
bedewed with tears, his Death is such an Eclipse to poor Ireland; that may
be best felt and understood many years hence; indeed England and Scotland, and
all sorts of people in the three Nations, especially the poor oppressed
fatherless, and widows (to whom he was upon all occasions a patron, father,
and husband) have no small cause of lamentation, never had Commonwealth a
greater loss, because undoubtedly there was never a more able painful,
provident and industrious servant; that with more wisdom, prudence,
faithfulness, fortitude, and self-denial, discharged his duty to all people,
and acted every part so well since he first appeared to public view, as if he
had been borne only for that particular; if he erred in any thing (as error and
humanity are inseparable) it was in too much neglecting himself, for like a
candle he wasted his vitalls, to give light to others, seldom thinking it
time to eat till he had done the work of the day at nine or ten at night, and
then will sit up as long as any man had business with him; indeed he was every
thing from a foot Soldier to a General; and thought nothing done whilst any
thing was undone; his last tedious and wet march into Conaught, for the
reducing of Clare, and other Castles, after the rendition of Lymericke cost him
dear (as I understand) occasioning the fever; his heavenly Father would not
suffer him to dye by the hand of the enemy, nor of the Pestilence* whereby many
of his dear servants have been called home; he was a most exact Iusticiarie
in all matters of moral righteousness, and with strength of sollid reason had a
most piercing Judgment, and a large understanding heart to discern between
good and evil, truth and error; he was one of those good Magistrates
prophesied of in Romans 13. and his conversation was a true interpretation of
that Text, being so intent to Gods honor, that he never thought himself served
or be friended in any Action unles God was therein, served and honored; let us
mind our duty (says he) and what Scripture have you to warrant it? I believe
few men knew more of the Art of Policy and self interessed prudentialls, but
never man so little practiced them; he is, and shall be most dear to my
remembrance; and of all the Saints that ever I knew, I desire to make him my
President; for uprightednes, singleheartednes, and sincerity; he exercised it
to his enemies; Oh, says he, deal platnely with them, let them know what they
must trust too, and though he was very sparing in his promises to the Rebels,
yet he was most liberal in performances; he had a very clear divine light of
truths supernatural, and being strong in faith and of a most humble and meek
spirit, gave God the glory of all success; upon the least loss we received by
the Irish, or any disappointment; Oh, says he, is not our God angry with us?
let us be fervent in prayer to know his mind in every check or chastisement;
as upon the loss in attempting the Island by Lymericke, where gallant Major
Walker lost his life; He wrote to Colonel Lawrence, and others of us here, by
the name of his Christian friends and brethren, to be earnest with the Lord, to
know his mind what he would have his poor servants in the Army to do; I do
verily think, that since the Apostles days there was never more Divine
breathing of the Spirit of Christ in any Letter then in that; He had a most
noble property, that if any man was questioned or censured behind his back,
he would be his Counsel, and argue for him every thing that could be
rationally alleged; never did man in the owning of his Authority more disowne
himself; he was a most exemplary Christian in duties of piety and Religion,
always beginning and ending Conferences and Counsels with prayer, seeking
wisdom, advise and strength from God upon all occasions, he had constantly
(when in Garrison) an exercise before supper, and though he satt in Council
till eight or nine at night, yet by his good will the discourse should not be
the shorter, but when Mr. Pacient (a man of great experience in heavenly
things) or any other, seemed to be strained in time, he would say, let us not
think that time too long in Gods immediate service, and when others had spoken
to any disputable and useful question, he would speak with that depth of
Judgment ever tending to unity and unanimity in opinions and affections, that
(to my slender apprehensions) I do not know that ever I heard him maintain
any error; and was willing to hear truth from the Soldier; when the sickness
increased the last year, he appointed not only one or two days to seek the
Lord to revoke that Commission* but every fourth day of the week for six weeks
together; and sure it is a blessed thing when Moses speaks to Aaron, the
Magistrate to all Gods people, to be servent in prayer, when wrath is gone out
from the Lord and the Plague begin Number. the 16. 46. his estimat or character of
a godly man, was not principally that he was of such a sorme, opinion,
judgment, or attainement; but where he found the maine bent and resolution of
his scule to be to know God in the face of Jesus Christ, and to promote his
glory, to serve the Saints, to begin or second a good motion, with all his
might; to do good to every visible object, to love the first appearances and
cherish the least sparks of grace, and Image of Christ in whom soever existing
and to renounce the honors, profits and pleasures of this life for Christ's sake
who became of no reputation for us; he greatly delighted in the Communion of
Saints, and made union with Christ (and not any other opinion) the ground of
it, which is the only foundation of that Church, against which the gates of
hell shall never prevail, as that sweet spirited Christian Mr. Iesse has
unanswerably evinced; he would often say to this effect, that there was no
honor like to the service of Jesus Christ, and let our ambition be who shall be
most isntrumental for God in his generation, and having done our work with
all diligence, let us trust God for our wages, but half work is not pleasing
to God. I know the want of some distinguishing ordinances was a burden to him,
and I am afraid that our heavenly Father has a controversy with many of us in
Ireland for several deficiencies or redundancies, as first, our undervallueing
the Lords Supper, I am afraid sometimes that God will make the less account of
our bloods and of our children, because we so little esteem (if not trample
under-foot) the blood of his Son in that Ordinance; if a Christian cannot
conveniently enjoy it, yet he should mourn for the want of it. Secondly, for
not Sanctifying the Lords Day, the morallity whereof too many deny, and such as
hold it, yet upon every trivial and slight business, which might have been done
the day before, or deferred till the day after; forget to keep it holy; I agree
that works of necessity and mercy may be done upon that day where it is really
so of Gods sending, and for public utillity; but a culpable necessity of our
own making will not excuse the breach of that holy Law. Thirdly, that when the
honest interest is struggling for life some should be striving for estates or
rather when Jesus Christ is daily Crucified in his members by the bloody
Tories, there should be emulations and contentions amongst us for superiority,
or prudencie, as was amongst the Apostles; that whereas S. Paul only commands
to render honor to whom honor is due, Romans 13. 7. we are too ready to assume
titles of honor which are not owned in England. Fourthly, or it may be that
every officer has not the bowels and tender care of a father to his poor
companions, 1 Chronicles. 11. 17. 18. 19. And David longed and said, Oh that one
would give me drink of the water of the well of Bethlem that is at the gate.
And the 3. brake through the host of the Philistines and drew water out of the
well of Bethlem that was by the gate, and took it and brought it to David, but
David would not drink of it but powered it out to the Lord* and said, my God
forbid it me, that I should do this thing; shall I drink the blood of these
men that have put their lives in Ieopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives
they brought it, therefore he would not drink it. Fifthly, or per adventure
that we are not so intent upon the principle work that we were sent over
about * viz to right and restore the plundered, banished, and oppressed
English, Sixthly or lastly, that we do not put a difference between such as
have been active in the beginning or prosecution of the Rebellion, and such as
have only had their hearts, and not their hands in it; the Lord help us, we
know not how to cast a severe eye upon the offense, and yet a pitiful eye upon
the person, some are too indulgent in the remission of just punishment; others
turn Judgment into wormwood by an over exact severity; but blessed be God,
what errors are amongst us? they are but in the head, I hope our hearts are
sound and right for Holiness, Justice* and Mercy; specially such as are
entrusted in Council and Conduct; this is but as an humble Caution. And
whether it pleased God to take away so precius an Instrument; either for his
own sins, or for ours (we being indeed not worthy of him) or that his glory
may be made more manifest, that he is not tied to any man, but can carry on his
own work, in the removal of the wisest Counselors, and most valiant
worthyes; It is not for us positively to determine.

Pray pardon me but a word more, truly all things considered* I do not know,
that there are diversities of gifts and operations, but it is the same God and
Spirit which works all in all, 1. Cor. 12. 2. 4. and happily some may excel
in one thing* and some in another; but for so great a stock of knowledge, such
extraordinary abilities in matters and learning, Military, Judicial*
Reipublicall, Mathematical, Moral, Rational, and Divine, I say for every
thing requisite and desirable, both as a man and as a Christian, I think it
will be hard with many candles to find his equal; but he that made him so
good lives for ever, and his years change not, Psalm, 102. 27. who can (and I
trust will) richly adorn and quallifie his successors, and make them such as
he would have them to be; that what his Mosesses shall leave undone, may be
finished by his Ioshuaes; which will undoubtedly be so, if our unbelief hinder
not good things from us; for blessed be God they which are next in Command
here, and many others, are of Gods designation Called and faithful and Chosen,
and such as honor God; and therefore ought to be honored; but Tragedies must
not be long, those that knew him not may think I speak for affection, and
those that were intimate with him will blame me of ignorance* that I say so
little, the more worthy he was, the greater is the loss, especially to his
dear and honored relations, (whom the Lord bless with all benedictions,
temporal and eternal) for whose sakes I should not have said any thing in
point of Comendation least it should increase their sorrow, but that I hope
that they are, and shall pray that they may be more possessed of that rare
Jewel of Christian resignation and living in the divine will; I am sure that
he was tender of the honor and welfare of the Son of God and his members:
therefore no doubt but God will be a Father to his good Lady and Children, but
great griefs command silence, and it is best to cast a veil upon it, that we
sorrow not even as others which have no hope, and now (most Honorable) because
God will honor them that honor him; It is but my duty to bear testimony to all
those excellent things which you have done for the glory of God and good of the
Nations; It was said of Hercules, that no man deserved so much as he, because
he freed the world from Lions, Wolves, and Tigers; you that may truly say
with David; we have killed the Lion and the Bear, shall I trust be blessed and
assisted to curb and overcome the Goliahs that oppose righteousness and
holiness, the Phylistins, deceivers* and mystical wolves; all oppressors, and
cruel men, all such as are inwardly ravening wolves in point of
selfe-interest, building their fortunes upon the ruins of honest men, though
they appear in any sheeps clothing; so shall your names be famous, and
immortal; which yet is not to be interpreted so much a comendations of the
persons, as the gifts and Graces of God in them. And so with all submisse
gratitude to Your Honors, that we Your faithful servants here, live in Your
remembrances, as knowing it to be all the interest expected; therein resembling
(like dear Children) Your Heavenly Father, who finding a thankful heart, for
one mercy conferrs another; I shall turn my praises of you into prayers for
you and yours, that God would make you masters over the peoples hearts and
minds, as well as over their bodies, that you may be a burdensome stone to all
oppression, to break in pieces all petty Tyrants; and to conquer not only the
Ecclesiastical beast, but the Political; that if it be his will you may live
to raise the superstructures, and finish the building of that foundation which
you have so happily laid and begun; And that after long lives, for the glory of
God, and the good of the Nations, you may follow that truly worthy member that
is gone before, into that blissful inheritance of the Saints in light, where
is all day and no night, where your daily cares and troubles shall cease; and
the voice of the oppressor shall not be heard; so prays

Your Honors most dutiful and thankful servant, John Cook.

Monarchy no Creature of Gods making, etc.
Monos arkein.
BY Monarchy I understand, the Government of one man over many, to give laws
and commands alone; to have thousands accomptable to him, and he alone to be
accomptable to God; as the late King Charles in 3. Car. in his speech (printed
amongst the Statutes no doubt by the finger of God, to let the world see what
he ever intended) in these words: I must avow that I owe an account of my
actions to none but God alone; God is no more the Author of such a government
then he is the Author of sin, which to hold is to deny him to be God, for he
that believes a Deity must conclude that God is without fault, without defect,
infinitely good, and just, or elce he is not God. Monarchs that assume an
absolute Supremacy to do what they list are not creatures of Gods ordination by
his promissive hand of love, but God permits such to be, as he suffers sin to
be in the world by his permissive hand of divine providence being that wise
Physician that maks use of poison for the good of those that fear him, and
that knows how to create light out of darkness. Indeed we read: Dan. 2. 21.
That God removes Kings, and sets up Kings, Psalm. 75. 7. Job 34. 30. God
plucks down Tyrants that they may oppress no more, yet suffers an Hypocrite
sometimes to reign for the wickedness of a people, but he appoints no
government but what is just and rational, as a Democracie or Aristocracie
elective, for that Wise men should govern Ignorants, is a principle in Nature;
but that God should create millions of people to be subject to the Arbitrary
lusts of one man, and that to go in succession to a minor or Idiot: That he
should be governor over millions; that knows not how to order himself, Reason
abhors it, and God approves it not though he permits it so to be, as those
great Empires of Turkey, Persia, the Tartars, Mogull, Russia, China,
Presto-Iohn, and to come nearer the Potentates in Europe, whoever assumes such
an absolute, unlimited prerogative and supremacy to make Laws, War, pardon
Murders, to raise money when he wants it, and makes himself Judge of that
necessity such a governor rules not by Gods immediate will of love and
approbation but his mediate will of wrath and anger which he appoints not,
having commanded the contrary viz. a just, rational government; but permits and
suffers Tyranny and oppression, for glorious ends and reasons best known to his
Divine Majesty; and if any such be called Gods, Psalm. 82. 6* it is no
otherwise then as Satan is called the God Revel. 9. 11.
and King of this world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. and the Prince of the Air who rules in
the children of disobedience for to make any chief Magistrate above law, is to
make Authority which is given of God to punish sin, to be a protection against
heaven contrary to Gods pure essence; not only as if he approved sin, but as
if he should protect sin by an ordinance of his own institution, and any
accomptablenes in a Monarch destroys that government. And those pollitique and
specious Arguments brought for the maintenance of Monarchy (no doubt the best
that could be had for money): poor Calvin made many rich. He Pauper Calvinus
multos fecit divites.
that could bring a fresh argument against Calvin's life or doctrine, or for the
Popes Supremacy had a good pension with impunitie for Enormities precedent or
subsequent) that they ought not to be accomptable to Law for the prevention of
Mutinies and Insurrections, that if the King of France or Spain should kill a
man it would be more h^zard and cost to the people to bring them to Justice
then to let them escape unpunished and Monarchs having the Militia at their
commands, and carrying life and death in their eyes and tongues no man dares
prosecute against them; The poor sheep thought it very fit that there should
be a bell tied about the Wolves neck to give notice of his approach but none
of them durst adventure to tie it about him, and Prudentia Humana Capitalis
Inimica Christi.
therefore says worldly wisdom: Let the people be accomptable to Kings, and
they only be accomptable to God, that is let the Wolves and Bears devour the
Sheep without control: As if God had appointed the Be to make honey only for
the Drones; this is to exalt the wisdom of foolish men above the Infinite
Wisdom of the Eternal God.

But the question precisely stated, is whether Monarchical government have any
footing in the Word of God to be of divine Institution which I deny; And
because I have observed that the ground of so many errors is principally men's
snatching at Scripture, reading here and there a verse, and very few in
comparison that will take the pains to consult the whole mind of God,
therefore I would in a Parenthisis in treat all such as pretend to Christianity
to begin at the first of Genesis, and not be weary of reading till they come to
the end of the Revelation, daily praying and casting themselves upon Gods
assistance for the guidance of his holy spirit in the interpretation thereof;
for indeed it is a shame for a Child not to be acquainted with his Fathers will
every legacy part and branch thereof: every one will be objecting; what, was
not David a Monarch, and a man after Gods own heart? pray stay a while, it is
not said that David's office was after Gods own heart, and the contrary will
plainly appear if we consult those sacred Oracles which (the more is the
pity) men do not value as their pardon or evidences of their salvation but
disesteeme them as if they were their Indictment like unhansome people care not
for the glass, or as the Elephant that muds the water to hide its own
deformity.

To begin then with Adam, who had an absolute supremacy over the Creatures,
but neither Adam (nor Noah who was the heir of the new world) ever challenged
to be Kings, because for one man to set himself above others without giving an
account of his Actions, is, to put off the nature of man and to make himself a
God, whose will is a Law, and the ground of all created goodness and Justice,
things being therefore good and just because God wills them, and he does not
will them because they are good and just.

The first man then that we find taking upon him Kingly power was Nimrod,
Genes. 10. 8. 9. the mighty Hunter, what did he hunt? the lives, liberties and
estates of poor people, those that would not hunt and catch venison for him he
hunted them, and ever since though never before; Monarchs and Tyrants have
hunted men, as men have hunted Bears and Wolves, and such noxious creatures;
and it is observable that the tower of Babel was not built to advance any one
man, or to get glory to a particular person, as a King above his Brethren, but
to gain a name and renown to them all, Genesis 11. 4. Let us make us a name not
one of us; If any Cavalerist or Carolist object that Cain was a King over Abel
because of his primogeniture being the first borne and heir to the privileges
of Adam, and that the Lord promised Cain that if he did well he should rule
over Abel, Gen* 4. 7. That will more disservice him in the rear and
consequence, then advantage him in the front, for Cain was accomptable for
murder, and was a man of death for killing Abel and though he did not dye
(peradventure because there were then few to take example and to be terrified
by his death) Yet by that murder he was made incapable of enjoying any dignity
and God did not preserve him alive in love but reproved him in his fury that
others which should be borne after, might see the vagabond and fugitife, and
magnify the Justice of God upon him, the branding, fear, and shame that he
underwent being far worse then death; and so the first King was not
unaccomptable but lost all for a murder; so true it is that many a man marries
a widow that would gladly be rid of her train of children; and whereas many
have instanced in David's case, that he was a man of blood in the murder of
Vriah and yet not put to death, the answer is easy that David ought by the Law
of Man to have suffered death though he was a Monarch, and Nathan caused him to
be his own judge* 2 Samuel 12. 5. As the Lord lives that man that has done
this thing shall surely dye, then Nathan said to David thou art the man; and if
he had said no more, there must have been some Executioner found out to have
taken away the life of David it being against the law of Nature to make any man
his own executioner, but be pleased to observe how Nathan aggravated the sin
verse 8. 9. as if it were a far greater sin for David to commit a murder then
for a private man, because it is a double sin, murder and breach of trust it is
the highest treason for a King to murder his Subjects; and there can be no
greater honor to any people in the world then to do Justice upon a murderous
King but verse. 13. David confesses his sin: I have sinned against the Lord in
killing Vriah the Hittite with the sword, and slaying him with the sword of the
Children of Ammon, though David never touched the weapon that shed the blood of
Vriah 2 Samuel 11. 14. therefore it is an impotent argument that the late King
never killed any man with his own hands, and as weak to say that there was no
malice in him which formally denominates and distinguishes murder from
manslaughter, but a Martial contending for his own right upon such probable
grounds, that if a plaintiff in Chancery were nonsuited he ought not to pay any
costs for that he had a probable cause of litigation; for if there was not a
prepenced and precogitated malice against all public spirited men against
whom he breathed out so many threatenings, wishing that they had but one head,
that they might be taken off at a blow as another Nero, yet there was malice in
Law, and malice employed, to kill every man that should stand in his way of an
absolute unaccountable domination; which certainly is a clearer malice then a
thief has that kills a man that will not loose his purse, the thief has no
desire to hurt the honest man wishes him at his own house in safety, if he
would but leave his purse behind him; for I appeal to every sober man whose
judgment is not corrupted by preingaged affections which is more heinous
murder and offense in the sight of God for a poor man to rob a rich man of ten
pound and in case of resistance to kill him, or for a Prince that for the
maintenance of his Pretogative (which himself says is to be accountable for
his actions to none but God alone) shall grant Commissions of Array, and raise
Armies to put a whole Land into a Combustion and flame, to the pillaging,
plundering, massacring and destroying many thousands of poor innocent people;
And Nathan said to David, the Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye,
No man can pardon murder but God alone so that the reason why David was not put
to death for that murder was not for the authority that he had as a King but
out of Gods pure mercy to him, there being a supersedeas to the Execution from
the Court of Heaven, thereby to make him and Manasses in the old Testament, and
Paul in the new, patterns to such as should believe, not only of Eternal, but
of Temporal salvation; he that may command Abraham to sacrifice Isaac may
pardon David for killing Vriah, that however the good Thief was put to death,
and if a godly man commit a murder he ought as well regularly to suffer death
as the most impious, the Law of man bearing a correspondency with the Law of
God, that he that never sins till seventy if he then kill a man must then
suffer death, not only Temporal but Eternal, if he be under the Law, Galat.
3. 10. 1 Pet. 4. 5. Let no believer suffer as a murderer, thief, or evil doer
proves that if any such be murderers they ought to suffer; and the next verse
holds forth to me more then what is ordinarily observed: yet if any man suffer
as a Christian not for his Religion only, for then it should signify no more
then verse 14. but if a Saint should, through the strength of a temptation and
malice of Satan commit a murder (as the best man living may possibly commit any
sin, but the sin against the holy Ghost) in such a case let him suffer legal
punishment as a Christian, let not him be terrified so much at the present
death as rejoice that he is goeing to his fathers house to Eternal happiness,
let him be more affected and afflicted that Religion should suffer by his fault
then for his own sufferings; let him take a kind farewell of faith which
shall presently be turned into vision, and of repentance for that all tears
shall instantly be wiped from his eyes, let him feel by the spirit how all
things work together for his good even his great sin for which he suffers; it
being the occasion to bring him soonet to his Crown of glory; I say though
this be regularly true, that if a godly man commit a murder the Law will take
hold of him, 1 Timothy 1. 9. 10. yet if the Lord work hearty Contrition in his
soul for the offense as in the case of David, I have sinned, and the heart be
kindly touched with godly sorrow (which did not appear to be the Case of the
late King) it seems to me that they which carry the sword may in some special
cases save such a man alive where happily the Lord has so sanctified that
affliction to him; that he is thereby become a new creature and is not the same
man that offended, and may be more serviceable and isntrumental for the
Public then his death would have been advantage to the people in point of
exemplary Terror without any violation or infringement of that preceptive
fundamental law of Genesis 9. 6. the reason whereof being perpetual so long as
men are made after Gods Image it can never be abrogated, though any one should
extraordinarily be saved, by the equity of the Law as in David's Case; who
certainly were it not for some special reason as a King did more deserve
death then for a private person to commit a murder, as he that is a Scholar
and knows the Law ought in reason rather to be hanged for stealing then he
that cannot read a letter, as Levit. 4. 3. 27. 28. if a Priest sin it requires
a greater expiation, he must offer a Bullock, whereas if a poor man sin
through ignorance a Kid was sufficient.

He that with David meditates in Gods precepts, and delights in his holy Law,
and Statutes, Psalm. 119. 15. shall find that in Judgment the person of the
poor is not to be respected, nor the person of the mighty to be honored, but
in righteousness every man to be judged Levit. 19. Altius patibulum.
15. Kings to dye for murder as well as others, and higher scaffolds to be
erected for them then others by reason of their high birth, that Justice upon
them may be more conspicuous, another generation will as much wonder that Wise
Royalists should be taken with such fond arguments, as we do now admire that
our ancestors should so long believe Transubstantiation, A Kings
unaccountablenes, and a Popes Infallibility being all one in the balance of
reason. Did not the people disobey a man after Gods own heart in the case of
Jonathan, and yet vain men to preach passive obedience where a power shall be
assumed above Law to pardon murderers, dissolve Parliaments contending for a
negative voice, to make solemn elections of Knights and Burgesses in
Parliament ludibrious and no more then a spiders webb.

The Patriarks until Moses time governed in their several lines and families
according to the mind of God never refusing to give an account of all they did
to those whom they were over in the Lord; Indeed the Nimrods and the Pharaohs
exercised and usurped authority over poor creatures and finding Nimrods
Monarchy, Genesis 10. in the 16. Chap. we find Wars; four Kings fighting
against five but for the great Empires of the Assirians (oh Assiria the Rod of
mine anger) Medes and Persians, Graecians and Romans; that have been in the
world there is no more ground in Scripture to make such Imperial Government to
be of God; then there is for the Popes supremacy, they that expect another
Antichrist are as blind as the poor Jews that look for another Messiah; and
I hope it will be granted me that Antichristian government is no more of Gods
ordaining then the Devil may be said to be Gods ordinance, because he is
permitted to do mischief for a time and though we read, Genesis 21. 26. That
good Abram and Isaac made a Covenant with King Abimelecke, that does not prove
him to be a King of Gods appointment for he had either made himself a King by
force, or else being a valiant man, poor people were constrained to run to
such for protection, and to put their lives, liberties, and estates under their
power, to prevent a greater mischief, and being so subjected the Nimrods have
dealt from time to time no better with them then the Lions with poor beasts
which they get into their denns, devour them at their pleasures, thinking it a
great courtesy if they reserve them to the second course, as Poliphemus
promised Ulysses to keep him for the last bit, or if they afford them food and
raiment it is but as the Turks use their slaves, feed them fat that they may
the better endure their blows, it is the text of the Civil Law, that all is
the Emperors, and what the people enjoy is of courtesy, for says the
Emperor, I expect all, and were it not for me another Nimrod should dispoile
them of all; and so he that steals a Goose and leaves a few feathers behind
him, thinks the poor woman is much beholding to his gentleness, but let such
titles and claims be examined by the Word of God.

Before we come to King Moses, we read of many Kings of Edom, and Dukes that
descended of Esau, Genes. 36. etc. he is Esau the father of the Edomites, but
not a word that this government was approved by God, and what good did Pharaoh
ever do, but at the instance of Joseph in giving a habitation and maintenance
to Jacob and his Children, Genes. 47. It is possible that Tirants may at the
crave and Rogation of worthy men consent to the enacting of some wholesome
Laws, still keeping the Militia in their own hands to have a power to destroy
all when they please, Exodus 1. 8. There arose up a new King over Egypt which
knew not Joseph* but oppressed Gods people, and he said unto his people,
behold the people of the Children of Israel are more and mightier then we,
come on, let us deal wisely with them; Reason of state put Jesus Habemus
legem, etc.
Christ to death, verse 14. All their service wherein they made them serve was
with rigor, then the Lord being moved with compassion toward the Israelites
respected their cry, he appeared to Moses saying, that he would send him to
Pharaoh to bring them out of Egypt* Exodus 3. 11. So that Moses was the first
King, or Ruler of Gods making, but Moses like unto his Savior Christ Jesus,
was not willing to be King, Exodus 4. 10. I am not eloquent says Moses, but
slow of Speech, and Gods anger was kindled against him, humble pride is proud
humility, when God calls to any employment a Christian may not deny the work
of God upon his own spirit, but see what a gallant public spirit King Moses
had, Exodus 5. 22. 23. Lord, says he, I can do no good for thy people; it is
the greatest grief to a man of honor that he cannot see through his business
to the furthest end of it, and when he cannot with Paul do that good which he
would; such a man has a divine calling, and see how Moses stands for the
peoples liberty, Exodus 10. 9.

He would not accept of his own liberty without the peoples rights, but was
willing to loose his own natural life to save them spiritually.

The next Ruler to him of Divine ordination was his successor Joshua, Deuteronomy. 34.
9. as God had been with Moses guideing his heart and hand to govern the people
by the law of right reason, not assuming any unaccomptable authority over them
but to speak and act in such evidence and demonstration of the spirit and
power to them that the most ignorant amongst them might easily perceive that
Moses intended the peoples good, and if any one could have given advice how to
have eased them, or comforted them in the least kind more then he did, he
would no doubt have hearkened unto it, and when the people murmured as for this
Moses we know not what he is; he drew no sword against them, to hurt them,
but prayed for them and cried over them, so then the Lord appointed Joshua to
succeed Moses, and the people accepted of him and approved of Gods election,
Joshua 1. 15, 16, 17, 18. is a very sweet Covenant and agreement made between
Magistrates and people not a word of passive obedience to do Iosuas will or
suffer his displeasure but the people promised to hearken unto him as they did
to Moses, only the Lord thy God be with thee as he was with Moses, that is so
far as the Lord is with thee, in the way of holiness and righteousness so far
we are thy subjects and no farther, and whosoever rebels against thy Command
so far as it is the Commandment of the Lord shall surely dye; then Joshua 3. 9.
says to the people, come hither, and hear the Word of the Lord your God, and
4. 14. the people feared Joshua, but it was because the Lord had magnified him
in the sight of all Israel; the Laws that the people were governed by, were
the Laws of God which Moses had written in the presence of the people of
Israel, Joshua 8. from the 31. to the 35. and in all difficult causes no doubt
but Joshua consulted with the Elders of Israel, Joshua 10. He hangs up five
Kings, makes quick work with them, they did not plead that their persons were
sacred, that they were the Lords anointed and not to be touched, but said Joshua
verse 25. thus shall the Lord your God do to all your enemies against whom ye
fight, as if he should say, if there be at any time so long as God has a
people in the world, a King in England, Scotland, or any other part of the
world fighting against them, the Captains of the men of War must put their
feet upon the necks of such Kings who ever they be, and they must be smitten,
slain, and hanged up until the evening; and never did trees in England yield
and bring forth such sweet fruit as those whereof the Scaffolds were made at
White Hall, January 30. 1648. Some slips or stocks whereof to be planted for
the same good use of hanging and beheading all Tirants and oppressors, will be
more worth to the three Nations then all the Timber in the Forest of Deane: in
the same Chap. 7. Kings more are Conquered and smitten, and Joshua 12. 24. all
the Kings 31. and observe the precious counsel that good Joshua gives to the
people before his death, such Rulers and no others are of the Lords appointment.

Come we to the Book of Judges, Joshua being dead the people did evil in the
sight of the Lord, 2. 11. and they were sold into the hands of their Enemies
that spoiled them, yet ver. 16. the Lord raised up Judges which delivered them
out of the hands of those that spoiled them, and Chap. 3. 9. the Lord raised up
a deliverer to the people of Israel who delivered them even Othniel, and the
spirit of the Lord came upon him and he judged Israel, and went out to war
ver. 15. left handed Ehud slew Eglon, Chap. 6. 14. The Lord raised up Gideon to
deliver Israel from the Mideanites, and Chap. 8. they would have made him King,
then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, rule thou over us 22. 23. both thou
and thy son, and thy sons son also, for thou have delivered us from the hand of
Midian, and Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my
son rule over you, the Lord shall rule over you, Gideon rejects the motion with
disdain, hereditary Kingdoms have no footstep in Scripture, but the Lord is
said to rule when fit men rule by the Laws of God. Chap. 8. 33, 34, 35. The
people soon forgot God and Gideon, then Chap. 9. the bramble will be King that
which is a curse of God upon the earth, Genesis 3. 18. will play Reax. Gideon
would not be King, but Abimeleck makes no bones to kill seventy of his brethren
to make himself King, 9. 5. is such one likely to be a governor of Gods
appointment? Can it be the mind of God that the Trees of the Forest should
have a bramble to reign over them? Iotham the Survivour ver. 7. stands up and
says, hearken unto me ye men of Sechem, that God may harken unto you, and
may I humbly beg leave of my miserably deluded and discontented Contrymen to
put them in mind of Iothams Parable, and in true love to tell them, that as
Iotham by that parable foretold their ruin, and ver, 57. the curse of Iotham
the son of Ierubbaal, was fulfilled upon them accordingly; so undoubtedly
whoever shall by plots and conspiracies endeavor to introduce any of
Abimelecks race or conditions to be King of England, Ireland or Scotland, or
act any thing against the late statute for the abolishing of Kingly power shall
perish by the sword of Justice, and those Cities that resist so just Acts and
Ordinances shall be beaten down and sowed with salt, ver. 45. The Lord grant
that the salt there mentioned, and Lots wifes conversion into a pillar of salt
Genes. 19. 26. (which the Lord Jesus would have us remember, Luke 17. 32.) may
be as savory condiments to season men's spirits, with a detestation of all
Tyranny and oppression, and with a love to Justice and Rational government;
that the Parliament may give us every day more and more of the fatnes of the
Olive, the peace bringing Olive quick, cheap, Celerem Iustitiam non Iustitium.
and sure Justice, which can only make peace and harmony in a Common wealth,
it being the only strong oak, that can keep up the ship of State from
sinking; and let all that would not be found fighting against God make a
Covenant of salt to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth as it is now
established, renouncing ever to have any thing more to do with Abimelecke; for
see what became of him ver. 53.

So God will undoubtedly render the wickedness of those that imbrued their hands
in the blood of that learned Doctor Dorislaus, and Ingenious Mr. Ascam, upon
their own heads, for such bloody Actions are seldom only punished in hell;
Chap. 11. Iephthah the Gileadite that mighty man of valor (who was thrust out
of his native place by his brethren) was soon called back to their assistance
to be their Captain and Ruler, note there a plain agreement and stipulation
between a Prince and people, and certainly so it was in the beginning of
Parliaments no doubt but it was agreed upon under hand and That Fox Herod.
seal (but Kings have been too subtle creatures to suffer it to be printed)
that if the King should be of one Judgment and the Representatives of another
it must pass according to the Public reason of the whole, and that
Parliaments were not to be dissolved till the business was done which they met
about; other wise what fickle things were Kings? and what vain things were
Parliaments, as building of Castles in the Air? Now Iepthah Magno Conatu nugas
agere.
having judged Israel six years, died 12. 7. after whom Ibzan and Edom were
Judges, they being dead, the Children of Israel did evil again in the sight
of the Lord, and the Lord delivered them into the hands of the Philistines 40.
years, 13. 1. then the Spirit of the Lord began to move in Sampson and his
valiant exploits are the substance of the 14, 15, and 16. Chap. then comes the
great objection which the Royalists make Chap. 17. 6. in those days there was
no King in Israel but every man did that which was right in his own eyes, Chap.
18. 1. and 19. 1. repeated upon the occasion of the abuse and murder of the
Levites Concubine, where the Holy Ghost does not mean such a King as
Abimelecke, or as the Gentiles had, to breath life into the Laws by his Royal
assent for such a King the people of Israel never had, nor owned in the Land of
Canaan, not a man that challenged a power unaccomptable to oppress, murder,
swear, plunder, and commit all manner of wickedness without control, such a
monster being fitter to carry garbidge to Bears then to live amongst Civil
people; but there was then no man zealous for Gods glory to fight for Israel,
and to judge them according to the Law of God, therefore the Lord raised up
Samuel a singular man for Justice and mercy, 1 Samuel 1. 28. Hanah his Mother
lent him the Lord, Chap. 3. The Word of the Lord was revealed unto him, he
dealt faithfully in telling Eli what the Lord commanded; thereupon he was
established to be a Prophet of the Lord, verse. 20. Chap. 7. He exhorts to
solemn Repentance then they make him a Judge verse. 6. being so, he yet prayed,
and sacrificed, and the Lord discomfited, the Philistines by Thunder, and
Samuel judged Israel all his days, and went Circuits, carrying home Justice to
the peoples houses, and built an Altar unto the Lord having ver. 12. taken a
stone and called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, hitherto has the Lord helped
us. Judges being to take special care that God may be purely worshipped and
glorified, and that Gods people may not forget the mercy of the Lord in
destroying their Enemies.

Certainly Moses and Samuel were two of the best Judges that ever were in the
world; and are to be as patterns and looking-glasses to all Magistrates, so
that as he is the best Christian that is most like unto Jesus Christ; so he is
the best Judge that is most like unto Moses and Samuel, Moses Exodus 18. 13. sat
to Judge the people who stood by him from the morning until the evening he
ended the business of the day with the day, ver. 16. says he, I Judge
between one man and another and I make them know the Statutes of God and his
Laws, if a Judge can but teach people the Statutes of God and his Laws his
work is in a good forwardnes, and more then half done: In that Samuel is
commended for telling Eli the destruction of his house, it argues that the best
part of faithfulness is to discover the abuses and errors in any profession as
being best known unto them, for the end of the professors and of every ones
profession ought to be the same (viz.) the welfare of the body politic;
therefore whereas there are many Ieofailes and rubs that lie in the Allies of
Justice, that poor men are overborne in their righteous causes by full purses
which the Reverend Judges proceeding regularly as they find the course of the
Court, cannot remedy without the power of Parliament; I have seriously thought
that oppressions in Courts of Justice have been spun by the late Courtiers with
so fine a thread that few but those that daily meet with it in practice can see
it, and therefore unless it please God to move the hearts of the honorable
Judges in pure love to Justice to propound fit remedies to the Parliament,
plasters that may be large enough for the wound, I mean an Act of
Retranchement to cut off all unnecessary delays, and expenses in matter of
Justice, between man and man; that poor men may have it for Gods sake, and the
rich for reasonable consideration; it will lie very remote from the
understandings of many worthy public spirited men what course to take therein;
without which all the wars have been but as purgings and vomitings; the
health of a State consisting in the equallity and harmony of Justice; and all
Martial Justice is sanctified by the Civil Justice; as for example, if one of
the Reverend Judges would make it his suite to the Parliament, that a bargain
and sale might be as strong, as a fine and Recovery, that a poor Farmer, or
Cottager might leave some small portions to his younger Children without paying
one or two years purchase for the charge of a fine, and recovery, what an ease
might this be to men of small estates to pass them from one to another, and to
cut off Intailes by a deed in writing without so much solemnity and expense;
if another would set forth the unprofitablenes of Outlawries which are to no
purpose but to multiply expense; And a third be earnest for an Act to plead the
general Issue in all Actions, and at the Assizes to insist wholly upon the
merit of the Cause whether the money be due or not, whether the Plaintiff have
right to the Land or not; I am confident it would make sweet music in
Parliament; I do not intend to dispute the lawfulnes of Legal proceedures in
point of conscience to them that Judge them so, but in point of comfort at the
day of Judgment let me humbly propound this to those that sit in the seat of
Justice, whether it appearing to them that the defendant has paid the money
though it be after the day of payment limited in the Condition, or that the
money is paid upon a single Bill, where payment by Law is no plea; or that the
Plaintiff in an Ejectment has a clear right to the Land, but the lease,
Entry, and Ejectment was not proved in due form of Law, or if a wilful murder
be committed, and so found by the Jury but there is a word mistaken in the
Indictment whereby the murderer escapes for that Assizes and so the matter
compounded, or the prosecutor desists, and the Plaintiff in the Ejectment must
begin again having lost his own charges and paid above five pound costs to the
defendant, who continues the wrong and keeps the Lands unjustly from the
plaintiff, and the defendant that has paid the money is forced to fly into
Chancery for relief where the unjust Plaintiff at Law refuses to appear or
else demurrs, because he has a Judgment at Law, or the witnesses dead, and so
the poor defendant taken in execution and buried above ground in prison for
ten pound where the principle debt was but five pound, and that paid, (though
not at the prefixed day and so proved to the Jury,) I say whether it would not
be easier for the^ to give an account of reforming such errors then otherwise;
but if by the Parliaments intention in altering the Judges oaths enjoining
them only to proceed according to Justice, the Judge may not of himself
moderate such like extremities; then of what huge concernment must it needs be,
humbly and earnestly to solicit for present remedies, for what soldier can
with comfort fight with a blunt sword? it is a great joy to Physicians to cure
their Patients, but if any dye under their hands when they might by a little
more then ordinary trouble have recovered them; it cannot but be a purgatory to
an Ingenious spirit; certainly that Judge which helps a man to his right and
thereby preserves a family from beggary deserves as much as he that cures a man
of a desperate fever.

But I Sam. 8. Is the Statute Law concerning Kings where it clearly appears
that the first generation of Monarchs and the rise of Kings, was not from
above, not begotten by the Word and Command of God but from the peoples pride
and ardent importunity, they were mad for a King to be like unto the Heathens;
I beseech you observe the story it is a Chapter that deserves to be written in
Capital letters of Gold, and if it were convenient to appoint the reading of
it but once a month in the public meeting places, I am confident it might be
of great advantage in the satisfying men of perverse spirits, for let the most
violent assertors and contenders for Monarchy but seriously consider and be
entreated to hear it as the Word of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. and they must needs
be convinced that they which endeavor to destroy a Parliament consisting of
Godly, Wise and Judicious men that are willingly bound by the same Laws which
are made for others, abhorring all thoughts of unaccomptablenes; and to set up
a King who fights for a boundless prerogative to do what he pleases on earth
giving an account thereof only to God, (as if hell were made only for them who
must not be touched nor be punished in this life for any of their abominations;)
do cast off and reject the God of Justice and mercy: for when good Samuels
rule the people, it is God that rules in them and by them, and there is nothing
so contrary to the gracious Nature of God as the violence, oppression and
Legal Thefts of the wicked Nimrods of the world, and then mark the doom of
their favorits, John 12. 48. he that rejects me and receives not my words
has one that Judges him, the word that I have spoken the same shall Judge him
in the last day.

First, it is very observable what it was that bred a dislike of the Judges
ver. 3. they turned aside after lucre and took Bribes and perverted Judgment
which Samuel did not ver. 5. when Commonwealths men turn private wealths men
and more mind the Trimming of their own Cabbins then the Ship of State, then
the people cry out, make us a King to Judge us like all the Nations, as if they
should say, better have one Tirant then thirty Tirants in Athens, better fill
one purse then many, now the Lord Commands Samuel to protest solemnly against
Monarchy that they may not pretend ignorance but be left inexcusable, and then
if they will have a King, hearken unto them, says the Lord, ver. 7. which is
no approbation of Monarchy as some vainly argue, the Lord therein dealing with
them as a tender wise Physician when the impatient Patient cries out for wine
which will increase the disease, the Physician to satisfy his importunity
gives him a little wine which he knows rather increases then asswages the
disease; but knows that if he have it not, his impatience may work a greater
mischief, ver. 19. Nay, but we will have a King over us, are words of men
possessed with afrensie, give us a King or we shall run madd for him, we will
have one whatsoever it cost us, that we may be like all the Nations; shall
France and Spain have Kings and we none? will they take away our God from us,
from verse. 11. to 17. Samuel describes a lively portraiture and lineament of a
Kings prerogative which are principally three as you may please to observe
first a prerogative over men's persons, to imprison any one whom the King
pleases; He will take your sons upon pretense of disobedience, or for reason
of State either intowre him, or send him beyond sea if he were a Commonwealths
man which in Court language is as much as to say a dangerous man, ver. 11. 13.
and 16. Secondly, in point of Militia, ver. 12. He will ap point the
Capitaines, the Kings Council called that an inherent privilege as an
inseparable accident and incident to the Crown, without which he is no King,
and then having the sword it is no head matter to command all the money in the
Land. Thirdly, in point of Interest and property ver. 14. 17. he will take a
tenth of all the Corn, Wine and Cattle, if the Judgment of Ship Money had not
been reversed a tenth would not have sufficed I mean that senseles Judgment
(which I cannot mention without indignation) that men should be so silly to
talk of building of ships when the Land was ready to be invaded or in eminent
danger, as if it were a time to look after leather to make buckets when a
house is on fire.

It seems to me, that the holy Spirit in expressing those three grand
prerogatives that the Kings of the Gentiles would pretend unto; had an eye to
the present age wherein we live; and therefore many book learned Royalists
not being able to answer this Scripture, have declared their Judgments to be
(whether their hearts and pens were of the same mind Ilargue not) that the
Lord did allow of such a Government, and ver. 11. he will take your sonns which
is to be meant by usurpation contrary to the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 17. 20. See the
learned Annotations upon that Chapter very excellent, not what they ought to
do in right, but that they would so do in fact; they read he shall take your
sons, and ver. 15. he will take a Tenth, that he shall, and may take a Tenth
as if they had a Commission from heaven so to do and to fortify that opinion
they alleige, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. When thou art come unto the Land which the Lord thy
God gives thee, and shall possess it, and shall dwell therein, and shall say
I will set a King over me like as all the Nations that are about me, v. 15.
Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall
choose, one from among thy brethren shall thou set King over thee, thou may
not set a stranger over thee which is not thy brother, ver. 16. but he shall
not multiply horses to himself, not cause the people to return to Egypt; to
the end that he should multiply horses for as much as the Lord had said unto
you yea shall henceforth return no more that way, ver. 17. Neither shall he
multiply wives to himself that his heart turn not away, neither shall he
greatly multiply to himself silver and gold, ver. 18. And it shall be when he
sits upon his Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a copy of
this Law in a book out of that which is the Priests, the Levites, ver. 19. and
it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life that
he may learn to fear the Lord his God to keep all the words of this Law and
these Statutes to do them, ver. 20. that his heart be not lifted up above his
brethren, and that he turn not aside from the Commandment to the right hand
or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in his Kingdom he and
his Children in the midst of Israel: And they read those words, I will set a
King over me, which is spoken by the people, Thou shall set a King over thee,
as if God had commanded a Kingly Government in Canaan which was only permissive
as the sin of Adam; let them have a King at their own peril, says the Lord,
The Lord foresaw that the Israelites would rebel, and cast off a happy
Government by the heads of the people and Judges, and God permits it and Moses
speaks of the election and duty of a King, the election is from the people,
they will have a King whether the Lord will or no; where by the way we may
take notice how bold many have been, and poor deluded Royalists still are, to
wrest the Scripture for the advancement of Monarchy, when men dare say, that in
the Hebrew it is that Moses commands them to elect a King which the holy
Scripture reproves in them as the greatest insanity and madness in the world,
that when they may have honest Religious men to go in and out before them that
will not oppress them, nor exalt themselves above their brethren that they
will notwithstanding inslave themselves to the Arbitrary and lawless Iusts of
one man and his posterity, whether they be Idiots, Children, knaves, Thieves,
Murderers, Fornicators, Gluttons, Drunkards, Idolators; or Women, which though
never so wise, Religious and merciful (as by reason of the tenderness of their
spirits and want of temptation; I believe there are more godly women then men
in the world) yet it is against the law of God and Nature to make Millions of
men subject to the commands of a woman; but blessed be God that the knowledge
of the Hebrew language is not necessary to bring an English man to heaven,
Joshua had the honor to conduct them into Canaan, and they took it into
possession, but there was a remnant of the Canaanites left unsubdued to prove
them* as the law is, Deuteronomy. the 20. from the 16. 10 the 18. which I the rather
mention for the Illustration of the equitable proceedings in Ireland, the Lamb
Judges and makes war in Righteousness, Revel. 19. 11. Every Soldier has been
as a Judge to execute the Judgment written Psalm. 149. 9. far be it from Gods
servants to slay the righteous with the wicked, Genes. 18. 23. No such
beatificall sight as to see a Murderer that has imbrued his hands in the
effusion of Innocent blood to suffer the most painful and shameful death
that can be imagined, but the Children of those Murderers ought not to be put
to death for their original sin as we read in the case of Amaziah 2 Kings 14.
5. 6. And it came to pass as soon as the Kingdom was confirmed in his hand
that he slew his servants which had slain the King his Father; But the
Children of the Murderers he slew not according unto that which is written in
the book of the law of Moses; wherein the Lord commanded, saying, the Fathers
shall not be put to death for the Children, nor the Children be put to death
for the Fathers; but every man shall be put to death for his own sin, Deuteronomy.
24. 16. And many that by reason of their wicked principles and adherence to the
Pope are not fit to be trusted in Garrisons yet receive rents for their houses
or estates there; Ezekiel. 18. 20. The soul that sins it shall dye, the son
shall not bear the iniquity of the Father; neither shall the Father bear the
iniquity of the Son, the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and
the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. Now by the equity of that law
Deuteronomy. 20. 16. where Gods people shall reside, they being chief in Command may
and ought for their own securities; expel delinquents and malignants out of
London, or any Garrison in England or Ireland for a time, or for ever, as may
conduce to the Weal public and their own safeties* whose lives are so
precious in the Lords esteem.

But here I meet a Goliath in the way that threatens much, but the spirit of God
is not in it, and therefore it is but as a statue; that God had given the land
of Canaan by promise to Israel, and therefore they might justly maintain a
war to destroy the Canaanites, Hittites, Amorites, Perizites, Hivites, and
Iebusites, and there being no command to destroy the Gibeonites, Deuteronomy. 20. 17.
therefore the league with them was lawful Ios. 9. wherein the war may be
judged lawful on both sides, for Joshua to fight, having a command from God and
the Canaanites to defend their possession not knowing of any such command; but
is there the same reason to destroy ancient Monarchies when they oppose Jesus
Christ, and will not suffer his people to enjoy their liberties which he has
purchased for them by his precious blood?

Answer. Yes doubtless, there are as evident promises for the Churches of
Christ in this age of the world to be redeemed out of Antichristian bondage by
the Moseses, Iosuas, Sampsons, Gideons, Iepthahs, and Samuels, which the Lord
shall raise up to be instruments in his hand to save his people; as there were
in Moses and Iosuas ages, that the Church of Israel should be delivered from
the Egyptian slavery, and reason to me clearly makes it out; that if a promise
of an earthly Canaan were a ground of the Churches War much more their
spiritual liberties; that if I may defend my house by force from thieves and
robbers, certainly I may defend my self in the exercise of my spiritual
liberties, which are ten thousand times deerer to me: if I may fight for a
piece of glass, may I not engage for a precious pearl that is invalluable?
The Kings of Canaan might have pleaded antiquity succession, and the peoples
consent which no King can plead against Gods people in the matter of their
spiritual privileges; God will have the Monarchs of the world know, that
whatever Civil right they may pretend to their Kingdoms where they have by
force or flattery gained the peoples consent as the honest man parts with his
purse to save his life; yet they must not upon pain of forfeiting their
Royalties persecute his friends and servants: Kings that style themselves,
Defenders of the Faith, if they prove offenders of the faithful; God will take
away their Kingdoms in a way of Justice, and righteousness, when any of the 10.
Kings having formerly given their power and strength to the beast, Revel. 17.
12. shall afterward cut off his head, as Henry the eight used the Pope in
taking away his supremacy and making himself head of the Church by Act of
Parliament, leaving the body of Antichristian Government by Bishops as before;
or if the body of Antichrist come to be destroyed and the thighs, legs or
feet only remaining in any Coercive Presbiters, when Kings will play at small
games rather then sit out and join with any people in the world to persecute
the people of God, see the end of such Kings, ver. 14. They shall make war
with the Lamb and the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of Lords, and
King of Kings, and they that are with him are called and chosen, and faithful,
and this Arraignement of Monarchs and Grandees for abusing the Spouse of
Christ, shall not be only upon the purity of Intention (which will not
Justify any Irregular Action for to Act Irregularly upon an Impetus or
Impulsive spirit makes Scripture useless) but according to natural Justice
and common equity, that when Kings shall proclaim the Saints Traitors,
Heretics, and Rebels, because they will not fall down and worship the Lord
according to human inventions, and shall raise Armies to destroy them as
enemies to their Crown and dignities; such Kings have forfeited their Civil
Rights as the Kings of Canaan did, and honest, faithful, righteous men chosen
by the people shall be their successors to whom by virtue of the equity of the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, the people are to be true and faithful as
to the Lord; for whom, and by whose laws they preside, and regulate their
Administrations: and other obligation lies upon no man by virtue of any such
Oath that he formerly took, for there is no other successor; the wisdom of
God has in Justice so ordered it, and He that is Truth when men are liars, is
also wise when they are fools; for the oath was only binding to the positique
capacity, to be true to the King, so far as he was true to the Laws and
safety of the people: He that took it in any other sense made the King a God,
infallible and impeccable when he sets up a standard of defiance against them,
is any man so unsound in his intellectualls as to think that the oath obliges
him to stand still, and suffer his own throat to be cut; No oath can tie any
man to do or suffer that which is destructive to humanity, and as for
Christians certainly by that statute of Numb. 30. what ever any Christian
vows without the consent of her husband Jesus Christ is merely void in Law,
and a precipitate rash oath, as that of David against Nabal, I Sam. 25. 22.
binds not but to repentance Levit. 5. 4. 5. If it be objected that Joshua fought
against Kings of another Nation as Gods people in England did not; what
foreign assistance has been in that kind? I shall not dispute, but the
answer is very easy, that the neerenes of the relation much aggravates the
offense on the Royalists part; If ambitious Princes would give Commissions of
Array against forraigners, and not to destroy their own people, then it might
be but a sin against the sixth and eight Commandment, but to destroy his own
Countrymen is a complicate offense of Treason also; and a sin against the fifth
Commandment as well as the other two, to betray those that trusted him; and
certainly had not the Parliament executed the late King, the Danes or some
others might have destroyed them, for God binds his people by his legal
Commands to Act and accomplish his designs, and to destroy all Tirants and
oppressors, and to say who ever heard of such a thing before is an argument
wherewith only ignorant poor people are taken, as the people said when Jesus
Christ cast out the dumb Spirit, Matthew. 9. 33. 34. it was never so seen in
Israel, he casts out Devils through the Prince of Devils; we do not read
that God ever dealt with any Saint as with Job, yet Job was no hypocrite; I say
the Lord has laid an absolute Command upon the Parliament to proceed as they
have done upon pain of his high displeasure, and being guilty of high treason
against the Majesty, (a term not fit for any mortal man, because higher then
that we cannot give) of Heaven, and of being utterly destroyed if they had not
done it; and that stroke put England into a salvable condition for do but
consider how severely the Lord dealt with Israel and Judah, when their Princes
turned Lions and Wolves: Then the Lord gave them a King in his anger, 1 Samuel 8.
7. and Hosea 13. 11. ver. I gave them a King in mine anger, and took him away
in my wrath; will any man say that Saul's office of being King was of Divine
ordination which was done in anger, all Gods ordinances are appointed in love
for the good of his people and Divine and humane society, but Saul's being made
King displeased the Lord; and it is very remarkable that on the day, and at the
very hour of election, Samuel dealt justly with them, and told them of their
great evil in rejecting God and his Government, 17, 18, 19. and Samuel called
the people together unto the Lord to Mizpeh, and said unto the Children of
Israel, thus says the Lord God of Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt,
and delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all
Kingdoms, and of them that oppressed you, and ye have this day rejected your
God who himself saved you out of all your adversities and tribulations, and
ye have said unto him, Nay, but set a King over us; but though the Kingly
Government displease God, yet observe how gently Saul behaved himself to the
people, 1 Samuel 11. 12. There were some that would not have Saul reign over
them which the people would have had put to death, but Saul said ver. 13. There
shall not be a man put to death this day; whereas the Monarchs of the world
make men offenders for a word, one man for speaking in jest, that he will make
his son heir of the Crown, meaning a house that had that sign in
Cheape-side; and another for saying, there goes Ed. 6. in Coleman-street have
been most Tirannically murdered and executed, Saul was never so bloody minded.

But one passage I may not omit, the Holy Ghost (foreseeing that Monarchy would
have many Advocates to plead for its divine right) for the satisfaction of all
that will not wilfully shut out the light, calls this importunity of the
Israelites to have a King to be a great wickedness, and such a sin that the Lord
will not let go unpunished, but sent unreasonable weather, thunder and rain
in wheat harvest, Proverbs 26. 1. As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest,
so honor is not seemly for a fool, I hope England will not forget the wet
season in summer 1648. how it was mid-winter at mid-summer, and certainly the
works of God have a voice and are most eloquent to his own people; what the
Lord did to the Israelites for their asking a King, England has great cause to
think that the Lord was highly displeased with those that would have made
peace with the late King, read but 1 Samuel* 12. from the 16. to the 22. and it is
all one to say, that God is the Author of Monarchy, as that he is the Author of
sin; for the blessed spirit (which cannot lie) calls it a great wickedness, the
people call it their evil, and Samuel says they have done all this wickedness;
yet fear not, for the Lord will not forsake his people; for his great names
sake, because it has pleased the Lord to make you his people, and he promises
to pray for them ver. 23. as if Monarchy was such a great sin that if it had
not been, that the Lord will not truly destroy his own people, Psalm. 89. 33.
Exodus 32. 12. (for what would the Egyptians then have said?) he would never
have pardoned it, for a Just rational Government is one of the things that is
of the greatest concernement in the world: but is it not said 1 Samuel 15. 9, 10,
11. that God set up Saul to be King? true, but no otherwise then he set up
Pharaoh to oppress his own people, but Saul and the people spared Agag, and
the fatlings which was Saul's disobedience, and observe for what Saul lost the
Kingdom, the people will have a King; though he err but in mercy, saying, it
is more noble to save him whom we may destroy then to kill him whom we may
save alive, and the best of the Sheep and the Oxen, spared for sacrifice unto
the Lord, and confessed his sin v. 24. Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned,
for I have transgressed the Commandment of the Lord and thy words, because I
feared the people and obeyed their voice, 25. Now therefore I pray thee pardon
my sin and turn again with me that I may worship the Lord, 26. And Samuel
said unto Saul, I will not return with thee for thou have rejected the Word of
the Lord, and the Lord has rejected thee from being King over Israel, 27. and
as Samuel turned about to go away he laid hold upon the skirt of his mantle
and it rent, 28. and Samuel said unto him, the Lord has rent the Kingdom of
Israel from thee this day, and has given it to a neighbor of thine that is
better then thou, 29. and also the strength of Israel will not lie nor repent
for he is not a man that should repent 30. then he said, I have sinned, yet
honor me now I pray thee before the Elders of my people and before Israel,
and turn again with me that I may worship the Lord thy God, 31. so Samuel
turned again after Saul and Saul worshipped the Lord; what would not the
merciful God of Israel pardon the King of Israel an error in mercy? being but
too pitiful to spare a great man that happily might have repented; that
confessed his sin, prayed for pardon, that he might worship the Lord, that prayed
again for pardon, of that particular sin, and did worship the Lord
accordingly, that was anointed, 1 Samuel 10. 1. in token of the gifts and
graces of Gods spirit, and kissed by Samuel for congratulation and homage, 1
Kings 19. 18. Psalm. 2. 12. it speaks aloud to me, that the Lord was very angry
at Monarchical Government, and that Kings when they have possessed themselves of
such a God-like state, and Immense powers, Incompetible (almost with humanity)
not only by force and usurpation, but by the peoples consent or election, as
Saul was; the people shouted and said, God save the King, 1 Samuel 10. 24. and
Chap. 11. 15. it is said, that the people made Saul King, and Saul and all the
men of Israel rejoiced greatly, yet one offense and that a small matter in
comparison (though no sin be little that is committed against the great God)
makes a Monarch to forfeit all his Royalties; for when people, either for
fear, or through the vanity or pride of heart, will tie themselves by Oaths
or Covenant, to be in subjection to any man; the Scripture tells them that God
is angry with them for giving away that liberty, which he would have them
keep, and if they break their trust never so little they may pluck them down
and choose godly and Judicious men to rule over them in the fear of the Lord;
certainly Saul was a Saint in comparison of the pretenders to Monarchy in our
days: He sins in mercy not in cruelty, confessed his sin, never used any means
to be King but hid himself as unwilling and unworthy to be King, ventured his
life most freely for the people, was not guilty of Innocent Blood as we read
of, unles it were in the case of the Priests, 1 Samuel 22. 19. took the news of
his rejection from Samuel patiently, acknowledged divine Justice in all, and
would not have a man suffer that denied his title to the Crown as in the place
before alleged: How unlike was Saul to Charles the last; but by Solons law, no
evil is to be spoken of the dead least quarrels should be immortal; He has
appealed to a higher Tribunal, where no error will be found in the sentence
pronounced against him, but all that had a hand and acted in that execution
from a conscientious principle to be rid of Tyranny and oppression, in
discharge of their duties to God and man. Not for any sinister end to make
themselves great, but faithfully to serve their generation; will have much
cause of rejoicing therein, at that great day when the secrets of all hearts
shall be disclosed, and many Judgments given in several Courts shall be
reversed, but that undoubtedly will be confirmed.

Object. But it is strongly objected for Monarchy that God accepted David, it
is said of him, 1 King. 15. 4. 5. Nevertheles for David's sake did the Lord his
God give him a lamp in Jerusalem to set up his Son after him, and to establish
Jerusalem, because David did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and
turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him all the days of his
life, save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite.

Ans. Gods choosing David was no approbation of the Kingly office in him, more
then in Saul; God never said, that David's office was after his own heart, unles
sin and great wickedness be after Gods Spiritum Regiminis non regenerationis.
heart; God gave Saul gifts, he had a spirit of Regiment, the Israelites were
resolved to have a King as the Heathens had, whether God would or not; let them
have one says God, at their own perils, when the King was good and governed
them as the good Judges did, and would give an account to the people and a
reason of all his actions, Then God had his will, and the people had their
wills, to have the name of a King, but the Nature of good magistrates; and
certainly I have thought many times upon the late troubles that if I durst
(have asked any thing in the world contrary to the mind of God) which may not
be, me thinks it should have been the continuance of a Kingly Government in
England, to have had the preeminence and power in one, Good, Gracious, Just,
Merciful, Valiant, Faithful, and Patient Man, as a Moses or a Job,
Iehosophat, Josiah, or Hezekiah, that would dye for the people.

A Christian that like his Savior Jesus Christ goes about doing good, Acts
10. 28. that makes it his trade to relieve the poor people, the father less,
and widow, and such as are oppressed, and his recreation to sit down at night
and think upon it, and that day which he has done no good in, he counts it
lost. A man whose maine resolution of his soul is to know God as accounting it
the most honorable thing in the world for the Creature to know its Creator that
counts it his chiefest good to promote the glory of God; to do good if it were
possible, to every visible object, and living creature, at least to pray for
them: A man that loves the Saints as his own soul for Christ's sake, knowing
he will reward him, and puts forward every good motion withal his might, that
will renounce his own honor and become of no reputation and think himself
highly honored if by the meanest office of love he may be serviceable to any,
specially to the Elect, if such a man had a plenartie of power to do what he
pleased without control from a blessed principle of love to God what
abundance of good might an E. 6. have done had his days been numerous whom
God only showed to the world, and recalled him as not worthy of him, I say,
what abundance of good might one such rare incomparable person do in a short
time when great Counsels can move like great bodies but slowly, but this is
but worldly wisdom to be wise above what is written, for man to be wiser then
God, who says, it is dangerous to trust any single person (though never so
singular) with an unlimitted power; for the best men are but men at the best,
and there is no grace but may be counterfeit, he that seems to be a Paul to
day, may be a Saul to morrow, the heart of man is deceitful above all things,
and the very conceit of such a power is enough to corrupt the best man living,
therefore the best government is to have Princes of the congregation, godly and
righteous men to be chosen, governors, and Judges, (a Joshua to lead and conduct
their Armies against their Enemies which Job calls a King in the Army, Job 29.
25. is a sweet text for a general; I sat chief and direct as a King in the
Army as one that comfort the mourners, V. 11. to 18. When Job was compassed
about with extraordinary honors, and seated in the Assembly of other Eastern
Princes, sat in the Chair; those honors entered not into his soul, but his
thoughts were taken up, about the afflicted and miserable, such as were in a
mournful condition* his soul was with their souls, to alleviate and ease
his distressed Country men by bearing part of their burden, his greatest
coverousnes was to enrich the poor, and the desire of comforting them was
always the strongest of his passions; and so the people are not to be led up
and down by the noses, but the Magistrates are to open their eyes, who are
very sensible of their own good; and this is the mind of God and great design
of Heaven to govern the world by rational men as he enlightens it by the
sun; for Reason is the soul of all things sublunary, and the life of all Just
human laws without exception, by this reason no man in the world ought to
challenge a power unaccomptable over others; for the people are more immediately
the original of all Just power, then any King ever was, of a Constables
authority: And ought to be accountable by the same reason for offenses against
the Public good, as a Constable for his offense, but it is not the name of a
King but the boundless power which I argue against (though the Romans for the
insolence of Tarquin would not endure the name) if any people shall place the
Legislative power in Parliamentary authority and give unto one man the Title of
King for their better correspondency with foreign Kingdoms, with no more
power to hurt the people, then the Duke of Venice or the Duke of Genoa have;
such a government may be Just and Rational, but Domination is a sweet morsel,
let all States take heed how any man grows too popular and engrosses too much
power into his hands.

Object. But many object that Paul and David being anointed by Gods special
command, that their office was pleasing unto God.

Ans. I agree that Anointing does generally imply that God accepts of such
persons and things that are so anointed by his command; but observe, that God
and the people were of a contrary mind in that Action; God appointed and
anointed Saul as a Captain to go before them to defend them from the Tyranny
of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 9. 15. 16. and Chap. 14. 47. So Saul took the
Kingdom over Israel and fought against all his enemies on every side against
Moab and against the Children of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the Kings
of Zobah, and against the Philistines, and whithersoever he turned himself he
vexed them; but the people took it as an accomplishment of their desires to
have a King as the Nations had, which power God gave him not, but told the
people that he would make them cry. Chap. 8. 18. And ye shall cry out in that
day, because of your King which ye shall have chosen you, and the Lord will
not hear you in that day; and we read, 2 Samuel 21. That they had three years
famine for Saul's wickedness, because he had slain the Gibeonites in his
zeal to the Children of Israel* it is a golden Scripture sufficient to
satisfy an Iron age of men that are so stupid to think that Kings and their
Children are not to be executed for murders* verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 9. then
there was a famine, etc. and so did Job 4. 10, 11. The roaring of the Lion, and
the voice of the fierce Lion, and the teeth of the young Lions are broken, the
old Lion perishes for lack of prey, and the stout Lions whelps are scattered
abroad: I judge the meaning of it to be, that men who reign like Lions, Kings
and great ones who under the face of men carry the hearts of Tigers; and their
Children who equal them in* and inherit their fathers cruelty; and their
wives who surpass them in Insolence, and Marian persecntions; must all receive
such punishments as their sins deserve, they end their lives tragically, heaven
has, and will make it seen in their persons that it never leaves cruelties
without chastisement, as there shall be no Innocent ones abandoned, so the
greatest persons that are culpable shall not be unpunished, such as plough
iniquity and sow wickedness shall reap the same ver. 8. 9. those to whom the
news of the murder of the Innocent is as sweet, as a plentiful harvest is
agreeable to the husbandman; shall not be able to avoid the stroke of Justice,
but be like high trees that are planted upon the mountains shall be made a
sport and pastime for the winds, and tempests. But the poor Gibeonits case
before we leave it, affords us an excellent document how Gods Israelites ought
to carry themselves toward Ismaelits and Canaanits, that would have destroyed
them, viz. to be very sparing in promises and protection toward them, but
having once conditionated with them and received them into favor, to be very
liberal in performances toward them, and not to violate faith given in a
title, though the conditions were obtained by craft and deception; And now I
humbly entreat you to observe what little esteem David had of Saul's Royal
seed to hang up seven of them; for what offense does not appear, but very
probable that they had given Saul bad council to destroy the poor Gibeonites;
and yet David had sworn to Saul not to cut off his seed after him, 1 Samuel 24.
20. 21. And now behold I know well that thou shall surely be King, and that the
Kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand. Swear now therefore
unto me by the Lord that thou will not cut off my seed after me, and that thou will not destroy my name out of my fathers house, and David swore unto Saul:
With these two arguments I do in the name of the Lord, Challenge all the
Royalists in England, Ireland, and Scotland, to answer them if they can, or
rest satisfied with Scripture and reason.

1. That no oath of Allegiance or Supremacy can be any ground to any people not
to do Justice upon a King for murder; David a man after Gods own heart (that
never offended but in the matter of Vriah) therefore did not err in delivering
up Saul's seven sons to execution; would not make his oath to Paul a ground not
to do Justice* for the Spirit of God in David argued thus, I am by the Law of
Nature as I am a creature, a poor worm bound to the holy and just Law of my
Creator (which is unchangeable and undispensable; God can no more dispense with
my loving and obeying of him, then he can cease to be God by reason of his
Infinite goodness) which Law is* that blood requires blood, Genes. 9. 6. It is a
fundamental Law without which there can be no conservation of human society,
and I find in the Law of God that my eye must not pity him that sheds blood,
Deuteronomy. 19. 11, 12, 13. But if any man hate his neighbor and lie in wait for
him, and rise up against him and smite him mortally that he dye and flees into
one of these Cities: then the Elders of the City shall send and fetch him
thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood; that he may dye,
ver. 5. thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shall put away the guilt of
Innocent blood from Israel that it may go well with thee (parallel whereunto)
is 2 Kings 14. 4. And also for the Innocent blood that he shed, (for he filled
Jerusalem with Innocent blood) which the Lord would not pardon. And therefore
when I take an oath of Allegiance or Supremacy, it must be saving that faith
which I owe unto my Creator; as in Justice Littletons case when any man did
Fealty to his Lord, it was with a saving that faith and duty which he owed
unto the King, and those other Lords which he held land of, by Priority of
Tenure, which if it were not expressed it is employed in Law.

2. Thus I argue that if it were just to put Saul's sons to death for their
fathers sin wherein he was principal and they but accessaries, at the most;
doubtless it had been just to have recompensed it upon the head of their
father, it could be no sin to put Saul to death for killing the Gibeonites
where it was lawful to execute his sons which might have made many pleas, that
what they did, was Saul's command, they had the Kings Commission of Array and
warrants from Saul to raise forces to secure the Country, and under pretense
of keeping the peace to plunder and destroy whom they pleased, but observe what
a glorious sight it was in the eyes of heaven, 1 Samuel 21. 14. when those seven
sons were executed, God was entreated for the Land: It may be the common Law
would have acquitted those seven gentlemen, because regularly where the
principal is dead, the accessory cannot be tried, but the Law of God makes all
principal in murder whether present or absent, as the Law of man makes all
principal in the highest offenses of Treason, and the lowest offenses of
trespass; nor did David question, what? shall I shed the blood of the seed
Royal for the Gibeonites who were strangers and bondmen, hewers of wood, and
drawers of water, upon which Eternal Law of Righteousness, Major Ottoway and
Cornet Grant, were shot to death for murdering an Irishman at the siege of
Waterford who having leave to go into Waterford to receive some money and to
return, was at his coming back murdered by their Orders or Command, for which
by the Council of War they were justly condemned, and the execution was a
most famous piece of justice, for had not zeal and love to Justice
preponderated, and out-voted all private affections much might have been said
for the valor, Gallantry, and hopefulnes of the Major, and Cornet; I could not
in faithfulness but mention it as being a case so parallel to that 1 Samuel 21.
That Saul's sons should be executed for murder of the Gibeonites, and out of my
dutiful respect to bear witness to the exemplary and exact discipline of the
Army where vice is punished and virtue rewarded whereof I was sometimes
Advocate, and count it more honorable to be a member of an Army fighting for
Christ then to be head of an Antichristian Empire.

But before we leave David, let me but observe how the anger of the Lord was
kindled against Israel for David's one sin of numbering the people; what had the
poor sheep done that 70000. men from Dan to Beersheba should dye by the
Pestilence in three days? Did not God think you therein reckon with them for
their Kingly government, you will have a King says the Lord to them, whether I
will or no; you shall now smart for your wickedness; for your great wickedness,
for unmanning your selves, making your selves less then men, to make one man
equal with God, to do what he pleases; I will not endure it in my own
people; Eli sinned, yet the people not punished, for he governed the people
according to the mind of God* but you will have a King, says the Lord, as the
Heathens have, be it so, but if he sin I Will punish you, not only with the
famine, but by a great pestilence, and as you like that, so continue your
Kingly government.

Object. But David's days drew to an end therefore he gives a charge to Solomon
his son, of righteousness, saying, there shall not fail thee a man on the
Throne of Israel, 1 Kings 2. 4. which expressing a stability of David's Throne:
some may argue, that God approved Kingly government.

As also there is another objection that should have had priority in Deuteronomy. 17.
14. to 20. That God gave a Law for choosing a King, therefore he approved that
government; the answer whereunto is easy, that the Lord foreseeing, that when
he had brought them into Canaan they would desire a King, like the Pagans,
being a people dear unto him, he would not therefore cast them off; but tells
them how to make the best of a bad bargain, that if they will play with the
Lion or the Bear let them pluck out his teeth; all Kings are ravenous
creatures in point of their office, but some will do less hurt then others,
and the words of the Text are very perspicuous: when thou art come into the
land which Jehovah thy God gives thee, and shall possess it, and shall dwell
therein, and shall say, I will set a King over me like as all the nations that
are about me, etc. So that the rise of Monarchy was plainly from the peoples
pride, the words are not, that God will set a King over them, but they will
have one against his desire; If Pride, Luxury, and Rapacity which were called
R. 2. daughters, and that if he did not marry them they would undo him, be of
a divine of spring and original; then Monarchy is; but the very constitution
of it is Tirannicall, Antichristian and diabolical; And now the reason why God
chose the seed of David and not the seed of Saul, was not his approbation of
Monarchy, but because he had appointed Jesus Christ to come of David's race,
Genes* 49. 10. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet until Shilo come, and to him shall the gathering of the
people be; therefore a King must be until Christ's time; yet only over the
Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, for the ten Tribes were carried away Captive; and
who knows but that the reason thereof was principally because of their great
wickedness; in casting of Gods government by godly righteous Judges, and setting
up Monarchy like the Heathens; and so David's posterity did not terminate and
end until Christ's time, because the Lawgiver was not borne before.

Solomon therefore after David's death, was a most glorious King, who preferred
wisdom before honor, riches, and pleasure, none before him or after him were
ever like unto him, 1 Kings 3. 12. 28. For the Wisdom of God was in him to
do Judgment, yet being but a man was drawn away by his wives to Idolatry,
and did evil in the sight of the Lord, 1 Kings 11. 5. he went after Ashtoreth
the goddess of the Sidoneans.

And there is seldom any so singular, eminent or rare-gifted man, but wants
his grains of allowance; either he is contrited, censorious, passionate, or
has some mixture or tincture of folly which yet must be charged upon the
unregenerate part; See what it is to be an absolute Monarch only accomptable
to God; if Solomon's power had been only to have confirmed such good and
wholesome Laws as Gods people would have propounded to him, or if Solomon had
only been a leading man in Parliament in probability Israel had not run a
whoreing from the Lord after such Idols; but you shall taste, says the Lord of
those bitter fruits which are of your own planting: It was a web of your own
weaving, a King you would have, well says God, I will surely rend the Kingome
from Solomon, 1 Kings 11. 11. Yet not all the Kingdom, for the Messiah is not
borne, and Solomon slept with his fathers, and the people came to Rehoboam his
son, 1 Kings 12. who heard his Senators speak, but did as the young men
advised him, 1 Kings 12. 10. how like unto Rehoboam are the Monarchs of this
world, they will be content to hear what a Parliament will advise, but keep a
negative voice, and prefer copper heads before silver hairs, and Court
Parasites have distinguished between advice and consent, that whereas by
ancient fundamental Laws Kings could do nothing without consent of the
people in great Counsels and Parliaments, they say, they may not do it
without advise, as if the great Counsels of the Law stood only for a Cipher
and a Kings pleasure to be the figure, but let such as are wise but call to
mind who it was that used this speech of Rehoboam, that the late Kings little
finger should be heavier then his Fathers Ioynes, and Adore the Justice of God
in the Tragical end of such wicked Counselors; And in the revolt of the ten
Tribes from the house of David, see what means Rehoboam attempted to reduce
them, 1 Kings 12. ver. 21. to 24. And why so? certainly, because the government
was unjust and tirannicall in it self, and therefore if the people who in
their choice of a King have displeased God, when they have well smarted for
their folly, have wit to cast him off, the Scripture says, it is from the
Lord, God does not say as in the case of Election they have rejected and cast
off me, not a word of anger or displeasure, which holds forth this divine truth
to all that will not wilfully shut their eyes against the light, that if the
people in Turkey, Persia, Russia, or any place in the world where one man
governes, or pretends to rule as he pleases, will rise against him and dethrone
him, it is an action not only justifiable, but commendable, and if the King
cause any of them to be put to death as Traitors, it is murder in him, and he
fights against God, Justice, and Reason, but it is otherwise where the
government is just and rational by godly righteous Magistrates and Judges
chosen by the people, if they be affronted and injured it is an offense, and
high treason against the Majesty of heaven, they have not cast off thee, but
they have rejected me, says the Lord, to a just authority acting for him and
giving an account to the people of their laws and administrations in love; we
may observe in Ionathans case, that when the Legislative power is in one man's
hand, though none of the worst, what laws are unadvisedly enacted? 1 Samuel 14.
24. And the men of Israel were distressed that day, for Saul had adjured the
people saying, cursed be the man that eats any food until evening, that I
may be avenged on my enemies, so none of the people tasted any food: And they
came to a wood, and there was honey upon the ground* ver. 26. and when the
people were come into the wood behold the honey dropped, but no man put his hand
to his mouth for the people feared the oath, but Jonathan heard not when his
father charged the people with the oath, wherefore he put forth the end of the
rod that was in his hand and dipped it in a hony-combe and put his hand to his
mouth and his eyes were enlightened; then answered one of the people, and said,
thy father strictly charged the people with an oath, saying, cursed be the man
that eats any food this day, and the people were faint; then said Jonathan,
my father has troubled the land, see I pray you how mine eyes has been
enlightened, because I tasted a little of this honey, ver. 30. how much more if
happily the people had eaten freely to day of the spoil of their enemies which
they found, for had there not been now a much greater slaughter amongst the
Philistines; It Is a cruel saw, we had killed more if we had eaten; Jonathan was a
gracious man and had a sweet spirit for government, and Jonathan said to the
young man that bare his armor, come and let us go over unto the garrison of
these uncircumcised, it may be that the Lord will work for us, for there is no
restraint to the Lord, to save by many or by few. As gallant Caleb said, Ios.
14. 12. If so be the Lord will be with me, then I shall be able to drive out
the Anakims: but nothing would satisfy Saul but the life of Jonathan, and the
execution of a cruel law and that against nature, for hungry men not to eat
food, which in the Hebrew is bread; now bread being not honey, and that being a
penal law, it ought to have been taken strictly; and so Jonathan not guilty,
for a penal statute is not to be extended by equity, for the oath was much
better broken then kept, but the people had more wit then to suffer Jonathan to
be put to death, ver. 45. nor was Jonathan legally guilty, because he was not
present when the law was made ver. 3. and 17. nor had any notice of it, and
such laws that are not consonant to the laws of nature are not obligatorie
without full and perfect notice and proclamation thereof made to the people,
and in that the Lord did not answer Saul ver. 37. It was because he was angry
with him for his rash oaths, he being given to swearing, ver. 44. and it
appears chap. 28. ver. 6. 16. that Gods not answering is a sign of anger,
though Saul suspected Gods silence was for some hidden sin therefore would
cast a lot, ver. 7. says God to Samuel, I am chief King, thou art my Minister,
I rule by thee, therefore they have rejected me in casting off a just government
free from Tyranny and oppression which my soul abhorrs, for God is King over
all the earth, he keeps the supreme power to himself, it is his prerogative
only to give no account of his Actions to any creature, and yet in love he is
pleased to condescend to poor creatures, and makes out the reason of his
administrations; and the Image of God consists in Holiness, Justice, Mercy, and
Goodness, which is a government of a divine original it comes from heaven and
has a tendancie thither, and those that are my governors have such graces and
gifts of my holy Spirit signified by pouring on of oil upon the heads of the
rulers, as being necessary graces for priests* Prophets and Kings, but the
Israelites would not let the Lord to keep the power in his own hand to appoint
what governor and government he pleased.

Therefore observe in the next place what course does Jeroboam take to
establish his Kingdom, he thinks to strengthen himself by the Idolatry of
the two Calves, the people will revolt from me, says Jeroboam, unles I make
them two Calves of gold and say, behold thy Gods O Israel which brought thee up
out of the land of Egypt; Monarchs care not what they do, though they destroy
even the souls of millions of people to maintain their pomp and glory, make
the people believe says he, that these Calves which were made but yesterday,
brought their fathers out of the land of Egypt, ver. 27. If they sacrifice they
will turn to Rehoboam; Kings fear that piety to God will draw away peoples
hearts from the^: Monarchs delight wickedly to keep the people in gross
ignorance; and how foolish was this Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14. to send his wife
disguised to the Prophet Ahijah to know whether his son should recover, as if
the Prophet could tell the greater and not find out the wifes disguisement,
Idiots, Minors, Murderers, any are good enough and will serve to be Kings;
mark therefore what becomes of King Jeroboam, 1 Kings 14. ver. 10. 11.
Therefore behold I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam and will cut off
from Jeroboam him that pisseth against the wall, and him that is shut up and
left in Israel, and will take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam as a
man takes away dung till it be all gone: him that dies of Jeroboam in the City
shall the dogs eat, and him that dies in the fields shall the fowls of the
air eat, for the Lord has spoken it; but if only guilty Kings might be
punished it were no great matter, but the poor people must be destroyed for
their Kings wickedness* ver. 15. 16. for the Lord shall smite Israel, as a reed
is shaken in the water, and he shall root up Israel out of this good land which
he gave to their fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the river because they
have made their groves, provoking the Lord to anger, ver. 16. and he shall
give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam who did sin, and who made Israel
to sin; blessed Lord! it was Jeroboam that made the groves and high places and
not the people, but when the people choose a King, what he does, is reputed
their Act; they do it by him, as the whole body sees and hears by the organs
of the ears and eyes: what a sad consideration is it, that Gods people should
be destroyed for the sin of the Kings of Israel? let them smart, says the
Lord, a King they will have, then there was war between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam all their days, 1 Kings 14. 30 which the spirit of God reiterates
Chap. 15. 6. as if Kings delighted in nothing but wars about prerogatives,
precedencie, or such trivial matters, the poor people must shed their
precious blood, loose their lives, not only temporal but hazard their
inestimable souls; for as the tree falls, so it lies, their Wives and Children
utterly destroyed, and all to attain and satisfy the ambitious designs and
wicked lusts of proud imperious men that set all on flame to warm themselves,
as if God had made Bees to make honey only for the Drones, poor men only to
be as the wool in the breach to receive Cannon and Musket bullets; and yet,
when the world is; in love, and bowels of pity, jogged and wakened out of
this pleaseing dream, they are angry with their Monitor, and he that is a
friend to public liberty, is counted an enemy to Caesar, poor Turks,
Russians, and Europian slaves, that delight rather in servitude then freedom,
and like spannells fawn upon those that most beat them, and are sorry that
they have but one life to loose for the glory of their Sovereign; well, after
Jeroboam and Rehoboam, there was war between Asa King of Judah, and Baasha
King of Israel all their days, 1 Kings 15, 16. 32. and see what became of
Baasha, 1 Kings 16. 1. Then the Word of the Lord came to Iehu the son of
Hanani against Baasha saying, for as much as I exalted thee out of the dust and
made thee prince over my people Israel, and thou have walked in the way of
Jeroboam, and have made my people Israel to sin to provoke me to anger with
their sins: behold I will take away the posterity of Baasha, and the
posterity of his house, and will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, him that dies of Baasha in the City shall the dogs eat, and him
that dies in the fields shall the fowls of the air eat. Then Elah succeeds
Baasha, he being druncke was killed by Zimri, who made himself King, 1 Kings
16. 9. Where Monarchies have been elective or gotten by force or fraud, what
has been always held the best way to secure the new Monarch in his throne but
by dedestroying the family of his predecessor, Gloria Papoe successoris est
rescindere Acta predecessoris deleatur nomen Calvini.
Zimri destroyed all the house of Baasha, left him not one that pissed against
the wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends, 1 Kings 16. 11. As the
Popes always glory to rescinde and repeall the Acts of their predecessors
(what bloody butchers have Kings and Popes ever been, if any man stand in their
way, let his name be blotted out) then Omri was chosen King, and besieged Zimri
in Tirzah, Zimri becomes desperate, sets the house on fire and burns himself,
ver. 17. 18. and ver. 25. this Omri wrought evil in the sight of the Lord, and
did worse then all that were before him; Ahab his son succeeded him, and ver.
30. Then Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the Lord above all that
were before him so that 1 Kings 21. 25. there was none like unto Ahab which
sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord whom Iezebel his
wife stirred up; and therefore whereas the practice of the primitive Christians
is objected, that they prayed for the healths and prosperity of the heathen
Roman Tirants that persecuted them; here you may see the reason thereof, they
knew that if one Tirant died, a more cruel one would succeed; as the poor
woman having had three cruel Landlords successively; having wished the death
of the two former, prayed earnestly for the long life of the third, and being
demanded a reason thereof answered, that the last is always the worst, and if
this should dye, certainly the next would be the devil, for a more cruel
Tiger there could not be in a human shape then the third was; but concerning
the Primitive Christians that were as the Lords garden hedged in, with his
protection, it pleased God sometimes to take away the hedge, and to let the
wild beasts in; they saw that through many tribulations and persecutions in the
world they must enter into the Kingdom of heaven, and finding that Antichrist
was to be their greatest, and the most cruel, enemy to the Church of God; and
that he could not get into the throne during the reign of the Roman Emperors
who hindered him, as it is 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. 8. therefore they prayed for the
prosperity of the Dragon, for the fourth Monarchy, Dan. 7. 7. is generally
interpreted to be the Roman Empire, which is described to be very terrible and
dreadful, and exceeding strong, it had three iron teeth, it devoured and brake
in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it, and if this heathen
Empire was taken away, the poor Christians knew that the same power must be
given to the beast Antichrist, Revel. 13. And therefore it were better for
them to have it continue; but it is most admirable to observe, that the great
Monarchies of the world, viz. Babylonians, Persians, Grecans, and Romans,
should be set out, and described by four beasts; it shows unto us, that those
that are most highly esteemed by the men of the world are but as beasts in the
sight of God, that the great King of Kings (who rules in Equity and
Righteousness over all the world) looks upon the great Nimrods and Monarchs of
the world with a most contemptible eye, counts them no better then the most
ravenous creatures, that are suffered a little to rage for the punishment of
wicked men; when the Lord says, that the beast shall devour his people: It is
the King of Asiria, and his wicked Cavaliers, and therefore God threatens to
deal with him as with a beast; I am against thee, O Gog, the chief Prince of
Mesbech and Tubal, Ezekiel. 38. 2. 4. I will put a hook in thy jaws, and so the
Lord threatened to put a hook in the nostrills of Senacherib the King of
Asiria, and a bridle in his lips, Esa. 37. 29. because of his rage and his
tumult it was fit to use him as a beast, and mark how contemptibly God speaks
of the great King of Babylon and his numerous Army, Joel 2. 20. his stincke and
ill savor shall come up: the Spirit of God gives no other Epithet then a
stinking King, an unsavorie prince; and David speaking of Saul and his
Courtiers, Psalm. 59. 6. 7. 8. as if he had predicted the deportments and
behaviors of the malignants about such time as the late King was Iusticed;
their nocturnall whisperings in Tavernes and Conventicles against the State and
such as are Godly in the Land, they return at evening, they make a noise like
a dog and go round about the City; behold they belsh out with their mouths,
swords are in their lips, for who say they does hear (but thou, O Lord, shall
laugh at them, thou shall have all the heathens in derision, ver. 14. at
evening let them return, and let them make a noise like a dog and go round
about the City, and therefore Gods people may rejoice in the Lord, as in ver.
16. 17. But we will sing of thy power, yea we will sing of thy mercy in the
morning, for thou have been our defense and refuge in the day of trouble unto
thee our strength will we sing for God is our defense and the God of our
mercy: Indeed he was the song of the drunkards, Psalm. 69. 12. but now to be
compared to a beast is worse then to be so by nature, for it is no dishonor to
a hog to be called so; for it is but to be as God made it, but for a man to
make himself a beast is the corruption of the creature, the worst deformity
that can be in the world, and where is there any Monarch in the world, that
assumes a power of accompting only to God, but has in him the sensuallitie of
a swine, the filth and uncleanenes of a Leopard, the cruelty and inexorablenes
of a Tiger, Bear, or Lion; the subtlety and craft of a Fox, the skittishnes
and stubbornes of a Mule or an Ass; and in what things they have common
together with beasts, they are worse then beasts, for beasts will not be
druncke with their drink as the drunkard corrupts himself in his drink Jude
10. they speak evil of that they know not and what they naturally know as
brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves; if it would be such a
judgment that a man would be willing to endure any misery in the world rather
then to have his body turned into the fashion of a beast; and if our Ancestors
have been so diligent to destroy Woolves and E pessimo Cane ne catulus quidem
relinquendus.
such noxious creatures, that whosoever should bring in the head of a Woolfe
was to have a reward for it; what a madness or lethargy is it in men that would
be counted rational, not only to suffer Tirants and mystical Woolves to
domineere with a rod of iron when God gives them an opportunity of
extirpation, root and branche; but to contend against their brethren to set up
a Tirant; to rage like the waters, because they cannot bring in an overflowing
Tide and stream to break down the banks of honesty and equity; what was it
that made David wish? Psalm. 55. 6. compared with Ier. 9. 1. to 6. and Psalm. 59.
Oh that I had the wings of a Dove that I might fly into the wilderness, and
there abide; are not wild beasts in their proper element in a wilderness as
fishes in the Sea? true, but the government of Saul and his prerogative
creatures was more cruel then the fierce Lion, that will either pity the
crouching passenger; or not prey upon him till hunger require it, and then put
him out of his pain in an instant, but Tirants (and such are all that will not
be accomptable to the people) keep men in prison many years to satisfy their
insatiable cruelties; and torture poor creatures by lingering deaths, denying
them the favor of expedition in that kind, therefore David says, Psalm* 22.
20. Deliver my soul from the sword, my darling from the power of the dog, the
spirit of God in David calls Saul a dog; better says David, to fall into the
hands of a Tiger, and wild beasts then live under a Tirannicall government:
there is a famous story of some Spaniards, that being besieged by a Tirant and
in danger to be taken, the young men first took all the old people in the City
and let them blood to death, and cut off their heads killing them with the
fairest and easiest deaths that could be, next they took all the treasure and
riches in the City and set it on fire, and then they took poison and poisoned
themselves; and the survivor opened the gates and killed himself, so as the
enemy had nothing but rubbish and ashes, of two evils choosing the least; old
and young, and all the City to be destroyed together, rather then to fall into
the hands of a Tirant; where no Justice can be had the Lord continue and
increase the same gallantry and nobleness of spirit, in the English nation
rather to endure any misery in the world, then ever to admit any more of a
Tirannicall Government, for that is to make our selves lower then beasts (which
are not devoured by those of the same kind) to make one man more then a man;
with Titles of Sacred Majesty, and Gracious Highness, Incompitible with a state
of humanity.

Now I beseech you, have patience a little longer to observe what strange
creatures the Kings of Israel were, and then let every honest hearted man but
ask himself some such questions as these, whether it is not likely that God
would give his own people as good Kings as to any other Nation?

Secondly, if God was so exceedingly wroth with his own children for desireing
a King, whether will he not be more angry with us if we should not take
warning by Gods people? Note therefore that when King Ahab was dead Iehoram
reigned in Israel, 2 Kings 3. 1. 6. and because there was a famine in the Land,
the first news, is that Elisha the Prophet must be slain, 2 Kings 6. 31. 32.
then he said, God do so, and moreover also to me, if the head of Elisha the son
of Shaphat shall stand on him this day; but Elisha sat in his house and the
Elders sat with him, and the King sent a man from before him; but ere the
messenger came to him he said to the Elders, see ye how the son of a murderer
has sent to take away my head, take heed all ye fighters, for the son of a
murderer in the 8. Chap. ver. 15. Hazael kills King Benhadad and Elisha told
him what a Tirant he would be against Israel, and wept for grief to think how
Hazael when he came to be King should oppress and Tirannize over them then
ver. 12. says Hazael, why weepeth my Lord? and he answered, because I know the
evil that thou will do unto the children of Israel, their strong holds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou slay with the sword and wilt
dash their children and rip up their women with child, ver. 13, 14, 15. And
Hazael said, but what is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing?
and Elisha answered, the Lord has showed me that thou shall be King over
Syria, so he departed from Elisha and came to his master who said to him, what
said Elisha to thee? and he answered, he told me that thou should surely
recover; and it came to pass on the morrow that he took a thick cloth and
dipped it in water and spead it on his face, so that he died, and Hazael reigned
in his steed. As if a King should take the Sacrament upon it, that he intends
no more hurt to the Parliament then to his own children and the very same day
grant comissions to slay and murder the most saithfull patriots, but see what
credit there is to be given to such men's vows and protestations, 2 Kings 10.
32. Hazael smote them in all the coasts of Israel; Iehu was next made King by
the Soldiers, and 2 King. 9. 24. Iehu drew a bow with his full strength and
smote Iehoram between his Arms and the Arrow went out at his heart and he
sunck down in his Chariot; then Iehu follows after Ahaziah King of Judah and
smites him and he died at Megiddo 2 Kings 9. 27. and Iehoahaz succeeds Iehu in
the Kingdom of Israel, 2 Kings 10. then Chap. 11. Athaliah the mother of
Ahaziah arose and destroyed all the seed Royal only Ioash, who with his nurse
was hid and peserved from the massacre, and was afterward anointed King, and
the people clapped their hands, and said, God save the King, 2 Kings 11. 12. and
blew their Trumpets; then Athaliah rent her clothes ver. 14. and cried,
Treason, Treason, she might with more reason have cried out; away with Kingly
government that occasions so many murders; treachery and villainous conspiracies
who to get into the throne, and to secure their stations and maintain their
pomp and grandor must destroy poor Innocents and all that stand in their way
of absolute Dominion.

In Chap. 12. 2. Iehoash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, yet
ver. 20. his servants arose and made a conspiracy and slew Ioash in the house
of Millo which goes down to Silla; if God sometimes gives a good Josiah, an
Edward the sixth, or a good Queen Elizabeth, the office is not sanctified by
the person; when princes profess love to the people; It is but sowing the
seeds of future troubles and miseries for when Kings are good, the people are
never jealous, of their liberties; and fair language, and a few good Acts and
actions, bring the people into a fools paradise, the prerogative then taking
ten times firmer and deeper root in such Halcyon days; and certainly the
Tares, Wormwood, Gall, Colloquintida, and bitter fruits which England has
lately tasted of and reaped in such abundance; were sown, set, and planted,
in those calmer times; and the precious blood that has been shed, is no doubt
the seeds time of freedom and glory to the Nation, the ground work of those
precious and durable privileges, that Englishmen shall hereafter enjoy, but
see Chapter 13. Iehoahaz son of Iehu was King in Israel, ver. 2. and he did
that which was evil in the sight of the Lord and followed the sins of Jeroboam
the son of Nebat which made Israel to sin, he departed not there from, and the
anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and ver. 3. he delivered them
into the hand of Hazael King of Syria, and into the hand of Benhadad the son of
Hazael all their days; it would make the very bowels, liver, and intralls of a
Christian, to yearne and stir within him, to consider how poor creatures from
time to time have been punished for the wickedness of their Kings, says David,
2 Samuel 24. 17. Indeed I have done wickedly, but these sheep what have they
done? Let thine hand be against me and my Fathers house, against a Kingly
government. Next comes Amaziah upon the stage of Monarchy, 2 Kings 14. and his
comendation is for doing Justice upon those that killed his father; and
sparing the children of the murderers according to the Law of Moses that the
Fathers shall not be put to death for the Children, nor the Children for the
Fathers, but every man shall be put to death for his own sin, ver. 6. but
vain man that he was to think to prosper, knowing how greatly God was
displeased with his office, ver. 19. the people made a conspiracy against him
in Jerusalem and he fled to Lachish and they slew him there, and they brought
him on horses and buried him at Ierusalom as Rich. the third slain at the
battle at Bosworthfield by Henry the seventh, was thrown over a horse like a
Calfe, and carried to Leister and there interred; then ver. 23. there was
Jeroboam the second King of Israel and he did that whch was evil in the sight
of the Lord and departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat
that made Israel to sin ver. 24. then in chap. 15. 3. 4. Azariah son of Amaziah
reigned in Judah and did that which was right in the sight of the Lord
according to all that his Father Amaziah had done; save that the high places
were not removed, the people sacrificed and burnt incense still on the high
places, so the Lord smote him that he was a Leper to the day of his death and
dwelt in a several house apart by himself scarce a king of them that died
like other men; for he that will take upon him to be above other men's
judgments, and only to account to Heaven, is not worthy the society of men,
ver. 8. Zachariah the son of Jeroboam reigned in Israel, and ver. 9. 10. he did
that which was evil in the sight of the Lord as his Father had done, he
departed not from the sin of Jeroboam the son of Nebat who made Israel to
sin; how made them to sin? is not example a moral violence? that where the
King is wicked the people must needs be so; or is sin taken there for
punishment, that the people are punished for the Kings enormities; but ver. 10.
Shallum the son of Iabe^h conspired against him and smote him before the
people, and slew him, and reigned in his steed, what? would the people stand
by, and see Shallum kill their King, and then presently make him King, how
violently and insensately are men set upon Monarchy, that though they feel all
the Plagues of Egypt upon them for it, yet they will have a King, like the
Heathens; but how fared it with King Shallum ver. 13. he reigned but a month
in Samaria, for Menahem the son of Gadi, went up from Tirzah, and came to
Samariah and smote Shallum there, and slew him, and reigned in his steed, but
how does Menahem comport himself in his Kingship ver. 16. then Menahem took
Tipsah and all that were therein and the Coasts thereof from Tirzah because
they opened not to him; and all the women therein that were with child he ripped
them up; then ver. 19. 20. Pull the King of Assyria came against him, and he
exacted a thousand Talents of silver of the rich men of Israel fifty shekells
of silver, thence they took the President for Ship Money; to tirannize and
bring themselves and the people into danger, and then take what they please
from the people to procure foreign forces to assist King Menahem to confirm
the Kingdom in his hand, but ver. 22. this bloody man slept with his fathers;
and his son Pekahiah reigned in his steed, blessed God! that such a cruel
monster should dye a dry death; but if Murderers and Tyrants were always
punished in this world, men would think that there were no other hell for them;
and yet if they were not commonly punished here, many men would believe that
there was no God; well Pekahiah reigned two years, and did mischief enough to
have destroyed Israel, because no doubt they might have cast off Monarchy, but
would not do justice upon their King, therefore the Lord stirred up particular
men still to do it, ver. 25. Pekah the son of Remaliah a Captain of Pekahiah
conspired against him and smote him and killed him in Samaria in the Palace of
the Kings house with 52. more, and reigned in his room; a good riddance of the
King and his Cavaliers; but the more unwise they (to give them no worse
Epithete being Gods people) to suffer Pekah to be their King, for he abounded
in wickedness, and in his days ver. 29. seven Cities of Israel were carried
captive to Assyria, but ver. 30* Hoshea the son of Ekah made a Conspiracy
against Pekah, and smote him and slew him and reigned in his steed; indeed
Iotham King of Judah did righteous things howbeit the high places were not
removed by him ver. 35. he is a good man against whom there is but one But, or
How beit in his Kingly government chap. 16. 2. succeeds Ahaz who walked in the
way of the Kings of Israel, and ver. 3. made his son to walk through the fire
according to the abominations of the Heathen whom the Lord cast out from before
the Children of Israel, and he sacrificed and burnt Incense in the high places,
and on the hills, and under every green tree; this is the fruit of their
crying give us a King, like the Heathen Nations? it is noted how the Lord drove
out the Heathens from before his people to aggravate their folly, that when the
Heathens were destroyed, yet they would have a Government like the Heathens; if
the good Kings had removed the high places and burnt the ground, then the
wicked Kings had not sacrificed thereon, but if the people had not been stark
blind they would have seen their extreme folly in admitting that government,
but why do I speak so improperly, as to say good Kings, a good Monarch is a
white Devil, cures one and kills twenty; do men gather grapes of thorns, or
figgs of thistles? he that is bound to no Law cannot be a good King, for the
office is against Divine Institution, and therefore sinful, unaccomptable
Monarchs are no more to be suffered then Devils; if they do any good it
flows not from the constitution of the office but as they are private men that
would do less hurt if they had less power; if one should have a commission to
rob; and he should suffer some poor men to pass untoucht, no thanks to his
Commission; but his Debonaritie; and natural pity; unaccountablenes is a most
corrupt, pernicious, accursed, and pestilent principle, and fountain from
whence must needs flow streams of much Oppression, Injustice, and Cruelty,
toward poor people; chap. 17. 3. Salmanezer King of Assyria falls out with
Hoshea King of Israel about Newyeares-gifts: Kings have so many Courtiers to
feed, that they must be like the Horse-leach that cry, give, give, therefore
the King of Assyria shut him up, and bound him in prison, ver. 4. then was
Israel carried away captive, for ver. 21. Jeroboam had made them sin a great
sin, which ver. 8. and 15. is said to be walkeing in the Statutes of the
Heathen and of the Kings of Israel which they had made; where note, that, the
King had the Legislative power, made what laws he pleased, and the people
imitated the Heathen round about them therein in giving the same power to their
Kings; as the Heathens did, to carry life and death at his nod, and honoring a
wicked man more then the King of Glory; ver. 23. until the Lord removed Israel
out of his sight as he had said by all his servants the Prophets, so was Israel
carried away out of their own Land to Assyria unto this day: is it not
admirable that the Israelites should be so extreme mad to set up a King like
the Heathens to their own destruction many sins might concur to their
captitie, but the Grand Capital sin is noted to be their inordinate desire to
have a King, the Laws, Customs, Statutes, and Ordinances of the Heathens; now
mark I beseech you poor mistaken deluded Carolists, if wise men, Gods
peculiar people, worth all the world, for suffering such Tirants deserve for
ever to be called not the men, but the Children of Israel, more foolish then
babes, nay then the brute creatures, that will not empower one of themselves to
destroy, or to be cruel to their own kind; It speaks loud to all such, as
by Gods infinite mercy have cast off Tirants, to abrogate, repeal, oblitterate
and change their Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and Customs, to suffer no filthy
rags infected with the Plague to remain; not to think to wash and purify
them, for the Blackamore will not change his skin; the first work done at
Geneva upon the change of their Religion from Papists to Protestants was
(Reformatio Legum) to examine their Laws, and such as were contrary Igni
traduntur lege Papistarum.
to the Law of God they burnt them; for Justice is more necessary in a
Commonwealth then reformed Religion, no State can continue without the first,
but many flourish in Temporalls, without the latter, salt is more useful then
suggar, and Pearls, though not so excellent in its nature. The next King chap.
18. was Hezekiah ver. 5. who trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after
him was none like him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before
him, he falling sick, by prayer had his life lengthened, a Heathen King sent
to congratulate his recovery, and Hezekiah did not magnify the Lords mercy to
him, and speak in the language of an Israelite to the Ambassador, but showed
him his treasures and rejoiced more in them then in the God of his mercies (a
fault that Gods people are too subject unto, when their friends visit them they
do not entertain the time by magnifying Gods mercy, and multiplied
preservations toward them, but show one another their fine rooms, clothes,
and such vanities) for which very thing the Prophet Esaias denounces unto
Hezekiah the Babilonian captivity, chap. 20. and see how the poor Jews were
punished for that very sin of Hezekiah chap. 24. ver. 10. to the 16. At that
time the servants of Nebucadnezar King of Babylon came up against Jerusalem,
and the City was besieged, and Nebucadnezar King of Babylon came against the
City, and his servants did besiege it, and Iehoiachin the King of Judah went to
the King of Babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his princes, and
his officers; and the King of Babylon took him in the eight year of his
reign; and he carried out thence all the Treasures of the house of the Lord,
and the Treasures of the Kings house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of
gold which Solomon King of Israel had made in the Temple of the Lord, as the
Lord had said; and he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the Prince, and all
the mighty men of valor, ten thousand captives, and all the Crafts-men and
smiths, none remained save the poorest sort of the people of the Land, and he
carried away Iehoiachin to Babylon, and the kings mother and the kings wifes,
and his officers, and the mighty of the Land, those carried he into captivity
from Jerusalem to Babylon: and all the men of might even seven thousand, and
Crafts-men and Smiths one thousand, all that were strong and apt for war; even
them the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon; blessed God that ever any
people of understanding should contend for Monarchy! when the Spirit of God
speaks so plainly, that whether the kings be good men or bad, I will punish
the people says the Lord, so long as they have any kings; it is not a
government of my ordination, kings are the peoples Idols* creatures of their own
making; if they will have them, let them be sure that if the best of their
kings do but out of a little vainglory show his treasures to a Heathen king
I Will punish them for that transgression; The next successor was Manasseh, and
he followed the abomination of the Heathens, chap. 21. 9. he seduced the
people to do more evil then did the Nations above all that the Amorites did,
and made Judah to sin with his Idols: Is not man a free Agent, if he suffer
no outward violence he has none within him: but a kings example is
unresistible violence. Merciful God, shall thy own children, that one of them
before they had a king was worth 10000. Amorites, be made worse then the most
abominable Heathens only by having a king, ver. 12, 13, 14. therefore thus
says the Lord God of Israel, behold, I am bringing evil upon Jerusalem, and
Judah, that whosoever hears of it both his ears shall tingle, and I will
stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of
Ahab, and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning
it upside down, and I will forsake the remnant of my inheritance, and deliver
them into the hand of their enemies, and they shall become a prey and spoil to
all their enemies; this Manasseh shed innocent blood till he filled the streets
with it, 2 Reg. chap 22. after Manasseh reigned Ammon, who was the fathers own
son in wickedness, and his servants conspired against him, and slew the king in
his own house, and the people slew them and made Josiah king, the hopeful
prince, who turned not aside to the right hand or to the left but walked in all
the ways of David his father, ver. 2. but if the Lord will not turn from the
fierceness of his great wrath against Judah, because of the provocation of
Manasseh, as it is 2 Kings 23. 26. will not the Lord be entreated to save the
people for good Iosiahs sake? no; all that the Lord will do for the best king
is to take him away from the evil to come, chap. 22. 19. 20. then chap. 25.
Jerusalem the glory of the Lord is besieged by Nebucadnezar king of Babylon who
built forts against it round about; the famine prevailed, and there was no
bread for the people of the Land, the men of war therein forced to fly, the
City taken and defaced, ver. 9. the house of the Lord burnt; and all the houses
of Jerusalem, every great man's house burnt; the kings eyes put out and his sons
slain. 7. and bound him with chains, as it is more at large expressed, Ier.
39. 7. and it is very observeable (to teach Gods people how to behave
themselves when the people are so mad in contending for Monarchy, to bring Gods
Judgments upon them) that Jeremiah who in all probability would have been one of
the first that had suffered for his faithfulness, in reproving sin so
impartially as he did, was only preserved Ier. 39. 11. 12. Now Nebucadnezar
king of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan the Captain of
the guard, saying, take him, and look to him, and do him no harm, but do
unto him even as he shall say unto thee, this same Jeremiah that had mourned in
secret for the Court vanities, or rather enormities, the insanitie and
egregious folly of the people to cast off a Rational, just Government by worthy
Patriots that charge their own estates as well as others, and to establish
kings according to the manner of the Heathen, for whose sins so many of the
people lost their lives, God punishes the people for their sins, not only
where the kings are wicked and monsters of men, but where they are good men and
live good lives (which yet is very rare) yet the people must smart for
suffering the kingly office to continue; but if that be not a sufficient
argument take another: If the most desparate Malignant in England or Scotland
was but in Ireland, to hear of the horrid Massacres that have been committed
upon the poor English, 154000. barbarously murdered in one Province, and to
see the miserable effects and sad desolations of so bloody a Rebellion whereof
the maintenance of the late Kings pretended prerogative was undoubtedly the
first inducing cause he was as sure the Author of it as ever the Devil was the
Author or first tempter to sin, for without his countenance they durst never
have attempted it; without question, he would be for the Parliament, if it were
but from the common sense of humanity, for fear either of being tormented with
the Ghosts and dismal apparitions of those poor Innocents, or out of a sad
consideration to bethink himself what an astonishment it will be unto him at
that great day to hear the cry of all the Innocent blood that has been shed
in the three Nations crying to the Just God for vengeance, vengeance against
all those that have in any sort made themselves guilty or accessory to the
death of their bodies, but to the death of many of their souls as it is to be
feared; for as the tree falls so it lies, many a poor Creature innocently
murdered for ought we know to the contrary might have lived to repent, but the
sentence is past, and he can but curse all those malignants that had a hand in
his death, as every one undoubtedly had that has either warred or pleaded for
the late King or his posterity. The sum of these and many other Scripturs and
reasons that might be alleged to the same purpose is to let you see, that not
only wicked Kings have brought misery and the wrath of God upon his people, but
the best men that ever swayed the Scepter of Judah or Israel have been authors
and occasioners of ruin and destruction to the poor people; David by numbering
the people, Solomon by tolleration of Idolatry; Iehosaphat by taking part with
Ahab; Asa for his confidence in the arm of flesh, and his severity to the
Prophet; and Josiah for his rash and unadvised war with Pharo, Neco, did all of
them* though godly men, bring wrath upon Gods people which (I beseech you
observe) the Judges of old never did, though Elies offense might be greater
then theirs; yet the people smarted not for that, as for their Kings
transgressions, and though the Lord was pleased to choose the seed of David and
not of Saul, that did not justify Israel; but it was because God appointed
Christ Jesus to come of David's race, from Judah; therefore there was a
stabilitie of David's throne, and his posterity to terminate in Christ, and
therefore as that Scripture of Genes. 49. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet until Shiloh come, and unto him
shall the gathering of the people be; might be sufficient to convince the Jews
of their unbelief, and that the Messiah is come, because the scepter is so
long since departed from Judah; they have had no King of their Nation but have
been many years as a scattered people (though happily their dispersion has
been their preservation, for had they not found favor amongst many Princes,
and to live quietly under them, they might in all probability have been
destroyed, and in a worse condition then they are) if there were not some
malice and imbitterednes of spirit amongst them against Christians it being so
pregnant a Scripture, that a more clear and express Text cannot be imagined;
so we may safely conclude from the forementioned Scriptures; that if there were
not much malignitie in the hearts of people they must needs be convinced that
Monarchy was never any ordinance of God but an invention of wicked men acted by
the spirit of Satan, being content to Idolize one Tirant, that themselves might
tirannize over many: and whereas it is called a Human Ordinance, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake whether it be
to the King as supreme; that is either to be intended of a King that is guided
and directed by his Parliaments or Counsels who in cases of Competition must
yield to them with such power as a Duke of Venice or Geneva may have, or else
it is an agreement and constitution of Irrational people, a nation delighting
rather in servitude, then freedom; and those ancient Scholasticks and
Philosophers which made such learned arguments of the best kind of Government,
whether Monarchy, Aristocracy or Democracy, were to be preferred, many holding
that Monarchy ought to have the preeminence, specially where Kings were good
men; Certainly they did not intend it of absolute unaccountable Monarchs, for
Aristoteles King, was no more then a Duke of Venice, greater then any one, but
less then all; the Prince of Orange had two votes in Counsel, which yet was
more then right reason allows; for that saying of his, that Nature makes
Kings, is meant that nature makes men valiant, wise* and amiable, qualified for
Kingly power; or else being such that studied Books more then men did not
understand the end of government, and being little acquainted with those many
provocations that the best of Monarchs have, to degenerate into Tyranny, and
the strong temptations that they have to satisfy their sinful appetites, and
how the Concupisible and Irasible faculties of the soul are predominant, as
occasions are presented; they being good, merciful, just, and patient, men
themselves, judged others accordingly; and so are most Heteradox and Erroneous
in that opinion, concerning Monarchy, but they never consulted with the sacred
Oracles of God; which we that profess our selves Christians must either yield
unto, or else make Scripture useles, and leave every thing to the greatest
incertainty and confusion that is in the world, and so being in the dark may
run out heads one against another, like two blind men, that josling complain
of one another, can you not see? and why do you thrust me? but never
complaining of their own blindness; in a far thicker Egyptian darkness are all
people in the world, in matter of Government and Policy that reject the Council
of God, and yet never complain of want of wisdom, but think themselves the
wisest people in the world, in contending so eagerly, strenuously and
impetuously, for the maintenance of old heathenish Goverments and superstitious
customs, Ierem. 8. 9. The Wisemen are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken,
they have rejected the Word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? and
because many whom I honor in the Lord; as godly and precious Christians may
happily be entangled and captivated with the Majesty of Monarchy, as being
borne under it, and are in love with their own issue, though never so deformed;
Dear hearts let us consider, that truth is more ancient then error, and that
all are but novelties to the Word of God; you are in love with foul mistress
Monarchy, not because she is not fair, but for that you are in the dark, and
then we tell the Papists, that in the dark Pope Ioane with them is as good as
her Lady; what ever may by carnal politicians be invented for the maintenance
of Monarchy, let us give more credit to the Word of God then the wisdom of
men which is foolishnes, when it approaches before the God of Wisdom, God
says, he will not have his people come under a Kingly Government, and that he
will plague them for their Kings offenses; if they suffer it, there needs no
other reason against Monarchy but a Divine Prohibition; why was the Manna sweet
at one time and at another corrupt? but because it was Gods Ordinance for the
better sanctifying of the Sabbath. Why would the Lord have the walls of Ierica
beaten down with the sound of a Ramshorne only, but that the more of his own
power might appear? why was there no more ceremonies used in the cleansing of
Namaan but wash and be clean; are not other waters as good? Is not Monarchy
more pompeous and like the Heathens? now God has protested against Monarchy in
all these places of Scripture, and therefore to contend for it, is flat
rebellion against the Majesty of Heaven, to make our selves wiser then God:
for this is certain, that what the Lord did enjoine or forbid unto his people
of old, in matters of Iudicialls, there is an equity in it, for Gods people to
observe for ever; Gods positive Laws can no more be altered or changed then
his essence; he is delighted with the ways of Truth and Justice. It is very
true, that carnal Israel expected a restoration of Monarchy, and therefore
perceiving that Jesus Christ did not exalt himself as a Monarch, they did not
believe in him, his Kingdom being not of this world (though he will have a
Kingdom in the world) they did not conclude him to be the promised Messiah we
thought he should have restored the Kingdom of Israel; many godly learned
men, are of opinion, that the Lambs bride will not be glorious till the calling
of the Jews; Jesus Christ has already a Spouse and visible Churches of Saints
in the world; but come and behold the Lambs bride is conceived to be after the
Jews conversion; at which time it is likewise conjectured that the Jews shall
have a great command in the world, but no man to be a King over them; only King
Jesus to be Lord and Sovereign; Consider well Hos. 1. 11. Then shall the
children of Judah and the children of Israel be gathered together; and appoint
themselves one head and they shall come up out of the Land, for great shall be
the day of Iezerel* That head is meant Jesus Christ, the head of his Church, 1
Ephesians. 22. and Hosea. 13. 9. 10. 11. Oh Israel, thou have destroyed thy self,
but in me is thine help. I will be thy King, where is any other that may save
thee in all the Cities, and thy Judges of whom thou said, give me a King and
Princes. I gave thee a king in mine anger and took him away in my wrath: no
king but Jesus, And Esaias, the 1. holds it out fully what Government they shall
have when they have repented, Not Monarchy; but by good Judges and Counselors,
ver. 12. how is the faithful City become an harlot? it was full of judgment;
righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers; so long as they had their good
Samuels, Justice was like a mighty stream* but when they would have a king
like the Heathens then men were made offenders for a word, and if any man stand
in the way of the kings domination the kings Judges for money would condemn
him, as in the case of Naboth for his vineyard, ver. 23 thy Princes are
Rebellious, and companions of thieves; therefore ver. 25. when the Jews shall
be converted, says the Lord, I will take away the tin (of Monarchy) and I will
restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning;
afterward thou shall be called the City of righteousness, the faithful City,
there are hopes now that England, Ireland and Scotland may be faithful Cities,
the dross and Tin of Monarchy being happily purged away, the Lord tells them
again of their sin, in choosing kingly Government in the days of Hezekiah.
Hos. 8. 3. Israel has cast off the thing that is good: the enemy shall pursue
him, ver. 4. they have set up Kings but not by me, they have made Princes: and
I knew it not; did any Royalist ever think, that God makes the sin of Monarchy
equal to Idolatry; as there he does? but let any Royalist (if he can) show me
one word of approveing, or commending, kingly office, or Regal Government in
Scripture. And when God redeemed them from the Babylonish captivity, and gave
them Ezra who was a ready Scribe in the Law of Moses. Ezra 7. 6. he speaks not
one word of the commendations of Kingly government: nor yet Nehemiah who was the
Kings cup bearer, 1 Nehe. 11. a most active and zealous instrument for Gods
service speaks not a word of Kingly power to be of God, but chap. 6. 6. 7.
Sauballat and Tobiah enemies to reformation; sent a letter to Nehemiah that it
was reputed that he intended to make himself King, and appointed Prophets to
preach him up King at Jerusalem, but Nehemiah sent word that there was no such
thing, but it was feigned by craft and policy to hinder the work of God, and
ver. 13. says Nehemiah, they would have made me afraid and to have sinned that
they might have matter for an evil report that they might reproach me; and was
not this the very language of the Malignants; that the Parliament intended to
make themselves Kings, and many other false accusations raised against them to
discourage and weaken their hands from the work, but blessed be God, that has
maintained a spirit of Christian fortitude in our good Nehemiahs, ver. 11.
shall such men as we, do good works by the halfes? God forbid, the Lord
think upon his servants, both in Parliament and Army for good, according to
all that they have done and suffered: And so Haggai 2. 22. prophesies of
overthrowing the throne of kingdoms, and the strength of the kingdoms of the
heathens, and the chariots, and those that ride in them, but not a tittle in
any of the Prophets; whereby the lawfulnes of Monarchy may be gathered or
maintained, if the government were lawful, why should the Lord destroy it? and
if it must be destroyed from amongst the heathen people (that are ignorant of
God, and rational rather in habit then in act:) certainly God is exceeding
angry with his own people for suffering Monarchs to Lord it over them, when
they have a power in their hands to subdue them.

Object. But was not Jesus Christ borne in the days of Augustus Caesar who had
so great a power, that all the world was taxed in his days, Luk 2. 1. and did
not Joseph and Mary of their own accord go up from Galilee into Judea to be
taxed? and is not subjection commanded to the Roman Emperors (that were some of
the^ monsters of men? and that even for conscience sake Romans 13. 5. nay did not
Jesus Jesus Christ himself work a miracle to pay tribute for himself and
Peter, for Caesar's service?

Ans. First, concerning that of Romans 13. I marvel, that any man that has but
a dram of ingenuitie will object it, for it is as clear as cristall, that the
Magistrates there which are not to be resisted, are such as command just things
and forbid the contrary* that are not a terror to good works, but to the evil;
for the Law is not made for the righteous man, 1 Timothy 1. 9. He that punishes a
man for doing good is no more to be obeyed by any command from God then Satan
is; If God should suffer any people to be spiritually possessed or obsest by the
Devil, the Scripture says, that in such cases only spiritual reasons are to
be used, this kind of burning, drowning, and persecution goes not out, but by
prayer and fasting, Matthew. 17. 15. 21. but when rulers are possessed with a
spirit of cruelty, hunting and thirsting after the blood, liberties, and
estates of honest people; they are not to crouch under such burdens with an
asinine patience, but to quit themselves like men, and purchase their freedom
at any rate, for no remedy can be so bad as such a disease; If it should be
intended of Religion, then Nero might have compelld Christians to worship the
Sun, and the Apostles had find in Acts 5. and if it should be construed of a
submission in Civil matters, that is to arm sin by a Commission against the
law but the question is whether Monarchical Government have any footing or
Divine approbation in Scripture; for God is not obliged to hinder sin and
oppression, but he approves it not; there is a plain and direct prohibition
against it; my people shall not have a King, says the Lord, but we will have a
King, say they; it is your great sin and wickedness to ask a King, says the
Lord, but let us have one at our own perils, say they; as the poor Jews
said in another cause, his blood be upon us and our children; let us have a
King, though we smart never so much, and pay never so dear for it, the people
are made sensible of their sin in asking a Habetis confitentes reos*
King, and crave pardon for their rejecting God, and a rational Government;
against which express inhibition and charter, in that 1. Sam* 8. Some
interences are made of the lawfulnes of Monarchy in general, which yet if it
were lawful (as it can never be evinced being against reason) amongst the
Heathens, yet it is no argument that it is lawful amongst Gods people, because
of that Divine injunction that they shall not imitate the government, nor
manners of unbelievers; but that which Paul by inspiration wrote to the Saints
at Rome, was to satisfy them in any doubt that might arise by their living
under Imperial Government; to tell them that until God did find out a way to
free them from hard Taske-masters, they must submit for conscience sake, if
Nero would send to them for half their goods, it was better for them to part
quietly with them, then to resist, and so to loose their lives; for what could
two or three hundred Christians do to oppose the Emperors power; however, he
was none of their Lord; they set him not up, but they came in by blood and
conspiracies, or else the Romans elected them; the Christians were merely
passive in the Government, and in conscience ought to pay tribute to them, not
as if the Government was approved by God, but because it was Gods will that
Christians should with as much peace and quietness as the world would affoard
the^, pass the time of their sojorning here in fear, wherein the Saints looked
at the performance of the promises of God, and the will and mind of their
heavenly Father, which they found in Scripture to be, that as the people of God
had suffered under the Egyptian power those Pharoes and hard taske-masters, and
so under the Babylonish power in the captivity, and had suffered and were
trampled upon by the Assyrian, Persian, and Grecian Monarchs; so likewise they
were to suffer and to be oppressed by the Roman power, as we read Dan. 7. where
by the vision of the four Beasts is represented the four Monarchs men of
bestiall spirits that create a property by force, as amongst the beasts
possession is the only right, but says Daniel, it must not be so always, for
ver. 18. and 26, 27. But the Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom,
and possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever, but the Judgment
shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion to consume and destroy it unto
the end, and the Kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom; under
the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High
whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey
him, see Dan. 2. 44. now this is a truth, that the Malignants exceedingly vex
and fret at Psalm. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. why do the Heathen rage, and the people
imagine a vain thing? the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers
take council together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, saying, Let
us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us; he that
sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision: then
shall he speak unto them in his wrath and vex them in his sore displeasure,
ver. 6. Yet I will (says the Lord) set King Jesus upon his holy hill of Sion;
The Monarchs of the world think to intaile their Crowns so fast upon their
posterity, and make Laws like the Medes and Persians to be unchangeable, and
men may think to establish Royal Statutes, and make firm Decrees that
Monarchy shall stand, but the Lord will blow upon them; It is admirable to
consider that Scripture of Ier. 29. Babylon was to be destroyed as it is, Psalm.
137. 8. 9, O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be
that rewards thee as thou have served us; happy shall he be that dasheth thy
little ones against the stones; and yet for the 70. years the people of God
must be patient and pray for the peace of that City where they were captives;
do but read that excellent place Ier. 29. from the 4. to the 7. 10. If the
Parliament had complied with the late King, and set him upon the throne, it had
been putting a golden Scepter into the hand of Antichrist, and a reed into the
hand of Christ, to have called Christ master but to have Crowned him with
thorns; and a mortal man with Gold; it had been but mocking and scoffing at
the promises of Justice, Holiness, Purity, Peace, Plenty; and freedom from
oppression, which the people of God are to enjoy upon the earth; for do but
consider how ridiculous it is, to call those Defendors of the Faith, that are
offenders of the faithful; that make the Saints offenders for a word; that
hate the Saints, as men naturally hate poison; from whence it follows, that
the darkness and dissatisfaction which has been upon the spirits of many
Christians concerning the Justice done upon the late King proceeds from their
not understanding the Scriptures and not distinguishing the times and seasons
which the Lord has appointed for his people, when to be in a suffering
condidition and when to be in a prosperous condition; the primitive Christians
were predestinate to be conformed to the image of their head Jesus Christ, in a
patient suffering, Romans 8. 2. 9. under Tirants, but in these later times the
Saints are to get victory over the Beast, and the Kings of the earth shall
bring their glory to Gods people, Revel. 21. 24. the Churches of Christ shall
not any longer as sucking Lambs be in fear of wolves, or as tender kids in
the paws of Bears, nor as a prey to the mouths of Lions, but those that
oppress the Lords people shall be fed with their own flesh, and drunk with
their own blood, as with sweet wine, and all the world shall know that the Lord
is the Savior and the Redeemer of his people, the mighty one of Jacob, Esaias
49. 26. as it is Gods prerogative to bind the Devil in chains, so the Saints
shall bind Kings on earth, let Malignants mock and jeare at the Saints and
servants of the most high God, mind what the Scripture says Psalm. 149. 1, 2,
6, 7, 8, 9. ver. praise the Lord; sing unto the Lord, a new song, and his
praise in the congregation of Saints; let Israel rejoice in him that made him:
let the Children of Sion be joyful in their King: Let the high praises of God
be in their mouths, and a two edged sword in their hands, to execute vengeance
upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people, to bind their Kings with
chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron, to execute upon them the
Judgment written: this honor have all his Saints, praise ye the Lord: that
as Paul was delivered from the mouth of the Lion, so the Saints shall be
delivered from all the Lions and beasts of prey, for God will ere long visit
Babylon and all those Kings that have been druncke with the blood of the
Saints, and then all men that are of the same spirit as the holy Apostles were
(as all Christians are animated by the same spirit as the members by the same
soul) shall rejoice, Rev. 18. 20. and it is a special duty of Christians to
express their joy by singing and exaltations in the Lord, Rev. 19. 1, 2, 3. and
for the effecting of so glorious a work the Lord will plead with fire and sword
with all the potentates of the earth, Esaias 66. 16. but it must be a righteous
war, Revel. 19. 11. And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse and he
that sat upon him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness he does
Judge and make war: for unless Justice be advanced in the front of all
military designs, God will not protect the rear; It is an error in any to
hold that the power of Antichrist must not be destroyed by the material sword
and maintained by such only as turn all Scriptures into Allegories; I do not
count it any superstition for the Gentry of Poland to stand up, and draws their
swords at the rehearsal of the Creed, signifying, that they will fight for their
Religion against all opposers: And they that are called, are faithful, chosen,
and true, Ier. 51. 20. Thou art my battle Axe and weapon of war for with thee
will I break in pieces the nations, and with thee will I destroy Kingdoms,
men of Gods designation and appointment. He is the Lord of Hosts that has
taught the hands of his servants to war and their fingers to fight, Psalm.
144. 1. For not only that knowledge which is divine is from God, but skill in
arms and expertnes in wars, which though it may in a great measure be
acquired by natural valor and understanding, voluntary industry, and long
experiences, yet considering how many veteran Commanders of noble extraction
and education, famous in feats of Chivalrie; have been foiled, broken in
pieces, and beaten at their own weapons by a few gentlemen (in comparison) and
inuenile mecanicks and honest tradesmen, whose hearts the Lord has drawn forth
and engaged to fight his battles; we must needs acknowledge, that their
valor, prowess and dexterity has either been infused by God, or improved by
him to a miraculous proficiencie.

The Scripture is very clear, that Gods people were governed by Parliaments
for though we read, 1 Kings 8. 2. That all the men of Israel assembled to King
Solomon, yet v. the 3. the Elders of Israel only came, the people were but
vertually present by repre sentation as every man, woman and child, is supposed
to be present in Parliament, otherwise an Act could not in reason oblige them;
1 Number. 4. one of every Tribe, one chief of the house of his Fathers to appear
and stand up for the rest, and more expressly in the 2 Chronicles. 1. 2. and 5. 2.
They are called Captains of thousands and of hundreds, that stand up for
Counties, and Cities, Judges that weigh men's causes, Governors of Forts and
Garrisons, and chief men for wisdom, principal officers, for age and
prudence, and by Kings, and Princes in several texts of Scriptures are only
meant eminent nursing fathers to Gods people; but accountable to their brethren
for any Maladministration; but Kings make themselves so sacred that they may
not be touched, they say, the Laws are their own Creatures, to which they can
no more be subject then the Romans could be subject to their own slaves; the
Civillians at Paris not long since resolved, that the King could not be
plaintiff in any Action, for he was not tied to any Law, all is the Emperors
as to property, though not as to possession, say some of them, and they have no
other obligation but the conservation of their own dominions and greatness,
they must dissemble for their proper interests: one made many promises and
after being made a King, said; he was not the person that promised, and so all
was void.

In the Wars between Henry the third and the Barons, most of the Citizens of
London took part with the right side against the King (for never had any King
just cause to fight against the people) who was taken prisoner; an obstinate
man that would not yield, though he was brought to a morsel of bread; the
people in that midnight of Popery took oaths and protestations from him, for
the maintenance of their lives and estates, and set him at liberty, and in
special he took a solemn oath not to question the Londoners for any former
matter, wishing damnation, and the lowest chamber in hell for himself and his
posterity, if he did not punctually keep and observe them, and took the
Sacrament upon it, which he believed to be the very Body and Blood of Christ;
and the people counted him a Heretic that made the least doubt of his
nonperformance; what not believe the King upon such solemn Oaths and
imprecations? this was ratified by Act of Parliament, but what followed? he had
no sooner got the Milicia into his own hands, but the active men that
contended for their liberties were Imprisoned, the Liberties of the City
invaded, Strangers appointed to be Governors of the City; those that had been
honest put to death; their goods confiscate, and never poor creatures more
miserably afflicted and tormented; and what promises did Queen Mary make to the
Suffolk men at Franingham Castle, that they should enjoy their Religion
established by Edw. 6. but when she had got power in her hand she began to
persecute and burn them for Heretics, the poor Suffolks men besought her to
make good her promise, what said she, keep promise with Heretics? I shall
make you know that the members must not be so bold with their head, as to
endeavor to rule it; Innumerable instances might be made of foreign Princes
in this kind, but it is but to show the Sun with a candle; Monarchs have no
other principles but self preservation, though they should intend to perform
when they promise (which I doubt very few of them do) it is but as the I
esuits teach, to keep until they have power to break and forgive an injury, as
the Italian says, till he can revenge it, they have such strong temptations to
draw their hearts, from what they have engaged their selves unto; if it cross
them in point of domination; which is so sweet a morsel unto them, that no
prudent people will ever trust them for matter of their liberties: Richlieus
principle and Council to his Master was, keep your Subjects low Sir, that
having time little enough to get bread they may never think of any liberties:
I do not know whether his tongue and his head were of the same opinions (for
he was famous for deep dissimulations) but if he spoke as he thought I might
without offense say, that it was as unwise a speech as ever came from a
Scholar; Let me entreat your honorable patience but to read a little of
Machiavell (which Kings study more then Scripture) his words are these in his
Prince; A King* says he, must be a Fox, that he may be aware of snares, and a
Lion, that he may scare the Wolves; A wise Prince ought not to keep his faith
given when the observance thereof turns to disadvantage* and the occasions
that made him promise are past; if men were all good this rule would not be
allowable, but being the people are full of mischief and would not make it
good to the Prince, neither is he tied to keep it with them, nor shall a Prince
ever find lawful occasion to give color to this breach, very many modern
examples might be alleged wherein might be showed how many peaces have been
concluded, and how many promises made, have been violated and broken by the
infidelity of Princes; ordinarily things have best succeeded with him that has
been likest the Fox, but it is necessary to understand how to set a good color
upon it, and to be able to feign and dissemble thoroughly, and many are so
simple and yield so much to the present necessities that he who has a mind
to deceive shall always find some or other that will be deceived; Alexander
the sixth never did any thing else but deceive men, and never meant otherwise,
and always found some to work upon, yet never was there any man that would
protest more effectually, nor aver any thing with more solemn oaths and
observe them less then he did; nevertheless his cosenages thrive all with
him; and further says he, a Prince will be forced for the maintenance of his
State to do contrary to his Faith, Charity, Humanity, and Religion, therefore
it behooves him to have a mind so disposed as to turn and take the advantage
of all winds and fortunes; and a little further, let the Prince seem to him
that sees and hears him, to be all pity, all faith, all integrity, all
humanity, all Religion, nor is there any thing more necessary for him to seem
to have then this last quallity, for men in general judge by the sight and
appearances, few by the touch, every man may come to see what thou seem to
be, but few come to the truth and feeling of thee to understand what thou art,
and those few dare not oppose the opinion of many who have the majesty of State
to protect them, and in all men's actions, especially those of Princes, where
there is no judgment to appeal unto, men forbear to give their reasons till
the events and ends of things; let a Prince therefore take the surest courses
to maintain his life and estate, the means shall always be thought honorable
and commended by every one for the vulgar is ever taken with the appearance and
event of a thing, and for the most part of the people they are but the vulgar,
the others are but few in comparison, there is a Prince, says he, that preaches
faith, and that Princes are not above their words, but had he kept his
promises he had lost his state long ago, so far Machiavell: And another
principle amongst Monarchs is, that if any subject begin to have a conceit of
his own merits, or to deserve well from the public, he must in reason of
state be discourted, if not executed; for sear of factions and Rebellion; when
David came to Jerusalem with the head of the Giant the women met him singing,
Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands, 1 Samuel 18. 7.
thereby ascribing more honor to David then Saul, for which Saul was wroth
against him, and from that hour you may observe that he never looked upon him
with a pleasant countenance, oh this David he stands in the way of my applause;
he is counted a better soldier, more just, merciful, or Religious then my
self, banish him at the least, if not, utterly destroy him; Monarchy and
wholesome Laws can no more cohabit, then the Arc and Dagon; take but one
divine instance; what wicked laws and statutes of Omri were practiced and put
in execution, even by Monarchs that professed to govern and rule as for the
Lord and over his people in that 59. of Esaias v. 3. the land is defiled Exeat
aula qui vult esse pins.
with blood, the King shall have power by Law to pardon murders under the name
of man-slaughters, ver. 4. none calls for Justice; nor any pleads for truth
ver. 5. they hatch Cokatrice eggs and weave the Spiders web, ver. 8. there is
no judgment in their goeings, they have made them crooked paths, ver. 9.
therefore is judgment far from us, neither does Justice overtake us, ver. 14.
15. and Judgment is turned away back, and Justice stands a far off for Truth
is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter, and the Lord was displeased
that there was no Judgment; the meaning whereof can be no other then this;
That Evangelicall Propher, or Prophetical Evangelist Isaiah foretelling the
Judgment that should befall his own Nation by the Assirians and the Caldeans,
tells Judah and Israel, that principally for corruption in their Courts of
Justice; they shall be severely punished, his prophecy rising no higher then to
the reign of Vzziah King of Judah and Jeroboam the second King of Israel, he
tells them that their Laws are like Spiders webbs, they entangle poor clients
as the Spiders web does the flies, to their destruction, and undoeing, their
Laws are spun with so fine a thread that none but Eagle eyed practisers can
discern them; the plaintiff hatches Cockatrice eggs, the issue of many
tedious suites, is poysonfull and pernicious, if he recover, considering his
costs and pains he may put his gains in his eyes and see never the werse, and
if he mistake his Action, or do not hit the bird in the eye, he must pay the
defendant his costs (who yet is in conscience indebted unto him) to his utter
undoeing; but the Spirit of God prophesieing against such wicked Counselors
that contend for Monarchs says ver. 6. their webbs shall not become garments,
when Monarchs are destroyed; their Laws shall perish with them, they shall
prove but as cobwebs to those that practice them, and shall afford them no
succor against Gods vengeance, their Laws are crooked like the serpent, full
of turnings and windings, Maeanders and Intricaties; such as swerve from the
strait and easy path of Gods Judicial Laws; for equity can find no
admittance, or is not able to stand and bear it self up; and ver. the 11. the
people roar like bears and moutne sore like doves and look many years for
Judgment, yet there was none; for Monarchy and good Laws are inconsistent;
and what Amos says chap. 5* 21, 22, 23. I hate and abhor your feast days,
and I will not smell in your solemn assemblies, 22. though ye offer me burnt
offerings and meat offerings; I will not accept them, neither will I regard the
peace offerings of your fat beasts, 23. take thou away from me the multitude of
thy songs, for I will not hear the melody of thy violls, that is, leave off
praying and singing till there be a settled course of Justice between party
and party to run down not by drops, but like a mighty stream of water in a
firm, quick, cheap and unvariable way, and chap. 6. 8. says the Lord. I
abhor, the excellency of Jacob, and hate his Palaces, what blessed Lord!
abhor thy poor worm Jacob and his fathers pomp and best condition? sure it
must be for some transcendent iniquity, behold the reason rendered Amos the 5.
and 7. and 6. 12. for ye have turned Judgment into Worm wood and Gall, and
the fruit of righteousness into hemlocke; Justice (which of it self is the most
pleasing and profitable thing in the world and which being tempered with mercy
cures all the distempers and diseases in a Body politic) was corrupted, made
most bitter to the oppressed and most abominable to God, when men are undone by
the Law which should preserve them: And the Laws were no better in Habakkuks
time, 1. 13, 14, 15. wherefore hold thou thy tongue when the wicked
devoureth the man that is more righteous then he, and make them as the fishes
of the Sea, as the creeping things that have no ruler over them, they take up
all of them with the angle, they catch them with their net, and gather the^ in
their drags, therefore they rejoyee and are glad; that as in the Sea the
greater fishes devour the lesser so a full pursed malicious plaintiff or
defendant wearies out his poor adversary and right is conquered by might; by
means of those Angles, Netts, Draggs, and Cobwebs, and Rubbs that hang and Iye
in the way and allies of Justice, preferring ceremonies, forms, and shadows,
before truths, reallities, and substances; and Monarchs ever loved such witty
Judges as could expound the Law, that Judgment should be given as his
Imperial Sacred Majesty desired, and where the plaintiffs cause was so clear
that it was too gross to give Judgment against him, then after Judgment
given for him to have such Council as should find a knot in a Bullrush, an
error in the proceedings, to reverse the Judgment, and so the poor creature
caught like a fish in a Net, or a bird in the snare, and the more he struggles
to get out the faster he is ensnared, for he must pay costs to the defendant
who unjustly keeps away his Land from him, and if there be no such net or snare
in one Court, then he is Non unitum sed unum*
brought into another, because Law and Equity (which should be the oearest
friends in the world) are many times together by the ears and it is hard
reconciling them; and being upon this subject, let but the wisehearted consider
what the Lord says, Esaias 1. from the ^1. ver. to the 18. verbatim, so 5. 7.
God looked for judgment but behold oppression for righteousness, but behold a
cry: God will at the length be cloyed (as one is cloyed with meat which he
loatheth, and his stomach goes against, Prove. 27. 7. with the prayers and
devotions of any Nation in the world, that have not an expedient of quick,
sure and cheap Justice, and will disown and spew out such a people, though
they be never so instant in prayer, and by their instancie and importunities
hope to speed, Matthew. 6. 7. yet his soul hates them, he abhores it from his
very heart; and take but that precious Text of Ier. 22. 15, 16. did not thy
father eat and drink and do Judgment and Justice, and then it was well with
him, he judged the cause of the poor and needy, then it was well with him, was
not this to know me, says the Lord?

Indeed a man would think that it should be easier to find one good man, that
would even sacrifice his life to reputation and for the good of the people, and
so one good King for whom the people would even dare to dye, Romans 5. 7. and if
Gods people had been left to any kind of government which they should think
best they might happily have entrusted some good man with a plenartie of power,
and have expected a blessing therein, but Monarchy is against Gods
institution, and blessings are only annexed to Gods Ordinances; bread and wine
in the Sacrament are better to work devotion then pompious toys, Images and
Puppets are for carnal Gospellers, says God, when his people choose a King
they reject him.

But does not Peter and Paul call an absolut Monarchy Gods Ordinance, I deny
it, for the power Legislative was in the Senate, the Romans did never entrust
any man by any Legal constitution to do what he list without the peoples
consent in the Senate, Neroes cruelties were never with the peoples consent,
but says Paul to the poor Saints there, you see what differences there are
between the Caesar's and the Senators who stand for the peoples Liberties, in
such a Case, those that have the swords in their hands as the Emperors had (the
Millicia being at his dispose) it is best for you to submit to them, those to
whom Peter wrote being strangers, scattered by persecution, were not to trouble
themselves with State-matters no more then it had been proper for the Dutch or
French Congregations that live quietly in London, to have troubled themselves
with the difference between the late King and the Parliament: But may not
people live happily in a mixed Monarchy; where the King may have a prerogative
in many things, and yet the people enjoy their Liberties; I say not, for
Monarchy and Liberty are inconsistent and incompatible; Indeed an Apprentice
that has a good master may after a sort be said to be free; but to speak
properly, he is a servant, so if there should be a good King (like a black
swan) the people may be less miserable for a season but it cannot hold long,
for every creature seeks its own perfection which depending upon the
destruction of one another, they Act accordingly, and therefore for any people
to live in quiet it is necessary that they be totally slaves or wholly free,
and those Kings at first that promise or pretend to be satisfied with a
mediocrity of power; they do not intend to rest there, but that they may the
more easily compass what remains, and for my own part, when I hear many
wise men speak of making peace with the King and tyeing him up so close to his
Laws, that he should not be able to hurt the people; I thought it was but a
kind of dissimulation to make people beyond Sea think him to be a great King,
and yet in effect to make him stand but for a cipher therefore I do much
prefer the Spanish principle before the Scottish, the first wishes that he
had many lives to loose for his King, and that he had rather loose his life
then question the Kings Justice, but the Scots contend for a King of Clouts
merely for the name of a King that must be whipped if he look but awry, keeping
their Kings in as much awe as schoole-boyes; for any people to live in slavery
whenthey may be free is a baseness of spirit, and for others to contend for a
King and no King, I mean a titular King without power not; so much power as a
High Constable has, to commit a night-walker; is rather worse, for God that
has punished gross profanenes in England and Ireland with rods, will punish
hypocrisy in Scotland with Scorpious; But still versatill wits will be
objecting, what, were all the former Emperors Tirants in the four Monarchies?
or if so, what shall we say of the Kings of Israel and Judah? where the King is
sole Judge, or has a negative voice there he is unlimitted, and consequently a
Tirant that may do wha the pleases, and such a one can never have any love of a
people of any understanding; if the people be Judges, and may make war or
peace without the King, then he is no King; it is no discretion to be too much
in particulars; Certainly for the general, Monarchs have been monsters of
men; a generation of men and women borne for the scourge and punishment of man
kind, whose wickedness and villainies have been of the highest Elevation and
Magnitude, more forcible to provoke and irritate Gods Justice to punish the
world then the honesty and singleheartednes of the people, to incite and
procure his pardoning mercy and forgivenes; Therefore I hope all good people
will agree with me, that we have great cause to rejoice in that famous piece of
Justice of January the 30. 1648. acted where most of their miseries had been
plotted; and as Josephus records (antiquit. lib. 18. cap. 6.) of one Marsias,
that after the death of that Tirant Nero or Tiberius; He made an Oration to
the people to write every man upon his door The Lion is dead: and Tedneken o
Leon*
as after the removal of Tarchoni, the Romans would not so much as endure the
name of a King; which comes from the old Saxon word Koning; or rather cunning;
for they learn to catch the prey and devour men; I would entreat my Honored
Countrymen to be as wise in this generation as the Romans were before Christ's
time; and instead (of plotting to destroy themselves by hunting after new
Tirants) to consider what the Spirit of God says in the 19. of Ezekiel* from v.
1. to the 9. v. Let them say unto the children of the late King, what your
mother a Lioness? she lay down among Lions, she nourished her whelps among
young Lions, and she brought up one of her whelps, it became a young Lion, and
it learned to catch the prey, it devoured men; but when she saw that her hope
was lost, she took another of her whelps and made him a young Lion, and he
went up and down among the Lions, he became a young Lion and learned to catch
the prey and devoured men, then the nations set against him on every side, and
spread their net over him he was taken in their pit, and they put him in
chains, and imprisoned him, that his voice was no more heard upon the
mountains of Israel; how admitable and adorable is the fulness of Scripture, as
if it had been calculated for the Meridian of England; Zedekiah was the last
King of Judah, the whelpe was Iehoahaz who was King for three months only, 2
Kings 30. ver. 31. he was taken in a pit or net, a phrase importing the manner
of catching Lions, of whom Jeremy Prophesied, that he should never return to
see his native Country, Ier. 22. 10. the other whelp was Iehoiakim, who went
up and down craving aid from the King of Egypt to make him King; which was the
cause of his ruin, the roaring of the whelpe made a great noise, by their
cruel and tirannicall commands, but they were taken in strong holds, and being
dead were buried with the burial of an Ass Ier. 22. 18. thrown out upon a
dunghill; It is not I but the Spirit of God in the holy Scriptures that calls a
King (that challenges a power against the public judgment of the people in a
national Counsel) and his Children, a Lion and his whelps: the Lord knows my
heart, that I bear no more malice to any one herein mentioned or intended,
then I did when I lay in my cradle, and though I should expect no more mercy
from them then there is milk in a male-Tiger, if the Lord should suffer me to
fall into their hands, as he justly might in regard of my sins, though I trust
for his mercies sake he will not; yet I do freely pray for blessings upon
them, that if it be the will of God, those Fatherless Children which are not
fit to be Kings upon earth may be Heirs of Heaven, to a Kingdom that cannot be
moved; and if it shall please God to give repentance to any of them, that with
Achan they shall confess their sin, and give glory to God; learn to govern
themselves, and renounce all vain and sinful pretenses: I should be an humble
Advocate for them, that Mercy might be honorably seated on the right hand of
Justice; and that there might be not only a competent, but an eminent
exhibition allowed them for their support; for I could heartily wish, that such
as profess Christ, would dye more to vain Philosophy, Col. 2. but live to
moral Phylosoply, if it were but to learn this lesson, of blessing them that
curse us, and doing the good of Justice against the evil of injustice;
because for any man to lay aside his Justice is to deprive himself of reason,
and to become a brute; Justice being nearer of kin to every Magistrate then his
child or brother, as being part of his soul, but Justice without Mercy is
cruelty, and Mercy without Justice is mere fatuitie.

FINIS.
Pray excuse the want of a Greek Character and the Errata, viz.
OMitted in the title page these words, viz. With some humble petitions and
observations interweaved, concerning Cheap and speedy Justice; with the Authors
hopes above his fears of happy days. In the same page leave out late* in the
Epistle read in their annotations* for breach read branch* read the Law must be
set. for party read Deputy. for records r. retards. for leave it read bear it.
for intertolares read intercalares* for it is not r. Is it not. for one Act r.
an Act. r. Ima^es. r. seems. r. a just. r. as the defendant* r. I scarce. for
flock r. stock* r. many families preserved which would. r. breaden. r. will
not do it. r. may seem. r. as if godly. r. would sit. r. straightened. r. any
time. r. meanest soldier. for begin r. begun* for have been called home r. may
be called home. for prudencie r. precedencie. a line left out r. I do not know
that he has left his peer behind him. fol. 32. for head r. hard. f. 52. for
direct r. dwelt. f. 57. for Paul r. Saul f. 63. for contrited r. conceited.
fol. 82. r. preserved. f. 90. r. captivity. f. 92. Princes. fo* 96. r. Author
of. f. 97. r. not only to the death f. 139. r. when I heard. f. 131. r. Tarquiu*


