THE ART OF COOKERY REFINED AND AUGMENTED.

Containing an Abstract of some rare and rich unpublished Receipts of COOKERY:

Collected from the practice of that incomparable Master of these Arts, Mr.
Jos. Cooper, chief Cook to the Late KING; With several other practices by the
Author, with an addition of Preserves, Conserves, etc. offering an infallible
delight to all Judicious Readers.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. Lowndes at the White-lyon in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the West end. 1654.

READER,
THOUGH the cheats of some preceding pieces that treated on this subject (whose
Title-pages, like the contents of a weekly Pamphlet, promised much more than
the Books performed) may have provided this but a cold intertainment at its
first coming abroad; yet I know it will not stay long in the world, before
every rational Reader will clear it of all alliance to those false
pretenders. Ladies, forgive my confidence if I tell you, that I know this piece
will prove your favorite; and if any thing displeases you, it will be to see
so many uncommon, and undeflour'd Receipts prostituted to the public view,
which perchance you will think might have been placed better among the
paper-secrets in a few of your Cabinets; but it is easy to pardon that offense,
which is only committed in favor of the Common good. I could say, that the
skilfullest professors of either Art need not blush to take out new lessons
from hence, but it is not safe to prepossesse and bespeak expectation.

Farewell.
A Table of the Receipts in the following Treatise.
How to hashe a Leg of Mutton. page 1. How to boil a shoulder of Mutton. page
2 How to boil a neck of Mutton page 4 How to stew a Loyn or Neck of Mutton.
page 5 Another way for the same. page 6 How to boil a breast of mutton. ib. How
to farce a knuckle of veal. page 7 How to boil a neck or breast of veale. page
8 How to stew a Calves head. page 9 How to stew a loyn of Lamb. page 10 How to
boil a joint of Lamb. page 11 How to boil a hanch of Venison. page 12 How to
boil a Duck. page 13 How to boil a Coney. ib. How to stew a Neats tongue.
page 14 How to boil a Chicken. page 15 Another way for the same. page 16 How
to boil Pigeons. page 17 How to make a grand boiled meat. page 18 Another way
for the same. page 20 How to make White-broth. page 21 How to boil a Capon or
Pullet with French Barley. page 22 How to make stewed broth. page 24 How to
boil a Pike. page 25 Another way for the same. page 27 How to stew a Carp.
page 28 Another way for the same. page 29 How to stew a Bream. page 30 How to
stew an Eele. page 31 How to stew Oysters. page 32 How to stew Cockles, being
taken out of the shells. page 33 How to stew Lobsters. page 34 How to stew
Artechokes. page 35 How to stew Potatoes. page 36 How to stew Pippins. page 37
To pickle Salmon to keep half a year. page 38 To pickle Cucumbers. page 39 To
souce a Tench with jelly. page 41 How to souce a Pig. page 43 To souce a Rams
head. page 44 To pickle Oysters. page 45 To pickle Artechokes. page 46 To make
a Sallet of Salmon. page 47 To keep Beef three weeks fresh enough to roast.
ibid. How to roast a Shoulder of Mutton with Oysters. page 48 To hash a
shoulder or leg of mut. page 49 To make sauce for any joint of roasted Mutton.
page 50 Make a hashe of a leg of Lamb. page 52 Farce a leg of Veale to roast.
page 53 To roast a Pig with the skin off. page 54 To roast a Calves head with
Oysters. page 55 How to hashe a Capon. page 57 Sauce for roasted pullet or
capon. page 58 For Woodcocke, Snipe, etc. page 59 Partridge sauce. page 60 T^
^oast Larks with Bacon. ib. Roasted Quails, sauce for them. page 61 How to
roast Oysters. ibid. To make Olaves of Veale. page 62 How to roast a large
Eele. page 63 To roast Pigeons or Chickens. page 64 Batter to fry your garnish
with page 66 To make a frikese of a Loine of Veale. page 67 To make a frikese
for chickens page 69 Another frikese of Chickens, Pigeons, Rabbets, etc. page
70 To make a frikese of Veal or lamb, Sweet-breads and Stones page 71 How to
fry Oysters. page 72 Sauce for fried Soles. page 73 How to fry Turbut. ibid.
How to fry Artechokes. page 74 To fry Skerroots. page 75 To fry Mushromes. page
76 To fry Beans. page 77 To make a Tansey. page 78 How to fry Glarie. page 79
To make Veale Toasts. page 80 To make Fritters. page 81 How to make Pancakes.
page 8(...) To fry young Artechokes. page 83 Scotch Scollops of Veale. page 85
To fry Toasts. page 86 To fry Veale. ibid. Of Puff-paste. page 87 Of cool
Butter-paste. page 88 Paste for thin Bake-meats. page 89 For cold Bake-meats.
page 90 To make a Steak-pie of mutton. ib. To make a pie of a Fillet of Veal.
page 92 How to bake a loyn of Veal. page 93 How to make a Lamb-pie. page 94 How
to make a Tongue-pie. page 95 How to make a Chicken-pie page 96 How to make a
Paris-pie. page 98 A Pie answerable to the grand boiled meat, with 10 other
pies belonging to the first: Figured, etc. page 99 How to make a Bacon-tart.
page 114 A Spinage-tart. page 115 To make Cheesecakes. page 117 How to make an
Almond-tart page 118 How to make a Clary-pie. page 119 ^ow to make a Custard
without eggs. page 121 Ho to make little Pasties, etc. page 122 How to make an
Apricock-tart. page 124 To make a Gooseberry-tart green. ib A Codling-tart.
page 125 How to make a made dish of Puff-paste. page 126 A Red-deer-pie. page
127 How to make a Pie of a leg of Pork page 128 How to make a Pig-pie. ibid.
How to make a Lampre-pie. page 130 A Salmon-pie. page 131 Instructions* etc.
ib. How to make an Olave-pie page 132 How to make buttered Loaves. page 134 How
to make Cheesecakes without milk. page 135 How to make an Ox palat-pie. page
136 How to make a Rice-pudding baked. page 138 How to make Bread-puddings. ib.
How to make French-barly-puddings. page 139 To make Haggus-puddings. ibi^ A
boiled Pudding. page 140 An Oatmeal-pudding. page 141 To make a Hasty-pudding
in a bag. page 142 To make a Shaking pudding. ib. To make Puddings of Wine.
page 143 To make French-barly-puddings. page 144 An Oatmeale-Pudding. page 145
White-puddings, page 146 Rice puddings, etc. page 147 To make Black-puddings.
page 148 To make a Posset. page 149 To make Barly-cream. page 150 To make
Stone-creame. page 151 To make Macroones. page 152 To make a Fool. page 153 To
make Almond-puff. ibid. A Syllabub. page 154 To make Cream with Snow. page 156
To make a Rice Florentine. ibid. To make Cream-cabbidge. page 157 To make
Indian Puffs. page 159 To make a Posset-pie. ibid. An excellent clouted Cream.
page 160 Codling-cream. page 161 Almond-cream. ibid. A quaking Pudding. page
162 To make Apricock-chips. page 163 To dry Apricocks with the full* etc. page
164 To dry Apricocks with half, etc. page 165 To candy Oranges with Marmalede.
page 167 To make Paste of Oranges. page 169 To make Jelly of John-apples, etc.
page 171 To preserve Pearmains in slices. page 172 To make Jelly of Raspasses.
page 173 To preserve Pippins in jelly. page 174 To dry Pippins. page 175 To
make Snow. page 176 To make Raspes Cakes. page 179 To preserve Raspesses. page
181 To preserve Cherries. page 182 To make Quince-cakes the true way. page 184
To preserve sweet Lemmons. page 185 The best way to preserve Oranges. page 187
To make jelly of Oranges. page 188 To candy Oranges. page 189 How to make
Crystal jelly. page 191 How to make white Leach of Cream. page 192
FINIS.
THE ART OF COOKERY, REFINED AND AUGMENTED.
How to hashe a leg of Mutton.
Half boil the Mutton in Water, then take it up and slice it into thin
slices, only leave some about the bone; put it into a pipkin with strong
broth, or the broth which boiled it, with three or four boiled Onions minced,
a little Pepper, large Mace, one pint of Claret or White Wind, and a little
Vinegar. This being done, let it stew above an hour, then put a faggot of sweet
Herbs, that is, Time, sweet-Marjerome, winter-Savory, and Rosemary, stew it a
little after, then scumme off all the fat, and put to the meat a minced Lemmon
and Salt, then dish the bone, and pour the meat upon it, garnish it with
Lemmon, Large Mace and scalded Parsley, then sippit it, and serve it up hot to
the table.

How to boil a shoulder of Mutton.
Half boil the Mutton in Water, then slice it as* before, fore, and preserve
the gravie, putting the Mutton into a pipkin with some of the broth which
boiled it, a little grated bread, Oyster-liquor, Vinegar, Bacon scalded and
sliced thin, a quarter of a pound of Sausages stripped out of their skin, large
Mace, and a little sliced Nutmeg, (put not in the gravie till it be almost
stewed) and let all these boil almost an hour; then put to them a pint of
Oysters, a faggot of sweet Herbs and Salt, stew them together, take out the
bone and broyl it and dish it, then scumme off the fat, putting a little minced
Lemmon into it, shaking it well together, dish it on the bone, garnish it with
fried Oysters in batter, Lemmon sliced and Barberries; before you dish it rub
the dish with a clove of Garlike.

How to boil a neck of Mutton*
Boil your Mutton as fair as you can in Water and Salt. For your Sauce take a
little handful of Samphiere and put it into a pipkin, with strong Broth,
Verjuice, large Mace, Pepper, an Onion, the yolks of three or four Eggs
boiled hard and minced, sweet Herbs and Salt; these being boiled together half
an hour, or more, as you see good, beat it up with Butter and Lemmon (if you
have it) and pour it on your meat (being dish'd) garnish it with the whites of
Eggs and Parsley minced together with sliced Lemmons and sippits, and serve it
up hot.

How to stew a loyne or neck of Mutton.
CUt the Mutton into thin steaks, as to fry, and hack them with the back of
a cleaver, and put it into a pan or pipkin, with as much water as will cover
it, and when it is scummed, put to it three or four Onions sliced, Sage leaves
minced, a little Turnip sliced: when it is half boiled in other broth, sliced
Bacon or Sausege, sliced Ginger, Capers, sweet Herbs minced, Vinegar and Salt;
stew all these together two or three hours softly, till all but a pint of
liquor be consumed, then sippit the meat and lay it in slices, then scum all
the fat off the liquor and pour it on the meat; garnish it with what you please.

Another way for the same.
PRepare as in the last, and put to it a handful of Spinnage scalded, and
hacked with your knife, a handful of french Barley; prepare two or three hard
Lettuces, quartered and scalded, Vinegar, a faggot of sweet Herbs, Ginger, and a
little Salt; when the meat is stewed, dish it with two or three thin tostes
of white bread, scum off the fat and put into it a piece of Butter, Sugar, and
a handful of Gooseberries scalded, then beat it up thick, and pour it on the
meat, garnish it with Lettuce, Spinnage, Gooseberries and Sippits.

How to boil a breast of Mutton.
Boil the Mutton in Water and Salt. For the sauce, take some of the broth
which boiled it Verjuice, half a pound of Raisons stoned, a little Carret cut
in dice-work, the yolks of two or three Eggs hard boiled, and minced, two or
three blades of large Mace, a little sliced Ginger, the bottom of a boiled
Artechoke cut as the Carret; salt it: boil all these together in a pipkin, a
convenient time, then dish your Mutton, and beat up your sauce with Butter and
a little Sugar (if you please) then pour it on the Mutton, garnish it with
Carret cut in works, with some of the boiled Raisons, Barberries, and Sippets,
and serve it up hot to the Table.

How to farce a knuckle of Veale.
TAke half a pound of Suet and mince it very small, and put to it grated
Bread, one grated Nutmeg, a little beaten Clove and Mace, a little Sugar, Salt,
a pretty quantity of Time, Rosemary minced very small, and a quarter of a pound
of Currants, mix all these together with an Egg and a little Verjuice, and
stuff your Knuckle with it, and boil it; for the sauce, take some of the
broth which boiled it, with Verjuice or Vinegar, a sliced Nutmeg, Currants and
sweet Herbs minced, then boil it an hour, and put in some Lemmon, Butter and
Sugar; beat it, and dish your Veale, then pour it on it.

How to boil a neck or breast of Veale.
FIrst parboyle your meat, then cut it into thin slices or steaks, then lay it
in a broad stewing pan, or drying pan, and put to it strong Broth, Verjuice,
thin slices of Bacon, large Mace, an Ox Palate blanched and cut in dice-cut,
Oysters or Cockles, a little handful of Capers one Anchove; stew these
together till there be but a pint left, but have care of breaking the Veale;
lay your Veale one piece by another in a dish, then beat up this broth with a
piece of Butter, and pour it upon it, garnish it with what you please; I will
give you characters of all sorts of garnishing hereafter, that you may please
your own fancy in garnishing.

How to stew a Calves head.
FIrst boil your Calves head in Water half an hour, then take it up and pluck
it all to pieces* and put it into a pipkin with Oysters, and some of the broth
which boiled it, if you have no stronger, a pint of white or clarret Wine, a
quarter of a pound of middling Backon sliced, and either watered or parboyl'd,
ten roasted Chestnuts split, the yolks of three or four Eggs, sweet Herbs minced,
a little Horse-Radish-root scraped; stew all these one hour, then slice the
Brains (being parboyled) and strew a little Ginger and grated Bread, or make a
little batter with Eggs, Ginger, and Salt, and Flower; you may put in some
juice of Spinach, and fry them green with batter, then dish the Meat, and lay
these fried Brains, Oysters, the Chestnuts, and half yolks of Eggs, and sippit
it; then serve it up hot to the Table.

How to stew a loyne of Lamb.
CUt your Lamb into steaks as you did your Mutton, to stew, but not altogether
so thin as the Mutton; put it into a pipkin with water to cover it; it being
scummed, put to it Capers, Samphier, the bottom of two or three Artechokes,
boil six or seven large blades of Mace, half a Nutmeg sliced, Verjuice and
Salt; stew all these together one hour, then dish your Lamb with as little
breaking as you can, then scum off the fat, and put into the broth scalded
Spinach and Parsley minced with scalded Gooseberries, a piece of Butter,
shaking it well together, dish it and serve it up with sippits.

How to boil a joint of Lamb.
Boil your Lamb in Water and Salt: For the Sauce, take some of the Broth which
boiled it, and put it into a pipkin with Verjuice, Mace, three or four Dates,
a handful of (...) and sweet herbs; these being boiled together enough, beat
i^ up with Butter, a handful of scalded Gooseberries, and a little Sugar, if
you find it too sharp; dish the Lamb, and sippit it.

How to boil a hanch of Venison*
LEt your Venison be poudred, then boil it in water: for the sauce, take some
of the strongest broth and put it into a pipkin, with Vinegar, Ginger sliced, a
little Pepper, Colleflower or Collewort stalks boiled, and the pith taken out,
and put in large Mace, Cowes udder boiled and sliced, a little Horseradish
root scraped, and sweet Herbs; boil all these a convenient time, then dish the
Venison, being boiled, and beat up the sauce with a little Butter, and lay
Colleflowre on it, and what you please. This sauce is very good with a boiled
poudred Goose, you may lard your Goose with Bacon, if you please.

How to boil a Duck.
TRusse your Duck and boil it in water, and take some of that broth with
Pistachoes blanched, Cow's udder boiled and sliced, Sausages strippt out of
their skins, white Wine, sweet Herbs, large Mace; boil all these together till
you think it sufficiently boiled, then put to it beet roots boiled and cut in
slices, beat it up with Butter, carve up the Duck, pouring the sauce on the top
of her, and garnish it with sippits, and what you please.

How to boil a Coney.
TRuss your Coney, boil her in water and salt: for the sauce, take strong
broth, if you have any, or that which boyleth it, with two or three Pippins
quartered, large Mace, Pepper, Salt, a handful of Currants, a faggot of sweet
Herbs, two sliced Onions and Vinegar; boil all these together half an hour,
then strain it, and throw away all the thick, put in a piece of Butter and a
little Sugar, with Lemmon, beat it up thick and pour it on your Coney: being
dished, garnish it, and serve it up to the Table.

How to stew a Neats Tongue.
EIther boil or roast your Tongue, and split it, put it into a dish, or flat
pipkin, with a good quantity of Cinnamon, Ginger, a pint of Claret, a little
Vinegar, a bunch of Rosemary tied together, a little grated Bread and Salt;
stew these together till half consumed, dish the Tongue and beat the Broth up
with Butter.

How to boil a Chicken.
SCald the Chickens and trusse them, boiling them in water as white as you can:
For the Sauce (if it be in winter) take a pint of White Wind, Verjuice, five
or six Dates, a little handful of Pine-kernels, five or six blades of large
Mace, a faggot of sweet Herbs; all these boil together till half consumed,
beat it up thick with Butter, and pour it on the Chickens (being dished) with
two or three white-bread tostes dipped slightly in a little Muscadine, and lay
on the Chickens yolks of Eggs cut into quarters, puffe-Paste, Lozanges, Sheeps
tongues fried in green Butter; being boiled and blanched, pickled Barberies,
three or four pieces of Marrow (being boiled) and serve it up hot.

Another way for the same.
IF in Summer, take Wine as before, and a little Broth which boiled them, if
you have no stronger; large Mace, the bottom of two Artechokes, being boiled
and cut in dice-work, an Ox Palate sliced thin, Salt and sweet Herbs; all
these being boiled together, beat it up with Butter, dish the Chickens and pour
this sauce on them, laying on the chickens boiled Aspuragus, hard Lettuce
scalded, a little handful of scalded Gooseberries; sliced Lemmon will do will
in the sauce, if you please; sippit it and serve it up Verjuice, and some of
the broth boiled with large Mace; a little sliced Ginger and Salt being beat up
with Butter, the gizerne of the Chickens, a little Sugar, the Parsley which was
boiled in their bellies, all minced, and a handful of scalded Gooseberries or
Grapes with sippits, will be good.

How to boil Pigeons.
SCald and pull your Pigeons, draw and truss them to boil with Parsley in
their bellies, and boil them in water and salt; for the sauce, take some of
the broth, Vinegar, Bacon scalded and sliced very thin, large Mace, whole
Pepper, 3 or 4 yolks of hard Eggs minced; boil these together with a sprig of
sweet Marjerom a quarter of an hour, and put in a little gravy of any flesh
(if you have it) beat it up with Butter, dish the Pigeons pour the Sauce on
them, garnish the meat with good store of Barberries, Lemmon and Sippits; you
may put in some picled Broom- buds (if you have them) then serve it up hot to
the Table.

How to make a grand boiled Meat.
KIll and pull, or scald what young Foul is in season, as Pigeons, wild or
tame, Partridges, Pheasants, Teale, Plover, Widgeons, Snipes, Larks, or any
other Foul; you may do a young Coney, wild or tame, trusse them and boil
them as fair and as white as you can, and while they are boiling, take strong
Broth, wherein Veal or any other fresh Butchers meat has been boiled to
pieces, put to it an Ox Pallet blanched and cut in dice-work, Pestaches,
Pine-kernels blanched, a quart of White Wind, a good quantity of large Mace,
Salt, and five or six Dates cut to pieces; boil these together as long as you
think it expedient, and when it is boiled put to it a large piece of Butter and
Lemmon sliced very thin, the rind being pared off, and beat it up thick;
then dish your meat orderly with thin tostes in the bottom, pour the sauce on
them; garnish with Sheep tongues, boiled, blanched and split, rolled in
green Batter, and fried green; sliced Lemmon and Orange; sippit it and serve
it up hot to the Table.

Another way for the same.
Boil your fowl as at the fir^^ then take strong Broth a^^ Wine, put to it
large Mace a^^ sliced Nutmeg, a pint of gre^^ Oysters, being washed very
cleaa^ strain the liquor which was wit^ them into the Broth, a handful o^
Capers, a quarter of a pound o^ Cocks stones and combs prepared, a little
Parmasan grated, little sliced Bacon, if it be not rusty, a faggot of sweet
Herbs, Vinegar and Salt; all these being boiled together, beat it up with
Butter and the juice of two or three Oranges; dish your meat a^ in the last,
pouring this on it, and lay on your meat Oysters fried brown, halfyolks of
Eggs, Lettuce scalded green, if in Somer, or Skerriots fried green, as I will
write hereafter, when I treat of ^^^ed meat; garnish your dish ^^^h Lemmon
sliced, pickled ^^rberries, or what other garnish ^^u fancy, or is in fashion.
If you ^^^l not go to the charge of ^^^wle, or that you cannot get
^^^ficiently, lay a boiled neck of ^utton in the middle, or 3 or 4 ^arrowbones
boiled between, some large Poultrey in the ^iddle, as Capon, Duck, and ^^ch
like.

How to make white Broth.
TAke Sack, or white Wine, with the same quantity of strong Broth, Dates
quartered, large Mace, sweet Herbs and Sugar, boil all these together till
one third be consumed, then beat as many yolks of Eggs as will thicken it;
put them in with a piece of Butters, and beat it up till it boil, have a care
it do not curdle; this wi^^ be fit for Capon, Pullet, or Pike or what you
please; dishing you^ meat, if it be flesh, garnish i^ with Lemmon, Barberries,
or any Preserves, and sippit it with puff Paste, Lozanges, or ordinary Paste,
and serve it up hot with the Meat.

How to boil a Capon or Pullet with French Barley.
LEt the Barley be boiled in two several waters, then dreine the water from it
and put it into a pipkin, with large Mace, whole Cynamon, and a little race of
Ginger, and put to it a pint of White Wind, Dates, and some strong Broth of
flesh, or some of the Broth you boil the Capon in, or some Scerroots, or
^otatoes boiled and peeled, or if you have neither of them) ^wo or three Apples
pared and ^uartered, and boiled tender in water, and put them in when the Broth
is almost boiled, which will be enough, when you think the strength of the
spice is boiled out; then take six or eight yolks of Eggs, and beat them well
with a wine-glasse of Sack, and some of that hot broth in the pipkin; then take
the pipkin from the fire and put in the Eggs, to prevent curdling, and sweeten
it with Sugar and set it on the fire till it boyles, keeping it with continual
stirring; then dish the Pullet, being boiled, and pour this broth on it, and
garnish it with the same, and some Lemmon; lay boiled Marrow on the Meat.

How to make stewed Broth.
LEt the pot be set a boiling five hours before dinner with Water and good
store of fresh Beef, or bones of Venison or Mutton, and to every gallon of
Water put in two pound of Raisons, one pound of Currants, half a pound of
Pruines, and one pound of Pruines boiled in a bagg to strain in the broth (as
you shall have in order) but so soon as the broth boyls, let there be a
quantity of one pound of wheaten Bread sliced and steeped in some of the hot
booth till it be tender, then strain it through a sieve or strainer, and put it
into the broth, keeping it with often stirring, then strain the Pruines with a
pint of Claret, or a less quantity of Verjuice, if you have no Wine, and put
it in the broth with a Nutmeg, as much Mace, half as much Cloves, beat all;
and about two hours or more before dinner, put in the ribbs of a neck of
Mutton, and as much more fruit, a bundle of sweet Herbs; and when it is boiled,
season it with Salt and Sugar; then dish the Mutton and Broth together, and
serve it up.

How to boil a Pike.
TRusse your Pike to boil, and wash it very clean, and boil it in Water,
Salt, and Vinegar; put it not in the liquor till it boyleth, let it boil very
fast at first to make it crispe, but afterward let it boil softly; the rivet
of a Pike will not require so much boiling; for the sauce, put in a pipkin a
pint of white Wine, sliced ginger, large mace, a quarter of a pound of Dates
quartered, a pint of Oysters with the liquor, being strained, a little
Vinegar, and Salt; boil all these a quarter of an hour, then mince a handful
of picked Parsley with a little sweet Herbs amongst it, and boil it another
quarter of an hour, till half be consumed; then dish your Pike in a dish,
garnished with fearced Ginger, or chippings of Manchets, Lemmon or Orange, or
what you please; some flower or green garnish will do well in the Spring, and
sippit it with puff-Paste, and lay on it the Marrow of two bones, being boiled
in as big pieces, as you can, with the rivet on it; you must beat up your Broth
with half a pound of Butter, and minced Lemmon.

Another way for the same.
Boil your Pike as at first; for the sance, take white Wine, Vinegar, Mace, a
little whole Pepper, a good handful of Cockles, being broyled or boiled, and
picked out of the shells, being washed well with Vinegar, a faggot of sweet
Herbs, the liver being beat and strained, Horse-raddish root; boil all these
together; it being boiled, dish your Pike with sippits, and beat up your sauce
with Lemmon minced and good store of Butter, pouring it on the fish; garnish it
as you fancy.

A Pike (if small) is excellent meat fried with Butter, and the sauce Butter,
Lemmon sliced, Nutmeg and Salt beat up thick with a ltitle fried Parsley, or
baked with Nutmeg, Ginger, and Pepper, and Salt, with good store of Butter.

How to stew a Carp.
LEt your Carp be alive, and when you are ready to boil it, take it and scale
it with your knife, drying it very well with a cloth; open the belly, taking
out the entrails, then wash the blood into a pipkin with claret Wine (a pint
will be the least you can use) with Vinegar, a ladleful of some fresh broth, or
water, a faggot of sweet Herbs, two or three whole Onions, half a pound of
Butter; stew all these together with the Carp half an hour, or more, softly;
then dish your Carp with sippits and tostes in the bottom, pour some of this
broth on them, garnish them with Rosemary or Bayse dipped in Butter and fried,
or Lemmon, Barberries, Grapes, Ginger on the side of the dish; be sure you
boil the Rivet, it being the best of the meat, and lay it on the Carpe, being
dished.

Another way for the same.
OPen your Carp and wash it very clean with a cloth, all the blood out; do
not scale it as the other, but put it into a flat pan, or pipkin; there are
things purposely to stew fish in; and put to it a pint of white Wine, Mace,
Ginger, Salt, Vinegar, Oysterliquor, and sweet Herbs; and when the Carpe is
stewed, take some of the liquor and beat it up thick with the yolke of an Egg
well beaten, and a piece of Butter, then heat your dish wherein you serve up
your Carp, and rub it with a clove of Garlike; put minced Lemmon in your sauce;
dish your Carp with two or three tosts of white Bread in the dish; sippit it,
and serve it up with what garnish you please.

How to stew a Bream.
SCale your Bream and wash it without, but preserve the blood for to stew it
with, as follows, Take Claret, Vinegar, Salt, Ginger sliced two large races,
the pulp of one pound of Pruines, being boiled and strained unto the Broth, one
Anchove, sweet Herbs, and Horseraddish root stamped and strained; stew these
with no more liquor than will just cover the fish* when it is stewed beat up
some of the liquor with Butter and pour it on the fish (being dished) garnish
it with rasped Bread, Lemmon, Orange, and Barberries: serve it up hot to the
Table.

How to stew an Ele.
FLay the Eles and cut them into pieces, put them into a pan with Water and
Verjuice, as much as will cover them, with large Mace, Pepper, a quarter of a
pound of Currants, 2 or 3 Onions, three or four spoonful of Yest, a bundle of
sweet Herbs; show all these together till the fish he very tender, then dish
them, and put to the Broth a quarter of a pound of Butter, a little Salt and
Sugar, pour it on the fish, sippit it, and serve it up hot to the Table.

How to stew Oysters.
Strain the liquor from the Oysters, then wash them very clean, and put them
into a pipkin with the liquor, a pint of Wine to a quart of Oysters, two or
three whole Onions, large Mace, Pepper, Ginger; let all the spice be whole,
they will stew the whiter; put in Salt, a little Vinegar, a piece of Butter and
sweet Herbs; stew all these together till you think them enough, then take out
some of that liquor and put to it a quarter of a pound of Butter, a Lemmon
minced, and beat it up thick, setting it on the fire, but let it not boil;
dreine the rest of the liquor from the Oysters through a cullender, and dish
them; pour this sauce on them; garnish your dish with searced Ginger, Lemmon,
Orange, Barberries, or Grapes scalded; sippit it, and serve it up.

How to stew Cockles, being taken out of the Shells.
WAsh them well with Vinegar, broyle or boil them before you take them out,
then put them into a dish with a little Clarret and Vinegar, a handful of
Capers, Mace, Pepper, a little grated Bread, a little minced Thyme, Salt, and
the yolks of two or three hard Eggs minced; let all these stew together till
you think them enough, then put in a good piece of Butter, shaking it together,
then heat your dish and rub it with a clove of Garlike, and put two or three
tostes of white Bread in the bottom, laying the Meat on them, Crawfish,
Praunes, or Shrimps, are excellent good the same way, being taken out of their
Shells you may make variety of garnish with the shells.

How to stew Lobsters.
YOur Lobsters being boiled, take out the meat, breaking the shell as little as
you can, but break the meat small, put it into a pipkin or dish, with Claret
wine, Vinegar, and Nutmeg sliced, a little Salt, a piece of Butter; stew all
these together an hour softly; it being stewed almost dry, put to it a little
more Butter, stir it well together, lay very thin tostes in the dish, and lay
your meat on them, or you may put it into the shells, and garnish your dish
about with the small legs, and lay your body over the meat with an addition of
Lemmon and rare colored flowers, being in Summer, or pickled in winter.

Crabs are good the same way, only add to them the juice of two or three
Oranges, a little Pepper and grated Bread.

How to stew Artechokes.
FIrst let your Artechokes be boiled, then take out the core, and take off all
the leaves, cut the bottom into quarters, splitting them in the middle;
provide a flat stewing-pan, or dish, wherein put thin Manchet-tostes, and lay
the Artechoke on them* the Marrow of two bones, five or six large blades of
Mace, half a pound of preserved Plummes, with the syrrup, Verjuice and Sugar,
if the Syrrup do not mak^ them sweet enough; let all these stew together two
hours, if you stew them up in a dish, serve them in it, not stirring them,
only lay on some preserves, which are fresh; as Barberries, or such like;
sippit it and serve it up: instead of Preserves you may stew ordinary Plummes,
which will be cheaper, if you have no old Preserves.

How to stew Potatoes.
Boil or roast your Potatoes very tender, and blanch them; cut them into thin
slices, put them into a dish or stewingpan, put to them three or four Pippins
sliced thin, a good quantity of beaten Ginger and Cynamon, Verjuice, Sugar and
Butter; stew these together an hour very softly; dish them being stewed enough,
putting on them Butter and Verjuice beat together, and stick it full of green
Sucket or Orrengado, or some such Liquid sweet-meat; sippit it and scrape Sugar
on it, and serve it up hot to the Table.

How to stew Pippins.
PAre your Pippins, cut them into halves and coare them, and lay them into a
stewing-pan with fair water, Rose Water, a little Verjuice, Sugar, Orangepeel,
Ambergriece, or Musk; if you eat them hot put Butter on them, being beat up
thick; if you eat them cold, put not any in; sippit them, scraping Sugar on the
top, and serve it up.

To pickle Salmon to keep half a year.
TAke the Salmon and cut in six round pieces, then boil it in Vinegar and
Water, there being two parts Vinegar, and one of Water, but let your liquor
boil half an hour before you put in the Salmon, which being well boiled,
take it out of the liquor and dreine it very well, then take Rosemary-leaves,
Bay Leaves, Cloves, Mace, and gross Pepper, a good quantity of each, and boil
them in two quarts of White Wind, and two quarts of Vinegar, and let it boil
well for half an hour; then take the Salmon, being quite cold, and rubb it
well with Pepper and Salt, and pack it into a cask with a lay of Salmon and a
lay of Spice, that is boiled in the liquor, but let your liquor and spice be
very cold; when the Salmon is packed, then put in the liquor, and renew the
pickle once a quarter, and it will keep a year or more. This is for one
Salmon, and so proportionably; let not the cask be bigger than just to fill it
with Salmon and Pickle.

Put some Lemmon peels into the pickle, and let the Salmon be new taken, if
possible.

How to pickle Cucumbers.
GAther the tops of the ripest Dill and cover the bottom of the vessel, when
you pickle the Cucumbers, and lay a layer of Cucumbers and another of Dill,
till you have filled the Vessel within a handful of the top, then take as much
water as you think will fill the vessel, and mix it with Salt and a quarter
of a pound of Allom to a gallon of Water, and pour it on them, and press them
down with a stone on them, and keep them covered close.

For that use I think the water will be best boiled and cold, which will keep
longer sweet; or if you like not this pickle, do it with Water, Salt, and
White Wind Vinegar, or (if you please) pour the Water and Salt on them scalding
hot, which will make them ready to use the sooner.

How to souce a Tench with jelly.
YOur Tench being new, draw out the garbish at the gills, and cut off all the
gills, it will boil the whiter; then set on as much clear water as will
conveniently boil it, and season it with Salt, Vinegar, 5 or 6 Bay Leaves,
large Mace, whole Cloves 3 or 4, a faggot of sweet Herbs bound up hard
together; so soon as this preparative boyls, put in your Tench, being clean
wiped; do not scale it, it being boiled take it up, wash off all the loose
scales; it will be best to put in your Spices after the Tench is in and
scummed: the fish being boiled and taken up, strain the liquor through a
jellybagg, and put to it a piece of Iceing-glass, being washed and steeped for
the purpose, and boil it very cleanely: dish your fish in the dish you intend
to send it up in; then strain the liquor through the bag, and pour it on the
fish, and let it cool* you may sonce a Carp, or an^ other pond-fish, only you
must put in more Icing-glasse, the other fish being not so apt to jelly;
garnish with Lemmon-peel cut in branches or long pieces as you fancy, with
Barberries and Flowers.

This gellie will serve to gelly Lobsters, Crawfish, or Praunes* hanging them
in some glass by a thread, at their full proportion, and filling the glass
with the jelly when it is warm, it being cold* turn it out on the glass
plate; if you fancy it yon may make very pretty things for to set out a table,
and cheap; you may color your jelly in diverse colors, but I think white to be
the best for this use* I will omit it for another place.

How to souce a Pigg.
SCald the Pigg and cut it into four quarters, and bone it, and let it lie in
water a day and a night; then roll it up (like Brawn) with Sage-leaves, Lard,
let your Lard be watered and cut into small pieces, grated Bread mixed with the
juice of Orange* season it with Nutmeg, Mace and Salt; this being done, roll
it up in the quarters of the Pigge very hard (like Brawn) bind it with tape,
then boil it with fair Water, white Wine, large Mace, a little whole Ginger,
a little Lemmon-peele, a faggot of sweet Herbs and Salt; boil it very well,
and set in an earthen pot to cool in the liquor, and let it souce there two
days at least; then check it out on Plates, or serve it in a collar (like
Brawn) and eat it with Sugar and Mustard.

How to sauce a Ramm 's Head.
CUt the Head off with a good part of the Neck to it, and boil it with the skin
on* it will require a great boiling; it being boiled, take it up and pluck off
the skin, souce it in Jelly, or boil some broth (which you have boiled fresh
meat in) with Vinegar, salt, a good handful of sweet herbs, Ginger, Pepper, a
good piece of Horse-raddish root scraped, and a quarter of a pound of French
Barley; boil them well together and strain it through a bagg, and souce the
head in it; it being souced, slice it and serve it on a plate with Vinegar, or
serve it up whole with the horns.

How to pickle Oysters.
TAke the largest Oysters you can get, strain them from the liquor, and wash
them clean, then set on as much water as you think will cover them, and when
it boyleth, put them in, and let them but scald, and pour them from the
liquor; then take the natural liquor, with some of that which scalded them,
Vinegar, large Mace, whole Pepper, Salt, and two or three Bay Leaves; boil all
these together, barrel your Oysters (being cold) and fill them up with liquor,
and make them up very close, being very cold; a clove of Garlike will do well
in some of them, for those that like it.

I would have mentioned the pickling of all sorts of Flowers, Seeds, Buds, and
Roots, only it is so tedious, and so common, that every one can do them;
only Artechokes you may pickle, as follows.

To pickle Artechokes.
WHen your Artechokes are ripe, gather them, and cut off the stalk within an
inch of the Choke, washing them very clean, and boil them a little with Water
and Salt; then take them up, laying the bottom upward till they be cold: this
being done, provide a vessel of clear Water and Salt boiled together, and
cooled, then put the Artechokes into it, covering it very close, and you may
keep them all the year, have a care of making it too salt, they are excellent
for Pies at Christmas, or to stew.

How to make a Sallet of Salmon.
WHen the fresh Salmon is boiled, mince it small with Apples and Onions, then
mix it with Oil and Vinegar, a little Salt and Pepper; sippit it, and serve
it up. Pickled Herrings are excellent with the same ingredients; the seeds of
Cabbage or Turnip are excellent Sallet hot, when they are ready to blossom,
being boiled and buttered.

How to keep Beef three weeks fresh enongh to roast.
WRap your Beef up very close in Linen, and lay it in some dry vessel, and
in a dry room, and cover it close up with Salt, that no air gets in, and it
will be very fresh and sweet.

How to reast a shoulder of Mutton with Oysters.
Strain your Oysters, wash them and scald them, dreine them well; then provide
grated Bread, Salt, minced Thyme and Parsley, Mace, Nutmeg and Pepper beat very
small; mix all these with a little Vinegar and the white of an Egg; roll your
Oysters in it, and make little holes in your Mutton, being spitted, and thrust
your Oysters in half way, and keep them in with little scuers, or sprigges of
Thyme: roast it, and preserve the gravie, and that which droppeth from it for
the sauce, with white Wine, Vinegar, the Oyster-liquor, sliced Nutmeg, some of
the meat which was left of stuffing it, and Oysters; boil all these together,
and put the Gravie, with Salt, and a piece of Butter, a minced Lemmon, or the
juice of an Orange; rub your dish with a clove of Garlike, and dish your Mutton
with this sauce in the bottom, garnish it with Lemmon and serve it up.

How to hashe a shoulder or leg of Mutton.
Half roast the Mutton and draw it from the spit, cut it into thin slices and
put it into a pipkin or stewing-panne, with strong Broth, a pint of Claret,
Vinegar, five or six Anchoves, a sliced Nutmeg, a faggot of sweet Herbs, a
handful of Capers, and Salt; stew all these together one hour, or more; then
put in the Gravie which came out of the meat, when you cut it in pieces, the
juice of Lemmon; scumm off the fat as clean as you can, then dish your bone,
pouring the meat on it; garnish it with Lemmon and serve it up.

How to make sauce for any joint of roasted Mutton.
Boil Vinegar, Claret Wine, or strong Broth, a sliced Nutmeg, minced Thyme,
Salt, and minced Lemmon in it, when it is boiled, and Gravie (if you have it)
rub your dish with Garlike (if you like it) and serve it up with your Mutton.

Another way for the same.
OR Claret, five or six Oysters, with some of the liquor, a little pickled
Samphiere, three or four blades of Mace, an Onyon minced with sweet herbs and
salt boiled together; it being boiled put in minced Lemmon and Gravie; dish
your Mutton with this sauce, or set a dish under the Mutton as it is roasting,
with Claret, Vinegar, a sprig of Thyme, a little sliced Nutmeg, one Anchove,
Horse-raddish root scraped, a handful of Broom-buds pickled, and Salt; when
the Mutton is roasted scum off the fat, and pour the sauce on it, being dished.

I could relate many more; but this shall suffice for this subject.

How to make a hashe of a Leg of Lamb.
Half roast your Lamb, then slice it from the bone into a pipkin, but leave
some meat on the bone, and lay it in a dish by, and put to your sliced meat Ver
juice, Claret, and the yolks of three hard Eggs minced, a sliced Nutmeg,
roasted Chestnuts quartered or sliced, sweet Herbs minced, a quantity of pickled
Mushromes minced, two or three whole Onions, a little strong Broth* stew these
together with as little breaking the meat as possible; it being well stewed,
put to it a piece of Butter, a minced Lemmon, red Beet-root; being boiled and
cut into dice-work, shaking them well together, boil the bone and dish it with
this meat laid on it, and lay on it boiled Asparragus. Beet-roots scalded,
Lettuce scalded yolks of Eggs cut into halves, with sliced Lemmon sippit your
dish and serve it up hot.

How to farce a Leg or Fillet of Veale to roast.
TAke Beefe-suet minced very small, with Thyme, sweet Marjerome, and a little
Winter Savoury, Cloves and Mace beat, Salt, grated Bread, five or six Dates
minced, and a handful of Pine-kernels blanched; mix all these together with a
little Verjuice and the yolk of an Egg* This being done, cut your Veale full of
little holes and stuff it full with this Compound; spit it and roast it
thoroughly: for the sauce, take Vinegar, Butter, Sugar, Cynamon and Ginger
beaten; beat it up thick together, dish your Veale with the sauce, garnish it
with Orange sliced, and serve it up.

How to roast a Pig with the skin off.
WHen your Pigge is fleyed and garbidged, dry it very well with a cloth, and
make a hard meat with Bread, three or four Eggs, Cream, minced Thyme,
Beef Suet, a little beaten Cloves, Mace and Salt; it being compounded like a
Pudding, stuff the belly of the Pig full, and scuer it up close, trusse it
round and spit it, laying it down to the fire, but stick it full of sprigges
of Thyme; set a dish under it with Claret, a little Thyme, a sliced Nutmeg,
with a little Vinegar and Salt; baste the Pigge with it till it be roasted,
then froath it up with butter, taking this sauce with a little minced Lemmon
and a large piece of Butter; beat it up and put it in your dish with the Pig.

How to roast a Calves head with Oysters.
SPlit your head, as to boil, take out the brains, washing them very well
with the Head, cut out the Tongue, boil it a little and blanch it; let the
Brains be parboyled as well as the Tongue; mince the Brains and Tongue, a
little Sage, Oyster, Marrow, or Beef suet very small, mix with it: it being
minced, three or four yolks of raw Eggs, beaten Ginger, Pepper, Nutmeg, grated
Bread, Salt and a little Sack (if the Brains and Eggs make it not moist
enough: this being done, parboyl your Calves head a little in water, then take
it up and dry it well with a cloth, filling the holes where the brained and
tongue lay, with this meat, and bind it up close together and spit it and
stuff it with Oysters, compounded with the same ingredients as they were with
the Shoulder of Mutton; stick it as full of them as you can, and roast it
thoroughly, setting a dish under it to catch the Gravie, wherein let there be
Oysters, sweet Herbs minced, a little White Wind and a sliced Nutmeg* when the
Head is roasted set the dish wherein the saucer is, on the coals, to stew a
little; then put in a piece of Butter, the juice of an Orange and Salt; beating
it up thick together, dish your Head and put the sauce to it, and serve it up
hot to the Table.

How to hashe a Capon.
ROast your Capon almost enough, then cut all the flesh from the bones which
will mince, and mince it very small; put it into a pipkin with white Wine and a
little strong Broth, five or six hard yolks of Eggs, with nine or ten
Chestnuts minced very small, an Ox Palate sliced very thin, a little Bacon (if
it be not rusty) minced small, some powder of Saffron, a handful of Pistaches;
stew all these together with the gristles and bones (which will not mince) till
it be tender; then put in a large piece of Butter, a little Vinegar or minced
Lemmon (if you have it) with a little of the peel, and a little Salt; shake it
well together and let it not boil; then lay thin white-bread tostes in the
dish; pour this meat on it, and lay the bones in order about the dish with
Sippits, Barberries, half yolks of Eggs, or green and what other colored
garnish you fancy.

A Sauce for a roastest Pullet or Capon.
WHen your Pullet is roasted and dished, put a little piece of Butter into the
Belly at the end, with a little Claret, a hard yolk of an Egg minced, a Lemmon
squeezed into it and Salt; give these one boil with the Gravie and the Foul
in the dish, then garnish it with Lemmon and serve it up.

For Woodcock, Snipe, etc.
YOu may make sauce for Woodcocks or Snipes as follows; If you draw your
Foul put an Onion in the belly, then spit them* roast them with a dish under
them, in which let there be Claret, Vinegar, an Anchove, Pepper and Salt; the
Foul being roasted, put a little piece of Butter and a little grated Bread,
shaking it well together and dish it with your Fowl.

It is very good sauce for a wild Duck, only rub your dish with a clove of
Garlike, because it is a ranker foul.

Another way for the same.
Boiled Onions, Pepper, Salt and Butter, is very good; or raw Onions, Water,
Pepper, Salt, with a little Gravy of any fresh meat.

Partridge sauce.
FOr Partridge, grated Bread, Water, Salt, and a whole Onion boiled together;
when it is boiled take out the Onion and put a minced Lemmon and a piece of
Butter: dish your Fowl and serve it up with this sauce.

How to roast Larkes with Bacon.
WHen your Larks are pulled and drawn, wash them and spit them with a thin
slice of Bacon and a Sage leaf between every one; make your sauce with the
juice of two or three Oranges, Claret, and a little sliced Ginger, give it one
or two walms on the fire and beat it up with a piece of Butter; dish* your
Larkes with the sauce in it.

Roasted Quails, a Sauce for them.
DRy some Vine-leaves on the spit, or in a dish*before the fire, mince them
very small, put them into Claret and a little Vinegar, with a little small
Pepper and Salt; it being boiled beat it up thick with a piece of Butter,
serving up your Foul in it.

How to roast Oysters.
Strain the liquor from the Oysters, and wash them very clean, and give them
a scald in boiling water, then cut small Lard and lard them with a larding
sever, and spit them on a small spit provided for that service; then beat two
or three yolks of Eggs with a little grated Bread, or grated Nutmeg, Salt, a
little Rosemary and Thyme minced very small; and after your Oysters are heat at
the fire, baste them continually with these ingredients, laying them pretty
warm at the fire: for the sauce, boil a little White Wind, some of the Oysters
liquor, with a sprigge of Thyme and grated Bread, with a little Salt; it being
boiled beat it up thick with a piece of Butter; rub your dish with a clove of
Garlike, and dish them with the sauce.

How to make Olaves of Veale.
SLice your Veal into thin slices, but as broad and as long as you can cut out
of a leg or fillet of Veale, and provide for them grated Bread, Cloves, Nutmeg,
Mace beat, sweet Herbs minced, Currants and Salt; mix all these together with
Verjuice and a raw Egg, with a little Sugar, and roll it into the slices of
Veale as close as you can, and spit them the convenientest way to keep the meat
in, and roast them brown: for the sauce, mix Verjuice, Sugar, Butter, Cynamon
and Ginger; beat it up thick together and dish it with your meat being roasted
well.

How to roast a large Eele.
STrip your Eele and garbidge it, and cut it into pieces a handful long, and
spit it on a little spit, because it must be thrust through the middle of the
sides, and not the ends; have a care of shaking shaking them off the spit
before they are roasted; as they roast let a dish stand under to catch the
Gravy; put to it a little Vinegar, Salt, Pepper, one Clove, Parmasan or old
English Cheese, or a little Botargo grated: the fish being roasted scum off all
the fat; then put in a piece of Butter, shaking it well together; put in Salt,
and dish it with your Eeles; garnish it with Orange and serve it up hot.

An excellent way to roast Pigeons or Chickens.
PRepare them to trusse; then make a farcing-meat with Marrow or Beefe-suet,
with the liver of the Foul minced very small, and mix with it grated Bread,
the yolks of hard Eggs minced, Mace and Nutmeg beat, the tops of Thyme minced
very small, and Salt: incorporate all these together with hard Eggs and a
little Verjuice, then cut the skin off the Foul betwixt the legs and the body,
before it is trussed, and put in your finger to raise the skin from the flesh,
but take care you break not the skin; then farce it full with this meat, and
trusse the legs close to keep in the meat; then spit them and roast them,
setting a dish under to save the Gravy, which mix with a little Claret, sliced
Nutmeg, a little of that farced meat, and Salt; then give it two or three walms
on the fire, and beat it up thick with the yolk of a raw Egg and a piece of
Butter, with a little mine'd Lemmon, and serve it up in the dish with the Foul.

How to make a Batter to fry your garnish with.
MIx Eggs, flower of Wheat, Salt, Ginger and Cream together very well, and dip
your garnish in it, and fry it in a pan with suet, being rightly tempered
with heat, as Bay Leaves, sprigges of Rosemary, Sheeps Tongues boiled, blanched
and split, Oysters, or tostes of Manchet, or dip your fritter-moulds in it, and
fry it; it being fried, put it off with your slice, or knife; if you will have
them green put into the Batter the juice of Wheat, or green Beet, or Spynage,
which is the best; you may season your Batter according as you please; you may
put in Sugar, Salt, or any sort of Spice, or you may alter the color with
Saffron, and many more things, which I will leave to your own fancy.

How to make a Frikese of a loyne of Veale.
CUt your loyne of Veale into thin steaks, kidney and all the fat, laying the
kidney by it self to fry; then beat it with your cleavers back as thin as you
can, then prepare green tops of Thyme, a handful of Capers, two or three
Anchoves, an Onion; mince these together very small, and put to it a sliced
Nutmeg, a little beaten Pepper and Salt; then hack a handful of Sorrel and
Parsley together, but do not mince it small; fry your Veale in Butter, as you
do Steakes in a large drying pan; the Kidney being fried, drein all the Butter
which fried it out of the pan, and put to the Veale about a quart of strong
Broth or Wine, with the Ingredients which you minced small, and fry it in the
pan t^^^ half consumed; then put in your Sorrel and Vinegar, frying it a little
longer; when you think it is well, put into it a minced Lemmon or two, with
half a pound of Butter, stir it well together, but let it not boil lest your
Lemmon grow bitter: this being ready, take a large dish, ginger the edge and
garnish it with Lemmon, Barberries, and tostes in the bottom of the dish,
soaked in strong Broth, and lay the Veale on it with the sauce; garnish it on
the top of the Veale with any green fried garnish, as Sheeps tongues, or
Fritter cast in mould, with Orange or Lemmon, or what you think fit; sippit it
and serve it up hot to the Table.

How to make a Frikese for Chickens.
FLey your Chickens and draw them, cut them into quarters, or thin slices, with
the giblets and liver; beat them well with the back of your cleaver, and fry
them brown with Butter; in the interim, provide sweet Herbs minced, Ox Palate,
Dates, the bottom of two or three Artechokes sliced all together, Mace and
Ginger beat* Salt* now your meat being fried, and the pan clean, put in the
Meat with strong Broth, Verjuice, and all the Ingredients prepared, and let it
fry till all but a pint be consumed; then put in half a pound of Butter*
Sugar, scalded Gooseberries, a minced Lemmon, shake it well together, put
tostes in the dish; being garnished with Bread, rasped and searced, sliced
Lemmon, and scalded Lettuce quartered; sippit it and lay Lettuce, scalded
Gooseberries, and boiled Asparragus on the meat and serve it up hot.

Another Frikese of Chickens, Pigeons, and Rabbits, etc.
PRepare your meat, and fry it as aforesaid, and put it into the pan with
Broth or White Wind, or Claret, Vinegar, sweet Herbs minced, a little
Horse-raddish root scraped, a quarter of a pound of Bacon cut into dicework,
and fry a little in a fryingpan by it self, half a pint of Oysters with the
liquor, or Cockles, Pepper and Nutmeg a convenient quantity (being consumed in
the drying pan) of the Broth, put in half a pound of Butter and minced Lemmon,
shaking it well together; dish it with rostes, sippit and Lemmon, and serve it
up hot.

How to make a Frikese of Veal or Lamb, Sweet-breads and Stones.
SPlit your Kidneyes and the Stones, and fley off the skins from the Stones,
hacking them with your knife, fry them as your Foul in the pan, being prepared
the second time, put in the meat with a quart of Wine, a little Vinegar, a
handful or two of Pinekernells, or three or four yolks of hard Eggs minced, a
little Thyme and sweet Marjerome minced, a sliced Nutmeg; all these being fried
together till a quantity of the liquor be consumed* then put to it a handful of
pickled Purslane, a piece of Butter, Sugar, Salt, and a little Gravy (if you
have it) shake it well together and dish it with tostes in the dish, garnishing
it with Lemmon, Puff-paste, Lozenges, and some of your green garnish fried;
serve it up hot; you may fry diverse sorts* of meat the same way.

How to fry Oysters.
Strain your liquor from the Oysters, wash and scald them a little; then dry
them and roll them in Flower, or make a Batter with Eggs, Flower and a little
Cream, with Salt, rouling them in it, and fry them in Butter; for the sauce,
boil the juice of two or three Oranges, some of the natural liquor; a sliced
Nutmeg, Claret; it being boiled a little, put in a piece of Butter, beating it
up thick, then warm your dish and rub it with a clove of Garlike, and dish
your Oysters, garnishing it with sliced Orange, serving it up hot.

Sauce for fried Soles.
THere is an excellent Sauce for fried Soles, the Garlike excepted; if you have
no Oysterliquor put in Claret the more; garnish them with Orange and Barberries.

How to fry Turbut.
CUt your fish into thin slices, and hack it with a knife, and it will be
ribb'd; then fry it almost brown with Butter, then take it up, dreining all
the Butter from it, and the pan clean, then put it into the pan with Claret,
sliced Ginger, Nutmeg, one Anchove, Salt, and Saffron beat; fry it till half be
consumed, then put in a piece of Butter, shaking it well together with a minced
Lemmon, and dish it: garnish it with Lemmon, rub your dish with a clove of
Garlike.

How to fry Artechokes.
Boil and sever all from the Bottomes, and slice them in the middst and
quarter it, dip them in Batter, and fry them in Butter; for the sauce, take
Verjuice, Butter, Sugar, with the juice of an Orange: dish your Artechokes with
this sauce (being fried brown) and lay boiled Marrow on them; garnish it with
Orange and serve it up.

To fry Skerroots.
Boil your Skerroots and peel them: this done, roll them in Batter made with
Eggs, Ginger, Cynamon, flower of Wheat, and Salt; if you will have them green,
put in juice of Spinach and fry them in Butter very carefully, for they are apt
to stick together and burn; if you fry them brown, the same sauce as was in the
Artechokes will be good; If green, take Verjuice, and Butter, Sugar, a sliced
Nutmeg, the yolks of two or three Eggs, with the juice of Spinach beat up thick
together, and serve it up with this sauce; garnish it with some pretty cuts of
puff-Paste, or other, with Sugar scraped in it.

How to fry Mushromes.
BLanch them, and wash them clean; if they be large quarter them, and boil
them a little with Water, Salt, Vinegar, sweet Herbs, large Mace, Cloves,
Bayleaves, with two or three cloves of Garlike; then take them up and dry them,
and dip them in Batter, and fry them till they are brown: make sauce with
Claret for them, the juice of two or three Oranges, Salt, Butter, the juice of
Horse-raddish root beat and strained, sliced Nutmeg and Pepper; put these into
a fryingpan with the yolks of two or three Eggs, beat and shake them well
together for fear it should curdle; dish your Mushromes, the dish being rubbed
with a clove of Garlike; garnish it with Orange or Lemmon.

How to fry Beans.
TAke Garden Beans and boil them tender, blanch and beat them, with Almonds,
boiled Pippins, grated Cheese, Sugar, Ginger finely beaten, Horse-raddish and
Spinach beat and strained, a little grated Bread; mix all these together with
Eggs, Salt and Cream, with Marrow finely minced into a gentle Paste, and make
it up into what fashion you please; stick it full of Pinekernells, and fry them
with Butter; for the sauce, take Verjuice, and the juice of Spinach, the juice
of Oranges, a little Muscadine, Sugar, and make them ready to boil; then beat
the yolks of Eggs very well and put them into the sauce, with a piece of
Butter, and beat it up thick together till it boil, take heed it does not
curdle; then dish the meat, pouring this sauce on it; scrape Sugar on them and
serve it up.

How to make a Tansey.
TAke a good quantity of Spinach, with a little Tansey, and beat it together,
and strain it with Cream, and to every pint of that Cream and juice put eight
eggs, with half the whites well beat, with a grated Nutmeg, a little salt and
sugar, but not too much sugar, for it will make the Tansey burn; you may put
to Violets pickled, and mince a little and a little grated bread, it will make
it eat shorter, but it will not look so green; then make your pan hot with a
little piece of butter, shaking it round, and pour the Tansy in it: set it on
a fire which is not too hot, keeping it with continual stirring till it be
thick* then let it congeale together, and keep the bottom of the pan moist,
with putting under it little pieces of butter, shaking it round: and when you
think it is fried enough on that side, after the same manner turn it on a
Plate, and fry the other side: then dish it, and squeeze a Lemmon on it with
Sugar, and serve it up.

How to fry Clarie.
TAke your Clarie and wash and dry it, then beat some of it, and strain it with
eggs, cream, a grated nutmeg, rosewater, Musk or Amber-greese, beating it
well together: then prepare your drying pan, let it be hot with butter in it:
dip your Clary in this compound, and fry it; you may dip some tosts made of
Manchet, and fry them in the same manner, and lay it under the Clary in the
dish; it being fried, stick it full of Comfets* Pistaches, or any dry preserve
sliced thin* scrape Sugar on it and serve it up hot to the Table.

To make Veale-Tostes.
TAke a kidney of Veal which has been roasted, and cold, mince it very small,
and put to it grated Bread, a sliced Nutmeg, Currants, Salt, Sugar, Almonds, or
Pistaches bruised in a mortar, with a little Rose Water, mix all these
together with Eggs and Cream, as you do a Pudding, then cut thin tostes of
white-Bread, and lay this compound on them, and fry them brown with Butter.

How to make Fritters.
MAke your Batter with good store of Eggs mixed with Sack, new Ale, Salt, beaten
Ginger, and a little Cream, beat together well; then provide Pippins, Marrow,
or what you intend to make them of, and cut them in round pieces as big as a
Walnut and put it into the Batter; you must warm your Sack and Ale before you
put it into the Eggs; the Fruit or Marrow being in, let it stand before the
fire an hour or more, to rise, but let it not stand so hot as to bake: This
being done, provide a Kettle or Pan half full of tried suet, tempered with a
good heat on the fire, but not too hot, if it be, the Fritter being cast in,
the Suet will boil over the top; neither castin so many at one time* for then
they will not fry clear: you must take them out of the Batter with your hand,
and disperse them about the pan, lest they stick together: they being fried,
dish them, and strew Sugar on them, and squeeze some Lemmon on them. Mix
Cynamon with your Sugar, if your Fritter be made with Marrow.

How to make Pancakes.
TAke twenty Eggs, with half the whites, and beat them half an hour or more
with fine flour of Wheat, Cloves, Mace, and a little Salt, Cream, a little new
Ale, or a spoonful of Yest being warmed, and beat them well together; make it
so thin as to run out of your spoon or ladle without any stop: this being done,
cover it and set by the fire half an hour, or more, stirring it now and then;
fry them with a quick fire (but not too hot) with a little Butter; and after
you have fried one or two, you may fry them without Butter as well as with it,
and will be better, if you love them dry; scrape Sugar on them and serve them
up.

If you are loose in the body you may make a Pancake of nothing but Eggs and
Cynamon, and Salt beat well together; you may put in some Anniseeds (if you
please) it will expel wind, and take away the raw taste of the Eggs, or strew
Carraway-comfits on it, being baked.

To fry young Artechokes.
TAke young Artechokes, or Suckers, and pare off all the out side, as you pare
Apples, and boil them tender, then take them up and slit them through the
midst, but do not take out the coare, but lay the split side downward on a
dry cloth, to dreine out the water; then mix a little Flower, two or three
yolks of Eggs, beaten Ginger, Nutmeg, Verjuice and Salt to the thickness of a
Batter, and roll them well in it, then get a fryingpan, with Butter, pretty
hot, and fry them in it till they be brown; for the Sauce, make a Lear with
yolks of Eggs, Verjuice, or White Wind, Cynamon, Ginger, Sugar, with a great
piece of butter, keeping it with stirring upon the fire till it be thick; then
dish them on white-Bread Tostes with the Caudle on them and serve them up.

Scotch Scollops of Veale.
CUt a leg of Veale into very thin slices, and hack them with the back of a
cleaver, and draw lard one inch long through every piece, or as many of them as
you please; then fry them very well in Butter, then make a sauce with a little
claret Wine, half an Anchove, and a little Mutton or Veale gravy, let it have
but one walme on the fire, then rub your dish with a clove of Garlike, and dish
the meat with sauce and serve it up hot; garnish it with Lemmon, with some in
the sauce, if you please.

How to fry Toster.
TAke a stale Manchet and cut them in round slices like Tostes, and wet them in
Muscadine, then beat ten Eggs very well and fry your Tostes in Butter, then
pour half the Eggs on the Tostes as they are in the pan, and fry them brown,
then turn the Tostes and pour the residue of the Eggs as before, and fry that
side; then dish them, and pour Rosewater, Butter, Sugar, and a little grated
Nutmeg and Cynamon, well beat together, on them, and serve them up hot.

How to fry Veale.
CUt a leg of Veale into thin slices, and hack them well with the cleaver, then
lay them in a dish and season it with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper and Salt, then mix
six or eight raw yolks of Eggs with it very well together, and let it stand an
hour or more, then fry it in the pan with Butter till it be enough, keeping
the pieces with turning; then take it up into a dish, and stew it together with
a little White Wind and a Lemmon sliced; and when the dinner is ready, put in a
piece of Butter, and shake it well together, and serve it up to the Table with
sippits.

Before I will treat upon Bakemeats, I intend a short discourse in making
several sorts of Pastes: And first,

Of Puff-paste.
TAke half a peck of flower and mix it with cold Water, and one pound of
Butter, the whites of nine or ten Eggs, a very little Salt (if any) work these
together very well, and stiff, then roll it out very thin, and put Flower
under and over it; then take near a pound of Butter and lay it in bits all
over it, then double it in five or six doubles: This being done, roll it out
the second time, and serve it as at the first, then roll it out, and cut it
out into what form, or to what use you please; you need not fear the curle,
for it will divide as often as you double it, which is ten or twelve times:
enough for any use.

Of cool Butter-paste*
WHich is, to every peck of Flower, five pound of Butter, the whites of six
Eggs, and work it well together with cold water; you must bestow a great deal
of elboe-grease, and but little water, otherwise you put out the Miller's eyes.
This Paste is good only for Patty-pan and Pastyes.

Paste for thin Bake-meats.
THe Paste for your thin bake-Meats must be made with boiling liquor, as
follows: When your liquor (which is water) boyleth, put to every peck of
Flower two pound of Butter, but let your Butter boil in your Liquor first.

Of Custard paste.
LEt it be only boiling Water without Butter, and likewise all Paste, for
Cuts, or Orangado Tarts, or such like, as you shall hear hereafter; you may
put Sugar in this last Paste, which will* add to the stiffnesse of it.

For cold Bake meats.
PUt to every peck of Flower one pound (or something more) of Butter; you may
put dissolved Icein-glasse in this liquor, because it requires strength;
Rye-flower is best for this use, with a little wheat amongst it. I would
mention many more Pastes, as for all sorts of Bread, as Ordinary bread, French
bread, etc. But of this more conveniently.

How to make a steak-Pie of Mutton.
MAke the Pie round and deep, and cut a neck or breast of Mutton in thin
steaks, as to fry, and hack it with the back of your cleaver; season it with
Pepper, Nutmeg and Salt, and provide a quantity of sweet Herbs minced very
small, a handful of Capers, one Onion minced, the yolks of three or four Eggs
minced: your Pie being made, lay in your meat, scattering these Ingredients on
it; put in Butter and close it, bake it three hours moderately.

Another.
THe meat being prepared, as before, season it with Nutmeg and Ginger, and a
little large Mace and Salt, one Onion minced, half a pound of Currants washed
and dried; put in Butter and close it; when it is half baked put in half a
pint of Claret, being warmed first; for any cold thing hardens the meat;
when you draw it, cut the lid in pieces and stick it in the meat round about,
and serve it up hot.

You may leave out the Onion, and put in Sugar and Verjuice, with your Claret.

How to make a Pie of a Fillet of Veale.
CUt your Veale into pieces no bigger than a Walnut, season it with Cynamon,
Ginger, Sugar and Salt; shape your Pie into corners as you please, put in the
meat with Chestnuts cut into quarters, being roasted, and blanched Dates
quartered, the Marrow of two bones cut into pieces; these being mixed together,
close it and let it bake two hours, then make a caudle with White Wind, Sugar,
Cynamon and Ginger; beat up this and pour it through the lid, little holes
being made with your Knife or a Scuer.

Another way.
IF it be in Summer, abate the Nuts and put in quarters of hard Lettuce
scalded, and when it is drawn, lay on it scalded Gooseberries, or Grapes, the
lid being cut up, and some boiled Marrow on the meat.

How to bake a Loyn of Veale.
BOne your Veale and season it with Pepper, Mace, Nutmeg and Salt; lay it into
a square Pie as whole as you can, put a little White Wind in it, being half
baked; if you love it sweet, put Sugar into the White Wind or Verjuice; when
you put it in shake it well together, that it incorporate: This is good either
cold or hot.

Another way.
IF you eat it hot with Sugar, and in Gooseberry-season, put scalded
Gooseberryes in it, the lid being cut up, this requires four hours baking
moderately.

How to make a Lamb-Pie.
CUt your Lamb into Steakes, Kidney and all the fat with it, season it with
Nutmeg, Mace, a little Pepper and Salt; the Pie being made, and the meat in,
put with it half a pound of Currants, with Pruins, lay Butter on it and let it
bake three hours; a cornered Pie is best for this; when it is baked, make a
Caudle with a pint of White Wind, or Verjuice, the yolks of five or six Eggs,
Sugar, and a quarter of a pound of Butter; beat up all these continually on the
fire, in a pipkin, till they boil. The Pie being baked, cut up the lid and put
in this Caudle, shaking it well togther, and serve it up hot. It is good cold,
but then leave out the Butter in the Caudle.

It will be very good seasoned with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper and Salt, without
the Caudle, to eat hot or cold; you must not forget to put Butter to all your
Pies when you close them, to prevent drying in the Oven; the hind quartet is
best for this use.

How to make a Tongue Pie.
TAke the Tongue, after it is boiled or roasted, and Udder, if you have any,
either roast or boiled, slice them into thin slices, and season it with
Cynamon, Ginger and Salt; then take half a pound of raisons Solis stoned; your
Pie being raised, lay in it a laying of Tongue and Udder, and another of
Raisons, till your Pie is full* put some Butter and close it; one hour and an
half will bake it; it being almost baked, make a Caudle of Eggs, Vinegar and
White Wind, Sugar and Butter, beat up together till it boil; dish your Pie,
and pour in the Caudle, and serve it up hot or cold.

How to make a Chicken-Pie.
DRess the least Chickens you can get; they being cleansed, cut your Chickens
legs off and trusse them as you fancy, so make your Pie, season your Chickens
and the Appurtenances, lay the fowl on their backs, with the giblets
intermixed, being seasoned with Mace, Nutmeg, Salt, and Ginger; the Mace will
be best not beat, but large, and lay it on the top of the Chickens, half a
pound of Dates quartered, and Pistaches blanched, with a good quantity of
Butter: close your Pie, and let it bake two hours: then make the same Caudle
as to the Lamb-pie, only add a Lemmon sliced in it. It being baked, put in
this Caudle, and lay the sliced Lemmon on the top of the Chickens, lay on the
lid, shake it well together, and serve it up hot, Sugar being scraped on it.

Another way.
IF it be in Summer, instead of Dates and Lemmon, put in scalded Goose-berries
or Grapes, with Asparagus boiled, or cabbaged Lettuce scalded. These must be
put in when the Pie is baked. You may make your Caudle green with Spinach,
being beat and strained into it. It is good hot or cold.

How to make a Paris Pie.
TAke good large Chickens and quarter them, or very small Chickens whole with
the giblets: raise your Pie round, and prepare to mix with the Chickens a
handful of Cockles, or two Oxe-palaets blanched and sliced, nine or ten yolks
of eggs, some minced and in halfes, Pine-kernels blanched, the marrow of two
bones cut into gobs, a little sliced Mushrome, if you have any, pickled: Season
all these together with Salt, Ginger, Nutmeg, Mace, and a very little Pepper:
your Pie being made and filled, put in a good quantity of Butter, and close it:
It will require two hours baking; it being almost baked, put in a little
White Wind or Verjuice, or some of the liquor which stewed your Oysters, if you
do stew any, beat it up with a piece of butter, and serve it up hot.

A Pie answerable to the grand boiled Meat.
I Will give you the Moddle of it hereafter: First, for that in the middle must
be round with five Scollops: As for example, Provide Cocks stones and combs, or
Lambs stones, and sweet-breads, if they be young the sweet-breads of Veale a
little set in hot water, and cut into pieces, two or three Ox Palates blanched
and sliced, half a pint of Oysters, Dates sliced, a handful of Pine kernels,
a little quantity of Broom buds pickled, some fine interlarded Bacon, fat and
lean, sliced, let it not be rusty; scald it to take away the rank taste; nine
or ten Chestnuts roasted and blanched; season all these together with Salt,
Nutmeg, and a good quantity of large Mace, and close it, having good store of
Butter. For the Caudle, it being baked, beat up some Butter with three yolks of
Eggs, white or claret Wine, the juice of a Lemmon or two; cut up the lid and
pour it on the meat, shaking it well together; and lay on the meat sliced
Lemmon and pickled Barberries, then cover it again. Let it not boil in the
Oven after the Caudle be in, lest it taste bitter with the Lemmon: Let these
Ingredients be put into the Moddle above.

Ten other Pies belonging to the first.
I Will show you a Moddle of one of the five which must be of one fashion, as
follows; and the last cut in the due place: But you must be sure to make the
three fashions proportionable, answering one the other; you may set them all on
one bottom of paste, which will be more convenient; or if you set them
several, you may bake the middle one full of Flower; it being baked, and cold,
take out the Flower in the bottom and put in live Birds, or a Snake, which
will seem strange to the beholders, which cut the Pie, at the table: This is
only for a Wedding, to pass away time. Now for what you shall put in the
other ten; and first for the middle five, as follows.

1 An Oyster-Pie.
YOu may put Oysters in one; scald your Oysters, plucking off the beards, and
dry them; season them with large Mace and Pepper, with a little beaten Ginger
and Salt, with Marrow and Butter, and close it: it being baked, make a Leare
with White Wind, the Oyster-liquor, three or four Oysters bruised to pieces to
make it stronger; but take out the pieces; one Onion, or rub the Ladle with
Garlike you beat it up withal; it being boiled, put in a large piece of
Butter, with a minced Lemmon; sweet Herbs will be good boiled in it, bound up
fast together: cut up the lid, or make holes to let in this Leare, and serve it
up.

2. A Praune-Pie.
FOr the second, put in Praunes and Cockles, being seasoned as the first, but
no Marrow: Put in some pickled Mushromes (if you have them) sliced: it being
baked, beat up a piece of Butter, a little Vinegar, a sliced Nutmeg, and the
juice of two or three Oranges, thick, and pour it into the Pie.

3. A Bird Pie*
FOr the third Pie of young Birds, or Larks.

Take young Birds, or Larks, pulled and drawn, and a farce meat to put in the
bellies, as follows: Grated Bread, sweet Herbs minced very small, Beefesuet
or Marrow minced, Almonds beat with a little Cream, lest they oil, a little
grated Parmasan or old Cheese; season this farce meat with Ginger, Nutmeg and
Salt, mix them together with Cream and Eggs, like a Pudding, and stuff the
Larks with it; season the Larks with Nutmeg, a little Pepper and Salt, lay them
in the Pie with good store of Butter, and scatter between them Pine kernells,
yolks of Eggs, and sweet Herbs, the Herbs and Eggs being minced very small; it
being baked, make a Lear with the juice of an Orange or two, and Butter beat up
thick together, and shake it well together.

4. An Artechoke-Pie.
Boil your Art choke, and take only the bottomes for the Pie, cut them into
quarters or less; season them with Nutmeg, Ginger, a little Salt and Sugar;
put them into the Pie with good store of Marrow, Dates sliced or quartered, and
close them; it being baked, make a leare with Verjuice, or a little Vinegar and
White Wind, a good piece of Butter, a little Cynamon; Sugar, and Ginger beat
very small; it being baked, make holes in the lid to pour it in.

5. Of Cabbidge-Lettuce.
CUt off all but the hard Cabbidge from the Lettuce, and quarter them, wash
them and scald them; then dreine out all the water and mix them with sliced
Dates, Marrow, Raisons of the Sun stoned, and green Grapes; season them with
Cynamon, Ginger, Sugar and Salt; lay them as lightly in the Pie as you can; it
being baked, mix a little Butter, Verjuice and Sugar, and cut up the lid,
raising up the meat, and fill it up with this Leare, laying on the top the
yolks of Birds Eggs boiled hard, boiled Marrow, scalded Grapes, Gooseberries,
or pickled Barberries.

Let these Receipts serve for so many Pies, being made at any time severally;
in case you have not convenience, you may add or diminish as you think fit.

For the last five, which must be minced meat, make after this fashion, and
fill them as follows.



Five minced Pies.
Boil twenty Eggs, and mince them very small, being blanched with twice the
weight of Beef Suet, half a pound of Dates; these being minced very small, put
to them a good quantity of Raisons and Currants washed and dried; season them
with Nutmeg, Cloves and Mace beat, Sugar, Salt and Rosewater, close them and
bake them; every one of them should have a tuft of paste jagged on the top: all
these Pies will not require above two hours baking in a moderate Oven; they
being baked, join them together as you see your pattern, and serve them up on
one plate.

To make a Pie of the Kidney of a Loyne of Veale being roasted.
TAke your Kidney of Veale being roasted and cold minced with the fat, a quarter
of a pound of Dates being stoned and minced very small; then mince Thyme, sweet
Marjerum, a little Rosemary and Parsley: Season these with Nutmeg, Mace, Sugar,
Salt and Currants: grate some bread and put with it. Mix all these together
with eggs and verjuyce, and roll them in balls as big as eggs: raise your
Pie round, but not very deep, then fill it with those balls and close it. It
will require two hours baking. Then cut up the lid, having a Caudle made of
the yolks of eggs, verjuyce, the juice of a handful of Spinach strained, a
piece of butter being made sweet with sugar: Set this on the fire, and beat it
up thick together till it boyleth; then fill up the Pie, cover it and set it in
the Oven again for a quarter of an hour to drink up the Caudle, and then fill
it up again and serve it up. It will serve for a Second-course dish.

To make a Potatoe Pie.
Boil your Potatoes tender and blanch them; slice them, but not very thin, and
mix with them some apple pared and sliced: season them with Cynamon, Ginger,
Sugar and Salt. Your Pie being made, put in these meats with good store of
marrow on the top, being cut into lumps as big as a wallnut: pour a little
verjuyce on the Pie and close it; it being baked put to it verjuyce, sugar,
butter, cynamon and ginger, beat up thick together, cut up the lid, and fill it
with leare, raising it up with the knife to let in the liquor. You must put in
Butter when you close up the Pie to bake it, otherwise it will burn in the
oven, they being of a very dry substance. Less then two hours will bake it.
Scrape Sugar on it, and serve it up hot.

A Lady thistle Pie.
IN the same manner you may make a Thistle-pie; only add some Dates sliced:
your Thistles must be cut as for a Sallet, and scalded, dried and cold,
otherwise it will pull down the side of the pie. As all these kinds of pyes
must be thin crust, the same quantity of baking will serve. You may put in
scalded Gooseberries, it being baked (if you please.)

How to make a Pig pie.
FLea your Pig, and bone it, and cut it into quarters; Season it with Nutmeg,
Salt, and a very little Pepper; and you may lard it if you please. Your round
Pie and deep will be best; for this put in good store of Butter, and bake it
four hours, and serve it up hot.

How to make a Carpe pie.
IF your Carpe be new, when you garbidge it, wash the blood into a vessel with
Claret, and keep it. Your Carpe must be scaled; then scotch it athwart to let
in the seasoning; season it with Nutmeg, Ginger, a little whole Pepper, with
Salt: make the Pie as near the form of your Fish as you can; put in good
store of Butter and bake it: it being baked, provide some boiled Pruanes
strained with the blood, and Claret, boiling it a little; then beat it up thick
with yolks of Eggs, and pour it in, shaking it very well, and dish it. It will
require three hours baking.

Another way.
SCale, garbidge, wash and dry your Carp very well; then provide Lard or Bacon,
and lard it very well, season it as before: make a Pudding for it with grated
Bread, sweet Herbs, and a little Bacon, the yolks of hard Eggs, one Anchove
minced very small, with Beefe-suet, or Marrow, Nutmeg and Salt: fill the belly
full of it and sew it up close, and put it into the Paste, laying some of that
Pudding in round balls on either side, and scatter on it a little handful of
Capers, as many Praunes or Cockles, yolks of Eggs minced, with good store of
Butter in it, and close it. It being baked, cut up the lid and stick it full of
cuts of Paste, Lozenges, and other pretty garnish; fill it full of Butter and
serve it up hot.

You may split your fish, and lay that Pudding which you put in the belly about
it, and bake it in a Patty-pan with better Past than that which you make your
Pies* with, which is cold Butter-paste. This is a very good way for a Tench or
Bream.

How to make a Bacon-Tart.
TAke your new Lard, or fat Bacon, the freshest you can get; if it be not
fresh, water it two or three days, if your time will serve, or cut it fit for
the Tart (as follows) and it will water the sooner; cut it into pieces an
inch long, then cut it into squares no bigger than your smallest Lard; five or
six hours watering will serve this: then dreine it in a cloth very dry, and
mix it with as much green dried Cittron of the same cut; beat as many sweet
Almonds very small with Rose water, mix them with good store of Sugar, and a
little beaten Ginger, with seven or eight drops of Oil, or spirit of Vitrioll,
or spirit of Saltpeter; if you have none of these, put in Runnet, such as you
turn Milk with: these being well minced together, make a round Tart, as
shallow as possible, and lay this Composition in it, sticking it with Cittron
(on the meat) to make it look of a green color: then lid it, or you may make
it in a Pattypan, which will be the better way; it will require one hours
baking: it being baked, stick the lid full of sliced Cittron, strew in some
small perfumed Carrawaycomfets, or ice it with Rose Water and Sugar: it will
eat well hot or cold, but best cold. Mix with this Tart some Eggs, but not too
many, and Musk, and Ambergriece, if you please.

A Spinage-Tart.
IF you have never a low Pattypan, set your Tart with works about an inch high,
or less: then provide a good quantity of Spinach and beat it very well, strain
it: then beat Almonds with rosewater very small and mix with it, if you have no
Almonds, Nutkernels or flower of Rice, but put not in too much: put into every
pint of this composition six eggs, with half the whites, two grains of Musk
or Ambergris well rubbed and dissolved: All these being well beat together,
set it by till your Tart coffin be a little hardened in the oven, then fill it
as a Custard, but if you bake it in a patty-pan (which is best) then make your
paste of cold butter and water, as you shall see in your Chapter of cold
Butter-paste. It being fitted to the pan, put in your Tart stuff, and let it
bake in a very gentle oven uncovered: have a care of burning, but that it may
look very green being baked: then set it on a plate, and stick it full of small
Comfits, or springs of preserved Barberries, or Orengado sliced, or any other
Sweet-meat you can spare.

To make Cheese-cakes.
LEt your Paste be very good, either puffe-Paste, or cold Butter-Paste, with
Sugar mixed with it; then your Cheese-curds being dried very well, the Whey
from them; they must be made of new Milk, or better; then beat them very well
in a mortar, or tray, with a quarter of a pound of Butter to every pottle of
Curds; a good quantity of Rosewater, three grains of Ambergriece, or Musk
prepared, the crummes of a small Manchet rubbed through a cullender, the yolks
of ten Eggs, a grated Nutmeg, a little Salt, good store of Sugar. Mix all
these well together with a little Cream, but do not make them too soft:
instead of Bread you may take Almonds (if you will go to the cost) which are
much better. I need not relate the fashion, they are so various, and also
easy; bake them in a quick Oven, but let them not stand too long in, lest they
should be too dry.

How to make an Almond-Tart.
BLanch your Almonds, and beat them in a Marble mortar, with Rose Water, to
prevent oyling: mix them with half the weight in Sugar, a quarter the weight
in Pine-kernells, or Pistaches, being blanched, Ambergriece, or Musk prepared,
a small quantity of white-bread crummes finely searced, yolks of Eggs, with
half the whites, some Preserves, as Cittron, Orange or Lemmon minced. Mix all
these well together, either with Almond-Milk, or raw Cream, and put them into
Paste, as your Spinage-Tart, and be sure you do not bake it too much, nor in
too hot an oven: This is best in a Patty-pan, without any cover of Paste; but
when it is baked, stick it with Preserves and Carrawaycomfets, and serve it up
with cuts of Paste.

How to make a Clarie Pie.
TAke two handful of Clary, wash it and cut it reasonable small, beat it
together with eight whites of eggs, and half yolks, and put it into a
drying pan with a good piece of butter, sweeten it, stirring it well together
as it fryeth; let it not fry too long, and have a care of burning: then take a
handful or two of Spinach boiled very tender, press out the water very
clean, and mince it small; then take two or three Potatoes boiled and sliced,
and Marrow minced: Season all these together with Nutmeg, mace, salt, sugar,
verjuyce, and Lemmon minced being pared. Your pie being raised, put in these
ingredients, and lay the marrow of two or three bones on the top as whole as
you can: close it, and bake it in a soft oven an hour and an half, then make
a Caudle with yolks of Eggs, Cynamon, Verjuyce, and a piece of Butter, Sugar,
and a sliced Lemmon, if you have it. Beat it well together till it boyleth. The
pie baked, put it in a dish, scrape sugar on it, and serve it up.

How to make a Custard without Eggs.
IF you make it in Paste, set it in Works and dry it in the Oven, then beat the
spawn of a Pike in a Mortar, and strain it with Cream, season it with Sugar,
Rosewater, a grated Nutmeg, and a little Mace: beat it well together; then fill
your Paste and bake it, strowing Comfets on it when it is dished, and serve it
up.

How to make a White pot.
CUt a Manchet in thin slices, like Lozanges, half a pound of Raisons Solis
stoned, the Marrow of two bones cut in slices, then lay all these in a dish, a
laying of Bread, with Raisons on it, the Marrow on the Raisons, and so on the
other till your dish be almost full; then take a pint of Cream and boil it,
with a Nutmeg quartered, five or six blades of large Mace; it being boiled,
beat it up pretty thick with yolks of eggs; six eggs will serve: put in a
grain of rubid Musk, with good store of Sugar, and a little Rosewater*
stirring it well together, pour it on the ingredients which you dished, and
bake it in the oven, or in a skellet of boiling water, being covered with
another dish. Have a care of baking it too much, lest it whey. Scrape Sagar on
it, and serve it up hot.

How to make little Pasties to serve up six in a dish.
MAke your paste of cold water and butter as you are directed; then roll it
out thin in several sheets, and lay on every one Potato, Quince, and Artechoke
boiled, and sliced thin with marrow, seasoned with salt, cinnamon, ginger, and
sugar. These being laid in together, lay on it five or six stewed or preserved
plumbs, or damsens, or any other plumb so it be not too big; if it be, split it
in twain: then close your Pasties very well, and jagge the eggs with your
iron; lay them on white paper, and bake them an hour, then provide a Caudle
with yolks of eggs, verjuyce, butter and sugar, beat up together till it
boyleth: Then cut up the lids, and put in the Caudle, and serve it up hot,
scraping Sugar on it.

How to make an Apricock tart.
FIrst, be sure your Apricocks be so tender at the stone as you may thrust a
pin through them, then scald them and scrape the out side off, putting them
into the water as you do them, till you have raised your Tart, then dry them
and fill your Tart with them, strowing good store of fine Sugar on the top; lid
it and bake it an hour, sugar it, and serve it up.

How to make a Gooseberry-Tart green.
YOur Tart being raised, fill it with Gooseberries, and Sugar on the top, then
cut your lid with Works, before you lay it on; then close it and bake it with a
quick Oven: less than an hour will do it.

A Codling-Tart.
YOu may bake Codlings after the same manner, only you must scald them,
letting them stand an hour in the same water which scalded them, being
covered, which will turn them very green; then put them whole (or in quarters)
with Sugar and a little Musk, cover them with a cut lid, as you do your
Gooseberries, when it is baked: if you please you may boil up a quart of
Cream, with yolks of Eggs, Sugar and Musk: cut up the lid and pour that on the
Codlings, setting it in the Oven again for the space of half an hour, or
less; then dish it, scrape Sugar on it, the cover being laid on it, or another
handsome cut lid being dried on a paper in the Oven.

How to make a made dish of Puff-paste.
MAke your Puff-paste as in your Chapter of Puff-paste you are directed; then
lay it on a pewter dish, it being flowered, and prepare wardens, pears or
pippins, boiled with Rose Water, Sugar, Musk, or Ambergreese, Orange pill, or
preserved Oranges minced, with Pine-kernels stuck in it, being laid on the
paste in a dish round on a heap, and cover it with Puff-paste; or you may put
the same meats as prescribed for the little Pasties, with the more Marrow, and
the exemption of the Caudle. I could set down many more, but they are so
numerous and common, they will be tedious to the Reader, since my intention is
only a memorandum to bring you into the practice of the diversity of Diets.
You must bake your Puffpaste with a quick oven, or it will not rise well, but
have a care of too much coloring. Scrape Sugar on it, and serve it up in the
same dish, with a cross cut of Paste on it.

I intend a short progress in the ordering of cold Bakemeats, and first

A Red dear Pie.
BOne your Venison, and if it be the side, skin it, and beat it with an Iron
pestel, but not too small: then lay it in mere sauce, which is Claret and
Wine-vinegar: put it in some close thing, letting it lie two days and nights
if in the Winter, otherwise not so long; then drayne and dry it very well; it
being lean, lard it with fat Bacon or Lard: cut your Lard as big as a Finger,
and as long; season it very high with Nutmeg, Mace, Ginger, Pepper and Salt,
shaking it well into the Mace: make your Pie with Ryepaste, deep, round, and
very thick, laying Bay Leaves in the bottom and top; then lid it close with a
funnell on the top. This will require but a little Butter to bake it, only
when it is baked and cold, if you will keep it long let out*the Gravie, and
fill it with Butter, as clear from Buttermilk as possible, otherwise it will
sour and mould: it being filled and cold, stop the funnell close, and it will
keep three months very well; you may bake it in a pot in stead of paste, and
it will keep longer and better, and less Butter will fill it up.

How to make a Pie of a Leg of Pork.
FLey and bone your Pork, beat it up very small, and lay it in pickle, as your
Venison, then season it with Ginger, Cynamon, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace, Pepper and
Salt, very high, and make it up in the same manner as your Venison: Either of
these Bakemeats will require nine hours baking, you must wash them over with
yolks of Eggs and Wheatflower beat together, with a little Saffron, to give it
the better color (if you please) before it go into the Oven.

How to make a Pig-pie.
FLey and bone your Pig, and beat it very small, season it with Nutmeg, Ginger,
a little Pepper and salt rubbed well in it: let your Pie be round, and deep;
for the lesser compass your round bakemeats are, and deeper the better. Let
this be made of good wheat flower, and put good store of butter in the baking.

A Hare is excellent meat dressed in the same manner. These will require five
hours baking.

How to make a Lampre-Pie.
GArbidge your Lampre, and take out the black blood which is like a string in
the back; slit the back and it will pluck out: then season it with Nutmeg,
Pepper, and Salt: let your Pie be round; then roll your Lampre as your Pie;
lay two or three whole Onyons in the middle, good store of butter, with two or
three Bay Leaves. Bake it four hours, fill it up with butter, and keep it for
your use.

A Salmon Pie.
SEason your Salmon and Trout with the same seasoning; only a little Ginger
added. These Pies must either be long or square, and not so deep, for your
Salmon baketh best split. Throw on the backs the Gills taken out, and the
skinnie side downward. This requires great store of butter to bake it.

Instructions for several Bake meats.
THere is a Fish taken in Westmoreland, which is admirable baked; it is called
a CHAR. They are as red as a Salmon, but little bigger then a Herring.

There are many sorts of cold baked meats, which I will not mention; the
seasoning differing not much from those I named, only something in the
ordering, as Pea, Partidge, Pheasants or Turkey, which require lard and deep
seasoning, with store of Butter. Woodcocks, Snipes, and the like, are so
usual, I not mention, only lay them close with the breast downward, they will
bake the moister, or make use of the head (being the best meat) and stick the
beak upon the Pielid.

How to make an Olave pie.
SLice the flesh of a leg of Veal into thin slices the breadth of four
fingers, and hack them with the back of a cleaver; then take six ounces of
Beefe-suet minced small, then take Thyme, Sweet-marjerome, Winter-savory and
Capers: mince them small and season it with Mace, Cloves, Nutmeg, Cynamon,
Pepper and Salt; then take a quart of great Oysters, drein them from the liquor
and roll them in the ingredients, and take the slices of Veal and roll them up
with the ingredients in them, with two Oysters in either of the Olaves; then
lay them into the Pie with good store of Butter over and under; but before you
butter the top, lay in*five or six hard yolks of Eggs, some bits of Bacon and
Sausage made up into balls, with sliced Lemmon: the rest of the Oysters and
Ingredients on the top of the Pie; then lid it and let it bake; and when the
Pie is half baked, put in a quarter of a pint of Claret wine and let it bake;
then make a Lear or Sauce for it with Claret wine* one Onion or two, the liquor
of Oysters, 2 Anchoves, letting it boil a little: take out the Onions, and beat
it up with the juice of a Lemmon and Butter; when it is baked put in this
Leare; shake it well together and serve it up hot to the Table.

How to make buttered Loaves.
TAke ten Eggs, and four of the whites, one spoonful of Ale-yest, and four
spoonfuls of Cream: beat all these together, and let them stand half an hour;
then take as much Wheat flower as it will wet, and make it up into a Paste and
wrap it up warm in a cloth, and lay it to the fire to rise a quarter of an
hour; and when the Oven is ready, make them up into Loaves as big as your
fist, prick them on the top, and cut them round with a knife, set them on
papers and put them into the Oven for half an hour; then take one pound of
sweet Butter, three or four spoonfuls of Rosewater, and as much Sugar as will
sweeten it, beating it well together; then cut your Loaves up and butter them
with it, and serve them up hot.

How to make Cheesecakes without Milk.
TAke six Eggs, three whites of them beaten very well; then take a pint of
Cream and boil it with Mace; then take it off the fire and put in the Eggs:
stir them well together and set it on the fire to boil again, and let it
boil till you see it is curds; then take it off and put to it a good quantity
of Sugar, some Nutmeg and Mace beaten; then dissolve Musk and Ambergriece in
Rosewater, and put to it three or four spoonfuls of grated bread, with a
quarter of a pound of Almonds beaten small; and (if you think it to thick) put
to it a little Cream and Currants (if you please) then make Coffins for them
with Flower, Butter, Sugar and Cream; put in the Meat and bake them in a slow
Oven one quarter of an hour.

How to make an Ox Palate pie.
Boil the Palates tender, and blanch them as you do Neates tongues, and lay
them in their own liquor without Salt; then take them out and cut them in
pieces, and put to them Sweet breads of Veale or Lamb, squab Pigeons full of
Marrow, Lambs stones, Cocks combs and stones, Pine-kernels, Chestnuts, Oysters
and some small Capers, with a good quantity of Marrow, with balls of farced
meat minced very small, seasoned with Nutmeg, Ginger, Pepper, Salt, a small
quantity of Cloves and Mace, and Lemmonds, or Gooseberries, or Grapes (if you
can) and put them to baking in a Pie with Butter: a sauce for it with half a
pint of Gravie of Mutton, or more, the yolks of four raw Eggs, some White
wine, one or two Anchoves, a little Grape, Verjuice, or juice of Lemmon: it
being baked, cut it up and take out the fat, and put in this Leare: stir it
about and set it in the Oven again, or rather put it not in till you are ready
to serve it up; and then remember to let it be ready to boil, in a dish or
pipkin, with continual stirring, and a good piece of Butter beat with it.

How to make a Rice-pudding baked.
Boil the Rice tender with Milk, and season it with Nutmeg or Mace,
Rosewater, Sugar, yolks of Eggs, with half the whites, with grated Bread, and
Marrow minced, with Ambergriece (if you please) temper them well together, and
bake it in a dish buttered.

How to make Bread-puddings.
TAke Cream and boil it with Mace; then take Almonds and beat them small, with
Rosewater, and mix them with Eggs well beaten, and strain all into as much
bread as you think fit, with sliced Nutmeg, Marrow, Suet and Currants, and fill
the guts.

How to make French Barley puddings.
Boil the Barley; and put to one pint of Barley, half a Manchet grated: then
beat a great quantity of Almonds and strain them with Cream; then take eight
Eggs, half the whites, and beat them with Rosewater, and season it with
Nutmeg, Mace, and Salt, with Marrow; or if suet, mince it and mix it well
together, and fill the guts.

To make Haggus-puddings.
TAke a Calves Chaldron, being well scoured and parboyled, and the kernels
taken out, and when it is cold mince it very small; then take four or five
Eggs, and leave out half the whites, and take thick Cream, grated Bread,
Sugar, Nutmeg, Salt Currants and Rosewater, and (if you will) Sweet-majerome,
Thyme and Parsley; mix it well together: then having a Sheeps Maw ready
dressed, put it in, and boil it a little: remember Suet or Marrow.

A boiled Pudding.
BEat the yolks of three Eggs with Rosewater, a quarter of a pint of Cream, and
warm it with a piece of Butter as big as two walnuts: when it is melted, mix
the Eggs and that together; season it with Nutmeg, Sugar and Salt, and put in
as much grated Bread as will make it as thick as Batter, and as much Flower as
will lie on a shilling: when your water boyls tie it fast in a double cloth, or
bag, and boil it: serve it up with Butter, Verjuice and Sugar.

An Oatmeal-Pudding.
TAke the biggest Oatmeal, and mince what Herbs you like best, and mix with
it; then season it with Salt and Pepper, and tie it straight in a bag, and when
it is boiled butter it.

Another Oatmeale Pudding.
Bind up in a bag the great Oatmeale, and boil it in Beefe-broth tender,
then boil Cream, with large Mace and sliced Nutmeg, then take it off the fire
and slice a manchet very thin into the Cream, take eight Eggs to a quart of
Cream, but half the whites; and mix with it as much Oatmeale, which was
boiled, as you think fit, and thick enough, a good deal of Beef Suet,
Rosewater, Salt and Sugar; stir them well together, and butter a dish and put
it in and bake it.

To make a hasty Pudding in a Bag.
Boil a pint of thick Cream with six spoonfuls of Flower, and season it with
Nutmeg, Sugar and Salt; wet the bag and turn it, and flower it; then pour in
the Cream (being hot) into the bag; and it being boiled, dish it and butter it
as a hasty Pudding; if it be well made it will be so good as a Custard.

To make a shaking Pudding.
TAke a pint of Cream, boil it with large Mace, sliced Nutmeg and Ginger; then
put in a few Almonds, blanched and beat with Rosewater; then beat four Eggs
with half the whites, and beat them with Rosewater, then strain them all
together, then put to it sliced Ginger, Sugar, grated Bread and Salt, then
butter a cloth and flower it, and tie it hard, and put it in boiling water (as
you must do all Puddings) then serve it up with Verjuice, Butter and Sugar.

To make Puddings of Wine.
SLice the crumbs of two Manchets, half a pint of Wine, as much Sugar as you
think fit; the Wine must be scalded; then take eight Eggs and beat them with
Rosewater; then put sliced Dates, Marrow and Nutmeg, and mix them well
together, and fill the guts to boil.

Bread-puddings.
TAke Cream and boil it with Mace, then mix beat Almonds with Rosewater, then
take the Cream and Eggs, Nutmeg, Currants, Salt and Marrow, and mix them with
as much bread as you think fit, and fill the guts.

To make French-barly-puddings.
Boil the Barley in three waters, and to a pint of Barley, half a Manchet
grated, a good quantity of Almonds beat, eight Eggs, half the whites,
Rosewater, grated Nutmeg* Sugar and Salt, and Marrow; mince all these together
with Cream, and fill the guts, or I think it will do well in a bag.

An Oatmeale-pudding.
STeep great Oatmeal in Milk a night, and pour it through a cullender, and
season it with Penneriall* Saffron, Sugar, Nutmeg, Rosewater and Salt, then
mix it well with Eggs, and flower the bag and boil it; when it is boiled,
butter it and serve it up.

A Pudding baked.
TAke a pint of Cream, warm it and put the quantity of two penniworth of Dates
minced, four Eggs, Marrow and Rosewater, one Nutmeg grated, or beaten Mace
and Salt; butter the dish and put it in, if you will lay Puff-paste on it you
may scrape Sugar on it, but if it be Puff-paste put Sugar in it.

Another boiled.
TAke Flower, Sugar, Nutmeg, Salt and Water; mix them together with a spoonful
of Gumdragon, being steeped all night in Rosewater, and strained; then put in
Suet or Marrow, and put it to boil in a bag.

White puddings.
TAke of great Oatmeal three pintes clean picked, steep it in Milk three or
four hours; then dreine the Milk from it, and let it lie a night in warm
Water; then dreine it from the Water, and put to it two pound of Beefsuet
minced, eight or ten Eggs, with half their whites, a quarter of an ounce of
Nutmegs, as much Sugar, a little Mace, a quart of Cream, a little Salt: mix
them well together and fill them into guts, being clean.

Rice-puddings.
Boil your Rice in Water once, and Milk after, and last in thick Cream; then
take six Eggs, grated Bread, good store of Marrow minced small, some Nutmeg,
Sugar and Salt, and put them into pipkins and boil them for eating; you may
exempt the boiling in Milk, and Rosewater will do well in them.

Puddings of Swine-lights.
PArboyl the Lights, and mince them very small with Suet, and mix it with
grated Bread, Cream, Currants, Eggs, Nutmeg, Salt and Rosewater, and fill them
in skins.

Other Puddings.
TAke a pint and a half of Cream, one pound of Butter, and set them on the
fire till the Butter be melted, then take grated Bread, three or four Eggs;
season it with Nutmeg, Rosewater, Sugar* and make it as thin as a Pancake
batter, then butter the dish and bake it in it, with a garnish of Paste about
it.

To make Black puddings.
FIrst* take half the Oatmeale and pick it, beat it a very little, then take
the blood when it is warm from the Hog, and striane it, put in the Oatmeale as
soon as you can, and let it stand all night; then take the other part of the
Oatmeale, pick it clean and boil it in Milk till it be tender, and all the
milk consumed; then put it to the blood and stir it well together, and put in
good store of Beef or Hogs suet, and season it with good Pudding-herbs, Salt,
Pepper and Fennel seed, and boil them, but do not fill the guts too full.

To make a Pudding.
TAke more than a pint of Cream, and boil in it a Manchet, and rub it through a
cullender, and season it with Nutmeg, Salt, Sugar and Rosewater, with Suet
small minced: butter a dish and bake it.

To make a posset.
TAke a quart of new Cream, a quarter of an ounce of Cynamon, Nutmeg quartered,
and boil it till it taste of the spice, and keep it always stirring, or it
will burn to; then take the yolks of 7 Eggs beaten well together with a little
cold Cream; then put that into the other Cream that is on the fire, and stir
it till it begin to boil; then take it off and sweeten it with Sugar, and stir
on till it be indifferent cool; then take somewhat more than a quarter of a
pint of Sack (half a pint will be too much) sweeten that also, and set it on
the fire till it be ready to boil; then put it in a convenient vessel, and
pour your Cream into it, elevating your hand to make it froath, which is the
grace of your Posset; and if you put it through a tunnell, it is held the more
exquisite way.

To make Barley Cream.
TAke a quarter of a pound of French Barley, and boil it in three or four
waters tlll it be soft, then take three pintes of good Cream, and boil it with
large Mace and quartered Nutmeg till it be pretty thick; then have in
readiness a quarter of a pound of Almonds finely beaten, and strain them into
a Porringer with Rosewater, and pour it into the Cream and set it on the fire,
keeping it stirring till it boil: then season it with Sugar and Musk, or
Ambergriece, and dish it to cool.

To make Stone-Creame.
TAke a pint and half of thick sweet Cream, unbeat Mace and Cynamon a good
proportion, six spoonfuls of Rosewater: season it sweet with Sugar, and boil
them till a quarter of them be wasted; then dish it and keep it with stirring
till it be as cold as Milk from the Cow: then put in a little Runnet and stir
it together, then let it stand and cool, and serve it to the table. You must
charge it with Runnet according to the goodness.

To make Macroones.
TAke one pound of fine white Sugar beat and searced very fine, and one pound
of blanched Almonds beat very fine: you are to note, when you beat Almonds, you
must wet them either with Rosewater or other water to prevent oyling; then mix
the Sugar and Almonds well together, put them into a dish ad dry them over a
gentle fire; then take the whites of five Eggs well beaten with Rosewater, and
wet the Almonds with it, so wet that you may make them up with your knife into
Cakes, and lay them on a paper that is buttered very thin, and bake them in an
Oven where Bread has been baked, a quarter of an hour.

To make a Fool.
SLice a Manchet very thin and lay it in the bottom of a dish, and wet them
with Sack, boil Cream, with Eggs, and three or four blades of Mace; season
it with Rosewater and Sugar, stir it well together to prevent curdling; then
pour it on the Bread and let it cool; then serve it up to the Table.

To make Almond-puff.
TAke half a pound of the best Almonds and blanch them in cold water, and
slice them in thin long slices, put them into a dish with their weight of
double refined Sugar, finely searced, and Mix Carraway seeds with Musk and
Ambergriece; then have some whites of eggs, and beat them, and as the froath
arises take it off* and put it among the Almonds: repeating this till the
Almonds be wet, if they be too wet they will not do well; then lay some on
Papers or Wafers, and cast them up lightly with the point of a knife, like a
Rose; you must not lay the Almonds thick, but that they may look a little
hollow, within, like a Honeycomb; then scrape a little fine Sugar on them and
put them into an Oven that is not very hot, for they must not be very brown.

A Syllabub.
TAke a pint of White Wind or Sack, and a sprig of Rosemary, a Nutmeg
quartered, a Lemmon squeezed into it, with the peele, and Sugar; put them into
the pot at night, and cover them till the next morn; then take a pint of
Cream, a pint and half of new Milk; then take out the Lemon peel and
Rosemary, and Nutmeg, and so squirt in your Milk into the pot.

Another.
TAke a pint of very thick Cream and a pint of Sack, or White Wind, and put
them together in a deep Basin, with two whites of Eggs, the juice of a Lemmon,
with a piece of the peel and a little Sugar; then take a whisk and whip it, and
as the froath arises, take it up with a spoon and lay it in a Fruit-dish, or
basin; and when the basin is covered, lay fine searced Sugar on it, and so to
the top of the basin.

To make Cream with Snow.
Boil a pint of Cream with a stick of Cynamon, and thicken it with Rice
Flower and the yolk of an Egg, season it with Rosewater and Sugar, and Salt,
and let it have a walm; then put it into a dish, and lay clouted Cream on it,
and fill up the dish with froath of Cream which comes to the top of the
churme; when you make Butter sprinkle it with Rosewater, and scrape Sugar on
it, and some Pine kernels on it, and serve it up.

To make a Rice Florentine.
Boil the Rice with milk or water, and season it with Nutmeg, Cynamon, Salt,
Sugar and Carrawayes, Rosewater, sliced Dates, lumps of Marrow, two or three
yolks of Eggs, a little Cream, if it be too thin put in a little grated Bread,
and put it into Puff-paste in a dish, and bake it: you may make a Pudding thus
in Guts, shredding the Dates and Marrow finer.

To make Cream cabbidge.
SEt a gallon of new milk on the fire, and when it boyles, scum it so long as
froath arises; then empty it into ten or twelve boules, as fast as you can
without froathing, and set them where the wind may come; when they are a
little cold, gather the Cream that is on the top with your hand, crumpling it
together, and lay it on a plate; when you have laid three or four layings on
one another, wet a feather in Rosewater and Musk, and stroke over it, and
searce a little grated Nutmeg and fine Sugar, and lay three or four lays more
on it as before: this do till you have off all the Cream on the boules; then
put all the Milk to boil again, and when it boyles, set it as you did before
in boules, and use it in like manner: it will yield four or five times
seething; which you must put on your plate, as before, that it may lie round
and high like a Cabbidge: let one of the first bouls stand, because the cream
of them will be thickest and most crumpled; take that up last to lay uppermost;
and when you serve it up, searce or scrape Sugar on it: This must be made over
night for dinner, or morning for supper.

To make Italian Puffs.
WOrk up the searced Sugar in Gum-dragon, steeped in Rosewater, and beat it in
a Mortar with the white of an Egg, to a Paste; put into it a few Carraway
seeds, and roll it in knots or little loaves, or what fashion you please, and
set them in Wafers and bake them in an Oven as hot as for Manchet; and when
they are well risen in the Oven take them out, but handle them not till they be
cold.

To make a Posset pie.
ROast Apples very well, and beat the pulp of them with Sugar, that it be as
sweet as Syrrop; then take thick Cream and boil it, and mix it with the
yolks of raw Eggs, a few crumbs of Bread, a little Cynamon, Ginger, three
spoonfuls of Sack; make the Pie low and set it in the Oven to dry, and when it
is hard put in the meat; and when you take it out, stick it with, and strew
Comfets on it, or stick it with Cittron or other Sweetmeats of different
colors.

An excellent clouted Cream.
TAke new Milk from the Cow and set it over the fire in a kettle to scald,
ready to boil, and strain it through a cloth, and put it in several pans to
cool: then take off the Cream which will scumme, and season it with
Rose Water, Sugar, and Musk, putting Cream to it. Serve it up with Snow on it.
You may keep it a day without Cream.

Codling cream.
COddle twenty fair Codlings very well, then peele and coare them very well,
and beat them in a Mortar; then take a pint of Cream and mix them well
together and strain it into a dish, and mix it with Sugar, Sack and Musk, and
Rosewater, if you please: you may do the same with any fruit if you will.

Almond cream.
BEat half a pound of sweet Almonds with Rosewater; then take a quart of
Cream and put it to the Almonds by degrees, as you beat them, and strain it
into a skellet, and boil a stick of Cynamon with it, keeping it with stirring
all the time, to prevent burning, and boil it till it be thick, then take it
and mix it with Sugar, and serve it up cold.

A quaking Pudding.
SLice the crumbes of a penny Manchet, and infuse it three or four hours in a
pint of scalding hot Cream, covering it close; then break the bread with a
spoon very small, and put to it eight Eggs, with but four of the whites well
beaten, and season it with Sugar, Rosewater, grated Nutmeg, or a drop of oil
of Nutmeg, if you think it too stiff put in some cold Cream: when you season
it mix it very well, it will be the lighter; wet the bagg, and butter, and
flower it; then put in the compound, tie it hard and boil it half an hour;
then dish it, and put to it Butter, Rosewater and Sugar melted, and serve it up
to the table.

Another.
SCald your Bread with a pint of Cream, as at first, and put to it a quarter
of a pound of Jordan Almonds, beaten small with Rosewater, to prevent oyling,
or at the time of the year, as many Walnut kernels blanched, which will be as
good: season it with Sugar, Nutmeg, Salt, six Eggs, a quarter of a pound of
Dates sliced and cut small, a handful of Currants, and Marrow minced: work all
these together, but not too thick: butter a dish and put it to bake.

To make Apricock chips.
TAke half as much fine beaten Sugar as Apricocks, pare and cut them as thick
as the back of a knife into a basin, and strew the Sugar on them, and set them
on a chasing-dish of coals, but let them not boil nor simper, but shake them
often, till the Sugar candy on the basin side; then take them out and lay them
on plates in a stove, and keep them with turning till they are dry.

To dry Apricocks with the full weight of Sugar.
STone and pare the Apricocks as you do them, put them in fair water on the
fire, being scalding hot, and scald them very tender, but let them not boil;
and while they scald, take their full weight of Sugar and put to it a little
water, and set it on the fire till the sugar be thoroughly melted, and seething
hot, but be sure it boil not; then put in the fruit, and let them stand on the
fire till they be thoroughly hot in the Syrrup; then take them off and heat them
so morning and evening, and in the heating turn them till you see them candy on
the top, which will be in seven or eight days; then take them out of the
syrrup and lay them upon glass or stone plates, and set them in the Sun to dry,
which will be in a day or two, but you must not heat them that morning you take
them out. For black or white Pearplums, you must take much less water* and you
must sees the sugar to a candy height. In all things else do them as the
Apricocks, except stoning and paring.

To dry Apricocks with half the weight of sugar, which is the best way.
STone and pare the Apricocks, having first weighed them, and take half their
weight in sugar, which must be boiled to a Candy height, which you may know by
the dropping of it: when you find it break, and run up like a small hair,
which it will do when it comes to that height; then put in the Apricocks, and
let them boil a quarter of an hour, and let them lie in the Syrrupe all
night; the next day lay them on a Glass, or stone Plate, to dry in a stove.

To dry Apricocks another way.
LEt not the Apricocks be too ripe, and a day after they be gathered stone and
pare them, and to a pound of Fruit take a pound of Loaf sugar beat small, and
cover them all over with it for two hours, till the Sugar be so moist that it
will melt without water; then set them on a slow fire, that they boil not in
two hours or more, turning them often that they break not; and when you think
they are enough, put them into a deep glass, and the Syrrup into a silver
dish, and let it boil a little, then pour it on the Apricocks, and let it
stand uncovered till the next day, then cover them, and when they have lain a
week in that Syrrup, take them out and lay them on glass plates and set them
in a stove, or any place where they may have the air of the fire, and
every-day turn them on clean glasses, till they dry.

To candy Oranges with Marmalade in them.
TAke the fairest and thickrind Oranges, and best colored, and pare off the
outside very thin and rub them with Salt, and wash it off again, and dry
them, and make a little hole in the bottom, only to put in your fore finger,
and take out the meat and seeds, and skins very clean, and keep the Oranges
as whole as you can; then lay them in water, and shift them thrice in a day;
then boil them in four several waters; all which (but the first) must boil
when you put them in; then lay them between two course cloths to dry up the
water; you may remember to cut stoppers for the holes out of some other
Oranges, which must be watered and boiled with them: then take to a pound of
Oranges, one pound and a half of the best Loaf sugar, and wet the sugar thin,
and let it boil almost to a candy; then stir it in the skellet till it cool,
and then it will be thicker and thicker; and before it be too hard, put in the
Oranges, and set them upon embers, and it will turn thin again, and so let
them preserve softly in the syrrup, still turning of them till you think they
will come dry, and the sugar candy, but not too hard; when they are hot fill
them with the Marmalade, and put the stopples on them.

To make Paste of Oranges.
TAke the thickest rind and fairest Oranges of color, is the best; then pare
off the outside very thin, and rub them with salt, and wash it clean off
again; dry them in a cloth and cut them in halves, and wring out the juice,
strain it and keep it in a glass, then scrape out all the meat and lay them
in water two days, and shift them twice a day; then boil them in four
several waters, boiling before you put them in, except the first; take them
out and lay them betwixt course clothes till they be very dry; then scrape out
the strings and cut out all the black in them, and beat them to a fine Paste in
a stone Mortar; then scald some Apple-Johns in the last water you boil your
Oranges in; then take off the pulpe of the Apples and beat it fine in a stone
Mortar, and to one pound of Orangepulp you must take a quarter of a pound of
Apple-pulp; then mix them well together, and put the juice of the Oranges you
saved, and the juice of four Lemmons to it; and take the full weight of all
this in double refined sugar; then set the pulp on the fire in a silver or
stone dish; stirring of it continually; then wet the sugar thin with water, and
put some Musk and Ambergriece tied in a Tyffeny bag into it, and let it boil
to a Candy; then put in the pulp and stir them well together, and let it boil
a little after it is in; then drop it on sheets of glass in round cakes, and
set them in a warm cupboard to dry, and when one side is dry, take them off and
clap two together.

To make jelly of John-apples to lay upon Oranges.
PAre and cut them in pieces somewhat less than quarters, then pick out the
kernels, but leave the coares in them, and as you pare them put them in fair
water, lest they be black; then put to one pound of Apples; three quarters of a
pint of Water, and let it boil apace till it be half consumed* then let it
run through a jelly-bag; then take the full weight of them in double refined
sugar; wet the sugar thin with water, and let it boil almost to a Candy; then
put to it the liquor of Apples, and two or three slices of Orange peel, a
little Musk and Ambergriece tied in a piece of tiffany, and let it not boil
too softly for losing the color; then warm a little juice of Orange and
Lemmon together, and it being half boiled, put it into it, but not too much
juice, for then it will not jelly; then set some to jelly in a spoone, and if
it jelly, take it up, and have ready in a glass some preserved Oranges, and
pour it on them.

To preserve Pearmaines in slices.
TAke them about Alhollontide, for then they are best; pare and cut them round
in thin slices, and cast out the coare of every slice as you pare them, put
them into fair wat^r, or they will be black; then take to a pound of Apples as
much fine Loaf sugar, and half a pint of spring water, and set the sugar and
water together on the fire, and boil it to a clear syrrup, and let it be cold
before you put in the Apple; then put to a pound of Apples a little rind of
Oranges and Ambergriece, and Musk, in a tiffany; and when it has boiled a good
while, put in the juice of three Oranges, and two Lemmons warmed; you may allow
at the first putting in of the sugar, three spoonfuls more of sugar for the
juice: let them boil till they be very clear, and the syrrup jelly.

To make jelly of Raspesses.
WHen you have strained the Raspesses, take to every pint of juice three
quarters of a pound of Loaf sugar, pick out some of the fairest; and having
strowed some of the sugar in the bottom of the skellet, lay them in one by one,
and then put the juice upon them, and some sugar, reserving some to put in when
they boil, and so let them boil apace, putting on the sugar till they be
enough; for Currants, you need not put them on till they be enough.

To preserve Pippins in Jelly.
TAke the golden Pippin, which is much the best, and take three quarters of
their weight in double refined sugar, being beat fine, and as much water as you
think will cover them in boiling; and when the sugar is melted put in the
Pippins, being very finely pared and cut in halfes, or quarters, which you like
best, a little of the coares being taken out of them. When they have simpered a
while, let them boil as fast as may be on a clear fire, till they look very
clear: when you set them first on the fire, you may put in a little
Orange-peel cut very thin, and boiled in several waters till it be tender, and
then cut into little long slices, which will look handsome, and give the
Pippins a good taste; then take out the Pippins, being boiled enough, and boil
up the Jelly with a quick fire as fast as may be. Being the day before made
thus, take any good Pippins and pare them, and cut them in halfes, and put them
in a skellet with a little more water than will cover the bottom of the
skellet, and let them boil fast till they look clear; then put them out into
a stone dish, and crush them through a jellybagg whilst any liquor will run out
from them, and let it stand all night in a clean stone pot; and when the
Pippins are boiled, take the clear of this liquor, and with the quarter of
their weight of the best sugar, and boil it till jelly; then lay the Pippins
in the glass, and put as much jelly to them as will even them in the glass,
and put the rest as fast as you can into little flat stone dishes very thin,
and when it is cold, slide it all over the glass of Pippins, and the next day
tie them up.

To dry Pippins.
TAke the fairest Pippins, about Christmas, and set them one by one in an Oven,
a little warmer than when bread is drawn* and let the Oven be heated twice a
day, and turn the Pippins once in either heating; when they begin to be a
little tender, flat them, and be careful you break not the skins; then keep
them flat and turned, till they be dry; the Pippins must not be spotted, but
the clearest can be got.

To make Snow.
TAke a quart of the best Cream, and a quarter of a pound of blanched Almonds
beated very fine, with Rosewater, and st^ained, half a pint of Whitewine, a
piece of Orange peele, a sliced Nutmeg, 3 sprigs of Rosemary, and let it stand
two or three hours, being made sweet with sugar; then strain them into a basin;
then take out some of it into a ser thing, and beat it till it froath or
bubble, and as the froath arises take it off gently with a spoon, and lay it
in the dish you serve it up in: you must beat it all by a little at a time,
till you have as much of the froath and bubbles as will rise a good height; you
may put more Sugar to it, but no Cream but what was in it, for that which falls
from the bubbles will be enough.

To make jelly of Raspesses.
WHen the Raspesses are picked clean, strain them through a hair sieve with a
spoon; if you would have it very clean, you must not strain them too dry, but
only the thinnest juice; then put in as much Loaf sugar as you think fit, or
(if you will) weigh the Raspesses; and when they are strained, weigh the seeds,
and take something less than the weight of the juice in sugar, and boil it
till it jelly in a spoon, being cold, (as stiff as you would have it;) if you
would have some seeds in it, leave out some Raspesses whole, and boil in it,
or (if you please) preserve a few and put in it: when you glass it, you must
not do any thing that is red in any Pewter or Tin; you may do red Currants
the same way.

To make Raspes*cakes.
WHen the Raspes are clean picked, weigh them, and take something less than
their weight in Loaf sugar finely beaten, and put in two or three spoonfuls of
sugar in the boiling of them, to keep their color, and keep them with stirring
while they boil, till you find they come clean from the bottom of the
skellet: in the mean time, let the rest of the sugar be boiling, being only
made wetwith water, or very little more; and when it is almost boiled to sugar
again, take it off the fire and put in the Raspesses, and stir them well
together, and then set them on a soft fire, and keep it stirring gently half a
quarter of an hour; then take it off the fire and stir it, that it may be
almost cold; then put it into the pewter moulds, and set them in a stove very
gently, hot, or where they may have a little air of the fire; after three or
four days take off the rings, and when you find them dry at the top, turn
them upon glasses, which you must lay under them at the first, or a pewter
plate, or else they will lose their bright color; you must not stir the sugar
when it boyles, but only about the sides, to keep it together, but let it
boil upon a good quick fire: it will be the better color, if you give them
the full weight of sugar.

To preserve Raspesses.
PIck clean the fairest Raspes, and take their bare weight in Loaf sugar,
which must be finely beaten, and strew a layer of sugar in the bottom of the
skellet, or China dish, and then a larger of Raspes, and so three or four
times double, and crush some juice of other Raspasses all over them, and set
them on a soft fire till the Sugar be melted, often shaking them; then let them
have a quick fire, and let them boil some five walms. Every time they boil up
shaking of them, and in so many boyles they will be enough.

To preserve Cherries.
TAke the deepest colored Cherries and largest you can get, and gently pull
out the stones and stalks, and lay them in a skellet, or China dish; lay a
layer of Sugar first, and then a laying of Cherries, with the stalky side
downward, and so to the height you intend, having the bare weight of sugar to
the cherries, and let them lie till you have peeled some skins off of the
smallest Cherries, but well colored; if you will have them of a crimson
color, one ounce of skins will be as little as you can take to one pound of
cherries, not taking any of the juice of the cherries with the skins, for
that will make them look tawny; put a little*sugar to the skins to fetch the
color out of them, and set the skins on a soft fire, often stirring and
crushing them with a spoon; then pour all that juice on the Cherries and set
them on a soft fire, often shaking of them till the sugar be pretty well
melted; then set them on a quick fire and let them boil up; then take them
off, and the froath settled scum them clean, and so do till you think them
enough, which you may find by their clearness; then take them off and scum
them very clean, and let them stand all night in a silver or china dish, and
the next day, if the syrrup be not very thick, let the fruit be put up into
glasses, and boil the syrrup again on a quick fire, and when it is cold, put
it to the Cherries, and be sure to let the glasses stand open till they be
cold. If you would have them pure colored, do them with the best sort of sugar.

To make Quince cakes the true way.
TAke the yellow apple Quince and parboil them over a quick fire, and when they
are soft, and begin to crack, take them out of the water, and lay them on a dry
cloth, letting the water drain well out of them, and scrape the pulpe of them
into a silver dish, and take to one pound of that pulpe one pound of the best
loaf Sugar; then boil them together on a quick fire, and when you think it
enough, which you may know by laying a little on a Table, and if it comes clean
from the board, without cleaving, it is enough; then strew some Sugar finely
serced upon the board, and put the stuff on that Sugar, and when it is cold,
mould them up into little cakes, and print them; then set them in a box by the
fire, with the lid of the box open, some two days, that they may dry.

To preserve sweet Lemmons.
PAre the Lemons thin, and rub them with salt, and wash it off again; lay them
in water two days and shift them morning and evening; then boil, and shift
them in four several waters, all which must boil before you put them in, except
the first, but let them not boil too long in one water for making them black;
take them out, and lay them between two hot clothes til the water be soakt out
of them; cut them in halfs, and weigh them, and take to one pound of lemons a
pound and half of the finest loaf sugar and to every pound of sugar a pint of
water, beat the sugar very fine, and set it on the fire with the water, and
when it is clean scummed and boiled a little while; then take it off and let
it cool; then tie up the Lemmons in Cobweb-lawne, every half by it self, and
put them into the syrrup, and let them boil or simper very softly an hour or
less; then put them into a silver basin, and so let them stand a week before
you boil them up, then boil them with a little Ambergriece and Musk tied in a
piece of Cobweb-lawn, the least that may be will make them taste very strong,
and some half an hour before you take them up, put in the juice of four or
six Lemmons made warm, and so let them boil till they be enough; then take
off the tiffeny, and put them up when they are cold.

The best way to preserve Oranges, or such like,
IS never to boil them in Sirrup, but when they are boiled in water, and not
too soft, and to make a Syrrup first; and as soon as it comes off the fire,
put in the citron, and let it lie three or four days, turning it every day:
then pour the sirrup from them, and boil it again, till it be of a pretty
thicknes; then put in the citron when it comes off the fire boiling hot, and
let it lie therein six or seven days, and then boil the sirrop as before, and
at the last boiling you may Amber it if you please: if you give them Sugar
enough, three times will serve to make them keep; if they do not, you may
boil the sirrup at any time again. But if they have stood long before you
boil the syrrup again, you must let it cool before you put it to the Citrons
again, lest they blister. This way is very good; if the sugar be fine, they
will eat daintily and firm.

To make jelly of Oranges.
SHave the Oranges thin, and quarter theme, and water them three days,
shifting them twice a day; then boil them very tender in several waters till
the bitterness be gone; then dry them with a cloth and cut them in thin
slices athwart the quarters, then take their weight of the best sugar, fill a
pint of liquor made of Apple-Johns, and Spring water, as strong of the apples
as you can make it, then mix the sliced Oranges and the liquor together, then
take the sugar, being finely beaten, and wet it with a little water, and when
it has boiled a little, and is scumm'd, put the orange and apple-liquor into
that syrrup, and boil it till it be ready to jelly; put in 4 spoonfuls of the
juice of orange and lemmon together, boil it a little after, and, if you
please, tie a little Amber and Musk in a tiffany and put in it, as long as you
think fit.

To candy Oranges.
GRate off the upper rind of the Oranges, then pare the rind off very thin,
and have water by you to put them in as you pare them; then sew them up in a
fine cloth, and when the water boils put them in, and shift them into three
waters, but they must not boil too long in one water, lest they look black, and
let the pan be made clean every time: when they are boiled take them out of
the Clothes and lay them one by one on a dry cloth, and cover them with
another; then make a clear syrrup, as much as you think will boil so many
peeles; let them boil softly, lest the syrrup grow too thick before they be
enough; and when they are clear, and the syrrup hangs about them, take them
off the fire and put the syrrup and them into a glass, or silver dish, and let
them stand on a dry place (not too hot) till you see them begin to candy; then
take them out and lay them on plates or trenchers, and let them dry of
themselves without any fire, till they be almost dry; then you may put them in
a little heat lest they grow black.

How to make Crystal jelly.
TAke a Knuckle of Veal, and two Calves feet, and boil them in clear water,
but boil not the meat to pieces, for then the jelly will look thick: then take
a quart of the clearest of it, and put it into a skellet or pot, with a little
sliced Ginger, whole white Pepper, a Nutmeg quartered, a grain of Musk; put all
these Spices in a bag, boil them in the jelly, then season it with four
ounces of white Sugar Candy, and three spoonful of Rose Water; run it through
a Cotton Jelly-bag, and if you will have it look of an Amber color, bruise
your Spices, and let them boil loose in the jelly.

To make white Leach of Cream.
TAke a pint of sweet Cream, six spoonfuls of Rosewater, two granes of Musk,
two drops of oil of Mace, or a blade or two of large Mace, boil it with four
ounces of Icing-glass, being steeped and washed clean; then run it through your
jelly-bag into a dish; when it is cold slice it in chequar-work, and serve it
up on a plate, or glasses. This is the best way to make Leach.

FINIS.

