CRUX CHRISTI, AND Judgment Executed.

OR, DIVINE WISDOM CRUCIFYING The humane, carnal, devilish, malicious, mad,
raging Wlsdom of the World.

By his righteous Judgments, drawing nearer to its full and perfect
manifestation.

Then shall Joseph's and Daniels afflictions end; and their Imprisonments be no
more heard of.

And also bondaged Israel re^urn, and be brought from their captivity both of
men, and from that malicious spirit of ignorance and darkness, into perfect
liberty, peace and everlasting rest.

So shall poor Lazarus and the Publican be carried into Abraham's bosom, and
rich Dives with all the traditions both of the righteous and wicked, appear as
a menstruous Clout, or as filthy Rags that all cleansed ones shall loath to
handle, touch, look on, or come within the smell thereof.

Whereunto is added a Comparatis Compraudis of the Judgments of God, with the
unequal ways and judgments of that malicious one in man. Written and
experienced by Richard Coppin, in his sufferings for the Truth.

1 Cor. 2.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ and him crucified, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto
the world. Gal. 6.14, 17. From henceforth let no man trouble me, for I bear in
my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. LONDON, Printed for William Larner, and
are to be sold at the Black-Moore near Fleet-Bridge, 1657.

The AVTHORS EPITLE. To all the beloved of the Lord, that love the appearing of
Jesus Christ in spirit and truth, in and about the City of Rochester in Kent,
aad wherever they may be scattered, to whom, Grace and Peace be multiplied
from God the Father, and Jesus Christ our Lord.
FRiends and Brethren, in the friendship and brotherhood of the Lord Jesus,
with whom, and for whom we all in the spiritual union of Christ, and him
crucified, have suffered together for the witness of Jesus, and the truth of
the Gospel which has been taught us by him, that our joy might be together in
him: Wherefore know ye, 1 Cor. 8.6
that there is in you, and rules over you, one true and living God, the Father
of whom are all things, and you in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things, and you by him, Romans ^.5. Ephesians 4.6.7.
and who is over all, through all, and in you all, God blessed for ever, and
that has given to every one of you that believes Grace, C^^. 2 9.
according to the measure of the gift of Christ, in whom dwells all the fullness
of the Godhead bodylie, and of whose fullness all that believe and trust in the
living God, the Savior of all men, have received grace for grace; 1 Timothy 4.9,
10.
the glory of whom with the eye of divine beauty you may behold, as the glory
of the only begotten Son of the Father full of grace and truth for you; for the
Law came by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, whose coming is to
reveal in you, Ioh. 1.14. Joh. 16.25.
and show unto you the Father plainly, even the mystery of the History which
lies hid in the Letter, til Christ shall unfold it unto you in the spirit; and
therefore God has given unto Christ all power in Heaven and on Earth, Matthew.
28.18. Col. 2.15 Col. 1.18, 19.
that he might overcome all Principalities and Powers for you, that hindered
the revelation of Christ to you, and he in all things to have the pre-eminence
with you, for it pleased the Father that in him should ^ll fullness dwell, that
of his fullness he might fill all things both in heaven and earth, of things
high and low, of what sort or degree soever they be; and all being full of him,
there is then no room in any thing to contain any thing but him, nor to be
contained besides him, where himself contains all things, for he is all and
in all; and this is he that will in due time free me, you, and all men, from all
that does oppress us, and oppose us in the truth.

And when the Lord Jesus shall become your all, in all places, persons, and
things, to fill all in your apprehensions, then is hell as well as heaven with you
full of him, and he rules in them both; so says David, who saw it, and knew it,
If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: Psalm. ^39.8^.
If I go down into Hell, behold, thou art there: And if I dwell in the
uttermost parts of the Earth, thou art there also: Heaven and Earth is full of
his glory, Psalm. 103.19.
and his K^ngdom ru^eth over all; and the presence of God in death and hell with
^is people, in which any thing of God has been shut up or hid, is that which
makes death, Rev. 20.13. Isa. 26.
and hell, and the sea of sin and mise^y to give up the dead that is in them,
and no more to cover their slain; and a new death and hell, or eternal fire, as
well as a new life, and a new heaven and earth, will God prepare to swallow up
ye old, where the old Name and Nature of Hell and Death and Heaven, (...). 7.32.
(...) 21.4, 5.
and Earth, even Tophet shall be changed, and their place no more found; after
which there shall be no more death; neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away, Isa. 6.
and all things will God make new, in the new Heaven and in the new Earth,
where all things that are is contained, and in which change all the things of
the first Creation as all old things are ended, and made new in the second
Creation; yea, even death and hell, else how is it said, Behold, I make all
things new, if that be not: Isa. 62.22.
And as the new Heaven wh ch the Lord shall make shall remain before him, and
have in it a new life and felicity, which should end the old, so the new Earth
which he shall make shall also remain, and have in it a new death and hell which
changes the old, and into which hell or Lake of fire all things of the old,
which belongs to the old man in us, even that death and hell which swallowed
us up, Rev. 20.14. Isa. 28 18.
and tormented us, shall be cast into it, to be ended by it, and the covenant
and agreement of men with death and hell disannulled, and all the enemies of
mankind to be destroyed with it, when Christ himself who makes all things new,
shall appear in hell to change the property of it, Isa 63.1, 2.3, Rev. 14.19, 20.
and thereby tread the Wine Press of the Wrath of ^od, even Satan under foot,
for the redemption of his people; and then shall all the Enemies of God and of
them which all sin and transgression, and all that is not found written in the
Book of Life, he cast into that Wine Press, or Lake of Fire, to be there killed
and ended: This is the second death, R^v. 20.14, 15.
and our second life and resurrection from the dead.

And that you may see this death taking place upon all that which is enmity
with God, Christ, your selves, and the truth, and you thereby come to a
resurrection of life in him let me encourage you to trust in God, who only can
save you and raise you to a newness of life, Isa. 26.4.
for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength who will bring down under foot,
Col. 2.14.15.
and nail to his cross all that which is against you, and contrary to you;
therefore you that would see the one to enjoy the other, wait upon him in the
way which he does it, which is by the obedience of Christ to the cross; for he
is said to drink of the Brook in the way, H^b. 2.9. Psalm. 110.6, 7.
tasting death for every man by which he is in us, and for us, wounds the
head of the Dragon, and thereby lifts up his own head, as you shall find more
of hereafter in what I have written to you, that the way of Gods justice,
judgment, and mercy, in which he destroys all his and our Enemies, is that by
which you shall receive comfort and consolation from the Lord, as the way of God
in which his Prophets, Apostles, and Saints, all waited for him, to be taught
by him, Isa. 26 ^.
as has been also manifest to be the way of God with me since I knew the Lord
and was taught by him, and by him made to bear witness of the truth which I
received in judgment with him, who my self has been comforted, refreshed, and
restored therewith in all my sufferings and undertakings for him unto this day,
and who will also comfort you with the same consolation, and restore you with
the same restoration into safety with himself for he that has kept you, will
keep you still, and will cast off none that wait upon him, but says the Prophet,
Thou will keep him in perfect peace and safety whose mind is stayed on thee,
Isa 26.3.
because he trusts in thee.

And as far as any of you shall with any, in the sufferings of any that suffer
for the truth, be a sufferer with them, who together suffer with Christ, so
know, that as you are partakers with them in the same sufferings of Christ, so
you are partakers with them in the same glory of Christ, though you may not all
suffer the outward Bonds and afflictions of the body as others do, and as
Christ did for us all, yet to be sensible of their sufferings, as when one
member suffers, 1 Cor. 12.26.
all suffer with it; and if one rejoice, all rejoice with it; and so if we
suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him, in which the God of all
grace, who has called us into his eternal glo y by Christ Jesus after that ye
have suffered a while, 1 Pet 5.6 7, 8, 9, 11.
make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you, to whom (and to none else)
be glory and dominion for ever and ever.

And now you my Brethren and partakers in the same So^-ship and spiritual union
of Christ, that which I desire, and always desired to know among you since I
knew you, and that I would you should also know among your selves to bear
witness to the truth, is, 1 Cor. 2.^.
Jesus Christ, and him crucified, by which the world is crucified unto you, and
you unto the world; and that whether we are present one with another, or absent
one from another, yet that the truth as it is in Jesus, and which makes you
free, may abide with you, Gal. 6.14. Joh. 8 32, 36. chap. 14.16. Phil. 2 5.
Romans 12.16.
and be perfected in you, and you thereby to know it, and by it may be united
into one mind and one spirit with the Lord Jesus and one another, walking
together in one fellowship of the spirit, and spiritual union, in all humility,
meekness, gentleness, and long-suffering, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3.
forbearing and forgiving one another in love, according to the example of
Christ the first and true pattern of all our walkings, sufferings,
undertakings, and rejoicings in the Lord, even then do you witness the true
Christ and light of the World in whom is light, and no darkness; truth, and no
error; good, and no evil; and that if you wal^ in the light as he is in the
light, then you have fellowship one with another, and with those that have
fellowship with Christ; 1 John 1.5, 6.
and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son (which is his Life shed abroad in your
hearts) cleanses you from all sin; which fellowship those that are ignorant of
God, and of the pardon of their sins by Christ, knows not, but are in
darkness, and under the bondage of corruption until now, and have not known
Christ, nor him crucified, and so long cannot bear witness unto him.

Then that you may be tried and proved to farther learn this Lesson of Christ,
and be made able and wiling to bear his cross, and witness to it, you are to
mind God in his judgments, the way in which you are called before him to learn
all the obedience of Christ to the cross, who after you have entered into
spiritual judgment with the Lord, do cause you to enter into temporal
judgment with men, as companions with his spiritual, as he did Christ, his
Prophets, Apostles, and Saints, who learned obedience by the things which they
suffered, and through sufferings they were made perfect; Heb. 2.10.
therefore are the prisons and sufferings of the Prophets and Apostles of the
Lord Jesus, into which they were cast by men for the truth, said to be their
Schools, where they both learned and witnessed Christ, and him crucified; and
which by experience I have found to be mine, where I have learned and witnessed
with them unto the same truth; that against me false witnesses have risen up,
and laid to my charge things which I knew not, as they did against them, Psalm.
35.^
and all that witness the truth to this day in the time of their witnessing;
and in which sufferings of the Prophets and Apostles, the truth was the more
manifest both to them and the world, as it was with Jeremiah, who was taught
in the Dungeon of the Prison, Jer. 32.1, 2. chap. 29^ so^^
and from thence sent forth Wr^tings of his Visions and Revelations of what
God had made known unto him, as also did the rest of the Prophets in their
sufferings, and as did the Apostles, and John the Divine, Rev. 1.9. Col. 4.18.
Phil. 1.12, 13:
who wrote the Evangelist and the Epistles, and when he was persecuted into the
I Will of Patmos for the testimony of Jesus, then was the revelations of Jesus
Christ revealed to him, and written by him; and Paul writ his Epistles in his
times of suffering, and says he, My Bonds proves all to the furtherance of the
Gospel; and times of persecution are the times of Gods farther teaching his
people; and did men that persecute others for their judgment, and endeavors
to destroy their knowledge, know that it would be thereby the more increased,
they would not do it; for when they send them to Prison, they do but send them
as to a School where they shall learn more of God, and be the more confirmed in
the truth they before knew, for Christ will never leave them that he has once
taught, but will be always with them more to teach them, that they may more
know him, and be settled and grounded in him.

And in all my sufferings and imprisonment for the truth to this day, I have
had with me the company of that one Schoolmaster, the Lord Jesus, who at first
taught me the knowledge of himself in the spiritual School of divine learning,
the Spirit of himself set up in my heart, by which I was made a Scholar fit
to take my Degrees, to bear the burden and undergo the reproaches by men laid
upon me in the school of my imprisonment and sufferings for the truths sake,
that I might not fear nor be discouraged by them, as I have not bin hitherto,
praised be God, but in six troubles the Lord delivered, me and in the seventh
which is this I am now under) no evil is yet come unto me, Job 5:17, 18, 19:
which has been seven trials and persecutions that I have had for the vvitness
of Jesus, and by which the Lord has also tried and proved me, whether the
Lesson he at first taught me, To trust in him, and deny my self for him, were
still owned, and not forgotten nor denied by me, in which through him I have
been hitherto faithful, and shall so continue unto death if the Lord will, and
am not without my revvard, which is a Crown of Life.

The fruit of which Life of God manifest in flesh (as fast as it was ripened
in me) was by the Lord and keeper of the Vinyard in which it grew, gathered,
and sent by me to be distributed among you, Acts 20.20.
of which with Paul, I kept nothing back from you that was profitable to you,
during the time I was with, you nor from the rest of my Brethren in the flesh
where I have at any time been, but with Paul I have taught publicly, and
from house to house, what the Lord has taught me, which I did not do for
price nor revvard of men, as some Parish-Ministers do, that as so many
Merchantmen, through covetousness make merchandise of the people; and seek not
the Lord Jesus Christ, but themselves; but what I do, and have done, as my
conscience bears me vvitness, has been really with heart and soul, according
to my power, for the glory of God; and the comfort of his people in the Lord
Jesus, that as freely I have received, so freely have I given; for the Vinyard
was the Lords, and he himself as the Husbandman of the Vinyard, did by his
spirit in me plow it, sow it, plant, and dress it, and caused it to grow by the
sweet and powerful dew of himself falling from heaven upon it, as the former
and later rain upon the earth, and being ripe in me, he gathered it, and made
it ready for me, and through the power of his spirit working in me, sent it
abroad among you to be by me declared unto you for your souls comfort, and did
himself (whose Messenger I was) reward me for it, not only with spiritual
comforts to my soul, and with food and raiment to my body, but also with the
reproaches of Christ, which I count greater riches then the pleasures of
Egypt or the riches and glory of this World, in which I also rejoiced as my
portion with the Lord, seeing the Lord in it, and with Paul, learned to be
content in all things, and with him returns you all thanks, that have in any
measure, (and freely) participated with me, and ministered to me in my
sufferings

And now the same Lord which caused to grow in me that Gospel-fruit which I
declared to you, must also cause it to grow in you, before it can bring forth
fruit to you, that you all with me, and I with you, and we both with
Ephraim may be like a green Firre-tree in whom fruit is found, for you had it
from me but in words, who only can plant or speak to the ear, but it is the
Lord that must speak to the heart, to teach, plant, and cause to grow in you
the great Mystery of godliness; for Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but
God must give the increase, which as I have said unto you, is, That you should
know God manifest in flesh, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and today, and
for ever; born, crucified, dead, buried, risen and ascended, and coming to you
the second time in spirit and truth, without sin unto salvation, bringing all
things of him unto your remembrance; and by which spirit of him in me,
manifesting the same to me, I have published it to you, beseeching you all in
Christ Jesus to be reconciled to God, for that God in Christ from all eternity
was himself reconciled to you and all mankind, and that while you and all men
were yet sinners, sent his Son to dye for us, according to the Scriptures, to
reconcile you to himself, and in mercy to you he pardoned you, and by his
spirit within you frees you, and which Message of him for the reconciliation of
all men to God so far as to me was made known by him; I have been, am, and
shall be through him ever faithful, who through his mercy has preserved me in
it.

And now the increase of the Fruit of this Vinyard of Christ for the increase
of his body, taught me by him in the School of my imprisonment and sufferings
for the truth, and ripened and gathered by him in the Harvest thereof, I shall
present you with from the Lord, and not as from my self without him, who first
writ in my heart, and after by my hand in several Treatises of several
subjects while I have been a prisoner among you, to be in order presented to
you shortly, agreeable to what I have before in words declared amongst you,
and which if you have an ear to hear what the spirit says, may be more opened
in you by the Lord of that spirit in the reading thereof; and in which reading
I desire you all to vvait upon the Lord to be taught by him who only can give
you an appetite to it and make you detest it; that can make you vvilling and
able to receive it, which is the mystery of Christ crucified; and you that
cannot receive all for the present, why rest your selves satisfied with what
you can, and judge nothing before the time until the Lord shall come and open
it to you with an enjoyment of it in you, 1 Co^ 4.5.
as he has done to me; in the mean time take this herevvith sent you as a
preparative to that which is coming; and he that can receive it, let him
receive it; and judge not that you know not; and despise not that you enjoy
not, lest you should speak evil of the truth unawares; but vvait the Lords time
with patience and confidence, until he that shall come will come, and make
truth appear truth to you, and then you vvil not judge at all; Heb. 10.35, 36
37.
the which I doubt not but with you that know the Lord, truth as truth will
be received by you as from the Lord, who himself with all his own Messages
comes with the Messengers to open the understandings of them which he has
appointed receivers; and the rest must tarry till he come, who was not only
the Author of it in me for you, but will also be the Finisher of it to you at
his coming; wherefore receive you it, the Lord and me together in one Spirit,
else you will not receive it as truth, nor to your souls comfort; but as Paul
says, It will be unto them that do not believe, but are reprobated, as the
savor of death unto death; 2 Cor. 2 15, 16.
and to them which do believe, and are saved, as the savor of life unto life;
for some in love to the Message of Christ will rejoice in it; and others in
hatred to it will be terrified by it; however the Will of God be done in it.

And as I have sometime said unto you (when I was at first forced to leave you
to go to prison for the truth and your sakes) that when I was absent from you,
my spirit should be present with you; so in the absence of now my person, you
may in this my Writing read my spirit, which is alvvayes with you in the
Lord; and as you have said you were comforted with my presence, be ye also
comforted still in my absence, of which I doubt not but through the Lord you
are comforted; yea, and in the absence of any man that may have been as a
Messenger of the Lord to you, let your comfort be in the Lord, who only is
able to make you stand: And the God of all comfort and patience fill you with
all joy and peace in believing; and the God of peace be with you; 2 Cor. 1.3.
and the peace of God which passes all understanding, keep you and rule in
you, and thereby make you able and willing to follow peace with all men; Phil.
4 7.
in which rest ye all together with me, where I also rest with you; and seeing
first our peace with God in Jesus Christ our Lord, we are therefore at peace
with men, and do forgive them as God in Christ has forgiven us, and is at
peace with us: And as I have not been forgotten by you that know my spirit in
the Lord, so I forget not you in him, but ever remain the Lords faithful
steward, and your faithful friend and servant in the brotherly Message of the
truth of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus, for the glory of God, and comfort of all
those that shall love his appearing.

And lastly; My friends and brethren, who all know of the proceedings against
me, you have also known how my life and Doctrine has been among you, and how
by false accusations I have suffered for the truth and a good conscience; but I
rejoice in it, and still say, The Lords Will be done, and his Kingdom come even
to my Enemies, and reconcile them, and those present differences with men that
having peace in themselves, they may live in love and peace one with another,
and no longer seek the destruction one of another: In the mean time with the
Prophets and Apostles of the Lord Jesus I shall rest, and say as David and
Christ did, Psalm. 35.11.
That though false Witnesses have rose up, and laid to my charge things which I
knew not, yet they could not prevail against me to hurt me, nor prevent the
truth revealed in me; but the things that have happend to me have proved rather
to the further increase of it with me; wherefore better is it if the Will of
God be that we suffer for well doing rather then for evil; Phil. 1.12, 13.
and wrongfully rather then justly, ^ Pet. 2.19.
for this is thank-worthy (says Peter) if a man for conscience toward God
endure grief wrongfully, as my conscience bears me witness in the Holy Ghost I
do, and have done to this day, endured cheerfully that which I have been
wrongfully accused, for owning the Name of Jesus; yet they cannot pull me out
of his hand, nor blot my Name out of the Book of his Remembrance; but though
men interested in the World, that are lifted up with worldly pride and honor,
Luke 6.22, ^^.
may hate me, and blot my name out of their Books, and cast it out as evil for
the Son of Man's sake, yet the Lord who says, I am blessed therein, owns me,
and does still love me, and never will nor can forsake me, because in Christ
the Book of Life I am always in remembrance before him, in whom my new Name is
written, and no man can take it from me; ^sa. 19.14, 15.
for can a Woman forget her sucking-child, (says the Lord) that she should not
have compassion on the son of her Womb? yea, she may forget, but I will never
forget thee, says the Lord: Such is my faith and confidence in the Lord, who
having loved his own, will love them to the end, and is tender of them as the
Apple of his eye.

And that as he has freed my soul from the snares of death, sin, and devils,
so he will in his time free my body from the snares of men that with hatred to
the life of God in me, lie in wait daily to devour me; and that when my
liberty has been several times like to come, have suggested false things
against me to prevent it, and hinder the truth from appearing, as the Princes,
Dan. 6. J^r. 38 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 9, 10, 11, 37.7, 8 9, 10. 39. 11, 12. Genesis 41.14.
Dan 6.23.
Priests, and false Prophets of old did against the true Prophets to keep them
in prison; but the Lord has his time for me as he had for them, to free me,
and I shall with patience wait for it, who works, and none can let; and who
made Zedekiah free Jer^miah from the Dungeon of the Prison upon the request of
Ebedmeleck, one of the Kings House; and who also made Pharaoh King of Egypt
free Joseph from Prison upon the motion of Pharoahs chief Butler; and did also
make King Darius to command Daniel from the lions Den without an, hurt to him;
and who no doubt in his due time will (by what means he pleases) free me, and
none shall hinder, till when I shall rest in him with my prayers in the spirit
for you all, that God will keep you and me; and also for my enemies, that he
will not lay to their charge the things they have acted against me, which he
has hitherto made me able to bear, and to rest contented with in the Lord,
that I still am (dear Friends and Brethren) a very loving Friend and Brother in
Christ to all men, friends and enemies so called, while I am, and the truth is
in me,

Richard Coppin.

A TABLE of the Contents.
Chap. I. THe cross of Christ set up in men and their dyings upon it; of the
life which is lost and to be found; the father, mother and brethren, husband,
wife and chidren, house, lands and all things therein to be forsaken for
Christ, what they are, with the time when, and the manner how. Chap. II. How
the cross of Christ is accompanied with the crosses of the world fiery trials
and persecutions for the truth, the clouds of Christ's coming, and the way of
his people in which he leads them, and walks with them to save them, how and
from what. Chap. III. Of the afflictions of Joseph, his being sold into Egypt
by his brethren, his being falsely accused and imprisoned; how God thereby
exalted him, and Judged his brethren that sold him; how the same was with
Christ and is with us to this day. Chap. IV. How Pharaoh and the Egyptians,
and all that with them to this day do betray and persecute, accuse, judge and
condemn any for conscience toward God, are acted by the Devil, hardened and
commanded to it by God; how with Cain, Judas, and the Devil, they are all Gods
servants, doing their devilish, dark and black work, and whose spirit in them
shall with the Devil, Death, Hell, and false Prophet, and the Beast, which was
and is not gone into perdition, be damned and dye the second death, when and
how. Chap. V. A definition of the rightous and the wicked as two parts of three
in man to be destroyed, and how the third part neither righteous nor wicked is
brought through the fire and saved; with a distinction of Dives and Lazaras and
their conditions in life and death, and of the dog licking Lazarus soars. Chap.
VI. That the more purer, innocent, and faithful men are in the truth, the more
do men plot and devise evil of them to destroy them, as against the Lords
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles; how God by his presence with them delivers
them as he did Israel, the three Children, Daniel Jonah and Jeremiah, and
destroyed their enemies. Chapter VII. How by persecution truth is increased, and
the more advanced; and they that suffer for it, to the terror of them that
persecute it; that truth is rewarded and witnessed by sufferings; how the
reward of sufferings is a crown of glory manifest in men, and when. Chap. VIII.
How the way to find our life is to lose it, that no man is to know any thing of
himself, but to be innocent in knowing his own innocence and righteousness:
also what the true knowkledge of God is: who has it, and how its obtained.
Chap. IX. How all men are alike to God, to whom light and darkness is all one:
that no man is better nor worse then another, and how; what it is to be b^th
best and worst in one person to be punished and exalted, and the way unto it:
how we are to serve one another, and of the state of Christ as God and man; and
how with him we are to love all men. Chap. X. Of Gods appearing in Judgment in
man, against all things of man and this world; that all outward duties, worship
and obed^ence by men professed, is a lie without the inward work of truth
within; how according to the inward work is the outward practice, that the more
by Christ any man is refined, p^rged and saved within in his conscience, the
more by men is he falsely accused, judged and condemned without in his practice.
Chap. XI. Nothing which opposes God can stand against him, how he will pull
down and get above Towers, Churches, worships, religions, and all things of men
that is not in Christ; also to whom the Lords Judgments are a day of joy and
delight, and to whom they are a day of darksnes and trouble, t trust in God
under them is a sure refuge of the good that comes by them, and when. Chap XII.
Incouragem^nts to wait with patience under the Lords Judgments and not to
opp^se them; Of the works of the Lord Jesus what they are, and how we bear them
about in our bodies, and when. Chap. XIII. How men of the greatest light
witnessing to truth under Judgments, do suffer most unjustly by false
accusations with the loss of all things below God; that not all, but some men
as witnesses shall suffer f^r the rest of one life; how some professing the
same life for fear of suffering will deny them that suffer for them rather then
suffer with them as the Disciples of Christ did. Chap. XIIII. That the true
sufferer w ll God enable with joy to bear his burden to follow Christ and deny
himself, to trust in God and rejoice in all things: how with Christ he is
humbled to the lowest with men, and exalted to the highest with God, as the
fruit and effect of Gods Judgments, and the state of perfection.
ERRATA.
In the Title page line 23. read comparandis; next read Epistle for Epitl^: in
p. 2. of the Epistle l. 34. r. the for ye: p. 3 l. 19 r. with for which.

Book, p. 5. l. 16. read John for Romans l. 18. r. to for so, p. 6. l. 22. r.
nurses for snuff^: p. 7. l. 1. r. with for which, p. 9: l. 17. r. whom for
when: l. 20. r. few for some: p. 10. l. 1. r. follow for slow; p. 12. l. 3. r.
pleased; p. 20. l. 24, 25. r. he for the Devil; p. ^4. l. 21. r. lofty. p. 25.
l. 9. r. purified, p. 29. l. 27. r knawed, l. 28. r. with p. 32. l. 1. r. know,
p. 35. l. 3. r. against: p. 39. l. 32. r. see, p. 41. l. 15. r. good, l. 28. r.
and, l: 31. r. every, p. 42. l. 3. r. might, l. 4 r. might, l. 23. r. the, p.
47. l: 9: r. desired not. l: 16: r. of, p: 49. l. 13: r. good, l: 30: r.
humbled himself, p: 52: l. 32: r: made, p: 57: l. 2, dele. that, l: 8: r.
comfort, p: 58: l: 19. r. set up, p, 59: l: 17: r. which, p. 62: l: 27: r:
marks, p: 65: l: 16: add are, p: 66: l; 29: read knowing, p: 68: l: 3: thy men
p: 69: l. 2: r. enjoyed it, l: 30. r. they must continue maintaining, p: 70: l:
24. r. with.

A new and spiritual Song of Sion and the Lamb;
Written by the Author in the Holy Land:
And also in his sufferings, wherein God did him try,
And unto him revealed life, light, and liberty.

Psalm. 98. 1 Psalm. 101.1. O sing unto the Lord a new Song; for he has done
marvelous things: his right hand, and his holy arm has gotten him the victory.
I will sing unto the Lord of mercy and judgment; unto thee O Lord will I sing.
1.
THE Lamb of God, our King is come
In righteousness to reign, Ioh. 1.29. Isa. 32.1. Heb. 2.9. Rev. 13 8. Hos. 3.
Mat. 7.12. Jam. 2.12.

His glorious Kingdom is begun,
He for all men was slain.
And he himself all men do woo
To be for none but he,
And do as they would be done unto,
In perfect Liberty.
2.
His Wedding Day with men he will keep,
The Law of Love fulfill; Rev. 19.6, 7, 8, 9. Rev. 4.4.

With Garments white he will clothe his sheep;
This is his Fathers will,
That they should all return to him
In union for to be, Jer. 3.14.

And see themselves redeemed from sin
to perfect liberty. Luke 6.68.

3.
This news abroad I did proclaim
As Christ gave me command, Matthew. 28, 19, 20. Jer. 4.12 23, 14. Luke 22.15.

That men from sin he would reclaim
To live in the Holy Land.
And those that did this Doctrine hate
Me often they did try,
Matthew. 10.16, 17, 18.
My body for to captivate
From outward liberty.
4.
Luke 19.47, 48. Acts 16.19 Mat. 26.34. Joh. 11.47, 48, 56, 57
And as in Kent I this did preach,
Christ's Kingdom to make known,
Some Ministers that there did teach,
This Doctrine would not own;
But straight unto the Magistrate
And Soldiers they did fly,
To have them presently me take
From outward liberty.
5.
Lu 20.20: Psalm. 35:11: Luk 14:55.56, 57: Acts 5:17: Acts 6:9:
And then against me they did plot,
And to my charge did lay
Many things which I knew not,
To have me thence away:
And unto prison did me send,
Me for the truth to try,
Because with them I did contend
For Gospel-liberty.
6.
Then that in Christ I might have rest,
P^al. 37.7^ Heb: 49:10.
He unto me did say,
Enter thou into my sweet breast
That nothing thee annoy.
Until the wrath of men be past
Isa. 26:20: Rev: 2:10:
I Will shut thee up in me;
Though into prison they thee cast,
I Will be thy Liberty.
7.
A work I have for thee to do,
Which by thee I Will maintain,
Acts 26:16, 17, 18. Ephesians. 1:13: (...) 4:30: Psa: 35:27 Psa: 69:30 ^^a 51:1:
My truth thou must bear witness to
While life in thee remain.
I have upon thee set my seal,
My Name to magnify;
And will unto thee there reveal
True light and liberty.
8.
The Prisons were my Prophets Schools
Where they were taught by me
To learn my Statutes and my Rules, Jer: 32:11: Rev: 1:9, 10: Isa: 26:9: Psalm:
119:54, 55: J^^: ^9:1: Ephesians: 3:1, 2, 3: chap: 4:^2

And eke my Majesty.
And they from theene did send abroad
News of Eternity,
That he who is the only Lord
Will give men liberty.
9.
As I beheld his glory bright
Shining in me so clear, Col: 1:26, 27. Rev: 14:12, 13: Ephesians: 5:14: Isa: 26:19:
Isa: 14:5:

I was thereby constrained to write,
His voice the dead to hear,
That they should all awake and sing
that in the dust did lie;
By Christ their dew on them falling,
To give them liberty.
10.
In spirit this he will declare
To all both great and small, Isa: 52:10: Psalm: 36:9:

His holy Arm he will make bear
before the Nations all.
And they that will his glory see
Must have him for their eye;
For there is none but only he
Can see true liberty.
11.
All eyes besides him are so blind,
That he an eye will be
To enlighten all that are behind
And see no liberty, Psalm: 4^.89: Psalm: 146.7, 8. Rom: 6:4: Psalm: 119:45^,

That they might dye and rise with him
From all that is a lie,
And be thereby brought out of sin
To walk at Liberty.
12.
He that true liberty has known
Does praises to Christ sing, Psalm: 30:3^ 4:

That he from death will bring me home,
No more to live in sin.
And when this nevvs abroad is spread
Lu: 24:45: Jam: ^:25:
That all men may it see,
Those that with understanding read.
May find their liberty.
13.
And though I a prisoner be,
Yet am I free from care,
Luk: 20:19 20:
And men with feigned words flattery
Do seek me to ensnare.
They counsel me to change my mind,
And so my words deny,
And tells me I shall thereby find
My outvvard liberty.
14.
False witness also did arise
Psa 35.11.
against me to betray
My innocence by their lies.
My life to take away.
Yet still the truth I Will vvitness to
Is^. 14.8. Psalm. 118.6.
Though for the same I dye,
And will not fear what man can do
Against my liberty.
15.
And that which does me still suppor^
2 Samuel 22:2. Exodus 15:2:
Is Christ my Rock and Tovver,
Who is all strength, joy, and comfort
To me in every hour.
Whose glory is still in my sight,
His presence stands me by,
Psalm. 16:8, 9, 10, 11:
To make himself my whole delight,
Peace, rest and liberty.
16.
Isai: 55.4. Romans 1.9. Rev. 1:5:
Christ is my witness and my guide,
My conscience pure and clear.
I know the Lord is on my side,
Therefore I need not fear.
I will not fear the stroke of death,
Nor Tirants cruelty;
So soon as Christ receives my breath
My soul gains liberty.
17.
A vow to God I once did make, Deuteronomy: 23:21, 22:

Which vow to him is due,
That I for him will freely speak,
That none but him is true.
And rather then from him I Will turn, Rom: ^:4: Dan: 3:17, 18:

Or should his truth deny,
I Will yield my body to be burnd:
This is my liberty.
18.
Patience puts balm unto my sores;
Love lives without control; Je^: 8.22.

They lock my body within the doors,
But cannot lock my soul. Psalm 97.11. 2 Cor. 3.17,

Life, Light and Liberty so sweet
Within my breast does lie;
They that my body here do keep
Know no such liberty.
19.
There Is neither pardon from the Pope,
Nor Prayers made to Saints,
That can enlarge my farther scope,
Or shorten my complaints.
It Is Christ above, Psalm. 146.7. Job. 8.36.
(the Lord of love)
That for mankind did die;
No one but he, that pardoned me,
Can work my liberty.
20.
There Is many men have treasure store,
Yet are so worldly bent,
Having so much, they scrape up more, Eccles. 4.^

And never a^^ content.
But I that am the poor'st of all
From worldly cares am free,
Which makes me think they are in thrall
And I at liberty.
21.
The man that bears a wavering mind
Jam: ^:6, 7, 8: P^ov: 29:22.
Is subject unto woe;
He that to anger is inclined
Must sorrow undergo;
But he that bears a patient heart,
Though he a prisoner be,
Re^: 13:10:
Exceeds both nature, skill, and art,
In point of liberty.
22.
God did for me this place appoint
Before that I came here,
P^^^. 1.29:
And he a spirit to me lent
That I the same should bear.
He gave to me a willing mind,
Psalm: 110.3: Col: 1:24:
And did my soul make free
To suffer that which was behind,
Before true liberty.
23.
And when my sufferings should end,
Which I shouldhere endure,
Exodus: 3:9, 10, 19, 20:
A Moses to me he would send
My freedom to procure.
And those that should it then withstand
His wrath he would make see,
And overthrow them by that hand
Isa: 41:10, 11:
Which gives me liberti.
24.
But some (like Pharaoh) still did plot
My body to keep here,
Evod: 8:28:32:
Though they would say, We hinder not,
But rather would him clear.
Yet God their hearts made hard again
My freedom to deny,
Until that I Gods time had lain
to have my liberty.
25.
Therefore in this I am content
His time here for to stay, Phil. 4.11: Heb: 13:5: Psalm: 119.50:2 Cor: 1:4:
Psalm: 84:11.

He having to me comforts lent
The time to pass away.
He makes his sun on me to shine,
My soul to satisfy,
And promises in his due time
To give me liberty.
Col. 3.16, 17. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom,
teaching and admonishing one another in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs,
singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord; and whatsoever ye do in word or
deed, do al^ in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the
Father by him. As is the Exhortation of Richard Coppin. Return into thy rest, O
my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.
Christ Crucified, AND Judgment Executed.
CHAP. I. The cross of Christ set up in men and their dyings upon it; of the
life which is lost and to be found; the father, mother, and brethren, husband,
wife, and children, house, lands and all things therein to be forsaken for
Christ, what they are, with the time when, and the manner how.
YOU that with Christ, and with those that are Christ's, will desire to live in
the same spiritual freedom, fellowship, 1 Co^. 1.1^
and communion of Saints in light, must by him be armed with the same spiritual
mind of Christ and them, to know Christ crucified in you, and you to all things
of flesh and this world besides God, and so with him to have peace, joy, and
comfort, in all your desires, ways, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.
and actions, and with patience and delight to follow him, and to take up his
cross daily and carry it with you after him, suffering it to be placed in you,
as the Lords standard lifted up against the enemy, sin, the devil, and all
iniquity, Rev. ^^, 1^ 1^ ^7.
which is a flood out of the devils mouth rushing out upon you to devour you,
till Christ the wisdom and power of God (as the cross) be set up in you to
overcome it for you, and restore you into perfect health and safety in the Lord
Jesus, Heb. (...).
through the manifestation of his second coming without sin unto salvation in
the perfecting of which work by the same cross, (walking through the paths of
the Lords judgments, where the natural man is to give up the ghost with the
loss of life) you are to abide upon this cross, not for a day a month, not a
year, and in some things and not in others, but in all things, all ways, and
continually, ever bearing about in you bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus
(after the flesh) that the life also of Jesus (after the spirit) may be made
manifest in your mortal bodies, and you in him to live without the knowled^ of
sin, and of the fear of death, hell and the devil; therefore you which live in
the body and would know Christ cru^ified in you, (...)
^are always to be delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the li^^ ^lso of
Jesus may be made manifest in you m^t^^ (...) and (...) sin ^eath, hell and
(...) man with all his corrup^ de^d^ of the fles^ wisdom, interest, and
knowl^^g, and to plan^ in you the new (...) which in Christ Jesus (...)
^ousness (...) holin^s^, and so (...) that in dying you (...) that life which
y^ (...) before the ^a^ of Adam, so (...) ^^eth judgment to destroy in man the
kn^^ (...) by which came death and so by (...) again to a new life ^ith (...)
which he shall know himself (...) live (...) not unto himself, (...)
and in dying and l^^^g (...) from which he shall never dye so says Christ,
[he that believes in me, Joh 5.15 16
though he were dead yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes in
^^e shall ne^^^ dy^^ believe you this, says Christ as sufficient (...) eternal
salvation?

And the way to this (...) dye daily till you be dead to all things but Go^, to
(...) only i^ God; for as you dye the d^^d of o^e life (which you must dye and
cannot live) to you liv^ a^oth^r (...) which is for ever^a^^ing and can nev^^
dye, whereby C^^ist himself is mag^^fied, (...)
set up, and ex^^^^d in your b^^^y to be you^ and you his, both in death and in
life (...) to you in both, and you (...) in you (...) death that you might o^
tru^t (...) ^^fore this dying (...) ^peaks of when he sa^t^. ^I am (...) yet
nevertheless I live, ye^ (...) ^^ow, (...) lives mine, ^al 2.1^, ^^
and the life that (...) the faith of the son o^ God (...) gave himself for me,
and no^ only (...) ^u^ ^or a^^ men whatsoever, that (...) as he sh^l be
manifest in them, may b^ (...) with him (...) unto themselves (...) dyed for
th^^, and now lives in ^^^m (...) that w^ether they live o^ dye (...), (...)
who ^^s that was dead i^ alive (...).

And (...) Christ said unto you all tha^ wo^^d (...) any thing in your selves
besides the lord of for any oth^^ but the (...) that ^f you will come after
(...) you (...) de^y your (...) and take up ^^s cross ^ay^y and (...), that you
may be noth ng (...) your ^^l^^^, know (...) any thing of (...) all by (...)
joy (...) things of the Lord who is made all things unto you, that you having
nothing, yet enjoying all things, as enjoying all things, Luke 9.23.24.
yet having nothing, [for he that will seek to save his life shall lose it, and
he that will lose his life for my sake shall find it] And now my brethren that
you may dye to live, lose all to find all, you are commanded by Christ to hang
upon the cross of Christ till you are crucified with Christ, and become dead to
all things, but Christ which is not an outward cross of any visible thing
without you, no nor altogether outward afflictions, but it is Christ the wisdom
of God, and Christ the power of God within you, and which you are to take up
and hang upon to the slaying of all your own wisdom, and strength,
righteousness, and life, and all things of man, and the world, and whatsoever
is contrary to this cross, even Christ in you, which you are to take up and
hang upon, even you and all that is yours, yea all of yours, even all is to be
fastened to him and slain by him, in your bearing of him, [for put you on the
Lord Jesus Christ and make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24.
] and we preach says Paul, Christ crucified, to the Jews even a stumbling
block, and unto the Grecians and them that perish in their own wisdom and
strength foolishnes^, but unto them which are called both of the Jews and
Grecians we preach Christ the wisdom of God, and Christ the power of God.

And upon this Cross of wisdom and power in God, did Christ himself in his
lifetime hang to be crucified to all worldly wisdom and honor, righteousness
and glory which he found with men here below in the flesh, as a pattern for all
men in the flesh to follow in all self-denial; leaving behind them all worldly
honor, righteousness and Religion, 1 Cor. 2.6.
which stands only in the wisdom and strength of men, which comes to
naught, and which is all but as the fashion of the world which passes away,
and must all at last give up the ghost with Christ in the flesh on the cross;
and without all or any part of this, you must come in Christ, who is only able
to teach you all things, and to make you and all things stand and be accepted
with God.

And in this trial in taking up of this cross, How to forsake Father and mother
etc.
and following Christ, you forsake father and mother, husband and wife,
children and brethren, house and lands, and all for Christ to live with him,
which is not meant carnally but spiritually, and is not a forsaking your father
and mother after the flesh, as some may carnally believe; but in this forsaking
here meant, your knowledge of them is renewed, and your love toward them is
increased; for your father whom you are to forsake is the devil that begets sin
and wickedness in you, Romans 8.44.
and made all your knowledge and love amongst men to be devilish; so you and
your mother, is the whore of Babylon, and lust of the flesh, the mother of
whoredoms, Rev. 17.5.
and abominations of the earth, in which sin is conceived and brought forth,
and of whom you at first were begotten by the devil into the knowledge of good
and evil.

And according to that knowledge you are to forsake all men and things
whatsoever, and to know no man after the flesh; no, 2 Cor. 5.16.
though you have known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth (after he is
manifest in the spirit within you) you are to know him no more so, but to know
him and all men in the spirit, as in the Lord, where your knowledge toward all
men is renewed, and you the more united to them, do the more love them.

But while you or any of you have known or do still know your father the devil,
and your mother the whore of Babylon not to be desolate and forsaken by you, so
long you have bin and still are by them matched and betrothed, united, and
coupled, marrying, and giving in marriage with the daug^^ers of men, your own
inventions and imaginations which are as harlots, and which as whores you make
your spouses, Hos^^ 4.13. which appearing fair and beautiful ^o you, you are in
love with them, and do go a whoreing after t^em, and of whom you have begotten
and brough^ fo^^ strange children, children of whoredoms and of fornications,
(after the image of your father the devil and of d ^ whore your mother) yea
many opp^e^sive children nourishe^ up within you and without you, (...) 5.7.
which are (...) miseries of all sorts as angels of dark^^^s, by wh^^^ you are
fa^^en from God to idolatry, and other chil^r^n you have which are seeming
prof^ssed Religions and (...) holyn^ss and opinions of all so^^^ which yo^ ^ave
brought f^rth as Angels of lig^^, (...)
wh^^^ you put the name of G^d and godlynes^ upon with your s^lves to make them
and your s^lves accepted with men and appear love^y unto them ^^ough they are
but the ^hildren of the devil, and also ^arlots of ^^e who^e bringing forth,
for men to go^ whoring af er, and w^i^h the who^e and mother o^ har^o^^ spirits
up and k^^^ ^p a^ive for and at the side of her ^^^band the devil, (...)
and which is the Scarlet-^ou^er^d beast the w^ore fit^ upon to deceive the
nations, and to contrive for the devil, a kingdom of pride and covetousnes^,
the (...) and glory of (...) w^rld, which is all enmity wit^ God, and but
vanity and vexation of spirit, (...)
and is all to perish in the ^^^ing, and in which you your selves therein
living are (...) of your father the devil whose works you do, (...)
and whose kingdom and all thin^^ ^^^r^in you are to forsak^ ^^r Christ and his
ki^gdom^ and ^ll such marriages are all t^ i^ b^^^^ lost (...) f^^^^k^n, and all
the said chil^ren b^tween t^em (...) whether angels o^ Light or angels of
darkness, good and bad; all which men are to be slain with death, Rev. 2.23.
and all men are to know that the Lord i^ ^e which searches the reins and
tries the hearts, and gives to every one of them according to ^^eir works.

And you are to marry and be married unto none but the Lord, not live with any
but him, Hos^a 3.3
who himself loved you when you were in your sins, (...) 16 6 7 8 Hos^^ ^^, 10,
and be^^ro^hed you and married you to himself in righteousness and in
Judgment, in mercy and in loving kindness that you might know the Lord, and be
for no other but him, but to forsake all, and follow him whethersoever he shall
lead you, as you have him for an example, who himself forsook his Father and
his Fathers house, his heaven, and his glory to come after you into sin, death
and hell, to seek and to save you when you were los^, Romans 10.20.21,
and to m^nifest his unchangeable love ^o you when you rebelled against him and
went a who^i^g from him after other lovers, y^^ then did he lov^ you, and
therefore you are to forsake all other lov^rs, and follow him, Cant. 14
who will lay his cross upon you, and thereby draw you; he will manifest
himself unto you, and still remain your husband, as it is wri^ten, ^^y (...)
^s thy husband, the Lord of hosts is his (...) the whole earth shall he be
called, I^^ 5^
and (...) besides the Lord or follow any but the Lo^^ (...) thing you do, you
are guilty o^ w^ore^^m (...) ^^ow not the Lord.

(...), Of (...)
you know not his dwell (...) r^^hes of his glory, but you are building (...)
your own to dwelin^ (...) from them which (...) and the Lords house and (...)
wast and is unknown to you, which (...) and g^apes of l^fe, and you say the
time is not come that the Lords house should be built, Hag. 1, 2, 3, 4.
or that his kingdom should be revealed or established among you till after a
natural death; and because you know it not you resist the coming of it before,
and will still dwell in your own ceiled houses, your fet forms and opinions
of religious ways and worships, and the Lords house, way, worship, and
religion, even Christ which you should have possessed and enjoy, lies waste
among you, and is not inhabited by you; but when the Lord by manifesting
himself in you shall appear to build up the waste places and raise up the
Tabernacle of David which is fallen down, and close up the breaches thereof as
in the days of old, Amos 9. ii.
and so cause the desolate heritages, even men and all things which has been
known of them to be without Christ, Zacha. 6.12, 13.
to be inhabited by Christ, and shall manifest himself in them to be unto them
their house, habitation and glory, then will men forsake their own houses,
lands, and purchased fields which they have builded and planted, with all their
household stuff therein being, and their goodly cedars therein growing, and
shall not return to take any thing with them, but shall leave all behind them
and follow Christ, yea and though you may be upon the top of your houses in the
highest of your profession and godlyness reaching even to Heaven, yet you must
come down, and shall not take any thing with you, Luke 17.30, 31.
neither shall these in the field return back to reap any profit of all their
own labors which they have labored under the Sun in performing of duties and
ordinances of religion wherein they thought themselves rich without Christ;
this all must be left, lost, and forsaken, and no more remembered in the
knowledge of Christ and him crucified.

And would you now dye that you might live? then this is the way to see your
selves and all things of your selves crucified with Christ, and to know him
living in you to be unto you a father, and mother, and husband, and wife, and
children, and brother, and sister, and house, and lands, and life, and death,
Romans 8.32.
and food, and raiment, and all things whatsoever else is in the world; you and
all is Christ's, and Christ and all is yours, and you and Christ with all things
else is Gods, and you are not your own but as you are in him; i Cor. 3.2i, 22,
23
for you are bought with a price to be the Lords; and all that you are, you are
in the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.20,
therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits which is Gods, and
know nothing in you but Christ, and him crucified; and whatsoever else you have
known to be any thing or any profit or advantage to you besides the Lord, count
it all lost for Christ, and with Paul count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord; for when you suffer the
loss of all, Phil. 3.7, 8.
and count them but dung that you may win Christ; this is the fruits and effct
of your hanging on the cross, and this with men is hard to do; the way is
narrow and some there be that find it.

CHAP. II. How the cross ^f Christ is accompanied with the crosses of the
world, firey troyals and persecutions for the truth, the clouds of Christ's
coming, and the way of his people in which he leads them, and walks with them
to save them, how and from what.
AND wheresoever this way of Christ crucified shall be manifest and found with
any that with Christ have been hanging upon the cross of divine wisdom and
power, to be thereby weaned from sin and the world with the loss of all their
own wisdom, righteousness, and strength, there do the crosses of the world
flow and come together as fellow-helpers and companions in assistance with the
cross of Christ; 1 Pet. 2.21.
for even hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an example to follow his steps.

And therefore you my brethren and fellow sufferers for the truth, you that
have in any measure learned to embrace this cross of Christ for the saving of
your souls, let it encourage you not to lay it down, but with patience to lie
down under it, Gal. 6, 17.
and to bear it about in your bodies as the marks of the Lord Jesus till you be
perfected in him, and still to trust in God, and wait upon him, in whatsoever
affliction he by men or any other means as a rod in his hand, shall afflict
upon you to humble you to walk with him; and be not sorrowful nor troubled at
any thing, Ephesians, 2.12.
as those that are without hope, but rejoice always, and in all things, still
praising the Lord for his goodness, in laying his cross upon you to humble you
and protect you in it, and who without respect of persons has called you out
of darkness into his marvelous light, manifest by the Lord Jesus in the way of
his judgments, by the spirit of judgment and by the spirit of burning, for
the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus, ^ Cor. 5.5.
or God manifest in flesh.

Therefore my brethren think it not strange concerning fiery trials, ^ Pet.
1.12.
persecutions, tribulations, and sufferings, as if some strange thing happened
unto you; for they are companions with Christ on the cross, and they are the
clouds in which he comes to manifest his glory on earth, and the way which he
walked in himself before he entered into glory, wherein the Father made known
himself unto him, and in which way he leads his dearest Saints that know him,
and are nearest in union with him for the trial of their faith, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7.
which being tried by fire might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory at
the appearing of the Lord Jesus, as the Lords spirit with the Scriptures in all
my sufferings for the truth to this day bears me witness, that bands, and
afflictions, Acts 14 22.
persecutions, and trials, through which a soul enters into the kingdom of
God, are very good, and in which much of God has been manifest unto me, for
that the Lord by the Angel of his presence was with me to sanctify it to me,
and save me as he did his Prophets and people of old, and as he will do all
throughout all generations of the world; for in all their afflictions he was
afflicted, Isa. 63, 9.
and the Angel of his presence saved them, in his love, and in his mercy he
redeemed them, and he bear them and carried them always continually, which
has been witnessed by his Prophets of old from Adam unto this day, as I shall
more particularly hereafter mention, that the coming of God to save his people
from their enemies, the world, flesh, sin, and the devil, and to draw them out
of many waters, death, hell, and damnation, has been in the way of his
judgments, in dark and thick clouds of the sky, as all can witness that ever
saw him, and have known any deliverance by him, and that before he delivers
them from any condition of hell, he comes himself unto them in it; for at his
presence, the earth and all hellish devilishness in men (out of which a soul is
to be brought) trembles and shakes before him, and as stubble it is burnt by
him; for so says David of his coming to him, he bowed the heavens and came
down, Isa. 64.1. Psa. 18.8, 9, 10, 17.
and the mountains did melt at his presence, that is, he made all creature
excellency and glory fall down before him at his coming, and become as darkness
unto him, he came flying upon the wings of the wind, as in the majesty and
power of his spirit, which blows where it lists, Isa. 40.6, 7, 8.
as the breath of his mouth and as his spirit to wither and consume all flesh,
and he made darkness his secret place that none but whom he pleated should
behold him, and out of his nostrils went a smoke to darken all the light and
glory of man, and a consuming fire went out of his mouth to burn up his
enemies, and coals were kindled at it, that all his enemies became as ashes
before him, and at the brightness of his presence his clouds passed, all
troubles were ceased, his enemies were scattered, and his people delivered; it
is the day of the Lord, Jer. 30, 7, 8, 9, 10
even the time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it, and restored
into rest and peace where none shall make him afraid.

This is the manner of Gods coming to judgemrnt to redeem man, every one in his
order, as he shall be manifest to them, to lead and carry them through fiery
trials and dark waters, Isa. 43.16.
but not without the Lords presence with them, purging them by it and saveing
them in it, that the fire might not burn them, nor the waters overflow them,
but only that enmity which is for destruction within them; therefore he says
when thou passest through the waters I will be with thee; Isa. 43.1, 2, 3.
and through the floods that they shall not overflow thee; when thou wvlkest
through the fire thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the flames kindle upon
thee; for I the Lord thy God am with thee, and the Holy one of Israel thy
savior that redeemed thee; and though for a time he gave Jacob to the spoil,
and Israel to the robbers, Isa. 42.24.
and though the land of them be filled with sin and iniquity, yet he leaves
them not, nor forsakes them, but continues his presence with them to redeem
them, ^or. 51.5.
save and deliver them; and the robbers and destroyers of his people which came
upon them to destroy them these will he destroy, spoil, and cast into the
prison of their own shame, and after bring them to judgment; he will also
afflict them and try them and thereby humble them that they might be saved, and
all the wounds that the enemies of God people have made in them, Jer. 30.16, 17.
he will also heal up, that they shall be no longer a prey to their enemies;
and them that have been their enemies, Isa. 19.22.
even Egypt and Assyria which God sometimes destroyed, them will he also save
with Israel, and there shall be no more destruction of one another, nor of them
by the Lord, but one heart and one mind will the Lord give them.

CHAP. III. Of the afflictions of Joseph, his being s^l^ i^t^ Egypt by his
Brethren, his being falsely accused and mprisoned; how G^^ thereby exalted h m,
and Judged ^is Breth^en that sold him; how the same was with Christ and is with
us to this day,
THIS did God by Israel and all the sons of Jacob in the afflictions of Joseph
whom his brethren conspired against, hated, and sold into Egypt; Genesis 37.18, i9.
and wherefore did they sell him but because they hated him? and they hated him
because they thought Jacob their father did love him more then them; Genesis 37.3,
4, 5.
and when Joseph had told unto them his dream whereby they understood that he
should reign over them, they hated him so much the more, and sought his
destruction though he were their Brother: and after they had sold him, and he
like to find favor with him that bought him, he was sought unto day by day to
be tempted by an Egyptian woman to lie with her, and because he refused and did
not, she falsely accused him to her husband, saying that he would have done it,
but she would not, and therefore by false accusation he was cast into prison,
and had bands added unto his afflictions, Genesis 39.
but the Lord was still with him and showed him mercy that he found favor with
God, and through great affliction God humbled him and brought him to honor,
and afterward his Brethren that sold him to be afflicted, them did God also
afflict, judge, and humble before Joseph, and the saying of Joseph to his
Brethren was brought to pass, Genesis 42.6, to 22.
that he should reign over them, and they be subjected to him, which was all
for their good, that they were thus afflicted and did afflict their Brother, as
was and Joseph's afflictions for him after they had sold him, and yet it was not
they that sold him, but the Lord by them sent him into Egypt before them to
preserve life, and that in time of need he might preserve them, Genesis 45.3, 4, 5.
and at last be made known unto them, for their joy and comfort in the Lord; so
it was not us that sold Christ but the Lord by us crucified Christ with us,
that he might preserve us and with comfort make known himself unto us:
therefore the like affl^ctions of Joseph was with Christ, and are to this day
with us; for we are all the sons of Jacob, and have all joined together to sell
our Brother Joseph, (even Christ) and one another for naught, that he should
not reign over us, as to this day we do in persecuting the spirit of Jesus in
his people; for whosoever we find among us to be best beloved of God, find
favor with men, and to whom God shall manifest most of spiritual wisdom and
knowledge to be preached and declared by any, to the exalting of Christ and
abaseing of man, such will they with Cain slay, and with ^^seph Brethren sell
for naught into a strange land, persecute him, banish him, or imprison him,
that he should not live with them, whereby the afflictions of Ioseph^ are
continued to this day, and with Joseph's Bret^ren they will say the^ we shall
see what will become of his dream, Ge^. 37.20.
his principle and doctrine which he preached, which say they, under
afflictions he may deny for his liberty, and so it will come to nothing; but
as it happened to Joseph's Brethren, so will it happen to them; for the
spiritual Abel even that Jesus the Lords anointed which was preached unto them,
and persecuted by them, shall reign over them, and they shall submit unto him,
and by him they shall be tried, judged, and humbled, and made to acknowledge
their sins, as Joseph's brethren was by him; and with much joy and comfort will
he make known himself unto them, and they shall know him (even that Jesus)
whom they persecuted, and shall be humbled for him; Zacha. 12.10.
so he was their Savior and reigned with them; and that man which (for the
spirits sake in him) they persecuted and sold, him would God preserve and keep
in all his afflictions, as he did Joseph and Christ, and through afflictions
will God bring him to honor with himself, he will both humble him and save
him.

And as the Father and Brethren of Joseph (after he was made known unto them)
left their own Country to come and live with him in Egypt, which was the
children of Isreal's first going into Egypt to live in a strange Land, which
was not theirs: so the Father, Mother, and all the Brethren of Christ after the
flesh, must with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob leave their own country and fathers
house, and come to live with Christ in a strange Land which they know not; Genesis
12.1, 2, 3.
so did Joseph in his afflictions when he was sent away by his Brethren, he nor
they knew not of themselves whether they sent him: Deuteronomy. 8.2.
Neither did Israel when God led them forty years in the Wilderness, and fed
them with Manna from heaven, which they knew not; but thus did God for the good
of all I rael, that he might humble them and save them.

And therefore my Brethren, Friends and Enemies so called, may he with Joseph
say to them by whom he has suffered any of the afflictions of Joseph, It was
not you that did it, but the Lord, who does all things according to the counsel
of his own will, and makes all things work together for good to them that love
God, Romans 8.28. Genesis 58.19, 20, 21. Acts 4.27, 28.
and will himself bring good out of the greatest evil, as he did in this
against Joseph, and in that against Christ; and so in all things that is done
for to glorify himself: and thus will God make all things work together for
the furtherance of truth, the destruction of its Enemies, the manifestation of
his glory, and the good of all people.

CHAP. IIII. How Pharaoh and the Egyptians, and all that with them to this day
do betray and persecute, accuse, judge and condemn any for conscience toward
God, are acted by the Devil, hardened and commanded to it by God; how with
Cain, Judas, and the Devil, they are all Gods servants, doing their devilish,
dark, and black work, and whose spirit in them shall with the Devil, Death,
Hell, and false Prophet, and the Beast, which was and is not gone into
perdition, be damned and dye the second death, when and how.
THE fall of Adam and slaying of Abel which was to this day in the persecution
of any, that do both persecute and are persecuted, all is done by God and for
God, and God does it to glorify himself by it; wherefore whatsoever God calls
you unto, go out unto it, and not resist him in it; for no one shall proceed
farther in any thing then God will; and therefore when Abraham went to slay his
son Isaac, it was by the command of God, and God was with him in it, and
Abraham's faith the more strengthened by it, and in time of persecution truth
will the more increase, and therefore men shall the more persecute it, as the
new Pharaoh did the children when they began to multiply in Egypt; and God
hardened Pharoahs heart that he should not let Israel go; Exodus 1.7, 8, 9, 10.
Exodus 7.3, 4.
but should afflict them so long in Egypt that they might the more increase,
and at last come out by great judgments; and after he had let them go, he
hardened the hearts of the Egyptians to persist in persecution against them, and
to follow them through the red sea, Exodus 14.4.30.30.
that he might himself get honor upon Pharaoh and all his host, in their
destruction and Isreal's deliverance; and before any deliverance can be of any
to any, there must first be a bondage, or else there can be no deliverance, and
no deliverance can be without judgment; and therefore God sent them into Egypt
to be affl cted and imbondaged by Pharaoh, and after that by his judgments
brought them out with great substance; so all that Pharaoh did against Is^ael
God made to be for their good, and afterward judged their enemies, and he does
it that all men might fear before him.

So in like manner God to make his power known upon the enemies of his people
to this day for his own honor, his peoples good and the advancement of truth,
does sometimes deliver them up into the hands of their enemies, to be afflicted
and imprisoned by them, and does harden their hearts against them, as he did
Pharaoh against Israel^, who will sometimes through policy to increase their
bondage, deceitfully promise them liberty, yet are their hearts still hardened
as Phaorahs was, not to let them go, but to lay more and more upon them by
plotting new evils against them to more afflict them, as Pharaoh did, and which
by experience I my self have found from the like spirit of Pharaoh in these
days of persecution, as that which God ever did, and to this day does, to
manifest his power the greater in delivering his people out of their enemies
hands, and so bring them through the wilderness to try them, as the way of God
unto salvation, and in which way all men are to stand still and see the
salvation of God.

Number. 22.5, 6.
And as did Pharaoh to oppress Israel in Egypt when he feared they would grow to
strong for him, so Balaack King of the Moabites, when he saw Israel to
multiply and be too many for him, he sent messengers to Balaam to come and
curse the children of Israel, and God turned it all unto Isreal's good, for
in-stead of cursing them God made him all together to bless them, then said
Balam to Balaack, showing Gods work in all things, how can I curse where God
has not cursed, and how can I detest where God has not detested; thereore
said he, if Balaack would give me his house full of Gold and Silver I can not
pass the commandment of the Lord to do either good or bad of my own mind, Number.
24.12, 13.
but as the Lord has said, that shall I do, and the Lord is not a man that he
should lie, nor the son of man that he should repent, Number. 23.19, 20, 21.
but he has said it and he will do it, and I have received a commandment to
bless, for he has blessed, and I cannot reverse it, and he sees no iniquity
in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel; but the Lord their God is with them, and
the joyful shout of a King is among them, and unless he bid I cannot curse
them, and the lying spirit could not go into the Prophets of Ahab king of
Israel unless ^he Lord had sent him therefore when Shimei cursed David, 2 Chronicles. 1^.20, 21.
he did it because the Lord had bidden him, and David reproved those that
gaine-said it, saying he curses even because God has bid him curse David; who
dare then say wherefore have thou done so, and behold says he, 2 Samuel 16.10,
11, 12.
my Son which came out of my own bowels seeks my life, and why should not he
that curses be let alone, for the Lord has bidden him, it may be the Lord
will look on mine afflictions, and do me good, for his cursing me this day,
thus said David, and thus may we say, why should not these be let alone that
revile, persecute, banish, or imprison us or any, seeing they do it by the
Lords command, which he lets alone for good to them that are persecuted; for
without him they can do nothing; and David under judgment and the reproaches
of men, seeing all that men did unto him to be of God, he said he was dumb and
opened not his mouth because he knew the Lord did it; Psa. 39.9.
and Christ as a lamb led to the slaughter, and as a sheep dumb before the
shearers, so he opened not his mouth against them knowing it to be the Lord
that did it, therefore when he was reviled he reviled not again, but committed
himself to God that judges righteously, so neither Pharaoh nor the Egyptians
cauld do any thing against Israel except the Lord had hardnen their hearts to
do it, neither could the devil touch Job in his person nor estate to afflict
and punnish him without God had bidden him and gave him commission, Job. 2.6.
which God saw would be good unto Job, and therefore Job in all his afflictions
accuses none, neither devil, nor witches, nor any other in the loss of any
thing, Job. 1.21.
but ascribes all unto God who gives and takes at his pleasure, and did all
that was done unto him to humble him: and after what a strange manner does God
sometimes act his people to make them a reproach and scorn of men, as he did
David when he made him to uncover himself in the eyes of the hand maids of his
servants, 2 Samuel 6.20, 21, 22.
and he said it was before the Lord, and that he would be yet more vile and
base in his own sight and the sight of his maidservants, of whom he said he
should be had in honor; Isa. 20.2, 3.
and so did the Lord do by Isaiah when he made him to walk naked and barefoot
three years for a sign, Isa. 20.2, 3. Ezekiel. 4.12. chap. 5.1.
and made Ezekiel to bake men's dung and eat it for a sign, and to shave the
hair from off his head and face, and burn the third part for a sign, which was
all by the Lords command, yet all such are counted as mad men by those that
knew not the Lord, though they did it by his command; who says it, and men
must do it, Job 1.21. Hose. 6.1.
who witholdeth, gives, and takes, at his pleasure both men and things, even
poverty and riches, health, wealth and sickness, prosperity and adversity,
life and death, honor and shame, all is of God, and by God, and not of any
other but God; who works and none shall hinder, commanding all things, even
men and devils to serve him for good; and therefore the devil walking to and
fro in the earth, seeking whom he may devour, may be said to be the servant of
God, employed about Gods work to try and prove his people by temptations and
afflictions for good to them as he did Job; and so says Christ of the devil
when he was led by the spirit (even God) into the wilderness to be tempted of
the devil, he said unto him, [thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, Mat. 4.17.
^0. Acts 2.23. Acts 1.25.
but thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve;] and
Judas when he betrayed Christ, he did also the work of God, which was before
appointed to be done, but the devil not knowing that what he did was of God,
did therefore accuse himself, and after death went to his own place, Eccles.
12.7.
the body to the earth from whence it came, and the soul to God that gave it,
every thing to its place and center, light unto light, and darkness unto
darkness, earth to earth, and the spirit to the spirit, every thing to its
like, as it always did, and ever will do, world withour end: and that which is
the dark and devilish part, even the devil it self, which entered into Judas,
whereby he became a devil, (tempting, and betraying, persecuting, and accusing
any) is the same devil that enters into men at this day, whereby they become as
devils one to another, and which remains still with men of the same nature,
doing the same devilish work of the devil in them to this day, who are some
times made use of by God, as a rod and scourge in Gods hand to whip and scourge
others whom God loves and chastizes for good to them to humble them, Psalm
17.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
which rod shall at last with the devil be cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone to be burnt, as the Egyptians were into the sea to be drowned.

And therefore all men persecuting, plotting, and devising evil devices against
others to accuse them, are no better then the devil in that devilish nature,
which God sometimes sets a work to do his dark and black work, and to discover
themselves in the trial of others for their own shame and destruction, in that
state after convinced by God, and so they are the servants of God, as Judas and
the devil was, to do that work of God as the devil and Judas did, and who with
the devil must at last come to judgment before Christ, Rom 2.15, 16.
where their own consciences shall accuse them of the evil they have done
against Christ, and by him they shall be cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where all their abominations and devilish actings of one man against
another, and against God shall be destroyed, and themselves saved, yet as by
fire, and that in them which was devilish and made them so long to be devilish,
i Cor. 3.15. Jam. 3.15, 16.
is the devil in them that so long destroyed them, and kept them from knowing
their peace with God; and this devil and sin the devouring lion of mankind is
that which is only for destruction in men's salvation and coming unto God, and
he is that beast which is the fourth and which was and is not, and shall go
into perdition: and whose power or little horn that came up last rageing most,
having a mouth and eyes like a man, is he that continued speaking and acting
great things against the Saints of the most high in their coming to their
kingdom, and with which beast or beastial power acting in men to take the
kingdom from the saints, the kings and rulers of the earth as enemies to Christ
and his kingdom, Rev. 14.9, 10
do receive power and authority with, and from the beast, to act one hour with
the beast, and by him they do reign over the people of all Nations, Rev. 17.11,
12, 13, 14.
and with him they shall suffer and go into perdition together, and they give
their power and authority to the beast and prince of darkness that ru^e^ in the
children of disobedience, yielding themselves his servants and sons, as the god
and father which they worship and fall down before; Romans 6.16.
For his servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto life; and yielding to the Beast, they with him, who with Gog and
Magog do join in battle together, to make war against the Saints of the Most
High, until Christ the Lamb of God and Prince of Light by his innocent life and
light in the Saints, shall overcome the Beast, or beastial power by the bright
fiery appearing of his presence amongst them in the Saints, and shall give the
victory to the Saints; Rev. 15.2, 3.
and until Christ and the ancient of days shall sit in judgment upon the white
throne of innocence, Rev. 20.11, 12 Deuteronomy. 7.9, 10, 11, 19, 20, 21, 22.
light and life in God, from whose face the heaven and the earth, and all
things therein of man's inventions shall fly away, and before whom all books
shall then be opened, and every man's conscience shall bear witness either for or
against himself, and their thought the mean while accusing or else excusing
one another; Romans 2.16, 17.
for then do God appear to judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according
to his Gospel, and then does he give the Kingdom to the Saints of the Most High
to possess it, even to them that know themselves in him and he in them, and
then will the beast, devil, and sin, even Gog and Magog; warred against the
Saints, in the time of their deliverance from sin and resurrection from death
by Christ, (as the Egyptians did against Israel in Isreal's coming out of
Egypt) be quickly slain and devoured with fire from Heaven, as the Egyptians
were by water drowned in the red sea, and that body of sin and death the old
man which is the body of the beast in which he appears to live and act, shall
be destroyed and given to the burning fire in the lake which quenches not,
where the devil, death, hell, Rev. 20.8, 9, 10, 14.
and the false Prophet is to be damned to a perpetual end for ever and ever,
which is the second death, and these men with whom the beast and prince of
darkness have so acted and ruled, Rev. 12.12.
shall themselves go in his destruction (who will then be in great wrath in
them because he knows his time is short with them) be shut out from the
enjoyment of love and peace in God, and have punnishment greater then they
bear, but the Heavens shall laugh, and they that dwell in them shall rejoice,
and be at peace and rest in the Lord.

CHAP. V. A definition of the righteous and the wicked as two parts of three in
man to be destroyed, and how the third part neither righteous nor wicked is
brought through the fire and saved; with a distinction of Dives and Lazaras and
their conditions in life and death, and of the dog licking Lazaras, ^a^es.
ANd into this consumnig fire where Gog and Magog is destroyed for persecuting
the Saints; thither went Adam after he eat the forbidden fruit, Genesis 4.13.
and Cain after he had slew his brother Abel, where Cain said, my punishment is
greater then I can bear; and where rich Dives, whose kingdom is of this world,
and that to this day despises Lazarus, James 3.15.
is tormented in the flame of a burning conscience, being that dark black
devilish part which is earthy, sensual, and devilish, opposing, hating, and
loathing that part which is light, bright, and Heavenly, Genesis 18.23. Job 9.22.
Isa. 64.6.
and who is both the righteous and the wicked with men that must be destroyed;
for both the righteousness and wickedness of men is all as filthiness, and so
shall perish together; for as they are one in pollution so they shall be one in
destruction, so was Dives with all his glory, he and that destroyed together.

But to more explain this, Dives is the pharisaical principle of righteousness
under a law dispensation, where sin is manifest representing of men in the
state of unbelief, and which so far as any man lives in it, he is as Dives
was, righteous and wicked, for in opposition to his own wickedness he forms to
himself a righteousness, in which he is proud and lusty, rich and mighty,
boasting himself in himself against the poor publican, as Dives did against
Lazarus; yet this publican shall enter into Heaven before the proud Pharisee,
Matt. 21.31.
so shall Lazarus without Dives, even as humillity without pride; and then
Lazarus is the gospel principle of righteousness under a gospel dispensation,
representing all men in the state of believing, which so far as any man lives in
it, he is as Lazarus was, poor and humble, meek and lowly, even as a poor
despised publican, having no righteousness of his own, but is clothed with
poor beggarly raiment to the worlds view that wear it not, and waiting to be
clothed with change of raiment from Heaven, and justified only in the
righteousness of Christ.

Again this Dives the righteous and the wicked in a mystery is two parts of
three in the whole creation with man that cannot stand in the presence of Gods
consum^ng fire to be tried and saved, but is for destruction to be damned and
cast into hell to be burned, for two parts therein shall be cut off and dye,
but the third part shall remain and be brought through the fire as refined
silver and as tried gold; Zach. 13.9.
this third part is poor Lazarus tried and punished for salvation, having all
his own works good and bad burned, but himself saved; for none of the third
part can be lost, being of God, having past the trial through the fire and
overcome the righteous and the wicked that warred against it, and could not
escape the fire; for they that are both righteous and wicked seeing
righteousness and sin of their own, do persecute the innocent that sees and
know nothing of their own, which the righteous and the wicked, even Gog and
Magog incampeth about to destroy and thereby destroys it self, yet is the
inocent sanctified nature of men, that is neither righteous nor wicked, exalted
with Christ into the throne of God into Abraham's bosom where no evil of sin nor
sorrow can come near it to hurt it, and where there is no curse but the eternal
blessedness of God.

And so this third part which comes forth refined and not consumed is poor
Lazarus that lay at Dives gate full of soars at the gate of this world without
the glory of this world and worldly comforts, but as a poor despised wretch
whose soars the dogs came and licked, Luke 16.19, 20 21.
delighting and refreshing themselves with them, and by it healed them, that
is, men of a dogish, sourly malicious nature and spirit, without the spirit of
God in the outward court or form of religion are as dogs, Rev. 22.15. Psa.
22.16.
where they so long trod undet foot the Holy City; for without are dogs etc.
and dogs says David have compassed me, the assembly of the wicked have
enclosed me, they have pierced my hands and my feet.

And these dogs (or men) reviling, reproaching, and persecuting any in whom the
life of God lives, (which is not in the form and glory of the world) is their
barking, biting, snapping and snarling at them to devour them, and that life of
God in them, in which they as dogs licking their sores, do delight and refresh
themselves, glorying also in the infirmities and afflictions of others, which
they inflict upon them for the life's sake in them, for which they do not love
them; as the dogs that licks Lavarus his sores, they loved not the person of
Lazarus, nor his sitting at Dives his gate begging for food, which they thought
belonged unto them, they being of that house or family; but they delighted in
his sores, and refreshed themselves with them; so do men that persecute other,
hate and despise them, because they are not of them they love them not, nor
that salvation should come by their way, for that they think belongs only unto
them, and comes only in their way, who account themselves of the House and
Church of God walking in forms of Religion, and will deny others of the same
benefit of salvation that are not of the church and way as they are, and so
will despise and persecute them, and they will delight and rejoice in their
persecution, infirmities and afflictions, as one man's rejoicing in another
sufferings, which rejoicing is with dogs a licking of their sores, and by this
are their sores healed, and they accepted that take it patiently as Lazarus
did; for they that are persecuted for the truth, are the more strengthened and
confirmed in the truth, and the truth is the more increased by it; for says
Paul, these things which have come unto me in my sufferings, Phil. 1.12, 13, 14.
bonds, and imprisonments, have proved all to the furtherance of the gospel,
and all things shall work for good to them that love God, and that are so
despised and persecuted of the world; and this is the third part which passes
through the fire to be tried, purified and saved.

Yet this third part which is of God tried and refined to be saved (to wit,
Lazarus which Dives despised, Rev. 12.3, 4, 5.
or the man child born, which the Dragon persecuted) is carried above men's
malice, and the afflictions of this world into Abraham's bosom, as into rest
and peace with God, being of the same nature of God.

And this third part is also the same with the third dispensation, Heaven and
glory of God manifest in flesh, the other two being vanished, not able to
appear in the presence of this third, which is also the third day or light of
body the son of righteousness, the light and glory of all lights (even Christ)
wherein the knowledge of God is pure unto men, living without the knowledge of
good and evil; and in which state nothing appears impure nor imperfect to those
that live there; but as the Prophet Zachary says, Zach. 14.20, 21.
Every pot and pitcher (as the worst of things so called by men) is in the
Lords house all holiness unto him that is holy, and as golden bowls before the
Altar of God (even Christ) filled with the holy oil and annoynting spirit of
Jesus by which all things is sanctified to him that knows the Lord; Tit. 1.15.
for to the pure all things are pure.

And the more of that purity and pure life of God there is manifest in any one
man, the more trials and persecutions he must pass through and undergo for the
same, by the impure, in whom the pure is not manifest; and the more purer any
one is, the better able he is to endure to the end of what he for the pure's
sake shall have inflicted upon him; for none but the pure (according as it is
manifested in all ages to this day) is tried and persecuted by that which is
still beneath it, and cannot attain it, as Dives who was in hell could not come
to Lazarus who was in heaven, Luke 16.23, 24
yet (as it is written) they were both within a corporeal sight and hearing one
of another, but the one could not be comforted, and the other could not be
tormented; for their spirits in their several conditions were at a vast
distance one to the other, but their bodies might come together, as to this day
they do, but not to have communion together one with another, nor in any one
thing, for there is no communion between light and darkness, Christ and Belial;
but the one is taken and the other is left; one denied himself and the other
could not.

And therefore it is not any local hell and heaven (as some men suppose) that
Dives and Lazarus was in, but the different states of men under the Law, and
under the Gospel, under wrath and love, at the left and right hand of God by
which hell and heaven is signified to them, even one living in the presence of
God, as of love, and loving his appearance; and the other living in the
presence of God, as of wrath, and hating his appearance, being not able to
stand before him; for nothing but what is of God born again by God, shall stand
before God, and have peace in God; for to every thing else God is as hell, yea a
tormenter, even a consuming fire to destroy it; and every thing from its
center, and out of its element, is as in hell, where it cannot live to abide,
and have rest; as the fish out of the Sea; the worms out of the earth, the
birds out of the air, and the soul out of God cannot; therefore says Cain, I
am gone out from thy presence, and my punishment is greater then I can bear;
Genesis 4.13, 14.
so for the body of man which is but earth, and as a worm, to be any where
else then in or on the earth, though in heaven, it were as in hell; therefore
every thing to its center for rest, and the souls of all men into God, which
that they are when men see God in them giving rest and peace to them, and
themselves to be in God as Lazarus did, but Dives did not in that state; and
therein the one is comforted, and the other is tormented, yet were they
brothers, and both the sons of God; but the flames of a wounded conscience (of
the one) who can endure the bitter burning of it! so the joys of a healed
saved conscience (in the other) how sweet is it! and both these manifest in
flesh under the law and gospel dispensation, where the discontent and torment
of one man's conscience, wounded by the Law, is manifest; and the joy and
comfort of another healed by the gospel, and both living together on the earth
in the body, and having the glory of this world, and the other the same; but
Dives dyed, and was buried.

First, his death was the coming of the Law to him to revive sin in him,
whereby sin was made exceeding sinful, and thereby slew him as it did Paul, and
as is the death of all, after which comes judgment; before which Paul (as
Dives) was rich and righteous in himself, Romans 7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
till the Law was set home to him and revived sin in him, and so slew him,
after which the gospel came and gave life unto him; But Dives also was buried,
and in hell tormented; he was with David laid into the lowermost pit in
darkness, Psalm. 88.6, 7.
in the deep, where the wrath of God lay hard upon him that he could not come
forth, where he was scorched with fire, and burned his tongue for pain under
the four and five vial, and which David he cried out, Luke 16.23 24.
Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the tip of
his finger in water and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame, as
David said, Will thou show wonders in the grave, where thy fierce wrath goes
over me, Psa. 88.12.16. Psa. 43.2, 3.
and thy terrors have cut me off; Why do thou cut me off? Why go I mourning
because of the oppression and the enemy; Psa. 51.8.12.
send [Lazarus] thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me
unto thy holy hill: make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou
have broken may rejoice; restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold
me with thy free spirit: so is the cryings of a wounded soul that looks up
unto God for mercy, as is said Dives did, who was also a son of God as Lazarus
was, for he called Abraham father, and Abraham called Dives his son; and so is
every unbeliever the son of God, though so long he brings forth fruit to
himself, and not unto God, and thereby destroys himself; Romans 11.32.
yet in God is his help, and the help of every unbeliever; for he has
concluded all under sin and unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all; and
therefore Dives said, Father Abraham have mercy on me.

Now Lazarus he dyed, that is, he dyed unto sin, and lived unto righteousness,
and was not buried as Dives was, Romans 6.11.
but was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom; he was dead in Christ as
every believer is while he lives, by whom he was crucified and slain to sin and
the worlds glory, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10.
having received in himself the sentence of death, that he should not trust in
himself but in God which raises the dead, and delivered him from so great a
death from which he had not delivered Dives; and all thus dead in Christ,
rises first with Christ into the life of Christ, which is the first
resurrection; but the rest of the dead (to wit, they of Dives, the righteous
and the wicked that are so in themselves, and do worship the Beast and his
Image and follow the whore) they rise not till they are so become dead in
Christ from sin and the world, which yet they live in, and are dead from Christ
buried in the grave of destruction, ^ev. 14.9, i0, 11.
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, and where the worm dies not, and the
fire is not quenched to all that are in it; but blessed are ehe dead which dye
in the Lord, Rev. 14.15.
from the whore and her worship from henceforth, yea says the spirit, that
they may rest from their labors and their works do follow them, for dying and
rising in Christ they do enter into rest with Christ, resting from all their
own works, as God did from his, who also have received in themselves the
sentence of death, that they should not trust in themselves, but in God that
raises the dead, and delivered them from so great a death which others lie
groaning under; and so by the angels or ministering spirits of Christ in them,
are carried out of themselves into Abraham's bosom, swallowed up into the life
of God, free from the wrath and curse, as believers, still living in the body,
having Christ their life manifest in their mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4, 11. Matt.
5.8, 9.
by which their consciences are at peace and rest with Christ in God, as the
pure in heart which is blessed with God, receiving, possessing, and enjoying
the reward of their works of humility, meekness and love, which is rest for
evermore, and unto whom the impure and unbeliever cannot come, nor be blessed
with the same spiritual blessing of Christ in them, but do (with Dives the
righteous and the wicked) still hate and persecute them that are blessed above
them, and like roaring Lions they will go about seeking to devour them till the
Lion of the tribe of Judah meets them (as he did Paul) and destroys in them the
righteous and the wicked, Acts 9.3, 4, 5.
the Pharisee and all his works, the good and the evil knowledge with men,
turning their evil into good; their darkness into light; their death into life,
and their hatred into love, and so translate them out of the kingdom of the
evil and of darkness, into the Kingdom of light and the Lord Jesus.

And these two parts, Righteousness and sin, good and evil, so known by men
(which is to be destroyed) every man for a time (while he believes not) known
to be more or less in him, the one opposing the other, which is the
righteousness of man against the sin of man, and do both join together against
the third part of man, which is refined and draw out from the other to be pure
in Christ; and by the pure, even Christ, is the righteous and the wicked purged
forth and destroyed together; for works of gold and works of dross, the best
and worst of man is all but vanity, 1 Cor. 5.12, 13.
and must be destroyed; for as the wicked part which is sin, is compared to
briars, and thorns, wood hey, and stubble; so the other part, which is the
righteous so called, is compared to gold and precious stone, and all but as one
Dives; even the two parts of three, righteousness and wickedness, which must be
burnt up, and man therein shall suffer loss; Genesis 18.23. Job. 9.22. Eccle.
3.16, 17.
for God will destroy both the righteous and the wicked, which is of man; but
man himself, or that third part which is of God shall be saved, and which is
neither righteous nor wicked in it self, but is pure, holy, meek and humble, as
Adam was before his fall, and now again regenerated from the knowledge of good
and evil, to be like Christ risen into the state of the second Adam, more
perfect then the first, as in the state of rest and salvation, where man is
saved and made perfect in God, yet so as by fire, and where there is neither
truth nor error, light nor darkness, day nor night appearing distinct, but in
the evening it shall be light, or that which before was darkness shall now be
made light, Isa. 42.16.
even the crooked straight, and the rough plain, as all but one day and one
light, Zach. 14.6, 6, 8, 9.
one way, and one kingdom of the Lord known unto men, and in which there is but
one king, and his Name one over all the earth, and all other kings and kingdoms
good and bad so known, are destroyed and at an end to its goodness and its
badness out of Christ; and at the sounding of the seventh angel is al become the
kingdoms of the Lords and of his Christ's, whose name is but one, and there is
none besides him.

CHAP. VI. That the more purer, innocent, and faithful men are in the truth,
the more do men plot and devise evil of them to destroy them, as against the
Lord Prophets, Christ and his Apostles; how God by his presence with them
delivers them as he did Israel, the three Children, Daniel, Jonah and Jeremiah,
and destroyed their enemies.
AND he that with this one, even with this pure and perfect one shall know most
of this King and Kingdom, to declare it, and most purely live in it, he must
suffer the greater by men and with Christ, he shall drink of the cup of Christ,
Matt. 20.25. Luke. 12.50.
and be baptized with the baptism of Christ's sufferings, under which Christ
himself groaned till it was accomplished, and brought through the fire, and
seven times tried in the presence of Gods burnings, he is most certainly
humbled and exalted with Christ in the spirit, to sit in the Throne of his
Father; and so long as he lives in the flesh, manifesting and declaring to the
world the glory of Christ's Kingdom, which he knows and is possessed of, Job.
16.33.
he must so long expect to have tribulation in the world answerable to the
peace and consolation he has with Christ in God, and in which tribulation and
affliction of fiery trials and persecutions by men, his peace and consolation
shall not cease to be with him; for his God in whom he lives and trusts,
Isa. 63.
will continue it by the angel of his presence, being in all his afllictions
afflicted with him, to protect, save, and deliver him, that no evil shall come
unto him; for when thou passest through the fire I will be with thee (says the
Lord) and in the midst thereof I will redeem thee, Isa. 43.2.
that no evil shall come unto thee.

And this abiding, of God with his people, to rule and reign in them, is that
which saves them and all men in their sufferings for the truth, even as it did
all the Lords Prophets and people in all their afflictions throughout all
generations to this day, witnessed in the three children of Israel that had
been taken captives, Shadrach, Meschech, and Abednego, who at the wrath of the
King Nebuchadnezzar for their faithfulnss in God, and not falling down to
worship the Image which Nebuchadnezzar the King had set up, were cast bound
into the midst of the hot fiery Furnance, heat seven times hotter then it was
wont to be heat, Dan. 3.13, ^4.
and they had no hurt of the Fire, for the son of God whom they worshipped in
truth and righteousness, and trusted that he would deliver them, walked in the
midst of the Fire with them, and saved them, and these men which cast them in
were burnt with the flames of that Fire which they had kindled for to burn
others, according as it is written, The wicked have drawn out the Sword, and
have bent their Bow to cast down the poor and needy, Psa. 37.14, 15.
and to slay such as be of an upright conversation, their sword shall enter
into their own heart, and their Bows shall be broken, and the Fire that they
have made for others shall kindle upon themselves, as it did upon those which
cast them into the Furnace; insomuch that the King and those that saw the
deliverance of the three children, and the great power of God, were astonished
and convinced at the Protection of them, to see them thus delivered by the God
in whom they trusted, who is a God always at hand, ready to help, the helpless
from those that would devour them; and this has been the protection that Gods
people has found at this day, though great persecutious has been against
them, wherein many has suffered much, and not so much as was the desire of
their enemies they should, as many can witness that have seen the malicious
proceedings at them, but the Lord resttrained them.

The like we have in Daniel, another witness for the Lord, who was Innocent and
Faithful, one of the Children of the Captivity of Judah, in whom the spirit of
VVisdome and understanding was most excellent, Dan. 5.12, 13.
in opening Divine mysteries; and because for his VVisdome, he was preferred by
the King, the Rulers, and Governors, over wnom Daniel was set, sought an
occasion against Daniel to destroy him, but (said they) we shall find no fault
against him except it be concerning the Law of his God, and so they consulted
together how they might make a Law on purpose to betray him, as all men at this
day have don to betray those whom God has most honored and indu'd with the
understanding of divine mystries, to betray them, they will make Laws and
Statutes of things concerning God, which shall be sin and blasphemy for them
that shall act it, or speak it, to bring them into bondage for it, as all the
Rulers, Officers, Govenors, and Counselors took council against Daniel; for
they prevailed with the King to seal a writing, Dan. 6.4, 5, 6, 7
that whosoever should ask any thing of God or man for thirty days time, and
not of the King, should be cast into the Lions den; now Daniel notwithstanding
prayed and praised his God as he use to do, and these men assembling against
Daniel, watched him, and as he was worshipping came upon him and brought him to
the King for breaking their Law; Ver. 14.
then was the King sorry that he had made such a law, for he loved Danel, and
then sought to deliver him out of their hands, but they pressed the King so
much, that he yielded to them, and they cast Daniel into the den of Lions, and
shut him in amongst them, and on the morrow the King came unto the den and
said, O Daniel Servant of the living God, is not he able to deliver thee from
the Lions, then said Daniel O King live for ever; my god has sent his Angel,
and he have shut the Lions mouths that they have not hurt me, for my innocence
was found out before God, and against thee have I done no hurt, and then was
the King glad, that he had no wrong, and commanded Daniel to be taken out of
the den, and he had no hurt because he believed in his God, and then the King
commanded all that were against Daniel both they and their families to be cast
into the den among the Lions where they had before cast Daniel, and the Lions
tore them in pieces; for they believed not in the God of Daniel; and then did
K. Darius write unto all people, nations, and Languages in the world to worship
and honor the God of Daniel; for said the King, he is the living God, and
remains for ever, and his Kingdom is everlasting, who dilvered Daniel from
the mouths of the Lions; and so say I that this is my God, and has hitherto
delivered me from those that would have devoured me. Thus was Daniel also saved
in his affliction, and his enemies were destroyed, and the Lord his God was the
more honored, and his kingdom the more increased, as is to this day in the
affliction of his people, Isa. 63.6.
who in all their afflictions is himself afflicted with them, and the Angel of
his presence saves them, and will cast off none that trust in him, and come to
him by Jesus; nor is he ever wanting with any that know him and wait upon him,
but will deliver them out of all their troubles, which they shall suffer for his
cause, and which he for his honors sake (in delivering of them) will bring
upon them. Iohah. chab. 1.2
And it was not without the Lord that Jonah was in the ship, and that for him
being in it, the ship was tossed, and the people therein troubled with fear:
and Jonah by them cast into the sea, and he to be three days and three nights
in the Whales belley preserved alive, and at the Lords command was by the fish
cast out to dry land in safety; so was Jeremiah, Ier. 38, 34, 39.11.12. etc.
who for declaring the word of the Lord was by the King Zedekiah left to the
cruelty of the Princes, who cast Jeremiah into the dungeon contrary to the
Kings knowledge; but Jeremiah for trusting in the Lord was in the destruction
of Jerusalem delivered, and the Princes that cast him in were destroyed by the
Caldeans, so all that in their troubles shall trust in God that he will deliver
them, they shall in the worst of troubles be preserved and safely restored into
rest and peace with the Lord, and not that any thing shall be done, without the
Lord: Christ himself, though by the hands of men, yet by the Lord was he
delivered up unto men to be slain, and by him was he with Jonah raised the
third day to life again, and all the prophets and apostles of Christ who were
most clearest in the knowledge of the truth of Christ were persecuted and put
to death for their Judgments, and were not without the Lords company with them
in it, neither was any thing don unto them without him; and he was with them in
all their sufferings that they should not fear nor deny him, nor that which
they knew of him, but still hold fast their integrity and faithfulness in the
truth before him, to live and dye in his cause, and will not worship the Beast
nor his Image, Rev. 15.15.
so shall al whom the lord has set a work [and not man] to contend against the
Beast and his Image, though they suffer much by men that have the Image of the
beast upon them, and the glory of the whore about them, yet they shall deny to
own them: Psalm. 110.3.
for in the day of his power they shall be a willing people for the Lord,
willing to receive his message and declare it, willing to be persecuted, and to
suffer for it, this honor have all his Saints.

CHAP. VII. How by persecution truth is increased, and the more advanced; and
they that suffer for it, to the terror of them that persecute it; that truth is
rewarded and witnessed by sufferings: how the reward of sufferings is a crown of
glory manifest in men, and when.
ANd suffering for the truth is the ready way to advance it, and when men are
most humbled for the truth then are they in the way to be most exalted: with
the truth, and these things (says Paul) which have come unto me in my
sufferings, Bands and Imprisomments have proved all to the furtherance of the
Gosple, Phil. 1.12, 13, 14.
and for the discovery of truths enemies; and by my bonds says he, other
brethren have been the more encouraged to preach the truth and suffer for the
truth, and in the time of persecutions the saints that were scattered went
every where preaching the word, Act. 8 3, 4.
and the more men sought to stop and prevent them, the more did they increase
and were encouraged, and the truth was the more confirmed amongst them, as it
is to this day where persecutions are manifest, and whosoever it is that do
persecute another for his Judgment, he does manifest himself to be ignorant
of God and the truth, and lives not in the truth but in the lie which is
enmity to it, yet will the truth advance it self above it and the more for
being persecuted: And did men know before hand, that what they persecute is
thereby advanced, and themselves thereby abased, and they would not so much act
against themselves, and the truth which they know not, but God will have it so,
for the wrath of man shall turn to his praise, and the remainder thereof will
he restrain, Psa. 76.10.
and will suffer nothing to be done, but what he will gloryfie himself by; and
therefore when the kingdoms of the world are most divided one against another,
1 Thessalonians. 5.1.2.
then the kingdom of God comes in, as a thief in the night upon them, and
that which men in their days set themselves most against, that will God in his
day most exalt.

And therefore you my brethren, that would in all things love the appearing of
the Lord Jesus, then meet him in his coming though it be to kill and crucify
you, and though Clouds of thick darkness be round about him that you see him
not for the present, yet know that it is but for a moment he hides himself,
and that he will again break through these cloulds, and shine Gloriously upon
you to the inlightning of your souls, for though sorrow has continued for a
night yet joy comes in the morning, and therefore though persecutions and
tribulations may be amoung you to try you, and out of which the Lord will
redeem you, Isa. 41.10.
yet let not your hearts be troubled, and be not afraid of men nor of their
reviling; for though they may band themselves together against you, and the
Lords anointed in you, to break the cords and bands of love and unity amongst
you, yet their devices shall not prosper but the Lord will have them in
derision, Psa. 2.
and will break them in pieces like a pottors vessel, and will set his own
anointed (even Christ) upon his Throne, who shall be great amongst you, and you
with him shall rejoice together: for he that sits in the Heavens shall laugh:
and the Lord his King shall rain in the midst of you for evermore; and the
work began among you will he perfect, Psa. 35.1, 8.
and will turn all the evil devices of men that have invented evil against you
without cause to devour you, upon their own heads, and shame and confusion
shall befall them in the end: but the more is your glory as is their shame; for
they shall be the Lords displeasure against them, and they shall be vexed, for
the evil that they have done against you, and could not have their purposes
fulfilled upon any of you, and in the midst of all your peace and joy in the
Lord shall be manifest in you; For though in the world you have tribulation,
yet in Christ you shall have peace; and be of good cheer, Ioh. 16.33.
for Christ has overcome the world. And if you will be possessors of the
truth, you must be armed with patience in the Lord to suffer reproach and
trials for the truth, 1 Pet. 4 1.
and with all willingness and obedience of mind thereunto, you must yield your
selves as a living sacrifice ready to be offered up with Christ on the cross,
though the outward sufferings with many of you may not be afflicted upon you,
Romans 12.1.2.
but being made willing in the mind, your willingness and free submission
thereunto shall be accepted even the will for the deed, concerning which God
will try you if you will deny him or no, Heb. 11.17 Ge. 22.12.10.11.12.
as he did Abraham, when he made him offer up his only son Isaac to be slain,
but he did not slay him; for being made willing it was accepted of God with
him, as if it had been done by him, and the will for the deed with some shall
suffice, 1 Timothy 6.12, 13.
and they shall with others that do suffer, reap the same fruit, for some only
shall suffer outwardly as witnesses for the rest, as did Christ for us who
before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good profession, yet with him we reap the
same fruit, 1 Pet. 2.21.
witnessing with him the same profession, and whose steps some in the outward
sufferings must follow him, as his apostle did, even those whom the Lord shall
choose, and whom he will make able, with himself and the apostles to bear
witness with him unto his sufferings, for the true life we live as the same
which he said should come to pass, and does and will come to pass, till the
man of sin in any shall be no more, as in all ages some in whom the life has
been most manifest and most purely have lived it, have suffered in bearing
witness to the life of ^od according as it has been manifest under any
dispensation that truth is always witnessed by sufferings going with it, and
following after it, according to the Scriptures, as a reward given to it, 2
These. 1.4, 5.
and a fellow helper and companion for it; for he that will live godly in
Christ Jesus must suffer persecution and persecutions, and tribulations is a
mainfestation of Gods righteous Judgments whereby a soul is counted worthy of
the kingdom of God for which he also suffers. And as sufferings is a reward of
truth and godlyness, and a companion for it, joined with it unto those that
enjoy it and know it to live in it; so the reward of sufferings is a crown of
glory, all witnessing one another; for ought not Christ who is the truth, first
to suffer, and then to enter into his glory; and says Paul who sought with
Beasts at Ephasus, I have fought a good fight; I have finished my course, 1 Timothy 4.7, 8.
I have kept the faith. Hence forth is laid up for me a Crown of Glory, as the
price of my race which I have won, and which is brought unto me at the
revelation of Jesus Christ and to all that love his appearing; and he to
comfort us in afflictions says, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
you who are troubled rest with us in the same spirit: waiting for the same
crown as a recompense of reward, for all your troubles, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels powerfully appearing and
manifesting himself for your good in the Lord; but to take vengeance on all
that that trouble you, and that know not God, and obey not the gospel of the
Lord Jesus, but do persecute it, they shall suffer the vengeance of eternal fire
(God himself) whose wrath is revealed from Heaven against all ungodlynesse and
Unrighteousness of men that hold the TRUTH in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18.
and shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and the glory of his power when he shall come to be gloryfied in his
saints, and admired in all that do believe, 2 These. 1.
Heb. 12.2.
and that have with patienec endured the cross, and despised the shame, these
shall have joy and glory with God, when these that trouble them shall have
sorrow and anguish of spirit, and so much the more for beholding the others joy
and confidence in the Lord which they so much have persecuted, (For think
thou O man that Judge another, that thou shall escape the Judgments of God?
Romans 2.3, 4, 5, 6.
no thou that hardnest thy heart against another, treasureth up wrath unto thy
self against the day of wrath) which must certainly come upon thee; for God
will reward every man according to his works, for with what Judgment ye Judge,
Mat. 7.2.
ye shall be Judged; and with what measure ye meet, it shall be measured to you
again; wherefore howl and lament, ^^e. 3.1. etc. ^oel. 1.5. etc.
and be ashamed, thou man of the Devil that persecutest and Judge another,
for when the Lords Judgments are upon thee, it will be a day of terror unto
thee, till by Judgment the enemy, sin and the devil within thee shall be cast
out from thee, as from those whom thou persecutest. And you that with Christ
have been Judged by men, and have been made partakers of Christ's sufferings,
rejoice ye, that when his Glory shall appear ye may be glad with exceeding joy
and account that the long sufferings of God is salvation, 1 Pet. 4.13.14.
and that if ye be rayled against for the name of Christ happy are ye; for the
spirit of God and of glory rests upon you: and on their part that speak evil
of you God is evil spoken of by them, but on your part he is gloryfied: and
therefore blessed are ye when men shall hate you and persecute you, and shall
say all manner of evil sayings against you, for the son of man's sake: and shall
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out your name
as evil, why rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, for behold your reward is
great in heaven, Luke. 6.222, 3.
for so did their fathers unto the prophets, but he that indures unto the end
shall be saved.

And this blessed reward of salvation for suffering for the truth to be
manifest in this mortal flesh, 2 Cor. 4.10. 10
and his prophets and apostles had, for they received it and bear witness to
it, and all that since have suffered with them do bear the same testimony, and
unto which my self, with many others at this day, shall set my seal, who have
hitherto suffered for the truth which I first received, 1 Cor. 8.5.6.
that there is but one God and father of all who is above all, through all, and
in all, Ephesians. 4.6.
and one Lord Jesus Christ manifesting this unto men by the spirit of himself,
and his own presence dwelling in them, by whose presence manifesting this unto
me to be declared by me, I have also been enabled, and with patience made to
endure to this day, even to the end of what for the truth have yet been
inflicted upon me, and in which I had my reward being therein satisfied and
contented; and having a perfect assurance of Gods uncangeable love in Christ
Jesus toward me, never to be taken from me, nor I to be separated from that by
principalities, nor powers, Romans 8.34, 35, 39.
things present nor things to come, height nor depth, nor any other creature
whatsoever, though I have been persecuted, despised and rejected, and as one
counted for the slaughter; yet in all these things Christ has been a conqueror
for me, and has kept me that I have not denied him, who himself all along
has been my reward, even my portion, my lot, and eternal inheritance in his
kingdom of eternal Glory, 1 Pet. 5.10.
unto which he has caled me by Jesus Christ, and unto which after ye have
suffered awhile he will also call you, make you perfect, strengthen, settle and
establish you. And is not this a reward, yea and a double reward, as the
apostle says, that the sufferings of this life are not to be compared with the
Glory that shall follow, and there is no man says Christ that have denied
himself of the Glory of this world for the glory of God, but he shall have a
thousand fold in the world to come, wherein God appears without sin unto
salvation, and whosoever has followed Christ in the steps of regeneration in
the state of grace, Mat. 9.28, 29.
shall sit with him upon twelve thrones, Judgeing the twelve Tribes of Israel,
even the throne where Christ sits and overcomes all things, Rev. 3.21.
shall he sit that overcomes the world with Christ, and with him his glory
shall be doubled from the throne of grace as of twelve degrees of the 12
apostles, to the Throne of glory of the four and twenty Elders clothed in white
raiment from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, Rev. 4.4.
and shall wear on their heads crowns of gold which they shall ascribe to him
that sits on the throne with them, Ver. 14, 15.
and gave it to them, as still being his, though with them, and unto whom all
Honor, glory and Power of all things belongs, for God is judge of all the
earth.

This is the perfect state, the throne of God, and fullness of glory, where
Christ his prophets and apostles, and Saints, and all that are in Christ, do
with him sit and and reign together with God on the same throne of his glory,
rejoicing and singing Halaluiahs unto him for ever and ever, and where is heard
by them to sing and praise the Lord, all creatures both which are in Heaven and
which are on earth, and under the earth, and in the sea and all that are in
them, saying, Praise and Honor and glory, Rev. 5.13.
and Power, be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for
evermore. And all men of the same Lamb like nature of Christ, have the same
honor and glory with him as due belonging to them.

CHAP. VIII. How the way to find our life is to lose it, that no man is to know
any thing of himself, but to be innocent in knowing his own innocecy and
righteousness: also what the true knowledge of God is: who has it, and how its
obtained.
ANd Paul to comfort and encourage us in the way of sufferings to this Throne of
glory, wherein to lose our lives that we may find it, and so to know God
aright, he bids us look unto Jesus the author and finsher of our faith, who
himself by malicious men, Heb. 12.2.3.
as he was a man himself in the flesh, suffered such reproaches, whipings,
scourgings and revileings of men, and yet for the joy that was set before him
endured the cross, and despised the shame, and set him down at the right hand
of the throne of God, which he that overcomes and indureth to the end shall
inherit with him, and Christ was made perfect through sufferings; so shall all
that will be made perfect as he is perfect; Luke 24.26.
for ought not he first to suffer and then to enter into his glory, and if thou will be perfect, says he, thou must sell all that thou have, and take up thy
cross and follow me, Mat. 19.21.
and be content with joy to suffer the spoiling of your goods, your own wisdom
and knowledge, your righteousness and your glory, knowing in your selves how
that you have in Heaven a better and a more during substance, Heb. 10.33, 34
and therefore in knowing this you will not regard the sufferings of this life:
but will know that after you have received the light and knowledge of the truth
in any measure, you must come under persecutions and afflictions for it, and be
made a gazing stock and a reproach unto men by the Lord for your Good, 1 Cor.
4.9.
that you maybe humbled and emptied of all that you call your own, and be
exalted and filled of all that is Christ, and so with him to lose your life,
that you may find it, even all that you lived to in the world and thought your
selves happy besides Christ, must you lose and sufer to come to Judgment, for
he that will seek to save his life shall lose it, but he that will lose his
life for Christ, the same shall find it, wherefore as Peter says, humble your
selves yea in the Lord under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in
due time casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you.

And these are the steps of Christ and his apostles and prophets, 1 Pet. 5.6, 7.
which you are to follow, in losing and finding, in being humbled and exalted,
and with them to bear the same testimony to the same truth, to see the fullness
of Christ, and the emptiness of your selves, and all things that are beneath
him, and with the prophets and apostles of Christ suffer a reproof of the Lord
when you shall in the behalf of your selves contend for any of our own
innocence, integrity and uprightness, and seek to justify your selves in any
thing of your selves, or in vindication of your selves, to boast and declare
unto men as Samuel did, 1 Samuel 12.3.
saying, Whose ox have I taken, or whom have I done any wrong unto? or whom
have I hurt? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes
therewith, and I will restore it to you; But in this though a man be never so
just (as a man ought to be in all his actions, ways, and works
notwithstanding) yet he is not to boast himself of that, 2 Cor. ^.30.
nor to glory in it, nor yet to know it, no not in any thing of his own
righteousness, but only in his own infirmities, lest he should be proud of
it, and contend with God for it more then for righteousness in God, as
sometimes David, Job, and others did, for which God reproved them, and brought
them to judgment, and so saved them; but though a man were never so innocent,
just and righteous before men after the righteousness of the Law, yet as a man
he is not to know himself so, but to account all loss for Christ, and to know
none but him; Gal. 6.3.
for if a man think himself something when he is nothing, he deceives himself;
and the greatest perfection of innocence, wisdom, and righteousness of God with
man, is for man to be innocent in the knowledge of himself, 1 Cor. 4.4.
or any thing which he knows, he knows besides God, and to know that he knows
nothing of himself, nor by himself, as Paul did not, and then does he know most
of God, because man's weakness is Gods strength, and his ignorance is Gods
wisdom; for he that knows he knows any thing, (which is the greatest desire of
man to do, 1 Cor. 8.1, 2, 3
to know something of himself) he knows nothing in righteousness as he ought
to know, but is proud in what he thinks he knows, because he knows it with
distinction to something which he knows not, and all that a man knows of any
thing without knowing all things, is but his own thoughted knowledge, which a
man is to be crucified unto, and to know that God who is only to be known, is
he only that knows all things, and that no man has ever seen nor known him
but only God himself in the Son has known and seen himself in the Father, and
he that with God in the Sonship of God knows God, he knows that the knowledge
of all things is in God, and that there is none other to know any thing but God
who knows all things as he knows himself, and then cannot hate or despise
any thing which he so knows, and till man know it a god and good, he knows it
not as he ought.

And God which is a spirit can be high and low, rich and poor, strong and
weak, full and empty, the best and worst, one and all where he please, and when
he please, without contradiction in himself; For the Spirit blows where and
when it lists, as the wind, to save and to destroy, to gather together, and
scatter abroad; and this Spirit is the Spirit of Truth which Christ says we
shall receive of him, to bring all things to our remembrance, whereby we may
know all things, even him in the state, of the new birth, which no man knows
but the Spirit it self: 1 Ioh. 2.20.
And John says, That having the annoynting of the Holy One we shall know all
things, and he that has Christ has all things, even Christ who is all of the
Father, and then cannot but know it in him, and we need not that any man teach
us, 1 John 2.27.
bur as the annoynting which we have received of him, and is in us, teaches
us all things and is truth and is no lie, and even as we be taught by him so we
shall abide in him.

And he that by the Spirit of God is taught all things, to know all things in
the Spirit, he by God is taught God, and knows God, and can then know no
other besides God, nor after any other manner but as God, and so with him is in
charity with all men, and then knows that he knows nothing of himself that he
should boast in nor be proud of, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
neither vaunt himself above, for he knows both the highest and the lowest,
and God in them all, which makes them all one unto him as unto God, even unity
in variety, and variety in unity, as all one God, and so knows nothing better
nor worse then himself, nor any thing better nor worse then the other; for he
sees the sin of all to be ended, and also his own righteousness, which is the
same with his sins to be ended from having any thing of good in it more then
unto men, and therefore cannot boast in, nor be proud of any thing of his own,
which is not to tarry with him, but to perish in the using; and so not in one
thing more then another of humane things, and where contrarities of things are
not known; there pride and boasting in one thing above another cannot be, but
in that state a man is most like unto God, as Adam was before his fall, wherein
he knows no distinction; and Adam fell not till he sought to know his own
innocence, and the state i^ which he stood, which God sorbad him to know; for
thereby did Adam come to the knowledge of good and evil, to know righteousness
and sin, joy and sorrow in himself; and he that with Adam shall see any good
in himself in opposition to an evil, he glories in that good so often as he
does it, and when he does it not, he fears and is offended as Adam was, when in
truth there is none good but one, even God, nor none that does good but one,
even him who knows no evil; and therefore neither fears nor is offended.

And no man but the Lord only, who is himself the God and the innocent, the
Iustness, Vprightness, and the righteousness, that can know it, and who is not,
neither can be proud, lofty, 1 Cor. 13.
nor high-minded in the knowledge of any thing, because he knows nothing more,
nor nothing less then himself, and all knowledge of all things is himself;
therefore the greatest perfection of man's knowledge is to know that he knows
nothing till he knows God who is no one thing distinct, but all things in
one, as his greatest exaltation is when he is most humbled, and that knowledge
by which a man does not know God even as he is known of God, 1 Cor. 13.10, 11,
12.
is no true knowledge but must pass away as that which is perfect does appear;
and the true knowledge of god is to know the height and dep^h of all things, m
to be the same which he knows, even to ascend to the highest and descend to the
lowest in one and the same love to all, and so to know God in love once and
ever, even where and in every thing both high and low without confinement to
any thing with the like love to all things; this is the knowledge that shall
stand, and all other knowledge shall pass away.

And that these men whom God has set a part and chosen to know and declare him
as he is in himself, might know none but God, and in their knowing him,
might be humbled and exalted with God, to know God even as God knows them, he
makes them to bear his CROSS; He smote them with the rod of men to try them,
that they may witness of his living in them, Number. 23.21.
though against all the ways of men, and he will lay his Judgments upon them
to make them the more like himself, Zeph. 3.15.
to live without knowing sin or evil even upon the most righteous person in the
world as the first that shall have it and come unto it, 1 Pet. 4.17.
[for Judgment must begin at the house of God] and did begin with Christ as
the first in Adam, whose image which Adam lost was renewed by Judgments, and
who is the first fruit of men unto God, and whose righteous Judgments none
shall escape, though by men unjustly executed; no, Christ in the flesh as a man
could not escape them, that no flesh might glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.17,
18, 19.
nor that any one should think better of himself then of others, nor that
others should think better of any then they ought, which is too frequent with
men to do, for the gifts they see in them, and for which many are made to
suffer, for they esteem that others have of them, though they are most humble
in themselves, and therefore it is not safe for men to be too popular and
eminent among men in the account of men, for any ipiritual wisdom and knowledge
they have of God; for then it is just with God to pull them down; even all that
men sets up or idolize for any gift that God has given to them, but the
greater the gift of God is in them, and the more they know of him, the more for
that gift are they to be humbled both before God and men, to give a good
example of humility unto men, and have the less honor from men, as the way
with Christ to exalt them.

CHAP. IX. How all men are alike to God, to whom light and darkness is all one:
that no man is better nor worse then another, and how; what it is to be both
best and worst in one person, to be punished and exalted, and the way unto it;
how we are to serve one another, and of the st^te of Christ, as God and man;
and how with him we are to love all men.
And as we cannot think better of one man then another as they are in Christ
and by him represented to the father spotless and blameless, he having dyed for
all men, Ephesians. 5.27. Col. 1.28.
so we cannot think worse of one man then another, as they are out of Christ,
for all are sinners and there is none righteous no not one, and therefore we
should not esteem of one above another, i Tim. 5.21.
either better or worse in Christ or without Christ, knowing that all (except
as to the manifestation of Christ in them) are all alike unto God who sees not
as man sees, Psa. 38.12.
for to him light and darkness is all one, and the difference that is, is unto
men themselves, or those that shall make the diffrence, and not unto God, nor
unto those that know God, but unto those that know him not, and shall say unto
others, stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am more holyer then thou;
but these are a smoke in my nose, Isa. 65.5.
and a fire that burns all the day says the Lord, and these are the proud
pharisees, the painted sepulchers that make a separation, and despise their
brethren, who are of the same flesh and blood, for of one blood has he made
all nations of men, Acts 17.26. 2 Pet. 1.4.
and of the same divine nature with Christ in God, and that whatsoever good is
manifest among them, God is that good; and whatsover is evil is the devil; and
god makes all good, and the devil makes all evil, and all men being of the
nature of god and man, both divine and human, may conclude themselves to be in
one sense as good as the best, and in another sense as bad as the worst, for
all men naturally and as men, are vanity and a lie, and in the best of human
actions walk as in a vain shadow, and as Christ is so are all men in this
world, and also before the father in him; 1 John 4.17
for all as men represents him with men, and are as men in this world, so he
being in the presence of god for us all, Heb. 9.24.
represents all men with god, with whom they are the same in him. But lest any
either in themselves or others should through the pride of nature and glory of
this world be exalted and puffed up above measure to glory in any outward
appearance, 1 Cor. 8.12.
1 Cor. 4, 5.
and to rhink of themselves above what they ought, as the best and not as the
worst, and cannot descend to the lowest as well as ascend to the highest; God
that he might honor them with himself, 2 Cor. 12.6, 7, 8, 9.
gives them a thorn in the flesh, sends satan to buffet them, and the serpent
to bite them, and to let them know that they are but men in the flesh, that
they might not glory in themselves, nor that others should glory in them, and
so to become as the devil set up in the room of God; wherefore that they may
know themselves as men to be but flesh, and in all things submit to the will of
^od, God will keep them down, he will correct and reprove them, to humble and
exalt them, as he did Adam and the first fathers, and the Prophets, Christ and
his Apostles; for Christ as a man with us was subject to the like infirmities,
Mat. 4.1. Heb. 2.18. ^h. 4.15.
and was led into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil, and was in all
points tempted as we are, (yet without sin) and as a man he would have refused
Gods Judgments, and have put them off from him, when he said, father if it be
possible let this cup pass from me, and when he went forth and wept, fearing
the punishment of death, but God made him willing to submit to his will, as he
does us by laying his cross upon us, and as he did Job, Paul, and others to
humble them and keep them near unto himself, Job. 42.
that they might not go beyond their bounds, nor put any confidence in flesh,
nor to think of themselves above what they ought, but to know that his grace is
sufficient for them, Romans i2.3.
and that if they will trust in any thing to trust in God, and be exalted in
any thing to be exalted in God, who will both humble and exalt them, that he
that gloryes in any thing should glory only in the Lord, Romans 12.4, 5.
and so in one another as being all members one of another, and but one body in
Christ.

But we see in men that have the best gifts so far as any thing of flesh or the
glory of flesh is in them, how incident they are to be exalted in flesh, and to
glory in outward appearance, and receive honor from men, and how ready flesh
in men is to give human exaltation and honor to men, and to glory in men for
those gifts of God for which they should glory in God as the author and
finisher of them all, whether temporal or spiritual, which say they, so we do,
for when we honor any form, person or thing, it is God in them that we honor;
but I say, Then honor it not in outward appearance, by the outward motion of
the body; for that relates to the outward and not to the inward, and is no
honoring of god but the devil; for God who is the heart, mind and spirit
(without being defiled) is honored with the same; and so says God, give me
thy heart; and says David, thou have taught me all obedience within, Psa.
51.6.10.
and to know truth in the inward parts, and within is thy Law written; for the
Kings daughter is all glorious within, Psa. 45.13.
and all outward glory is but the world, flesh, sin, and the devil, which
vanishes away and is no more known, as the inward does appear; for all flesh
is grass, the grass withers, Isa. 40.7.
the flower fades, because the spirit of the Lord blows upon it, surely the
people are grass.

And that you may honor God spiritally and inwardly by says, and not by
sight, look unto Jesus the author and finisher of that inward and spiritual
glory within you, who only it is in you that can honor God and you with God:
and who as he was a man, yet refused the honor and glory of the world, neither
as a man would he take any thing to him that belongs to God as a spirit, for
call not me good (says he) for there is none good but one even God: Mat. 19.17.
and call no man master on earth, for one is your master even Christ which is
in Heaven: and he that will be great among you let him become your servant: and
yet those that knew him to be the son of God, and for the gifts he had, and
miracles that he did, how would they honor his outward person; yet he forbideth
them not though he did not command them; for when he was riding to Jerusalem
though upon an ass which showed the humility of him, yet how did the people
then adore him and cry him up, even his very person, Hosanna, Hosanna unto him,
pulling off their garment and casting down under him, cutting down branches and
strewed the way before him, Mat. 21.7, 8, 9.
with so much mirth and rejoicing, that the Priests and Rulers of the people
who were more for the honor of men to honor them, then for honoring God, hated
him so much the more, and were the more incensed against him, saying, crucify
him, crucify him, that the more some loved him the more oaths hated him,
especialy those men that knew they should lose their honor by him, and by them
did he suffer, for said they in conspiracy against him if we let him thus
alone all beople will pelieve on him and will follow him, Ioh. 11, 47, 48.
and we shall lose our kingdom, place and nation, which is the same with men to
this day, who for fear of loseing this worlds honor will conspire together in
persecution against those that walk most nearest unto the way of Christ for the
honor of God) yet Christ desired not their kingdom nor their honor, John
18.36.
neither do these that believe in Christ, for my kingdom (says he) is not of
this world, if it were then would my servants fight that I should not be
delivered unto the Jews, but my kingdom is not of this world, and Christ would
not receive honor from men, as a man, but the honor which came of his father
only, but if men would ascribe that to him which he as a man desired of them,
what was that to him? he was notwithstanding humble in himself, and reproved
those that were not, and that did either give or take honor one of another, as
men, showing that all honor, power, and glory in Heaven and on earth, and all
things therein belonged only unto God, whose glory fills Heaven and earth, and
that all men should honor him. And as with Christ, so with the Apostles or
Christ for when they preached the Gospel how did the people admire them and
adore them, saying, Acts 14.11.
Gods are come down amongst us in the likeness of men, and so they would have
honored them and offer sacrifice unto them, Gal. 4.15.
yea and some in love to them, could have plucked forth their own eyes and have
given them, but the Apostles would not be so honored by them, but rebuked
them, saying, Acts 10.2^ 26.
Why do you do these things? for we are men even subject to the like passions
and infirmities as you are, and we do preach unto you that you should turn from
Idols and from things sacrificed unto them, and turn unto the liveing God, Acts
14.15, 1.
which made Heaven and earth and all things manifest in your selves.

And when the Angel came and preached unto John the revelation of Jesus Christ
for John to reveal unto men, then John immediately fell down at the feet of the
angel to worship him; but the angel reprovd him, saying, See thou do it not;
for I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren, which have the testimony of
Jesus, Rev. 19 10. chapter 22.8, 9.
worship God, for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy] so should
all men that carry the Lords message to any, they should not regard men nor be
regarded by men above what is written, 1 Cor. 4.6.
but reprove those that shall have their persons in admiration, or honor them
with the honor which belongs only unto GOD, who himself will honor his
messengers with the honor of himself, as he did Christ, which is greater
honor then that of men, yet thus are men oftentimes carried beyond themselves,
being on a sudden filled with the joy of the Lord in the message received, and
are ready to honor and admire the messenger for the message sake, which is but
a servant and one of his fellow brethren, yea even a fellow creature, and so
said Moses concerning Christ or God manifest in flesh: A Prophet shall the Lord
your God raise up among you of your brethren, Acts 7.37.
yea of yourd own flesh and blood who shall be a brother of you, and servant to
you to teach you all things; therefore him shall you hear in all things
whatsoever he shall say unto you, John 14.17.26
for he dwells with you and shall be in you, and whose voice as it spoke in
him, so shall it speak in you, and that voice of him only you are to hear which
shall bring all things to your remembrance and say within you, this is the way
walk in it, and he bids us to cease from men, and look only at Jesus, manifest
in our mortal flesh, and and to receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet
which is as a messenger or servant bearing only (as unto men) the message of
Jesus, Isa. 2.22.
Mat. 10.41.
and we should have a Prophets reward, which God only gives and not men, and
learn of me says Christ, who am the Lords Prophet and messenger unto you, Mat.
ii.29.
for I am humble, meek, and lowly, and you shall have rest to your souls, and
so humble should all the Lords prophets be, and also they that receive them.

And when men are most humbled, then are they most exalted; wherefore exalt not
one another without the Lord, but wait all to be exalted and lifted up in the
Lord, who only is able to make you stand; and know you this, that all men in
the world are but one flesh and blood, Acts 17.26.
made up into one body as members therein to one serve another without respect
of persons, 1 Cor. 12.26, 27.
and that if one member suffer, all suffer with it, and if one be had in honor,
all rejoice with it, and all are the body of Christ, and members in particular,
and therefore should not seek to be one above another, nor to be regarded one
more then another, but though he were a Prince to rule and govern others, yet
he should be but a servant for God unto others, doing sevice to his nation; to
feed and keep them in pecae and safety, as God in Christ is unto his creation,
Luke 22.24, 25, 26, 27.
even a servant that came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, not to be
served or to have any thing done for him that needed nothing by those that had
nothing, but to serve and do for others that could not serve nor do any thing
for themselves, Psa. 50. i2.
and as one that had all power and obedience in himself, so to serve and do for
himself, who as a Prince of righteousness will not be exalted above his
sebiects, but as a servant will humble himself into the condition of the
lowest, which is his greatest honor, and by which as he humbled himself with
them, so he; John 4. 17.
will exalt them with him, for as he is, so are they in this world, and though
he were God in the form of God, yet he made himself of no reputation, but took
on him the form of a servant, yea he was in all things made like unto his
brethren in the flesh, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9.
and he humbled and became obedient unto death, even unto the death of the
cross, after which he was again exalted to God in the highest, but not without
his people, for they were exalted with him, the head and the members together
^s one body; For I (says he) if I be lifted up will dr^w all men unto me, Ioh.
12.31.
that where I am they may be also; and I am no where alone says Christ, but
all that God has given me are with me, Isa. 26.19.
and together with my dead body, and as my dead body shall they arise, says
Christ, when I arise with them, and with him he has raised up together and
made us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.6. Chap. 5.30.
as all members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones, that cannot be
separated from him to live without him, but with him to have the same honor
and glory that himself has, which in due time shall be manifest in all men; 1 Timothy 2.6.
therefore he says, father gloryfie thou me with thy self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was, John 17.5, 22, 23.
and the glory which thou have given me I have given them, that they may be one
even as we are one, I in them and thou in me, that we all may be made perfect
in one.

And Christ being both God and man one in another, he was the best and worst
together, even the highest and the lowest; the strongest and the weakest; the
richest and the poorest, the fullest and the emptiest; all in one perfect one,
who as he was in the form of God was equal with God, Ephesians. 4.9, 10.
so being in the form of men was equal with men, for he that ascended far above
all Heavens to receive gifts to fill all things, is the same, he that descended
into the lower parts of the earth, that both Heaven and earth might be filled
with his fullness, and then what is there in the world that may be said to be
either high or low, rich or poor, strong or weak, light or dark, full or empty,
best or worst, either of good report or evil report with men (sin excepted)
that he fills not, is notin, and in union with, as himself, without respect to
time, place, person or thing, it being all given to him; why he fills all and
is in all, and in union with all, and will lose nothing but the son of
perdition of all, and all is in him, though all knows not its union with him,
yet in him all live, move and have their being, Acts i7.28. Job 12.10.
and in his hands are the soul of every living thing and the breath of all
mankind, and all things was made for him, and by him, and without him was not
any thing made that is made, Col. 1.15, 16, i7
therefore is there nothing contrary to him, but whether it be high or low,
good or bad, as unto men, yet unto him it is all alike and is all like himself,
even God, as in the creation it was made by him, and so he still knows it, owns
it, and is in union with it, and when once it appeared unto man by the wisdom
and knowledge of man to be out of that state, and to be both good and bad unto
him; then that men might know all things as it is in Jesus, Christ appeard with
man in that state wherein it appeared bad to make it good again, as at the
first, and so to restore man and all things into a union together with Christ
in God, where every man that has Christ does behold himself and all things,
and possess himself and all things even in God, who is all and all in all. And
he that has not Christ, but does still live in his own will, does not so
behold it, but still looks upon it as himself is wicked and abominable, full
of all contradiction and destruction, Isa. 57, 20, 2^.
and so remains himself without peace in God; for there is no peace to the
wicked, no nor to the righteous that are righteous and good in them selves, and
that have not the knowledge of God in Christ.

But to he that has Christ, and that with Christ his Prophets and Apostles,
has thus suffered, been thus humbled to be thus exalted, may with them rejoice
that ever he saw the day wherein he drank the cup of affliction, Col. 1.14.
and eat the bread of adversity to fill up the measure of Christ's sufferings,
for which he now eats the bread of life, and drinks the water of life, and may
with David say, It was good for me that I was afflicted; for thereby I was
taught divine precepts, and with Christ learned all obedience to submit to the
will of God in all things, saying, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven;
that let my condition be what it will, I will learn therein to be content and
always rejoice in the Lords Judgments that divides between flesh and spirit;
Isa. 27.9.
that saves man and destroys sin and all enmity against God and his peoples
peace; for this is the fruit of the Lords Judgments to take away sin.

And now with God in Christ I will delight my self with the worst of men as well
as with the best, and with him I will be merciful, loving and pitiful unto
them, as the despised and rejected of men, (by men) yea though he were a
Prelate or Cavaliere so called, Publican or sinner scorned and despised by the
proud Pharisee that is wise and righteous in himself; yet the other waiting for
mercy, he is rather justified, and more easier saved then the Pharisee that
seperates himself, though he were a Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, etc.
that glories in his profession, righteousness and religion, ^sa. 65 9.
and will say unto others, Stand off, come not near to me, I am more holier then
thou, and so cast themout of their favor as reprobate ignorant persons; why
this proud boasting (says the Lord) is a stink in my nostrils, and a fire that
burns all the day, which I cannot approve of, but they must come to Judgment
with it, and lose it before they can be saved, and they that have erred in
Spirit shall come to understanding, ^sa. 29.24. 1 Cor. i.30.
and they that murmr shall learn doctrine, even to be wise and learned in
Christ who is head unto them, their wisdom and righteousness, Justification,
Sanctification and Redemption; for Christ is all and in all.

CHAP. X. Of Gods appearing in Judgment in man, against all things of man and
this world; that all outward duties, worship and obedience by men prosessed, is
a lie, without the inward work of truth within; how according to the inward
work is the outward practice, that the more by Christ any man is refined,
purged and saved within in his conscience, the more by men is he falsely
accused, judged and condemned without in his practice.
AND now against all knowledge, wisdom and strength, righteousness and glory
of men that is not in Christ, nor of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.17, 18.
nor grounded upon Christ in spirit and truth, will God come forth unto to
Judgment, and will destroy it by the foolish and base things of the world, and
he will plead with men for his own wisdom and strength, righteousness and
glory, which he will not have given to any other god but to himself, that none
should have the glory of any thing but himself, nor men to glory in any
besides himself; and he will make all men to know that by fire and by sword
will he plead with all flesh, good and bad, Esa. 66.16.
and whatsoever is not found in him shall be slain by him, even all the works
and imaginations of men, that men might know the Lord without knowing any thing
else; therefore will he come against all things of flesh, form and formality,
your keeping of Sabboths, and calling of Assemblies, wherein you seek your
selves and not the Lord, which is all but the riches of Egypt, and shall with
you come to Judgment, as having no part in Christ, nor being any thing of his
Kingdom; John 18.36.
for my kingdom (says he) is not of this world, nor of the things of this
world which perish and come to naught; it is not meat and drink, killing of
oxen and slaying of sheep, nor the offering up of swines flesh for a sacrifice
to the Lord that he accepts of; Isa 66 3, 4.
for the best of things which men offer up, are no better when they are offered
up by men and not by Christ, and when Christ himself is not the offering, but
that which God accepts of is Christ, the offerer and the offering, Heb. 10.12.
who is peace and reconciliation for all men, and whose Kingdom is
righteousness, 1 Cor 5 19. Romans 14.17. Luke 17.20.
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, and which says Christ is within you, and
stands not in outward observations of days, times, persons, nor things in the
Religions of men which shall all perish in the using, Col. 2.22.
and is nothing, nor shall be nothing with God; but Christ the first and the
last is all and shall be all; For neither circumcision nor uncircumcision
avails any thing, Gal. 6.15.
but a new creature; nothing outwardly, but all inwardly in the spirit, mind
and heart, even circumcision within, baptism within, breaking bread and
drinking wine within, which is bread of life, and water of life to every soul
that knows it within, even preaching, praying, reading, hearing, seeking the
Lord, and communion of Saints, Esa. 26.9
which are all works of grace, are all within; the keeping of Sabboths (which
is a Christians rest from the works of the Law, Esa. 58.13.
no more doing his own ways, nor seeking his own will) is Christ within, who is
himself all these, and is the Teacher, Keeper and Performer of them all within
us, Esa. 54.13.
that gives peace unto us, for of our selves we can do nothing; But thou O Lord
wilt ordain peace, Esa. 26 12.
for thou have wrought all our works for us; and with whomsoever all these
things are not seen to be done and performed by Christ within in the heart,
there is not, neither can be any thing of good done by any; Romans 10.8, 9, 10
For with the heart man believes unto righteousness; and with the mouth of the
heart confession is made unto salvation; for from the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks; and from the grace of God within are the works of grace
manifest without; which grace within is to believe in God and see an end of
sin, and to have peace, joy and comfort in God, and with men here on earth,
doing to all men as they would that all men should do unto them, forsaking
swearing, lying, cheating, cozening, drunkenness, murder and adultery, and the
abomination of pride and covetousness which is most frequently used with the
greatest Professors of Religion, who are the greatest persecutors of others,
and all for want of the inward teachings and workings of God within them, for
the inward sends forth the outward.

And therefore you that would be holy without and righteous without, to do good
outwardly, must first be so within, for till then you know not what the outward
is, nor how to discern what is good nor what is evil, to do the one and leave
the other undone, therefore says the Prophets, Apostles and all Saints, every
one for himself, (Lord create in me a new heart, and renew my spirit within me)
give unto me the mind of Christ within, Psa. 51.6, 7, 8, 10.
cleanse and purge me within of all my secret faults, then shall I offer upon
thy alter, even Christ, the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and pay my
vows where it is due; then shall I sing halalujahs even the Lord Omnipotent
reigns, and not as the righteous Scribes and Pharisees with all outward
professors of our times that would reign themselves instead of Christ, and that
stand to make clean of themselves the outside of the cup and pltatter, but
remain still within full of all extortion and excess, and who like unto whited
walls and painted Sepulchers would appear beautiful without, Mat. 23.25, 26,
27, ^8.
righteous unto men, and who may have escaped some of the grosser pollution of
the world, but within full of uncleanness and hyphocrisie, and therefore as I
know I shall declare, that all outside religions only in the form and the
knowledge of the Scripture only in the letter, is but as an outside garment by
most men put on to cover a rotten deceitful inside, and by which they would
appear unto men to be more holyer then others, but this is no holiness of God
nor of Christ, but the seed of the serpent which abides in the lie and not in
the truth; therefore except your righteousness exceed this, you can in no wise
enter into Heaven nor learn how to act purely toward men without, wherefore
thou blind Pharisee says Christ, cleanse first that which is within the cup and
the pltter that the outward may be clean also.

And this clensing of men cannot be done but by Christ, and not by him, but by
him in judgments manifest in men; therefore in the way of thy Judgments have
we waited for thee O Lord, says the prophet, and the desire of our soul is
only to thy name and the remembrance of thee; for when thy Judgments are in
the earth, then the inhabitants of the world shall learn righteousness; Esa.
26.7, 8, 9.
and in this cleansing work of teaching man, Christ sits upon his throne of
Justice, Judgment and Mercy in man to search and try man, even as a refiner and
purifier of gold and silver, Mal 3.1.2. Esa. 4 4
who by the spirit of Judgment and of burning do wash and purge away all man's
filthiness, and the more the judgments of Christ are manifest within, the
greater upon that person will the Judgments and afflictions of men be manifest
without, against him, and against that way of God in him which is Christ the
hope of glory, because it calls him from the ways of men without which is of
Antichrist, and men in their ways do always appose God in his way, and when
Christ by his Judgments shall undo man within of all that is a man's own, and
make all these in him become Christ's own, then shall men by their Judgments
undo him without (with men that and amongst men) to render him odious to men,
and he shall not be against it nor resist it, but the power of the inward shall
make him willing and able t^ bear and endure with cheerfulness the outward;
Psa. 110.3
in which work of Judgment Christ will not leave him nor forsake him, but will
restore peace and comforth unto him; to all which proceedings of Christ within
men, and of men, without men, from the time of Christ manifest in me to this
day I bear witness; that as God from the day of my first conversion to the
truth, has increased the manifestation of his son in me, so has men in
opposion to that increased their persecution against me.

CHAP. XI. Nothing which opposes God can stand against him, how he will pull
down and get above Towers, Churches, worships, religions, and all things of men
that is not in Christ; also to whom the Lords Judgments are a day of joy and
delight, and to whom they are a day of darkness and trouble, to trust in God
under them is a sure refuge of the good that comes by them, and when.
ANd now you all that would know the Lord and your own salvation, wait for this
day of God wherein he comes to call you from your own (and for his own from
you) and to destoy yours, yea all of yours that you call your own without him,
receive him in it, oppose it not, nor think it strange but bid it welcome when
it comes, though it be to your outward sufferings and to the loss of your
lives, honor and credit, goods and good names amongst men and all things on
this side God, even the perfection of all human excellency, wisdom,
righteousness and religion, nothing of which can stand with you nor is to be
pleaded by you when God comes forth against it to Judgment, but you are to see
an end of all perfection of things below God, and then are you most perfect and
pure in God and Christ, and have the greatest peace in your selves, when with
Christ you are become in your own eyes and before men most poor, vile and
imperfect and impure as man, and see nothing good of your own to defend you nor
make you accepted with men; for the best of man is not able to stand when God
appears, but best and worst all must go when God calls for it who will leave
nothing; but when God comes his work is before him and his reward is with him,
even to bring down man and exalt himself above and upon all the Hills and
Mountains of men that are high and lifted up by men to save themselves from his
wrath and Judgments which must come upon them and upon every high tower and
strong walls of Churches and Church fellowship set by men to worship God in and
by, Esa. 2.11.
and upon all the sheeps of Tarshish and all the pleasant pictures of outward
reformed ordinances and observations of men in these Churches and Church ways
which appear outwardly beautyfull unto men, Esa. 23.13, 14.
all shall be abased and laid waste, brought down and consumed, Esa. 24.10.
yea every Church and house way and worship of man's building shall be broken
down and shut up that no man may come in, and the Lord alone with his way,
church and worship shall be exalted in men, in the day of the great slaughter
when the towers shall fall, Esa. 30.15, 16.
or the highest part of any church or profession of church way and spiritual
notionists, and if the Towers fall then the church will be broken and the
people therein will be scattared even the shepherd and his sheep, and their
worship and service therein will be at an end, and then will Christ himself
appear in a greater glory to bind up the breach of his people, and will
himself come and gather them together to his fold, and will teach them himself
of his ways, and he will be unto them their high Tower, church and worship and
all things the rein; for the glory of the former is passed away and they shall
not need to teach one another nor assemble themselves to any but the Lord, who
himself will gather them and be exalted in the midst of them, and will be
righteousness unto them; Esa. 60.4.5.
and then will all their own bravery and costly apparels of outward
rigteousness be all taken from them, as t^r scripture expresses, even their
vailes and glasses, their fine lenen and ^oods which the Priests have used to
wear, and all the righteousness of men as the fine lenen and fleshpots of Egypt
with men perfumed and made sweet unto t^^m^^lv^s shall be as fi^thy rags, and
upon their fleshpots there shall be a stink, and instead of a girdle a rent,
instead of pride humility, Esa. 3.8. to the end.
and upon all outward comlyness and beauty shall become a baldness and
mourning, for the Lord will s^rip himself of all outward coverings that men
have put upon him to appear with a fair outside unto men, and the vail spread
over all nations shall cease, and he will make bare his holy arm in the eyes
of all nations and will bring in his own everlasting righteousness which shall
not cease, and in which there shall be no outward form nor comlyness whereby
men should desire it, Esa. 53.2.
but rather hate and abhor it, but within even to them that enjoy it and have
past through his Judgments for it, shall it be all glorious, pleasant and
delightful.

And therefore you people all rejoice in that day of the Lda Judgments when it
comes upon you, as it will perticulerly come to every one of you in hi order to
manifes^ in you the glory of God even Jesus Christ for the consumation of your
own glory with the men of the world, which no doubt some of you with Christ in
the flesh have already found, who had nothing of this worlds glory left him,
but was crucified to it all, that the purpose of God in his day, might be
manifest upon all flesh, to stain the pride of all Glory, ^sa. 23.9.
to bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth: which is a work much
manifested at this day by and upon the people called quakers even to be under
the Lords Judgments striping of all worldly honor and glory waiting for
Christ in the spirit, and who will be unto you as a day of the Lords
indignation against sin and enmity, and all the works of the devil, but with
his love toward you to try you, to humble you and to save you, and it will be
to the rich and mighty a day of wrath, ^^ph. 1.14, 15.
a day of trouble and heaviness; a day of destruction and desolation; a day of
obscurity and darkness, a day of clouds and blackness, especialy to them J say
that have made flesh their arm, that are in their own eyes strong, wise and
learned in themselves, righteous and holy in themselves and not in Christ, I
say to such it will be a day of terror and great tribulation, and though they
shall run to the rokes and to the mountains and cry unto them, saying, fall on
us and hide us from the wrath of the Lamb, ^ev. 4.15, 16, 17.
and him that sits on the Throne, for the great day of his wrath is come and
who can stand; yet those rocks and mountains shall not save them nor hide
them, as the trees of the garden could not hide Adam when he fled to hide
himself from God, after he had sinned; therefore should all men in all
affliction and tribulation fly only unto God and to nothing else of man nor
the world, for God only is the refuge of his peoble and the rock that shall
stand, and it is not greatness and mightyness, pride and loftiness,
righteousness nor holiness of men when you fly unto it that can save you from
the fear of wrath; for that is all below God and has no part in him; but
rather fly to the valies even the things that are not and is counted the lowest
with men, 1 Cor. 1.
that shall confound the things of men that are highest with men even to God
himself which with men is humility, meekness and lowlyness, for there does he
dwell to give rest and peace in the day of trouble; and there will he hide them
from the wrath of their enemies in the day of his Judgments; Zeph, 2.1, 2, 3.
wherefore with Christ descend and sink ye down out of your selves into a
nothingness of all creaturely glory, even to the lowest of humanity, and your
descension will be with Christ your ascension into the highest of divinity,
which will be unto you the last of Gods judgments and a day of joy and delight.

And then when the Lord shall have finished his Judgments upon you, and
perfected his work in you (by taking (...) your own things from you) as
doubtless with many he has already done, who have denied all for Christ, then
will he return unto you a pure language, even the language of Canaan, and no
longer of Egypt, and you shall call only on the name of the Lord, and rest only
on him for salvation, and not on your own works, ways and worships any more;
and you shall all agree together in one mind to serve the Lord with one
consent, and in one Lord Jesus without any fear; for God who is but one,
cannot be worshipped but by one, and in one way, even Christ, who is the way,
the truth and the light, and in him they that wait upon God, shall renew their
strength, and they shall run and not be weary, John 14.6. Esa. 40.31.
they shall walk and not faint, and shall do no iniquity nor speak any evil,
neither shall any deceitfulness be found in their mouths, nor yet in their
hearts, for they shall be purged of all uncleanness, and be fed with the Lord,
and shall lie down with the Lord in safety, and none shall make them afraid that
walk in Christ; but they shall rejoice and be glad; for it is the Lords day
wherein he will have taken away their Judgments, and cast out their enemies,
Sin, Death, Hell and the Devil, and all fe r, and the King of Israe, even the
Lord of Hosts, shall be in the midst of them, and they shall not see evil any
more, Zeph. 3 13. to the end.
neither shall they any more live in fear of any thing, nor yet sorrow any more;
but sorrow and sighing shall fly away, and they sha^ rejoy^e always with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, Rev. 21.34.
and the Lord himself will be seen amongst them to dwell with them, and delight
in them, and rejoice ^ver them with Joy, and will turn back their captivity,
even before their own eyes, and they shall see it, and know that the Lord who
has done it, is for ever with them in it; For the tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself
shall be with them and be their God.

CHAP. XII. Encouragements to wait with p tience under the Lords Judgments,
and not to oppose them; Of the works of the Lord Jesus what they are, and how
we bear them about in our bodies, and when.
ANd now seeing that so much good is wrought in men by the Lords judgments
spiritual and temporal, though acted unjustly by men, as the rod that afflicts
them outwardly, yet let no man seek by any outward means (or laws of men) to
put them by, for it is the Lords way, though it is incident with all men so to
do, that know not the Lord with them in it, who would seek to escape the
Judgment thereof to save their own honor and credit with men, and to avoid the
punishment of the flesh, as did David, Job, yea Christ and his Apostles, who
had the same infirmities of the flesh as we have, when Christ said, Lord if it
be possible let this cup pass from me, and sought means to avoid it, for indeed
no afflictions with any seems joyous for the present, though afterward it
yields a peaceable reward of righteousness to all that are exercised therein as
it did to Christ himself, who after he had suffered entered into glory with his
Father, so shall all that with Christ overcome and endure to the end, yet this
glorious reward of righteousness with men may sometimes be hid under
afflictions, as the Sun when the clouds are before it, that men may not for the
present see the end of God in it, nor the good that is to be brought unto them
by it, till the clouds are passed and their Judgments ended, as before you have
heard, for clouds and darkness is round about him, Psa. 18.
as about the Sun when you see it not, yet the darkness of these clouds will he
expel by the brightness of his coming, and by his light he will shine
gloriously through them, even upon him who with the eye of faith shall see
Christ coming to him, and he will therein cheer and comfort him, encourage and
support him, from the evil that men have invented against him, as the spirit of
the Lord with my spirit bear witness unto me, which concerning my self in all
my sufferings and persecutions for the truth to this day, 1 Pet. 2 21.
unto which I was called by the Lord he has done for me that bonds and
afflictions through which a soul enters into the kingdom of God have been good
unto me, Acts 14.22.
it being sanctified unto me by his spirit, by which I was comforted and the
Angel of his presence with me in it, by which I was saved, concerning which I
with Paul can speak the truth in Christ and lie not, and which another for me
cannot know but for themselves that has seen it, for to him that overcomes it
is hidden Manna, and a white stone, and in it a new name written which no man
knows but he that has it. Rev. 2.17.


And now that you may with Christ endure to the end for this new name which is
a pearl of great price, and a name above every name that is named amongst men,
be you persuaded by the spirit of the Lord within you, to watch for the coming
of the Lord to give it to you, and be ye armed with the same mind and patience
in the Lord to suffer with Christ in the flesh, 1 Pet. 1.4.
for he that has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin, and so be ye
ready prepared in all things to meet the Lord, both in his birth, death,
resurrection, and ascension, and to embrace him in the worst condition as well
as in the best, as well to suffer with him as to regin with him, to dye with
him, as to live with him, and to be reviled and reproached, scoffed and mocked,
derided and falsely accused by men more vile then the earth, Christ was, and his
prophets and Apostles were, so were all his Saints, and so must all that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, Isa. 64 6.
and not after the godliness of men, which is filthyness with the Lord, Ye
filthy rags says the Prophet, and by the Lord shall be cast out; therefore be
ye armed with the saints patience in tribulations, that with Christ you may
bear his reproach without the camp of your own righteousness and religion,
Heb. 13.12.13.
as he did without the gate of the honor and glory of the world, and with him
be willing to dye to all things of men, and with him to live to all things of
God, Gal. 6.17.
and so with Paul ever bear about in your body the marks of the Lord Jesus,
both in dying and in living, in dying the unjust persecutions, mockings,
revilings and scourgings of men, groanings, sighings and mournings in the
suffering of the flesh as did Christ, whose visage was more ma6rr'd then any
man's, Esa. 52.14.
and his person more desormed then the sons of men, and who in his pangs cried
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? These are the dying marks of
Christ which you are to bear about in your body for the truths sake, and the
living marks is peace, comfort and consolation, joy of heart, content of mind,
quietness of conscience, and a soul at rest in the Lord, full of all humility,
meekness and love; these are the living marks of Jesus which you are to bear
about in your bodies, 1 Cor. 4.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.11.
that while you live delivered unto death for Jesus sake, so the life also of
Jesus shall be manifest in your mortal flesh, yea in these your mortal bodies,
when with Christ you have been crucified to see an end of sin.

CHAP. XIII. How men of the greatest light witnessing to truth under Judgments,
do suffer most unjustly by false accusations with the loss of all things below
God; that not all, but some m^n as witnesses shall suffer for the rest af one
life; how some professing the same life, for fear of suffering will deny them
that suffer for them rather then suffer with them as the Disciples of Christ
did.
CHrist and his Prophets and Apostles for conscience toward God, suffered
uniustly, 1 Pet. 2.19, 20, 21.
and dyed uniustly by the hands of men, though it was just with God that they
should suffer, yea and to suffer by men unjustly, as being not guilty of the
crimes for which they were accused; but false witnesses did arise, Psa. 31.11.
and laid many things to their charge which they knew not, as my self (with
many others at this day) can witness has been also laid against us by false
witnesses since we with them have born witness to the Truth, in which
notwithstanding I abundantly rejoice, and my joy in this is fulfilled, that the
Lord Jesus for conscience toward God has joined me with himself in his worst
condition to suffer with him, and in his best condition to reign with him, yea
and to suffer unjustly by men as he has done before me, and now in this my
sufferings to suffer with me, else my peace in it would not have been so great,
nor I so cheerfully to have past it through, that I cannot but rejoice that he
has made me willing and able with cheerfulness to bear his cross after him,
and that in it he has so far honored me as to have all manner of evil said of
me falsely for his Names sake, as a blasphemer, a seducer, and what not by those
that knew me not, and which by the world and them that know not God, may be
counted a shame and dishonor; yet to me and all that know the Lord, it is a
crown of honor and rejoicing through him who has been my example and pattern,
and by whom I have been made to endure the cross and despise the shame, who
himself for the honor which is of God, regarded not the honor of men, but
suffered it all to be laid in the dust, and himself to be reckoned with the
worst of men, yea and with Christ we have many more Examples, to wit, his
Prophets and Apostles who counted it their greatest honor to suffer unjustly by
men in the Lords cause, 1 Cor. 4.9, 12, 13.
and for his sake to be made as the Filth of the world, and the offscouring of
all things, know it to be their portion, lot and inheritance with men which
with Christ and for Christ they must receive by the hands of men that know not
the Lord, nor the people the Lords inheritance; for had they known Christ they
would not ^ave crucified him nor a^y that lived his life; but because they
know not Christ nor the life of him which any live, therefore they rise up
against it and condemn it.

And God will have those that suffer for him and his cause, to suffer unjustly
by men, that they may the more hate the ways of men to declare against them;
and know that there is nothing just amongst men, nor none that is good, no not
one; and so he will wean them from the milk, and draw them from the breast of
all fleshly confidence and human excellencies below himself, that they may
depart from all things but God, Isa. 28.9.
and love none but him in the world whom they are to know above all things, and
no more to contend for the wisdom, knowledge and excellency of men, nor any
thing of moral righteousness to glory in, but though you may be as righteous as
others, and have as much as any to boast your selves in, yet rather then you
shall keep it to be thought the more righteous for it, and exalted by it, to
glory in it, God will take it from you, though by false accusation; for you
shall be accused by men of the things you are not gulilty, that you may be
tried and brought to Judgment, and know that there is no respect of persons
with God, nor none that does righteousness but him, that no flesh might glory
in his presence, 1 Cor. i, 2, ^
and that he that stands might not stand in the wisdom of men but of God,
and glory only in the Lord.

Now every single person of one and the same life, may not all suffer alike in
outward bonds and afflictions, nor be alike accused, but only that life they
live with Christ in God; for the same life which many men live and injoys, may
be but in some accused and suffer, even in them where it is most manifest and
enjoyed, and where it most appears in opposition to the world, and he that is
most perfect before God, as Christ, Job 2, 3, 4, ^.
Job and David was, even against it in them, and in such as against Christ the
manchilde, Rev. 4.12, 5.
will the Dragon most vomit up his malice, and act it (men) with endeavors to
devour it in all men that live it, and that with Christ do inherit it, of whom
they said, Come this is the heir let us kill him that the inheritance may be
ours, but shall not be able to overcome the life, as they always sought to do
against Christ, but could not prevail to destroy the life, though by Herod and
the Jews he was persecuted to death, that they which lived the same life might
deny it and fly from it, as many in these times have done, when some of their
own judgment have suffered, which they seemed to own before, and as did some of
Christ's own Disciples, they owned him and followed him while he ^ad his liberty
and was in prosperity amongst them; but it was for the loaves and the warm
themselves at his Fire; John 6.65, 66, 67. Mark. 14.67, 68.
but when he was accused and in custody likely to suffer (being as he was
betrayed by a Disciple that followed him) then his Disciples denied him, saying
I know not the man; and because he in his preaching to them said, that no man
could come to him except it be given unto him of the Father, they left him and
walked no more with him, because with him they were unwilling to suffer; yet he
continued faithful unto death in maintaining his spiritual life, which they
could not prevail against; for though they destroyed his body, yet his life
they could not, but it was the more manifest (as it is to this Day) And some
one person or other in ^ll Ages, and under all Dispensations whom God shall most
enlighten and make able and willing, him shall suffer for the rest (to try and
prove the rest of the same life) to vindicate and maintain it.

And though Christ as a man in the flesh had temptations and tribulations as
well as others, yet they that truly loved him still continued their love to him,
and he gave unto them a Kingdom: Luke 22.28, 29
so all of the same life of Christ that have truly enjoyed beyond a bare
profession, shall participate with them that suffer for it, as the Disciples of
Christ did in the sufferings of him, and as the Saints of old did in the
sufferings of the Apostles, they still owned them, the like which has been to
this day amongst men of all judgments, which any that have suffered for
conscience toward God, as the truth has been manifest in all ages, so shall
we of one life one for another bear a part in the same sufferings of him that
shall suffer for us, to witness the life of God manifest in us, that he is God,
and there is none besides him, which sufferings some must always expect to
have that so witness him; Isa. 43.10, 11.
for God never left himself without witnesses, neither will.

CHAP. XIIII. That the true sufferer will God ^nable with joy to bear his
burden to follow Christ and deny himself, to trust in God and rejoice in all
things, how with Christ he is humbled to the lowest with men and e^alted to the
highest with ^od, as the fruit and effect of Gods Judgments, and the state of
perfection.
ANd therefore whosoever God shall appoint to stand in this lot of outward
sufferings by men for the truth, as many has done to this day, him will God
enable with strength and patience to undergo it and pass t^rough it to the
end, though with the loss of a life, and all that have been accounted near
and dear unto him, which must freely be offered up, and sacrificed as an only
son Jsaac, when the Lord shall call for it, and he shall not stand to plead with
God for any thing of his own goodness to justify himself or to save himself
from the aspersions and reproaches falsely cast upon him, as many of the Lords
Prophets and Saints have indevoured to do, when they have been falsely accused
for which the Lord reproved and pleaded against them, but without contending
for to save any thing, that must be sacrificed mantaining and vindicating of
the truth, he whom God will have to do it, must freely submit to the yoke of
Christ, and to bear the burden of Christ, which God will have put upon him, as
upon Christ, and whom he will make able to bear it, as he did Christ, and
therefore says Christ take my yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am humble,
lowly and meek, and you shall find rest for your souls, Mat. ii.29.30.
for my yoke is easy and my burden is light, and Christ will lay no more upon
any then they shall be able to bear, and he will lead them in a way that they
shall be able to go, and that in following him they lose themselves their own
wisdom and glory, yet they shall find Christ, therefore says he, deny y ur
selves come and follow me and you shall have treasure in Heaven, and there is
no man that has forsaken himself and the glory of this world for Christ, but
he has the glory of God, even the father given to him by Christ; wherefore
value not your honor with men to receive honor with God, which is greater
riches, and account it your greatest happiness when by men you are tried and
falsely accused and that God has chosen you to bear witness of the truth
through sufferings, and when men through hatred to you (for the life's sake in
you which they persecute) shall separate you from their company and shall revile
you, Luke 6.21, 22, 23, 24, 35, 26.
and cast out your name as evil for the son of man's sake, why rejoice in that
day and be glad; for behold your reward is great in Heaven, for so did their
fathers unto the Prophets; but woe be to them that are rich and wise and full
in themselves, as being with child with the wisdom of this world, and shall
delight therein, for they shall weep and lament when that day of Christ shall
come upon them, and then they seeking to save their own lives, which is enmity
in the life of God, they lose that life even Christ, by which they live in
peace with God and so the saying of Christ is made good, that it is hard for a
rich man to enter into heaven; and the righteous are hardly saved, or it is
with much ado, because the righteous man while he thinks he is righteous in
himself, he will contend for his righteousness, and count it his greatest
happiness to save it, and therefore he will contend against that life which is
manifest to destroy it, and which will at last come upon him as a thief in the
night, and take it from him; and such a one so contending shall have woe, when he
that can freely part with all for Christ, shall have peace; and therefore says
Christ, In me you shall have peace, in the world you shall have tribulation, John
i6.33.
but be of good cheer I have overcome the world.

And such a one who with Christ has overcome the world, he is a conqueror over
his own life, and can with Christ lay down his life and take it up again at his
pleasure, he can descend to the lowest and ascend to the highest; he can become
the worst and the best without contradiction between them; he knows how to be
full, and how to be empty, how to be bound and how to be free, and have peace
in all things; and then though tribulations, bonds and imprisonments come, yet
is it all the way of God to him, and he sees in the midst of Gods judgments,
mercy with God appearing to save him and resrore peace and com ort to him, and
God himself to be his refuge, that though the earth be moved round about him,
Psa 46.1, 2, 3.
and the mountains fall into the midst of the sea and be drowned, yet will he not
fear, and though the waters (to wit, people, Nations and tongues, and the
glory of this world on which the Whore sits and men glory in it) do roar
and be troubled, and the powers of the earth shake and fall with the swelling
thereof, yet will he not fear, but rather rejoice; for when the refuge of men
and the world fall, then will God be a refuge and strength, and a very present
help in time of trouble to all that wait upon him; and they with David will then
say, The Lord is my rock and my fortress and my deliverer, Psa. 18.1.
my God and m strength in whom I will trust my buckler and the horn of m^
salvation and my high tower which shall stand and not fall; and mercy has God
built up for ev r, as the throne on which he will sit in judgment with man to do
justice judgment and mercy, Psa. 139. i. 14.
which shall all come together with God unto judgment as unseperable companions
to be all given unto man, in which man is taught three things, For when ods
Judgments are on the earth, Isa^. 26.8, 9. M^c. 6 6, 7, 8, 9.
then will the Inhabitants of the earth learn ri^hteousness; that is, for man
not to come before God with any thing of his own, but to do justly, to have
mercy, and to walk humbly with God; to come before the Lord in the Lord, and
in no other but the Lord.

And this is that which all the Lords people are taught by judgments to be
just and merciful, humble meek and lowly as Christ was; who learned
obedience by the things which he suffered, and who thereby teaches him who know
him, to follow his steps, Job. 42.3, 4, 5, 6.
to lay down himself and all things of himself into dust and ashes as a Worm
and no Man, yea as a scorn of men, acknowledging the just judgments uf the Lord
upon him, and all things of him that is not of God, as the way to save him
humble him and bring him home unto him by the cross of the Lord Jesus; and
whosoever is in any measure brought home to God (or a bringing) that he know
any thing of God as he ought to know, then the more he knows of God and of the
things concerning the Kingdom of God, the less shall he know of men and of the
things of this world which is enmity with God, and know also that when men are
most purest with God knowing their purity all in him, then shall they be most
vilest with men in the account of them that know not God, and so see their own
emptiness and vileness as men without God, and that the best with God is always
accounted the worst with men, yea despised and rejected of men as Christ was,
and that when they themselves shall see his purity and their own purity to be in
him, they must needs see that all things out of him is impure, and that the
best of man's righteousness is but filthiness, and extends not unto God in any
degree, Esa. 64 6. Psa. 16 2.
but to be destroyed by him, who has the fullness of all righteousness
sufficient to save all men in himself, and that none but him in all the World
is or can be righteous without him; Ier. 33.16.
for he is called the Lord our righteousness, who makes all men righteous in
his righteousness, and accepted in his acceptableness, and that there is none
that does good but him who is the only good of all, and with whom nothing is
evil, polluted, nor unclean, nor with any that know him, and see their whole
life to be in him, Zeph. 3.1^, 14. Dan. 9.24.
which that all men do who in Christ can see their judgments to be ended, and
their works to be finished, and Christ their righteousness to be revealed and
exalted in them, and that by him have received the end of their faith, even the
salvation of their souls, even they and only they can live the life of Christ,
and do the Works of Christ, and in humility can descend with him into the
lowest state of men to have communion with them, and with him ascend into the
highest state of God to have communion with God, and so enjoy both God and man
together in each state, as the full accomplishment of the work of God with man
through the Lord Jesus, who in the day of his power to them manifest, makes
them willing and able with Christ, to lay their lives down, and take them up
again; 1 Pet. 1.9. Psa. 1^0.3. Ioh. 10.17, 18.
to be all with all in all states whatsoever with delight and pleasure; this
is perfection and the day of salvation; and this with men has been more or
less manifest from Adam to this day, as I shall further manifest in the next
from Scripture the dealings of God with particular Persons, Kings and
Prophets, whose life and actions are therein recorded, and written for our
learning.

FINIS.

