A LETTER Sent from a GENTLEMAN TO Mr. HENRY MARTIN Esquire, a Member of the
House of Commons, from Worcester this 19. of October. 1642.

Who was employed by his Exellence to deliver a Letter to the Earl of Dorset,
with the Votes of both Houses of Parliament concerning a Petition to be
delivered to his Majesty.

SHOWING The desperate Resolution of the Cavalliers, who swear they will
neither give nor take Quarter.

Ordered by the Commons that this Letter be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Elsing Celric. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON, Printed by L. Norton, for E, Husbands and John Frank, and are to be
sold next door unto the Kings Head in Fleetstreete.

Anno Dom. MDCXLII.

A LETTER Sent from a GENTLEMAN TO Mr. HENRY PERKINS Esquire, a Member of the
House of Commons from Worcester this 19, of October. 1642,
Honored Sir,
I Received commands to present from his Excellence a letter to the Earl of
Dorset at Court, which was then said to be at Sturbridge, fifteen miles hence,
with the votes of both Houses of Parliament concerning a Petition to be
delivered to his Majesty, whither repairing on Sunday last, I found there many
of the Cavalliers who command their horse: upon my coming thither, I caused
the Trumpet sent with me to sound thrice, but finding no guard, I advanced into
the Town, and demanded of such ragged people as I found there for an officer
to convay me to Prince Robert, and I told them I had a message to deliver to
him from his Excellence, of which those kind of people not taking notice, I
went further into the Town, and called to a Gentleman desiring him I might be
brought to the place where the Prince was, which the Gentleman (who I after
found was the Lord Caff) directed me to, upon my approach thither, I alighted
with the Trumpot, and demanded to speak with the Prince, but before I could be
admitted to him, I was by Commissary Wilmot conveyed to his own chamber and
being, asked if I had letters, I replied I had, and told him to whom, and upon
what occasion the letters he willed me to deliver to him, and tartly said he
must have those I had, whereupon I delivered the letter to him which was
sealed, he then left me in the custody of an officer or two, who used me
fairly, and stayed with me in the chamber till his return, which was shortly,
and then took me with him to the Prince, to whom in presence of General
Ruthen, and Commissary Wilmot, I declared the message I had in charge, to which
his Highness gave a fair answer, but withal told me I was by the law of
Arms a prisoner, for that I came into the town without leave procured by a
Trumpet, and brought letters through the Army which was sealed: I told his
Highness, sor the first, I conceived I had not broken the law of Arms, for
that the Trumpet sounded thrice, there was no court of guard, or other watch
kept about the town, neither would any take cognizance of my business with the
Prince, (though I entreated it of diverse) till I was in the town, which gave
me cause to believe his Highness was not there: For the second it was business
from the Parliament, therefore not unfit to be sealed, the rather for that the
like course had within few days been held before in the very same business,
and it found acceptance which presidented rhis; the answer not satisfying
under the name of an officer to keep me company, I was returned to Commissary
Wilmots chamber, where I was entertained with convenient respect, though no way
suitable to the business of that day: the Trumpet was put into a chamber close
by, and there they endeavored to seduce him from his service, to become a
Trumpet to the King, from about eleven a clock in the forenoone, till one next
morning I was kept in the chamber, a strong court of Guard being set at the
street door of the house where I lay, there came several officers to me, and
took liberty to speak of his Excellence, most of the Lords here, and both
Houses of Parliament in most high and approbious language, of these the prime
were Major Oneale, Major Hutchison, Mr. William Murry, Capiaine Chapman,
Captnine Mountain, and some others: after supper Commissarie Wilinot came to
me with Collonell Hastiugs, Sir Thomas Byrom newly knighted, he commands Prince
Charles his Troop, Mr. William Murry, Mr. Dudly Smith, and a Scotch commander,
who I remember not, they fell upon me with high discourse, and told me I was
the greatest enemy the King had in these parts of the country where I lived.
which I would in time know the King was sensible off: and they wondered I durst
come thither, that and my being an officer of the Army considered (both which
rendered me a man regardlesse either of the Kings power and favor) I told them
I was as good a subject as the best of them, I wished better to, and prayed more
for, and would much more truly serve his Majrsty then the best of them which
upon all occasions I would be ready to make good, for my coming thither, it
was not as an officer, nor as a man relating to the Army, but as a messenger
sent to the Earl of Dorset, in the business of the Parliament, for my
boldness, if it were any to come so sent, it was God and my inocency which
encouraged and would protect me against whomsoever:they told me they admired
(some things considered which they pretended I was endued with,) I should be so
blinded to appear in such a business against my King, and act the part of a
traitor as all my partakers did: I desired they would forbear such language,
and replied upon them in short, that I had done nothing but what my judgment
and conscience had dictated to me, and that upon such mature deliberation with
my own thoughts, and conference with others of approved judgments, that by
the help of God I would stand or fall to the way I had engaged for, which was
so far from treason, or a thought of ill to his Majesty in me or any else
whose way I went, that I feared not all the ruin of our oppressors, which if
done, his Majesty would clearly see his own mistake, both of them and us, and
such of them as escaped the sword, he would refer to justice, that it might
appear wherein he erred and misbelieved of us, was through them, but I
entreated we might not talk any more of that business, it being a point too
tender: whereupon they fell to other discourse, told me what great things they
had done at Worcester the 23. of September last, and there slain hundreds of
our men and converted (as they called it) Colon. Sands both which I answered
according to what I saw and knew. First, Collonell had declared, fully his
heart and words, he then spoke to the world; and secondly, there was but
twenty five slain on both sides, which lay upon the place, Major Douglas, and
a Cornet of theirs, the Lord Beamonds brother dyed within a day or two after,
and four of their part, one whereof they buried, and carried three with them
dead, and a third part of the twenty five men slain upon the place was theirs,
and the hurt men were near upon as of theirs as ours, some of them more
ingenuous then the rest confessed the death of the last four, but wondered how
it was known. I told them the Major of Woster discovered, that though he was
so much theirs, he forgot to show himself a Christian or a man, they replied,
all men were false they thought; but now they had taken a good course with
those about the King; for they had locked up his Majesty's ears and tongue from
the Lords at Court, who they say said were both treacherous and cowardly, as
the L. Dorset and others, and they swore [with their ancient boldness and
untruth] that the Lord Dorset and others of them about his Majesty did discover
and betray the Kings intensions to our side, but now of late he had learnt to
keep his Councels from them: I told them they had forgot to speak of their
valor at Southam and Manchester; to the first, they swore hard they lost but
three men; to the second, one of them answered who had been upon that service,
that they had lost more there then at all other places; but they laid the fault
upon the Earl of Darby, who they said was both a fool and a Coward; and swore
heartily they hoped he would never come up to them.

From this Discourse they passed on to ieere and revile our Lords as well in
Parliament as here our Officers in the Army (I eannot forget those base
speeches they spoke against the Earl of Holland, though I abhor to write them
in particular) which was answered as it came, and returned with what sharpness
my own weakness and the present condition I was in would admit of. When each
man had spent his powder, and had his Bout at me, and received his answer, I
had my dispatch from Commissary Wilmot (who talked as if he had Commission for
it) with an answer to the Letter I brought (the Prince being rather willing to
send it to the Court, then trouble me with the carriage of it) and the next
morning I had leave with a respective Farewell to depatt till our next meeting,
which I hope will be about Dunsmore Heath, and not long too. In the interim I
thought fit to offer these to your view, if happily any advantage may come to
the Cause hereby, I wholly leave it to the wisdom of your self and those to
whom you shall think to impart them, whether you make them public or no, the
truth of them I will make good when I shall be called, and will ever rest;

Woster, October. 9. 1642. Your most humble servant; LIONEL COPLEY.


