THE COPPIE OF A LETTER SENT FROM ONE OF THE QVEENES SERVANTS AT THE Hague to a
Gentleman in Westminster Dated the second of May. 1642.

WHEREUNTO is added two strange Prophesies concerning these times.

With the predictions of Henry of Huntington.

Written by Tho: Asladowne, in the year of our Lord, 1556.

LONDON, Printed for I. T. 1642.

A Letter from the Hague.
Sir.
Give me leave to assure you, that you have further obleiged me, by your pains
already taken in writing to me then from this place you can expect to have any
satisfactory requital in that way.

There happened a very sad disastrous accident (on Friday the 15. of this instant
April) unto the son of the Lady Kingsmels, who was servant to the Prince
Elector, and had rem^ined in the Emperors Co^rt a Prisoner with Pr nce Robert
during the time of his restraint there. And thus it was; there had passed a
quarrel and single Duel, betwixt one M. Stepkins a Cavelere (who came over
when we came, and whom I remember I had lately seen in England) and M. Cutts
son to the Lady Morton; and it so falling out that they were to meet a
second time, (upon some aggravations, had been given by way of report from
Stepkins, as that he had disarmed Cutts, and given him his life) in the intrim,
M. King smell being an intimate frind of Master Cutts, unluckily interposed,
and unnecessarily ingageth himself to fight with Stepkins and paid his life
for it, that morning on the strand at Skeiveling, close by the Sea side little
more then a mile from the Hague.

The Q eene was yesterday entertained by the Prince of Orange at his House at
Hounslow-dike, the same place she dined at the day she came to the Hague; She
did return the last night again, and is to see Roterdam on Monday next, which
is not above 3. or 4. houers goeing by land or water. And (they say) returns
the same night, which I hardly believe.

About a fortnight after that, she resolves to see Amsterdam, which will be
about the time, the Prince goes to the Field. Then after we have seen Virick*
and Leyden and other places; I suppose the return will be to the Hague.

The Imperial City Cullen (in Germany) is straightly beseiged by the French and
Hollanders, and it is presumed they will take it; the bearer hereof (one of the
Queens footmen) returns again suddenly; I pray you write at large: So
presenting my love to you, and all my friends I rest yours

M. M.
Hague the 2. of May, 1642,
A PROPHECY CONCERNING these Times.
When James shall seek a second Crown,
as in white Armor ore the Down:
James needs not cross the brinish seas,
but take the fatal stone with ease.
High consultations when they hold,
best counsel often shall be controlled
and false in heart, grow strong and bold.
But the harm that they for others hatch,
shall be a snare themselves to catch.
A marriage shall be gone about,
not without danger, fear, and doubt.
They shall miss the mark, yet all is well,
but when they hit, the times shall tell.
Though James be wise and learned withal,
yet stumble in the end he shall;
And James shall vanish from their face
at halse Elizabeth's royal Race.
High Courts of head and members knitting,
are now not thought so much befitting.
But using Foreign policies,
grudgings and discontents arise,
Yet shall they assemble to that seat,
about some work of moment great.
But there shall such dissentions grow,
that each at other gloves shall throw:
Which strife shall so increase, that they
in fury all depart away.
Who shall their Tenants and their men,
with all their forces gather then,
And lead them forth to our great Heath,
where many a man shall taste of death.
Then proclamation shall be made,
to gather forces for their aid.
The Soldiers shall full fast increase,
four several times till silver cease.
First twelve pence, then four groats is cride,
then twenty pence to help their side:
Two shillings then they cry for aid,
but yet this last shall never be paid,
for ere they come an end is made.
Thus shall they greater forces crave,
though maintenance want for those they have.
Then each to other shall complain,
a Princes power who can maintain.
Then one shall look upon another,
and by some means confer together:
And secretly appoint a day,
to take their Leaders lives away.
Before those times a Plague shall reign,
and even then shall still remain,
which with the number of the slain.
Such as in those times live, shall see
great trouble and calamity.
To such as are good Landlords known,
perhaps some favor shall be shown:
And such as have plenty of store,
are in less safety then the poor.
Then twenty pound of money in hand
is better then so much yearly land:
A loaf, a cloak, a privy clough,
exceed six Oxen and a plough.
When Foreign Countries gain
what tribulation we sustain.
Then one from France shall claim pretend,
who on a block his life must end.
From Scotland then one needs be chief,
which there must dye without relief.
From Ireland likewise shall be one
must lose his head upon a stone.
A child with his Chaplain then shall come,
which to this Realm his right shall doom:
He shall this Kingdom wisely guide,
and other Kingdoms nine beside.
Then four great Dukes he shall elect,
whose Laws shall ever take effect.
No man shall Lawyers counsel crave,
for men their right at home shall have:
And Officers each Town within,
shall right the wrong, and punish sin.
He shall bring down Romes godless pride,
and spread Christ's Gospel far and wide,
the Turk shall not his force abide.
Worthies be nine, so reckon we,
and this the tenth, and last shall be.
The Moon obscured sixty year,
Shall get her light, and shine full clear.
Henr. Huntingdonensis Hist. l. 6. initio.
PRedixit etiam eis quidam vir Dei quod exscelerum suorum immunitate, non solum
quia semper caedi and proditioni studebunt, verum etiam quia semper ebrietati
and negligentiae Domus Domini dediti erant, eis insperatum A Franciae
adventurum Dominum, quod and eorum excellentium in aeternum deprimeret, and
honorem sine termino restitutionis eventilarent. Predixit etiam quod non eagens
solum, verum etiam Scotorum quos vilissimos habebant, eis ad emeritano
confusionem dominaretur. Praedixit Nihilominus varium edeo saeculum creandum,
ut varietas quae in mentibus hominum latebat, and in actibus ptaebat, multimodo
variatione vestium and in Damentorum designaretur.

A PROPHECY OF Tho: Asladovvne, Written in the year of our Lord, 1556.
THe time shall come, that there shall be showed many strange things. First,
the peaching of Traitors, of divisions in diverse Realms; Great rising of
Merchants, Confusion of Money-makers, great stealing; The destruction of
Traitors, and of rich men* much witchcraft, great plenty of Worms, Rats, and
Frogs ingendied in the Air, great hunger amongst the People, great dearth and
scarceness of diverse things: Namely, in the Land of Britain, and in England,
and France, great oppression of blood, imprisonments of many men. In England
shall be much Battle, so that there shall be few or no quiet place to abide
in; and the counsel of Aged men shall not be set by. The men of the Church,
Princes, and Lords shall forsake righteousness. The common people shall not
know for fear which way to turn themselves. The Father and the Mother shall
be hated of their Children. Men of Worship shall have no reverence of their
Subjects, Chastity shall be broken with Maidens, wedded-Women, Men, and
Widows, and also with men of Religion. Many Sects and Heresies shall arise in
those times; and great desolations shall be fall by the sword, which is the
greatest evil; with much more then I can tell, from the which Almighty God
defend, and bring us to thy bliss, sweet Jesus.

FJNJS.

