STPATOLOGIA OR THE HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH CIVIL WARS, In English Verse.

Containing a brief Account of all Fights, most Skirmishes, Stratagems and
Sieges in ENGLAND.

From the very first Original of our late Wars, till the Martyrdom of King
Charles the First of blessed Memory.

By an Eyewitness of many of them.

A. C.

Alta sedent Civiles vulnera Dextrae.

LONDON, Printed, for Joseph Cranford, at the Castle and Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660

TO THE Right Honorable AND Truly Noble CONYERS DARCY, Lord Darcy, Meynell and
Conyers.
THrice noble Sir, pardon this bold address,
In that my soaring Muse pitched on no less
A Patronage, than your Renouned Name.
Imboldned hereto was I, 'cause your Fame
Recorded is amongst those Hero's; who
The Royal Cause maintained against a Foe
Under pretenses specious that Rebelled.
When (yet a Boy) your Colors I beheld
And Regiment so gallant by you raised
Even by my Infant-Muse your worth was praised,
An Actor on this Bloody Scene you were,
And an eyewitness of most Fields fought here
That blood you lost your valor may declare;
Your judgment this, that no pretense (though fair)
Your intellect could blind; your Faithfulness
In that you fought, till that of Soldiers less,
Under your tattered Colors did appear,
Then Cinquefoils in your honors Colors were.
Wounds you received, and much of blood did lose,
Whilst on the field, your life you did expose
To do your Sovereign service. Sure that blood
Expended in a cause Royally good
Your Honor is; your wounds then chains of gold,
Are Ornaments more glorious to behold.
Your sufferings since the VVarres who has not known?
You paid both for your Soldiers, and your own
Loyalty, nor would your brave mind submit
To composition, till much moved to it,
By your most virtuous Lady's prayers and tears,
Your name the last in that black Roll appears.
(Except the martyred Slingby's) none there are,
Of all your Honored House engaged in War
Against your King: these things induced my Muse,
You (as the fittest person) Sir to choose,
To patronize these her first rude Essays.
Let not oblivion cancel the due praise
(It Is the Debenters we are like to have)
Of all those Sons of Mars, and Soldiers brave.
That for their Sovereign fought and suffered too,
In this they live, whilst this does live by you.
Your Honors most humble and most devoted in all service AN. COOPER.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER,
EXpect not, Reader, this Book should impart,
The Flourishes of Rhethorick, or of Art;
Such polite Strains do not indeed become
The Camp; nor suit the Trumpet or the Drum.
The more refined Muses have with Mars
No intercourse, Society, commerce.
Blunt Language does in truth the best declare,
The dreadful fury of our Civil War.
Rage, blood, and death, each Page herein they show
Of Cities, Castles, Towns, the overthrow.
Rapine, and plunder, all those sad effects,
Wherewith a Civil War a Land infects.
When first for Oxford, fully there intent,
To study learned Sciences I went.
Instead of Logic, Physic, School-converse,
I did attend the armed Troops of Mars.
Instead of Books, I Sword, Horse, Pistols bought,
And on the Field I for Degrees then fought.
My years had not amounted full eighteen,
Till I on Field, wounded three times had been.
Three times in sieges close had been immured,
Three times imprisonments restraint endured.
In those sad times these Verses rude were writ,
For Poesy a season most unfit.
Yet is my subject high: the Hystory true,
Presented in this Book unto thy view.
Well-nigh each Skirmish, Stratagem, Siege, fight,
In these late Wars, we here present to sight.
And if thou shall accept these first Essays,
Shortly perchance we may in smoother Lays
The second part of our sad Annals sing,
Till the blessed Restoration of our King.
Who like the Sun after a dismal night,
Of sad oppression, did restore both light
And glory to these Nations ruinous,
Whose Rising and illustrious shine on us.
Lighted these Lines out from Oblivion's Cell,
To which they were condemned, the world to tell,
That though the Royal Party was Captived,
The best of Kings, of his blessed life deprived,
Yet Oceans of Loyal blood was shed,
Before bold Traitors this accomplished.
But strange that we were beat, lest it be thought,
Upon great disadvantages we fought;
The Parliament the Navy had procured:
With them to side, all Armouries secured
And Magazines, usurped the Kings Lands,
Customs, Revenues, Rents into their hands,
With Arms, and Coin their men they could recruit,
When ours of both indeed were destitute.
But I transgress the bounds of my intent,
And thee from reading these our Wars, prevent.
A. C.

THE ENGLISH CIVIL WARS.
BOOK I.
The Contents.
See first a good, then a bad Parliament,
The fatal causes of our discontent,
The two Scotch expeditions; causes why,
Ireland 's Rebellion, Strafford's Tragedy,
London tumultuous: The Kings brave intents
Ireland for to relieve; Hotham prevents,
By Hulls denial; which the King to take
Forces combines: Meldrum on them does make
Two Sallies bold: Some Royalists are slain,
The King for York from Hull retreats again.
A noble Persons council, some releife
Contributes to the King, oppressed with grief.
SEE! where our English three Estates do sit,
In Parliament: a Council only fit,
Our Nation to secure from bold abuse,
To legal form, injustice to reduce,
To deleate bad; just laws to procreate,
Public assigns to guide and regulate,
To act what may conduce to the renown,
Both of the State, Religion, and the Crown;
Englands Epitomie; representation,
My Muse invites, excites to admiration!
Thy noble Senate, Rome, my wonder was,
Till this high Court their luster did surpass,
As fair as Cynthia that pale Queen of night,
Out-shined is, by Phoebus glorious light:
If admiration did thy thoughts transport,
From Rome's Terrestrial to Heavens glorious Court,
Much more, Fulgentius, might thy ravished mind
From this to Heaven's a quick transition find,
But what malignity, vicious excess
Is this, a Parliament cannot redress,
The body politic symptoms presents,
That all these State-Physitians discontents,
A dolorous Corasive we must endure,
These sad distempered Nations to recure:
Whilst head and members do indeed agree,
A Parliament's a Sovereign remedy
To cure distempers, but if these descent,
Each seems to move out of their element;
And such a motion must in the conclusion,
(Being irregular) induce confusion.
The hands of food, the belly did deprive,
(As in the fable) but how long survive?
Those most ungrateful members, by and by,
They with the dying belly also dye.
Our Army's sad miscarriages must be
At Cades, Rochel, and the Isle of Rhes,
All charged upon the King; when as the State
Themselves made those designs unfortunate,
By not allowing to his Majesty,
Such supplements of Coin, and Soldiery,
To manage those most excellent designs,
Unto some purpose: when the State declines
The King to second, who can then expect,
That brave attempts, should have a wished effect?
Ship-monys, Poles, Taxes, Monopolies,
Illegal Pressures, frequent subsidies,
They charge the King to have without consent,
Imposed on us, out of his Parliament.
But could our Royal Navies managed be,
Commerce maintained; our Seas from Pyracy
Be kept secure, and all out of no thing?
Crows are not killed with an empty sling,
Or may not Kings? when as the exigent
Of state requires, without a Parliament,
Impose such moneys, without all abuse,
Upon their subjects, for such Sovereign use?
If not, then farewell Crown, and Royalty,
Who would not rather a Plebeian be?
But peace, as yet these things seemed to repress,
Which did prepose a vulgar happiness,
Till Vengeance eminent, Celestial Ire,
Enflamed three kingdoms in the fatal fire
Of War: for blood these raging flames to quench
Bright English Swords, brave English veins must drench
Nothing but blood, dolorous Phlebotomie,
Can cure poor England of this Lethargy,
Hot was the Zeal (too hot for to be good)
That must be quenched with so much Christian blood.
The King now presses a Conformity,
In Scotland, to our English Liturgy,
Intent all his three Kingdoms to combine,
In Uniformity of Discipline,
Holding that Prelacy does most agree,
Both with the Scriptures and Antiquity;
For in our English Sphere even then did shine,
Such Prelates Orthodox, truly Divine,
Whose learned works like blossoms redolent,
Sweetly respire, an odoriferous sent;
And if my genius real truth inspire,
Their worths ensuing ages shall admire.
That the Kings Order might acceptance find,
Some Scottish Bishops also are designed
For Privy Counselors: But detestation
Of Prelacy possessed the Scottish Nation,
Shall their Presbytery now be substituted?
To Prelacy the cause not pre-disputed?
This Dagon never their Altars shall infest,
Their combined Synods boldly do Protest,
This Liturgy much Popery did comprize,
And did the Romish Missals sympathize,
Boldly (though falsely) do the Scots relate,
And with our Bishops thus expostulate,
Shall Romish Missals have their tolleration?
And Scotch Presbytery total extirpation,
Papists, than Calvinists less odious be,
Rome, than Geneva to proud Prelacy.
In audience of their Commons, Kirk, Estates,
The King a Scottish Bishop imperates
At Edenborough this Book for to repeat,
With zealous fury: Furious zeal repleat.
The Scots avow their general disaffections,
By barbarous tumults; furious insurrections,
Had not the Bishop's heels been his redress,
He sure had died in that tumultuous press.
And that their zeal rebellious might appear,
They rise in Arms, then covenant and swear
Presbytery to defend, even with their blood:
When as his Majesty this understood,
(With this affront so high, who could dispense?)
He vengeance does avow in consequence,
Upon the Rebels Prelacy disdaining,
And this his Liturgies non-entertaining.
Then to defend himself, and them to fright
Into subjection, rather than to fight.
The King does a defensive Army raise,
Yet both by messages and wise delays,
Their furious zeal the King thought to allay,
And their Ringleaders curb some other way,
Then by the dint of Sword: but the more mild
They find the King, the Scots grow far more wild
Impudent, fierce, seditious, arrogant!
What can induce such Zealots to recant?
But England's ease, and peace here terminates,
Recluded are those Iron-Temple Gates,
Of Janus; angry Jove by frequent Thunder,
Foretold those discontents that rent asunder
This Monarchy: Hell's impious furies rage,
Prodigious blazing-Comets, Stars, presage,
England's sad fate, Armed Chivalry appear,
Pransing upon the Clouds in full carrear,
And huge Battalions of Armed Infantry,
Marshaled on the Etherial Canopy
Of Heaven; with beating Drums, Colors displayed
And roaring Cannons, seem for to invade
Each other: Tragedy, Murder, Blood, Dearth,
Declare Heaven's vengeance to rebellious Earth;
Abortive, monsterous births of every kind,
Are to presage the rage of Heaven designed,
Sea Monsters with innumerable swarms
Of Fishes; bids England now prepare for Arms,
All Creatures our sad destinies disclose,
Sounding Alarm's unto our future woes,
But though Pandora from her Box do vent,
All the cursed Symptoms of dire discontent.
To England her ensuing miseries,
Though Heaven, sea, land, and all things trumpetise
Yet all cannot extract a just remorse,
From England, her loved sins, for to divorce,
Men's hearts obdure, impure, impenitent,
Impious, Seditious, proud, malevolent,
No Rethorick from such crimes can men persuade
Ruine-portending Judgments to evade.
Now Beat our English Drums, for Volunteers
Royal Commissions, to our Nobles, Peers,
Are given, to raise great forces in all parts,
Kings often men's hands command, when not their hearts
To York in April these Commanders bring,
This gallant Army to attend the King,
Who there designs them Scotland to invade
And Arundel's their Captain General made.
For Scotland now it is no time to recant,
They vow for to maintain their Covenant
Against the King, National devastation,
Kirk-Disciplines intended alteration,
Against proud Prelates, and the Kings design
They now profess they did, and will combine,
That their rebellion might it self discry
Yet further; these their Frontiers Fortify,
Leavy more Forces to defend their Land,
Which Alexander Lesley does command,
And to prevent the entrance of the King,
Lesley to Kelsay does his forces bring,
From York with displayed Colors, beating Drums,
To Barwick now the English Army comes,
Where first the prospect of the Scots white Tents,
Bold opposition to the King presents.
For Carlisle are designed some Regiments;
Whose in-rodes Lesley's vigillance prevents;
Having a party there in readiness,
All such attempts expected to repress,
Finding the Scots to fight thus resolute,
With words, not Swords, the cause they will now dispute
Our Grandees courage this does much abate,
No hopes Presbytery, to Episcopate.
The River Tweed these Armies did divide,
Who in their Quarters quietly recide,
For some few months, and then strong Obligations
Of Peace, concluded are betwixt the Nations.
Both Armies to retreat and be disbanded,
Are by the Generals of both parts commanded;
But while the King for London's retrograde,
The Scots their faithless faith again betrayed,
And in their words an odium is discry'd,
Unto that League confirmed, pre-ratifi'd.
Nor would the Scots their Forces now disband,
But slight the League, the Peace, the King's Command
So much for their own ends, and by-respects,
Scots faith upon advantages reflects.
New Articles they feign wherein the King,
So low in condiscentions they do bring,
As never Monarch would (though quite subdued)
On such dishonorable rearms conclude.
Which when the King received, and read, said he,
Because my Forces all disbanded be
Will they abuse me thus; can they pretend
That we, to these base terms would condescend?
No said the King: London to'th' Tower is sent,
Who did these forged Articles present;
All Copies of which forged Pacification,
The common Hangman burns; new preparation
For Scotland's made: The King with new supplies
Edenborough and Dun-Brittan fortifies,
Those Scottish Merchants that in England Trade,
Their Covenant for to abjure are made.
The King having his Army new recruted,
His Captain General Strafford is deputed,
The Scots their march For England do direct,
Strafford's advance at Barwick to expect,
His Excellence now in the North arrived,
This was the first design by him contrived,
That Holland should pass Tweed, and there discry
The Scottish Camp, number, Artillery,
Who their Vant-guard on Dunsian hills espyes,
Back with his Troops for England then he flies,
As though his Lordship with a panick fear,
Had been surpised to see the Scots so near,
The Scots their Camp dislodge, march through Tweed
The English Force retreat, and do receed,
The Scot Northumber-land; Strafford's design
Is to fight Lesley on the banks of Tine;
The Scots for Newburne straight direct their course
Discover, Charge, and Rout the English Horse,
After which running Charge, flying dispute,
Through Tine, the Scot imboldned, makes pursuit,
After our English dispersed Regiments,
Rumors of Conquests are of large extents,
New Castle is deserted, whose wide Bars,
Stand open to the Scottish Conquerers,
The Newcastilians can the Scots allow,
In prospect of their walls to randevow,
Their Drums they beat, their Colors they display,
Their Trumpets sound; the Tryumphs of that day
To celebrate; with Scottish Levites sweet,
Thy ecchoing walls, New Castle they do greet,
The Army drawn to a form circular,
The General in the midst 'gan to declare,
In Scottish Rhethorick; learned Oratory;
This speech ensuing, to augment their glory.
Fellows in Arms, brave martialists combined
England to conquer; Men by fate designed,
For better Climes then Scotland can afford,
Fair England, England, on your hearts record,
As your debenters for past misery,
As your reward for future gallantry,
Each Loune shall have a Lady for his prize,
Each Loune and Clown England will Gentelize,
Your Bonnets shall be changed to Beavers brave,
For louzy gray, of Scarlet Cloaks yee's have,
For Broangs, my Rooges, ye shall ha Boots most neat
For Plads, bra Lads, ye shall ha Suits complete,
For Cottages of Sods, Halls of square stone,
And Lord it bravely, rule the roast alone,
See, these wide gates, do our approach expect,
As though they did our conquering Troops affect,
We shall get riches, honors, Englands goods,
View these bra Towns, fields fertle, crystal floods
Our Scottish Frith, equallity disclaims,
To Northern Tine, much more to Southern Thames.
Here are some Lads the German wars ha seen,
And in those sharp encounters parties been,
Who can as well, even as my sell record,
Those sad vastations by the furious Sword,
This English warr's a Theater for play,
Face but the Louns, they will span their gates away.
This first Encounter does good fate presage,
The vanquished scarce with victors will engage.
Hermaphrodites, virago's feminine,
Cannot dispense with Martial Discipline,
English effeminate, Pudding-fed Lads,
Ken not the muckle worth obscured in Plads,
Wars, vigills, Famins, tumults, frights, alarms,
Will scar the Louns from dalliance, Ladies arms,
The muckle hardlinesse that wars comprize,
Will soon these English Louns anatomize.
Fresh Water Soldiers, milk-sops cannot fight,
Our very looks them daunt; shroudly affright,
On then, let us prosecute our conquering Fates,
Delay breeds danger: Cow-hearts animates,
Wars practice courage breeds, exempts dismay,
Though now they quake to hear our Muskets play.
From Bishopric our Forces make recession,
Now wholly yielded to the Scots possession,
In general our Grandees the Wars decline,
As private favorites of the Scots design,
But future bloodshed, ruin to prevent,
Both Armies to a treaty now consent,
First they conclude for two months, Arms cessation
To pay the Scots the prefixed times duration;
North-humber, Dure-holme, Carlisle, Westmore-Land
Are all resigned unto the Scot's command,
For Winter Quarters; Private wrongs, abuse
Must not infringe the pre-concluded Truce,
During the Peace in England. Merchandise,
By sea and land the Scots may exercize,
But Soldiers without Order, leave express,
Must not from Quarters, wander or digress.
Thus rests the Armies, and thus Wars surce ase,
Better than War, (though just) is impious Peace
This may encourage others to Rebel,
When as the Scots rewarded are so well;
The Scottish League, by this time, does expire
Paid, and reduced, their forces home retire;
London the King incontinent forsakes,
And into Scotland straight himself betakes,
Not one auspicious look these Scots would cast,
Upon their King, as he their Armies pas'd.
Yet the Kings presence, in the Scottish State,
Did their tumultuous madness much abate.
Whilst here the King resides Ireland Rebels,
And puts in practice those Hell-stamped spells,
Plots Jesuitical: by barbarous death,
Poor Protestants for to deprive of breath,
Inhumane Tyrannies, deadly persuasions,
Licentious rage, bloody insinuations,
Infused are by numerous distribution,
Into the Multitude, in execution;
These bloody Plots to put jointly conjured,
To such attempts, Romes Locusts are inured;
Two hundred thousand Protestants there dye,
As sacrifices to Romes Tyranny,
A Prologue to that Tragedy whose rage,
Must be enacted on our English Stage.
Phoebus th'Autumnal Equinoctial Line,
Toward the Pole Antartick did decline,
The sable Queen of the black-mantled night,
Had filled her Semi-globe with borrowed light,
And now to Thetis lap precipitate,
Darkness gave way these facts to perpetrate,
Darkness, the works of darkness to contrive,
Gave way: yet did poor Protestants deprive
Of all resistance; whom by multitudes,
That midnight in the night of death includes,
Murder, death, rapine, barbarous butchery,
A confused, dismal, hideous mid-night-cry,
Did fill the affrighted slumbering peoples ears;
Fire from the burning Villages appears,
With it is aspiring flames daring the sky,
Whole familys of naked people fly
Thinking those scorching flames for to prevent,
Meet death, in the contrary Element,
And are by thousands into waters forced,
Whose souls and bodies soon are there divorced,
Whilst man and wife, securely arm in arm,
Lie flumbering, clear devoid of thoughts of harm,
A confused noise them both does terrify,
Listening, at length, they plainly do discry,
The pitious plaints of poor injured wights,
This from their sleep (though last) them both affrights,
Up starts the man, opening the Casement wide,
The Country round about on fire he spied,
The naked people that came running by,
Cried, Neighbor rise, fly for your life, oh! fly,
This unsuspected, dismal accident,
Dismaies them both, but see! incontinent,
The Rebels break up doors, the house they fire,
And sacrifice to their infernal Ire
The suppliant peoples lives: they violate
The wife in sight of her now dying Mate,
They dye their skins in blood, by barbarous power
Their Maids and Virgins chaste they do deflower,
Before their Mothers eyes, shame bids conceal,
Those Barbarisms acted by their Popish zeal,
For what they act, for what blood they expend,
Commission from the King, the Rogues pretend,
And when the Irish work's done, they profess,
By force to London for to make access.
To guard the King from Scotland to White Hall,
And tame that Juncto Puritanicall.
But this was an officious Popish lie,
Those jealousies to widen, multiply,
That were betwixt the King and Parliament,
The King did such compliance, scorn resent;
And would have queld (though with his bloods expense,
This proud rebellion; Irish insolence.
Thy wings (my Muse) though bloody, elevate,
The Irish Sea, thou now must transvolate,
Wash not thy plumes; thy bloody plumes may be
A Symptom of poor Irelands misery,
And may extract remorse from hearts of stone,
To hear thy queremonious plaints, and moan,
Relief to grief, pray England distribute,
What Is Irelands now, may once be Englands suit.
To London straight my dolorous Muse now flies.
But few with Irelands grief there Sympathize,
For bold Petitions, by a multitude
Of people barbarous, factious, savage, rude,
Are brought each day into the Parliament,
Faction, disorder, tumult, discontent
Fills every place: Strafford, and Laud accused
Of Treason are; the King himself abused,
Aspersed, injured, each of his words and deeds,
Wrested, misconstru'd and from hence proceeds
These jealousies, surmises, fears, that ring,
In Vulgar ears, fomented against the King,
By Canniballs, who Monarchy resent,
Anarchy for to introduce intent.
Hence Pamphlets, Scandals, base Libells fly,
Plumed with abuse of Royal Majesty,
Because the King was moderate, gentle, meek,
Like Aesop's Frogs, these his deposal seek;
And may a Storke dominion over them bear,
That to a King so good; perfideous were.
Few Straffords admired parts could imitate,
The reason why, most him did emulate;
This noble person, an ignoble crew,
With Justice, Justice, in their mouth pursue,
And prosecute to death; The King does sign
The fatal Bill, (though much he did decline)
To pass his Royal (here scarce his) consent,
And Strafford dies for an expediment
Of State: In Strafford was the King overthrown,
With Strafford's ruin, he subscribed his own,
Pym, Hamden, Hollis, Hasleridge and Stroad
With scandals most injurious, daily load
The King: whom when of Treason he accuses,
The House to try them legally refuses;
Can injured Majesty be pacified,
When his demands (so legal,) are denied,
For then the King with his sole Guard attended,
Came to the House, thought to have apprehended
The Traitors; but alas, the Kings intent,
Their absence purposely, did then prevent.
All these are bad presages to suspect,
That some did Monarchy now dis-affect,
Such Symptoms have a dismal reference,
Into their thoughts inward malevolence.
Distempers will work out their malady,
Depressed but not oppressed, such thoughts may be,
Like furious winds seeking their rage to vent,
Which in the concaves of the earth are pent,
Having at length all obstacles extruded,
Whereby their force impetuous was included,
Rush out with too audacious insolence,
And by their uncontrouled violence,
Do curle the Oceans billows, bow the Woods,
Blow from their Channels the dispersed floods,
Untile the houses, Sacrilegiously,
From Churches rent their leaden Cannopy,
Jove scorning to obey, if Jove withstand,
Till Aeolus do their retreat command,
Thus thoughts most turbulent till now suppressed,
Enforce their way from many a factious breast:
Boldly their malice against the King they vent,
Ambitious of eruption and extent.
Conscience and council must to power give way,
To teach the Crown, the Gown now to obey,
The peoples privileges to dissolve,
In War and Blood, this Nation to involve.
Their Wills as laws on England to enforce;
Unto the Sword our Statists take recourse.
What stratagems had long time been projected,
Come to their birth, and must be now effected.
Forces they raise, yet under this pretense,
The House to Guard, to be their own defense.
And Essex over their new Militia bands,
By Order from the House, in chief commands.
At this (high time) London the King forsakes,
And unto York his journey straight he takes;
From whence he certifies the Parliament,
That his resolves for Ireland were intent,
His presence would be a most Sovereign spell,
The Rebels minds to charm, their force to quell:
To his victorious Ensigns he does vow,
To make the proudest of such traitors bow:
And in pursuance of such high intents,
He in the North will raise some Regiments,
Which from Hulls Magazine all Armed must be
For Ireland, to attend his Majesty.
'Twas not the King then (as some him belly)
That did obstruct from Ireland that supply,
That might those Rebels Armies have subdued,
And tamed that Savage, Popish multitude.
To York the Northern Gentry summoned are,
To whom the King his purpose does declare,
Commanding their attendance, most obey,
With these the King for Hull straight takes his way
Who to the gates with this Train makes address,
But Hotham there denis his King access.
Requesting him not to demand what he,
Cannot now grant without disloyalty
To the Parliament: The King soon makes reply,
Our entrance, good Sir John, do not deny,
I shall pass by, this your affront to me,
And our admission shall excuse, when we
To the Parliament our next address shall make;
With Hotham this mild Rhetoric will not take:
Wherefore the King him stubborn Traitor calls,
And vows he will hang him up upon those walls,
That his example may a terror be,
To all such haughty traitorous rogues, as he.
Like to a stream whose shoure augmented force.
Scorns obstacles that may retard his course,
And with his swelling waters potent Tide,
Over banks and all retards does bravely glide,
Rowls down huge stones, eradicates each tree
That to his feircer current lets may be,
So angers Tide in the Kings mind swelled high,
That him Hulls entrance Hotham should deny,
Especially he grieved for Irelands grief,
By this deprived of his resolved relief.
Hotham, he Traitor does proclaim, then make
Warlick provision Hull by force to take,
Yet first complaints unto the Parliament,
Of this most bold affront the King had sent,
Wherein he Hothams Treason did decry,
Whom with his Act, the States do justify.
This more incensed the King, shall Hotham be
In his rebellion countenanced, and he
Exposed to such affronts? he does profess
By dint of Sword these wrongs for to redress.
His Proclamations through each county fly,
Plumed with complaints of injured Majesty,
His loyal Subjects all to animate,
With him to join, these wrongs to vindicate.
The gentry to contribute these, request
Assistance to their wronged Kings behest,
That his intents both just and real are,
For Laws, Religion, Rights, he does declare.
These proclamations many gallants Court
To York, now for Commissions to resort;
Wherein short time no despicable force
Convened is, of Armed Foot and Horse.
But while the King pursues this Martial game,
The State, his Acts Illegal do Proclaim,
Prohibiting all men in any wise,
For to abet the Kings known enterprise.
Thus Proclamations, Proclamations thwart,
Commands oppose Commands, Art crosses Art,
The King commands, the State forbid to Arm,
Who do the King, who not the State, from harm
Vow to secure; Traitors both parts declare,
Who do their mandates cross, opponents are.
What County can pretend immunity,
From Proclamations vain Logomachy,
The States bid Arm for them; the King says no,
What shall the perplexed dubious Vulgar do?
If Arm you must, to void neutrality,
It Is but your duty, aid his Majesty;
Let not their vain pretenses you dis-swade,
Still their pretext Rebels Religion made.
Whilst these transactions are in agitation,
The King for Hulls Siedge, makes strong preparation
Whither from York his march he now does take
Hotham knows well, his life lies at the stake,
Therefore his rusty Cannons he does cleanse,
Putting the Town in posture of defense,
Brasse-Pieces mount, the stoutest Townsmen Arms
Promising reparation of all harms
Sustained in Hulls assistance: By and by,
The Sentinels the Kings approach descry,
The Allarum's given: Hotham does then decree,
That all the water-sluces drawn shall be,
The Country's drowned, men, walls, and Seas combine,
To frustrate this his Majesty's design.
Meldrum a Soldier of no small repute,
But yet a Scot, the Parliament depute,
Hotham's assistant; who a party takes,
Of the most hardy Townsmen, and out-makes
A sudden sally, where the King he beats,
Who with some loss, to Beverly retreats;
But not long after this, the Parliament
A party strong for Hull, from London sent:
Meldrum encouraged by this new supply,
Will of a second bout, the fortune try:
His choicest men he soon together calls,
And issuing out, on the Kings Leagure falls,
Whereof some scores, in their new trenches die,
The rest in haste (disordered much) do fly;
A hot pursuit after whom Meldrum makes,
At Aulaby, the Kings Magazin he takes;
Some barns, and houses, there this Scotch Knight fires
And then for Hull, his worship, back retires.
The King perceiving all attempts in vain,
Against the Town of Hull, for York again
Retreats: But O! who can his thoughts express?
How can he now (though mild) passion suppress?
What shall he do? what will be the event
Of these beginings, thus malevolent?
Reflects, his looks no reverential awe
Upon Spectators? Dare his Subjects draw
Their Swords against their Prince: shall he dispense
Further with their Rebellious insolence?
But whilst the King is in this self-dispute,
A Noble person did him thus salute:
By Traitors shall your patience be abused,
Your commands slighted; your demands refused?
Courage take Sir, Divine and humane laws,
Loudly proclaim the justice of your cause,
See what a train of Lords do here attend,
In your behalf, their dearest blood to spend.
the Parliament us Traitors does proclaim,
Because to your assistance thus we came,
And though they speak not out, their acts declare,
They are intent upon you for to War.
Why raise they Armies? what is your intent,
Us and your self to such a Parliament
Thus to expose? our Swords must us defend,
Or farewell life and fortunes, Strafford's end
We may expect: Traitors let us them declare,
And make provision for defensive War,
A thousand lives who would not rather lose,
Then see such Rebels you and yours depose?
To see rapacious Harpies ruinate,
This flourish of our peace, Religion, State,
Are you so credulous these not to fear,
When Treason it is, to you for to adhere?
Review the Actions of those Monarchs brave,
That as your Predecessors Reigned have,
See how the proudest of their foes did quake,
Even at their frowns, which did whole Kingdoms shake,
Whose very names, their Subjects did adore,
Reputing them not men, but somewhat more.
Then such Heroicks courage now assume,
Let Traitors know they do too much presume
Upon your Lenity; Sir, make them fear,
And know the Lion in your arms can tear.
At this the London Juncto Parliament
Traitors proclaimed are; The King 's intent
Is for the South-west parts to take his way,
Posting before Commissions of Array,
Commanding quick attendance from all those
In Arms, that would not be reputed foes.
Newcastle's General for the North designed,
Whose influence on those parts, soon combined
An Army Gallant: Thus to Civil War
Fully resolved, now both parties are.
But so my Muse, with Morpheus power possessed,
Take's Leave (would England could do so) to rest.
Finis Libri Primi.
THE ENGLISH CIVIL WARS.
BOOK II.
The Contents.
A short dis-swasive from this Civil War,
The King sets up his Standard: does declare
Of his defensive Arms, the Innocence,
Londons Zeal, for the Parliaments pretense;
Essex his Force to Coventry does bring,
Worcester Fight: The Battle at Edgehill.
Rouse up brave Martial Muse, prepare for fight,
Let Mars desist the Cyprian Courts delight;
Bellona's Trumpets calls our Troops to field;
Pallas advances, armed with Spear and Shield.
Combats, not Councels, Muse, thou must rehearse,
War, Blood, and Death, are subjects of my Verse.
England, O England! do not thou distain,
This flourish of thy Peace with Blood: refrain
These Civil Wars, whose sad effects we see,
In self-divided, ruined Germany.
Did Scotland tremble? did the Irish flee?
Was France once Tributary unto thee?
Renowned England, did victorious Fame,
From India, unto India, post thy name?
From cold Arcturus, to the Antartick Sands;
Thy admiration, England, filled all Lands:
Whilst Providence, and valor, foreign foes
Vanquished:shall homebred discord, work thy woes
No Council, nor yet Rhetoric can assuage,
Uncivil Civil Wars, tumultuous rage.
The furious Sword, scorns to obey the Gown;
Some with the State, some with the imperial Crown
Take part; known Ensigns, Ensigns, do defy,
And English blood; Englands Cross red must die.
If War we must? why do we not assay,
On Asian ground our Colors to display?
Mahomet's damned Impostures to expel,
To their cursed Author, down to Pluto's cell;
Why do we not out of the Seginor's hand,
Regain our Title to the Holy Land?
What, might we not, with lesser bloods expense,
Have quel'd the Turks aspiring insolence;
Razed Constantinople's world-commanding Towers,
With her Seraglio, Egypt might be ours.
And all the treasures of the spacious East,
By our victorious Armies be possessed.
As that brave Tartar, lets our Force engage,
Bajacet-like into an Iron cage;
Earths greatest Monarch 's captived power to bring,
Or let us advance against the Spanish King.
His Eighty eight's Armado's cursed design,
To vindicate our Forces let us combine,
Heaven can but grosper such a brave attempt;
Heaven that from Spain's Invasion did exempt
This Island, for to be Spain's dreadful scourge,
Till all those Martyrs bloods she shall disgorge:
Sucked in by inquisition-Butchery;
Or let us go set the enslaved Indians free:
Sail thither may we, with the tide and flood
Of vengeance-crying murdered Indians blood.
Why march we not to curb that Prelates pride?
Whose Scarlet vestments in the blood are died
Of Martyred Christians? doubtless we may fear,
His influence is too too powerful here.
These sad incitements to this Civil War,
Hatched surely by his Romish Locusts are.
That Sweed Heroic to his high renown,
Vowed to divest him of his triple-Crown:
And from his chair-infallible, by force,
That Beast so much admired for to divorce;
And but that death, too cruel did prevent,
Doubtless he had accomplished his intent.
England, O England! Civil Wars decline,
And prosecute that noble Sweeds design:
Hoise up thy Sails for the Italian shore,
The airy Alps, resolve for to march over.
Fall down like Thunder into Italy,
The affrighted-Scarlet Conclave let us make fly;
And these high Walls, wherein the Beast does trust,
Let Us raze and level with that bloody dust
Whereon they stand; in blood they founded were,
Ruddy with blood, their cement does appear;
Rape, Superstition, Fraud, Idolatry,
Polythism, Murder, Theft, Theomachy,
Hypocrisy, Pride, Witchcraft, Fornication,
Adultery, Sodoms-lov'd-Abomination,
Are their cursed Superstructures; Powers divine,
Except propitious, unto this design
Vengeance divine, our Cannons best will be,
Upon those Walls, to enforce a Battery;
Needs must we conquer in so just a War,
Where foes designed by Heaven to ruin are.
Reason should with the wise be Prevalent,
What, have not Civil Wars a sad event?
No joyful Triumphs in such Wars have place,
No brave exploits do here the Conquerours grace.
No spoils are taken from the captived foes,
But such, as even, whereby the Conquerours lose.
Brother, does Brother, unto death betray,
Fathers, their Sons, and Sons their Fathers slay.
Maids are deflowered, and Matrons chaste misused,
Young Men for Soldiers pressed; Old-men abused.
Those treasures that industrious Peace acquired,
Exhausted are, the Villages are fired;
Cities dis-peopled, Castles ruined be,
Friends even from friends (as from the Plague) shall flee:
Justice, Laws, and properties, all stand
As Ciphers, at the furious sword's command.
Servants will of their Masters, Masters be;
From Tinkers, even the Constables shall flee:
The basest men will proudly dominere,
Rant, drink, whore, plunder, strike, curse, damn, and swear.
Oxen, Sheep, Horses, all that you possess,
Soldiers will take, and if you seek redress,
Perhaps you may be cudgel'd by a slave,
Or else imprisoned, and that's all you will have.
O what affronts! what wrongs! what violence!
Must all sorts suffer, under the pretense
Of Enemies; when, whom Soldiers dispose,
They make at pleasure, either friends or foes;
Nay the wronged people cannot be assured,
By whether party they were thus injured:
Your foe, you shall not know, nor yet your friend,
Such sad distractions Civil wars attend.
The Sword scorns council (list) Drums beat I hear,
The Trumpet sound, armed Horsemen do appear:
The King from York marches with all his Force,
To Nottingham they straight direct their course;
Where first upon this Civil Wars account,
The King his Standard Royal does amount;
And standing under't in the Armies view,
His glistering Sword, he from his scabbard drew,
Which brandished about his head, he said,
Fellows in Arms, here in your Sovereigns aid
Conveen'd, you to inform I shall not need,
What to this Parliament we did conceed,
More than our Royal ancestors had done,
(Thinking the most averse for to have wone,
By acts of Grace) we granted: But behold!
Our Condiscentions make these men more bold,
Things to demand against a Kings renown,
And what would they have now, except my Crown?
When all such acts of Grace did vain appear,
We left them, and resolved for Ireland were;
Revenged upon those Rebels to have been,
Whilst these into their Errors more had seen;
Intending then at Hull to arm our Guard,
Hulls entrance we, by Hotham were debarred,
From Ireland; Ireland now Entombed in grief,
This did obstruct our then-resolv'd relief.
And when to Hull our next address we made,
With fire and sword, our Camp he did invade;
Wishing our Person in the number, where
Some scores of our League subjects murdered were.
By Proclamation they prohibit all,
From their Allegiance to our Sovereign call;
And whence do these affronts so numerous spring,
But even from those, that me a Glorious King
Pretend to make; The men presage my Fate,
Only the time they seek to antidate.
But this (at which he shook his glistering Sword)
Even this, our best redress must now afford,
Traitorous, here, their proceedings we declare,
Denouncing War, against them, and all that are
Their Fautors and Abettors; know, we must
Soldiers, to courage, and our swords now trust,
Through wounds, blood, death our passage now does lie
To our detained Rights: resolve to dye
With me, my Lords, and Soldiers ere we yield,
Essex that traitorous Cockoo's in the field:
A numerous Army against us he does bring,
Are these League Subjects that will fight their King?
My Lords (as you your lives or fortunes love)
Your utmost interest, Force to raise, improve,
For fight we must, and if the day we loose,
Of us and ours, the Conquerours will dispose:
Your Regiments with speed, my Lords complete,
I even presage, we Essex shall defeat.
And you, my Nephews, whose Heroic might,
Has been approved in many a bloody fight
Beyond the Seas (with that he cast his eye
On Rupert and Prince Morice standing by;
In England late arrived) Princes we must,
To your Heroic skill and prowess trust
The conduct of our Horse. Rupert replied,
Uncle, what is in our power, you may confide,
We shall effect; fear not but we shall bring,
The proudest Rebels, you to own as King.
At this the flourished Trumpets that surround
The King this while; commanded are to sound,
Whose sweetest Levits from the Rocks so near,
With airy Eccho's ravish every ear.
Then off the Troops to march commanded are,
To Shrewsbury the intended seat of War:
Rupert and Morice late arrived here,
Now in the Fronts of armed Troops appear.
Rupert the elder, of complexion fair,
Yet somewhat swarthy, of brown-coloured-hair,
Of body slender, yet indifferent tall,
Of mind courageous, wondrous fair withal:
Scorning, both fears and dangers, on he went,
Yet inconsiderate, in the management
Of his bold charge: which proved indeed to us
In many fields disadvantagious;
His forwardness excused, Europe never bred,
One who more nobly Chavalry on led.
Morice more corpulent, yea, and more tall,
Yet not so bloody, and so tragical:
Full as courageous, not so unadvised,
More fortunate in what he enterpris'd:
Whose prowess, and whose skill in feats of War,
Were such as might renown a Soldier.
Out breaks the War, with uncontrouled Rage,
Great Lords, and Gentry, on both parts engage;
Yet more of these the Royal cause maintain,
As not deluded with pretenses vain.
But of Plebeians less intelligent,
More do adhear unto the Parliament;
Their Intellectuals hood-winked and captived,
By those pretenses, specious then contrived.
What City, Town, House, Castle now was free,
But fortified, and Garrisoned must be?
What Fields with Grain, Mountains with Flocks, that were
Flourished of late; now terrible appear
With armed Camps: what deadly Engines wrought?
Sure not more Fields, than bloody battails fought
Has England now: try all the Sword would make,
If that of blood, it could a surfeit take.
London! what Martial fury thee possessed,
That thus with madness not to be expressed,
Against thy King, so boldly do engage,
What Hellish fury did their hearts inrage?
To strive who should most forward be in arms,
How did they flock? adjoyn themselves by swarms
To Essex Colors; what did they intend?
What, was Rebellion? or was Zeal their end?
What, were they weary of that Regiment?
The loss of which (if lost) they will much repent;
What do they think the name of a free State?
More advantageous, or more fortunate,
Or will Commerce, or Trading flourish more,
Monarchy routed out, then't did before?
London, O let not such conceits thee blind!
All to thy expectation thou shall find
Quite contrary: But what is it indeed,
From Superstitious Rites for to be freed
That thou do thus engage: Rebellion had
Always religion's Cloak; wherewith she clad
Her monsterous body: All the world shall see,
Religion but a mere pretense to be
In these sad Wars: London will be as proud,
Her Sins will in the Ears of Heaven as loud
Sound* If she had desired Presbytery,
As now under much-hated Prelacy;
That much pretended, wished for reformation,
Shall have a most apparent confutation,
From those cursed crimes, London will exercise,
And grant her even what Form she can devise
For Government, either in Church or State,
But whether does my Muse thus deviate?
Rupert the leading having now acquired,
Of such a Party as his heart disir'd;
Courageous Gallants, who did scorn to fly,
The face of even the proudest enemy,
Thought that his smaller parties fortitude,
Might balance Essex's numerous multitude:
O! that their temperance had but equalis'd
Their valor: would Rupert had exercised
A stricter Discipline, and not by force
Suffered his stout (though too licentious) Horse;
Coin, Arms, and Horses to extort from those,
That doubtless (but for this) nere the Kings foes
Had proved: Indeed plundring, intemperance,
Bacchus his bowls; Venus her daliance
Were of the Royal party the sole bane,
How many men surprised! how many slain!
Often in their cupps; want! want! of discipline,
Our Cause (though just) made many to decline.
Yet our Commanders, this to tolerate;
The want of pay, did thus necessitate.
Nor long to us, did any such adhear,
Who in their service mercenary were.
By this time Essex numerous Forces were
Drawn out of London, to North-Hampton, where
They wait their General 's coming: and indeed,
In number three to one, they did exceed
The Kings: So zealously was London bent
Against the King, to aid the Parliament.
Essex arrived, with his Army now,
Coventry, Warwick, and North-Hampton too
Did fortify: Gloucester then did stand
For the Parliament, under Massies command.
To Worcester Rupert his Troops does bring,
Thinking that City, strongly for the King
To fortify; But Essex Horse so near,
Prevents his stay and resolutions there,
Nevertheless, both parties now so near,
Scorn to retreat, as men surprised with fear,
Before their Gallantry they have expressed,
By skirmishing most fiercely they contest,
They ride up close, and boldly do give fire,
In one another bosoms, then retire.
Others advancing, do their rooms supply,
Their discharged Pistols, at the heads do fly
Then of each other, and incontinent
Then hand to hand, unto the Sword they went,
Some giving, some receiving many a wound,
Till many a man lay gasping on the ground.
But Rupert causes a retreat to sound,
Lest that the numerous foes should him surround,
And from this skirmish, up his Troops does bring
To Shrewsbury, for to attend the King,
Sands now his Prisoner, whose whole Regiment,
To Rout and Ruin, in this Skirmish went.
That famous River that Sabriua's name,
From her drowned in it, does as yet retain,
Almost surrounds the Town of Shrewsbury,
His Magazin, Mint, Coin, Artillary,
His Person too, here did the King confide,
A Town by Art, and Nature fortified:
During the King 's (though short) residing here
His smaller Forces much augmented were,
So that he takes the field, fully intent
For London, but this Essex does prevent,
Who with his Force, at Worcester did lie,
And hearing that the King was marching by,
Draws out his Army, and to Coventry
After the King, directly marches he
Resolved to fight: Such preparations are,
Made England to engage in Civil War;
Whose desperate prologue, Muse thou must prepare,
Indoleful accents, now for to declare.
Now Phoebus did from the Equinoctial Line,
His course to the Antartick Pole decline,
Nor could the cooler air yet qualify,
Men's hotter Zeal, and desperate fervency
To Civil Wars; this Fire alone must be
Quenched with blood, dolorous Phlebotomie.
In Warwickshire there lies a spacious Plain,
(Pity that Civil blood should it distain)
Nere Keinton, called the vale of the Red Horse,
Where General Essex, with his numerous force
Was now arrived: The Royallists hard by
Upon Edgehill, their near approach discry,
And there their Troops most gallantly display,
Putting their Battle, quickly in Array.
Linsey was Captain General for the King,
But Ruthen ordered their embattailing,
The Valliant Linsey with his Pike in hand,
Led the main Body: Rupert did command
Those Gallant Troops, placed in the right wing,
Bravely the left Carnarvan on did bring.
Essex this while embattailed did stand,
His right Battallions Balfore did command.
Ramsey his left: Hurry this Day did serve
In the right wing, and was Balfore's reserve:
Essex a while his Infantry did head,
Till Meldrum came, who on the same did lead:
Essex now mounted, in his Armies sight,
Thus to the Battle did his men excite;
Take Courage, Soldiers, from your juster cause,
It Is for Religion, Liberty, and Laws
You fight: who would not spend their dearest blood
Now for Religion 's sake; and England's good?
What, do not Pressures, Poles, cursed subsidies?
Ship-monies, Taxes, damned Monopolies?
Now Fleece us Subjects, for no Sovereign use,
Impudent by permission, grows abuse.
What is not superstitious innovation
Of Romish Rites, Cross-Altar-Adoration
Obtruded on us? have we not permission
Of the Mass-Idol: See! the exhibition
Of Sports, even to the Sabbath 's Profanation,
Are authorized by Order, Proclamation.
Cards, Dice, Bowls, Tennis, Stage-plaies, Sabbathsport
Are made, both in the Country and the Court.
Dare mortal men, Gods morral Laws withstand?
What God forbids, dare earthly men command?
O Sinful days! O impious, hellish times!
When even by Order, warranted are Crimes,
Bad Presidents, without indulging Laws,
Find too too frequent, practice and applause:
Ambitious Prelates, now do arrogate,
In honors temporal, to Officiate,
Their Romish Doctrines, ceremonious guise,
All pious hearts resent and much despise.
Nuncio's from Rome to England now resort,
And much were honored in our English Court?
Whither when Jezabel's proud Sons were come,
They much admired in England to find Rome.
It Is not against the King that we declare,
But those that Authors, and Abettors are,
Of these strange things: who will not rather dye?
Then be ensnared again in Popery?
Even in your looks I easily perceive
Your forwardness, I know you will not deceive
My expectations: for (meethinks) I see
You in pursuit, and yonder Troops to flee;
Meethinks I see what numbers we have slain,
How many prisoners, Horse, Arms, Colors taken;
How every Soldier is enriched with prize,
What rare inventions London does devize
To grace our Tryumphs: how their Bone-fires burn,
And Bells ring loud to honor our return.
His wicked council all dispersed and fled,
In Triumph shall the King himself be led
By us unto his London Parliament,
Who will reward with condign punishment
Most of his wicked party: valorous be,
Take resolution, magnanimity,
Brave Soldiers, and indeed you may confide,
All these presages shall be verfi'd.
At this, a prologue, to the near dispute,
Essex the King, daringly did salute,
With a loud Volley of his Ordinance,
Whose fiery bals near to the King did glance,
As he from his prospective did survey
Their Army, in that Valley where they lay,
And then three acclamations, even so high
Their Army gave; as seemed to rend the sky.
At which brave Linsey soon the King desired
Leave to go on: Saying Essex has fired
His Cannons on us; and shall we stand still
And suffer his great shot our men to kill?
Shall we be dared thus by such proud foes,
And thus our bodies to their Guns expose?
To whom, the best of Kings, sadly replied,
Loath, loath I am my Sword should e're be died
In civil blood; my soul does much decline
These worst of wars; are not these people mine?
(If undeceived) we suddenly should see
Their Arms cast down, they all would come to me.
But now (more pity) fight indeed we must,
Therefore (brave Soldiers) that your cause is just,
I know you are persuaded, Loyalty
Under your Sovereign's Ensigns here to dye,
Or conquer, does, and did you first engage,
How factious Zeal some Sectaries does inrage
Against their King, you are not ignorant;
I hope they will see their errors and recant.
Others that are not such, we soon shall see
Prove loyal, Essex leave, and turn to me.
Wound not, who e're of them before you flies
Such are not yours, nor yet my enemies.
And now your magnanimity approve,
If you your Country, or your Sovereign love.
See, how your King (if conquered, see no more)
Your courage, utmost valor does implore.
They are more numerous; let our fortitude
Their numbers balance; when they are subdued,
'Twill be our glory that with numbers less,
We did their greater conquer; on, possess
Their Riches, Camp, Artillery, as prize,
Yonder rich Army I to you demize,
Win Gold and wear't: my cause's just intent,
God now assist as I am innocent.
The murdering Cannons now began to play,
Whose so well levelled bullets made their way
Through many a rank; heads, arms, and legs, off fly
Which hit, and often strike dead the standers by.
The Chain-shot, by the middle cuts asunder
Whole Files of men; who, now in death do wonder
How this so wide a passage open stood,
At once to let out all their vital blood.
How head and feet, legs, and arms, in one place,
By this strange death conjoined should now embrace
From Morterpeeces great Granado's fly,
Which in their fall kill some; but to the sky
Do in their breath blow up who stand them near,
From others their dismembered Limbs they tear:
Others their furious blasts do blow stone-blinde,
O hapless men to such sad fates designed.
As a tempestuous, Heaven-obscuring shower,
With violence does Rain, or Hail down power,
With Lightnings, frequent flashes intermixed,
And loud sky-renting Thunder claps betwixt.
Even so from fire-lock-Pistolls and Carbines,
The fire like lightning from the sky now shines;
And fiery Bullets with their thicker flight
Obscure the day and antidate the night.
Sulphurious clouds of smoke toff'd with the wind
With fiery flashes glancing through them, blind
Both Horse and man, so that they cannot see,
Therefore less fear their quick Catastrophy.
The King's Forlorn, Dives his Regiment,
First down the hill courageously on went.
Where Major Backstake with his party clears
The Hedges lined with Essex Musketeers.
The Royalists then cheerfully descend
The hill: as bravely Essex does defend
The ground whereon his Army Marshaled stood,
Till that red Valley, redder became with blood.
But like a Lion greedy of his prey,
At length their left wing, Rupert does assay,
Whose charge most furious and Heroic might
Them break, and put to a disordered flight,
Rupert through Keinton in pursuit does ride,
Then fell to plunder; Hurry soon espied
This fair advantage; and with eagerness,
Did now on Wilmot and Carnarvan press,
Forcing them to give ground: Then wheeled about
And fiercely charged on the Royal foot,
Where soon the furious Horse asunder rents,
Linsey's, Bowls, Paget's, Fieldings Regiments.
Brave Linsey seeing his in such distress,
Rallies a party soon for their redress;
And like a Tygar of her whelps deprived,
In thickest Troops of Armed foes arrived?
Most valliantly thousands does kill or wound,
Yet him the numerous foes at length surround,
But when his Son, renowned Willowby,
His Father thus encompassed did see
He rides up with his Troops: gave such a charge,
As soon, his noble Father did enlarge
But wounded, soon (too soon, alas) he died,
A fatal loss unto the Royal side.
The Royal Standard Balfores Troops had taken
Varney the Standard Bearer being slain,
A valiant Gentleman who this espied,
Gallantly through their thickest Ranks did ride,
And there (the new Possessor having slain)
The Standard Royal bravely did re-gaine.
For which brave exploit, Knight and Barronet
The King bedub'd him: Balfore hard beset
With our fresh Troops, most bravely was assailed,
And made give ground: The Royalists prevailed
Sometimes, and sometimes Essex: Dubious
Was Fortune whom to make victorious.
By this, that spacious Valley was bespread,
With heaps of Men, and Horses that lay dead;
From several wounds, the several streams of blood,
Increased to an overspreading Flood,
Whose stronger currents to the lower ground,
Drove down some bodies, now both killed, and drowned,
Thus many deaths, poor mortals do attend,
When one's sufficient to enforce their end.
Here might you hear the sad laments and moans,
In doleful accents, of their dying groans,
Some execrating their Nativity,
Others that Fatal day: Revenged to be
Some vowed; and with their Swords about them laid,
Now even in Death: Some boldly did upbraid
The Parliaments Pretenses feigned, some swore,
And off their heads, their hair they fiercely tore;
Some Prayed, and were exceeding Penitent,
Such several humors, dying men present.
Who late against each other boldly fought,
Their Reconciliation Death had wrought,
Whose blood dispended, falling in one place,
Kindly now, arm in arm, by Death embrace.
Here might you see a bullet-galled steed,
Now of his wounded, or dead rider freed,
Fiercely run through the field, and often out-tread
The bowels of the living, and the dead.
Here might you see two armed Gallants met,
Their courage sharper than their swords was whet
By vowed revenge, much hotter was their ire;
Than from their clashing swords that sparkling fire,
Whose courage, strength, dexterity, and art,
Byinter-courses each did play their part
Till blood and strength expended; these two foes
Upon that bed of honor both repose;
Whose streaming blood could not be intermixed
Such strong antipathy was them betwixt.
A Cockney, whom blind zeal-did much inflame,
Essex to serve, a Volunteer late came;
Who to his fellows vaunted, they should see;
The wicked (none pursuing) for to flee.
Tomkins said true, the Cannons 'gan to play,
Down went his Arms, and straight he ran away.
A flying piece of a Granado-shell,
Stroke Simpson into th'back, who dead down fell,
Speaking these words, then with his latest wind
It Is base and cowardly for to strike behind.
A welsh-man, who came as a Volunteer,
Hur King to serve, proudly did dominere
Before the fight, vowing that hur would slay,
All Rebell-Round-heads that came in hur way?
Essex himself should not escape hur hand
If that he durst, till hur came to him stand?
Essex might long have stood; Taffy was gone
Before the fight, and so killed never a one,
For when he heard the Cannons 'gin to play,
Down went his Bill; and straight he ran away
Swearing by got, in English he could swear,
He never before such roaring Devils did hear.
Another Welsh-man, armed a cap a pee,
Upon a Charger fierce, mounted was he;
His two-edg'd-sword, drawn in his hand did shine,
His Pistols charged, and also his Carbine.
To have him heard, and seen, you would have swore
Stout master Morgan would have chased a score.
But when it came to his turn for to have fought,
To Have faced about, and fled, Morgan had thought.
But his fierce Horse, that did in War delight,
Went on indeed in Morgan's hearts despite;
Morgan with all his might pulled at the Reign
To stop his Horse, alas! 'twas all in vain.
With pulling, and for fear, dead men to see,
Backwards, even to his horse tail, bowed he.
On went the horse: The Royalists surpast,
Amongst the adverse party runs at last.
A Cockney that him in this posture spied,
Come fiercely on; hold good sir, quarter cried;
The Cockney seeing that he made no stay,
Turn'd's horse about, and fairly ran away.
Morgan more valorous than he wis'd or wil'd,
Was thrown at last, and under's horse feet killed;
The Cockney that fled, when he Morgan spied,
Into a Saw-pit, broke his neck, and died.
But now the obscure mantle of the night,
Each Army veiled, from one another sight,
Only the Musketeers, so thick gave fire,
As yet gave light, to both for to retire;
Neither could either Io, Paean, sing
Though victory more inclined to the King:
Yet both parties claimed the triumphal Baies,
And noble Palm; both parties returned praise
For Victory, to their Heavenly Deities,
Both parties had taken Ensigns, Prisoners, Prize,
Both parties of Victory, Trophies did display,
And on the field that night, both parties lay:
By those great fires, which were the only light,
Left them in this obscurity of night.
That night in a black cloud, the Sun had set,
As looking on Edgehill, with much regret;
Ravenous beasts, Rapacious birds of prey,
All hovered near this fatal field that Day,
Each man the night before, in his last sleep
Seemed to lament, howl out, and sadly weep,
And by Anticipation to prevent
In fancy, this cursed days doleful event.
Titan (though late) now Thetis lap forsook,
And either Army, might with horror look
Upon each other; all the Vale bespread
Betwixt them, with their intermixed Dead.
Nor would the Sun, bee-clouded that Day, yield
His Rays should shine upon this bloody field.
In Warlike posture here both Armies stand
Until high noon, then Essex gave command
For to march off: His Briggade's to complete,
From hence for London, straight he does retreat.
But when the best of Kings surveyed the slain,
He sighed and wep't, and wep't and sighed again,
Saying, alas! alas! deceived were
Some thousands of these Dead, that now lie here
Slain in Rebellion; we lament their fate,
And their Sepulture, here we imperate,
As well as these, that Love and Loyalty,
Have for our Cause engaged here to Dye;
Our gracious Pardon too, we here Proclaim
To all, that shall or will embrace the same.
Before that Cynthia with her borrowed light,
Shall three times fill her Globe; at this he sighed
And wept again, but off the Army went
For Loyal, Royal Oxford now intent.
Finis Libri Secundi.
THE English CIVIL WARS.
BOOK III.
The Contents.
Blake hanged: diverse vicessitudes of War.
Brainford fight: Rupert storms Cirincester:
Lord Brooks his acts, his fatal wound, and death.
The fights in Riple-fields: On Haopton-heath,
Litchfield stormed twice: and Reading taken had been
Chalgrave, Landsdown; and Roundway fights: The Queen
At Burlington does land: The King and she
Meet on Edgehill: Gloucester seige: Newberry
First fight: Eccleshal seige: Arundel taken;
Bramdean-heath fight; where noble Smith was slain.
Prince Griffiths gallantry, and quick defeat,
Rupert from Newark seige, does Meldrum beat.
IN order good the Royalists retire,
And now at leisure, farther do inquire
Into their taken papers, which discry
One Blake a Traitor, whom the King to die
Adjudged in a halter, would each tree,
To end the Wars, bore but such fruit as he:
This Blake the Royal Court belonged unto,
Worse is a secret, than an open foe.
To Banbury the Royal Army came,
Resolved by storm for to enforce the same.
Rochfords, and Peterboroughs Regiments,
All Blew-Coats did lie there; Marrow prevents
The Kings assault, by yielding of the Town
Upon Conditions. Rupert now sat down
Broughton before, a House of the Lord Say,
At the first Peal, his Ordinance did play;
The House is yielded, the King's next address,
By dint of Sword, was Brainford to possess.
Nor could the Foes, the Kings approach discry,
By reason of the mist-condenced sky,
Till them the Cannons thundering language gave
A fierce allar'm; a while resistance brave,
Was made by Traitorous Hollis Regiment.
Courageously the Royalists on went;
Enforce the Town, whose Streets are paved again,
With numerous bodies of the men there slain,
The Channels run, as after a great flood
In stronger currents, with their warmer blood.
But while the King plays at this prosperous game
Lord Brook's, and Hamden's regiments on came
Maintaining against the King, a bloody fight,
From Noon, till the Obscurity of night
Parted the fray; Also the Parliament
Had numerous Forces out of London sent,
So That the King almost surrounded was;
Kingston alone gave way for his repass:
Then having given the Rebels this defeat,
Safely for Oxford did the King retreat.
Though greater Hoasts in Winter Quarters rest,
Yet smaller parties, sharply thus contest,
Nor, had the Royalists alone success,
Massy did Sudeley-Castle much distress;
Wooll-packs on rolling frames, his men had set,
Under whose covert, to the Walls they get
Free from the Castle-shot, the Barns they fire
With Hand-Granado's, in the smoke aspire
And mount the walls, but Bridges thus distres'd
A Parley sounds, and yields what he possessed.
Prince Rupert taking this in great despite,
Resolved was, the Rebels to require;
Therefore next day, his Force he did combine
Sudeley before, yet was his chief design
On Cirincester; whether when he came
With fire and sword, he did assault the same.
Of Hand-Granado's, a thick flight was sent
Into the Town, for the first complement,
Which their Outhouses, and their Barns all fired,
With resolution, yet to be admired,
Over the Bul-works, then the Foot soon flew
In full Divisions, then the Horse ensue;
Stamfords whole Regiment, were well nigh slain,
And twice five hundred Prisoners also taken.
A timorous Footman, when the Prince drew near,
In a Straw-mough had hid himself for fear,
Burned was the Straw, in it the Footman too,
Him his presumed safety did undo,
Apparent danger's often more secure,
Then in strong walls, our selves for to immure.
Next day from hence, the Prince victorious went
To Gloucester, and in his Summons sent:
But Massy boldly his Demands denied,
Now did the Prince before the Town reside,
But marched off; and in great triumph came
To Oxford, with his Prize so lately taken.
Some Irish also, for the King do land,
Over which Earnly did in chief command.
Massy to Berkley, with his Troops now came,
And for a while stood facing of the same,
Till Herbert with his Horse came up, they fire,
Kill some on both parts, and then both retire.
Near Tedbury, Massy also dissipates
All Cary's Horse: Beverston on thy gates,
Massie's bold Foot, do fasten their Pittard,
But their audatiousness, thou did reward,
Beating them off with loss: To Wotton then
Massy (still active) next led up his men,
Skirmishing there a while, with those within.
Now landed Ledger, and bold Colonel Min
At Bristol with more Irish: These design
With Herbert, Digby, Winter to combine
And Block up Gloucester, Massy suppress;
Skirmishes often indifferent, for success
Happened amongst them; scarce a Town was free
Of any strength, but garrisoned must be,
In that impoverished County: Wretched are
The Seats of most uncivil Civil War.
Worcesters Earl with his most noble Son,
To Gloucester with their Welsh Forces come,
Encamp at Higham, and demand the Town.
Near Monmoth, as this Army late came down,
Burrows they beat, with his new Regiments,
Massy from their Demands in scorn Dissents,
Telling them plain, he Rupert had denied,
And soon would curb, their Insolence and Pride.
Could a Welsh Army think that to regain?
Which Rupert did Demand, but all in vain;
Glory not that you Winter did defeat,
Slew Lunley, and did Burrows Forces beat
Late in the Forest; shortly you shall feel,
And know, our sword's of better-tempered steel.
Now while these Forces here encamped lie
Against the Town, from Bristol a supply
Came unto Massy: Malmsbury now wone,
Even Waller too, did with his Army come
To join with Massy; The Welsh they assail
Even in their Camp, and do so far prevail,
That in the place, some hundreds there they kill,
The rest take Gloucester against their will.
To Hereford from hence then Waller goes,
Scudamore, and his Roy allifts oppose
And keep the Town; Waller against the gates
His Guns does play, the first shot perforates
The boards (though strong) and did the Gate behind
Strike off a Captains head; some were designed
Upon another side, assault to make,
Which boldly Captain Gray did undertake.
The Town distressed, un-mand, not fortified,
Yielded, most of the Soldiers undiscri'd,
Over Wy-bridge, away for Wales do pass,
Whilst Waller busied in the Parley was;
Nor yet did Waller keep the Town thus gained,
Though after for the King it was retained.
Monmoth before, when Waller first appears,
It is deserted by the Cavalliers,
Waller it leaves, and toward England came,
Yet for the King Lane after kept the same,
Till Stovens by Treachery did the same surprise,
That Lane betrayed it, some indeed surmize.
Waller from Wales, for Gloucester intent,
To intercept and fight him Morice went,
Who, ere the Princes Horse could him Descry,
Beat up their Quarters, and so marched by.
Morice alarmed, thus falls in his rear,
And for a while engaged both parties were,
And then do both retire: Massy had heard,
How Wallers passage, Morice had debarred:
And marching out to meet him, did him find
Near Teuxbury, and their Forces now combined,
They do resolve upon that Town to fall,
And on they go, the Guard surprised all
Sleeping, (indeed over secure they were,
Dreading no danger, Morice now so near)
The Town they enter, break up doors, inquire
For Cavalliers; Muskets and Pistols fire
In at the windows; Carew's men some dye,
Some Prisoners taken, some hide them, others fly.
Next day some of the Prince's Horse appear
In Ripple-fields, the rest embattel'd were
Near Upton-bridge: Waller came, does them view,
But fighting did decline, and off-ward drew
With his Dragoons, thinking to guard his Rear;
The Prince advancing charge: all in fear
Through their own foot upon the Bridge, they fly,
Whose heels could not them save, there Pistol'd lie
Hasleridge comes up with a fresh recrute,
And for a while retards this hot pursuit;
But Morice presses on with his bold Horse,
And soon to flight, them all does reinforce,
Many of Wallers, in this flight do dye;
But at Mitch-hill again a fresh supply
Of Foot them meet; The Prince there makes a stand,
And then an orderly retreat command.
From London with his forces came Lord Brook
And Stafford-Avon first his Lordship took,
Defeating Crooker; Wagstaff, and stout Twist.
Nor could brave Leichfield then his powers resist,
The Town first won, his zealous Ordinance
Play against the Close. But mark what fatal chance
Befell this Zealot; whilst he did espy
Out at a loop-hole, even into the eye
A bullet pierced him, and down dead fell he?
Thus from a Church, the Church's enemy,
By the Son of a Churchman here lay slain,
His men went on, and did the fight maintain
Winning the Close, a noble sacrifice
Of Cavalliers unto his Ghost here dies.
But stout North-Hampton, Leichfield to regain
Against the Close, does a close fiedge maintain,
Until his Scouts came in and do him tell,
Of the approach of Brearton and old Gell.
At this, with his Horse and Dragoons he goes,
Boldly to meet his near approaching foes.
Where soon his unexpected charge and sight,
Puts all Gell's Horse to a disordered flight.
And then the foot threw down their Arms and yield
Numerous the Prisoners were, taken on the field.
Yet dear (too dear, alas) this victory cost,
For brave North-Hampton's life, for it was lost,
Who charging in the front, his Horse first shot,
Dismounted there his mortal wound he got.
But gallant it is on honors bed to lie,
And thus victorious Loyally to dye.
Prince Rupert too, at Leichfield now arrived,
His mines the Close for to re-gain contrived,
Which sprung, the valorous Soldiers on do go,
But were repulsed stoutly by the foe.
After an hours respite, (though in vain)
With greater courage on they went again.
For with great slaughter they repulsed were,
Ruddy with blood the Moats do all appear.
And of dead Corpse in every place do lie
Great heaps, the Breaches and the Ladders by.
Yet to the Soldiers no discouragement
Was this, for on the third time now they went,
And bravely enter, Russells then retreats
Unto the Church, and there a parley beats.
Rupert that they in warlike equipage
Should all march off, his honor does engage.
This while had General Essex Force sat down
Reading before, playing upon the Town
With his great Ordinance; then did assay
To scale the works; and by main-force, his way
To make into the Town; but off was beat,
And in despite was forced to retreat.
After some days, again they do assail
The Town; and did some of the outworks gain
Though with much loss: The King sent a supply,
Of Ammunition, Men, Artillery,
Which safe arrived there in Essex sight,
But this his Lordship did so much dispight,
That he commands the Soldiers to prepare
Now for a third assault, his Ladders are
Provided; walls, and works, his Cannons beat
All down before them, his Grenades great
Blow up whole houses; and in furious guise
His soldiers do attempt the Enterprise.
Aston made brave resistance for that while
He could do service; for a ponderous Tyle,
Which from a house a Cannon bullet rent
So brus'd his head, that now incompetent
Of all command he was; Fielding's resolve
Now upon whom the power did all devolve,
Was for to yield, a parley sounded is.
On gallant terms, indeed both he and his
March out: The Royalists the Act decry,
And by a Martial Council judged to dye
Was Felding for it at Oxford: but the King,
Pardoned the person, and forgave the thing.
Rupert and Gunter did at Chalgrave meet,
And with their discharged Pistols boldly greet
Each other, but Rupert shot Gunter dead,
And whilst the Traitorous Hamden there did head
His party, he received a mortal wound
Even on that field, upon that very ground;
Where first against the King he did declare,
Even so remarkable God's Judgments are.
Numerous the Prisoners were, that Rupert took;
But let us a while now into Cornwall look.
On Lands-Down hills, most advant agious ground
Waller encamps; Hills, Woods, and Walls, surround
His Camp almost; what part did open lie
With Rampires, and strong works they fortify,
Lining the hedges thick with muskereers,
Slaining advances with his Cavalliers.
Whose horse at the first charge disordered were.
The Cornish foot charge up; the hedges clear;
The Horse now ralli'd, bravely wheel about
Charge home in deed; put Waller's Horse to rout
With a great slaughter; the first hill regained,
Brave Greenvile with a stand of Pikes maintained
Against their Horse, and shot both great and small
But there, alas, that valorous Knight did fall,
With hundreds more; four brave assaults they make
On Wallers Camp: the fifth, they do it take.
To the next hill, Waller his men retires,
At midnight many Marches there he fires,
Hanging the hedges with them; and so flies,
The Royalists still fireing: A brave prize.
The morning light, to Slaining's men discry'd,
Sharp was the fight, numerous the men that died
On both sides; for from noon even till midnight,
Continued was this bloody desperate fight.
Through unfrequented by-waies Waller flies,
Yet him Prince Morice met near the Device
At Roundway-Down; but with two thousand men,
And though indeed Waller was nine or ten,
Morice him greeted with so brave a charge,
That from close Order, soon his men enlarge
To shameful flight, the Royalists pursue,
Numbers of Prisoners took; numbers they slew
Six thousand Arms, ten Cannons, and great store
Of Ammunition, hence the Victors bore.
The Captives did the Victors duplicate,
Which Round-way-Downe did Run-way nominate.
Whilst these trans-actions in the South do pass
At Burlington the Queen arrived was;
Of Arms and Ammunition store she brought,
With the Crown Jewels late in Holland bought.
The Parliaments great Ships that hovered near,
When once these Royal parties landed were,
And the Convoy returned; near shore advance,
On Burlington with their great Ordinance
They play off Shipboard; for an hour and more,
And then weigh Anchor and put off from shore.
Ougleby and Montrosse to the Queens train
Conjoyne their Troops, and first to York they came.
Jermin was the Queens General, the Infantry
Infamous Lesley led; her Chavalry
The noble Gerrard; Leg the sole Chieftain
Of her Artillery; and thus they came
From York up to Edgehill; where the King meets
His Loyal Consort, and most kindly greets
Her with embraces most affectionate,
And with great joy does there congratulate
Het safe return; Sweet Martial Melody,
Does make the Ecchoing Hills and Vales reply,
And tell the World, what love and joys there are
Conceived at meeting, of this Royal pair.
The Thundering Cannons play at such a rate,
Judgments loud Trump, seeming to antidate,
So sweet the Levits were, so high the strain,
Joying those Loyal Ghosts, there lately slain.
From hence these Royal Armies, all repair
To Gloucester: All things provided are
Now for the Siege: And thus the Camp sat down,
After the King, in vain, summoned the Town.
Upon the South, laid Ruthen Earl of Forth,
Ashley on the East, Vavaser on the North,
The River, and most of the Chavalry,
Upon the West side of the Town did lie;
Still in the Leagure does the King reside,
Ladders, and Engines, numerous they provide,
And with their batteries, make the City-wall
As leaves from Trees, in Autumn, for to fall:
Yet could not enter, for the Deeper Moat,
In which so many Faggots thrown, still float
Upon the waters, so that they repair
Their breaches: The Kings Mines countermin'd are.
The King (whilst here) much precious time did lose,
Either the art, or prowess of the Foes,
Or the Towns strength (this Town's) unfortunate,
Did all the Kings assaults annihilate.
Many bold Sallies the Besieged make
Some wound, some kill, and some they prisoners take,
Whilst Gloucester the King besieged in vain,
Exiter did Prince Morice powers regain.
Before this Town a while the Prince had laid,
And on it only with his Cannons played,
Then makes a fierce assault, prevails so far,
As that their mounts, works, sconces, all won are,
And their own Cannons turned against the Town,
In this distress they beat a Parley soon
And yield on Quarter: Thus even the whole West
Became the Kings, for Rupert had possessed
Bristol before: The third or fourth Day,
Fines had surrendered, and was marched away.
That constant Herald, even swift flying fame,
Now told the King, how General Essex came
To raise his Siege, who Rupert off soon sent,
To be to Essex an impediment,
And to retard his Marches, whilst that he
From Gloucester drew of 's Artillery.
Some skirmishes betwixt these parties pass,
Yet Gloucester releiv'd by Essex was,
And having done this feat so much desired,
For London he resolved to have retired.
But Rupert follows with a numerous force
Of Chavalry, and Bodies brave of Horse,
Marches for Wilt-shire, and to Aubern near,
Most boldly falls in General Essex rear.
Urry first charged, who the Forlorn did lead,
Did execution much, many fell Dead
His Troops before; But Essex faced about,
And well-nigh put brave Jermins Horse to rout;
Jermin and Digby shot, some also taken,
Constable and La-vienville slain.
On Mavern Hills, they have a second bout,
And for a while engage both Horse and Foot,
With success equal: But this while the King
To Newberry, his Infantry does bring.
Essex goes on to Cirincester, where
Of Royallists, too many Quartered were
Which he surprises. Next Day he did see
The King embattail'd, near to Newberry.
At the first sight, both parts began to fire,
But night comes on, and so they both retire.
A plot of very advantageous ground,
This night about two miles off Essex found,
On which he did encamp; But the next Day
So soon as Phoebus, did his Rays display
Fully upon our Hemisphere, the King
Up even to Essex Front, his powers did bring.
With the Forlorn, brave Lisle boldly went on,
And first did fight, for ground to fight upon:
Then the two Byrons with much Gallantry,
Led on the Royal Horse, and Infantry,
Acting their parts like Soldiers excellent,
Even to their Enemies astonishment:
Louder than Thunder, now the Cannons roa^
Heads, Legs, Arms, Thighs, with violence they to^
From whom they hit; Of Bullets the thick flight
Even at high noon, induce a sudden night:
As leaves in Autumn from an Oaken Wood,
Men fall down Dead; the field o'reflows with blood
Most hideous, pitteous cries, and groans, resound
From Dying men, laid on that bloody ground.
Some wounds so wide, at once men's bloods do spill,
Rapiers and Tucks, do full as surely kill
With smaller pricks, the Fauchians broad hew down
And cleave men, to the middle from the crown.
Here might you see two ride up close, present,
Give fire, then both fall Dead incontinent;
Of Musketeers, whole Bodies you might see,
Now come to push of Pike, fiercely let flee,
With But end of their pieces at the Head
Of one another, striking many Dead
Even at a blow, their brains dispersed were,
And often did the survivours face besmear.
Here might you see a Bullet-galled Horse,
Through Ranks and Files, his bloody way enforce,
Till on the point of a well-level'd Spear
He runs himself, and there ends his carrear.
Whole Files of men, the Chain-shot cuts in twain,
With the Plebeians, are great Nobles slain;
Stroud, Falkland, Morgan, Fielding, Sunderland,
Are now by Death, sequestered from command.
Noble Carnarvans Death was eminent,
Who now had multitudes before him sent
To Charons-boat; At length there did him meet
An Armed Gallant with fierce blo^ (...)
Each other, from each stroke the (...)
Does slye about them, both at length retire,
And then ride up again, and bravely tilt
At one another, up even to the hilt:
The Enemy did in Carnarvan sheath
His bloody Blade, nor did the other breath
One minute after; for in Death more fierce,
Carna vans sword, his very heart did pierce,
Thus with their swords in one another breast,
They fell and laid on Honor 's bed to rest.
A timorous Footman laid close on the Earth
Amongst the Dead, only for fear of Death,
Yet peeping up often about him spied,
A fierce Dragoon that him lie quick descri'd.
In twain, his head with a broad Pole-axe slit,
Freed him from what he feared, by giving it.
Andover, Peterborough, and Carlisle,
Brave Lucas, Darcy, Gerrard, Ivers, Lisle,
All wounded are led off; But Essex lost
Here not a Lord, though dear his victory cost.
The King and Queen as sad spectatour stood,
And see the effusion of those Seas of Blood
That flowed upon that field, and to retire
Their well-nigh routed Army did require.
Shrill sound the Trumpets, and the Drums loud beat;
To some a glad, to others a forced retreat.
Nor now had Essex any appetite
To rally, and renew this bloody fight,
For with Dead Corpse having now paved his way,
For London straight he marched without all stay:
And to Westminster did in Triumph bring,
His (dear bought) Colors taken from the King.
Had but the King this Fatal Seige declined,
And his brave Troops for London then designed;
When first he came Gloucester walls before,
He need not sure, have foughten any more.
Essex condition desperate at that time,
The Londoners assistance did decline
To the Parliament, the Lords did all accord
To end the Wars, the King should be restored,
The Principallity of all the West,
(Save Gloucester) the King as then possessed,
But the Errata's we commit in War
By fates Decree irrevocable are.
Gell, Brearton, Ridgby, Jacson, all prepare,
Bird in his Nest, Eccleshal, to ensnare
And take; who came, first won the Church and Town,
And then those Barns and Stables all burn down
That stood the Castle near; Their Guns they plant
Play at the Walls, yet all this cannot daunt
Those here besieged; their hold they do Defend.
To raise the Siege his Majesty did send,
Capel, and Hasteings, who now drawing nigh,
IN the Church do the Besiegers fortify
Themselves; Bird councels to enforce them thence,
The Lords cannot with so much time dispense
To beat them out, so Bird resigns his place
(Hopeless indeed as in the present case)
To Captain Abel, and away he went
With the Releif, the Siege incontinent
Renewed was, and Abel thus confined,
After a while to Gell the place resigned.
Arundel-Castle Waller came to take,
Assaults most furious, many did he make,
Yet, with great loss was bravely still repel'd.
After a month or more they out had held
They yield; In it was a full years provision,
Wondrous well manned, of Arms and Ammunition
Abundance, who can value this rich prize?
Which made the most that knew it to surmise,
Waller with Golden Cannons here had played,
And so this last and greatest Battery made.
For Winchester Waller does march, the Town
Hopton possessed, and does to Bramdean Down
Draw out his men, resolved Waller to fight,
Waller comes on, the Armies now in sight
Each of the other; with loud shouts they rent
The very Clouds, a Dareing complement
Of thundering Cannons, is the first salute,
Waller the Hill had gained, the first Dispute
Was him to dispossess; but dear it cost,
And many a life on both parts for it lost.
This dear-gain'd Hill, Stout Lisle guarded that night,
During which both parts did desist to fight.
Another Hill more advantageous far,
Waller had found, hither his Foot drawn are,
The hedges lined, his Horse themselves display
All in the Van. No sooner had the Day
Lightened the World, but Hopton on does press,
Waller of his new-ground to dispossess.
Balfore wheels off, as though he seemed to fly,
The Ambuscado's of their Infrantry
Are now discri'd: Yet no time to retire.
In Vollies thick from the hedges they give fire,
Bullets like hailstones fly, that bloody ground
Is covered with Dead Corpse, Ruthen a wound
Received here; Lord Stuart here was slain,
And that brave Smith, that erewhile did regain
The Royal Standard at Edgehill; Stout Scot,
Apleford, Mannings, Sandies, all Colonels, shot.
Most violent, and bloody was the fight,
Sulphurous Powder-clouds, obscure the light,
And fiery flashes through them blind men's eyes,
Clashing of Armor, tumult, dolorous cries
Of dying men resound in every place.
Wallers Commanders also fall apace,
The Stout Dalbier had many a wound here got,
A Cannon Bullet Thompsons thigh off shot,
And numbers more lay bleeding on the ground.
Hopton at length a forced retreat does sound,
His men disordered well-nigh to a rout,
To Basing-house from hence he wheels about
Winchester left; Waller does follow near,
Winchester yields, when once his men appear
Before the Town? Waller's successeful fate,
Prince Griffith does indeed so animate,
To undertake North Wales, obedient
To bring by force, unto the Parliament.
From Lonoon in a most heroic guise,
They set him forward to his enterprise;
His silver Trumpets, Sumpters, brave attire
Even of his Troopers, make the most admire.
His first design is Rupert to seek out
They meet; This Pseudo-Prince is put to rout,
His men dispersed, all driven into holes;
His golden Mountains, thus do prove but Moles;
Like Phaeton now fallen from the sky
Of all command; his vaunts and gallantry
Lie buried now in scorn, his means spent all,
Debauched he lives, Pride needs must have a fall.
Newark against Meldrum close siedge had laid
And many ways the Town to gain assayed;
His Batteries, Mines, assaults were all in vain,
Numbers each day of his assailants slain.
Rupert at length with a brave Army comes,
To raise the siedge, Meldrum draws off his Guns
At his approach; and to the Spittle near
He plants them; all his foot embodied were
In the same place; strong trenches them surround,
His Horse stands pransing on that champion ground
Under the Beacon-hill; Rupert draws nigh,
And from the Beacon does the foes discry
Resolved to charge them; though his Foot and Rear
Some three miles distant yet behind him were.
In Order good, his men the hill descend,
Stoutly their ground do Meldrums Horse defend.
Bloody grew the dispute, the Vale bespread
With heaps of Men and Horses, fallen, and dead.
Rupert's right-wing was well-nigh put to rout,
And cowardly some did run till Martin stout
Came in to their relief, and turned the chase
Making the late pursuers fly; give place.
Hasting's and Porter's acts were eminent,
And Gerrard did service most excellent
Till first dismounted, in his arm then shot
He yields himself a Prisoner; who did not
Rupert's heroic valor here amaze.
As on some prodigy men stand and gaze
So do his actions even attract each eye,
To see, and wonder: him his deeds discry
Three sturdy fellows him at length beset,
And one fast hold, did of his Choler get;
But that hold hand Neale at a blow in twain,
Cut from its arm; a second there was slain
By Rupert's self, the third was Pistol'd dead
By Master Mortaign. On the Prince does lead
His troops victorious; charging through the foes,
Hewing down lains before him where he goes.
At length they run even quite behind their foot,
Up to their works Rupert pursues the rout;
And then retires out of their Cannon shot.
Tilliar by this, up with the foot was got;
And from the hill most boldly does them lead,
Toward their Bridge of Boats, for which they plead
With Vollies thick of Muskets, intermix't
With thundering peals of Ordinance, betwixt
Them, there they manage a most bloody fray.
From Muscam-bridge their horse run quite away
For Nottingham: the Princes force surround
Them at the Spittle. But at length they sound
A parley; Rupert let them march away
With Colors, Drums, Swords, Horses; but does stay
Their Cannons, Muskets, Powder, Match and Ball;
The noble Gerrard was released withal.
Then Rupert having given them this defeat,
Does to his best advantages retreat.
Finis Libri Tertii.
THE ENGLISH CIVIL WARS.
BOOK IV.
The Contents.
Essex and Wallers Forces are combined,
Essex for Cornwall goes: Waller's designed
The King to fight: Copedray-bridge dispute:
The King does after Essex make pursuit;
Essex defeat in Cornwall: Malsmberry taken,
Pennington Siege and Banburies: Min is slain;
Ast-ferry fight: Monmoth lost and regaind:
Newberry second fight: Norton constraind
Baseing to leave: Wye- fight. Shrewsbury won
Some Northern actions that this while are done.
THe winged Musicians pleasantly did sing
Their airy notes, to welcome in the spring,
Tellus in her Green Livery was beclad,
Flora the Meads with Flowers enameld had,
And now what County, or what Hamler clear
Of Armed Camps, and Martial tumults were?
Great expectation of some actions great
Possess the World, for Oxfordshire the seat
Of three great Armies was; combined here
Essex and Wallers numerous Forces were
Against the King: who fighting did Decline,
With their united Forces; and design
Them to divide, and then the one assail.
Nor did the King his expectations fail,
For he with winding Marches flies about,
And they pursue their Guns, their numerous Foot,
Their Carriages: their Marches so impede,
That Essex does from Waller now recede,
And into Cornwall his great Guns does bring,
Waller alone left to pursue the King,
But ere they part the Heavens did evidence,
Their Frowns on their Rebellious Insolence,
And made them feel the thundering Jove well knew
That his Anointed, none should dare pursue,
A most prodigeous storm of hail there fell
Near Woodstock on them, out of Heaven, even Hell
Seemed to be poured; every stone so great,
As to the ground, down Horse and man did beat;
Thus for two hours, the angry Clouds did pour
Upon their heads this more than furious snower;
Yet in the Royal Camp no hail at all,
But two miles distant (wondrous strange) did fall.
But let us return to Waller, and the King,
His Majesty to Worcester does bring.
His Army Waller follows, Beudley then
The King marched toward. Waller with his men
Here got before; thinking the King would fly
Straight up the River, unto Shrewsberry.
The King wheels back for Worcester, and so
Some two-daies march had got before his foe.
When first the King to Worcester drew nigh,
From Dudley-Castle the Besiegers fly.
In winding marches hence the King does pass
To Buckingham: his next March ordered was
For Banbury; But Waller in his way,
Upon Croach-hill, his Army does display
To the Kings view: From that time, even till night,
For Burley, and for Nethrope they do fight,
Two Villages betwixt their Camps that laid,
The loss was equal; but when night displaid
Her sable Mantle over our Hemisphere,
Waller advanced to Burton-hill; more near
To Banbury, and here his Excellence
Embattail'd stood: nor could be drawn from thence.
For Daintry, off then march the Cavalliers,
Leaving the Bridge well manned with Musketeers
To guard their Rear: Waller his Cannons sends
First down the Hill, and then himself discends
With his main Body, falls in the Kings Rear,
Compton and Cleaveland, first commanded were,
With noble Bernerd's brave reserve of foot
To make a stand, and then to face about
And charge: most nobly on the Lords do go
Charge through, and through the proud advancing foe.
Nor Waller's thundering Cannons did they fear,
Of which, the most here from him taken were.
Wilmot, the Lords did second gallantly,
Many of Wallers on the Turfe do dye.
Bloody the fight with courage brave maintained,
Yet victory Nobly was at length regained
On the Kings part; Wilmot twice Prisoner taken,
The valiant Cleark and Bootlier, both here slain.
Haward and stout Cornwallis Knighted were
Who seeing Wilmot Prisoner void of fear
Rush through their thickest foes, and hundreds send
To Charon's Boat; reschew their honored friend.
Waller by this gave ground, sounds a retreat,
Fearing indeed a total rout, defeat;
Nor could the King his victory home pursue,
Cause Waller his advantages too, drew.
Some Leathern Guns; twelve Brass here taken were
With Weems that Scot; their Master-Cannoneer,
Who both against his Oath, and Loyalty
Unto his Prince; Waller's Ar^illery
Commanded; oh! ingratful mone-sworne- Scot,
Against the King to act; who sure did not
Deserve at thy hand; two hundred foot,
Were also taken prisoners at this bout.
And the like number on the ground lay slain
Of Waller's men; for London now again
For fresh recruits Waller his march does take.
Haste after Essex, hence the King does make.
In Cornwall now arrived Lestithiel near
Where General Essex forces quartered were.
The King's victorious forces upon sight
Would needs go on, engage them there to fight.
But them to starve the King resolves, and so
Encamps his Army very near the foe.
Himself at Mohum's house Boconnock lies.
Greenvile came up at length with more supplies,
And now by force of Lesterman possessed
Essex was straightned much, much now distressed.
A Fort and House near to Foy-Haven stood,
The King got these; Essex deprived of food
Was from the Sea by this; for these now manned,
The King that harbor solely did command.
Yet 'cause the foes ground had so much still West
And two small Harbors there as yet possessed.
Morice upon their quarters does design
To fall; yet after some advice, decline
The enterprise; for them to hunger out
Was held the best: Goring's Horse, Basset's Foot
Therefore went West, betwixt them and Saint Blaze
Obstructing all relief, in this sad case,
Balfore does with their Horse break quite away
Leaving their Foot: Walgraves near Saltash lay
Whom with his men, Balfore had nigh suppris'd.
But when the old man better was advised
That they were foes; his Brigade out he drew,
A hundred of them on the place there slew,
Took Abercony Prisoner, and some more
Goring pursued too, but they got over
To Plymouth: in the mean time all the foot
Lestithiel left; to Foy-ward marching out,
Many brave Cannons left behind them were
The King possessed them; follows in their Rear
From hedge, to hedge, most bravely does them beat.
At length they face, and force the King retreat,
Having got an advantage of the ground,
On goes brave Bret, (and though he got a wound)
With the Queens Troop, and forced them run again,
Only some four or five of his were slain,
For which brave service he was dubbed Knight.
Nobly Lord Stuard did in this same fight
Behave himself; With the Kings Troop: Wray's Foot
Twice forcing from their hedges, to a rout;
But night comes on and parts this running fray,
And in this night their General stole away
With Meirick, and Lord Roberts in a beat,
To Plymouth over the Waves they nimbly float.
Leaving their Army in this great distress.
Pity such men should General's names possess;
Who will not with their men participate,
In most adverse, as well as prosperous state;
O timorous men! notorious cowar dize.
Ten thousand men to leave in such a guise.
But the swift hours by this induce the day,
And known it was Essex was run away,
Butler his Drums a parley caused to beat,
And with the Royalists on terms they treat.
And in conclusion, thus they do agree,
To leave their Powder, Arms, Artillery.
Only to officers it granted was,
With Pistols, Swords, and Horses off to pass.
Ten thousand Arms, brass Pieces forty nine,
Seven hundred Carriages they here resign
Of Powder too; three hundred barrels: then
Their Armelesse Army march: yet of their men
Some thousands take up Arms on the King's part.
From Cornwall does his Majesty depart
For Oxford; and sole Master of the field
Barstable, Ilfercombe, and Saltash yield,
To his victorious Troops, ( Saltash was taken
By storm, and therefore many of them slain.)
Thus in the West, the King was prevailent
Gloucester near, the game against him went,
As though that county were designed to be,
The King and Kingdoms, sole Catastrophie.
Massy at Beverstone once wors'd; again
Draws out his men that Castle to regain,
Makes an assault; but least unto the foes
The places weakness should their lives expose,
Upon conditions the Defendants yield.
Nor yet could Malmsbury Colonel Howard shield
From Massies powers, the suburbs first they gained.
But Howard sallying out boldly; constrained
Them to give ground; what cowards will you flee?
Said Massy to them, rally, follow me,
On then again they go, the Town they win
Many put to the Sword, of those within.
On Teuxbury Massy had his next design
Which he surprises; but they soon combine,
Their dispersed for ces beat him out again
Massy comes on afresh; many are slain:
Min routed in disorder fled away,
The Town to Massy left is as a prey.
The Fox so politic had left his den
Of Tamworth and to Beudley leads his men,
Pretends to Rupert that he did retain
Demands access, it is granted; the Guard's taken,
The Town he enters falls upon his prey,
Littleton and his men all led away
His Captives are; Mythologists applaud
In Foxes, not their sortitude, but fraud.
Dennington-Castle Middleton comes to take,
And an assault unparralleld did make;
With more than desperate fury they maintain,
This fierce assault six hours, but all in vain,
A hundred Soldiers on the place there fell,
Nine of their Captains, and a Colonel;
Hundreds more wounded, but Blois of his men
Both killed and wounded, had not full twice ten.
Middleton marches off toward the West,
Bridge-water, near Courtney, and he contest
Sharply a while (the hedges all were lined
With Musketeers, in Ambushes designed,
Middleton to catch) but off he wheels and flies,
Many first killed: at Sherburn does surprise
A Troop of Royalists, and some does slay,
Victor and Vanquished in the self-same Day.
Dennington too, now Horton comes before,
Twelve nights and days, his thundering Cannons roar,
And play most furiously against those Walls,
Some part whereof unto the ground there falls,
Three lofty Towers they raze too, to the ground,
Yet all attempts in vain, experience found
For the Defendants gallantry, and art
(Maugre their malice) forced them to depart.
With numerous Colliers now comes Colonel Fines
From Bedworth, Banbury-castle undermines,
Thought in a cloud of Sulphur, to have sent
These Walls up to the Skies: Waters prevent
His wished attempt, frustrate his Colliers skill.
Then with his thundering Cannons next he will
The work effect, a breach full wide he made,
With Sword and Pistol they the same invade,
In four Divisions more, on came his Foot
With Scaling-Ladders on their shoulders; stout
To admiration, the Defendants were,
Nor could the assailants any Ladder rear,
But with a vengeance all beat back again,
Except some hundreds on the place left slain.
The next means for to win it, Fines does try,
Is with Granado's them to terrify
Out of their hold; with streaming fires these blaze
Amongst the Clouds, while the Defendants gaze
With wonder, Down precipitate they fall,
Whose thundering language did indeed, them all
At first affright, some kill, and some blow blind,
As Dust in streets, is by a whirling VVind
Blown every way; So bullets, many a nail,
With shattered shells the standers by assail
When these do break; the only waie's to fall
And lie prostrait, so to avoid them all.
Whilst multitudes of these, Fines on them plays,
North-hampton comes with Gage the Siege to raise.
Fines fac^d the Earl a while, then off-ward Drew
To Hanwell, but North-hampton does pursue,
Falls in his rear; Fines faces, many slain,
Two hours and more, both sides the fight maintain
With resolution, and much gallantry,
At length Fines Forces do disperse and fly,
Three carriages of Powder, Match and Shot,
With one brave Cannon, here the Victors got.
Mins grand design was Massy to ensnare,
And to this purpose many projects are
All set on foot, but fail; Hartpury near
Some few of Mins Rear-guard surprised were,
But near to Elderfield their whole Brigade
Advance; and there their Ambuscado's laid,
Lining the hedges with their Musketeers,
Their Horse stand in their Front; Massy appears
Next morning, charge: Mins Horse soon retire,
Thinking their Ambuscado's should give fire,
Upon the now advancing Enemy,
And so they did; but forced at length to fly.
Min with two-hundred on the turfe were slain,
And near three hundred Prisoners of them taken.
Wounded and taken Passer was also,
Slain Min's Brigade as he came posting to,
To let them know more Forces were at hand.
And though those follow under his command;
Yet their pursuit was vain, the feat was done,
And Massy with his prize and prisoners gone.
Rupert Ast-ferry to secure intent,
Six hundred Horse and Foot thither had sent,
These for their Guard entrench that neck of land,
That Wye and Severn's confluence 'twixt did stand.
Massy this hears, and therefore does Design,
Thence to enforce them, ere their works and Line
Perfected are; thither therefore he went,
A Squadron of his Musketeers are sent
Privately on; Ruperts men them discry,
And at them all, their Guards at once let fly,
In a loud Volly all their shot; again
Ere they could charge, Massie's Forlorn amain
Now mount their works; then his reserves on came,
A bloody fight both parts a while maintain;
But in conclusion Massy got the Day,
Except whose heels and Boats bore them away,
All slain and Prisoners are; So various are
These sad successes of this Civil War.
Kirle to Massy, Monmoth had betrayed,
Which to effect, thus they their plot had laid.
Massy to Monmoth first advances near,
Then feigns a Post him to recall; they hear
In Monmoth Massie's gone; Draw out, pursue
Kirle commands this party, who well knew
Where Massies Ambuscado's now were laid,
Thither he leads his party; all betrayed,
And now surrounded, yield to Massy; then
To Monmoth with a part of Massie's men
Kirle returns, saying these Prisoners were
They on the Gates; But, behold, in the Reat
Massy comes up; then Kirle and those got in,
Declare themselves, to wound and kill begin
The Guard; let down the bridge, Massy comes ore
The Garrison they instantly ore power,
The Governor, advantaged by night
With many more, escape their hands by flight.
Broughton intends Godridge to fortify,
Hereford Forces his design discry,
Draw out, the first assault they on it make,
Broughton and all his men they Prisoners take.
Now Massies Horse to Monmoth quartering near,
Bravely assaild by valiant Blaxton were,
Many he took, many of them were slain,
Yet fresh supplies came up, and back again
Blaxton enforce with loss. Massy also
With Gerrard and with Winter had to do,
Skirmishing often. Massy from Monmoth gone,
Throgmorton had the Regiment alone,
And Drawing out on Chepstow to attempt,
From Ragland and from Godridge some are sent,
Who in Throgmorton's absence now devise
A Stratagem, Monmoth again surprise.
What Treachery lost, Policy bravely won
These nobly did, but Kirle had basely done.
Stephens, Raudon to releeve, flies with his Horse
To give him ground does the besiegers force,
Whilst he alights, makes merry with his friends,
Renowned Ashley a strong party sends,
They block him up, who others thought to free
From a straight siege, besieged himself is he,
And all together yield, so excellent
Such Stratagems was Ashley to invent.
Manchester, Essex, Waller, all combine
Forces, the King for to surround, near Spine
They randezvow; then off their Horse they Draw,
First to enforce the Royalists from Shaw,
A hot dispute Prince Morice Horse and they,
Maintain with loss on both parts all that Day.
Nor did their thundering Cannons cease the while,
Some men they kill, some houses they untile,
And with those tiles, often strike some Soldiers Dead.
Then for a Mill on Kennet next they plead,
Where (many Royallists surpised and slain)
That Mill and passage the Essexians gain,
Till noble Ashley with his Valiant Foot,
Came up (the Foes put all to flight and rout,
And many in the River Drowned) regained
The Mill and Passage: Bennet too maintained,
Waller against a bloody fight: Whose Horse
For to retire, Legs Chavalry enforce.
Yet rallying Leg did bravely charge again,
Routs Essex's Lifeguard, whose Commander slain
By Bennet was; The Duke of Yorke's Brigade,
Led on by Leagure, gallant service made,
Thus on the West of Newberry went the game.
But on the East the bold Essexians came
With confidence, and resolution on,
And noble Goring pressed sore upon;
Who did with courage no whit less oppose
The numerous, and as yet prevailing Foes.
Till on goes Cleaveland with his own Brigade,
And those insulting Foes to fly soon made:
In this same charge was Major Urry slain,
And Cleaveland's self, that Noble Earl was taken.
Manchester's men this while on the North-East,
To Shaw-ward in this bloody fight, the least
Part had not managed: where Renowned Lisle,
Had bravely kept them Martial play this while;
Astley and Brown here service brave had done,
And had some Cannons from the Rebels wone.
Thus was this fight maintained in a round,
Till with dead corpse that blood-ore-flowing ground
Newberry on each side, lay thick bespread,
And Kennets ruddy streams discolored
With several rivulets of crimson blood,
United, and augmented to a flood,
Nor on the Day alone here did they fight,
But in loud Vollies fired all the night,
The Echoes of their thundering Guns, loud cries,
In Doleful accents from those woods replies,
And neighboring vales, tumult, licentious rage,
Fills every place; here armed Troops engage,
There great Battailions of brave Infantry,
With Death-Defying magnanimity:
The Earth seemed for to tremble and rebound,
Whereon the prauncing Horse did charge; a wound
Brainford received in the mouth, Alford in the thigh,
Leagure and Leak stout Royalists here Dye,
Their honor lost in Cornwall to regain
The Roundheads fight; the Kings part to maintain
Their Honor got; the motives equal were
Courage to breed, and to exempt all fear.
A Cornish Foot man slipped and got a fall,
As he was running nigh a Garden wall,
Even at that time, that a thick flight of shot,
Came whistleing ore his head, he swore by Got
That he was slain; and panting there he said,
For Saints and Souls, Desiring his Comrade
Him there to Bury: But to search his wound,
A Surgeon came; behold! none could be found.
They bid him rise, and fight, for naught him ailed,
But all their words with him nothing prevailed:
Rather, said he, Inter me here alive,
Then I should in such Dangerous times survive.
Cold grew his limbs, his pulse beat weak, his breath
Fetched thick, at length he Dies, for fear of Death.
Dubious as yet, was victory whom to grace
With her triumphant Palms, for in one place
The King prevails, takes Cannon, when hard by,
The like success attends the Enemy.
Here might you see some fly, others pursue,
Fresh Horse advance, those victors late subdue.
Both sides had Ensigns, Cannons, Prisoners taken,
Numbers of both parts on the field lay slain,
Dubious it was, to whom to attribute
Victory, in this so late, and fierce Dispute.
Yet Trophies more on the Kings part appear,
Now marching off for Wallingford: whose Rear
Till midnight on that bloody place did stay,
And then without Disturbance march away.
Basing had been besieged nigh half a year,
Many the assaults, many the batteries were
Against it made; yet those attempts all vain,
Defendants few, numerous assailants slain.
Many assaults Waller upon it made,
Who six whole weeks battering before it laid.
Then Norton's, Morley's, Onslow's Forces come,
Out the Defendants Sally often, kill some
At each adventure; but at length the King
Sends them releif, which on stout Gage did bring.
On Chidnam-down, Norton and he does meet,
And with a gallant Charge most nobly greet
Each other; In conclusion Norton flies,
Basing-house furnished is with all supplies
Now necessary, Gage does back retreat.
Johnson and Cufford Sallying out did beat
Up Onflows Quarters, many Prisoners taken,
One Demi-culvering, with some hundreds slain.
But the besiegers rally, and again
Renew their Siege: To whom Manchester came
With a great Army, yet here did not stay,
But to meet Essex marched straight away.
When the besiegers heard of Essex fate
In Cornwall, and that battle passed late
At Newberry: with the Kings approach, they fire
Their Hutts, and rise; to Reading straight retire.
Winter intends a passage upon Wye,
For his advantages to fortify.
But Massi'es forces all upon him came,
Put him to rout; Gamne and Vangerris slain,
And Pore of Barkley drowned; the Prisoners were
Many (though Winter's self escaped) here.
Shrewsbury to surprise, Mitton had laid
His project, which now took: some say betrayed
Into his hands, that Town and Castle were,
Great was the loss the King sustained here.
Commanders many of great dignity,
Arms, Ammunition, Men, Artillery,
Abundance here were taken: Plymouth also
Surrendered had to her beseiging foe.
Weymouth was yielded too; even every where
Sharp seidges, bloody skirmishes there were.
So active Mars was on the Southern Stage.
No whit less furious was his Northern rage.
New-Castle's numerous Forces now advance,
Haward to Pras-bridge comes, whose fatal chance
Was there for to be slain, Hotham that day,
Had faced; at night draws off, marching away.
New Castle comes to York; where Cumberland
Conjoyns these forces under his command,
To Tadcaster they march, where the bold foes,
Fairfax and Hotham's forces, them oppose.
The Town well nigh New Castle's men had got
Till Lister's men (though Lister's self was shot)
Did in disorder beat them back again,
About a hundred Royalist; here slain.
Fairfax at night (the fight maintained all day)
Clear quitts the Town, for Selby marched away.
Young Fairfax with his Troops from Bradford came
To Leeds, and fiercely did assault the same.
After some hours dispute the Town they win,
Many are slain and taken of those within.
Savile does fly to Pomfret; Beamount drowned
In swiming Air: Briggs here received a wound
And so did Leigh: some twenty of these slain.
Fairfax his Horse, Foot, and his Club-arm'd train
To Sea-croft leads, after a sharp dispute
Routed is Fairfax, nigh to Leeds, pursuit
After his dispersed men the conquerers make,
Many they kill, great numbers Prisoners take.
Wentworth with his Brigade at Wakefield laid,
Fairfax comes thither, does the Town invade,
All Wentworth's men (just as the Trojeans) here,
Drunk, or asleep, in bed, surprised were
Though Wentworth escaped, the Prisoners taken thus
Then the assailants were more numerous.
Chamley the Quarters of the Cavaliers
Often with success attempted when he hears,
Slingsby at Gisborough to be resident,
Bointon and he conjoined, thither went,
After a sharp encounter, Slingsby's taken,
With nigh two hundred more, many are slain;
Many the Arms the Royalists lost here.
Active the Royalists at Latham were.
Before Manchester did Lord Strange Display
His new-raised forces, but was beat away
Thence with some loss: alas! who can declare,
All the occurrences of this sad War.
The valiant Tinsley did with sword and fire
Lancaster fall upon; the Rogues retire,
Out of those flaming streets, discolored
With blood, and with dead corpse also bespread;
Then on the Castle Tinsley makes assay,
But leaves it, and for Yorkshire marched away.
Girlington stout, Thirlan his house maintained
Against a sharp siedge; yet was at length constrained
On terms for to surrender, Horneby too
Had yielded to the now prevailing foe.
Leviston with his valiant Skiptoneers
To Setle came; the Town assaults, Briggs fears
His men would not hold out; up th'hills he flies,
Only some three in this dispute there dies.
After a while, Briggs did to Skipton near,
Conjoined with some of Hothams Troops, appear.
At Carleton or Kildwick these remain,
Often they skirmish, often some are slain.
In Richmond-shire the noble Darcy had,
Agallant Regiment in blew-Coats clad;
Under blew Colors raised for the King,
Which Regiment he does to Skipton bring.
With these conjoined, against Thornton-Hall we go,
Make an attempt out thence to beat the foe
But neither House nor Barns, scarce once hit were,
At twenty shots, by our blind Cannonier;
Whilst some Dragoons alight on foot to play,
Some of our horse the foes had stolen away;
Only some Barns we at this bout did fire,
And thence for Skipton with some loss retire.
To Thornton-Hall, that Country that lay near
Much disaffected to the Kings part were,
Clowns for the most part sturdy, savage, rude,
Whom fair pretenses did trapan, delude
And court into Rebellion; these did fear
Cause some; that all of us even Papists were;
Their whineing Preachers made them think the King
Strange innovations on the Church would bring
And that his studies all he did employ
The Laws to change, Propriety destroy.
And on the contrary they did pretend,
The Parliament the country would befriend
Popery rout out; make them a people free
From any Tax, from any Subsidy,
And all their charges in these Wars defray;
(These things they did the clear contrary way.)
And still their exhortations thus did end.
Your Coin and Plate on public Faith now lend.
The Parliament is on your good intent,
O freely then, aid you the Parliament.
Such fair pretenses, promises untrue,
To sad rebellion multitudes soon drew.
And did much Coin into their Coffers, bring
To manage these late wars against the King.
Finis Libri Quarti.
THE English CIVIL WARS.
BOOK V.
The Contents.
Atherton fight; Hulls Siedge yet these between,
At Gainsborough and Nantwitch do interveene
Some actions. Winsby fight: Hulls siedge does rise:
New Castle meets old Levens enterprise
Invading England, his Oration
His Covenanters to; Bowden-Hills on
And Pinshaw; Skirmishes: Corbridge dispute,
Fairfax 's forces mightily recruite
In Yorkshire: Selby stormed is by them,
Renowned Redman's Cauwoods Stratagem.
New Castle had received a brave supply
Of Arms, Commanders, great Artillery,
Late from the Queen: against Bradford then we go,
That town devoted so much to the foe,
That scarce a Royalist in it was found.
The place is situate on declining ground;
A craggy River on the South does glide.
With Bulworks strong the Town was fortified.
Trading had flourished, rich the Boars late grew
Of which no cause, but self-desert they knew.
A deep dissembled, verbal, sanctity
Was their Religion; for true piety,
Truth, and good manners had small practice here,
Bishops and Papists hated of them were.
Also the Gentry; facile to persuade
Upon the Account of liberty: to aid
The Parliament, which made them in such swarms;
Under rebellious Ensigns now bear arms.
Such is the Town, such is the Country too,
With which our Forces now must have to do.
Leeds is forsaken; before Howley-Hall
We then encampe; a breach soon in the wall
Our thundering Cannons make; they yield, then we
Bradford toward, draw our Artillery.
Near Atherton a whinny More does lie,
Full of old Cole-pits, now filled up, and dry:
Fairfax in these his Ambuscado's laid,
From out of these, our Forlorn they invade
Put them to rout, our seconds also fly,
Till General King came with a fresh supply.
Whose words, and actions much encouragement,
Unto our flying Cohorts did present
So that they Rally; and charge up again,
Many of both parts on the field lie slain?
Sharp was the contest, desperate, fierce and hot,
Thick flew the vollies of dead wounding shot,
Loud roared our Cannons; a tumultuous rage,
Filled every place, Bodies of Foot engage,
(Having their Powder spent) at push of Pike,
And with the But-end of their Muskets strike
Out one another brains, so fierce each stroke
As Barrels bowed, and Stocks to shivers broke,
Leaving their Pans often fixed in the head
Of whom they wounded, or had last struck dead.
Fairfax's Horse advantage had of ground,
In number ours, Haward a mortal wound
Received; our Swords, Rapiers, and Tucks we Dye
In one another blood: Pistols now fly
With more than furious, angry violence
At one another heads: most brave defense
The foe still made, though we press on amain,
So difficult was victory to obtain.
Hieron and Talbot meet, most dexterously
At one another let their pistols fly
One in the breast, the other in the head
Shot; from their horses on the Turfe fall dead.
Now victory, that of late was dubious,
Had her tryumphant Palm bestowed on us;
The foes before our Troops victorious fly,
In this pursuit numbers of theirs do dye.
A zealous Puritan amongst the rest,
Before the fight did Fairfax thus request?
'Beseech your worship let us no quarter give,
Pity these wicked Cavalliers should live.
Their party beat; a Cavallier did ride
Up to this Zealot who soon quarter cried?
Villain, said he, no quarter thou shall have,
Who will not give, pity they should receive.
From Hallifax a club-arm'd short-shorne crew
Zeal for the cause, unto this battle drew,
Who, while the day seemed on their side to go,
Pursued and cried, see! God does rout our foe!
At length the battle sore against them went,
Their Clubs and Sythes thrown down incontinent
They run, and cried, oh! God where art thou now
These Cavalliers, alas! will us undo.
Smalwood had told them, Preaching in a tree,
Ten before one, ninety before ten should flee;
Smalwood was a true Prophet in this case,
One now might ten, and ten might ninety chase.
A Northren Trooper after Briggs did ride,
About to strike, his club-foot he espied,
Turning his horse he said thus in great fear,
Alas! Comrades is not the foul Fiend here?
But with the fight the day began to close
To several guards our Prisoners we dispose.
Lousie to grow indeed they need not fear,
For now of clothes as thin as hair they were:
From close crop't heads, and long ears preminence
The name of Roundheads late they did commence.
Next day betimes Bradford we came before,
Against the Town our thundering Cannons roar,
Resolved the place by storm to force we are.
But for the onset while we do prepare
Advantaged by obscurity of night
Fairfax with some Commanders take their flight
To Selby-ward, which when our General knew
A party strong are sent, them to pursue.
Fairfax having got (start enough) arrived
At Selby safe, the old Lord and he contrived,
That Town to quit and straight for Hull to make.
To Selby come our Horse, some kill, some take,
Ere over the River they all Boated had.
Bradford this while was taken, a plunder sad
(But yet deserved) it suffered. Rotheram taken
We had before, with Sheifield: To regain
Hull, fatal Hull, our Army makes address
Hotham of this by force to dispossess.
Fairfax on Gainsborough an assault does make,
Enters the Town, in it does Kingston take,
Who in a Pinnace down the river's sent
To Hull; King meets them as they thither went,
And plays upon them with his Musketeers,
The noble Earl upon the Deck appears,
To cry for quarter, for his enemies,
But by a Bullet shot from Shore, he dies.
Thus by his friends the noble ^earpoint's slain.
Cavendish marches Gainsbrough to regain
From Newark, and close siege thereto had laid,
But Cromwell comes to the Defendants aid,
They fight: a many Royalists there dye,
The rest for safety are enforced to fly.
Not many hours after this fight was done,
New-Castl's Army to the field up come.
For Lincoln, Cromwell his Retreat does make,
And Gainsborough soon New-Castle's Army take.
Want of Intelligence, thus cast away,
Many brave gallants on this fatal day.
Nantwitch before, the Siege some while had laid
When Monk at Chester-lands, and Byron made
Both with his own and these received supplies,
Them to releeve, this following enterprise.
At his approach off the besiegers drew,
They meet, and fight, thick now the Bullets flew,
Many of both parts on the ground lie slain,
Fairfax at length is victor, Monk's here taken,
And Byron put to a disordered flight,
And nigh to Chester walls pursued that night.
Kingston before, our Army late sat down,
Mounts high were raised, Cannons against the town
Are planted, furious batteries many made;
Many Grenades on the Town are played,
Great Engines, many Ladders frame were
Only perhaps to put the Town in fear,
For no assault was made, the siege throughout.
With the Defendants many a bloody bout
Our Army had, the strength of that cursed hold,
Made them in frequent sallies far more bold.
Their numerous Cannons from the walls they play
Beat down our works, many Commanders slay
One fatal shot Leviston of his head
Deprived, and struck another Captain dead.
Alutus with many more of Eminence
Here lost their lives; Witherington led from hence
A party brave, Boston (as some surmise)
To take; but Cromwell meets the enterprise.
They fight, at length the Cavalliers do fly,
The valiant Hopton, and brave Bowls do dye,
With hundreds more, numerous the Prisoners were
And great the prize, Cromwell obtained here.
As with her Train the Queen late Southward went
Bravely she had regained Burton on Trent.
Of Darcy's Blew-Coats some the River wade,
Whilst that their Colonel had his entrance made
Upon the Bridge, their Cannon leapt upon
This is the Kings, said he, thence nobly on
His men he leads into the very Town,
Their Rampires and their Bulworks all thrown down
Many of the Defendants there do dye,
And Burton's taken by their gallantry.
Not many hours after the Town was taken,
Within the Church by accident the Trane
Took fire; the Leads into the Air it blew,
And of Legg's men, some lamed, and some it slew
Against Hull the siege was stoutly still maintained
Though but small hopes that Town should be regained
But the same day of Winsby's late defeat,
Boldly they sally out in numbers great,
Beating up many of our Guards; they take
And kill a number. And the Scots now make
Their entrance into England, and we were
Drawn off to meet and stop the Scots Carear.
From Hull the Camp thus rose, oh! fatal place,
Out of our Annals let us even quite dirace
Of Hull and Gloucester those odious names,
Rebellions hellish sin them much defames,
And infamous for ever let them be,
Till they repent of their disloyalty.
In that same month from Janus that bears name
The Covenanters into England came;
Deep was the Snow, conjeal'd the Rivers were
With crystal Ice, drowning they need not fear?
No though the Ice had not been half so strong,
Seldom the water does the Halter wrong.
Thus cold the winter, but the zeal was hot,
Of the rebellious, and falacious Scot.
Some twenty thousand strong, they march in men
And with great Guns about some two times ten.
Each Loune had numbers of those creatures bold,
That sit till taken napping at their hold.
If winter their increase did not prevent,
Each Loun had bred his triple Regiment;
For a reserve they bore amongst their rags,
At least a couple of well crammed meale-baggs,
His Can, his Pan, his muckle large-horn-spoone,
The luggage was of every lousy Loune.
A Piper did before each Cohort play,
Each Jocky had his Ginny by the way
To mow with now and then; All was their own
They could lay hands on, the long Robe and Gown
Especially they hate; nor did they irk,
(Though sacrilege) to plunder every Kirk.
What there they found, as bratts of Popery
Most superstitious do the Louns decry?
This deformed army for the Reformation,
Is hired to fight, of this our English Nation.
If out of Hell an army they had sought,
Sure no such Villains, could from thence be brought.
This Army now advanced New Castle near,
The General bade each Lad, draw nigh and hear
What to their expedition he could say.
It Is not bra Lads those Louns that run away,
Some five years since, not far from this same place
With which we are to fight: Indeed the case
Is altered now; all England then were foes,
But now they are friends, let us only beat but those,
(Casting his eye upon New-Castle's men)
Our work's then done, home we may turn again?
What, said I home again, nay by my fay,
Not till we have received even all our pay.
If then all England fled at our first sight,
These Cavalliers never dare our forces fight,
Meethinks as yet, that running Charge I see,
When quite through Tine disordered they did flee.
And if my Genius, Lads, do truth presage,
These Cavalliers never will with us engage,
Our cause is now the same that it was then,
We have as many, and as gallant men.
The Parliament will let us nothing want,
Being engaged in our good Covenant;
These Louns before us we shall hunger-starve,
The names of soldiers they do scarce deserve;
We need not fight, this snow, this frost, this hail
Hunger and cold, against them will soon prevail,
And make them either run away; or dye
By multitudes, meethinks I do descry,
Discouragement already in them all.
Many good prizes to our share will fall;
Plunder of the Malignants we shall take,
But who are such? even whom we please to make,
Bra' Quarters we shall have, bra' commodation,
We Will put our selves into the English fashion.
Each Ginny here shall have her silken Gown,
Those Cloaks, bra' suits, good Beavours, all our own
Shall be we find: we will then fare of the best.
With good your worship, the English shall request
The worst Lad here, even for their own: for we
Of them and theirs, will the sole Masters be.
Take courage then, and hardship let us endure,
Toil is a mean will wealth and ease procure,
Even in the height of future gallantry,
Past toils to think on, will most pleasant be.
Thus said th'illiterate General while the rest,
By a loud shout their high flown hopes expressed.
New-Castles Army was arrived near.
On Bowden-hills, therefore these Blew Caps were
Straight ordered to their post, whence all that day,
From their advantages both Armies play
Upon each other, Vollies thick of shot,
Yet at the push of Pike engaged not.
On Pinshaw-hills they have a second bout,
And for some hours in vollies thick the foot
Upon each other play: The English stand
Embattel'd, much desiring acommand
For to fall on: But all that Winter's spent,
And yet no service that was eminent
Performed, except at Corbridge; Langdale here
Had charged the Scottish horse, who by him were
Routed to the purpose: numbers here he slew
Took many; did their flying Troops pursue
With execution great: The Jockies had
Never such a breakfast; but my Lord forbad
The further prosecution of the game.
Whereas if he had seconded the same
By fresh supplies, many good Soldiers thought,
Ruin on all the Scots that day had brought.
But seeing fighting was indeed declined,
Thousands now Winter starved, or hunger pined,
And Englishmen impatient of delay,
New-Castles Army mouldred quite away.
Whom for a while we leave, Fairfax by this
In Yorkshire with his Troops arrived is;
And grows each day more and more numerous,
Many that were arrayed late by us,
And run away, with him do arms up take,
From Hallifax, and Bradford many make
To him address. Sole master of the field,
Many of our less holds to him do yield.
Selby before, his forces now he drew;
The Town denied him, on his Soldiers flew
With fury; several entrances they make,
More then themselves, of ours they Prisoners take.
Whether our men surprised were with fear,
Or for those narrower streets too numerous were
We shall not now dispute: The Conquerers know,
Scarce where their numerous Prisoners to bestow.
Manchesters Army toward York repair,
Wortley and Nostill taken by them are,
As down they came; Nostil they burn to ground,
Putting the most to sword they therein found.
Now hovering about York these Armies laid,
The Scots advance expecting by whose aid
York closely to beleagure, they might be
Put into a complete capacity.
Before which siege, one stratagem of War,
For Pomfrets honor shall my Muse declare.
The valiant Bedman Canwood to surprise,
From Pomfret marching, does this plot devise;
Of Orrange-Ribbons bought that morning store,
Flourished in our Hats each soldier wore;
Six men from the waste upwards, stripped were
Into their shirts, with blood we all besmear,
Their heads and shoulders; These before us drive
As Prisoners. At the Town when we arrive,
Their Sentinel bids stand; come draw thy chain
We answered; we to Cromwell do retain
And Prisoners brought: That Centry did obey,
Then up the Town we straight direct our way
Unto the Castle gate, where there did stand
A Sergeant, with his Halbert in his hand.
Of him access demanded, straight the Gate
He opens, bids us welcome prosperous fate.
Thus brought us to our wish, some there were slain
And twenty only of them Prisoners taken.
Their Cannons we dismount, some gall ants free
(Their Prison's broken) from Captivity;
Yet Girlington (though Prisoner there he were)
And called upon often by us; did not hear,
Not yet could we him find though him we sought
In many a Room. To Pomfret safe we brought
Our Prize, and Prisoners, though the foes in view,
Did even nigh to the Castle us pursue.
Finis Libri Quinti.
THE ENGLISH CIVIL WARS.
BOOK VI.
The Contents.
New Castle from the North, the Scots before
Does fly: York Siege: The fight at Marston-more,
New Castle England leaves; a short reveiw,
Of all those Northern Seiges that ensue.
BEhold of men a Concourse from all parts
Of England: with armed hands divided hearts,
Conjured of King and Parliament, the right
To try by dint of sword, and Martial might;
And Yorkshire by the Fates designed to be,
The Stage whereon, to act this Tragedy.
New Castle now deserts the Banks of Tine,
And to the Scots those Quarters does resign,
His numerous Army almost ruined now,
By means insensible; And who knows how?
But that I may the noble General here,
From all suspicion of dis-loyal clear
I'dare engage; that Boreaes might take wing,
Sooner at Nilus-head: Tygras-spring,
Sooner in Itie Island: than that he
Perfideous prove, unto his Majesty.
Whether then, fate conspired to aid the Scot
Or General King with Lesley did complot,
This gallant Army basely to betray,
And Fabious like to conquer by delay
Is still unknown, yet this is too too plain,
That Lesley did this victory only gain,
By times procrastination, hunger, cold,
O how resolved! how numerous! and how bold
Upon our first advance our Armies were,
How few! how hunger-starved! surpised with fear;
Now in Retreat, what thousands run away!
Or killed by hunger, cold, or base delay.
Neither the number nor the fortitude
Of Lesley and his Scots, our men subdued.
If that our army at our first advance
Against the Scot, had bravely tried the chance
Of War: these Victors might have been captived,
Our Northern Army had York-siege survived,
The Scots like mercinary slaves most slain,
The rest sent with a vengeance home again.
But see! the Scots do march, this barbarous crew
Even to the walls of York, our men pursue.
Oxen, Sheep, Horses, all thats's in their way, Spoons
To these rapatious Harpies proves a prey.
Their Cans, their Pans, their Meal, their long-horn
Their rags, their baggs, so load the lousy Louns,
Their Drums, their Guns, their Plundering in the way
Their slower marches do so much delay,
That York has for a siege, time to prepare,
And our now dispersed Troops united are.
Ramsdale from Leeds, does lead his Regiment;
From Knaisbrough, and from Pomfret some are sent
And those too under Belhouses command,
That late at Selby did escape the hand
Of Fairfax: come these broken parties all
Conveen'd at York: Our honored General
Beckning his hand, our silence to request;
Thus to the Army his designs expressed?
Soldiers we cannot in the field withstand,
These Rebels that flock in on every hand?
It Is not the Scots alone but Fairfax too,
With whom at present we must have to do;
Selby is won, most of our Soldiers taken,
And what but York to Leagure does remain.
Manchesters Army also now draws near,
All these combined are, to besiege us here.
Therefore in York these Foot I will secure,
Till from the King assistance we procure,
Hulls bloody siege in kind we will requite,
And with these walls, and guns we will make them fight
With fallies bold their courage we will fore-stall,
With thundering shot, their bodies wound and gall.
May Yorks siege prove as sad, disasterous
To Fairfax, as his Hulls has done to us.
May all these Blew-Caps once before us flee,
As Caesar's men Torguatus did from thee.
Langdale shall with these Troops fly to the King
And such relief will shortly hither bring,
As shall these Rebels all then put to flight,
Or bravely vanquish if they dare to fight.
Within these walls, provision here is in store,
For half a years subsistence or for more,
These Citizens all Loyal, here secure,
Within these walls we may our selves immure.
Necessity admits no Law, we must
Now to these walls, soldiers, our selves entrust,
And though to be besieged be some grief,
Yet here is our joy, certainty of relief.
At this, the Horse now for the South designed
March off: The Foot are unto York confined.
By this the pale Queen of the silent night.
With her dark Mantle veiled had the light,
The Gates commanded are for to be shut,
And round upon the walls strong Guards are put.
The first besiegers that discovered were,
Were the Scotch Armies, who next day appear
Ranged in battailions great; Then Lesley takes
Bishop-Thorpe for his Quarters, Fairfax makes
At Forforth, residence; Manchesters force
Encampe at Clifton: Thus with foot and horse
Of armed foes, under three Generals,
Surrounded are Yorks now well managed walls.
But no assault this City for to take
By violence did these besiegers make,
Save Manchester alone; whose great design
Was, these our City walls to undermine.
Blow up, and enter; but his Minors skill
Failed, with the execution of his will.
As stronger winds striving their force to vent,
From Caverns under ground; furiously rent
The Rocks, and make even mountains to give way
And to their uncontrouled rage obey,
Causing the Earth to gape and to devour
Whole Cities, yea whole Islands; even such power
This Mine now sprung had; for up to the sky,
Earth, Walls, and Towers, and men on these do fly
In a sulphurious globe; till down at length,
They fall, the Powder having lost its strength.
Then in the place you quickly might espy
Those lofty walls, and Towers entombed to lie
In their own ruins: he are a soldier's head,
And there his legs, or arms discovered.
But not the City, but the Manour-wall,
By this sulphurious Powder-blast does fall.
At this, the Armed foes with great fury run,
Up at the breaches, and doubtless had won
The City, but that here the inner wall,
Still standing firm, their expectations all
Deceived: And here bagan a fierce Dispute,
Their error by repulse ours would refute;
And they by further violence maintain
Against our Sally-Ports; till from the slain;
The mannour-Guard like to a great Land-flood
Did overflow with intermixed blood;
Yet at the length the enemy was wors'd,
And from the breaches headlong re-inforc'd,
Where now on heaps, wounded, and dead they laid
And buried in those graves their own Mines made.
But the besieged and the besiegers here
We leave a while; Prince Ruperts Troops draw near
Worcester and Bridge-North, now left in haste
And all those Western Counties now surpast.
His swifter Troops new Quarters do acquire,
In the adjoining towns of Lanca-shire.
Stopwash, the Prince to stop did first design,
And therefore did their thick-set-hedges line
With numerous companies of Musketeers;
But Washington of these the coast soon clears,
Charging them in their flanks, making them flee
Into the Town, in whose pursuit even he
Entered; putting some hundreds to the Sword,
Leverpoole to surrender does accord.
And off from Latham the Besiegers run,
Hearing what Rupert had at Stopwash done.
Though thus the Princ's numerous Troops affright
The most: yet Bolton dare oppose his might.
In their more bold affront they dare assay
His Quarters up to beat; and men to slay.
But to correct their prouder insolence,
The Prince can with so much of time dispense
To storm the Town, and cause them to lament,
Thus to provoak a Princes discontent;
For full three hundred Widows here are left,
Which were of husbands in this storm bereft.
And not the Towns men only, here are slain,
But hundreds more of soldiers, that maintain
The town against us: All which town as prize
The Prince unto his soldiers does demize.
From hence to Skipton, Rupert's Army come,
But by the way they Thornton-Hall had won,
Which down unto the ground they burn with fire
That Rebels thither may no more retire.
From hence to York the Prince's marches were
Directed: But when the Besiegers hear
His near approach, they raise their siege in haste,
Leaving their Cabins, Hutts, and Trenches waste;
And their three Generals those their forces all,
To Randezvow immediately do call,
Where they consult, both where, and how to fight
The Princes Army; marching off that night
Toward Long-Marston, where a spacious Plain;
From Hessom, or Long-Marston bearing name
Does lie; in some places full thick beset,
With whin-bushes, and Marshes deep and wet.
Least these Disorder should their Horse, they take
A field well grown with Corn their camp to make.
The only, and most advantageous ground,
That round about that spacious Moore was found.
Here they their murdering Cannons plant, and then
In order good Imbattaile do their men.
Of intermixed English-Scottish bands
Their main battallia stood; Crawford commands,
And leads on these: On the left wing and side
Cromwell with his Manchestrian Troops does ride.
The right wing was Sir Thomas Fairfax care,
To whom the Scottish troops conjoined are,
Which David Lesley leads, the Generals find
A place, the main Battallions close behind
To lodge their Tents: Thus these three Armies large,
Stand Marshaled to expect the Prince's charge.
By this, New Castle a brave party had,
Of Foot, in white-Coats uniformely clad,
Led out from York, some Gentry, Volunteers,
Attend the General, and his Soldiers
Well mounted: we near Popleton do meet
The Prince's Army, and embrace and greet
Our old acquaintance, (for the fates decree,
That these the last embraces now shall be
Of thousands of us) Ouse having over past.
The Prince the Army marshaled all in have.
But some Commanders thought by wise delay
He might have famished and made run away
Even without blood, the numerous enemy.
Pomfret, York, Knaisborough, Garrisons had we
Environing the foe, which might have staid
Provisions from their Camp; and doubtless made
Them to remove, fresh Quarters to have sought,
And so for us a fair advantage wrought.
But Ruperts purpose nothing can dissuade,
But even that night, their Camp, he will invade,
And to our disadvantage make them fight.
Goring our left wing leads, Byron the right,
In the main battle do our white Coats stand
With others; the word's given, and straight command
To fall on; Thus on our own Ruin bent,
Our soldiers all courageously on went.
With equal fury now both Armies meet,
And with their Cannon-Rhetorick loudly greet,
Bullets begin at distance the dispute,
Till their thick flights Sword Logic could refute.
The Horse Ranged in battalia's proudly prance,
While fire oblickely through their eyes does glance
From thundering Guns, like lightning from the sky
Whose fiery balls, thicker than hailstones flies
Shrill Trumpets sounding, with loud beating Dr^
Clashing of Armor, with great roaring guns
Rattleing of Pikes, Powl-Axes, naked Swords,
From different minds different effects affords.
These sights the Valorous more do animate,
But Cow-heart, timerous-courage, quite abate,
And if dismay should not diminish fear,
Such would fall dead before they wounded were.
The empty air is filled with dolorous cries,
The ground with bodies of the men that dies.
Whole Ranks and Files by Cannon fiery balls
Asunder cut, upon the ground there falls.
Here without head, there without legs or thighs
In blood, dismembered bodies wallowing lies.
And that pale Death may potently fulfill
Her pleasure; she most barbarously does kill
The Living, with those Limbs dashed off the Dead;
Here flies an Arm, there flies a soldiers head
Which strike their fellows down even to the ground
Thus friends by friends a way to kill Death found.
The smaller shot clouded bright Phocbus light,
Darkning the Air with their far thicker flight;
Whose whistling fury quickly did assail
The strong'st brest-peeces, and best Coats of male,
And through the strongest armor passage found,
To death, even brave Commanders for to wound.
But where no armor did their fury stay,
Theough many bodies they enforce their way;
(...) them gasping on that bloody ground.
(...) ^om the nigh Valleys and the Woods re-sound,
T^ doleful occhoes of their dying cries,
But most of all the Sword does Tyrannize
And glut it self with the expense of blood,
Which now like to an over-spreading flood
Ran under our Horse feet; for every sword
By this time, had some breast or other goar'd,
And issues made, by which their souls had left
Their bodies, now of blood, and life bereft.
These several streams of blood from several wounds
Winding along those Valleys, lower grounds
Thy lesser waters Nid, do multiply,
Thy streams discolor with their crimson Dye,
Thou into Ouse dis-burthenest the same,
Who swiftly down to York with tidings came.
And to the Citizens did soon discry,
In bloody colors, this dire tragedy.
But still most furiously both sides maintain
The fight, though thousands on the ground lie slain.
Here might you see a strong courageous Horse,
Whose wounds add fury to his former force,
(His livelesse Rider thrown) through friends through foes,
Through ranks, through files, make way; and where he goes
Does men by scores of their last breath deprive
Whose falls himself does not so long survive,
Till on the point of a well levelled Spear,
To'th'he art himself he runs in his carear;
And falling with his heels about him lies,
Till strength and blood expended, there he dies.
Here might you see a wounded Rider thrown,
There others from their horse come tumbling down
Hang by the stirrops, dashed against pikes and swords,
Thus fate to one, more deaths than one affords,
For with the fall the frollick horse afright,
Through thickest Ranks takes his enforced flight,
Tossing about his hanging Riders head,
Killing the living, often with the dead.
A timorous footman did himself immure,
Amongst dead corpse, thinking to be secure
From flying shot, where closely as he lay,
Some Troops of Horse designed to charge that way,
Came prauncing down the Moore, in full carrears,
Squeesing the blood, out of his nose, mouth, ears,
As he lay sprawling under their horse feet
Who flies from one, another death does meet.
A Cannon bullet stroke off Sandies head,
And with it hit poor Wolley who fell dead,
Crying alack! alack! I ever ken'd,
Sandio's fauce head, would bring me to my end.
A thick grown wood, unto the Moore stands near
Where many a blew-Cap hid himself for fear.
Patrick behind the bulk of a grown Tree.
Peeped often out, the battle for to see,
Thinking that if his party lost the day
To span his gates, for Scotland run away.
But as poor Patrick at bo-peep thus played,
A bullet shot at random did invade
His forehead naked; who falling, mercy cried
Alas! alas! for Ginny, and so died.
When Wolly heard the smaller shot to play,
In such thick whistling Vollies, he away,
Spanning his gates through Ranks, and Files, at last
Presuming he all dangers had fur-past
He stops to see, and hear, the fights event,
A bullet from a Piece at random sent,
Hit Wolly where he stood devoid of fear,
Under the long of his right side leav-ear,
Who falling dead did never there intend
Under a whin-bush thus to make his end.
But thickest ranks of armed foes to assay,
Is still more safe then thus to run away.
The victory still was very dubious,
Yet rather seemed to smile, and fawn on us,
For our left wing, had routed now their right,
The Scots and the Fairfaxians put to flight.
All their three Generals now the field forsook,
To Bradford ward Lesley his fleet betook,
Whom we pursue, his Scots now curse the time,
That e're they crossed the Northern Tweed, or Tine.
Their rags, meal-baggs, gull-pans, long-cans down cast
They span their gates, and run away full fast.
In doleful accents, now the Louns do cry,
Mercy and Quarter, O! how thick they lie
Wounded and slain, how many Prisoners were,
How many Colors taken? in their Rear
We follow still, thinking the day our own
But Goring our Commander should have known,
That to pursue one party was not good,
Whilst any of the adverse Body stood;
If after we had put that wing to rout,
Against the other we had wheeled about
And on the flank have charged them, sure we might
Victors have been; Crommwel's men put to flight
And Routed, unto Cauwood sent them all,
After old Fairfax and their General.
But now when Cromwell (apt enough to take
Advantage) see our Horse the field forsake
Now rifling, now pursuing such as fled
In their right wing he presently up led
His Troops; to whom in brief he thus did say,
Assure your selves, brave soldiers of the day.
How stand these foot, and horse to us exposed?
How easy are they all to be enclosed?
How will they fly our Armed Troops before,
And for the rest that now have left the Moore
In pursuit of our other wing they will yield
Or fly; when we are masters of the field.
If but one Troop of ours fall in their Rear,
They Will run, surpised with unexpected fear;
Only the time at present does require,
Your valor to demonstrate; you desire
The spoil of this rich field; Victors to be;
And from our wish, but one brave charge are we.
Our Generals all now off the field are gone,
The Victories glory will be ours alone.
And what the Prince and his brave Chavalry
Possess; after one Charge all ours shall be,
Their Sumptors, and Port-Mantles, by and by
We shall have time to search. Then furiously
On Byron's wing they charge, routed, and broke
Our bravest Regiments: Each bloody stroke
That their Pole-Axes gave was present death,
And thousands did deprive of their last breath;
Scarce one of ours escaped without a wound,
But our vain strokes and thrusts again re-bound
Off their Armed breasts and heads; The Prince does fly,
And yield the field to the proud enemy.
Now when the Prince's Horse thus routed were,
A party wheeled about, and in the Rear
Charged on us; broke our disordered Horse,
And from the pursuit of the Scots enforce
Us unto a base flight; Yet our brave Foot,
Especially our white-Coats stood it out.
For though the foe on each side them surround
They scorn to yield, but drawing to a round
On every side most stoutly do give fire,
Forcing the conquering foe often to retire,
Till all their Ammunition's spent and gone,
Our Horse all fled the field, they left alone
Night drawing on, and many of them slain;
No hopes at all the victory to obtain.
Rather oppressed by th'adverse multitude,
Then by true valor conquered, they are subdued;
Taken, killed, wounded, even most barbarously
By the insulting desperate enemy.
After their Arms down thrown, they Quarter cried
Their armed Troops amongst them fiercely ride,
And put them to the Sword, in vain to live
Most of them supplicate; Cromwell would give
No quarter: Much delighting in that blood,
That ran under his horse-feet like a flood.
Like as a ravenous Wolf greedy of prey,
Is not content alone, to kill and slay
So many of the flock as shall suffice
His greedy Jaws; but even does Tyrannize
Over the sheep, and hundreds of them kill,
To satiate his so natural-savage will.
So Cromwell's bloody mind not satisfied,
With all that bloods expense of such as died
During the fight, and while we kept the field
Murders even Captives, after they did yield,
And to the mercy mercylesse expose
Themselves of such in-humane savage foes.
The bloodyest field of all our Civil Wars
Now foughten is; the furious Conquerers
Our Cannons and our Carriages possess.
Here Carry, Slingsby, Prideaux acquiesse
Upon the bed of fame; affociates
Are Wentworth, and stout Gleddal in their Fates,
Here Lampton, Dacres, Metham, Kirton, dye
Hure, with Fenwick these accompany.
But now the kind obscurity of night,
Gave an advantage of far safer flight
To Rupert, who (though with a fresh supply
Claveren came up next day) yet will not try
The chance of War again: but rather yield
What Is lost, then hazard more, by a new field.
Nor were our hopes then altogether vain,
If we next day had Rallied to re-gain
The victory: even those of them that staid
Upon the field, it would have much dismayed,
To see us on the Moore again appear,
Before their broken Troops united were.
But Rupert flies, (though Northward first he went
Up to the South, in mind much discontent;
That this great fight had such a sad effect.
What sure said he, it was not my neglect
In Marshalling my men, no want of skill
Or valor on my part, that to this ill,
And fatal Rout, exposed my soldiers,
Only I was too forward as appears.
Why did I Charge this night? or why not stay;
Till Claveren's coming up? (though his delay
His Armies service did this day prevent)
Must I be rash, 'cause he was negligent.
Why did I not refresh my men before?
I did attempt to march up to the Moore;
Both Horse and Man our longer marches tired,
And of repose some longer time required;
If we before we fought a while had stayed,
Perhaps some fair advantage to our aid
Conspired had: Seldom the Powers Divine,
Do give success unto a rash design.
This night strange thoughts New-Castle's head possessed
At length in passion he these words expressed.
O! resolution strange of adverse Fate!
How am I thrown from a most prosperous state,
Into misfortunes nethermost abyss
Yet this the honor, of my sufferings is,
And that which seasons all my sorrows well,
That with, and for, my Sovereigns cause I fell.
Where shall I fly? where shall I be secure?
Within what walls shall I my self immure?
Did forty thousand Soldiers once appear,
Under my Colors, did the Rebels fear
My numerous forces? and their Dreadful Powers?
Were all the Towns 'twixt Trent and Tweed then ours
Excepting Hull: And now behold! even I
Where to secure my self, whether to fly
Am dubious: had I Hulls siege declined,
And to the associate Countys then designed
My marches, sure our cause had gained thereby.
Or if the first time we the Scots did eye,
We had them fought, no doubt but then we might
Have put those ragged Ruffians all to flight.
But time, with fair advantages now past,
Are not to be recalled: With this, in haste
He Posts to Scarborough, where both King and he
The Seas do take; intent for Germany.
Gleman, of York the government does take,
And for a Siege the best provision make
That time would then admit; Scorning to yield
The City yet; though we had lost the field.
By this, all their Three Generals that had fled
The field: returned, and up to York they led
Their men: The City to besiege again.
Each General his old station did retain
Having their Cannons planted, night and day,
Most furiously against the walls they play;
They vow, the work by storm for to effect,
Nor age, nor sex, their Swords shall then respect.
But Gleman does their prouder vaunts defy,
Yet at the length Provision's scarcity
Prevails; On terms they do capitulate,
York's yielded: Gleman marches out in state
And Martial gallantry: To Carlisle where
We leave him for a while; The Scots appear
By this before New Castle, on the wall
Make furious batteries, while their Miners fall
To work, which work they to perfection bring,
And trains now laid, their several Mines they spring
As great sulphurious globes of stone and fire,
From Aetna's hideous Jaws the clouds aspire;
Whence falling, all the neighboring Vales they spread
With Coals adust, the fire extinct, and dead
Even so the trembling earth was heard to roar,
Which, with those walls, and Towers the Powder tore
Up with great violence, and lightly threw
Into the air; here like a Comet flew
A soldiers head all on a flame, and there
Whole guards in those sad Ruins buried were.
Up at the breaches fly the Scottish Foot,
Though the Defendants made resistance stout,
And bravely did from street, to street maintain
The fight; till numbers of both parts were slain,
And Tines augmented Tide discolored,
With the great influx of the blood here shed.
Entered now were also the Scottish Horse,
Which Marley to the Castle does enforce,
Upon the which, they forthwith Batteries make,
But good Conditions while they might partake;
Surrender's made. Then did the Scots sit down
Carlisle before, boldly demand the Town,
Thinking perhaps the New-Castilian Fate,
The valiant Gleman could Disannimate.
At his Defiance furiously they play
Their battering shot, by Mineing to assay
To make their entrance, Ladders they provide;
But the Defendants bravely curb their pride
By frequent sallies, killing multitudes,
Which the Scots high presumptions all excludes,
Of taking Carlisle by armed violence.
Therefore most strongly they themseves entrench
Knowing what force could not, that famine will
Effect. Provisions fail, Horses they kill
Within those walls; their Horses all up eat,
Dogs, Cats, old shoes, Mice, Rats, nay Froggs are meat.
Yet Gleman e're to yield he will consent,
To know the pleasure of the King had sent.
Phillipson bravely mounted through their guards
Had charged; and now rides post to Oxford wards,
At Borrow-Bridge some English Horse him took,
But a close friend by chance in that same Troop
Secured his Horse and Arms, till he could make
From York, which soon he did, his wished escape.
Near Ferry-Bridge, the place his friend assigned,
(Thither now got on foot) he safe did find
His Horse and Arms; hence to the King he went,
To whom he Gleman's Letters did Present
In Oxford, whence he with the Kings reply
Returned, and now to Carlisle drawing nigh,
Quite through the Scottish Troops he bravely rode.
But famine will not suffer their abode
Longer within those walls, which to the Foes
Surrendered are: Gleman to Oxford goes,
With a small train, lean, naked, hunger-pin'd
And the Scots are, for Hereford designed.
E're Fairfax was made Generalissimo,
A party strong he Hemsley led unto,
Where while in Leagure with his men he laid,
One from the wall so dexterously had played
A shot; that three inch lower had debarred
Him, from what victories he got afterward.
But he recovers, and the place does take,
Though Skiptoniers it to relieve did make
A brave attempt. Scarborough was battered sore,
The greatest Tower whereof asunder tore;
Half standing, half into the Sea down fell.
Upon the top there stood a Sentinel,
Who in the renting, to the standing side
Had leaped, and saved his life. But to abide
Longer within those walls, famine forbad
And Chamley yields, what he possessed had.
Devoid of any grounded hopes of aid,
Scroop of his Bolton had surrender made.
Not long on Knaisborough had their Cannons played
E're breaches wide in those old walls were made,
Which Croft (though valiant) did necessitate
Now to submit to a surrenderers Fate.
With Horse and Foot, Pomfret they do surround
Some Towers whereof were battered to the ground
And the Defendants much distressed, when we
With a brave party, from the South do flee.
( Langdale commands in cheef) swifter then flame
On the besiegers with our Troops we came
After a short Dispute, few slain, we take
Of Prisoners store, Pomfret releiv'd, we make
A quick return: To Melton-Mowberry near,
With Rossiter we skirmish'd had, and there
Were valiant Girlington, and Gascoin slain
As we came down. Pomfret's besieged again,
And though with frequent Sallies they assail
The enemy, yet Famine does prevail,
Which Louder does on terms to yield compel.
The Sandalliers had played their parts full well;
And made the enemies full often feel,
Their swords were made of the best tempered Steel.
Yet famine's lean Pittard enforced the Gates
A passage for the Foe, this perforates
To enter; and for the besieged away
To march: Against Latham the besiegers lay
A year, what Art, or Force, could do, to win
This House was done, but bravely those within
Not only their own Interest did maintain,
But hundreds of the enemy had slain.
Resolved the gallant Countess was to try
All straits, e're Rebels she will gratify
By a surrender; but, alas! compelled
To yield what she so stoutly had withheld
By famine, this Virago noble is.
Though Greenay valiantly held out, e're this
Yielded it was. Now Skipton they assay
Enter the Town, plunder, and bear away
What lighter then stone-walls in it they find;
Batteries against the Castle were designed,
Numerous Grenades in the interim played;
When here the Leagure had some few days laid
From Apleby upon Paroll I came,
Having exactly first performed the same.
I to the Castle with a Trumpet went
Whom we returned. Their Scouts stood eminent
On Rumles-Moore, from whence they might us
When any party we together drew.
Therefore some twenty in their sight do mount, view
They take th'Alarm, and to their Guards account
Our motion; In the interim we drew out,
Three hundred undiscovered Horse and Foot,
Their Horse all mounted, our small party drew
Straight on our ambuscado: out we flew;
Their three divisions soon we put to rout.
Briggs had some parties to draw out of Foot
Whereof some slain, the rest we dissipate,
Take Briggs with many more. So fortunate
In such attempts, were the bold Skiptoneirs;
Their gallantry, in these their acts appears,
In their own meadows, numerous Horse and Foot,
A party small of them did break and rout,
Tripleing their number with the Prisoners taken.
At Ast-wick-Fair how many had they slain,
Taken, and broke; their party very small;
Wren's Regiment we beat at Eshton-Hall.
But with a hundred Horse, Kighley's design
Was gallant, though alas! the love of Wine
In some Commanders, a miscarriage wrought
Fatal. But we to yiedling terms are brought,
And hence, conveyed to Leichfield, march away
In Arms complete, and souldier-like array.
Finis Libri Sexti.
THE English CIVIL WARS.
BOOK VII.
The Contents.
The Model new, with some of Cromwels deeds:
Lidney Siege raisd: Ludberry fight succeeds.
Taunton besieged: The King storms Leicester;
Naisby fight: Gorings forces routed are
At Lang-port: what is at several Sieges done,
Routon and Shearburn- fights: Westchester won
Kilsithe fight: Digby 's rout on Carlisle Sands:
Torrington fight: Goring his men disbands.
Stow fight: Oxford besieged: The King does make
Thence in disguise unto the Scots escape:
Hereford is surprised by a Plot:
Newark Siege: North the King goes with the Scot.
THe Parliament now their Grandees recall
All from command: Young Fairfax General
Is made of England: By this Model new,
Many advantages to them accrue
Emulous Lords now being laid away,
Men of less note, will need the lesser pay,
Spirits most active for the Cause they choose,
Of milder Zeal. Commanders they refuse
As useless now: Cromwell for Eminence,
Was now the MAN next to his excellence.
Northampton's Horse, with the Queens Regiment,
At Islip-bridge, in Quarters resident
Cromwell upon them comes, they fight, at length
The Royalists ore-powered are in strength;
Cromwell some hundreds of these Horse does take
With the Queens Colors: then pursuit does make
To Blackington after the rest that fled.
Cromwell demands the House; delivered
By Windebank on terms it is next day,
Both Horse and Arms they leave, and march away
To Oxford: where a Martial Court decree,
Windebank shall for this delivery
Be shot to Death: when too late to prevent
This Colonels Death, the King does it resent,
Blaming Prince Ruperts too much urgency,
In this young Gallants late Catastrophe;
His Royal bounty does the King express,
(All he could do) to his Relicts distress.
Near Bampton-Bush, Vavisors party lay,
Cromwell his marches does direct that way
So privately, that he surpised them all,
Numerous his Prisoners, and his prize not small.
Lidney against Massy close Siege had laid,
Langdale at length to the Defendants aid,
Came with a party brave, Massy off beat,
Many he slew, and took, in this defeat.
To Ludberry Rupert with his Forces came,
Massy before possessed was of the same,
But seeing Ruperts Horse so near drew out;
Whilst off for Gloucester he sent his Foot,
He charged with his Horse: fierce the dispute,
Massy at length does fly, in the pursuit
Rupert shot Massie's Horse, doubtless his aim
Was at himself, though short his bullets came;
Harlow was taken, Bacchus laid on the ground,
Bleeding of his (now last) and mortal wound.
Numbers were killed, numbers of them were taken,
On Ruperts part, was noble Haistings slain.
Hopton on Tauntons Seige had now designed,
Greenvill and Goring were with him combined:
Willington-House by storm they late regained,
Many within put to the sword: maintained
This Siege was with much courage, and more art.
Nor wanted these on the Defendant's part,
Which Blake advanced unto such renown.
Many assaults were made against the Town,
Mounts high were raised, off which their Cannon played
Fairfax sends Graves at length unto their aid,
At his approach the Assailants march away,
Tauntons releiv'd, nor longer Graves would stay.
The Assailants soon renew the Siege again,
Where to their work we leave them to remain.
Massy recruited, Evesham comes before,
Demands the Town, Leg no such spirit bore
To yield at the first Summons, Massy then
Commands the storm; with loss three times his men
Were bravely beaten off; Sevorn grew red
Soon with the influx of the blood here shed;
But at the fourth assault, the Town they win,
Many put to the Sword of those within.
Fairfax and Brown, Oxford before sat down,
But the Defendants all the Meadows drown,
Slight their out Forts, and all the Suburbs fire,
Cromwell does from the Kings pursuit retire.
(For Cromwell had a while followed the King,
But now recalled) does to the Leagure bring
His well-arm'd troops; while Fairfax veiws the town
And ore the Bowling-green rides up and down,
A Cannon-bullet from the works does fly,
(Pity it mis'd) which wafts his head hard by,
Which made his excellence in great fear,
Once veil his Beavour to a Cavallier.
But now let us leave this Leagure, and review
The Kings transactions, who together drew
A gallant Army, and North-westward went,
The Siege at Chester for to raise intent.
Brearton his Siege draws at the Kings access,
The King wheels East; to Leicester address
We make, demand the Town in vain, for they
Within do entrance to their King deny.
At this, command is given to storm the Town,
After our Guns wide breaches had beat down,
(Though those within did make resistance stout)
Resolutely we enter, Horse and Foot.
Those enemies that yet survive do fly
To the Marketplace, where their Artillery,
With some fresh Companies of Horse and Foot
Did stand, with these we have a bloody bout;
For full two hours and more they here maintain
The fight, in fine the most of them were slain;
Here laid whole heaps of Scottish Volunteers,
There Dalbin's men by scores; ruddy appears
The Sour with blood, the Channels did convey
Out of those streets; here Gray's men slaughtered lay
The Town was plundered, Gray and Hacker were
Prisoners: Great was the prize was taken here.
Fairfax hears of these actions of the King,
Rises from Oxford, and does Northward bring
His Army: Orders unto Cromwell sent,
(Who lately to the Isle of Ely went,
From Oxford Siege) to march; Naisby fields are
For the most fatal fight of this sad War
Designed the place: The King had got the wind,
Which now stood West; to Rupert was assigned,
With Morice the right wing, Langdale did head
The left; the King did the main Battle lead,
The right hand Tertia Linsey did command
Bards, and stout Lisle the left; Ashley did stand
With Linsey. Skippon now had Marshalled
Fairfax's Army, Skippon's self up led
The main Battalia, Cromwell the right wing,
Ireton the left, Pride, Rainsborough, Hammond bring
On the reserves; The Hill was their intent
To get, which the King hastens to prevent.
The Signals given, the thundering Cannons play,
Of smaller shot, thick flights obscure the day,
That vale seemed all in one united fire,
Which in a Pile sulphurous did aspire
The very clouds; the Air shrill Trumpets wound,
Clashing of Armor, the tumultuous sound
Of different voices, reach the Olympic Sky,
Numbers of both parts, on the ground now lie
Bleeding, the last of their, yet vital blood,
Which now the field o'reflow'd like to a flood.
That Brook from Welford that does downward glide
Ran now more blood than water; proudly ride
The prauncing and curvetting Horse about.
Rupert by this, put their left wing to rout,
Who like a swelling stream down fiercely bore,
All opposition him that stood before.
While Rupert follows the pursuit amain,
As far as Naisby, numbers having slain
Of their dispersed Troops: with slaughter Great,
Cromwell with his, did our left wing defeat.
Our Northern Troops too much enriched were
At Leicester, to stand well to it here,
If these of Leicesters prize less had thought,
Perhaps much better here they would have fought.
Yet did stout Langdale here himself behave,
Like to himself, making resistance brave,
While either skill or courage might prevail.
Our Foot their main Battailians do assail
Most boldly, putting most of them to rout,
Skippon and Ireton wounded at this bout,
The last our Prisoner too: Cromwell does see
Their Foot, back on their own Reserves to flee,
Rides thither and does reinforce them on
Joining his Horse, mainly they press upon
Our standing bodies; who assailed were
At once, both in their Fronts, Flanks, and their Rear,
For some indeed to admiration fought,
Whilst others by their heels for safety sought.
A Cobbler from North-hampton lately came
Fairfax to serve, but here he got a lame,
Having in his right Leg received a shot,
Tush says the Cobbler, Sirs I value't not,
For running from my work, my Wife me beat,
Now shall I sit much closer to my Seat.
As Mars himself against the Giants fought
On Phlegra's Plains, when Heaven to scale they thought;
So active was the King in this same fight,
Giving his Soldiers of Heroic might,
A still to be admired president
Sometime engaged, numbers his own hand sent
To Erebus; sometimes he did recall,
And rally such as fled; a General
He showed himself, both valorous and expert,
Acting Ulisses and Achilles part.
His words the Timorous much did animate,
His acts the Valorous strove to imitate.
Such as did run, he did implore to stand,
To every wing he Rode and gave command,
For what to our advantage might conduce.
For Cowardice who now could plead excuse?
Seeing their Sovereign King thus to engage,
In the most sharp Encounters, Fury, Rage,
Tumult, Disorder every place does fill,
Sirrah, the Sword! and then no more but kill,
Pistol, strike down, here heaps of men do lie,
With Horses intermixed; here some do fly,
Others pursue; here lay a Leg, or Head,
And there an Arm, under our Horse feet Dead
Many were trod, nor could we understand
Whom to obey, to whom to give Command,
Such the confusion; thick our Pistols fly
At one another; all the Ground does lie
Bespread with these; Pole-axes cleave Men down,
Which often left fixed are in the patients Crown.
From covered Armor our charged Tucks rebound,
And in the Glance often times do kill or wound
That party whom against we did not aim.
By this the sword might sole dominion claim
Over the field, with this alone we plead,
Till many a Gallant on the field lay Dead:
Brown, Dallison, Cave, Band and Markam slain,
Linsey, and Ashley wounded, now it is vain
Ours to entreat to stand. They round beset
Most of our Foot, the Coach, the Cabinet,
The Royal Standard of his Majesty
Are taken; all our great Artillery,
The thousand Arms, well nigh five thousand men;
To Leicester-ward now we fly, but when
His Majesty came there, he would not ftay,
But even that night for Litchfield rode away.
Cromwell pursues, takes many, then beset
Leicester, till his Excellence could get
Up with the Foot; which on in haste they bring,
Thinking perhaps, here to have taken the King.
The town they Summon; their demands denied,
They vow to storm it, and forthwith provide
The Onset for: Mounts raised, Batteries they make.
But Haistings, while as yet he might partake
The Benefit of good conditions yields.
Many successful Skirmishes, and fields.
About this time, fall to the Parliament:
Gell toward Newark late a party sent,
Which met a Troop from thence, they fought, and beat
The Royalists; Mitton a great defeat
Near Shrewsberry, had given to some of ours:
Brearton near Chester also now over powers
A party, near two hundred Prisoners took,
Hingham's now yielded, but a while let us look,
To Fairfax who marched Taunton's siege to raise.
Goring draws off to Lang-port, there Displaies
His Army; Massy first charged in his Rear,
Ere the Fairfaxians Troops advanced were
Up to the field: neither could vaunt success
In this contest, Fairfax comes, does possess
Himself of Sutton fields, where upon sight
Of Goring he draws up, intent to fight.
Goring presaging that he might be beat,
In the best order, for his safe retreat
Unto Bridge-Water, did his men dispose.
Many strong Hedges did those Lanes enclose,
Which with his Musketeers he lined, then stood
His Cannon, and his Horse in order good
Ranged in the Lane: Fairfax by this drew nigh,
Though at some distance thick the Bullets fly,
And many a Man lay Dead upon the plain.
But Gorings Foot at length they do constrain,
Quite from their post, Bethell then charged the Horse
Who with a vengeance did him reinforce
With loss; till Desborough his reserve came on,
And pressing sore the Royal Horse upon
Put them to rout; Goring did what he could,
To bring the most of his safe to his hold,
Odd of a thousand on both parts were slain,
Some Cannon Goring lost, many were taken
Of his: The rest, Fairfax amain pursues
Up to Bridge-water: first the Town he views,
Then sends his summons in, to yield on sight
(As Buroughs now had done) or else that night
He vows to storm the Town, put all to sword,
Goring is gone; Digby returns him word
To do his worst: But Fairfax makes a pause,
Till Peter's Preached the justness of the cause,
And till his men received had their pay.
And then with fire and sword he did assay
The Town; The storm was furious, many slain
But in the end the low Town they re-gain.
And Fairfax Colors on the works display,
To grace those bloody Tryumphs of that day.
Out of the high Town, the Defendants power
Upon their heads, a most stupendous shower
Of great Granado's, which the low Town fire
About their ears; Fairfax does much admire
Their Courage, for a second storm prepares.
Yet more for's own security than theirs,
Offers conditions; which refused, they rear
Their Ladders, and go on, but bravely were
Repulsed, with the effusion of much blood;
On heaps they lie now dead, their Ladders stood
Forsaken, and the Trenches round were filled
Now with the Arms and bodies of their killed.
Fairfax thus beat, his thoughts does soon Reflect
Upon a new design, which took effect,
Numbers of Iron Bullets straight they make,
Which shot red hot, straw, Hay, and Houses take
A sudden fire, the Town's all on a flame.
Eliot to treat for the Defendants came,
But Fairfax all his offers now refused,
Telling him they his patience had abused,
And that indeed he will put them all to sword,
Or burn them there: Yet does recall his word,
And grant them with their lives to march away.
Thus of that Town to ground burned both parts lay
No house or harbor the poor Townsmen had,
Of Civil wars a spectacle most sad.
Hence unto Bath, Fairfax directs his way,
Rich with his Forelorne did the Town assay,
Gaining some outworks, e're the General came.
But on these terms Bridges does yield the same;
That he and his, in warlike posture should,
To Bristol march; To Shearburn that strong hold.
Next Fairfax came, of which being denied
His Mines, and Batteries, for a while he plied;
Vain were his Mines, his Batteries do prevail,
Making wide breaches, on they go, and scale
In furious wise; The Cannons while they played
Had the Defendants not so much dismayed.
But Dives bids them fight, and lets them know,
In valor, their security all now
Consisted: But the enemies on press,
On every side the Castle they distress;
Those walls not able longer them to shield;
They beat a Parley, and on terms do yield.
Bristol before, the General next sat down,
Boldly of Rupert does demand the Town;
Yet e're the summons, Rupert sallyed out,
And from the fired Suburbs beat their Foot?
But on again they come, the works down tear
With thundering shot, the Moats all filled were
With Faggots, then they force their bloody way
Up Ladders; and in spite of fate Display
Their Colors on those works, from whence they beat
The Royalists: Rupert makes his retreat
Into the Castle; but thus yields next day,
That Souldier-like he march with his away.
Next the Fairfaxians before Dartsmouth came
To whom when Pollard had denied the same,
Encouraged with successes, on they go,
What walls or works can keep out such a foe?
Hammonds Brigade first enter on the West
The Gate House, with mount Flagon soon possessed,
Forward they go: Pride had like prosperous Fate,
Having now entered at the Northern Gate.
Through every street they force their bloody way,
Kingsworth alone, as yet did hold them play.
But as of blood they had been Prodigal,
Or scorned their lives, most furiously they all
With mounted Ladders this strong Fort assay.
Twelve murdering Guns at once upon them play
And numerous Vollies of dead wounding shot,
But mounts they will raise of corpse; rather then not
Now conquer: But all the Defendants tired
With killing, these Conditions yet acquired,
Unto the Castle safe to march away.
Which Castle fiercely they assail next day,
The storm so bloody the Defendants crave,
Their lives and liberties alone to have;
Which Fairfax Nobly grants. And marches hence
To Exeter: where we his excellence
Shall leave a while, Cromwell and he now were
Parted; two Suns could not shine in one Sphere.
On the Devises Cromwell first Designs,
The Governor his offers all declines,
Which made him on a desperate battery fall
After a while down tumbling comes the wall;
And the Defendants a surrender make.
To Winchester Cromwell does then betake
Himself, the Gates against him there are barred
To which his men affixing a Pittard
With other combustibles, burn them down,
And in despite make entrance on the Town.
The Castle, which to, the Defendants fled,
Is to some purpose by him battered,
That the within besieged, for terms do suo,
Which granted: Unto Basing Cromwell drew
His great Artillery, Batteries soon they make,
And then the House to storm they undertake.
Had all been Cromwells, had all thought upon out
A Crown, as he, sure not more fiercely on
They could have gone: That house that had stood
Both many a siege and many a bloody bout,
By force they enter; The Defendants crave
Quarter alone, which Cromwell nobly gave.
But who the prize can value taken here,
Let Us leav't to Cromwell; for we must: And hear
A while the exploits of the Scots. By this
Near Hereford arrived, Cannon-Froom is
The place, which first to storm they do accord
Which they perform, putting the most to Sword
Within that house; to Hereford next came
Leaven with all his Mercenary train.
Their lines they draw, Mounts raise, batter the wall
With thundering shot, employ their Miners all
Under the ground, of Ladders store provide;
Yet by all this, not one whit terrified
Are the Defendants. Mines they counter-mine,
Their battered walls, with earth they counter-line:
On the Besiegers often sallying out,
Many they kill; often put whole Guards to rout.
But when the Louns heard how the King drew near
They quit their fiege and Northward march forfear.
Hereford-shire of these Scotch guests may rue,
Their curses even to this day them pursue.
The King this while imbodied had of Horse,
With some Dragoons, no Despicable force;
And late to Worcester advancing near,
Even at his name, the Scots had fled for fear
From Hereford: From hence the King went East,
And here and there some enemies suppressed.
At Huntington arrived, the Town he won,
Some put to sword at entrance, then we come
By Cambridge; and so unto Oxford went.
After a while the King is fully bent
West-Chester's siege to raise; thither we go,
Skirted still in our marches by the foe.
At length on Routon-Heath, West-Chester near
Arrived we make a holt; Pointz does appear,
After a while, and boldly does assail,
Our now imbattail'd Horse: who shall prevail
Is dubious for a while. Hot the dispute,
At length they fly, we follow, in pursuit
Many are taken and killed; but in our Rear,
Louthian and Jones do suddenly appear,
With a fresh party, both of Horse and Foot
Drawn from the siege; Pointz Rallies, wheels about
As soon as e're their signal Cannons play.
Our Front and Rear at once they do assay
With a fierce charge; Ours did what men could do
But in conclusion with the numerous foe
Over pressed, we fly: many of ours they kill
And numbers take, Churches with these they fill.
Where Hunger-starved they keep them to repent,
And grow Religious (as the Parliament.)
The King with hundreds more from this sad fight
Arrived at Chester, where we lodge that night.
Then into Wales again take our recourse.
After a while some two Brigades of Horse
Conveen'd we had, near Welbeck we divide
Our forces. Part do with the King reside,
And part march North with Digby; our design
Was Forces with Montrosse for to combine,
Who at Kilsithe in Scotland lately beat
The Covenanters, with a grand Defeat.
Forward we go pass Ferry-Bridge, and then
At Shearburn are opposed by Colonel Wren,
Whose Regiment of Horse, we put to rout
Surprising there too, nigh a thousand Foot
With all their arms, many we put to sword.
'Twas but small rest our Quarters did afford;
For while our men parting their prizes were,
Many fresh bodies of their Horse appear,
Whom Copley did command: straight out we drew
With courage great on one another flew;
Sharp was the charge, Copley's own Regiment
Had cause indeed this meeting to repent.
Routed to purpose, many of them dies;
But in conclusion, with their fresh supplies
O're-powr'd we are; turning our backs, we fled
Our Prisoners and our prize relinquished.
Three hundred Horse, Digby's Coach, Letters, Cook
A Countess, with five Collonells here they took.
Carnaby, and Sir Richard Hutton slain.
To Skipton ward we fly, when we attain
That Garrison, we find them there in fight,
Near to the Town, our presence did affright
The enemy; making them run; before
Who were well nigh victorious; full a score
Of them we took and slew: Digby goes on,
(After some rest) but Brown fell him upon
On Carlisle Sands, and put his men to rout,
Many were taken, some slain too, at this bour.
To Workington Digby and Langdale post,
Whence to the Isle of Man the Seas they crossed.
And thence for Ireland do their voyage take.
Newark about, the King this while did make
His residence, where to his discontent,
Amongst his Officers most eminent
A sad Discention fell, resolves they make,
Their King in's greatest need for to forsake.
But hence the King (sadden'd at this in heart)
With some few Horse for Oxford did depart,
Whom Pointz met by the way, they join in fight,
The Royalists o'repower'd are put to flight,
And forced to ride for it now to save their lives.
But while the King at Oxford safe arrives
In person, Pointz before Belvoir displaies
His Troops, with Sword and Pistol, then assaies
The place to storm, first the out works they win
The Barns and Stables; putting all within
Unto the Sword; but dear his victory cost,
For many of his Troopers here he lost.
When some months more the Castle out had held
Provision's failing, Lucas was compelled
To yield: His terms in souldier-like array,
That he with his for Leichfield march away.
We left West-Chester by her foes oppressed,
Who now the suburbs had by storm possessed,
Their Mines and Batteries strenuously they plied.
Nor yet impunely did their men recide,
Before the Town, often Byron wondrous stout,
With execution on them sallied out.
Many attempts of fatal consequence
Unto the King, the siege to raise from hence
Were made: the first design unfortunate,
Was by the King to Routon-Heath of late.
Then Vanghan with at least two thousand went
This siege to raise: Mitton and Jones are sent
Against him, near to Denby both parts met;
In a like Order both their battles set,
With equal fury charge: Many there dye,
But in the end the Royalists do fly,
Losing, at least, a thousand of their men.
Days had not passed above nine or ten,
Ere noble Aston in the enterprise,
Was met near Sturbridge, in this fight there dies
Many of both parts; for both stoutly fought,
But at the length safety, alas! was sought,
By flight on Aston's side, wounded was he,
And Prisoner to the insulting Enemy.
From Litchfield, Worcester, Ludley, Bridge-north,
Then the Lord Ashley draws some Forces forth;
To Chester-ward we march, but our design.
Was with some Irish Forces to combine;
Which Combination Mitton did prevent,
So, naught effected, back again we went.
Now of releif all expectations void,
Many within for want of Food Destroyed.
The City suffering under miseries great,
On terms of yiedling, Byron's forced to treat.
Though Brearton had the Town now at his will,
What terms he grants, he nobly did fulfill,
A shame to those who often falsifi'd
Those Articles, they had pre-ratifi'd.
The Herefordians Warrants did direct
Into the Country, unto this effect,
To bring in men, their Frost-congealed Moats
To break; Morgan this hears, in rustic Coats
Suborns a party: Thither does them send,
Rusticks to be themselves they do pretend,
And fall to work, long ere the break of Day,
At length the Guard, these for admittance pray,
Pretending they store of Tobacco had,
The Guard admits them (of the news full glad)
But being in they fall upon the Guard,
Their Ambuscado's near, their Signal heard,
(For Birch did with some Firelocks lurk hard by,
And Morgan with a thousand Horse) these fly
Over the Drawbridge, which now they found let down,
And in an instant do surprise the Town.
Fairfax we left for Exeter intent,
(For to this Siege both he and Cromwell went)
Pouth-rain to them surrendered is: and then
On Boats of Bridges, over Ex their men
They march; enclose the City on each side,
To Waller then this siege they do confide,
And march themselves for Cornwall; by the way
At Torrington, Hopton and Digby lay:
At sight of the Fairfaxians they Draw out,
Charge, put the Rebels Forlorn unto Rout,
But on their Army comes, Hopton is beat,
Who through the Town, does with some loss retreat.
The Enemy pursue, the Town they take,
Then to the Church (not for Devotion sake)
They haste, for there was Hoptons Magazin,
But by a train (many of them within)
Of Powder, eighty Barrels fired were.
This blast the Timber, and the lead did tear
Off from the Church; and for their Men made way,
Elijah-like (as Peter's then did say)
In this same fiery Chariot, Heaven to mount,
But surely Peter's ly'd on this account,
For in a sin-like Witchcraft, they were slain,
Their mangled bodies tumbling down again.
But while this Dreadful Stratagem does take,
Afurious charge Hopton and Digby make,
Upon the fear-surprized Enemies,
Many of whom in this confusion Dies;
And then for Cornwall do their party lead,
Hopton in the Thigh, Digby shot in the Head.
Fairfax pursues, to Lamiston come near,
Basset did quit the Town; the Prince does hear
These tidings, and Pendennis does forsake,
Then to the Isle of Scylly him betake.
Capel, Culpepper, Hide attend his Grace,
With many more Commanders: In this space
Goring that did that Army left command,
On Fairfax Summons, yields for to Disband
Upon some terms: Himself the Seas then crossed,
Thus the whole West to the Fairfaxians lost.
In Triumph they return to Exeter,
With thundering Vollies welcomed here they are,
And straight this Summons unto Berkley sent,
To yield what he commands incontinent,
Or to expect nothing but fire and sword.
Hopes of releif all void, he does accord
To treat, and then upon some terms does yield.
From several holds Ashley had Drawn to field,
About three thousand gallant Horse and Foot,
With these from Litchfield, by Bridge-north about
To Worcester we came; a Seige hard by
We raised; into a Church some Rebels fly,
Leaving some Cannons which we soon possessed.
The Church we enter, earnestly request
Those in the Steeple, Quarter for to take,
But they refusing, under them we make
A mighty fire, and leave them there to burn,
Or break their necks; to Bramiard we return,
And so do march about, but our Design,
Was with some Horse, our selves for to combine
At Farrington, and so an Army make,
At length our marches thither-ward we take.
Morgan and Brearton follow in our Rear,
Whom for to fight, at Stow enforced we were;
For having Skirmish'd with them there that night,
When the swift hours induce the morning light,
Of Horse and Foot their Bodies we Discry.
Our General said, Soldiers, let us nobly Dye
Or Conquer now, it is base to turn, and fly,
This will bring shame, or else Captivity,
The other fame: the Kings condition's low,
To raise it, let us our hands and lives bestow.
Suppose his Majesty stood you before,
And did your utmost courage now implore;
Suppose, as Forlorn Prisoners now of War
Led all we were, by the proud Conqueror
To nasty Gaols; there scorned and Hunger starved,
And might from all these miseries be preserved
By Valor: nay, suppose they should Decree,
That we should hanged be for our Loyalty;
(For they of Loyalty can Treason make,
If we be vanquished) rather courage take,
And these by a more noble Death prevent.
This said, with resolution on we went,
As scorning wounds and death, up to the face
Of the Enemy: Pistols are fired a pace,
Some of their Bodies soon we put to rout.
Nor with less Gallantry on went our Foot,
Levelling their thick-vollied shot so well,
That numbers of the Enemy there fell.
Indeed both Horse and Foot had here expressed
Such bravery, as the Enemy confessed,
Their number, not their Valor won the Day.
Lucas did here, there Vaughan did assay
Fresh parties: while that these we Dissipate,
Hydra-like she new Heads repullulate.
At length our Foot the Enemy surround,
Our Horse ore-power'd enforced are to give ground,
And after to enlarge to open flight,
Some fifteen hundred taken were in this fight,
Amongst whom our General, who aloud did say,
Your work's now done, put up your swords and play,
For now no Army had the King on field.
Dennington to the Foe, stout Bloys does yield
This while: Barnstable also they possessed,
Ruthen, and Woodstock too: Now from the West
Comes Fairfax, before Oxford does sit down,
Which hitherto blocked up had been by Brown.
To take the King Fairfax did think to have
The Glory: but the King does him deceive,
Who in disguise, Oxford, alas! forsook,
And to the Scots at Newark Siege betook
Himself: the Scots having received the King,
From Newark rise, him to New Castle bring.
Five months against Newark had the siege now laid,
Fiercely the Town often times had been assai'd;
Sand-fort the Scots had now some time possessed,
The English and they in their attempts, contest
Who should most active be; Granado's store
Shot on the Town; their thundering Cannons roar
Against the Castle, Houses down are burned,
Sinite and Trent are from their Channels turned,
And nothing unattempted for to win
The Town: No whit less active, those within
Make many sallies bold upon the Foe.
The Quarters of the Scots sometimes into
They fall, with fire and sword: sometimes they try
Rossiter, Pointz, or Copley's Gallantry,
At every sally slain are more or less,
Each enterprise was Growned with success,
On the Defendants part: but Fatal still
The Assaillants to, his Majesty does will
Bellas to yield: And Terms concluded are,
Then to the North the King and Scots repair,
Where (ah! good King) with this perfideous crew,
We leave him, Southern actions to review.
Finis Libri Septimi.
THE ENGLISH CIVIL WARS.
BOOK VIII.
The Contents.
The Royal Garrisons distressed much are,
The Scots the King do sell: The second War.
Horton does Poyer, and Lang-horn both defeat,
The London and the Kentish Forces beat.
Barwick and Carlisle, Langdale does surprise:
Duke Hamilton' s succesless enterprise.
The Kirk, late Cromwels Foes, with him now side.
Colchester taken: Cromwels cursed Regicide.
We that from Stow (routed of late) had fled,
In diverse Holds are now beleagured,
With Sieges close the Enemies distressed,
Even all those Garrisons that we possessed.
Dudley against Brearton a while had laid,
Many Granado's on the Castle played:
Of mines and batteries too, use he did make,
When none of these, nor yet them all would take,
Levison doubting of releif does yield.
Not yet our hopes on no grounds did we build,
We did presume that the Kings presence might,
The Scots into an understanding right,
Of these late bloody differences induce.
We did presume the Irish might take Truce
With one another, and their Forces bring
England into, for to assist the King.
Some hopes we had too of Domestic Jarrs,
'Twixt Independents, and the Presbyters.
But all our hopes and expectations failed,
With fire and sword the Enemy assailed
Bridg-north this while, not one house in the high town,
(Except in rocks) but burned were all down.
The town (or rather now no town) thus won,
The least part of their work they had not done,
For from the Castle often we sallied out,
One Color took, and put whole Guards to rout.
Scarce Pistol shot a barn stood from the wall,
In which a Guard they kept, on this we fall,
Kill some, beat out the rest, and then return,
But first the Barn down to the ground we burn.
The Church the Assailants made their Magazin
For Powder, while Alarmed they pressed in:
A spark that from a lighted match did fly,
Their Powder fired, which sacralegiously
Rent off the Church the timber and the Lead.
Some scores blown blind, some scores stricken quite dead
Here of their men: those that had burned the Town
Burned were in the Church, and to the clouds up blown
Like fiery meteors down their bodies came,
Their clothes and hair all in a smoking flame.
Five hundred of their battering shot each day
Fiercely against our walls the Assaillants play;
Of great Granado's too, full many a flight
They sent into these walls, us to afright;
And in those Rocks, their miners did employ
Us in a blast, Sulphurous, to destroy,
As many of themselves in the Church late were.
But our Provisions to an end grow near,
On terms we yield, which terms they falsifi'd,
Those march on foot, who promise had to ride;
No Martial Law the insulting Foes regard,
Of recompense they think us quite debarred.
Hence to the Scots many of us repair,
Who gave us words, made promises full fair,
But their performances, their minds discry'd,
It Is bad to trust such as we have not tried;
This we may say, their dealing was with us;
Their words full fair, their acts perfideous.
Though many a futious Battery, Bloody bout,
Courageously Banberry had stood out
Her Foes, and famine now grow prevalent,
Needs must she yield, though much she it resent.
The Valiant Byron was again immured
Within Carnarvan, where he had endured
A Siege most sharp: by batteries, storm, and mine
To win the place, the Enemies design:
But the Defendants answered each attempt,
With so much gall antry, as did exempt
All hopes the place to gain by violence.
But now provisions fail, who can dispense
With famine? thus stone-walls will penetrate,
This lean Pittard will break the strongest Gate,
And make the stoutest Champion condescend
To terms; His Trumpet out does Byron send,
With some proposals of delivery,
Then to surrender next day does agree.
Close siege to Worcester this while was laid,
But Washington dispairing now of aid;
And for to yield having the Kings command,
Not able long the Foe for to withstand,
Begins on terms for to Capitulate,
Then yields: even Oxford falls under the fate,
Of all the rest of the Kings Garrisons.
Here Fairfax self with all his Mirmedons,
Had laid some months, and done what in them laid
The place to force; Bat^^ries most furious made,
And many desperate bold attempts to scale,
Nor could their Mines, and great Granad's prevail.
Never was place with greater Gallantry
Defended, nor assailed; The Enemy
Thought it more Honor, Oxford to regain
By storm, than all those Holds they yet had taken;
Those undertakings great, they did reveiw,
Accomplished late; how over the Works they flew
At Bristol, Basing, Dart-mouth, and else where,
And shall their fury be resisted here?
What, shall this Town not yield when they command?
Shall this 'twixt them, and their grand triumph stand?
Nay, Cromwell knew it was the only Town,
That interposed betwixt him and a Crown.
Rather than Oxford shall their hopes defer,
Rather than Gleman shall protract the War,
As many Pioneers they swear they will bring,
As Oxford all shall into Isis fling
With Spades: the City all to fire they vow,
Man, Woman, Child, to put the sword unto,
And e're of sudden Conquest they will fail,
On one another shouldiers, mount and scale.
Not their attempts (though bold) much less their vants,
The valiant and resolved Gleman dants,
Not only Oxford bravely he Defends,
But often sallying out, some hundreds sends
Of these insulting Foes to Erebus.
The Muses proud to Mars propitious,
For Scholars now turned Soldiers stoutly fought,
And more by swords, then words, for honor sought,
The Gown indeed did love the Royal cause,
Consisting with Religion and the Laws,
Which life and limb they venter'd to maintain
Most bravely; what, Oxford by storm be taken?
They vow they will rather on the works all dye,
Gleman does therefore all their powers defy.
If Oxford yield, he must; conditions good
He Will have, or with the town resign his blood.
Shall the Kings Fort, Metropolis, submit
To terms unworthy, not becoming it?
First to worse straights, than e're he yet endured
In Carlisle, in these walls he will be immured,
Not only Mice, Cats, Horses, shall be meat,
But Boots, and shoes, nay, Humane flesh they will eat.
These brave resolves enforce the Enemy,
On noble terms, with Gleman to agree,
And Oxfords yielded: the two Princes are,
Rupert and Morice shortly to repair
To foreign parts: The Duke of York must go,
His noble Brother, and his Sisters to,
Now at St. Jameses: For the Parliament
Had all the Royal Children up there pent,
Except the Prince who had escaped their hand.
From Exeter of late they did command,
The youngest Daughter thither to be brought,
What thei'l do with them diverse things are thought
Let Royalists pray, and presage the best,
This absent is a safety to the rest.
But whither does my wandering Muse digress,
Than Articles, the Roundheads nothing less
Perform: this the Oxfordians fully find.
Wallingford is to Fairfax too resigned,
Though Blague the place most nobly did defend,
But who against swords and famine can contend?
This place like others must submit to fate.
Litchfield the next comes to capitulate
On terms: here valiant Tinsley played his part,
Not all their Force, not all their Miners art,
Not all their Batteries and Granado's great
Prevail; at every storm, they off were beat
With loss, and shame enough; the Moats were filled,
With bodies of the Assailants in them killed.
This place by storm had been twice taken before,
Which did the Assailants animate the more
To bold attempts; but so they answered were,
That no more Ladders did they dare to Rear,
But close laid in their trenches and the town,
But now provisions wondrous scarce are grown
Within; that Horseflesh they begin to eat,
Necessity Tinsley enforced to treat
With the Enemy, and now to yield the place.
Of all our Garrisons Ragland the Grace,
And honor had, even out the last to hold,
Nor the Old Marquess this surrender would,
For all that Morgan with his Force could do,
(Though much he did) Fairfax arrived here now
The Marquess tells; as good terms he would give
If they shall yield: So none of them shall live
Refusing: Life and Death stood in his power,
Expecting answer once within an hour.
The Marquess to this Summons does reply
In time; nor did he Fairfax quite deny;
After some intercourse of Letters sent,
The house is yielded: Out the Soldiers went
With Colors flying, and their Drums did beat,
All armed in Martial furniture complete.
Having some miles marched in this Gallantry,
Of Horse and Arms, they make delivery
To Fairfax, the Triumphant Conqueror.
The mercenary Scots money prefer
Before their King; he is sold to the Parliament,
And from New Castle first to Holmby sent.
The King had not long been here resident,
Before five hundred Horse the Army sent,
Which him surprise, and then to Hampton Court
Do with their Prize (or Prisoner) next resort.
Thus though a King indeed be in distress,
It Is valued much, his person to possess.
Here of access though friends admitted were,
Perhaps, their projects that the King might fear
The less; yet some gave him an intimation,
Against him of a resolved assassination,
Therefore in a most dark tempestuous night,
Hence he is enforced to his life-saving flight.
Though thus these Harpey's Talents he evade,
By the imprudence alas! he is betrayed
Of Berkley and Ashburnham, to the hands
Of Hammond, who the Isle of Wight commands,
Where most of that sad time he yet survived,
He Is kept of worldly comforts quite deprived.
But out again most fiercely breaks the War,
Poyer and Laughorn for the King declare,
Confessing they Deluded had been long.
The Cavalliers conjoyn, potent and strong
They grow at Pembrook; Chepstow do surprise,
Rout and kill Fleming: but with fresh supplies,
Of well armed, and well ordered Horse and Foot
Comes Horton, fights them, to a total rout
Puts these unarmed, scarce Marshalled Cavalliers.
Cromwell before Tenby then soon appears,
And falls to storm, indeed so furiously,
That the Defendants soon for Quarter cry,
On mercy yield: Pembrook and Chepstow are
Surrendered too, to this proud Conqueror.
The London Mutiners this while are quel'd
The General by, the Kentish men compelled,
After the fight at Maidstone to disband
Upon Black Heath: nor did the Essexians stand
To a field Fight, but into Colchester
Do fly, beseig'd by Fairfax. Parties are
Combined at Kingston upon Thames, and led
By Holland: whose designs discovered,
Roured they are to purpose, many taken,
And that young Lord stout Francis Villiers slain,
Brother to Buckingham, who did escape,
Then to beyond Seas straight himself betake.
Langdale this while did in the North surprise
Carlisle, and Berwick; and with him do rise
Many the Northern Gentry; whom unto
Advances the Scots Generalissimo
Hamilton, with his numerous Regiments.
Lilburn of Tinmoth also now resents
Rebellion, and does for the King declare,
But a short time, for a Siege to prepare,
To him and his does Hasleridge afford,
The place he storms, and puts them all to sword.
The other Lilburn did this while surprise,
Some hundreds of brave Gallants who did rise
Near Anwick for the King. To Apleby
Hamilton comes, Lambert and his do fly,
With some small loss over Stain-more: but their way
To make through Lancashire the Scots assay
With Langdale: As they march they do declare,
The King from thrall resolved to free they are.
But when the King heard who did thus engage,
Successess their design he did presage.
But Cromwell having Pembrook lately won,
And all his Western work against Poyer now don;
Northward by expeditious Marches flies.
Lambert near Skipton with his Forces lies
Conjoined, ten thousand strong upon the Scot,
Directly they advance, that fight was not
Deferred, whereof the King presaged true,
And the Scots their sad expedition rue.
Cromwell goes forward Lancashire into,
Near Preston his Forlorn engage the Foe,
But e're the Scots will draw their Forces out,
Langdale's exposed unto a total Rout,
Then charge the Scots thinking to bear away
The Victory, and sole Glory of the Day,
But no such facill thing it was to beat
Cromwell; the Scots are forced to retreat
Into the Town: Cromwels Horse them pursue,
Soon clear the Streets, and numbers of them slew.
The Duke does with a stand of Pikes maintan
The Bridge, till many of his men were slain,
And till the wished obscurity of night,
Gave him advantage of a further flight.
With execution great pursued those were,
Who fled to Lancaster-ward: every where
Great heaps of slaughtered Scots by the way do lie.
To Wiggon-ward this night the Duke does slye,
Yet a strong Barn he manned by the way,
This for a while Cromwels pursuit does stay,
And did some execution on his Horse,
But for to yield on mercy they enforce
The Scots, who from them little mercy find.
From Wiggon the third day, the Duke designed
For Warrington: but by the way, of ground,
Having a plot most advantageous found,
They make a stand: so fierce a fight maintain,
That Roundheads there are full a thousand slain
In half a hour, the rest reacy to fly.
At which Cromwell ride, up, aloud does cry,
Come follow me, and on himself then goes,
Leaping the Hedge to amongst the thickest Foes,
Of whom some hundreds on the place are slain,
And full two thousand of them Prisoners taken.
The routed Scots straight to the Bridgeward make,
The Duke with all his Horse does here forsake
His Foot; which at the Bridge delivered are,
With all their Arms, as Prisoners sad of War,
By Bayley unto Cromwell, who did go
Northward tryumphantly to meet Monroe.
Hamilton to Nantwatch directly flies,
Against him every where the Country rise,
At Uxiter Lord Gray does him enforce
Himself to yield, with nigh three thousand Horse.
Thus are his men all routed, taken, or dead,
And he himself adjudg'd to lose his head.
Heaven in their kind the Scots repay now would,
Who sold the King, by multitudes are sold.
Cromwell by this had Barwick bounds acquired,
Monroe for Scotland had again retired.
And the Kirk party do most Zealously,
The Dukes late expedition, curse, decry.
At Edenburge they feast, applause, and style,
Cromwell the man, who now could reconcile
Their Differences; whose presence, prowess, wit,
Made the Malignant party now submit.
For Lannerick and Monroe are forced to agree
Now with Arguile, the Kirk, Presbytery.
With Cromwels part, but late Sectarians styled,
The Kirk's cemented, and fresh reconciled.
Thus Proteus-like the Kirk's even what you list,
An Hamiltonian or a Cromwellist.
Barwick and Carlisle too delivered are
To Cromwell, who for England does repair
Tryumphantly; Scarborough and Pomfret's won,
Though the Colchestrians act what might be don
By art or valor, in their own Defense
Though with his Fleet, the Prince not far from thence
Hovered at Sea, yet Famine does prevail,
All expectations of releif them fail,
And yield they must to Fairfax; whose Decree,
Was Lisle and Lucas shot to Death should be.
And thus in short we end the second War.
Cromwell his hopes no longer will defer,
Cobbet is sent to Carisborough for the King,
To Hurst, and then to Winsor they him bring.
Of Justice an High Court they then erect,
A thing most unjust, horrid, these effect,
Their King arraign, condemn, and execute,
What Hell Hounds thus did Cromwels purpose suit?
What Judge durst Sentence pass so Impious?
Was there no Gods that had respect to us?
Or to our King? what, will the powers Divine,
Their Vengeance from such Miscreants heads decline?
If such acts irreligious shall go free,
Who will believe there is any Deity?
Or that these things sublunary, at all
Under cognizance of the Gods do fall.
The Gods on Mortals can inflict no wrath,
Jove's but a fiction, and no thunder has
Tisiphone! there no such Fury is,
Hell's but a fable and her Nemesis,
No matter whether Heaven we love or hate,
There Is no such place; all things are ruled by Fate.
Ah! whether does my passion me transport,
Justice dispensed will be from Heavens high Court,
On the High Court of Justice: blood for blood
Cries out aloud, and will be understood,
Revenge whereof although the Gods delay,
It Is with more Fury, that they may repay,
Their Miscreant Enemies, and make them know,
They have respect to things done here below.
Finis Libri Octavi.
A TABLE Of the most remarkable passages contained in this Book.
MEldrum's first sally upon the Kings Leagure at Hull. page 22. A second sally.
ibid. The King sets up his Standard Royal at Nottingham page 29. The King's
speech to his Army page 30 Prince Rupert's Character. p. 32. Prince Morice his
Character. ib. Worcesters fight p. 35 Sir Lewis Dives and Prince Rupert set
upon Essex his Army p. 42 Mr. John Smith regains the Royal Standard p. 43 The
Kings Proclamation of pardon to all that shall return to their Allegiance p. 48
Blake hanged p. 49 Banbury yielded to the King p. 50 Broughton-house yielded to
Rupert ib. Brainford Battle ib. Sudeley Castle yielded to Massy by Bridges the
Governor p. 51 Cirincester stormed by Rupert ib. Prince Rupert summons
Gloucester p. 52 Some Irish land ib. Herbert and Massy fight ib. Massy routs
Carey ib. Massy beat off from Beverston ib. More Irish Land ib. Herbert, Digby,
and Winter, block up Gloucester p. 53 The Earl of Worcester summons Glocefter
ib. Massy scorns the summons ib. The Welsh Forces routed by Waller ib.
Hereford yielded to Waller p. 54 He leaves it un-Garison'd ib. Monmouth left
to Waller, and left by him ib. It is Garisoned for the King ib. Waller beats
up Prince Morice's Quarters ib. Prince Morice and he Skirmish ib. Massy came to
bring off Waller, and both fall upon Teuxbury, and surprise it p. 55 Prince
Morice and Waller fight ib. Waller Routed ib. Hasleridge comes to Wallers
relief ib. Morice puts them to chase again ib. A fresh supply comes to Waller.
ib. Morice Retreats ib. Strafford-Avon taken by Lord Brook ib. Leichfield taken
by him p. 56. His fatal wound and death ib. His men storm the Close ib.
North-hampton befiegeth the Close ib. Brearton and Gell, come to relieve it ib.
They fight on Hopton-Heath ib. Brearton and Gell Routed ib. The Earl of
North-Hampton slain ib. Prince Rupert comes to Leichfield, Undermines the Close
p. 57. The Mines sprung, they scale it. ib. They enter at the third assault ib.
Reading besieged by Essex ib. He storms it. Is repulsed ib. A second assault
ib. A third assault p. 58 Reading yielded ib. Fielding adjudged to dye for
yiedling ib. The King pardons him ib. Chalgrave fight ib Lands-down fight p. 59
Wallers Horse Routed ib. Wallers Camp assaulted, at the fifth assault it is
won ib. Wallers stratagem to march off ib. Round-way-Down fight ib. Waller
Routed p. 60 The Queen arrives at Burlington ib. The Parliaments ships play on
her at her arrival. ib. Montrosse and Ougleby conjoyn with the Queen ib. The
King and Queen meet at Edgehill. ib. Gloucester besieged p. 61 Exeter taken by
Prince Morice p. 62 Bristol surrendered to Prince Rupert in three days siege
ib. Essex comes to relieve Gloucester ib. The Camp rises from Gloucester ib.
Gloucester releived ib. Newberry first battle p. 63 Carnarvans gallantry p. 64
His noble death p. 65 Several Lords wounded on the Kings part ib. Eccleshal
siege. Bird Governor p. 66 He is relieved ib. Eccleshal yielded p. 67
Arundel-Castle besieged by Waller ib. It is yielded to him ib. Bramdeon-Heath
fight betwixt Waller and Hopton ib. Balfore draws Hoptons Horse upon their
Ambuscadoes p. 68. Colonel Dalbier and Colonel Thomson wounded ib.
Winchester yielded to Waller p. 69. Colonel Griffith, commonly called Prince
Griffith, sets out from London gallantly ib. Newark besieged by Sir John
Meldrum ib. Prince Rupert raises the siege p. 70 Essex marches into Cornwall
p. 73 A prodigeous Tempest ib. Waller follows the King p. 74 Dudley siege
raised ib. Waller and the King skirmish at Burley ib. The fight at
Copedray-bridge ib. Waller Routed p. 75 The King marches into Cornwall p. 76
His Army engage Essex ib. The King encamps near Lestithiel ib. Greenvile
stormed a Castle and Fort near Lestithiel. ib. Balfore breaks away with the
Horse. ib. VValgraves skirmisheth with Balfore p. 77 Essex and the King
skirmisheth ib. Brets gallantry ib. The Lord Stuard's gallantry ib. Essex,
Meirick, and Roberts steal, away by water in the night ib. Essex his men treat
with the King. The result. p. 78 The Kings prize which he took at Lestithiel
ib. Barstable and Ilfercomb yielded to the King ib. Salt-ash stormed by the
King ib. Beverston yielded to Massy ib. Malmsbury stormed by Massy p. 79
Colonel Fox his stratagem against Beudley, whereby he took it. ib. Middleton
storms Dennington-Castle ib. Bloyes repulsed Middleton ib. Middleton and
Courtney fight p. 80 Middleton put to flight, and in his flight surprizeth a
Troop of Royalists near Sherburn ib. Horton batters Dennington, and retreats
ib. Fines undermines Banbury, batters and storms it, is repulsed ib. The Earl
of North-hampton relieves Banbury p. 81 He fights with Fines, and routs him
ib. Min and Massy engage near Elder-field p. 82 Min slain, and his Brigade
routed there ib. Rupert and Massy fight at Ast-ferry p. 83 Monmouth betrayed to
Massy by Kirle ib. Colonel Broughton surprised at Godridge, by the
Herefordians p. 84 Sir William Blaxton assails Massy ib. Monmouth surprised
again by the Cavalliers ib. Stephens releiving Rauden, is himself besieged
therein ib. Rauden yielded to Ashley ib. Newberry second fight ib. Waller
besieges Basing-house p. 88 Gage releives it, Norton and he fights, he routs
Norton ib. Basing-house besieged again, releived by the King ib. Many eminent
Commanders slain p. 89 Shrewsbury surprised by Mitton, in it were eight
Knights, forty Colonels, Majors, and Captains, two hundred Soldiers, etc.
ib. Plymouth and Weymouth surrendered to the Parliament ib. Haward slain at
Pease-bridge ib. Captain Lister slain in the fight at Tadcaster ib. Sir Thomas
Fairfax takes Leeds p. 90 Sir William Savile flies to Promfret. Major Beaumont
drowned in swiming Air ib. Captain Briggs, and Captain Leigh are both wounded
ib. Fairfax routed at Sea-croft, by the Kings party ib. Sir George Wentworth
surprised at Wakefield by Fairfax, where he took one thousand four hundred,
or, one thousand five hundred Prisoners ib. Cholmley and Bointon, defeat and
take Slingsby at Malton, with many Prisoners and Arms ib. Lancaster stormed,
and some streets burned by Tinsley p. 91 Thirlan-castle, and Hornley, both
taken by siege ib. Settle taken by Leviston, left by Briggs ib. Bradford, and
the Inhabitants thereabout described p. 95 Leeds regained, and Hooley-Hall
taken ib. Fairfax and King fight on Atherton-Moor ib. Bradford taken, and
plundered p. 98 Rotheram and Sheffield both taken by the King ib. Gainsborough
taken by the Parliament ib. The Earl of Kingston slain, and Cavendish routed
ib. Earl of Newcastle regains Gainsborough p. 99 Nantwitch besieged. Byron and
Monk attempting to raise the Siege, are routed ib. Hull besieged by the King
ib. Witherington and Cromwell fight at Winsby p. 100 The Queen takes Burton on
Trent ib. The siege raised from before Hull p. 101 The Scots Armies enter into
England ib. Lesleyes speech to his Covenanters p. 102 The Scots and English
skirmish on Bowden-Hils p. 104 Another skirmish on Pinshaw-Hills ib. Langdale
and the Scots fight at Corbridge ib. Fairfax takes Selby p. 105 Sir John
Redman's stratagem to take Pomfret p. 106 In Pomfret was taken, Sir, Peter
Middleton, and about twenty Officers more ib. The Scots march toward York p.
108 The Lord Generals speech at the head of his Army p. 109 Fairfax,
Manchester, and Lesley, besiege York p. 111 Manchester springs a Mine ib.
Manchesters Error in undermining the Manor wall instead of the Cities, his
men enter the breaches ib. The fight in the Manor Yard, wherein he is
reinforced p. 112 Prince Ruperts march to Worcester and Bridge-North ib. He
takes Stopwash, and Leverpool ib. Latham siege raised, and Bolton stormed p.
113 Rupert burns and takes Thornton-Hall ib. He marching to York, they
withdraw their siege ib. They Incamp in a Cornfield, near Hessom-Moore p. 114
The Parliaments Army consists of English and Scots ib. Prince Rupert, Goring,
and Byron Imbattail on Hessom-Moore p. 115 The Parliaments right Wing routed p.
119 Cromwels speech to his Horse, for a second Onset p. 120 Cromwels furious
charge on Byrons Wing p. 121 He puts Prince Rupert to flight ib. The
Gallantry of New-castle's white-coats ib. Cromwels cruelty in giving no Quarter
p. 122 York besieged by the Parliaments three Generals p. 125 York yielded.
Gleman marches to Carlisle ib. Newcastle besieged by the Scots ib. The Scots
storm Newcastle, and take it p. 126 The Scots besiege Carlisle, and take it p.
127 Hemsley, and Scarborough yielded to Fairfax p. 128 Bolton-Castle, and
Knaisborough yielded ib. Pomfret besieged, Langdale raises the siege ib.
Langdale and Rossiter skirmish at Melton-Mowberry ib. Pomfret since besieged
again, yeildeth p. 129 Sandal yielded. Latham besieged, and yielded ib.
Greenay-Castle yielded. Skipton besieged, and yielded p. 130 Essex, Denby,
Manchester, etc. recalled from command p. 132 The Parliaments New-Model of
their Army p. 133 Cromwell routs North-hamptons Horse ib. Blackington delivered
unto Cromwell by VVindebanke ib. Vavisor and his party surprised by Cromwell ib.
Massy beat from Lidney siege, by Langdale p. 134 Rupert and Massy fight at
Ludberry ib. Massy routed by Rupert ib. Taunton besieged by Hopton ib.
Willington-house stormed by him ib. Fairfax sends Graves to relieve Taunton ib.
Taunton besieged again p. 135 Massy storms Evesham, kept by Leg ib. Fairfax
and Brown block up Oxford ib. Brearton rises from before Westchester ib. The
King storms Leicester p. 136 A bloody fight in the Marketplace ib. The bloody
fight in Naiseby-field ib. Rupert Routs the Parliaments left wing ib. Cromwell
Routs the Kings left wing ib. Fairfaxes main Battalia much broken p. 138 The
Kings Gallant behavior in the fight ib. The Kings Army totally Routed p. 140
Cromwell regains Leicester ib. The Parliaments many successes ib. Fairfax Routed
Goring at Lang-port p. 141 Burrows taken, Bridge-water stormed p. 142 The low
town burnt, the high town stormed ib. The high town burnt by Fairfax, yielded
p. 143 Bathe yielded. Sherburn besieged, and stormed ib. Sherburn yielded.
Bristol stormed p. 144 The Castle yielded. Dart-mouth stormed ib. Dart-mouth
Castle, and Fort, yield on Quarter p. 145 The Devizes battered and stormed by
Cromwell ib. Winchester stormed by Cromwell, the Castle yielded ib. Basing-house
stormed, yielded on Quarter p. 146 Cannon-Froom stormed by the Scots ib.
Hereford besieged by the Scots, and the King raises the siege ib. A fight on
Routon-Heath, near Westchester p. 147 The King and Pointz Routed ib. Kilsith's
famous battle in Scotland p. 148 A fight at Sherburn, near Ferry-bridge ib.
Digby Routed on Carlisle Sands p. 149 Belvoir stormed by Pointz, is yielded p.
150 The Lord Aston Routed. Westchester yielded p. 151 Hereford surprised by a
stratagem to break Ice ib. Hopton and Digby fight Fairfax at Torrington p. 152
Goring disbands all his Horse p. 153 Fairfax goes to Exeter, it is yielded to
him ib. Lord Ashleys speech at Stow on the Would p. 154 The fight at Stow on
the Would p. 155 The Lord Ashley Routed and taken ib. Dennington, Barnstable,
Ruthen, VVodstock, yielded, ib. Oxford besieged, the King leaves it and in
disguise goes to the Scots before Newark p. 156 Newark besieged, and yielded
ib. The King carried to Newcastle by the Scots ib. The Kings Garrisons all
distressed p. 158 Dudley besieged, and yielded p. 159 The high Town of
Bridge-north taken and burned ib. The Church blown up, with many men in it p.
160 Bridge-north Castle yielded ib. The Scots perfideousness. Banbury yielded
ib. Carnarvon besieged, and yielded p. 161 Worcester besieged, and yielded ib.
Oxford Scholars, their gallant Commendation p. 162 Oxford yielded. Rupert and
Morice depart England p. 163 The Kings Children disposed of at St. Jameses ib.
Wallingford yielded p. 164 Litchfield besieged and yielded ib. Ragland holds
out the last of the Kings Garrisons ib. The King sold to the Parliament by the
Scots p. 165 He is brought to Holmby. Surprised by the Army, by them brought
to Hampton Court ib. The King put himself into Hammonds hands ib.
The beginning of the Second War.
POyer and Laughorn turn Royallists, surprise Pembroke, Chepstow, Tenby, etc.
rout and kill Fleming. Horton routs them p. 166 Cromwell storms Tenby ib.
Pembroke and Chepstow, surrendered to Cromwell ib. Fairfax quels the London
Mutiniers ib. Routs the Kentish Insurrection. Pursues them to Colchester, and
besieges it. Breaks Hollands party ib. The Duke of Buckingham escapes, his
Brother being slain. Langdale surprizeth Carlisle and Barwick. Duke Hamilton
enters England. Lilburn revolteth at Tinmoth. Hafleridge storms it, puts
Lilburn and all his to sword. Colonel Lilburn surprizeth a brave party of
Royallists near Anwick. Hamilton and Lambert Skirmish at Apleby. The King's
presages of Hamiltons Army p. 167 Preston-fight. Langdale exposed by the Scots
to a rout. Preston gained by Cromwell. The Bridge maintained by Hamilton. The
Bridge won, the Scots routed. Hamilton man's a strong Barn in his flight to
Wiggon. Cromwell puts them all to Sword. The fight at Red-Hill near Warrington.
Cromwell ready to fly. p. 168 Cromwels Resolution. The Scots routed. Hamilton
leaves his Foot. Bayley surrenders himself, with all the Foot, to Cromwell.
Hamilton yields himself with three thousand Horse. Hamilton beheaded. Monroe
retreats into Scotland. Cromwell feasted at Edinburgh. p. 169 Lannerick and
Monroe submit. Carlisle and Barwick surrendered. Scarborough and Pomfret
surrendered. Colchester surrendered. Lucas and Lisle shot to death. Cobbet sent
by Cromwell, brings the King from the Isle of Wight. The High Court of Injustice
erected. The King Martyred. Bradshaws infamy for his sentence. p. 170 A
Presage. p. 171
FINIS.

