Some CONSIDERATIONS Proposed to all you that sing DAVID'S SUNDRY Experiences,
Confessions, Complaints, Exhortations, Prophesies, Praises, etc. in Rhyme and
Meeter.

Psalm. 69.12. I was the Song of the Drunkards.

Amos 8.3. The Songs of the Temple shall be howlings.

1 Cor. 14.15. I will sing with the Spirit, and with Understanding also.

Psalm. 69.9. O worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness.

Psalm. 47.7. For God is the King of all the Earth; sing ye Praises with
understanding.

By Edward Cook.

Printed in the Year, 1670.

Some Considerations proposed to all you that sing David's sundry Experiences,
etc. in Rhyme and Meeter.
COnsider what the Apostle writes unto the Corinthians, To ^ing with the
Spirit, and with Understanding; and to the Ephesians, That they should make
Melody in their Hearts: Now I write to you the People of England these
following Queries, that use to sing Psalms in Rhyme and Meeter, collected into
English by Sternhold and Hopkins.

When did your Bones Quake for fear? And when did you all Night wash your Bed
with Tears of Complaint unto the Lord, as you sing in the sixth Psalm? If it be
not so with you as you sing, then I am sure you tell a Lie unto the Lord, and
that is not to make Mellody in your Hearts in Grace.

And do not you sing again in the first Psalm, That you will not lead your
Lives as Sinners do, nor sit in Scorners Chair? And in the second Psalm, That
the Lord above should be served with trembling? Why then do you scorn the
Quakers, who work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling? And why do you
condemn the Quakers for judging, when your selves sing and say, All the Kings
and Rulers of the Earth are conspired against Christ? Is not this high Treason
you sing amongst you?

And how can you sing the 3d Psalm with a good Conscience? who say, That if ten
thousand hem you in, you could not be afraid: Is this true? And in the forth
Psalm, You will lie down in Peace, when there is no Peace to the Wicked, says
my God: And when did the Lord make your hearts glad more then Corn and Wine?

And when did you give your Goods to the Saints, as you sing in the 16th psalm?
And why do you say the Lord teaches you every night? when your Priest says,
Immediate or present Teaching is ceased, and never here to be brought to; and
yet thou say in psalm 51. The Lord Reveals to thee; and here thou ownest
Revelation, which all your Priests deny.

And how cast thou sing, as in psalm 18. That thou wast an Innocent Person
before the Lord, and that thou resrainest from sin and wickedness in any case?
when your Priest says, You can never cease from sin while on this side the
Grave, in your best attainment? And when did thou break brazen Bars assunder?
And when were thy Hands and Feet pierced through, and thy Tongue cleved fast?
And when might thy Bones be numbered for torment? And when was thy Garment
divided, and cast Lots for? Is not this Blasphemy, when thou singest of thy
self that which was prophesied of Christ, and properly belongs to him, as in
psa. 22?

In psalm 27. thou singest, The Lord is thy Light; Why then do thou hate the
Light in thy Conscience, which Christ the Light has enlightened thee withal?
And when did thy Parents thee forsake, and cast thee off? And when was thy
Bones wasted, that thy Friends, and Kindsfolk, and Neighbors were afraid to
see thee, as men once dead? as thou singest in psalm 31.

When did thou faint with fasting that thy bones did wear and waste away? as
thou singest in psalm 32. And when did thou clothe thy self with Sack? Is not
this plain mocking of the Lord? Is this to sing with the Spirit of
Understanding?

And wherefore do you speak against the Quakers who owns the Everlasting Light,
when you your selves sing in psalm 36. That in the Light you are full sure the
Everlasting Light to see? Are not you Quakers now in your singing? do not you
hold forth their Doctrine, the Everlasting Light? and yet you will suffer your
Priest to call it a natural light, and not reprove him: For is that natural
that is Everlasting? Is not this for you to understand?

And when did you go weeping all the day long in doleful heviness? And when
did thou roar for grief of heart? as in Psalm 38. And where is it written of
thee, In the volum of the Lords Book? as in Psalm 40. Is not this of Christ?

And why again do thou desire the Lord in thy singing, That he would send
forth his Light, as in Psalm 43. and his Light is sent forth already; and he is
come again a Light unto the World, and has placed it in your Consciences
according as you sing, and yet you will not believe in that Light which he has
enlightened you withal, but look for another, and deny it,

And when were your Bellies glewed to the Ground? And when did you blush to
hear the wicked mock, and nod their heads, as you sing in psalm 44. Are these
things so or no which you sing unto the Lord? O when will you perform your
promises to the Lord, to lay Calves and other things upon his Altar? what, are
you gone back from being Christians, to be Jews again? to promise the Lord to
lay Calves upon the Altar? Are not you all Denyers of Christ that sing so now.

Come a little further: And when did dreadful fear make thee to quake, that no
shift thou could make, as thou singst in psalm. 55. you were used to say that
the Quakers Religion was but a new Sect, as yesterday; but you may read
otherwise: for David and Moses quaked, and exceedingly feared and trembled, and
if ever you mean to come into the life of Moses, and condition of David, whose
Psalms you have miserably abused, you must know a day of quaking and howling,
though now you sing over it: And in psalm 56. thou singest, That thou may
assend with such as live in Light.

And when did thou cry unto the Lord that thy throat was hoarse again? And
when did thou faint and quail with looking for help from the Lord, as thou
singest in psalm 69. And when did thou get Viniger and Gall.

And where learned; you these Verses and Rymes that you sing in psalm 74.

Why do thou draw thy hand aback, and hide in thy lap?

O pluck it out, and be not slack, to give thy Foes a rap.

Think you the Lord will be pleased with these things? Will not he turn such
Songs as these into Howlings, and make you howl for singing of them.

And when did thou say unto the Mad-people, Set not your Horn so high? and to
the Ungodly, Deal not so furiously, as in Psalm 75? Did thou ever reprove
Sinners in the gate? And when was thy Breath stopped, and thy Speech gone, and
thine Eyes always held from Rest, as thou singest in psa. 77.

And when wast thou stricken dead, that thou forgot to eat thy Bread, and thy
Bones burnt as an Hearth, that thou singest such things to the Lord, in psalm
102. where thou tellest the Lord, That thou have filled thy Hunger with Ashes,
and thy Drink has been Tears? If these things be not true, then thou art as
grievous a Liar as ever I heard of.

And how can thou sing Psalm 103. That God has removed thy Sin from thee as
far as the East is from the West, and yet say thou must have them as long as
thou live, when as thy Sins yet remain with thee, knawing upon thy
Conscience, for thus the Scripture says, He that commits Sin, is a Servant of
Sin: And Sin lies at the Door of him that does not well: And it is God's Word
to Cain, and to all Cain's Generation for ever, That their sins are not removed
until they cease from committing of sin, The Wrath of God remains upon the
Transgressor: And your noble Hosts of Ministers that you sung of the other day,
What is now become of them? Have not they brought themseves and you to a fair
pass, and brought you back again almost twenty years journey, and leaves you
now in a Wilderness with the Bishops? Which I am sure was not the reformation
they told you of, and these are not noble Ministers, that have cast the Law of
God behind their Backs, but ignoble; and so for them you cannot laud the Lord.

And when did thou loose all thy fatness with fasting, that thy knees were so
feeble, as in Psalm 109. And when did thou rise in Midnight to magnify the
Lord? And when did thou quake to see wicked men Gods Laws forsake? And when
did thou praise God seven times a day? And when was thy Body parched and
dried like a skin Bottle in the smoke, as thou singest in Psalm 119, verse 83.
and 53. and when did the Light shine in thy heart, as in Psalm. 225.

And wherefore do thou sing, That thou are not puffed in mind, and have no
scornful eye, when thou have both, in Psalm. 131. and why do thou desire God
that the righteous should smite thee, but when the righteous calls upon thee to
fear God and repent, then thou will smite him with the Fist of wickedness, as
in Palm 141. And what is the new Song which thou will sing unto the Lord, as
thou promisest in Psalm 144. have thou any other Psalms but the old which
Hopkins and Sternhold has brought in.

And who brought up the Te Deum, and Benedictus, and Nunc Dimittis, and
Quicunque Vult, did not some of these come from Rome? and Doctor Cox his Song,
and Da Pacem Domine, is not this like the Latin Service which the Pope
tolerates? And have you forgotten Bishop Bonners sayings when he heard the
Protestants had set up Lord Bishops, and retained some of the Church of Romes
Ceremonies he smiled, and said, If they sup of our Broth, we will make them eat
of our Meat: And this is a Caution to you Protestants, that you beware of
touching any thing appertaining to the Church of Rome, for she will quite
defile you; and your Song of the Virgin Mary, and Athenasius, Symbolae, do you
know from whence these comes? and your Song before Morning Prayer, where you
call upon the Gentiles, to pray God bring them into his Light; Here you confess
that there is a Light in the Gentiles, which you sing with a loud voice before
all the People; and in your Song before the Sermon, you desire God to convert
all your Foes, and bring them to his Light: Are not you all Quakers by your
singing, Bring all to the Light? and when your Pastor feeds your souls with the
Bread of Life, that you sing of, then examine well your selves and see if your
souls be not rather starved upon the barren Mountains for lack of the Bread of
Life, then fed with it; let the Light in your Conscience judge between you and
me in this matter, whether leanness and barrenness have not possessed your
souls.

And what manner of Christians are you that sing ^ought but sin and wickedness
^^sts in your heart, (...) the Lord, you play your parts; and how do you make
melody in your hearts in sin and wickedness? judge in your selves if you are fit
Persons to sup with the Lord; for this is your Thanksgiving Psalm, appointed to
be sung after the receiving of the Lords Supper.

And in the last Psalm you pray God to defend you from the Pope and Turk, that
would Gods dear Son thrust out of his Throne, and yet honor the Pope, and
honor his Music, Surplice, and Organ, and Flesh, and Fish days, and Lent;
and you your selves will not give Christ a little room in your hearts to guide
you by his Light, as by your own confession you sing, that there is nothing in
your hearts but sin and wretchedness, which I believe you, while sin remains in
your mortal Bodies, and so conclude your selves all miserable Sinners; and many
more things you sing, which is not to sing with the Understanding, nor with the
Spirit which makes Melody in the Hearts of Gods People, which have David's
Spirit, which taught them to sing Psalms and Hymes and Spiritual Songs, before
Hopkins and Sternholds were, and need none of their Rymes and Meeters to teach
them to sing.

How can you sing, You all give honor to his holy Name, when you curse and
swear, and daily profane it, as in Psalm 27. And you sing, The Righteous in the
Lord rejoice, and yet your Priests say, ye shall not be righteous while you are
on Earth.

E. C

THE END.

