HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM DVBLIN, Dated the 11th. of April to a
Merchant that lives in Mark Lane.

With the true relation of the happy proceedings of the Scotch-men in Ireland
against the Rebels.

As also the several Votes and resolutions of both Houses of Parliament,
concerning the Kings late Message.

With an Order from both Houses of Parliament, concerning Church-Goverment,
April. 9th. 1642. Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for G. L. 1642.

The Coppie of a Letter sent from Dublin, dated the Eleaventh of Apill to a
Merchant that lives in Marke-lane.
Worthy Sir,
I Have received your Letter which was dated the first of April, I am sorry to
hear of the difference which is in your Kingdom; and especi^lly berweene the
King and the P^rliament, but I hope in God that they will be reconsiled
together again, and then there is no question by the help of God but that you
will have a happy and joyful time there, the which I do much wish for, and
daily pray to God to send to you all the happiness as posible may be for
discontented spirits is the first cause of ruinating of any Kingdom; I may
speak it by experience God he knows, for it was the first that bred our
overthrow here in Ireland, after the Papists did hear that they should be
barred of their privileges, then they began to be disconted and to gather to a
head, and this was the cause of their first beginning as some of them have
confessed at the time of their death.

I do much marvel and wonder, to hear of the fall of Sir Edward Dearing, and
what was the cause of it, which made him ^o disagree with the Parliament, for
he had at the first, a very great commendation to be a very good Common
wealths man, and did agree very well in all things with the rest of that
Honorable assembly, and now I do hear that he is voted a delinquent, and is
fled to York to the King: I pray this next return send me of the truest news
concerning him, and Judge Malle^, for we do hear that he is committed to the
Tower, but we cannot hear for what, I hope that we shall hear some good
news of the happy success of the Parliament.

I make no question but you do hear news daily which does come from hence of
our miseries, which we do suffer under by these Rebels, I had thought of
late that I should not have sent to you such good news as now I do praised be
to God for it, yet we are very sorry for the loss of Sir Simon Harcot, but
praised be to God for it, that we have as good and lively spirits left behind,
and to the glory of God I may speak it, for Sir Henry Tichborne, sir Charles
Cootes, and Coronell Hunkes, with diverse others, have behaved themselves so
nobely and valient in their affairs, that they have showed themselves to be
true and loyal servants to the Kings Majesty and the Parliament, and Country
whom they do serve for, Sir Henry Tichborne, Sir Charles Cootes, and Coronell
Hunkes, with 5000. foot, and six hundred horse, went out of Dublin the eighth
of April, and marched up into the west part of Ireland, where they did meet
with ten thousand of the Rebels, and Sir Henry and his company did set upon
them and killed of the Rebels above three hundred that day, and did beat the
rest of them out of their works, so that they were forced to fly from them, and
Sir Henery and all his company persued them so fast for the space of eight
miles or above, until they took into the woods, and at their entrance into
the woods, they took seven of their commanders prisoners, and have brought
them to Dublin Castle, and there they does remain until their trial: The
names of those which are taken, Captain George Dungwin, Captain Roger
Rackley, Captain Patrick Pluncote, Captain Robert Wootton, Leifetenant
Lendare, and Liefetenant Faming, besides diverse others which does belong to
them, they took that day also 100. barrells of Gunpowder and shot, five Pieces
of Ordnance, and above three hundred Muskets, and ten bundles of Pikes; they
also took from them 120. head of Beefes, and six hundred of good fat sheep,
with a great deal of Corn and Cheese which was brought to Dublin the tenth
day of April, the which is a great help to relieve our men, until they do
send some relief from England, which is expected every day from you, with
Ammunition and Provision and moneys, the which is wanted here already very
much.

At their return back to Dublin, they mustered up their men, and they wanted
of the foot 85, of the horse 37. so that we wanted in all 122 of our soldiers;
but praised be to God, all the rest are in good health, only wants money to
comfort them at their Garrisons. We do hope in God that if you do send over any
Aid suddenly, that this Summer we shall subdue the R^bels; for they have been
dismayed very much a late, to see how it does please God to cut them off at
every time, had they not had any help come from other places, they could not
hold long, but we hope in God that their passage will be stopped very suddenly;
then there is no question but they will soon yield for themselves, for the
most of their Provision is already spent. Our Soldiers do intend by the help
of God, to go forth again the 15 of this month, toward the North part of
Ireland; for we do here that the Scotch soldiers have given the Rebels a great
overthrow on the seventh day of April; for they sent a letter to Sir Henry
Titchbourne concerning it, and as near as I can here it was to this effect:
That they marched out of Londonderry with five thousand foot, and four
hundred horse, and met with the Rebels by the way: whereupon they set upon
them, and (...) of the Rebels eight hundred of their Soldiers, and (...) ^hree
Towns, and killed five hundred of the Rebels, and took the spoil to
themselves; they got good store of Beefs and sheep from them, and have had
them to Londonderry to keep themselves withal until other provision comes
into help themselves withal. They have beaten back the Rebels further into
the Countries, and leave all their possessions which they had formerly gotten
from us, so that our Soldiers do intend by the help of God, to meet with the
Rebels now upon their flight toward Dondath, where they do intend to abide,
until they does aet into a head again; but we hope in God, that we shall
prevent them beforehand: for if the Scotch does fall upon them on the back
wing, the English by the help of Go, will meet with them by the way; so that
we hope in God, that in time we shall make an end of them, and gain to our
selves that which we have formerly lost, save only the lives of many a good
Protestant. I pray have me commended to all our friends there, So I rest.

From Dublin the 11th of April, 1642. Your ever loving friend, Christopher
Elger.


The several Votes and Resolution of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the
KINGS late Message.
Resolved upon the Question. THat this House shall insist upon their former
Votes concerning the Militia.

Resolved upon the Question. That the Kings absence so far remote from his
Parliament, is not only an obstruction, but may be a destruction to the affairs
of Ireland.

Resolved upon, etc. That when the Lords and Commons in Parliament, which is
the supreme Court of Judicature in the Kingdom, shall declare what the Laws of
the Land is; to have this not only questioned and controverted, but
contradicted, and a command that it should not be obeyed, is a high breach of
the privilege of Parliament.

Resolved, etc. That a Committee shall be appointed by this House to ioyn with
a Committee of the Lords, to enquire where this Message was framed.

Resolved, etc. That those persons that advise his Majesty to absent himself
from the Parliament, are enemies to the peace of this Kingdom, and justly to
be suspected to be favorers of the Rebellion in Ireland.

Resolved, etc. That those that advised his Majesty to this Messa^^ ^re enemies
to the peace of this Kingdom, and justly to (...) ^usspected to be favorers
of the Rebellion in Ireland.

AN ORDER FROM BOTH HOUSES OF Parliament, Concerning Church Government, April
the ninth, 1642.
THe Lords and Commons do declare, That they intend a due and necessary
Reformation of the Government and Liturgy of the Church, and to take away
nothing in the one or the other, but what shall be evil and justly offensive,
or at least unnecessary and burdensome: And for the better effecting thereof,
speedily to have consultation with godly and learneh Divines. And because this
will never of it self attain the end sought therein, They will therefore use
their utmost endeavors to establish Learned and Preaching Ministers, with a
good and sufficient maintenance throughout the whole Kingdom, wherein many
dark Corners are miserably destitute of the means of Salvation, and many poor
Ministers want necessary Provision.

Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

