EPISCOPACIE ASSERTED: As it now stands established in our CHVRCH and
COMMONWEALTH. With The Titles of Honors. The dignity of Authority. The
endowments of Revenues.
By these following Argnmnts; Taken 1 From the word of God. 2 From the light of
Nature. 3 From the rights of his Majesty. 4 From the Laws of the Kingdom. 5
From the laws of civility and common humanity.


By THOMAS COOK, Batchelour in Divinity, WHO Is so far from any engagement
by any relation to any of their Lordships, as he is enforced at this present
to his great charge and trouble, to become an humble suitor to the High and
honorable Court of Parliament, for redress of some grievances occasioned by
the miscariage of some of the Bishops, in a business that nearly concerned
him.

LONDON, Printed by THO. FAUCET, for NATH: BVTTER. 1641.

EPISCOPACIE ASSERTED: As it now stands established in our COMMONWEALTH.
AS for the Originals of Bishops and their antiquity, that is sufficiently
cleared and proved by many and sundry learned Divines both Bishops and Doctors,
and others, and may go for current till encountered with better reason, and
confuted with stronger Arguments.

But as they now stand incorporated into the superior part of the body of our
Commonwealth, they are represented to every Ordinary apprehension, so
impregnably fortified on all sides, as that they may securely endure, like Iron
Pillars or Rocks of Marble, all the battery of any eloquence or Sophistry
whatsoever.

For although their opposers advance their notions toward the borders of
Divinity, in imitation of the old Heretics, who in a blush to be sole and
bare in themselves and their single inventions, bragged out their absurdities
for a while with Scripture flourishes, and as Vincentius Lyrenensis said of
them that they did divinae legis sententiis quasi quibusdam vellerebus sese
obvolvere, so they tired in themselves with their own self-conceited
presumptions and preapprehending the dangers they are in to be censured as
Sacrilegious, or enforced to flee to the Scriptures, and from thence to extort
succor with a wrest of violence for the better boulstering out their homebred
exceptions against Bishops, that savor something of ignorance and malignity,
of whom J may say as Athanasius said of the Arrians in his Oration contra
Arrianos; That Christum simulant and contra Christum pugnant, so they pretend
the authority of Christ speaking in the Scriptures, when in very deed they
strive though insensibly they perceive it not, and contend and argue against
Christ and almost against all his Ordinances, and so fulfill not only the
predictions of preferment wherewith blindness and ignorance should outstrip
the clear sunshine of manifest light and truth, but also accomplish the
Prophecies of the wild degeneration of Charity into new and strange heats and
fits of zeal without knowledge, and so render themselves obnoxious to the
wrathful displeasure of the Almighty; for as St. Gregory says, Consilium
divinu^ dum devitatur impletur, humana autem sapientia du reluctatur
comprehenditur, so whiles man goes about to defeat and avoid the authority of
his commanding Word by any act of disobedience, he falls within the compass of
another branch of his word of Prophecy, which is thereby fulfilled and
accomplished, and so whiles humane wisdom like the builders of Babell soars
toward heaven in a pride, to vie and contest with the wisdom of the Almighty
that is infinite and incomprehensible, it is taken in the snares of its own
impotencies, and have its vain imaginations like Achitophels turned round into
folly and simplicity.

1. As first, because it is against Christ and his will revealed in his word,
whereby he ever maintains the beauty of honor, and the dignity of authority,
and the strength and sinews of Revenues, wheresoever he finds them rightly
fixed by humane Laws, whether on Jew or Turk, or Infidel, or upon
Christians, but especially i^ on his household servants and high stewards of his
chiefest treasures, and most mysterious secrets, such as the Bishops are, who
are graced in our Commonwealth with titles of Honors, and with the dignity of
authority by the favor of Princes, and are endowed with great Revenues by the
franck donation of many famous Founders and Benefactors, and have ever been
confirmed in all by the Laws of the Kingdom, which are as near as may be
regulated by his will, so far as has been possible to make discovery of it,
either by the dictates of nature, or his express commands set forth in the
Scriptures. And all this he seconds by surrounding them for the glory of his
general providence, with a guard of a double perfection not only of strict
Injunctions to honor and obey, to assist and support them in all. But also
with direful menaces of punishment proportionable to their transgression,
denounced against all (that prevent it not in time with a due repentance) that
should dare to derogate from their honors, or disobey their authority, or
disturb the peace they enjoy in their possessions, and turns of all violations
of his Law committed on them, but against himself from any the least
termination upon them only, and strikes in as a party, and makes himself the
Center of the injury, and reflects back again like a Rock upon the Authors, the
offenses offered to his Messengers, as if he himself had suffered, saying not
they, but I, not you, but me, which is the same with his language to Saul
before he was St. Paul; saying, when he appeared to him as he was traveling to
Damascus breathing out slaughter and threatenings against the Disciples of the
Lord, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, who, in all probability, were not
Disciples of the Ecclesiasticke, but the Civil state, and that too in the time
of his ignorance, and while he was yet in unbelief, but here CHRIST is
persecuted in his chief Ecclesiastic Disciples, and that by knowing and
believing Ministers, which is like the Contention between the Sun and the
Moon, which is an allusion the Poet took to express the insolences
wherewith the male contents of Rome seditiously did venture to outbrave their
Superiors and Governors; saying, -- Fratri Contraria Phaebe
Ibit, and obliquum bigas agitare per orbem,
Indignata, diem poscit sibi; totaque discors
Machina convulsi turbabit foedera mundi.


In English thus: The Moon impatient of her rule by night,
Would needs dissease the Sun the day to light;
And by this civil and unnatural jarre:
Enforced the bands of the worlds love to fry in war.


Oh, let not the reddition be told in Gath, or spoken of in the tents of
Ascalon.

Secondly, It is against the light of nature, that prescribes a rule for every
man to measure another good by the estimate and affection they hold and bear
to any thing they can, or do call theirs;

Which is this, Quod tibi fieri non vis alteri ne feceris.


Manifested thus: if there be any that can entitle themselves either to honor
or office, or inheritance that has been conferred upon them, either by the
favor of Princes, or by the donation of Ancestors, and that confirmed by the
Sanctions and Constitutions of humane laws and judicatures, and that
confirmation re-established by ancient prescription of long possession, and
nothing to the contrary: It would be thought a thing very grievous and
intolerable for a title so clear and strong, and so impregnable to be unhinged
and abrogated, and not to allow like Justice to the Bishops in all they are,
wherein like correspondence in every respect is obvious to every ordinary eye,
will prove a Paradox too too pregnant with mysterious absurdities both in
ordinary Divinity and natural Logique and vulgar Justice and Moralty.

Secondly, it is against the King his sole Deputy and Vicegerent upon Earth,
and that in a threefold respect.

As first, It is against his Royal Prerogative, which above all other glorious
beams of Divine Majesty that shine upon him, and abundantly show themselves in
him, not only in his power, but in his parts, both of sanctity and
intelligence, proves him the only express Image and lively representation both
of the ample and free liberty, and also of the communicative goodness of the
Almighty, wherein it is free and loose from the mixtures of humane limitations
and restrictions, which like Sea-bankes bounds it up and circumscribes it in
many particulars, but in this left free and absolute, and managed as it is
according to the prescript rule of the word of God for the setting forth of his
glory, by promoting of his peoples good, which is the supreme end of all his
Majesty's; for Salus pupuli especially spiritualis and eterna is suprema lex,
as his Majesty has ever done to his eternal renown by countenancing, and
continuing, and confirming according to the Royal pattern of his famous
progenitors, the honors and authority, and bountiful maintenance of the
Bishops as he found them at his first coming to the Crown.

Wherein he approaches by imitation as near as is possible to the nature of
the Almighty, and that in a double respect.

1. First thus: as God when he sent his Angels as nuntioes on his arrand to
Mankind, he formed them with lineaments suitable to humane nature, to
conciliate with their seeming germane affinity to their kind, some reciprocal
welcome to be spent in a willing and favorable attention, and waiting on the
delivery of their message, and so to steal upon both their apprehensions, and
faith, and belief, all together by the prefaces of humane insinuations: so his
Majesty takes his naked spiritual creatures, of the poor Ministers of the
Gospel, and lest they should be too much estranged, and abstracted, like
Angels in respect of secular and political out sides from all familiar
association, with common and vulgar expectations; he clothes them with the
Court Wardrope of honor and authority, and of the plentiful affluence of
means, and so sends them forth, to charm the senses of his Subjects, with the
pleasing shine of greatness, into a happy and holy treason to their souls,
for the betraying of their darling ignorance, and misleading darkness, into
the sweet captivity of a far better guide of light from above, which is
usually as odious to them, as a candle or daylight is to a Thief and a Robber.

2. And secondly, as God made Kings, Prophets, as Melchisedeck, and King David,
and after him Solomon his Son: so his Majesty vouchsafes to all the chief
Evangelicall Prophets that have been found famous for their parts, and piety,
to participate in some measure of some of the branches of honor and authority,
and of the ample Revenewes derived at the first from Kings. And that not so
much to gratify those Reverend and holy Fathers, with a Paradise of temporal
happiness, in their present preferments, which is nothing to them, in
comparison of those, fortes laetitias and solida gaudia, they have in their
studies and performances of their duties; as to win upon the affections of
carnal and secular minded men, to comply with him unawares in a point of
state, policy, whilst they pursue their own covetous and ambitious thirsts
and ^ymes at profit and promotion for themselves or theirs, and that in his
Royal providence and designs to perpetuate an eternal propagation of a
learned and Orthodox, and of an unblameable and unblemished Ministry to the
worlds end.

2. Secondly, it is against his Royal title of defender of the faith, which is
not to be conceived to be meant of faith in abstracto in any sense, but in
concreto as it is incorporated (blessed be God for it) into the hearts of all
or the greater part in some measure of his Christian people, the chief
Champions and propugnators whereof, under his Majesty, were as ever the
Bishops, who have incoumptred and subdued almost all the powers of darkness,
with all their antihcristian impostures, and diabolical, machinations
wherewith they have ever endeavored either to darken or eclipse, or totally to
abolish the light of the Gospel.

3. Thirdly, it is against his Oath by which he engaged himself at his
Coronation to embossome the Church into his dearest and most intimate embraces,
and to prove his Patronage thereof (according as has been prophesied of him)
by his care and zeal of its frail and tender safety and prosperity, subject
to all the storms of envy and malignity, which being duly observed as
hitherto by his Majesty is the Pillar and basis that bears up all other
fundamentalls both in Church and State, and that by reflecting back upon his
Majesty a strength and an assurance complete and eternal both of all
Temporal and Spiritual happiness, and to his Royal Consort and all his
Royal issue, and to derive to all his loving Subjects throughout all his
Dominions a confident security of the safe fruition of all the sundry objects
of their chiefest and dearest delights the shaking and unloosing whereof upon
any pretenses, how spetious and advantageous soever will be little credit to
their duty of loyalty that shall attempt it, and scarce thank worthy at his
Majesty's hands whenever it shall be presented unto him.

Thirdly, it is against the Laws of the Kingdom, and that in a double respect.

1. As first, it is against the grand Fundamental Law of Magna Charta, so
often confirmed by many sundry Acts of Parliament in sundry Kings Reigns,
which allows the Church and Churchmen wherein no doubt Bishops were employed
because it was a Bishop that first begun and co^arived, and continued, and
occasioned the free enjoying of all their endowements and immunities and
Privileges to the strict observation whereof all that oppose the good of the
Church, are or should be sworn.

2. Secondly, it is against the Law of propriety of late so much stood upon and
revived a new to the great good and comfort of the meanest and the lowest of
the Civil state. And if the Heads and fathers of the Church should be
condemned as aliens and political illegitimates to an incapability of common
Rights, and interesses with their inferiors, it would amount to be a greater
Monster in government then ever nature did produce.

For seeing they are freeborn Subjects as well as others, and capable with
them like free denisens of all Rights, and enlargements, either by honor, or
authority, or by any additions of Reverewes they shall be thought worthy of,
and can fairly arrive at, and being fully possessed of all by law accordingly,
and that possession ratified by long prescription, they ought not neither can
they be justly disseased of any, or all, but by order and course of Law,
usually observed in all proceedings in every Court against any, either for
disroabing, or dismounting of any from their honors, or for the deposing of
any from their authority, or for the deprivation of any man of his means.

And that too for some offense proportionable in weight to such a punishment,
and that again not merely moral, as pride or covetousness, or neglect
either of their Episcopal or Ministerial duties, for which or the like, or
greater, as merely moral, never man was yet ever known to be questioned in
any Court, nor legally can be: But political, and that not in generals only,
for Dolosus versatur in universalibus (particulars are expected to be produced
and proved, and they again to be tried, and examined, whether heinous and
enormious enough to undo and destroy any one of the present Bishops) for their
personal delinquences; for so the learned and the innocent, the pious and
religious might save themselves with credit, and fairly escape; or whether so
capital and outrageous, as like the sin of Adam, or a talent of Lead, it
should unmercifully drown them all at once in one common confused deluge of an
utter universal sweeping exstirpation, and final abolition of all, the
learned with the ignorant, the innocent with the delinquent, the person, place,
and Office, with all the concomitances, dependances, consequences, and
influences for ever: Or whether according to the tenor of one or more leading
precedents, practiced in like case, by the sages of former times, which is the
Cynosura, by which the whole Nation of Lawyers, both Judges and Pleaders for
the most part usually steer and move in all their proceedings, who never had
nor made precedents by the punishments of Communities, especially such as the
Hierarchy of the Bishops is; for speculative, imaginary universalities of
impieties.

And in the mean time it ought maturely to be considered of; whether such a
sudden violent redress of the supposed enormious crimes of the Bishops,
would not become to them or some of them an irresistible rentation to greater
and more intolerable, and unpardonable extravagant exorbitances, as of dejected
and heartlesse, malecontentednesse, and of impious and blasphemous murmuring
against Gods providence, and of seditious quarrelling with, and repyning
against the Wisdom and the justice of the present government, or of busy
studying out, and of subtle contriving of pernicious ways of revenge for the
unexpected losses of those precious pledges of many former Princes favors,
and, as may be supposed by them, for the undeserved deprivation of the ancient
inheritance of their famous predecessors, and so (...) a course of more
avocations and of greater in erruptions of their studies then as yet can
possible be conjectured: But the consequences thereof may easily be discerned
by any that is but weak sighted in future contingences, as blindness and
ignorance which is said to be matter errorum and vitiorum ^utrix, the fountain
and nurce of all impieties both Speculative and Practical, for as the Psalmist
says; Thou make darkness wherein all the Beasts of the Forest move; so
the night of blindness and ignorance is the only opportunity for all the works
and fruits of darkness to advance and display, and to show themselves in
their colors, such as are Heresies, Scismes, Factions, Dissentions, Seditions,
Rebellions, Treasons of all kinds, Jesuiticall powder plots, Regicydes state
underminings, and God knows what Chaos of disturbance and confusion of the
whole frame of Church and State of and all, for as Acosta very well observed of
old, that Heresenan surores regnorum conturbationes secutae sunt, so it may be
found true with us if not timely prevented. And as Varro said of Plautus;
Postquam morte donatus est Plautus,
Comaedia luget, scaena est diserta,
Them risus, lusus, jocusque
Et numeri innumeri simul omnes collacrumarunt.


Change but the Scene into the Church and the Seminaries, and Suborbes, and
all the branches of it, and a man may see the like truth spring up faster and
spreading already further then can be sooue or easily remedied.

Fistly, and Lastly, it is against the Laws of civility and common humanity,
and that in a double respect.

1. As first, thus to deprive the deceased founders of their proper
inheritances who still survive themselves in their devices and donations which
they did forbear whilst they lived to wast and consume on their own lusts
and pleasures, and without respect had to their nearest and dearest friends and
acquaintance diverted at their deaths ever their beneficence from them, and
turned it into a Sacrifice to be offered up to the Almighty, and to be spent by
the Bishops, for the setting forth of his glory, and that by promoting the
public and spiritual good, both of King, and Church and State, and of all
both at home and abroad, wheresoever the Gospel is professed, as is
sufficiently manifested by the famous Monuments of Learning and Piety, which
they have continually set forth and published to the world, of which as Horace
said of his works; Exegi monumentum aere perennius
Regalique situ pyramidum altuis,
Quod nec imber edax aut Aquilo impotens,
Possit divere aut innumerabilis,
Annorum eries, and fuga temporum.


So may they say and more, and trulier of their works, but they are no
boasters.

And now to defeat the aims of those deceased founders, and to contend with
them in a vye of better wisdom and larger liberty, and greater power then ever
they had, or exercises over their own estates, is like cum mortuo Protogene
bellum gerere was enough heretofore to make the victorious and courageous
Warrior Demetrius to retreat and shrink with shame and fear from his siege
of the City Rhodus, where the Picture of Iasylus made by the famous Painter
Protogenes was kept, for when he was remembered to consider how foul a thing it
was to war with the dead, it is said that forthwith oppugnatione desita and
imagini and civitati pepercit: so if it might be but deliberately thought on,
what an unworthy and uncomely thing it is, that those ancient Monuments and
lively ravishing pictures of charity and piety, and beneficence, of the famous
foundations and endowements of Bishops, that have thus long subsisted and
flourished; should now be the objects of envy and hostility, they would spare
their own trouble, and forbear their further prosecution of all the siege
they have begirt them with, and of whatsoever they have attempted and
enterprised against them.

But to fly upon the Bs. their donees and adopted children, and to out them of
their Legacies, as well or rather because they are Bishops, then for any Moral
or political offense, as yet either alleged, or sufficiently proved,
notwithstanding all the worthy services wherewith they or some of them, or some
of their famous predecessors have enlarged and advanced the felicity both of
Church and State, cannot be warranted from the gests and acts of former times,
and will prevent a Parallel in after ages.

For as Tertullus the Orator said to Foelix the governor, seeing we have
enjoyed great quietness by thee, and many worthy things have been done unto
our Nation by thy providence, we acknowledge it wholly, and in all places most
noble Faelix, with all thanks, so they might understand, if they pleased, and
confess and acknowledge, that they and their Forefathers have enjoyed great
quietness by their means; For as the Apostle says of the Israelites, that to
them appertain the adoption, and the glory, and the giving of the Law, and of
the service of God, and of whom are the Fathers: so to them appertain, the
adoption and the glory of the chief Ambassadors, and Messengers of Christ, of
the high Stewards of the great and manifold mysteries of Salvation, of the
Master Builders of the great City and Temple of the Church, and body of our
head Christ; of the faithful dispensers of the Covenant of Grace, and of the
Ministerial givers both of the Law and Gospel, and of the constant
preservers, with their utmost care and diligence, of the sincere service of
God, and of whom came all the Fathers, in both the famous Universities, and in
all the Cathedral and parochial Churches, throughout the whole Kingdom, who
did baptize, and teach, and marry, and bless from God, all their Forefathers,
and were to them in stead of Christ their first and sole Deputy redeemers, who
recovered them out of worse then Aegytian darkness and bondage: and so have
hitherto preserved them, and, with their burning and shining rays of light
from above, did enlighten and mollify, and reduce the old, blind, and
hard-hearted world, into bright daylight, and Dovelike mildness and
gentleness, to combine, and knit, and grow up together by the bands of charity
into one man and one mind.

And from those Halcyon days of love, and peace, and joy, and delight, they
deriving all their happiness (...) for their Forefathers debts and their
own, for former and present benefits all conce(...) them and theirs, with some
thankful requitalls of acknowledgement at the least.

But in stead thereof, to affront the merits of their Piety, and constancy, and
learning, and charity, with affections high and rough, and grimme in frowns,
and threats of their utter ruin and destruction, makes the Gospel little
better in event, then Senecaes institution of his great Scholar Nero in his
Heathenish morality, of whom it is said, that he seemed non tam erudi^sse
ingenium Neronis, quam armasse saevitiam.

And that by decreeing it incongruous and dangerous for them, as Bishops, to
taste of the pleasures of any little parcel of secular and temporal
greatness, that at the best, have but stillam gaudii in ultima te parvitatis
constituam, which is not only to prejudicate their generous education of their
continual exercise of their best parts in the sublimest co^te^plations, in ye
most abstruse mysteries in Divinity, as unfruitful to refine the temper they
are of by nature, and as altogether unuseful and unprofitable to renew their
infirm frame with sufficient supplies of grace, to be as pious and as religious
amid the smiles of their great fortunes, as Joseph was in the Court of Pharaoh
King of Egypt, and as the Evangelicall Saints were in the Roman tyrant Neroes
houfe: But to found and ground from thence a greater degree of Popery then ever
yet was discovered in the late Bishops, or aimed at, or attempted by any of
them; namely, the single life of the Clergy, which the Apostle calls the
Doctrine of Devils.

For if honors and intermedling with secular affairs, and great possessions
be inconsistant with holy orders, then must the Clergy be interdicted and
excommunicated altogether from the honorable estate of Matrimony, as too too
various and tedious, with many more unavoidable changes of distractions and
interruptions from their studies, which is by this means pointed at as the
next intolerable burden and grievous captivity they must of necessity expect
to be enthralled unto.

And so from thence to derive restraints to the honorable, and to the rich and
married, and to the great Commanders in the Civil state to forbear their
darling pleasures, and not to be like Polyphemus Evangeliophorus whom Erasmus
brings in his Dialogue between him and Cannius, dreaming that the Gospel
hanging at his girdle, might reach an influence to his heart and head, and
corporally work a spiritual change upon his intellectualls, as if the mere
carrying of the Gospel about a man, or the sometimes vouchsafing to a
Preacher, an averse ear that is charmed from within, with swarms of a
thousand curbes of sundry fancies, and that too but in case of distress, of
necessitated respite, and leisure from their other occasions, and in a just
dread of Court-censures, and the punishments prescribed by humane Laws: And as
the stream and swinge of custom and company, heaves and drives them, were
enough to maintain the credit of a Christian profession, and in the mean time
to ingrosse and impropriate to themsel^es all the guerdions and garlands due to
the greatest endowments and best deservings; and confine the Clergy only to
their Intellectual and Spiritual delights and hopes of their future
happiness and inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven; as Julian the Apostata,
did the Christians, when he spoiled them of their goods and estates, jeering
them with their Masters Doctrine, saying to them, blessed are ye poor, for
yours is the Kingdom of Heaven.

As if our blessed Savior had suffered death only to redeem them from the
bookish and lean drudgery of the Clergy, and had come to crown them, like a
Temporal King (as the Jews expected) with the Rose buds of all the delights,
or more then ever Solomon provided for his lusts, in the days of his vanity,
and to content himself only with some few younger brother Parsons to be
conformable to his poverty; and to side with him in the fellowship of his
sufferings, but rather they are to be like Epiphanius, of whom it is said, that
Pingebat actibus paginam quam legisset; So they are to express, in their lives
and conversations, all their Lectures they have heard, and read, and received
from their learned Ministers.

For as the exemption of them from the busy employments of Magistracy, and the
denudation of them from the bewitching splendour of honors, or exonerating them
of the cumbersome luggage of riches and great possessions, must be turminated
altogether by them in a moonkish Retirement, and that to be worn out and spent
in restless and incessant labors at their studies; the fruits whereof are all
to be expended for the enriching of the Laity, with all the precious treasure
of Divine Mysteries: so are they to be correspondent in a mutual reciprocation
of proportion^ble offices and duties; and that by incorporating all that
knowledge into all their existences, occasions, and occurrences, and as St.
Origin said of St. Paul, Sanctificabat prophana, and fecit ecclesiastica: So
they are to sanctify all their civil and secular conditions; And as one said
of the Sacraments, that they were Verba visibilia: So they are to rarifie and
sublimate all their low and terrene temporal employments, into a manifest
visibility of the purity of Religion; which will apparently result not only
out of the exact measuring of the length and the breadth, and of the height and
depth of all their endeavors and undertakings, according to the strict rule of
the word of God: But also by pointing all their intentions, with a defixed ^yme
at the high and chief end of the glory of God; and by ever rancking all their
other inferior and secundary ends, with a Methodicall subordination and a
harmonious coherence, and an orderly and tributary subserviancie to the
supreme.

And then, is the Poet said of Isla and her Picture: which the Painter had
drawn so to the life-like her.

Vt utramque putabis esse v^ram:
Aut utramque putabis e^^e pictam.
So an ordinary Spectator, that is divided, through weakness of Judgment,
into a dubious apprehension, might either think both Laicke and
Ecclesiastical persons to be a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an
holy Nation, a peculiar people; a^ St. Peter called the distressed Jews,
writing to them being strangers scattered through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
Asia, and Bithynia, or both of them to be and not to be, like a Picture, that
is and is not, what it seems to signify and represent; a Nation and no
Nation, a people and no people, Christians, and yet no Christians, as they
ought to be.

Or else because they are, as they are good Bishops; who for the most part are
as good as any sort of men: amid the many infirmities our weak nature is
subject unto, and notwithstanding the many tentations our best performances are
too too frequently blasted and blemished with.

And in some respects do far surmount and transcend many thousands of other
vocations and conditions, in both unknown and unvaluable eminencies, and that
in a double respect.

1. As first, because in their tender years, almost as soon as they could
see, to discern of colors and differences, they could be so Eagle-eyed, as to
spy out the precious pearl of the Gospel; to the study whereof they did
wholly dedicate themselves without any further consult with nature; and that
with a kind of disdain of all other professions whatsoever, and singled out
its excellencies from all the flatteries of honor, and riches, and renown,
that courted their judgment from every corner of the earth, and the known
world; to be their sole, and secure, and most sincere delight, and as most
really and substantially advantageous to themselves, and as most universally
and freely profitable to all others in their most spiritualized, and sanctified
desires and wishes; howsoever slighted and undervalued by some ignorant
Atheist, as the most barren and chargeable, and laborious, and difficult, and
despicable vocation in the world.

2. And secondly, for the many weary days and, weeks, and months, and
years, and anxious, and vexatious cares and indefatigable and restless,
pains, whereby they have exhausted and consumed the flower of their strength,
and prime time, and all to enrich themselves by Gods blessing, and the
assistance of his holy Spirit, with heavenly treasures, to be retayled again,
sometime to men of corrupt minds, who for the most part requite them with no
other rewards, but heaps of contumelies and heartbreaking reproaches;
wherewith they abundantly revenge all the great good of grace and glory which
they intended them.

And to conclude, when the State did never yet decree by any public act,
either riches, or any honorable remuneration, to any of the Bishops, or any of
theirs; for any of the best services, and performances; which measured by the
strictest exactions of humane Laws; may well go for luxuriant and redundant
super-erogations. And now to treat of nothing but degradations and demolitions
of those Pillars of earth; contrary to the word of God, and the light of
nature; and contrary to the Rights of his Majesty; his Title, Oath, and
Prerogative; and contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, and of common humanity,
and civility, and supra, and praeter, and ultra, all their demerits, and when
many poor and beggarly Incorporations, are permitted and allowed to triumph in
needless, and superfluous Privileges; whose chief Magistrates wisdom and
policy; is sometimes recorded with his own handywork on the roof, and top of
his ruinous habitation: this would make St. Hierome, if he were now alive, to
blush, and repent; at what he said in his Epistle, ad Eustochium, quid Cicero
cum Apostolis? For the Orators exclamation of o tempora! o mores! may well
suite for a fit amplification of the Apostles prediction of these our perilous
times, the Apostle speaks of in his 2. Epistle to Tim. 3. c.

v. 1. This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come.

v. 2. For men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemous, disobedient to parents, unthankefull, unholy.

v. 3. Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good.

v. 4. Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God.

v. 5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the powers thereof.

He that please may read, and use it as his Looking-glass, and m^ke Discovery
of some things amiss in himself, and thence learn to surrender up all the
surfets of mistakes, wherewith they have undervalued and vilified those
reverend Fathers, whom Tertullian calls A postolici semi^is frutices and
haereditarios discipulos Christi, and are procuratores salutis generis humani,
and the Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof, as Elisha said of Elias,
and ought to be honored with all thankfulness; omni loco, actu, habitu,
tempore, as Ausonius said to Gratian the Emperor, and rather then to abase
them any lower, then they are, with any dimiunitions; to study how to add to
them further and ampler enlargements in all; for as St. Hierome said in point
of obedience, so may I say in matter of beneficence, quis pudor, quod
nonpraestet fides, quod praestitit infidelitas, so what a shame is it that Our
Father should not be as bountiful to the Church as ever was Pater Noster.

But instead thereof, in this clear and plentiful Sunshine of the Gospel,
to bereave them contrary to the Laws of grace, and of nature; of those
endowements which were conferred upon them, by such as were contrary to
themselves, both in nature and in grace, in respect both of natural and
spiritual affections: will prove a double aequivocall operation, in the
production of contrary effects in both Religions, both theirs, and ours.

For as their blind superstition, became to them like the clay, wherewith our
Savior opered the blind man's eyes in the Gospel, which was likelier quite to
put them out, then any way to clear them or recover them: taught them to work
out new Discoveries of better ways of serving God, and honoring him with
their substance; not only for the buying out of the Prince of darkness from
his Regencie (if it were possible) wherewith he tyrannized over the Children
of darkness: but also for the hyring of the light of the world (if it might
be) to break out, and shine upon them, their kindred and Countrymen; and with
a holy kind of Symony, to purchase for them the gifts of the holy Ghost.

So the abundant bright Sunshine of the Gospel, dazles the light of nature in
some, into such a stupor of insensible blindness and ignorance; as they can
neither see their own hands; nor yet the surplussages of their overflowing
estates, nor the sundry forms of wants and miseries, wherein our Savior
proclaims and presents his distresses, continually in many thousands of his
poor and afflicted members.

But when they come to the Church they seem to see double, and take all
temporal accessions, of honors, of authority, and of revenues, to be a
voenenum, and a perditio, and altogether superfluous, bursome and dangerous.
But manum a tabula.

Therefore as the Hills stand about Jerusalem, as the Psalm. says, so let the
Lord, and the Lords anointed, and all the minor Lords of the earth; and all
that bear good will unto Sion, incompasse, and incampe, like Legions of
Angels; round about the reverend Bishops, and all they are, from this time
fourth, and for evermore, Amen good Lord, so be it. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
Errata,
PAge 3. line 23. for perfection read protection, page 5. line 2. for spoken
read published, line 27. for secondly read Thirdly, p. 6. l. 15. for Majesty r.
Majesty, is (p. 9. line 11: for Thirdly read Fourthly, l, 18. for employed r.
employed, l. 19, for con^rived r. contrived, p. 12. l. 18. for Heresenan r.
Heres^on, and l. 24. for deni r^ dein, p. 13. l. 19. for altuis 1. altius, l.
22. for ^ries r. series, and l. 28. for exercises r. exercised) p. 16 l. 1^.
for constituam r. constitut^m, and line 22. for in read of page 21. line 27,
for earth read the earth.


