A COPY OF A LETTER Written from his Holiness Court at Rome, to his Grace of
Canterburies Palace now in the Tower.

Deploring his Sequestration from his Liberty, but commending him for his late
care in performing his Holiness desires.



LONDON, Printed 1642.

Renowned, yet despicable SON,
TO you, as the only accomplisher of our Catholic designs, do we send this
paper greeting, whose desolations are almost the only object of our present
Lamentations, It cannot but extremely grieve us to hear with what good
success that Heretical Synod is attended, and what daily oppositions our
Episcopal government receives from them; never were we more cast down under
the sad sususpition of the not attaining our ends, then now; formerly when your
Grace was in your prosperity, then we lived not without a beneficial
expectation of accomplishing our desires, and had not those Puritans, and the
rabble, of the multitude been so clamorous, the voice of our mellifluous
doctrines had been heard in your streets, but no sooner did you begin to hoise
up our Altars Metaphorical, but the ignorant vulgar supposed them the Romish
and Antichhristian Mountains; and which is our grief, one of our sons
turning Puritan, Lincoln.
being then in Quierpo, vented his distillations against them; only we must
needs congratulate our hopeful son Heylin, who as much as in him lay gave
the same a Responsall warranted by your grace and favor; at this time were our
hopes cherished, and when all things being so fairly carried, and almost
finished, behold a Heretical Synod assembleth, and marres all our holy
enterprises, and as if this were not sufficient, the miszealous and Heretical
Scot must needs publish his Northern fumes to render us and ours odious to
posterity. The Canterburian Self-conviction.


But O it is our superlative grief, to hear that you are sequestered from
present liberty, and that the Fates have conspired your woe. Cheer my son,
cheer your self with hopes, either of freedom from these afflictions, or
else of eternal felicities for suffering in the cause of Christ, and his
chief Vicar here on earth; Let not these momentarie Castigations chase from
your valorous spirit thoughts of happiness; For notwithstanding the success
of your endeavors has not produced the good you longed for within your
Metrapolitanship, yet in Ireland we hope our dear children will perpetrate
all the good they can devise ( It yet holds well) and we hope will do so,
until we have a full possession of the same, only the Heretical City is in
hopes of relief and sustentation, Dublin.
which we desire may be procrastinated, to our great satisfaction.

Such being the condition of that Kingdom, that the Inhabitants being for the
most part members of our holy See, we were the better encouraged to lay
designs on foot, for the actuating some advantageous business to our self;
We resolved, seeing we could not secretly undermine them, by a professed and
open hostility to oppose them, where in a short time they have as yet had good
success, and unless the Heretics of the other Kingdoms contribute their
assistancee, we live in hopes it shall be our own.

Notwithstanding the Heretics insolency is such as does much trouble us, yet
in time we hope, and long to see the hour of redemption, when your Grace shall
be either freed from your present troubles, or else leave the world like a
meek Martyr, and be so cauonized at our Court of Rome, after the holy Order
Archiepiscopall.

FINIS.

