THE Feigned Astrologer. A COMEDY.

Horat. Ep. 2. Lib. 2. -- Magicos terrores, somnia, sagas,
Nocturnos Lemures, portentaque Thessala rides?
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Thornycroft, at the Eagle and Child, near
Worcester-house in the Strand. 1668.

The Actors
SIr Christopher Credulous -- A Rich old Knight, father to Clarinda. Bellamy --
In Love with Clarinda, and beloved by Celia. Endimion -- Once a Pretender to
Clarinda. Gratian -- In love with Celia. Lewis Bernard -- Friends to Endimion,
and Gratian. Clarinda -- Mistress to Bellamy. Celia -- In Love with Bellamy,
and beloved by Gratian. Fannie -- A little Cosen of Celia's. Beatrix --
Clarinda's Chambermaid. Luce -- Celia's Chambermaid. La-gripe -- An old French
man, a servant of Sr Christopher's. Rudeman -- Bellamy's Man. Shift Rawman --
Two witty Knaves servants to Endimion.
The Scene LONDON.

THE ASTROLOGER
ACT. I.
The SCENE, Lincolns-Inn-fields.
Enter Endimion, Bernard, Shift. End. HOw strangely does thy News perplexme,
Shift?
Art sure it is true?

Sh. Beatrix tells me so, and then I must believe it.


Bern. Is she your Oracle then?

End. But is it possible that my Clarinda should --

Sh. No, that it is not, she should ever love,
You I mean; for there may be perhaps --

End. Nay, nay, I guess the reason of her scorn,
She loves else where.

Bern. Even like enough.
She Would never hold her self at so high a rate to you,
Had she not other Chapmen.

Sh. I smelt some such thing in a certain Conference, I had with my Princess
to'ther day; and had not her doting old Master come by in the nick and spoilt our
sport, I was within two kisses of all her Mistresses secrets.


Bern. Is Beatrix such a tell-tale?

Sh. Tell-tale, and Wag-tail. Why, is she not a Woman? and is that Sex made for
Privy Counselors? it is true, Chambermaids, I think take an oath of Secrecy as
they do; and might do well to keep it too, as some of the others do: but alas!
--


End. Saving your mock-Morals and mongrel-Comments
On the whole Tribe, tell me of Beatrix, Sir,
What of her? what says she?

Sh. What says she? why she says any thing; she can no more keep a secret than
another woman, she is no more able to digest it; 'twill up Sir, 'twill up when
occasion serves.


Bern. Let Shift alone to manage her Evidence,
He Will pump her dry, I warrant you.

Sh. Sure enough: for whether it be my Person, my nimble dapper Person; or my
Wit, my fooling Wit she is taken with, or talking humor, in which we most
Sympathize, I know not: but I Am sure, I taste more of her kindness then you do
of her Mistresses:

However, our way of Love is nothing troublesome, it is free, and without any
tie, we aim not at Hymen, we; as long as we like one another, so; when we are
weary; so.


Bern. A pretty modern Method.
But prithee tell me Endiminion, art not thou sick of thy Constancy? have not
loved Clarinda long enough? to every fair one you were wont to cry, I love you;
and scarce a whole day loved the same.


Sh. And yet Clarinda now with all her scorn
Has held him to it a Month;
It Is a strange Metamorphose in your Worships humor.

End. I break custom, I confess it, for Clarinda's sake:
Yet let it not amaze thee, Bernard,
To see me burn so long in the same flames;
For if Love at first made me her Servant,
That Love is now to a Gaprichio vanished,
A mere peevish obstinacy:
Her want of complaisance for my Amors
Is the only reason why I haunt her now:
Not that I value her person, but I take
A pleasure in displeasing her; nor but
By vexing her can I wipe off the shame
This seeming Constancy would blast me with.

Sh. What a wrong sense I took you in all this while?

Bern. Why, you love her not then?

End. Not I, I thank my Stars.

Bern. Why do you visit her then? why write? why send?

Sh. What in the name of Madness makes you
That you are not in Love, play the fool, as those do that are?

Bern. Peevishness, I tell thee, mere peevishness;
Had she, when first I courted her,
With less severity welcomed my Affection,
The fit had soon been over;
And in my way of making love, to another
E're this I had made offer of my heart;
But to knit one's brow, and look wise so out of season,
To fume and fret at every merry word,
And pay with frowns instead of smiles
A whole day together;
Then do I make love in despite.

Bern Marry, you are a terrible Lover indeed!

Sh. I see it is dangerous for a Woman to have to do with you; why? would you
have 'em love you whether they can or no?


Bern. Is it so unpard'nable a Crime not to make much of you, that the
punishment must never have end?


Sh. But when will your Inconstance-ship get a new Mistress, and think of this
no more?


End. As soon as thy dexterity has sifted out
Who I am slighted for?

Sh. Why, for Bellamy perhaps

End. For Bellamy?

Sh. Yes, for that very Bellamy
That has Courted her, you know, these Twelve Months
Do You laugh?

End. That were a fine Match indeed!
Of all the gay men that frequent her
I never was jealous of him yet.

Sh. Why, he is a proper Gentleman, though but a poor one.

End. Clarinda is too proud to look so low
A mind like hers on state and bravery set,
Is with a Fortune not a Person taken;
This Bellamy too has ever been her scorn.

Sh. What, if that were but a trick?
A mere dissembling trick, to cosen the old Man?

End. They have more tricks then one then; for Bellamy
A week since left the Town;
Nay's shipped for France ever this,
And yet you would have 'em smitten still.

Sh. There may be a trick in the Journey too, for --

Enter Beatrix. End. Peace, yonder is Beatrix, feel her pulse a little,
Enquire, enquire how matters go; we will step aside.

Sh. It Is enough, I have my kue.

End. Let Us give him opportunity. --

Ex. End. Bern. Beat. What art thou thinking of now?
In a melancholy posture, his Cloak about his face.
Sh. Who I? I Am thinking of nothing.

Beat. What? in your dumps, when I come? when your Love comes?


Sh. My Love? I have no Love, not I;
My Master loves no more, and I love no more neither.

Beat. In earnest, Shift?

Sh. Yes in good earnest, Beatrix.

Beat. What, will thou forsake me now?
Thou can not be so hard hearted sure?

Sh. But I can, and will.

Beat. This is but to try the constitution of my heart,
And peradventure to morrow.

Sh. Nay, there is no peradventure, nor no to morrow;
Is it not always like Master, like Man?
Make thy Mistress love him, and then --

Beat. Thou must not request impossibilities at my hands,
Likely things I would do.

Sh. Why? is Clarinda such a Love-hater? --
Is she so inflexible?

Beat. Not so much; but --

Sh. But? but what?

Beat. My poor Shift, thou have so often promised me.

Sh. Let us come to the But; go on with your story.

Beat. What should I tell thee?

Sh. Why Clarinda uses Endimion with such base neglect?
And whether or no to love her still
Be operam and oleum perdere?
Thou may smell my meaning, for Lamp-oyl has a strong sent.

Beat. I could tell thee all this and more; but --

Sh. But what again?

Beat. I Am forbidden.

Sh. I Am glad o'that; she will tell therefore.
aside.
Beat. Yet if thou would swear not to tell again --

Sh. Why I can be as silent as the silent woman;
I Will be a dumb show; or the Chorus to it at least,
aside. I Will tell but all I see: judge by my taciturn aspect.
I never tell but one thing at a time.

Beat. Thou will not tell then?

Sh. Not I; what I do not know.
aside.
Beat. But swear to keep counsel.

Sh. By my shifting faith, I will. Is not that well sworn?

Beat. Shifting faith? heyday! what faith's that?
This is an oath of a new fabric sure,
What anvil came it off? prithee did thou forge it?

Sh. The faith of Shift is a shifting faith:
But let not that stick with thee;
Men shift their faith nowadays, as often
As they did their Trenchers, when this old Cap was new.
But to the point.

Beat. You must know then that Clarinda, my Mistress --
But you must not tell your Master, Shift.

Sh. You would fain shift by your story,
But 'twill not be: let me have it then, and quickly; for now I observe you
better, I find by your simpring, and by the fumbling of your apron (that is a
main sign) that if I long to hear it, thou do even twitter to tell; leave
your halting then before as very a Cripple as your self, and come roundly to
the business.


Beat. Why, I must tell thee then --

Sh. No Prefaces, nor Preambles.

Beat. That if thy Master be unkindly dealt with,
The reason is Clarinda

Sh. Has another Love.

Beat. Thou Art even in the right on*t.

Sh. Well, his name, his name? go on.

Beat. Must you know more yet?
You Are very inquisitive into Women's matters.

Sh. I do not talk like a man-midwife? do I?
His name, I say, his name?

Beat. Bellamy.

Sh. That poor Cavalier?

Beat. It Is a noble complete Gentleman.

Sh. And with his complete Gentility
Thy Mistress will send thee to market? yes, she may;
But then must thou pawn thy coif and pinner,
Or come home without Eggs and Butter.

Beat. She dot's on him, who can help it?

Sh. All the dotage is on her side belike,
He Would nere leave her sure to go for France,
Did he dote too.

Beat. That Journey on design is given out;
But to speak truth, should he fall into the free-booters hands
We were in some danger.

Sh. He Is safe then, and on this side the sea?

Beat. Yea, and in London too, as I may tell you.

Sh. In London?

Beat. And nere was out on it.

Sh. Who the devil taught him to Romance so finely?
To delude all the town, but Clarinda,
And you their confiding Mopse,
He has taken as solemn a leave
As he had been going to Tangler, or to Tyburn.

Beat. By this means he sees Clarinda every night, by her appointment too, and
has done this week: and while his friends pity him, and think him sea-sick,
he is Land-sick, and Lovesick, good Gentleman. There Is but small hopes, thou
see st, for thy Master.


Sh. So me thinks.
But is not your Lady afraid of the Lampon-makers?
Has she a mind to be in a Ballad?
There are some Women have had whole bundles made of them
Upon less occasion, (as they say themselves.)
Hoard up smooth faces, keep 'em leiger in a garret all day
To play at bopeep by night.

Beat. Alas! thou art too severe, to young Ladies especially;
The nights the only time for their recreation:
But we have a care of our ways,
And make a Conscience of being taken in 'em,
I Would have you know.

Sh. Just as the Lacedaemonians did of pilfering.

Beat. Why it is not a blot till it be hit, Man.
This night-work is so contrived.
That Bellamy steals into the garden by a backdoor,
Which I leave open for him, and so to an arbor,
Where she waits his coming.

Sh. An excellent Rendez-vous for a midsummer Moon,
But this hot weather will not last always.
Where shelters he all day?

Beat. At Gratian'S, as close as he that fears an Execution,
And that is the reason too perhaps he gives his friend
Of this concealment, for he is not of the Council,
Nor should I have been, I think;
Could they have carried businesses without me:
But I am right necessary Woman sometimes.
Fare thee well, give me thy hand;

Sh. Farewell, farewell.

Beat. Thou do promise me, Shift?

Sh. Promise thee? what?

Beat. Marriage, and't shall please thee.

Sh. Go thy ways, I do; when we are at age.
Ex. Beatrix. Is this the honor they vapor with?
This the reputation they are so shie of?
How many are there of this deceitful sex,
That wear Virtue enough all day,
And lay it by at night with their black patche;
And the rest of their superfluous ornaments?
Has Clarinda her Love-qualms too? well, the
Best of 'em have their failings, that I see.
But now am I as over-loaden with this secret;
Oh, how heavy it is? I shall shrink under the burden
An I carry it any further; I Am sure I Am sick on it already.
To him again Endimion, Bernard. O here is my Master, he will cure me.

End. Have thou found out the reason of my disgrace?
Is Clarinda engaged elsewhere?
Is it pride, is it hate makes her so coy?
What other Gallants has she? why do not speak?
Art deaf? or have thou lost thy tongue?

Bern. Why standst thou making faces thus, and clutching thy fist?

End Why do thou squeeze thy fingers so? speak.

Sh. O good Sir, let me alone.

End. Let thee alone? why what art doing?

Sh. You Will put me out now;

End. Put thee out? of what? the art out of thy wits already sure.

Sh. Now was I striving all this while to hold my peace;
I was bid; but the truth is, I am so far
From doing as I was bid,
That I Am even weary of striving already: hark you then
That Spruce, Complete out-sided Gallant, he that of all
Her gay frequenters nere gave you Jealous pang,
That very Bellamy, I told you of before,
That gives out he is gone for France,
By Clarinda's own contrivance is concealed at Gratian's.

End. Bellamy in town still?

Sh. As sure as you are; and see's her every night.
Alas, he had no arrant into France,
But to make an ass of your Worship,
And that it seems he can do better at home.

End. One of 'em shall dearly pay for it though.

Sh. Why, what do you mean to do?

End. Nay, I Am resolved, I Will to Clarinda again.

Sh. Oh poor Beatrix, you will tell Sir now,
And then is she undone for ever.

End. No, no, never fear it.

Sh. What good will it do you to see her then?

End. I mean to laugh at her, and for a full revenge
With deep protests will I renew my suit
If slighted, in the same coin I Will pay her instantly,
And give her scorn for scorn;
A biting jest or two, and I am even with her.
When she peceives my Vows were raileries,
Which merely to divert my self I passed upon her,
'T will shrewdly pinch her, that I Am sure of,
For she that thinks she is fair indeed,
Will never endure to have been told so but in jest.
But prithee the whole story of this fine Amouretta,
Bellamy sees her every night, it seems.
I cannot wish 'em joy yet heartily,
aside. There are some dregs of Love still lurking under my anger.

Enter Rawman. Raw. Lewis sir is here. End. it is well.

Sh. You shall know more anon.

End. Go thou, and warily sift out
Of some Neighbor or so, if I may see Clarinda.
That is whether --

Sh. I understand, you are afraid of the old Man,
You would have him safe.

End. smiling. The art in the right
That Is a stumbling block must be removed.

Ex. Shift To them Lewis. Lewis. May a friend be partaker of your Mirth?
Or know but whence it springs?
Clarinda without doubt
Has better thoughts of Love then she was wont,
It Is not an unbecomming weakness now, I hope,
Y' have wrought a cure upon her, I see it in your looks.

End. Nothing less; she never was more avers'd, nor I
More lost to all hopes of ever being favored by her.

Lewis. In what terms then must one condole your loss?
Or with what Arguments. --

Bern. Nay, never set your Rhetoric of the Tenterhooks for the matter,
Not quicken your invention with your nails,
He can live without her.

End. I praise my manly temper.
The loss Lewis I do not much regret;
And were thou fit for such a secret now --

Lewis. You do me wrong to doubt my keeping it.

End. I would acquaint thee with my whole Adventure:
I have discovered how the Market goes,
And see why I am not thought to bid fair,
The scorns Clarinda heapt on me
Were favors she obliged a Rival with;
She Is in love man, desperately in love
See how the World's mistaken in her,
And how groundless my pretensions are.

Lewis. Clarinda in love? versed with that subtilty too
In his dissembling Maxims to carry it thus?

End. Nay, it is a wonder; she that stood upon her guard
And kept us at such distance, to be taken?

Bern. She that set Love and Lovers at defiance,
And seemed so scrupulously modest, that to name
I ut Venus to her or Cupid, was talking bawdy.

Lew. But who is the luckie Woodman has struck this fair Do?

End. That Is the wonder of all wonders, Bellamy.

Lew. Away, away, now I see you jest.

End. It is a serious and a sober Truth, sir,
A sad one too it might prove for some body,
Had not I more discretion then all Lovers have.

Bern. The French journey's but a fiction, Man,
A mere slight to make their meetings
Private and unsuspected.

End. But see what a goodly choice she has made,
What a happiness she refuses me for;
A Man of no Fortune, Estate I mean,
For luck he has enough to fool me;
If 'twere wit he out-did me at,
He Would do it above board, and by daylight.

Lew. You Are misinformed, I Am sure on it;
I know Clarinda better then so, besides Bellamy
For another Beauty burns, though it flame not out.

End. For who?

Lew. For Celia.

End. Have you acquaintance with her?

Lew. Not much; this I know, she is a great Gallant,
L^ves in the Fields here, with a Widow-Aunt
And is Courted by him; it is true, Gratitude
As much perhaps as Love, may draw that Courtship
For his engagements to the Lady are great,
His bosom friend has told me all,
One that were happy could your surmize prove true.

End. I go upon sure grounds, Beatrix is my Author,
And not to tell you a secret by the halfes
He keeps close at a friends house of yours all day,
At Gratian's-

Enter Gratian. Lew. See where he comes; give me leave, and I Will know all;
He Will make no secret often to me, I Am confident,
Nor will I to you of what I learn from him.
Ex. End. Bern. Raw. What pensive still?

Great. And miserable still.

Lew. What new misfortune causes this complaint?

Great. It Is an old grief mine, Lewis; how often
Have I told you with what passion
I burn for Celia, and with what violence
Done to my self I do forbear all words
That might disclose that passion a friend
Is Rival in? judge of my misery then,
For sure no torments equallize his pain,
That dies for love, yet dares not once complain.

Lew. How out of season these respects are now?
When Bellamy's absence gives you place;
Take the opportunity,

Great. I Am never the happier for a Rivals absence.

Lew. No? that is strange; but I hear, let me tell you,
His French Journey's laid aside, nay, was never intended.

Great. Who tells you so?

Lew. Nay more, it is whispered he lies private at your house,
Nere seem amazed, but deal ingenuously.

Great. I did not think it had been known abroad.

Lew. Not is it generally; but what is his design?
Or what can he aim at by this stealth?

Great. I never dived so far into his breast:
I only understood it did concern his life,
Or what was dearer then his life, his Love,
To disappear some time:
All I can guess besides, (and that
But by some words he does drop forth by chance)
Is, that some jealous thoughts disturb his mind,
And that to try his Celia's real kindness,
He spreads this feigned report of travel,
That as his absence proves to this fair one
Irksom or indifferent,
He may see the power of Rivalling Pretensions.

Lew. It Is hotly rumored though he loves Clarinda.

Great. That Is the town-trick:
Because he is young and courtly, Clarinda handsome,
He cannot visit her, but straight
He Is thought in love; nay, though she be not
Beyond common Civility regarded by him,
Yet People need's will have him her Adorer.
The news with Celia too has wrought so far,
'Thas cost her tears; but he in such persuasive terms
Still vindicates his constancy,
She cannot long believe him false.

Lew. Is she so much his then still?

Great. Too faithful to him ever, too fond indeed:
Though without taking leave he stole away,
She seeks her self pretenses to excuse him,
And with such care does palliate his neglects,
As stops my mouth, and frustrates all my hopes.
While I (and that is my height of misery)
To make him happy, court my own ruin,
Visit her at his request, woo her for him,
And improve each minute to discourse his Love,
Fanning their heats thus, and childishly
Playing in a flame that must consume me.
She, with the very name of Bellamy ravished,
To sit and chat of him entreats my visits:
I must comply.

Lew. It Is something a severe compliance.

Great. Thus keep I still some interest in the family,
And have access to her; and if by some
Capriciousness of fate, which often breaks kindest leagues,
They chance to jarre, she may perhaps reflect
A faithful friend seldom proves faithless Lover.

Lew. I wish it may be so.
But you would be visiting this cruel fair one.
May she with justice balance both your services,
And then yours will be crowned.

Ex. Lewis. To him Celia, Fannie, Luce. Great. See where she comes the fair
Cause of all my grief;
No more then let the fear of displeasing her keep it in,
For though I should fall under her disdain,
Her beauty is concerned I make it known
Her eyes have captived her more slaves then one:

Cel. How happily do I meet you?
Sure Bellamy is landed long ere this?
A letter from Callis now me thinks, to make his peace.

Great. Madam, I expect some by the French post.

Cel. Why writ he not from Dover? nay,
From Canterbury, from Rochester, from Graves-end?
Are they not all post-towns?
Oh! I could have found twenty ways to send to him.

Fan. How well my Cozen knows the road?
Yet I dare swear she never was further
That way, then Southwark-fair.

Lu. Oh this Love is a subtle teacher, Mris Fannie.

Fan. Has it taught you any thing, Luce?

Cel. Nay, I have reason to be angry with him,
To steal away thus, and never bid adieu.

Great. Thence you may judge how great his passion is,
That fatal word, Adieu, had he but spoke it,
Must have been his last; of so much beauty,
So much kindness too, who without dying
Could have taken leave?

Cel. I Am easily won, Gratian,
To a favorable construction of all he does;
My love indeed pleads for him still: and yet
What ere the reason of his absence be,
I might, me thinks, have been acquainted with it.

Great. Nay, Madam, I excuse him not, he is too guilty;
I know what courtesies he is indebted to you,
With what a liberal hand you ever poured them on him,
And that when --

Cel. No more of that, I pray;
A Courtesy looses its merit if published once;
Would I be minded often, I did deserve
He should forget it. Besides if I may
Freely own the motive of those actions
I pleasur'd my self most in obliging him,
I did but justice to his fair desert:
And yet I Will not acquit him neither, I Will think
As you would have me more deservingly
Of what I did; there is no gift though he is bound
To me for, saving that of my heart, my
Love I Would have requited, then all is paid.

Great. That is the gift too he does value most:
And that he might not all Ungrateful seem
To the fair giver, when a necessity
Sudden as unwelcome forced him from what he loved,
He sought to leave you one half of himself
Gratian, to fill his room.
And friendship now making but one of us,
If among your discontents you reckon his absence,
It shall be my care to supply his place;
With tears and sighs I Will figure you his grief,
And will (to act your Bellamy to the life,)
Forget I am not he; from the same Eyes
I Will draw my warmth, with the same passions burn,
And in this personated Love outvie --

Cel. Enough, enough: for I begin to fear
Least the pretense of speaking for another
Should urge you further then a friends interest
Usually does, friendship transports you, Gratian;
Temper its heat a little.

Fan. A forward Proxy! hee'ld wed, and bed her
For his friend, would she but let him.

Lu. But she is not so coming; though he
Would fain take himself for Bellamy,
She Will not mistake him so too.

Ex. Cel. Fan. Luce. Great. My silence argued me remiss and slack,
And venture at a word, I Am beaten back.

Exit. ACT. II.
The SCENE, Lincolns-Inn-fields.
Enter Clarinda, Beatrix. Beat. BY my modesty, Madam, I Will keep your Counsel:
Alas
I stand in need of the like good office my self sometimes,
And they that tell deserve to be told of, I say.
Yet could I but understand what you drive at
I might be more serviceable.

Clar. What account can I give thee?
In such perplexity my mind's involved,
I know not what I would my self.

Beat. You love Bellamy though,

Clar. Oh Wench I do.

Beat. And that is it puzzles me now, to see so high an affection
Mushrom-like sprung up o'th sudden, Bellamy
Has courted you, and recourted you sighed and sob'd, again and again,
Yet all would not do, you were as coy still and as calm,
As nothing had been; nothing but frumps
Could he get of you in a whole years time,
Nothing but No's, and I wo' not's, and I cannot's,
And now in one week you are so strangely altered,
As you were turned the wrongside outward;
You Are got into the loving extreme now.

Clar. Alas! I loved him all that while;
Though knowing how much a Wealthy fathers bent
Against Pretenders of so small a fortune,
Set cold neglect and rigor in my eyes,
While my heart even melted with hot love.
This seeming cruelty had driven him into France,
Could I have worn it still, but thou saw me
Beaten from that ward; and yield, though he
Gave out he went, he should not go indeed.

Beat. Truly you are to be pitied: but what good
Can this counterfeiting of a Journey do you?

Clar. His intentions for travel were too well known abroad,
To have the Journey broken thus o'th sudden;
And sifting out the cause, perhaps
Something of the truth of it might have been found.
It Is safer to keep close by day awhile,
And then pretend some reason for's return.

To them Endimion, Shift. Beat. Endimion, Madam.

Clar. His importunity will nere have end.

End. Is it not just I quarrel with my Stars
That I can never see you? will you keep home always?
Must none enjoy you, but your self?
I shall grow jealous of yourself at last.

Cla. Home is most pleasing to me, and retired thus
I see but what I like, and will my self;
What moves you to press on my retirement?

End. Will you never take pity of my sufferings?

Clar. Bewail your self some where else, I Am ignorant of your griefs.

End. Love. -- Clar. Never name a Tyrant I abhor.

End. But a Lover that suffers. --

Clar. Leave out that name of Lover,
There is such a discord in the sound, I hate it.

End. Unjustly though, methinks;
For sure with fewer charms Nature does frame
What she means not the object of our Loves.

Clar. Will you never leave this odious talk?

End. Will you be lovely thus, and cruel still?
Oh what Flames do those Eyes kindle in my breast!

Clar. What aversion does this discourse beget in mine!

End. Heavens! how they sparkle? how many deaths
They shoot, those Star-like twins?

Clar. Oh, I could hate the Sun, whose light I see you by.

End. The Moon indeed is something kinder to you,
No doubt, but to her light
You are beholding for a lovelier sight.

Clar. I understand you not.

End. You will not.

Clar. You think to fright me with this obscure discourse.

End. I can clear it, if I am put to it.

Clar. Nay, it is time to be gone then;
I see you are angry, and might use me worse,

End. staying her Without hearing my reasons?

Clar. I care not for 'em:

End. But you must hear 'em though; it is a Love-suit
I am concerned in, you shall be judge in the case;
You Have heard my Adversary at leisure,
And taken perhaps some prejudice against my right;
It Is my turn now to have an Audience of you,
Since he has it by night, I may well
Claim one by day; not that I do expect
A Garden door should be left jarr'd
For me to slip in, nor Beatrix there
Confidingly to watch, none interrupt my story;
Much less that you your self should wait
My coming in an Arbor.
Were I supposed in France, and yet in spite of Seas
Could meet you at an hours warning, then indeed
I might deserve a kin^^^ welcome.

Sh. A pox on's memory! he has not left out a tittle,
to himself. What a speech has he made here?
Could I find no body else to tattle too?

Cla. What have I heard?

Sh. Oh Sir! what have you done?

End. It Is but a just revenge of her unjust
And undeserved scorn.

Clar. to Be. Thou have betrayed me,

Beat. Believe me, Madam. --

Clar. Away thou faithless wretch, thou have sold me;
Unhappy she, that trusts such mercenary souls.

Sh. to End. Now will poor Beatrix be turned away.

Beat. I would to Heaven you did not with your anger
Avow your self what I had still concealed,
And this reproaching me did not confirm. --

Clar. Peace Impudence: justifying yourself?

Sh. to End. I had need of a good back now,
'Twill all fall upon me.

End. It Is past now, who can help it? but for my interest,
For thine own, for Beatrix sake, for all; prithee Shift
And thou can, piece it up again; make any shift.
Invent, Frame, Lie, Swear, anything, I Will second it.

Clar. Nay, it is resolved, never speak on it more:

Beat. Well, I must pack then, since you will have it so
But may I now before your face, if ever I told tale. --

Clar. Oh, it is an innocent piece!

Sh. I have much ado sir, to make a good lie of the sudden;
But this shall serve for want of a better.

End. Good or bad, let us have it; I Will help thee out.

Sh. And you turn me away to morrow sir, I will tell
I Will speak the Truth in spite of all Masters, I:

To Clar. Madam, put up your anger, or turn it the right way:

To End. Nay, never wink on me, nor frown,
Nor make me signs to hold my peace;
Truth must be heard, and shall.

To Clar. Beatrix never betrayed your secrets,
Nor does she prattle of your Love,
The Stars, the Stars themselves discovered all.

Clar. What means the Fellow?

Sh. You don't believe me now?
But I must tell you though, and you will find it true too,
That this Master of mine (as out of countenance as you see him)
Has not stowage for his great Capacity,
Nor the World his fellow in Astrology,
The Man in the Strand was an Ass to him, when he was at best,
He can make the Brazen head speak at this hour,
Spirits he could raise Sans nombre
And make them talk too,
Till we were all weary of their company.
If ever an Endimion slept in the Moon's lap,
This is he, for he has as much familiarity with her,
To my knowledge, as that comes to.

Beat. Thy Master an Astrologer?

Sh. I, Twenty.

Beat. What Twenty Astrologers, and but one Man?
Thou will tell a lie anon.
aside.
Sh. I mean, he casts Figures, and raises Appearances
As fast as Twenty;

End. This story'll cry me up for a fine fellow.
aside.
To Sh. What sirrah? Sh. Yes sir.

Beat. aside. If she would but believe him now!

Sh. Nay, you are an Astrologer if ever man was:
I know I loose my place, and forfeit my no small
Arrears of wages too in discovering it,
But I love Beatrix, Queen of Beatrixes.
And ought to free her from the suspicion

To Clar. Her Mistress has conceived; he has made me mad
This week with his Ovals and his Circles,
He contemplates the Stars in nights so dark
They dare not appear, and is staring abroad,
When the dogs will not peep out.

End. Well said, Bull-dog!
aside.
Sh. By Moonlight, by Owl-light, by any light,
By no light; and in his Chamber
Continually poaring on a great black Book
Full of pot-hooks of all sorts and sizes,
The Inventory of the Devils Kitchen, it is I think:
And thus has he discovered your Amors
But in what Devils name, or which leaf of the Book
You Are written in, truly that I cannot tell you yet.

Clar. This is a jesting Knave, and yet
aside. There may be some Truth in what he says too;
Stranger things have been found out by that Art.

End. Why, thou everlasting prittle prattle!
Will It never have done? who has hired thee here
To tell a story of a Cock and a Bull?

Sh. I* I, Cocks and Bulls; those are some of your Familiars.
Madam, I have not said a word, but what is true.
I Will justify't, let him raise as many devils as he will,
What I have said will shame 'em all.

Beat. Meaning, it is truth he has spoke;
aside. Which is not the least of his lies.

Sh. Did not you show me a Garden.
To End. Last night, in one of your enchanted Glasses,
And bid me mark an Arbor to the West of that Garden?
I know not West from East, not I;
But I perceived it stood in one corner of the Garden,
And marked it so well, I can tell you
To Clar. What 'twas made of too, of Lauretine.

Clar. There is such an Arbor in the Garden.

Beat. Yes Madam, there is indeed:
God-a-mercy though, that he saw it once,
aside. When I took him into the Garden,
His Master's glasses had nere showed it him else.

Sh. But that you chiefly bade me observe,
And were your self so vexed at heart to see,
Was the Lady Clarinda here sitting in that arbor;
In a melancholy posture you were, I Will assure you, Madam,
Thus with your hand supporting of your head,
And looked, in my eye, as you had waited
For something, made you think the time long ere it came;
And so it proved indeed; for casting by command my eye
To another side of the Mirror, I spied a Gallant
Entered the Garden make straight up to the arbor,
And saw your first salute; it is true, I could not
Hear him what he said, (and by that I guess
The devil's not so great with the ears as with the eyes.)
But I suppose he did excuse his coming late,
And took such special notice of his garb,
I Would know him in a crowd of Courtiers,
Amongst clowns any one might discern him,
I could describe his habit too for need --

End. Oh! you have said enough, Sir, you have said enough;
And more then will stand with my credit, Madam,
To have believed, I Am worse then an Astrologer then,
He makes me conjure too: but since it is not
For my honor now to hide the truth from you;
I must confess that in my travels
'Twas my fortune to grow intimate with a learned Man,
Sometime a Scholar to the famed Nostredamus,
Who took some pains with me, my aptness
To his impressions making him with pleasure, as he said,
Impart his secrets, nor knew he ought
In Physiognomy, Palmistry, Astronomy,
Nor hardly in all the Mathematics
He read not to me; what ere belongs, I Am sure,
To the Optics or Mechanics he did disclose.
Thus came my skill.

Sh. I never heard this so perfectly before.

Beat. I don't think thou did.

End. But to own it publicly
I know too well the disrepute it is in
Amongst the Vulgar, too apt to give events
(Whose cause their dull capacity cannot reach)
To the black Art, and think the devil author
Of all subtleties above 'em; which makes my man
Talk of familiars, and take (dull brain!)
Our Optic glasses for enchanted one's.

Sh. Besides the wrong some late Professors too
Have done that art, by prostituting it
To men in power.

End. A servile flattery!

Sh. Made him more cautious in such times as those,
When it was dangerous not to be base,
How he seemed knowing.

End. But tired out at last with
Your too rigorous usage, your servants all
Too trusty, or too ignorant to betray me
Beat. Curt'sies. The cause on it;
I was resolved to find it out my self
In that great book, where truth's so fairly writ
For those have studied the bright Character:
I did consult the stars,
I found the garden, and the arbor too,
Bellamy's real happiness, and supposed absence.
But let not this discovery trouble you,
For my own interest I must keep your Counsel,
Our fortune is the same, it is but one secret for another,
My Man has told you mine, I found out yours,
Keep you but one of 'em, and I warrant you for the other.

Beat. It Is an able Man, I promise you!

Sh. You Will believe me another time, I hope,
to Clar. I was in the right, you see.

Beat. The truth, I trow, does justify me now, Madam.
I had heard it muttered indeed, he took upon him
To tell fortunes, interpret dreams, or so;
And could have made Almanacks too, for his skill,
But that he thought it a discredit to his youth,
To grow weather-wise so soon: but I had sold you,
I had betrayed you, I; he knew all from me.

Clar. Truth, I was loath to suspect thee,
I had no former grounds for it;
Had it not been for his Astrology though,
What could he have known, unless I had been betrayed.

Beat. You may, remember too, if any Incredulity remain,
How much my old Master talks of Astrology,
And what feats he was wont to do in's youth,
As he tells us, by the Virtue of Mars and Venus.

Clar. My father talks much of Astrology indeed,
What I have heard from him, helps to persuade,

End. Thou could not pitch upon a quainter fancy.
aloud having whispered
Sh. It Was extempore, Sir, remember that,
And may give some small hint of my faculty;
A little premeditation had afforded you a better.

End. It needs not, this fable is as current with her.

Sh. Nay, she is finely fooled; you shall
Have her in such a suppliant Style now,
She Is sore afraid of you, I see by her eyes.

Clar. Noble Endymion, whose clear-sighted mind
Is only parallel to your generous heart.

Sh. Did I not tell you?

End. Hear her Apology.

Clar. A slighted Lover's anger I should fear,
Were the excuse I am now to make you,
Due to any other, but you that know
The Influence of the stars, and force of destiny,
Will not deem it a Crime in me, to act
What they decree: when great ones cannot eschew
What they portend her, what should weak women do?

Beat. Peace, peace, your father's coming,
Your father's coming; it is his hem.

End. Would he would hem some where else,
We did not want him here.

To them Sr Christopher Credulous. Sr Chr. Now, what is the business with this
young Gallant?

Clar. It Is Curiosity, Sir, I must confess;
I heard not long since by a friend of mine,
He was most knowing in Astrology,
And having by her means wrought his acquaintance,
A Maiden-longing, which I blush to own,
Made me now question him 'bout my husband's name,
And when I should be married.
I Will try your skill though for once good Mr Astrologer.
aside.
Beat. The old man will have him into the Star Chamber presently.
aside.
End. She doubts my science, and sets him on to make trial often to Sh.
I le bear up bravely, and 't shall go hard,
But I Will beat that old tired Cock out of the pit.

Sr Chr. Are you a fortune tellers? do'e make Almanacks? hah!

Sh. Montelions perhaps, or so.

Sr Chr. He Is the sprucest truly o'th trade, I ere yet saw.

Enter to them Lewis, Bernard. They stand aside with Shift, who tells them what
has past between his Master and Clarinda. End. How rudely the man begins? this
is no fair disputant.

Sr Chr. What does he tell thee troubles thee thus?

End. I told her, Sir, of some hard fortune, which
By the malign aspect of an inauspicious Planet
I find her threatened with.
She takes it somewhat to heart, as you see.

Sr Chr. Thou art too blame, thou art too blame
To be so much concerned.
In so short a time what could you discover?

End. That she is decreed
To make the fortunes of a younger Brother,
Or some such wanting Gentleman;
For he whom she is to marry
Is rich in person only, and a comely mine.

Beat. Who would not think he spoke truth now,
aside. He delivers himself with such confidence?
The good Gentleman out-lies his man,
Foils him at his own weapon, Impudence.

Sr Chr. Fear it not upon such slight grounds,
It Is but one Doctors, opinion, I warrant you.

Clar. I would I had not heard it though;
The Prediction has made strong impressions on me.
Would it did so on you too, that you might be persuaded
aside. There were no remedy, but I must have Bellamy,
The fine wanting Gentleman he points at.

Sr Chr My Daughter meat for younger Brothers?
Fear 'em not I say again, let me alone
To stave them off, and wanting Heirs are as bad to me
As a poor Cadet, I Will beware of them too.

Clar. Endimion, though that reads my destiny thus,
Is a knowing Man, Father, one never yet mistaken,
Nor ever saw he, as he protests
The Stars on any one Event six'd so unanimous;
This would work, I think, on any one,
It falling so right with my own desires.
aside.
End. She takes more pains to delude her Father,
aside, Then I did to gull her: I shall be an Astrologer
At this rate, whether I will or no.

Sr Chr. Many Men have employed all their Lives
In this Study, and yet died short
OF the excellence of it too; and how this Man
Should arrive at the height of it so young,
I wonder much, I promise you.

Beat. It is with Scholars, I have heard, Sir,
As with Travelers; not always he that first sets forth,
But he that takes the nearest way, gets soonest home.

Bern. And what of him that is best horsed?

Lew. He out-rides his fellows.

Bern. Why, thou art a parcel wise Man too.

Sr Chr. Certes Astrology is a noble Science,
Worth the application of ingenious minds!
If you are such a Master of her secrets,
Few that pretend to the name come near
Deserving it so well; all men
Are not fit for speculation now a-dayes,
Youth especially, is all on Action bent;
So young therefore, and so learned, deserves
All Honor and Applause; and I am heartily yours.
I ever was affected to Men of merit,
A lover of Learning always, I:
And to speak truth, in my younger days
I was a dabler this way too, my self;
But marrying too soon, marred my Study,
My Wife burnt all my Books, and I soon fell
From casting Figures, to cast up accounts;
Domestic care, Lawsuits,

Beat. And good-fellowship too a little.

Sr Chr. Kept me from excelling* but tell me Sir, I pray;
Are not those Planets (Mars and Saturn excepted)
Of the happiest influence, whose Paralels are the greatest?
How like you Mercury beholding Venus,
With a trine Aspect? or, what think you,
Of the same Mercury in conjunction with Hecate?

End. The Man speaks Hebrew sure;
And he would take his answer in Gibberish now,
'Twere some thing:

Lew. Here are words as able to fright away an Ague,
As Voiture's Abracadabra

Sh. He had need be an Astrologer now indeed

End. I Will have one push for it.

Bern. Hark, he has provided an answer

End. to Sr Chr. Those Planets I account the happiest, none excepted,
Whose influence on Man and Woman pour down
What each desires most.

Lew. Learnedly answered!

End. Venus, you know your self, (but that you are pleased
To try my younger skill;) to Lovers does presage all bliss,
As Mars has a kindness for the Men of War;
Saturn is powerful with the Saturnians:
Marry, if Mercury eye Venus once,
There are Cuckolds made in the City:
Some false Dice* may be abroad too,
For he was a wag both ways, you know.

Sr Chr. But what if with a trine Aspect, what then, Sir?

End. That Is worst of all, Sir; then are the Cuckold-makers at work
In City, Court, and Country: if with a trine Aspect,
Then let all Men look to their Wives,
Their handsome Wives especially.
Oh, it is a Cornuting Constellation!

Sh. And governs this Cornuting age.

Beat. I never heard why we had so many Cuckolds before.

Sr Chr. Indeed, indeed, law-Daughter, I would
He had told thee thou should have
A rich old Knight, or some Alderman;
For sure enough he had reason for what he said,

Beat. No question but he had, though neither she,
aside. Nor you, know what reason

Sr Chr. But what of the Conjunction, Sir,

End. Of Mercury with Hecate?
I have much ado to speak the Goblin-words after him,
aside. It is a very critical one.

Sr Chr. Is it so? is it so? indeed?

End. Have at him now with down right nonsense.
aside. To Sr Chr. The Triplicity of it, as well as the Union
Of Hecate with Mercury, being Retrograde,
Or in combined Aspects, in the Horizon
Of a cross Ascendant, on such weak brains
Might paralax at last. --

Sr Chr. You Are too high for me, I promise you;
This is all out of my reach; if you would descend
To somewhat a more vulgar and intelligible phrase.

End. These are terms of Art, Sir.
I thought I should pose you.
aside.
Sr Chr. Pardon my age, Sir; it is so long since I
Broak Correspondence with the Art, the terms
Are as strange to me now, as I never had heard 'em;
And methinks too, they hardly were in use
When I was at the University:
But time that alters us, will alter Science too,
It has a daily increase, though we decay,
And other Countries may have other Methods.

End. Of late years, Sir, in the Mathematics
There are great alterations, they erect Schemes
A new way now, and have new names
Belonging to the Horoscope, Nostradamus him self,
Whom my Master followed, had his terms
And rules apart, wherefore the phrase
I Am studied in, may well seem strange to you.
But Schoolmen are like Carriers-horses; We plod on
In our old pad; like us, or understand us, who will.

Sr Chr. Do you so? do you so? That Is something strange methinks,
Yet amongst friends, you might vouchsafe, Sir, to be understood.

To them La-gripe. La-gripe. To Sr Chr. A vord vis your Vorship.

They whisper. Sr Chr. How now? what is the matter, Lagripe?

Sh. You claw it away with hard words.

End. Thou see, I sweat for it;
But for a friend now at need, relieve me
With an errand, or find some trick or other
To take off this old Lover, of he knows not what

Sr Chr. Your Pardon, Sir, it is an earnest business,
I should not leave you else, I Am even full loath as, it is,
For I did long to understand those new terms,
That I did: but we shall meet again
And discourse these learned Mysteries, we will try
Some Mathematical experiments too;
Nay, I have some Secrets worth your knowing:
But farewell farewell for this time.

Ex. Sir Chr. Clar. Beat. Lagripe. End. I had rather believe you, then stand to
sift 'em out.
I Am rid of him without thy help at last.
to Sh. Lewis, Bernard, I have had the finest adventure,
The prettiest part put upon me.

Lew. Shift has made us laugh at it already,

Bern. We stood aloof off all the while, and heard
How astrologically the old man questioned you:

End. And as Astrologically I answered him, I hope:
But he could not follow through the houses of the Sun
The pace I led him, he lost sight of me presently.

Bern. You did not vanquish him fairly, he understood you not.

End. It had been much he should,
When I did not understand my self.

Lew. It Is fit you take some pains in both,
He Will expect an expounding visit.

End. Bless me from undesign'd Encounters,
Such as this day's; and if by my good will
I visit him, let him plague me with nonsense;
Let him retaliate, and spare not.

Bern. Do You mean to trade in nonsense still?
A great Astronomer, or one taken for such --

End. He Will quickly find how I played upon him,
For what questions did he put to a Man,
That knows neither Signs nor Planets?

Lew. With your bold answers you so mall'd him though,
He Is yet well stunnied, and with as much ease
I durst wager, you will foil him next encounter.

Bern. Give him the other fall, complete your Victory,
It Is for the credit of learning
The work be not left imperfect.

Lew. We Will be the trumpet of your fame,
And sound your skill throughout the town.

Bern. What think you of posting up bills?
As others of the profession do.

Sh. And give some at the Playhouse doors
As they do for a match at the Bear-garden.

Bern. Or get him put into the Gazette
By way of Advertisement for the public good
Of what a Mine of Learning is discovered.

Lew. Either will convince the old knight,
to Bern. And if besides, by strangers we shall have prepared,
to End. The amazing rumor of your daily wonders
But reach his ear, as I Will be sure it shall;
Being full already of this first enterview,
He Will be so gulled, as nere old dotard was.

End. That I believe; but this fine pastime
Venture's me a little too far;
You consider not the danger may ensue,
Engaging thus my credit, and my quiet too; for 'twill
Draw all the curious fools of the town about my ears.

Bern. So we shall know how full the town is of fools,
And should they find, you are but a counterfeit,
'Twill pass but for a trick of youth at worst.

End. What sport soever we may fancy thus,
It cannot last long; for if it be
So generally bruited, I shall have questi ns
Put me hourly, and then my answers.
Must doubtless get me great repute.

Bern. What matter? you will answer as other Pretenders do,
Sometimes I, sometimes no; be it favorably,
Or fatally; have some respect to age and sex,
And for the rest, happy be lucky.

Sh. A fortune tellers never warrants any thing;
You answer not upon oath, Sir; and then you know,
One may strain a little, without venturing ears.

Lew. In Astrology the best of 'em does as much
By chance as skill: it is mere hab-nab.

Sh. What if you throw Cross or Pile, whether you say,
I, or no. or tell your buttons, I, no; I, no:

End There are ways indeed.

Sh. Why, it is an even lay, you hit right either way,
When there is but a right and a wrong in the case.

Bern. Have I not read of a judge was swayed by
Cast of Dice in trials of Life and death?

Sh. The high fulloms saved some, the low hanged the rest.

Bern. Right.

Lew. This remember; never to affirm any thing
With certainty, with what is past or present
Be very cautious how you meddle,
It Is as dangerous in this Profession
As speaking treason; of the future it self
Speak but obscurely neither, to your Consulters
'Twill pass for learnedly, they must
Allow you to be in the clouds a little.

Bern. Let your Answers be like Oracles, wondered at,
Not understood, foretell more good fortune
For the most part then bad,
That will send 'em away pleased at least:

Sh. And in that good humor they will remember
Your poor servants; our Wages may be earned this way.

End. Thou Mercenary fool.

To them Gratian. Lew. Here Is Gratian; be gone,
We Will begin with him, he is credulous.

End. I leave it to you, Gentlemen;
Manage the device as you will your selves,
Come Shift.

Ex. End. Sh. Lew. Who would have thought it?

taking no notice of Great. Bern. Who can well believe it yet?

Lew. It Is strange.

Bern. It Is beyond imagination.

Great. How is it with you, Gentlemen?

Lew. We hardly know our selves;
We are wrapped in such a cloud of Wonders;

Bern. Most miraculous!

Great. May not I know what? I would fain wonder too.

Lew. I fear least --

looking about him. Great. You need not; here is none to over-hear us.

Lew. But it requires a secrecy.

Great. Trust me.

Lew. Endimion declared even now,

Great. Declared? what?

Bern. And did before our face things so incredible
Almost to eyewitnesses, I Am loath to speak 'em.

Great. What did he do?

Lew. I never met with, nor indeed heard of his fellow.
He is so highly knowing in Astrology,
And shows his skill in practices so admirable,
I could suspect he conjured.

Bern. He told me passages of my life, and almost in an instant,
Which without Enchantment, I know not
How he should discover: yet all he did,
Was by Conjectures from my palm and face,
And certain figures drawn of the sudden;
For he is also a Chiromancer, and a Physiognomist.
Who could imagine, seeing him so spruce, so gay? --

Great. Is it not Endimion the Wit, that traveled Monsieur,
Whose Gallantry and Conversation are so much cried up:
He Is of the Society too, I think.

Lew. Yes, yes, an eminent member: he has some rare secret sure
Which other Artists are not yet arrived at.

Great. I ever took him for a well-willer
To the Mathematics indeed; Some twice or thrice,
I think, I have conversed with him,
And found him then, both by his Countenance and discourse
An Astrologer, I will not say,
For that great knowledge he took care, belike,
To hide from all, but bosom friends;
But a person of sharp wit and excellent understanding
I clearly saw he was;
A Man addicted too to curious sciences.

Lew. What will you say, if I carry you with me
Some day, that he has undertaken
To show me a Beauty, had some kindness for me
In Paris? the French Mistress you have heard me speak of.

Great. Is It possible he can? --

Bern. That Is nothing to what he can do.
He made a Picture speak before us,
And that is the Cause of this astonishment.

Great. May I believe this?

Lew. You have both Eyes an Ears, will you believe them?

Great. Dear Lewis, make me better acquainted
With this rare Man; he*l tell me
Whether Bellamy be jealous, or no; and why. --

Lew. I have inquired that out for you already:
He meets Clarinda by night, and abuses Celia.

Great. He does go out by night indeed

Lew. And to that purpose; never doubt it.

Great. I Am overjoyed, if it be so.

Lew. But not a word, dear Gratian, as you love me,
Of Endimion; he would be Lamm'd
If what we know were spread abroad.

Bern. Here Is one in the snare already.

Ex. Lewis, Bern. Great. Endymion an Astronomer, and Bellamy faithless!
Love give thee thanks, the opportunity's a fair one;
I le straight to Celia, there I Will boast his Art,
By which, (if Love and I can make her bold enough)
She may discover how she is abused.
Then dispossessed
Of the fair thoughts she holds of this false Man,
Her heart for me becomes an easy prize.
Nor can he tax me with a breach of trust
That to his Mistress is much more unjust,

ACT. III.
The First SCENE, Endimion 's Lodgings.
Enter Endimion, Lewis, Bernard, Rawman, Shift with a Satchel at his back.
Lewis. FAmous Astronomer, most admired Genius,
You that are now the only Town-talk grown,
As never plot was half so well contrived,
So never any yet took as this does*

Bern. No Man, but is persuaded of your skill,
No Man, but with respect does gaze upon you;
And it some cross accident spoil not the sport,
You will be taken for a Prophet shortly.

End. And to preserve that good opinion, Sir,
With a Book in's hand. See, I loose no time.

Sh. Witness my burden here.

Setting down his Satchel. Lew. Why, what have thou got there?

Raw. His Worships Library.

Sh. I think I may be worthy to carry
Gives 'em two or three Books. Books after him, as famous a Man as he is.

Lew. A Lillie's Almanac.

Bern. And a Whartons.

Sh. There Is the Pro and Con
That will make him a good Disputant.

Lew. Wings Ephemerides! I marry Sir,
Here Is an Airy Author indeed.

Sh. My Master soars as high as the loftiest of 'em.

Bern. You know the houses of the Sun, I hope, by this.

Sh. As well as any man here does Coffee-houses or Bawdy-houses.

End. Peace Scurrility; that he had houses I knew before:

Raw. I ever held him a mighty Prince,
And did believe he was well lodged.

End. But now I know his Risings and his Settings too, Heliack, Cosmick, and
Acronick; the number of the Spheres, both Tropicks, that of Cancer, and of
Capricorn, the Artick and Antartick-Poles, the Paralels, Ecliptick-line, the
Climate, Point-Vertical: and what not.


Sh. Nay then, I Will lay aside this superfluous Learning,
He has enough without book.

Carrys in the Satchel and returns. End. Alas Sir, Mercury in conjunction with
Hecate.
Or beholding Venus with a trine Aspect,
Thanks to my Almanac here, is not Hebtew now,
It Is but a labor, though of memory yet,
My Judgment is not much improved,
And I must shun Sir Christopher a while;
But what progress have you made with the Pageant?

Lew. A fair one, I think, for the time,

Bern. Such as you would laugh to trace us through.

Lew. My first station was to a house where I
Was sure I should meet company, and of
The best; a kind of Lady-ordinary,
Where they were beasting it, for that game's in
Fashion still, though Hombre be more Courtly.
To the standers by, I whispered first my news,
Then amongst the Bettors it began to spread,
At last it wrought the Gamesters too, and found
Even amongst the loosers such concern,
They could sit still, and question me about you;
They must play on though, but they were so full
of Signs and Planets, that in stead of Play
A Madam cried out Venus, and a Man
Of War for Counter, straight cried Mars.

End. I fear 'twas I beasted her.

Lewis. When I saw t work so well, I left 'em, and to the play;
Where to disseminate my story best,
In The pit, I whispered it from ear to ear;
And thus confidingly it spread so well,
That by the end it was in every mouth:
Going out, (I laugh still at the conceit)
A friend rounds me in the ear with my own lie,
Which with so many oaths he vouched for truth,
I made some scruple not to believe him.

End. A most excellent progress!

Lew. Is it not?

End. But prithee Bernard, where have thou preached me up?

Bern. To Court, I; for that is the staple of news.

Raw. I Will see what they say of my Master at the Bake-house,
For that is my staple of news.

Ex. with Shift. Bern. But peeping by the way into the Exchange,
I met with one did lie for you the heartiliest,
Relating twenty monstrous things y' had done,
To which he swore himself a witness too:
Some five or six had hemmed him in,
And hung upon his tongue, his lying tongue,
With an attention great as his impudence;
I hearkened too a while, (then to try his mettle)
Took on me to contest some points he had averred:
But he, full fraught with wrath and indignation;
I speak but what IN ve seen, and you perhaps
Gain-say't for want of knowledge of the person,
Or else you envy men of worth and parts.
When I, seeing him so fierce, for fear of being beaten,
Even sneaked away to laugh at him at leisure.

End. What impudent fellows there are about this Town?
Travelers and Falk oners are modest to this vap'ring, Sir,
'Twere an excellent Genius to write Diurnals;
Is he not something a kin to old Politicus, think you?

Lew. He would out-lye him some furlongs

Bern. Novelty has its Sectators every where
As gross lies pass for current truth daily.

Lew. They did indeed.

End. But why balked you Grays-Inn-walks, the Coffee-(houses or some sage Club.
There your grand News-mongers confer.

Lew. Retailers of grave, serious lies, they:
But mine was for the young, the gamesome ones.

End. And with what credit they receive it!

Bern. Were I sure, lying would always thrive thus,
I Would make a vow never to speak truth more.

End. But at Court, Bernard.

Enter Shift, Rawman. Sh. A Lady, Sir, a handsome Lady too,
though her hoods hide part of her beauty,
Would fain have you to her self a while.

End. To her self? why, what would she do with me?

Sh. Was that a fit question for me to ask?
As if they would tell servants,
What they do with their Masters;
They are not so immodest, I hope.

Raw. Some of their stories would make me blush.
But this Lady looks with some honesty,
And desires to speak with you in private.

End. Wait on her in.
Ex. Sh. Raw. Step you two into that drawing room a little.
If there were some Astrology in the visit now.

Lew. I hope it is the Astrologer the Lady makes it to.
You want such Visitants.

Bern. You must wittily and boldly chiause two or three,
And then you will be in Vogue indeed.

End. What ere it be from hence you may observe us.

Ex. Lewis and Bernard. Enter Celia, Fannie, Luce, Shift, Rawman. Cel. Are you
not surpised at the confidence of such a visit?

End. I Am honored with it, Madam, beyond measure honored.
Beshrew me it is a fair Lady indeed, a very fair one.
to Sh.
Sh. I hope, Sir, I have not so little skill in beauty,
But you may take my word for a good face.

End. Trust me, I do not see a better.
How may I serve you, Lady? how may I deserve
The pains you have taken thus, to find me out?

Cel. To see Endimion I would have done more;
With such impatience did I long to be
Acquainted with the Genius of the age;
The learned Man our England ever bred.
Oh Luce! I tremble; I shall never have courage
To utter what I come about.

Lu. What need you speak at all? he can understand you
By signs and tokens, as well as he were deaf and dumb.

End. Madam, I want expressions to return
A Complement so ill-deserv'd, it is true
I have some slight tincture of knowledge, but --

Cel. Nay, nay, your modesty is fruitless, I know your abilities.

End. This esteem is too obliging, Lady; but could I serve you,
I should value my self too.

Cel. Oh Endimion!

End. What means that sigh?

Cel. You might save me the shame of being truch-man to it.

Sh. She Is in love w'ee.

End. By my Astrology I would she were,
On condition I had forfeited all my Interest in the stars.

Cel. The knowledge you are so envied for
Of my desires cannot leave you ignorant.

Sh. S'lid, would you have her make love to you downright?
And she would say but half as much to me,
I Would understand her, I warrant you:
You Are the strangest Man.

Raw. So you would have had her-a-told us her errand too:
Yes, I warrant you.
Women love to do that they will not say;
Some pretty things have but course names.

End. By that very reason, Lady, that you give
For your silence, you ought to speak your mind;
If I know a'ready what brings you hither,
Your free declaring it to me ought not
Add any thing to your confusion.

Sh. Excellently well argued! what fending and proving here is?
He Is cried up for a wit, and the Wench
Will laugh at him for a fool, a dull one.

Raw. I had best talk to her for the credit of the house.
That she may see there is some quickness
Of apprehension in the family, some feeling left.

Cel. What can the hearing of my weakness avail you?
You know the languishing desires I Am pressed withal,
My coming to you, my standing thus before you,
Thus blushing and discountenanced, does speak my mind;
Use me not then with so much cruelty, but since
Bashfulness hinders me naming my request,
Do what I would have you, without my saying what.

Sh. Pray do, Sir, without more bidding.

Cel. I see, you are not free to strangers, Sir,
I could have made an Interest you would not have refused
Any courtesy the stars make you Master of.

End. It Is clear now; some Astrologicall question
She has to put me.

Sh. You Are even well enough served, and't be,
That would not understand her other meaning.

Ram. She'I shift her arrant now, and invent something
To plague you with, I hope.

Sh. Would she had made Shift her arrant,
She had sped better.

Raw. Very likely.

End. Is she mad, to expect I should know her thought?
Am I a Magician, or am I the devil himself to do it?

Sh. If it be Astrology, some bombast words
She cannot understand, will quickly put her out of play,

Fan. Unmannerly fellows, they are these Conjurers,
They will not satisfy a Lady without so much entreaty.

Lu. I'Id even leave him, Madam, and go to another*
What little pyed devil's that, whispers with him?

Cel. It Is his Man.

Lu. His Zanie, his Jack-Pudding;

Fan. It Is some quack this, I warrant you, some Mountebank.

Cel. Peace, he comes toward us.

Raw. Wrap your Answer in Fustian, Sir, it is a warm wear,
And will look gravely.

End. Not to belie my science, Madam, or uncivilly pretend
An ignorance, you will not believe me guilty of,
I must confess, it is easy scrutiny for me
To dive to the bottom of your heart, and read
What Is most abstruse.

Cel. Do You see now? I knew he could tell.
to Luce and Fan.
End. Yet 'twere in vain I should Endeavor ought
For you, unless by a Declaration
Free and sincere, you testify
Your sull consent to what I go about;
You would try my skill first; but take heed this
Diffidence you shroud with modesty,
Do not impede the compassing your wish;
A Frank confidence, a strong credulity
Is required in those apply themselves
To such as I am for relief; my art's
Beyond the Vulgar of Judiciary Astrologers:
Which clearly to evince, I will (if you
Desire it) tell you what your thought is, now,
This very minute; what brought you hither,
Whether your heart be free, or if engaged,
To whom, how long you have lived so; or what else
You think or wish most secret: but this done,
No more; I can do nothing for you then.

Cel. How I shall blush at this recital, you
Condemn me to?

Fan. I Would tell him nothing, and 'twere to me;
Are you sure he'I keep your counsel?

Cel. What do I save by that, when he can know it however?
I love, Endimion; and he that captives me,
Having by Amorous duties won my heart,
Forsakes me then to travel into France,
So scornfully, he never takes his leave;
This Letter though I have just now received,
As kind as he was wont to be himself,
Which new assurance of his love, makes me
Passionately now wish his return;
I burn to see him, and though what I long for
Seem impossible, yet am I well assured
To you it is so facile, you may this night
Feast my sad Eyes with that beloved sight.
If ever Love then warmed your youthful heart,
As your own flames may kindle mutual fire,
Deny not my request.

End. Here Is a request with a vengeance,
Would gravel all the Conjurers of the Realm.

Sh. It had been as easy, I should think now,
Taking her up at her first weapon,

End. I hou do run on still with thy own conceit,
And never think of helping me out of the mire.

Sh. Shall I fetch Charles his Wain to draw you out?

Raw. And yoke Phaebus's horses to it,
That the Teem may be strong enough.

Sh. Call upon Nostradamus, Sir, he was your Master, (...) (removed
He Is bound to help you for his own credit.

End. The old Man with his hard words was not half so terrible.

Raw. Tell her, she must make a pact with the Devil,
That will skare her.

End. I know not, Madam, who you take me for,
Nor what you may imagine of my Art,
For where is it like that I this night should find
A Man, that you your self tell me's in France?

Cel. That Is a matter of nothing to you,
You do things more prodigious howerly,
I know that, to make one long since deprived
Of life, both speak and move, is slight
And easy to you; I have it, from good hands.

Raw. No doubt but you have; and I durst have sworn.
aside. You Had bin an eye witness yourself too
Of some of these Miracles.

End. I had rather talk to her o'th influence
Of her Eyes now, then of that o'th Stars.

Sh. Oh, had you so?
But you are not to choose your own Text by
Your favor, Sir, she has set you a Theme.

End. The impossibility of your request pleads my excuse,
There is no power in all my Art to serve you,
If you command the presence of an absent person.
Such things are not done by pure Astrology,
Specter and Phantasms move by Magic only,
Which black and dismal study, as it lies,
Within the compass of the Law, never is the application
Of a noble mind; besides a Ghost or Vision
Clothed in a fantastic body, is too melancholy
For your Sex and Age, such dire Apparitions,
As they are full of horror in themselves,
Strike pale with it, the stoutest looker on,
Your courage would fail you too at such a sight,
And you would repent the courtesy obtained.

Cel. Oh never, Sir, if the kind Specter have
My beloved's shape; be it but like him,
And the sweet vision will more please then fright,
But you mistrust me still, and think a Woman
Unfit for such a secret.

Raw. He has been very cautious hitherto
aside. Of trusting the Sex with any of that Nature,
And I think he has not many of 'em for you neither.

End. Nothing less, Madam, and since you urge me to it,
I have, perhaps, skill enough for what you desire.

Cel. Oh Luce, 'twill come at last.

Lu. Hang him, Wizzard, I Would see him swim to the Devil
With a Millstone about his neck, e're I would Court him thus,
Or be beholding to him indeed.

End. If I did at first plead an impossibility
To obey you, it is for a certain obstacle
I find in it, a main one too, your Lover, you tell me,
Is in France, and there is the mischief on it,
The Sea divides us, and I have no power
Beyond my own district, the wild Element
So uncontrouledly opposes all my charms
My hands are tied; and that is the true
And only cause, I Have dallied we'e thus long.

Cel. Nay, if that be all, th'impossibilitie's none,
That obstacle of the sea is easily removed,
So the fresh water hinder not, and if it do,
We Will cross the River, this Letter here
Is dated from Dover, see.

End. Nay, I believe you, Madam. worse and worse.

Cel. From whence he writes, he will not stir of some days,
He waved the Packet-boat, and waits a Man of War;
He has some business too in Kent, some friends to see.

End. I am gone; this bold Wench with her mettle
Has conjured that Devil out of me, others
Think I have at my fingers ends.

Raw. Does my Master think they take him for a Tailor?

Cel. I know he is not shipped yet;

End. Would she were sunk some Fathoms with her fellow,
To cool her courage, it is such a Virago.

Sh. Bellamy's supposed on's way for France,
What if 'twere he now she longed for a sight of?

End. That Is not unlikely, this may be Celia too;
I Will sift it out, e're I engage too far.
If he be yet on English ground, let me
But know his name, for in that Circumstance
Your Confession's yet defective, not that
I Am ignorant often, for let me tell you,
Though his Birth be good, his Name as ancient,
The Familie's decayed in Means, his personal
Gallantry making good the worth of Ancestors
Whose I and he never inherited.

Cel. That is his Character.

End. Nor do we differ much in age, though he
Perhaps, be something of the fairer stature.

Cel. It is most true.

End. Nay, then I Am well enough.
to Sh. You Will think it strange now, when I know the Man,
to Cel. I should ask you his name, but I have reasons for it;
Such, as unless I have it from your mouth,
I cannot comply with your desires; it is an Essential
Ceremony, a kind of deference our Art expects.

Cel. How pleasing it is to me to speak that name!
Bellamy, now you have it; what else
Must I do, or say to obtain my suit?

End. The sea not awing then my charms*
There Is no pretense left to deny you now;
And were the Task yet harder then it is,
Your Confidence would win me to it,
So daring a Spirit, that seeks what hardiest Men
Durst not attempt, would ever make me try
My utmost, look me full in the face.

Cel. Oh happy Celia!

End. Let me see your hand, what day were you born on?

Cel. The Tenth of May.

End. What day of the week?

Cel. On a Saturday.

Fan. She does not look, Luce, as she had bin made up
On a Saturday in the afternoon.

End. You must see your Sweetheart then,

Cel. To night, if it be possible,
The very thoughts of it transport me so. --

End. You must make me a Covenant with his Idea now.

Fan. Oh Cosen! will you turn Covenanter now?

Lu. When they that set the Idol up
Have pulled it down themselves.

Fan. Nay, It Is burnt, they say, it is burnt.
He'I make you a Phanatick in the end
And you hearken to him, with his idle Idea's.

Lu As I am here, this is one of the Devils Trapanners,
And has a standing Fee of so many fresh
Familiars per annum from the Prince of darkness.
To wheedle young ones in.

Cel. This malepert tongue will draw a vengeance on it,
If you beware not, Minion.

Fan. You must excuse her* Sir, it is a mad Wench,
She will talk thus of her Mistress, or my
Mother, or any one sometimes.

Cel. Your tongue's but little better governed neither
For all your excuses.

End. Let em talk their fill here among friends,
But not a word of Conjuring abroad*
Do You mark me, Gentlewoman, not a word,
Or by my Jacob's-staff -- but go to.
The Covenant I desire is wholly harmless,
to Cel. An innocent Charm, and I must needs have
A ticket written with your own hand.

Cel. In blood, Sir? End. No, no.

Cel. Can I refuse any thing that may contribute
To what I so much long for?

End. My figure once made, and the Mystery finished,
I Will tear your note, indeed I will;
My Standish here, and some Paper.
they set a table with Lights and Paper --
Fan. What think you now, Luce?

Lu. I think he is a Conjurer still, as I may tell you,
Amongst our selves, for I dare call him so
Aloud no more, he swears by such a strange thing,
The Prime Minister of State to the subterranean Monark.

Cel. But what say thou to my note?

Lu. This very night will he carry it to the
Meeting House, and pin it to the goat's tail.

Fan. You are sure in the next Lampoons to be coupled
With Lucifer, you shall be the sole couple in hell
For me, I Will nere write to him.

Lu. Flat and plain, Mistress, he should have
Nothing under my hand, I say.

Cel. Away, away, thou art too scrupulous.

End. Write, as I Will dictate to you.
takes her aside toth' table where she sits to write
Sh. Shall you and I chop a little Logic now,
My blowing bud of beauty.

Fan. Even as little as you please, Sir.

Raw. My most undelicate Chambermaid.

Sh. On further acquaintance, you'I say, the more the better; for though I
serve such a terrible Master, I can be as familiar, as impudently familiar as
any little Rogue of 'em all.


Fan. Thou have thy sinful extreme too, I see.

Lu. Yet their Talent lies the more natural way,
I should like it the better of the two,
But thy Master is so dreadfully learned.

Raw. Beyond all thou see yet;

Lu. One must carry their body swimming
With him that knows the heart By looking in the face.

Sh. If he hear but one's name, it is enough.

Lu. That Is stranger yet.
Know people's thoughts, and hear but their names?

Raw. He never goes without a little devil in's pocket
For that purpose, which he calls his Vade mecum:

Fan. A devil always about him, and you serve this man?

Sh. Why not? the devil's no ill company sometimes,
I mean a familiar one:

Raw. Alas, we have whole Covies of tame fiends;
Why there is the devil of Mascon,
Would you wish a more sociable Goblin?
You have heard of him, the storie's in English.

Lu. I have not seen it.

Raw. Why, then I Will tell thee, it is a smug young fiend
Made love to a Parson's daughter.

Sh. Or his Maid,

Raw. True, for in that particular Authors disagree.

Sh. As they do about Statira the Wife of Alexander, whether she were the
Daughter, or Widow of King Darius.


Lu. Thou art read in History too.

Sh. Not much.

Lu. But prithee how did the devil court his Mistress,

Fan. Would he do her work for her, as the tales
Go of sprights and fairies?

Raw. That I have forgot, but I Will give you the book to satisfy your
Curiosity: This I remember, he had a damnable mind to a certain red ribbon she
wore somewhere; but the niggardly old Parson would not let her give it him, for
which don devil most zealously reproved his want of Charity.


Fan. But what if thy Master's devil should creep to my Cousin now?


Lu. How should we be troubled with her at home?

Raw. That need's not.
A handsome Woman's devil enough of her self,
Besides by her sharp look I guess her a shrew,
She needs no devil to teach her to scold.

Sh. She did so jet it too as she came in,
So eye her self, I see she is proud;
There Is another of the devils good qualities,
She Is not beholding to my Master for.

Lu. Why, thou studiest the black art too then?

Sh. Physiognomie a little, it is Physiognomie tells all this.

End. Your name is wanting still, subscribe it, and I Have done.

Cel. And is this all?

End. All, Madam.

Cel. I leave it w'ee: think on me, Endimion;

End. I never yet broke promise to handsome Lady,
Nor will I now begin with you, fair one.

Ex. Celia. Fan. Pray, Sir, don't tell my Cosen, 'twas I had her Apricocks; and
I Will steal you some to morrow, and sing you a fine song too.


End. Nay, without a bribe I can keep counsel, pretty one.

Ex. Fannie. Lu. I Am undone, if he look me in the face now;
I have angered him, and these Witches are
holds her Apron before her face. So revengeful.

End. You hide your face from me now, and I see your heart.

Lu. Oh, Sir, I Will never call you Conjurer more,
Nor speak true word of you again, but if
You know what I now think, as you are frail
Your self, keep it from my Mistress, she would turn
Away Ralph infallibly, and she knew it.

Ex. Luce. Enter Lewis, Bernard. End. How much ado have I had to shake her off?

Lew. You have been something long about it indeed.

Bern. This bold cheat will fame you straight
For eminently skilled;
And your renown will every where increase.

End. I never suffered so hot a persecution.

Lew. Nor I so tedious an Expectation.

End. I Am sure I sweat for it again.

Lew. I durst not laugh neither.

Bern. How modestly he declined her commendations? and yet the very carelessness
you received 'em with, persuaded her, you thought you well deserved 'em.


Lew. Why harp'd you not on the Ceremonious string still?

End. I saw she came not for a Compliment.

Bern. Why struck you not in, in your advisor's way?

End. Less on that account too.

Bern. That was the Common road.

End. It was not hers, you see.

Lew. I never was so put to it contein my self,
As when she proved her Lover was on English ground,
And whipped off the salt water.

End. I confess, I was put to it my self then;
I was almost non-plust.

Bern. I hearkened still when she would bespeak a bridge
Over to Callice; but what if we had
Not been in an Island now? what if there
Had been some way over Land into France.

End. If there had, it is odds she would not find it out;
For 'twere I think another wonder, she
Should be more knowing in Cosmographie,
Then I am in Astrology:
At worst I had found out some other Evasion,
Pleaded the difference of Religion --

Bern. Marry, and a good plea too.

End. Or I know not what my self now.

Lew. I think so; but the letter, what is that?

End. No secret; but prithee
Who should this Mother be the young one mentioned once,

Lew. Oh the Widow Aunt, I told you Celia lived with.
Reads Bellamy I know where you are,
Pretense of travels, vain and light.
And you are not yet got so far,
But I may see you here this night.
Celia.


A most elaborate Epistle, full of rithme and reason:
And much you can do with it no doubt.

End. We must convey it into Bellamy's hands,
Who suspecting by 't he has been dogged, or
Is found out indeed, will have to Celia
For his vindication, and so betray
Himself; I am revenged by this means of
Clarinda, whose night-works I destroy: and
If it happen that Celia full of spirits still
And apparitions, take him for one, and
Dare not give him hearing, no trick, no plot
We could contrive, will add more credit to
What Is of my Astrology already spread.
All the business is to deliver this note.

Raw. Leave that, Sir to my care

Sh. Your care? is that a fit Province
For a Raw-man? I Will take charge on it my self.

End. Nay, no Vying; I must use you another way,
But it must be delivered to his own hands.

Sh. So I intend it shall. End. But how?

Sh. Without much cunning thus: Clarinda waits
Him in her garden to night, it is near the
Hour too, in's road I Will lie perdu, and if
I do not make lam change his Rendezvous.

Lew. No better way could be imagined.

gives him the letter. End. Dispatch then, and bring us tidings on it.

Sh. That I shall speedily, and good one's too, nere fear it.

Exeunt severally. SCENE II. The Fields.
Enter Bellamy, Rudeman. Rud. GOod Sir, nay, but consider.

Bell. The more I do, the more I find you a trouble some fellow.


Rud. But I always was of your midnight Counsels,

Bell. And that blazes 'em abroad at noonday.

Rud. Was I ever heard to say, my Master has left such a Lady, such a one's
his Mistress now; he treated this Madam at that place, and the other Madam at
the other place? --


Bell. If you had, sirrah, I had been seen to beat you.

Rud. Nay, nay, I don't talk o'that; there is no body questions your aptness
that way.


Bell. Will you get you home?

Rud. After you is manners, Sir.

Bell. I shall beat you home.

Rud. What again beating? some other time, some other time may serve, you have
business of more concern in hand now to my Knowledge.


Bell. Your Knowledge?

Rud. You sleep not all day, to ramble all night for nothing.

Bell. Ramble, sirrah?

Rud. Nay, I observe you, when I don't follow you? it is for no good you hide
your self from Madam Celia thus. She has deserved Better of you; who did I
bring you the Two hundred pounds from, when you were snapt at Mr Grogram's suit
of Paternoster Row? Or who fills your Pockets again when your Dice run the
children of lee, or Deuce ace is your Comfort? Many a Lady has more comfort of
a cheaper Gallant.


Bell. Are you that Lady's Dun, Sir?

Rud. Her kindness will soon ha* done, and 't be no better requited, then are
we undone.


Bell. Excellent! quibbles too.

Rud. You may get preferment however in the next forlorn expedition: 'twill be
sad reducing your Coach, Horses, and Lacqueys to a sixty pound per annum
Equipage.


Bell. Thou art my Pedagogue sure, my Tutour.

Rud. I am your poor Valet de Chamber, Sir; one that would gladly have his
Master wise enough to grow rich, that he may thrive under him: refuse a
handsome Lady, and a good fortune, when they are offered, to ferret after Je
we scay quoy's?


Bell. Thou have not thy name for nothing, I see; the art e*en the Rude
Serving-man, it speaks thee.


Rud. I am honest, Sir, if I am bold, I do not flatter and cheat you.


Bell. One of 'em I Will swear thou do not; but for the other, Rud, I Will swear,


Bell. I shall not be rid of this fellow now, and aside. Looks on's watch. my hour
draws near. I know him close and secret as the night, however I seem shie of
him. Come, I will trust thee for once; as we go, I Will tell thee whither; but
follow me, do you hear, and direct me not.


Rud. Oh any thing, Sir, to make one.

Bell. This fellow's one of those are scandalized at all wickedness they have
not a hand in, and cannot abide any Man should Drink or Wench without 'em.


Rud. And some such exploit, I suspect you bound for now.

Bell. I should guess you do by your earnestness to make one.
Nay, this way, this way.

Exeunt. SCENE III. The backside of Sr Christopher's Garden.
Enter Shift. I Long to have done my arrant now, to see how heartily, how
gamester like, he will fret to loose the kisses he thinks himself so fair for to
night? how many ten groats will he swear himself out of, if any of the godly be
but within hearing? I must pack as soon as I have delivered the Letter, for
coming in Celia's name, the thanks he would give, will not be worth staying for. I
cannot be far from the Garden now, here will I stand sentinel: he knows me not,
and so there is no danger of an after-beating.

To him Bellamy, Rudeman* I hear some body, it is he certainly.


Rud. Nay, if Clarinda love you too, I Am satisfied, she is rich enough to do our
business, but here is a father's good will to get; the other's at her own
dispose.


Bell. Time may work him* who is there?

runs against Sh. as going into the garden Sh. A friend, Sir, that waited your
coming:
This note from Celia speaks my business,
She earnestly desires your Company to night:
And I am your Worship's servant.

Ex. Rud. An unserviceable one, he thinks, at this time.

Bell. What cursed Encounters this? honest fellow, Friend, prithee a word.
Rudeman, stay the fellow.


Rud. He Is gone, he is out of my reach; but that is no hard matter indeed, for I
never had any great reach with me.


Bell. Venturing at wit, when I am thus perplexed.

Rud. The night's so dark too, he is as soon out of sight.


Bell. Again?

Rud. What devil has discovered you were in town?

Bell. Or what faithless confident rather betrays
My secret? it is Gratian, it can be none
But he, I trusted none else, and he loves
Celia too,
In whose affection to supplant me now,
He has betrayed my privacie:
I have deserved no less to trust a Rival;
That title once succeeding dissolves
All former ties of friendship.

Rud. To be snap'd here too at the garden door
Brings Clarinda in question.

Bell. That Is mere accident; Gratian, though he knew
having muz'd a little I concealed my self, knew not wherefore,
And she would nere betray me.
Some speedy balsome though I must apply
Where he has used such Corrosives: I will
To Celia, she loves me, with ease I can
Pacify her, and destroy those rash hopes
A false friend has conceived.

Rud. But what is this note were not from Celia now?

stays him as he was going off. Bell. The Messenger I know not,
Nor had he any mind I should.

Rud. So far it smells knavishly.

Bell. First let me see, if it be her hand, and then
With all the kind words, Credulous Maids lend
Greedy ear unto, I will make my peace.
If light discover it a mistake, or trick,
I Will forward to Clarinda, where
A thousand kisses shall make amends
For staying thus beyond my hour?

Rud. Marry, would I were to do the penance for you.

Exeunt. SCENE IV. Celia 's Chamber. A Table and Lights set forth, a Chair by it.
Enter Celia, Fannie, Luce. Lu. CAn you imagine this star-wright with all his
hard words, should bring Bellamy so far on such a sudden?


Cel. Silly wretch! thy shallow understanding
Cannot reach the bottom of his Capacity,
Which, (so the sea lie not in's way) will do
A thousand things harder and stranger, he will
Come then, never doubt it, not he himself
It Is true, but his similitude,
Something resembling him so perfectly,
Love it self could not make a distinction.

Lu. What good will that Copy of his Countenance do you?

Cel. Ask Love if thou be'st ignorant, for he is
The reason of all he forces us to,
Nor is the Curiosity so strange,
In me, nor so particular;
I Have heard of many Women use the like.

sits down. Fan. 'Twere a strange thing indeed Women in this town would not
venture upon. I have heard too of the Woman of Billeter-Lane, and of her of
Grub-street.


Lu. And of Ladies that go into Chancery Lane to know when their husbands will
die, whether their next will be kinder.


Fan. And what day of the week is best to be married on: but bless me from such
pranks, they are no handsome leans melancholy on the table. one's, I Am sure,
though the handsome Ladies use 'em.


Lu. But, Madam, you are heavy, the very thought
Of this apparition, works upon you
Like the expectation of an ague-fit.

Fan. Shall I sing you a song, Cosen, to divert sad thoughts?

Cel. I prithee, Fannie, 'twill cheer thee,
However it work on me.

Fannie sings What strange disguises Lovers wear?
Misshapen shapes they still affect,
Thus the white bull that does Europa bear
Shrouding Jove's person does his Love defect:
Thus the same overruling power
Send him to Danae in a shower.
Bis. If among the gods he bear this sway,
What can he not over Mortals do?
He that with Deities thus dares to play,
Will govern sure Mankind as strangely too:
Nor is the fairer sex more free
From Metamorphoses then we.
Bis. For women once: --

Cel. I Will hear no more; there is none so strange as mine,
rising As that my Bellamy's expected in,
Others had the substances they loved, though
Clothed with accidents they were not used to,
But I must be content with the outward shape
Of what I love, shrouding I know not what
Substance or reality.

Lu. But if it be a Phantasm, a body
Patched up of air or grosser Vapors,
Will not you be afraid, think you?

Cel. Not in the least.

sits down again Fan. I Am sure but I shall then.

Cel. Hark, some body knocks at door.

starting off the table she leaned on. Lu. Some body, quoth you?
We neither look for bodies nor souls here,
What if 'twere the I know not what now?
The strange thing you will call Bellamy?
You grow pale already, you sigh too.

Fan. Is this the Courage love puts into his?
I think he is a Coward himself for my part
And he back you with no better mettle now in time of need.

Lu. You think it is he now.

Cel. I am not certain, but see who ere it be.
I Am strangely changed of the sudden, I feel not
That firm resolution now, my soul is
Seized with horror, that strikes a shivering cold
All over my body, something there is in
Nature still repugns against these Visions,
Maugre the love or humor sets one on.
But what need I fear?

she rises. To them Bellamy. Lu. Oh Madam, Madam, it is he, it is Bellamy,
drops the candle out of her hand and runs away. But that he is twice as tall as
he was wont to be.

Ex. Cel. Fan. Ay me! Ay me!

Bell. What means this shreeking and this running about?

Cel. Now am I well paid for my Curiosity, I have at the far side of the stage.
my wish, and 't proves my own undoing, it is Bellamy's Voice, but I have not power
to answer him.


Fan. I Am nothing mistaken in my self,
from under the table, where she had hid her self. I knew I should be afraid,
and my Cosen
For all her cracking proves as very a Coward.

Cel. When I besought the Astrologer to send him to me,
I wished to see him only, not to speak with him.

Bell. Send for me, Celia, and use me thus. it is something strange?

Fan. If the thing should find me under the table now.
I Will pray hard.

B. com. toward the table Bell. Could you find no body else to practice
These Exotic fits upon? must I be
Your ridiculous mirth, that bring my Celia
New assurances, it is she alone
Has power in Bellamy's heart?

Cel. I Will ha none of thee, nor thy heart,
I abhor the power, it is the true Bellamy I had a mind to see.

Bell. She suspects my inconstancy;
I am to Celia the same Bellamy still,
My thoughts of thee are nothing changed, I vow.

Cel. Fiend keep off, avaunt Phantasm; get runs into her closet, and shuts her
self in. thee to France again, or into Lapland, from whence thou came, I
think.


Exit. Bell. Hear but my reasons. is it rallerie this?
Or some trick devised on purpose to make
spies her under the table Trial of me? Fannie, what doe'st thou there?

Fan. Help, help, I Am killed, I Am done to death getting hastily from under it.
with fear.

Ex. Bell. Was ever Gallant thus gallantiz'd?
throws it down candle and all, runs away and leaves him in the dark. The devil
o-love, and this be it, I say.
Fiend, and Phantasm, and Lapland! I am not
Mad sure, though they be; I Will try'em again;
Luce, Celia, why Luce, prithee prevail with
goes from Corner to Corner. Thy Mistress to hear me. Celia, Fannie,
Pretty, Sweet Fannie: it is labor lost;
I shall not be answered, unless there be an
Echo within hearing, the dumb devil
Possesses 'em, and I am left in the dark
To grope out the meaning of this frolic.
Well, let her have her humor, I must to
Clarinda, and prevent what ill offices may be
There intended too, I am discovered
In town, and need not now keep out of sight,
Pray heaven the morn prove kinder then the night.

ACT IV.
The first SCENE, Sr Christopher 's house.
Enter Bellamy, Clarinda, Beatrix, Rudeman. Bell. SO deep a melancholy does
both surprise,
And grieve me, Sweet; what makes these sighs so frequent?
Can you doubt my fidelity?

Clar. I Am full of fears, I must confess it, Bellamy;
Nor can I, when I think what enemies we have,
Though you are present, force a cheerfulness.
What will not Endimion, knowing all
We thought most secret, attempt to ruin us:

Bell. He can do nothing, if you love me still.

Clar. Would I could say so of Celia too!

Bell. Oh Madam! you are too injurious --

Clar. Our first affections nere loose all their power;
Call your kindness for her a civil devoir,
A gratitude if you will; she is lovely still,
And Civility forces you to see her:
Then smothered flames too-easily break out.

Bell. Wrong not your own charms, and my affection
With so unjust a Jealousy:
If you can so much slight Clarinda's power
To fear Celia; I Will not see her at all.
But I am not without my fears neither,
For who loves tenderly, and thinks himself secure?
What will your father say, when once he knows
You suffer Bellamy's love, or what will
He not do to ruin a happiness
He thinks me not rich enough to deserve?
He Will chide, he will school Clarinda, he will threaten her,
If she neglect his lessons, will she not
Fear his anger? and in that fear, in that
Fear perhaps she will forsake me,
And wrought of his own mind, hold it
A madness where an Estate is wanting,
To value Birth, descent, or Breeding --

Clar. Think better of me, then so. Know that the
Virtue of the beloved object alone
Is enough to make me constant, that worth
Which first made me love, makes me persever.
Nor is my heart so much a slave to fear,
That Menaces can blot out an Image,
A noble affection had drawn in it.
No Bellamy, I shall wear yours here still.

Bell. I am too happy then.

Clar. Accept this pledge of my fidelity,
gives him a ring. And be assured I Am yours;
Let friends, let fortune smile or frown,
Never shall Celia's constancy equal mine.

Bell. My Joy is now so great, I am lost in it.
Unable to speak, unable to keep silence --

To them Sr Christopher. Clar. You must keep it a while; here is my father --

Sr Chr. Is not that Bellamy? what returned already?

Bell. An unexpected Lawsuit forces me back,
I am sub-pena'd up again, and must
Till after term at least lay by all thoughts
Of seeing France; I was at Canterbury.

Sr Chr. And how does my Nephew Manly?

Reat. He may as well ask me.
aside.
Bell. He entertained me nobly at his house.

Sr Chr. Has not the young-squire written to me? ha?

Bell. He had, and gave me his letter, but a
French Lacquey I took here for the Journey,
When he saw me turn back, run away with
My Vallize, and your letter was in it.

Beat. That Lacquey saves thy credit now,
It must have been said to thee else.

Sr Chr. You have made but an ill journey on it then.

Bell. Thus are my stars still inauspicious to me.

Beat. Endimion Madam at your request would
Tell him to his Vallize again.

Clar. Away thou cruel Wench, thou see the pangs
This discourse gives me, and can raise mirth out of it?

Bell. My ownloss I should not value,

Rud. 'Twas not so great indeed.
aside.
Bell. But the Letter was merely writ on my behalf,
And did implore your aid in my affairs.

Sr Chr. You may command me, and my interest.

Clar. If you Espouse his Cause, he need not fear being cast.

Beat. If the old Man Espouse his Cause,
The young one will Espouse you.

Rud. And that is it she would be at.

Beat. Would 'twere come to it once for me,
That I might have some quiet among 'em.

Bell. On your favor then I build my hopes, but this
Law-business draws me uncivilly away,
Pleaders are not Masters of their own time.
Your pardon, Sir.

Sr Chr. Business must be waited on;

Bell. May I presume you'I mind your father
Of my suit, Madam, and contribute
To the continuance of his favors?

Clar. I Will do my best, Sir, to possess him with
The justice of your cause; his Example
Authorizes me to own your interest too.

Ex. Bell. Rud. Sr Chr. But will thou be thus melancholy still?
What is the cause? tell me, good Clarinda.

Clar. I know no reason for it.

Beat. She dreamt of a younger brother, Sir, to night,
Which, reflecting on Endimions prediction,
Seems ominous.

Sr Chr. Your bolt is soon shoot still.
Art indisposed in health?

Clar. I feel no alteration;
And yet it may be some natural overslow
Of a dull humor in the body causes this heaviness.

Sr Chr. Ah Clarinda! my tenderness of thee
weeps. Is ill requited with this sullen reserve
Of thy sick thoughts..

Clar. To speak truth, I have lost some toys, and that is
The only reason I can give for this damp
My mirth is struck withal.

Sr Chr. Why, what have lost?

Clar. That which does vex me much.

Sr Chr. But what?

Clar. The Rose-diamond you gave me.

Sr Chr. Let not that trouble thee, it may be found again.

Clar. I have small hopes on it, I have sought every where.

Sr Chr. I was carelessly laid by perhaps,
And opportunity makes a true man a thief:
But the loss is easily repaired, there are fairer rings in town, I Will go buy
thee one presently.


Clar. That were a slight reparation of my loss;
I fancied this.

Sr Chr. What a fondness is here? though I give her
A better ring, she will loose by the bargain:
Well, set thy heart at rest,
Thou shall have thy own again, for I will
Just now to Endimion about it.

Beat. Now you are in a fine Pickle!
To excuse these dumps you are fallen into,
You Have gone and spoilt all.

Clar. So I have indeed.

Beat. Peace, peace; he is coming back.

Sr Chr. Tell me, when was this ring lost?

Clar. I mist it but to day.

Sr Chr. So, so, it is not gone far, I warrant you.

Clar. Further I hope, then your discovery will reach.

Beat. The old man's here again.

Sr Chr. But about what a clock was it lost? for I shall be asked all these
questions, that I shall; therefore I must be prepared.


Clar. Between eight and nine.

Sr Chr. Oh it is well, it is well, eight and nine, eight and nine;
Let me not forget eight and nine.

Exit. Beat. How he maunders it, eight and nine, eight and nine; he will Con his
lesson nine times over, but he will have it perfect.


Clar. What shall I do, Beatrix? advise me, good Beatrix.

Beat. 'Twere well and you would be adviz d, before*
You do it, then Beatrix could say something,
But to be put still to an after-game,
You are so wilfully fore-handed:
This scurvy Astrologer now will tell him all.

Clar. Endimion is the Man indeed undoes me*
But let him do his worst, my love stands not
In awe now of a father's check, it is of
So fair a growth his frowns cannot nip it,
My heart is Bellamy's, nothing can force it from him,
Endimion and his Stars are all too weak?

Exit. Beat. The devil is not so headstrong as these young Wenches, when they
have got a bit of a Man; but it is I must lay the storm for all her vapouring; I
must let Shift know how things go, least his Master be put to it beyond his
skill, and shaking hands with Astrology, be forced to tell our old man the
plot.


Exit. SCENE II. Endimion 's Lodgings.
Enter Endimion, Bernard, Lewis, Rawman. End. WHat a perpleity am I reduced to?

Lew. Why, 'twas with your consent,

Bern. Nay, by your own order we raised the report.

End. Yes of Astrology, but of nothing else,
And yet they think abroad, I have all hell
At command: They point at me in the streets,
So noted a person I am.
There goes the learned Man, says one; oh the
Astrologer, says another, that comes
And peeps me in my face to know me again.
In some places they stare at me,

Raw. As they would have done at the hairy woman,
Had she not cased her beard up as she went about.

Bern. Right -- or as they did at the Hermophrodite The Other day at the play.


End. The Prophet, says a precise one, and lifts
His hands and eyes to Heaven in admiration,
That one so young should be so knowing.

Raw. Children run away, and cry the Witch, the Witch, the Witch; because at
home their Mothers fright them with him.


Lew. Thou boy, Rawman!

End. Some understanding ones there are, (and those
I forgive, because they are in the right)
Believe me guilty of no Magic, but
A mere Impostor, for such contemn me,
Laugh at me, and those that think me other.
Thus am I entertained in the streets;
Or thus at least I interpret their looks
And actions that I meet in the streets.

Lew. Some skill you have in Physiognomy,
It seems, (if you have none in Astrology)
That can read all this in Men's faces.
But fame, you know, loves to augment every thing.

Bern. Nothing toth' People is a little rare,
They will hyperbolize, and skrue all novelties
To the highest Key: a lie with them
Snow-ball-like rowles about, and gets in every place,
Each teller often adds something of his own,
To shape it to his fancy.

Lew. If you are thus plagued abroad, you must keep
Home a while; the Wonder will be over.

Raw. We cannot do that neither in quiet,
So many have found his Lodging out;
And now Moll Cutpurse that Oracle of felony
Is dead, there is not a pocket picked,
But he is acquainted with it.

Lew. That Is much indeed.

Raw. Nor a silver hilt pincht away, but they come
To the figure-flinger for it.
He hears of every Wedding, Christning, City-feast, by the Butlers recourse to
him for Plate and Linen they lost at 'em.


Bern. That Is more yet.

End. Alas, I am a kind of grandissime Jurie, and have all thefts brought
before me, before they go to Hicks-hall, or the Old Baily; marry, could I help
the Man to his Mare again, they would never go thither, and I might take much
of the matter out of the Lawyers hands: but all Trades must live, I Will not
spoil theirs. I shall have the Country-fellows too with the savoury questions
that poz'd old Noll's star-peeper, then am I in a sweet condition.


Bern. The World is satisfied with your skill, it is grown a full and general
persuasion.


Lew. I see nothing but mirth the stratagem has yet produced.

End. What? to have Sir, and Madam; Cut and Long-tail put me a hundred several
questions, as if I were Jupiter hammon, or Diana's spokes-man at Ephesus? you
reckon this nothing? I never had too much of nothing till now.


Lew. Your Mistress by this fiction's awed,
Your Rival fears you too,
Their pleasures are disturbed,
And all succeeds as you could wish it should.

End. Believe it Lewis, it is without regret
That I give Bellamy place, the disturbance
I bring his pleasures, yields me no content;
My own flames extinct, it concerns not me
Whether Clarinda meet his love, or no.

Lew. Here Is an indifferency I looked not for.

End. In affairs of love I measure ever the Esteem I make of Women, by that
they make of me; where they incline to kindness, I can love too: if they
withdraw once, or refuse their favors, my flexible and obedient heart, Lewis,
can soon imitate: nor ever need I four and twenty hours to cure my self of
that disease.


Lew. I did mistake your temper; but since it is so convenient, why owned you
not the truth of all at first, without taking the Astrologer upon you?


End. You Will wonder at my stupiditie;
Nor can I now my self conceive, why I
Run my neck into this nooze, when all the danger
That threatened, was but the turning away
Of a Chambermaid.

Bern. Nere let it trouble you now, we bear our
Share of all, and owe a helping hand to
Bring you out, We helped to plunge you in, and
Half the shame will fall on the divulgers.

To them Celia, Fannie, Luce. Cel. I have a quarrel to you, Endimion.

End. Here Is my Virago again, it is the importunest
aside. Wench this, she will never be answered. How can
to Cel. I since last night have deserved your anger?

Cel. If Bellamy has not been absent, why
Would you, whose rare knowledge extends it self
To secrets more remote, make me one of
His being in town?
Why dealing with that candor you seemed to
Promise, did you not tell me where he was?

End. What reason shall I give her? oh! I knew
aside muzing It not my self till I made my figure;
to Cel. Yet what if I had known it sooner? I
Promised but a sight of Bellamy, and
Did you not see him? consider but with
Equal Eyes the whole adventure,
No part of it but to my credit turns;
For if in lieu of an illusion, Madam,
A shade, a Phantasm you expected,
Spite of the care he took to hide himself,
I forced him though in person to appear,
Does it not prove the certain influence
Of an art.
You cannot now with want of power tax?

Cel. It does, I must confess, it does; this reason
Destroys all Jealousies I had of it.

Bern. You may be sure it is the best
aside. He could find out for you oth' sudden.

Cel. But give my passion yet some further ease;
This Bellamy, this fair friend plays me fowl,
Those Vows forgot, I too much credited,
Pays a new Mistress what is due to me.
I have the story of their close Amors,
And know the stars alone, which you command,
Witness their meetings and their kindnesses:
Lewis and Bern smils Break me this league then learned Endimion,
You that nere meet with obstacle to your will
But what your art orecomes;
Cancel the bonds she has my faithless in,
In The midst of her Caresses force him from
Her eyes; restore him to his true Mistress.

End. No evasion does the Learning she so much admires
Inspire me now, but to persuade her she is mistaken.

Lew. Something from the learned Endimion will
smiling. Be expected, but that I think may serve

End. Take better thoughts of your Lover, Madam:
Though in his carriage he may be too blame,
Yet are you misinformed of what keeps him
In town, you are the cause of it your self,
To cure his Jealousy he thus plays least in sight,
And to observe you does pretend this Journey;
But since you are thus constant to him still,
Fear not his leaving you:
And should you of his Love want other proofs,
Let this suffice, that he is Jealous grown,
With a seeming coldness,
Or neglect perhaps he may dissemble
A while, but let it not disquiet you,
For it is you he loves, I say again,
And passionately.

Cel. Pleasing hopes! comfortable assurance?
Pardon dear Bellamy if without Cause
I questioned thus thy faith; if Jealousy
Must prove thy Love, let my fears assure thee of mine,
I feared to loose but what I love to keep.
The heavens, kind Endimion, power as many
Blessings on you, as you have assured me of.

Ex. Celia, Fannie, Luce. Lew. She pays you in your own coin; as you have
Pleased her with an assurance of nothing,
She requites you with a wish of as much.

Raw. It Is as believing a good Soul
As you would wish to preach to.

Bern. And as well satisfied you have sent her away,
Her heart I dare swear's as light as her head.

End. Her request did not much fright me this bout,
I knew that for a few fair words I should
Be rid of her credulous Ladieship.

Lew. But how intend you to make good your word
To Gratian? it seems already broke by
The hopes you have given Celia.

End. Why perceive you not those hopes are airie
Nothings with which I flatter her forwardness
To be fooled? I know Clarinda
Has Bellamy too fast, to think
He ever will be Celia's, and this knowledge
Made me speak my own belief to Gratian.

Lew. Nay, he believes you too, and looks on me
His Introducer to you, as bound in honor for your performance,
Yet how you will, or can, I Am still to seek.

End. In Love you are indeed.
Would you not judge else, that Celia
Needs must see at last how Bellamy fools her,
That she will grow weary of being thus abused?
If your friend then prove constant and persever;
Will not his services reach her heart in the end?
Now if he give my art the honor of an
Event, is due to his own industry
And the common Course of things,
The stars be praised for it,
But now we are free from these fortune seekers,
Let Us breath a while, and talk of something else.

To them Sr Christopher. Lew. Not so free as you think neither; here is one --

End. Is worse then twenty Celia's.

Sr Chr. Master Endimion.

End. Oh Sir! what wind blows you hither?

Sr Chr. An ill wind sure.

End. I thought so.

Sr Chr. But you will make it take about, and blow
Every one their own again, I must entreat
One Courtesy of you, kind Gentleman.

End. What is it?

Sr Chr. Excuse my boldness if I deal thus freely with you, and come to the
point without any further compliment or preamble, I use no Ceremony amongst
friends?


End. I commend you for it, a civil freedom is much better.

Sr Chr. The loss of a certain Diamond has caused great disorder at home, my
servants are suspected, and the whole family being in disturbance about it, my
humble request is, you will help me to set the saddle on the right horse, that is
you will cast a figure for it, and tell who has it.


Bern. The old Man comes in very good time to to End. break the truce you would
have made with Astrology.


End. I must break all commerce with it,
The cheer s too gross to last above a day;
I ever told you so.

Sr Chr. He Is musing on my request now.
to Lew.
Lew. The trade he drives requires great recollection, it is a speculative
trade, and I have often seen him on such occasions in so deep a study, you would
think the soul did quite forsake the body, it is lest so void of action.


Sr Chr. He had more need to set all wheels awork, he must climb up to the
heavens for my ring, he will nere find it here below else.


End. I am not quit now for gulling an Amorous Maid, to Lew. or a more ignorant
Lover, I must fool a man, who in that very toy I fool him with pretends to be
as skilled, as I am unacquainted, and will discover my ignorance as soon as I
pretend to knowledge. No, no, it is my own undoing to aside Lew and B. slighting
him. play upon him any longer. I must deal freely, it is the only way to get
out of this plunge.


Sr Chr. See but what pains he takes.
to Lew.
Lew. He Is about your business all this while.

Sr Chr. He begins to look something seriously upon the matter.

to Lew.
End. Having no Interest to delude you, Sir;
I must confess there is much more believed,
Or said of me, then I deserve: it is true,
I have read something of Astrology,
And viewed the grounds your Artists work upon,
Which makes some talking friends boast they have seen
Experiments beyond the common, though indeed
I never gave the least sign of a skill, they
Needs will force upon me, unless in words
Sometimes, yet sparingly, when their Example
Forced a compliance: but with you
I protest again, the reputation
This fiction gets me, nor all the merry
Consequences of it, can never force me
To such forgery; as for your Diamond then,
In vain expect you tidings often from me,
It Is out of my reach believe it, Sir.

Lew. He will fall to his natural Level
Of ignorance, I see, do what we can.

Bern. And yet he cannot resolve to confess himself
An Impostor neither; he minces it a little.

Sr Chr. Did I not know by the report of others, you are this day the Phoenix
of Astrologers; this very humility with which you depress you abilities, would
raise you in my Esteem above the common rank of Scholars.


End. Leave an opinion, I m not so happy
To deserve, I know nothing in the stars.

Raw. Who could forbear laughing at this old fellow, aside. that makes him take
more pains to persuade his ignorance, then others do to get knowledge.


Sr Chr. This very earnestness with which you decline
The title of a knowing Man, tells me
It Is your due, and confirms me more and more
In the belief of your capacity.
Thus modest, thus discreet are they always
Who know much, nor will they, by assuming
Worth unto themselves, derogate from what
They do deserve, or by such gross Vanity
Eclypse the Luster of their rare Endowments.

Lew. Our Astrologer has a fine time on it.

Bern. You wish your self in his place, I warrant.

Lew. No, no, I have my share of the pass-time,
Where I am.

End. Were I indeed the Man you take me for,
Though I had reason to conceal my self from others,
Here I would yield my interest up to yours,
And with candor lay open all my skill,
But I have none, none at all to merit
The honor you do me.

Sr Chr. I tell you again, that this humility alone is more commendable in you,
then all your learning; he that knows most knows himself too well to be proud
of what he knows, he sees too much daily to learn, to think that much he has
already learnt: and thus what art soever one pretend to, he that dares boast
himself a Master of it, knows nothing in it at all.


End. Liars, they say, loose credit even for the few truths they utter; but
mine is a stranger punishment, when I lied I was credited; and now I speak
truth, I cannot win belief.

aside.
Sr Chr. But to come to my ring again, I must tell you (if that be a necessary
Circumstance* 'twas a gift of my poor Wife's, for whose sake I long kept it,
till at last Clarinda got it of me, and she bas lost it this morning, as she
thinks, 'twixt eight and nine.


To them Shift. Sh. You shall have the other too at night, Sir.
gives him a Paper Hark hither, this is but a pretext.

they whisper Sr Chr. Why makes he so fine of it?

Lew. He Is afraid perhaps of being suspected of Witchcraft; it is a detracting
age, and he had need be cautious.


Sr Chr. He Is over-nice with me, I can keep Counsel, and would conceal what
were not fit for every Ear.


Sh. This did Beatrix tell me just now.
to End.
End. The intelligence comes luckily, I was caught else.
Pardon the freedom, Sir, I take, to leave you
to Sir Chr. For an account of business I had sent
My man about, I should not trespass thus,
But that it did require some have.

Sr Chr. Would you had trespassed, that you might expiate it With the Curtesy I
request.


End. I am provided for him now,
aside. And since he has a mind to 't, have at him;
Had I but skill enough.
to Sir Chr.
Sr Chr. Skill enough for a ring? away, away;
There Is nothing easier, then to help one again to such a toy as that, I could
have don't my self at your years:


End. I must yield by degrees, he will suspect me,
aside. If I pass suddenly from one extreme
To another. Sir, I protest again
Without dissimulation --

Sr Chr. Without dissimulation, or procrastination,
Good Sir, tell me to my ring again;
For I know you can, if you list now?

End. I did but spare you some trouble, declining
Thus to tell you what I find;
But since you needs will have it,

Sr Chr. Tell me, tell me, 'tshall never trouble me, I warrant you.


End. He that this morning saluted you in
A riding garb, is the Man; he has it.

Sr Chr. Who would have suspected him of all the world? that a Man of his birth
and breeding should play such pranks, Necessity perhaps drives him to it;

And that We know having no Law it self, makes those that feel it, Lawless too.
You see Endimion, how much in vain you go about to hide that, which in your
very looks I read; when once, I say, That Man's a Wit, a Scholar, he is one
indeed. But fare you well Sir, I Will go after my ring.


Exit. Lew. You stuck scurvily, till Shift helped you out.

End. Never more, I swear; I knew not what shift to make.

Sh. 'Twas well for you there was one made to your hand.

Bern. Marry, was it.

End. But what if he fall out with Bellamy now,
As having stolen his ring?

Bern. Nay, what if he charge him with felony?

Lew. And the Constable with him?

End. That were a jest indeed.

Sh. What matter whether he take him for a son-in-law, or a thief, it is much at
one; both lie at the catch for the old Man's Money, both (if it is not otherways
to be had) watch his death for it.


End. Though hitherto the sport does mainly thrive;
Checked by no obstacle but such, as the
Removal of, turns to increase of mirth,
I Am weary of a trade I nere was 'prentice to;
To leave it then with credit as I drive
It on, since the persuasion of my
Knowledge makes this old Man believe
What e're I say, I Will work on his facility
To a noble end, and far from Jealous
Of a Rivall's fortune, will crown his Love
With the good Knight's allowance of Clarinda's.

Sh. Hey day! all this busle for a Willow Garland?

End. If I must wear one, I will have added to it, both Groom and Bride's free
and grateful acknowledgment, it is I unite them, and that to my pretended skill
in the stars they owe their happiness.

Enter La-gripe. But who have we here? a new Consulter?


Bern An old one, I think.

Sh. Nay! We have more Chamber-practice then half the Lawyers in town; yet the
devil a fee or feeling I get amongst all our Clients:


Raw. This it is to serve a Generous Gentleman.


Sh. That does all for God-a-mercy, and the credit of doing it, and cries a
good deed carries its own reward along with it.


End. Peace Preacher.


Bern. Prithee what old Don is it?


End. It Is a Monsieur, Man, has served Sr Christopher Credulous ever since his
travels, he brought him a young fellow out of France with him, Monsieur
La-gripe.


Bern. A griping Sir, I warrant him,

La-gr. Ah Monsieur de Astrologue.

Sh. and Raw. Monsieur La-gripe.

La-g. For Clarinda sake, Clarinda our common Mistress they smile. -- dat is te
Mistres of us bote, serve for Love, serve for Money, for de Vages, Vat you
call? it is all one, it ise serve still.


End. Has he not made it good?

Lew. Not good English, Sir.

Raw. Good Pedlar's French, Sir, and that is better for Variety.

Bern. Hear out his story.

La-g. If I did dare pray you of one faueur.

End. What is it?

La-g. Very small petite chose, de no tingue.

End. But what? I Will do any thing for thee, honest Monsieur,

La-g. Do that den, I pray you.

End. That? what? I will and I can.

La-g. Oh if you can; Vraiment it is no if's nor Ans.

End. Can I unless you tell me what you would have done?

La-g. No laugh at me, one poor old French man, pourquoy demand Vat, Ven you
can as Vell tell, Var I say have done, as you can do.


Lew. May be so too.

La-g. Vat you tinke me no knoe Vat you can do? as if me no hear my old
Master, my fellow Beatrige, and all te town besides talk of you.


End. But do you hear I can know another's
Thought without his intimation?

La-g. I hear no intimation; Vat I hear, I know;
I no know dat.

End. Can a man divine your meaning?

La-g. Devine my mean? you look in my visage, you knoe all, and yet I tell you
notingue; you be no man to tell long story to; derefore no ask me Vat I
uould, but do vat I uoude.


End. I shall be hard enough for thee yet, old fox.
aside It Is not with thee Monsieur I would dissemble
having thought. My knowledge or my power; such palliations
Of an unkind repulse derogate --

La-g. Ah Monsieur! no hard vords, I pray you, Pallashons! de gros cat! Vat te
devil is dat to me? Plain English is hard enough for me, I promise you. How
you think I entend dose sayings? I have no devell but thirty years in dis
Contry.


End. Why, plainly thus then; I know what brought thee hither, and what thou will request of me!


La-g. Oh, oh! look you dear den! me know very vell vat I say, I varrant's you;
me no drunk.


End. But soft: though I do, I must not tell, nor use that knowledge for ought
thou seekst of me, the reason's this; I can do but one thing for thee at a
time: if then to read or tell thy thought be it, never expect me serviceable to
the procurement of that wish, that is a second act, my hands are tied from at
this t me.


La-g. Nay den, me tell you.

Sh. Discover his wish to day, and help him to it to morrow. Where were you now
Sir, if my Monsieur should come upon you thus?


End. A French man, and stay till to morrow? That Is a thing was never heard of;
delays are not for them, they nere got by 'em.


La-g. I be quite tired out uitte service here in England, tired as one Jade,
uerefore me have a great mind, to return to me own poor Contry again, to lay it
my bones at home, and te money me scrape up in dis; but begare it be one uery
Long Journie, and uery dangerous too, danger upon te Sea, danger upon te Eaise;
I be rob here or dear, no like dat uery uell, be killed, assassined, or drown
in te sea, begare like that uery uorse: an dat is te reason I come pray you, to
secure my person, and my purse, by some Enshantement, I no know how, to
transporte me at my home in one minute.


Lew. Oh Excellent Monsieur!

End. You see by this what they think of me Sh. and Raw. whisper. abroad. Pray
heaven I don't take my self at last for that I Am given out for, these are
strong temptations.


Bern. And so become a wise man by fancying Sh. whispers with End. your self
one;


Lew. As, they say, they do Witches, by strongly conceiting themselves Witches,


Sh. I have skill enough for this feat without my Master's meddling in it, I Will
convey thee into France.


End. Prepare your self against night, Monsieur for the Journey; Shift shall be
ready too with what on our part is necessary.


La-g. I no dare trust him, littell Coquin delny,
Play me some tricque or toder.

End. No, no; his fellow Rawman there shall go
Along too, and see fair play. Let Us leave 'em
To their work, and laugh at him a little.

Exeunt End. Lew. and Bern. La-g. Mister sirrah, do for me vat must be done
Fair and honest, your Master command;
You meddell in dis business de juggle too den.

Raw. I Am half a Conjurer, since I serve him,
And yet I came to him but a Rawman the other day.

La-g. An he parboil your Coxecombe?

Sh. Pickle him a little in the black art, or so.

La-g. Indeed? but is he so knoing, tey say?

Sh. Hear him talk of a Man
You Would think he had bin in his belley,
He Is so acquainted with every cranie of his heart.

La-g. I no please me serve souche Master, a
Valet no pass vell his time vit him.

Sh. Why? I have a good place on it.

La-g. Place Vat you Vill, I no be bound serve one,
I no dare tell lie to sometime.

Raw. It Is somewhat a hard case, but it must be so here.

La-g. If he send you of arrant, you stay a great vile, you no dare make
excuse; extend what I mean by excuse? Sh. Ouy, ouy.


La-g. I meet a friend by de Vay, I stay trink vit him a littell, one, two,
three, four hours (dat I learn in England tough) one no dare tell souche Man,
Monsieur, make me stay for one answer, yet Company come, no can write; or I
cherche him in several places, before I find: call at te tailleur's, see your
suit be make. An oder Man satisfy vit one of tese, he know te contrary, he no
satisfy vit it is nor notingue else, Vich de fear of put away, or receive
distribution -- you understand.


Raw. Ouy, ouy. La-g. on te head and shoulders put in one Mouse; you no dare go
to de Cabaret, Ven he at the Comedy, nor make good shear vit the Maids at
home; no, nor go to one bordell, Vile he at an oder.


Sh. Unless I knew he had such great business in hand, as lest him no leisure
to think of me.


La-g And so I say again, me rader beg, steal, do any hardeship, ten serve one
Master, I no dare tell lie to.


Sh. This necessity of speaking truth was something hard to me too at first,
but I was forced to betake my self to it, and use, thou know, brings
perfectness.


La-g. Dou dare not, (tough among discreet bodies, dat vill keep Counsel) tell
tales of him, or recount his secrets.


Sh. No marry, dare I not; secrecy is that he chiefly requires of a servant.


La-g. And vat is vorse, if loosing his money, or some todre ill humeur, make
him Colerick, an he Vell-come you home Vit Coups de pied.


Sh. How now? La-g. or one good soufflet, or two.

Raw. Nay, nay; one's enough.

La-g. Dear is no complaining, it is so mouche for you; and fear of more, you
must bite your tongue, and swallow your choler, as they say in my Country.


Sh. I, sure enough.

La-g. Vat Consolation it is Monsieur Sift to swear and curse at souche Master?
my bones no ache more* Ven mong my Camarades, I can give him heartily to all te
devils.


Sh. I have got the length of his foot now,
And seldom am in this predicament.

Raw. Besides he is good conditioned.

La-g. Good or bad, one fair morning I vould
Pack up my nawles and be gone for all date.

Raw. Would not he know my mind, and so prevent me, had I any such intention?


La-g. Vhy dere's todre ting I no speak. You no dare run vaye neider, no dare
tink of it, nor find one oder Master in secret, if dis fall out vis you.


Raw. It Is a common trick indeed of servants, that grow weary of one Master,
to have another in reserve:


Sh. Like Women who (for fear of wanting) provide a second husband, before the
first be dead; but that Providence We are debarred of too.


La-g. An odre incommodite I no reckon, an te gran incommodite of all; how you
pick up money in it is service? a Man get no more but bare vages? Pewh! it is
no Vorth Vile, I should be sorry to rob any body; begarre I make conscience
of dat: but if Largent go torow my hands, it is like meal, flower, Vat you call?
someting stick, stick still to de fingers.


Sh. Ah sirrah! you go snip in your Master's money then, you take toll, you
black Miller, you, you more Unavoidable thief then his Worship's tailour.


Raw. You make a Conscience of robbing, but you filch, you pilfer* you purloin
unmercifully.


Sh. Thou have a fine time on it, that we want; and Enjoy'st a revenue, We dare
not pretend to.


Raw. My Master hates theft beyond imagination, and I think that for a Tester
(merciless as he is) he could find in's heart to have us taught to dance in a
rope.


Sh. I Am sorry for thy sake thou came to him, since thou art given that way;
for finding it out (as doubtless he would by thy looks) he may very well tell
thy Master.


La-g. Tell my Master? oh me lost, me lost! vat I do?

Raw. Why, thy worst is but to be hanged.

La-g. And is no dat bad enofe, my friend?

Sh. Perhaps thou may be quit for a singing
Or so: thou can read?

La-g. Yes, yes; if he did need to know one name, to tell one's fortune, or
doings, den me attrappe him very vell, for La-gripe no me true name, me take
datte, because me Vould gripe vell good moneys here, and leave my own name Vit
my Country, for one blow I do, how you call? a ting, Vich make me leave
France; I no come into England, no, vitte Sr Christophore else.


Sh. Though he could not; yet knowing our names you have told all this to, he
cannot when his list but know what has past amongst us.


Raw. How could he else discover to the full what concerns him, or me: thou
shall find no ease on that side neither.

aside.
Sh. No, no; We Will keep his fears up to the height still.

La-g. Dat very true too; but my good Sift, if it be possible, make he no tell.


Sh. Have thou filcht soundly?

La g. Not mouch at a time.

Sh. But often?

La-g. Teuenty or tirty a monts, but littell, littell every one, dat he no
find: you call at Sessions Petty Larcenie.


Raw. Then a whipping perchance may serve.

La-g. A Vippingue? vhy many littell tefts no amount to a great teft.


Raw. But they make thee a great thief;
And may mount thee to the gallows.

Sh. Saving that, I know no way but one.

La-g. Oh good Sifte, tell dat toder vay, I take dat rader.

Sh. My Master's head's so full now thou may get out of town, and he never
mind thee; go thy ways then presently, and pack up; if the old Knight should
hear of thy pranks, he will not send into France after thee.


La-g. If I be dear once, I no care dis for him; but I no dear yet.


Raw. Fetch but thy things, We Will set thee going.

La-g. It Is great vay.

Raw. Were It further yet, We Will have thee thither to day.

Sh. But thou must be well provided against the cold; there blow certain winds
at Sea, thou will not like.


La-g. Vat? at Mid-summer?

Sh. I; as hot as it is at Land.

Raw. That Is the only inconvenience of the Journey,
But thou wilt be over in a hour or two.

La-g. I fear no Vindes nor Veader; I fear my Master more, and dine too: but
how I be carried?


Raw. At ease, as e're thou were.

Sh. Meet me in thy Master's garden,
I Will be there presently.

La-g. Let it be no long present, nor no perhaps.

Raw. Be you but ready.

La-g. If you no come, me very angry.

Sh. I will come, I tell thee.

Exit La-gripe. Raw. He Is of the house of the Credulous too:

Sh. In The Lime already, boy.

Raw. There let him flutter.

ACT V.
The first SCENE, Lincoln's-Inne-Fields.
Enter Sr Christopher, Bellamy severally. Sr Chr. BEllamy, I have been seeking
you;

Bell. Me Sir? I have my wish if I can serve you;
Lay your commands upon me.

Sr Chr. A Courteous Gentleman, and a handsome one!
aside. Who would take him for a Pick-pocket now
By his looks? but fronti nulla sides.

Bell. What means he talking to himself to eye
aside. Me thus? has he already discovered
Our Love, the art We used to hide it too?
Cruel fates! so speedy in your malice?

Sr Chr. Foolish man that I am! I can scarce find in my aside. heart to speak
to him now, I would not shame him quite; I must dissemble, and pretend that
some other way my ring is fallen into his hands. To be brief with you, there is a
certain Jewel wanting, a small toy a ring, or so, and I am told, you have it.


Bell How soon are all my hopes blasted?

aside. Sr Chr. How he is struck? his very Countenance pleads guilty.

aside. Bellamy. This the fair success I flattered my self with?

aside. Sr Chr. I do not say, Bellamy, you are faulty,
But the party you have it by.

Bellamy, With what obstinacy are we persecuted?

aside. Sr Chr. Trouble not your self; it is the hand alone
You have it from is guilty;
You are otherwise justifiable enough.

Bell. I have the Diamond, Sir, I cannot denie't,
Gives him his Ring. And here am ready to restore it you.
You Are prepossest, I fear, by some, with a
False story of the means I wrought it by;
But if truth may be heard, as sure it ought
In spite of their insinuations, the guilt
Is all mine, I have no Accomplices;
Rather die, then Peach Clarinda.
aside.
Sr Chr. I seek to excuse him, and he fondly accuses himself
aside
Bellamy. Let Us clear her, all we can. I tell you, Sir,
What e're you have heard, I am in all the fault,
Nor do I plead ought to attenuate. --

Sr Chr. How strangely does a guilty Conscience wring him?
I palliate his fault, he exaggerates it.
aside.
Bellamy. I seek not therefore to attenuate
A Crime, which when I first designed. --

Sr Chr. I am not ignorant of the Fact, Bellamy, set no misseeming gloss
upon it, I know the naked truth; but though I do, the knowledge of it shall not
hurt you.


Bellamy. There Is no dissembling with you then;
Plain-dealing, now is best I do confess. --

Sr Chr. Oh, Do you so, Sir? Do you so? but look to it another time; for,
Confess and be hanged, Do You mark? that is the Word.

aside.
Bellamy. I do confess my furtive actions then,
My Stealth, my Clandestine approaches, and
The surprizal* of a Jewel, which I see,
I am in your opinion too
Unworthy of: it is true, I am too bold,
Nor can I ought in my defense now plead:
'Twas the predominance of some ill Star
I Will say, since it brings your displeasure,
Forced me to what is past.

Sr Chr. I am not so severe a Judge neither;
I have been young my self, and can not now
Be ignorant what youth is subject to;
And some occasions seem to force our will,
Such powerful allurements they tempt it with.

Bellamy. Yet though my indesert seem to forbid
All hope of pardon, by your own goodness
Sir, I dare Conjure you. --

Sr Chr. Yes, yes, I am merciful, I tell you,
And can excuse: having my Ring too, I
aside. May hold my peace; it is an ordinary course
When a Man has his Good's again,
To wave the prosecution.
aside.
Bellamy. I must not lose this opportunity,
I shall not take him in the mood again.
Since you with so much goodness can excuse,
To him. Be good still, Sir, and to justify me
Thoroughly, Authorize my crime,
And give Clarinda leave
To crown my passion with approved consent;
Permit me, Sir, to Marry her.

Sr Chr. Marry my Daughter? for what acquaintance troe?
The Man's mad sure, or I am mad my self;
aside. He thinks me so at least, he would never talk thus else.

Bellamy. Though my means are small, I have a heart yet,
No frowning fortune, no adversity
Can bring under; and am of a Family
From which some richer ones may receive no
Small lust^e; look on me then, Sir, with eyes
Not inte^^ss'd, or greedy of more wealth;
And you will see no cause to scorn the alliance.

S Chr. I^ cannot be in earnest sure all this,
aside. Or with the least thought of persuading me:
Finding some danger in the Trade of Cutpurse,
He Is now fallen to, he will grow wise, and take
I^p^a^ my cost for which purpose he must
Needs marry my Daughter forsooth; this is
One of the finest Fools.
Laughes.
Bell. He Is something long-a-considering on it.
aside.
Sr Chr. Let him steal, let him pick, let him cut, as many aside Purses, or
Pockets, as he please; let him be hanged too, and he will, he will not disoblige
me in it at all: but for Marrying my Daughter, Pardonnez moy, Monsieur; well,
Bellamy, I promise you, what ever you have said.


Bell. Your Daughter, Sir?

Sr Chr. Secrecy, Sir, secrecy; I Will keep your Counsel,
And that is no small courtesy, I hope.

Exit. Bellamy. Was ever Man in such a maze as I?
His fav'rable construction of what is past,
Seems to invite a full Confession:
And when he knows my passion for his daughter,
He promises secrecy, and cries, he
Will keep Counsel. It Is the crossest this of
All my cross fortunes.
To him Celia, Fannie, Luce. This importune Woman is another;
Let Us give her the slip.

Cel. Stay, Bellamy, and be civil at least,
If you cannot be kind.
Is that heart then I have so long thought mine
An others Captive now?
Inconstancy and breach of Faith, it seems,
Are pleasing grown to him, so often Vowed
The Virtues contrary; the change it self
Is ordinary enough, nor am I
The first forsaken she.
But yet to shun a sight, you once
Swore, pleased you 'bove all others, is too strong
An effect, methinks, of a new passion;
It Is past indifferency this, even to scorn;
You might remember that you loved me once.

Bellamy. Say, I esteemed you, Madam: Love
In the respects I paid you, had least share;
My obligations to you were great,
And so I strove to bear a mind
Full of resentments for your noble favors,
A grateful, though not passionate heart.
But it is no time for such disguises now,
It Is fit each action wear it is proper name,
Own it is true motive;
Lay your credulity then aside,
For love has bound me in those fetters now,
Must never be cut but with my thread of life.

Cel. With what art this studied declaration
In such ambiguous terms is couched,
To Lu. It may be made for me as for another?
He neither named Celia, nor Clarinda.

Lu. It Is as plain though, he means her, as if he had.

Fan. But you are so credulous, as he tells you.

Bell. This night I waited on you by your own appoinment, what my reception
was, you cannot have forgot, the affront was to premeditate; you could not
afford me one serious word, no, nor your ear a minute: think not the return I
make you strange then, nor wonder, that I shun you now, as you did me; it was
your command I should, and I obey you, Madam.


Exit. Lu. He Is in love w'ee, you will believe it still?

Cel. He does, he does love me, I tell thee, strangely.

Fan. It Is strangely indeed, if he loves at all;
And as strangely he shows it.

Cel. It Is but a trial when he slights me thus,
It Is then he loves me passionately;
This sense of my odd carriage in the night
Is most becoming, and I take it kindly:
We Are indifferent to him, he would mind it less,
Loving me, as he does, he must resent it thus.

Lu. With an other, you see, he does himself
Confess he is in love.

Cel. For trial still, I tell thee, he affects
Inconstancy, as he does scorn;
And for revenge perphaps a little too
He seeks to vex me thus; all is dissembling,
Nor does he strive to make me Jealous, but
To discover at full the kindness I have
For him; it is that, I see, he aims at,
Endimion told me 'twould be so.

Fan. Nay, for him, he is a cheat, I Am sure, what ever the other be.


Lu. He has abused you, Madam, all-a-long,
His predictions are mere fictions,
Mere impostures.
You might (but that you were before you spoke with him, strangely persuaded of
his skill) have seen it in his whole proceeding.


Fan. He but deludes you with vain hopes,
Bellamy does forsake you.

Lu. Can you be ignorant he adores Clarinda?

Fan. Gratian assures you of it too.

Cel. I trust not to what Gratian says; he has
Cast off all thoughts of friendship, and without
The least regard to Bellamy, or his love,
Is hourly troubling me with his own,
You see he is.
I give no credit to a Rivall's story.
To them Gratian, Lewis. For whatso're of Bellamy he says,
I Have cause to fear, but reason still to doubt.

Ler. Rather believe him, Madam; for you will find
Gratians Story is a true one. His love
Though violent, can hear some reason yet,
And keep within the bounds of honor; think
Not then, he seeks by treachery to win you,
By base suggestions to supplant his friend.

Great. While I thought him worthy of you,
Or could on any grounds believe him yours,
What did I, Madam, or what said I, to
Cross your fair affections?
I was all friend then, moved not one step
Out of my Confident's path, for him was
All I spoke, my own cause I pleaded but
With silence, allowed it not the least complaint,
But what was fair from reaching him, or you;
Or if some time a sudden sigh broke through
The care I used to keep 'em in, how soon
Like to some blusht-at, or unlawful issue,
Did I disavow it, nay, lay it to
Another? but the concealment
Of my sufferings and his injuries to you,
Would not a kindness now to Bellamy prove
That false Bellamy?

Cel. How loath am I yet to believe him such?
aside. Can he be false to Celia, that thought so
To them. Well of him? She that so truly loved him?

Great. It Is strange a heart once yours, should ever own
An other Conqueror: but he is false, false
To the fairest Celia, false, as miserable
In this Exchange.

Cel. Bellamy forsakes me?

Great. Perhaps it is with regret, a sharp remorse
Perhaps poisons all the sweets he leaves you Sir
Yet he forsakes you still; and with his own
Consent I tell you so.

Cel. And it is Clarinda
Robs me of this beloved Perjurer?

Ler. But now We left him at Sr Christopher's.

Great. And least we should mistake him any longer
Gratian, (cried he to me, as he went in)
I know your passion, and cease to oppose it,
I quit all claim to Celia; for if love
Have happiness for me, it is in Clarinda's Arms.

Cel. May I believe all this?

Ler. A greater truth never challenged your belief.

Great. Alas! he never left the town, but lurked
At my house for private meetings
With Clarinda, whom he saw night by night.
A truth though, no Interest of my own
Had e're extorted, did not yours claim it,
And his allowance Manumize the secret.

Cel. No more; my doubt is over, and the mist
Love cast before my eyes thus vanished, more
Hatesul, as more hated does he appear,
Then ever he seemed lovely, nor was my
Affection ever half so strong, as now
My anger is* Gratian, do you love me?

Great. Oh Madam!

kiss her hand, sighing. Cel. How can I ever believe Man again,
When Bellamy is false? yet follow me,
If your affection be sincere, as you
Protest; Celia is yours; but bring me to
kiss it again passionately. Clarinda's, and make my own eyes witness
His crime, that I may do you Justice there
Before his face; serve my anger so far,
And second the revenge I do intend,
That he may see himself forsaken, as he
Forsakes, and there (if I may have my wish)
Shall he repent his perjurie,

Lu. That I believe too.

Cel. Yet all in vain.
Lost to all hopes of e're recovering
What he so basely does renounce; there let
Him pine to find me in another's arms,
And without hopes of either Mistress, see
Clarinda scorn him, as he now does me.

Fan. A fine humor this, Luce;

Lu. An 'twould hold.

Lew. Oh, it must hold.

Fan. Whether Love will or no?

Exeunt. SCENE II. Sir Christopher 's Garden.
Enter La-gripe in a traveling habit. A Dieu, London, adieu; I go see my own
natural Contree again: an France be never so bad, or England so good, better be
alive dear, den hang here.


To him Shift, Rawman. Raw. How now, art ready?

La-g. Dou see, te good Capotte, Vit my bottes ala Candalle


Sh. It Is well, it is well, thou have clad thy self warm; the Journey's
something bleak, as I told thee.


La-g. I putt it is hood over my face, for fear te cold, and some todre ting make
me loose my nose quite.


Raw. I think indeed it is something loose set on.

Sh. Zymar, Haly, Behemoth, Albenzera.
Get into this Circle.

La-g. Vat dou Mumble, mumble in te teeths?
Say te devils Pater noster, I tinke.

Sh. Words of art, words of art: but it is done already. Thou must be
hoodwinked now.


La-g. Pourquoy?

Sh. There are reasons for it, I warrant you.

La-g. Your Jockeys, I hear say, ride temself blind,
But for uate I be make blind, before I ride.

Sh. With the great light, and that prodigious height thou will be mounted to
thy eyes would be dazzled, and thou giddily come tumbling down.


Raw. Who knows too how near thou may come to the Sun, thy Lids would not
save 'em from scorching then, nor the distillations still overflowing quench
the fire.


Sh. That brinie dew would add more fury to it.

Raw. Then thy nose would melt off indeed,
But this muffler saves all.

La-g. Indeed me have grand distraction, to see all te Vorld at one time, I can
no hinder my self from be peeping in every corner; I tinkue I mind me business
better, and see notinge, deresore blind me, I am content: but how I ride? Vat
be carried on? uere dat?


Raw. I need but whistle, and it is here.

La-g. Is it a saddel horse, or one Coche?

Raw. No, no; a pad-nag.

La-g. A bad nag? begare me uill have a good nag, or no go at all your Vay.


Raw. Thou shall have a good one;
I say, a pad-nag, a fine gentle pacer.

La-g. Oh cry you mercy, Understand now; my Master ride souche one himself,
it is very easy for us old Men: but Vho be my guide? Vat if I loose my vaie?
it very like; for I no travel dat rode before.


Sh. There Is a question indeed! thou shall have a little Orengetawny devil to
lacquey by thy side.


La-g. A devil lacquey? I no hear of souch before.


Sh. Why, half the lacqueys about the town are devils, Man, and in thy Country
they are ten times worse.


La-g. Dat's true indeed; but I always hear say, te devil uery proud, and tink
he no take so mean place.


Sh. Some of 'em I grant are above it, but there are enough to supply all places,
and he will put on any shape, rather then not make one.


Raw. Which is to play at small game, rather then sit out.


Sh. Shall I tell thee? there are devils of all functions and qualities, trades
and callings whatsoever.


Raw. Alas, the Mystery of every trade is knavery,
And that leads directly to him.
There are Sergeants, and Bailiff-divils.

Sh. And divillishly are they used, when they meddle with a guard-man, or any
of the Boulley Rocks indeed.


Raw. Some neat, dapper, well-handed fiends are cut out into Barbers,
Tire-women, and Valets de chamber;


Sh. Of which there come such shoules out of thy Country:

Raw. Your nimbler handed ones make Tailors, and Weavers.

Sh. Thieving devils: he devils, and she devils.

La-g. Vat Voman devils?

Sh. Oh sans nombre: and they make cuckolds.

La-g. Te devil Cuckold too?

Sh. How should he come by his horns else?

Raw. And for more fiendly variety, there are sage devils, and mad devils;
hectoring devils, and cowardly devils; quaking devils --


La-g. Yes, in frost and snoe; I have bin such one my self, before I come to
good Anglish Cole fires.


Raw. But these quake now, at Midsummer.

La-g. Begare trow 'em in te river, and make
Quake for some ting.

Sh. Come, thou stay'st a devilish while here,
It Is time thou were goue.

hood-winkt him. Raw. There are water-devils too; but those we call dippers.

Sh. Rumpers and thumpers. Raw. Zealous and impious.

Sh. Precise and profane.

Raw. Merry devils, and very devils, commonly known by the name of Phanaticks.


Sh. But thine's come; get up, get up.


La-g. Oh undo, undo; I see if mine be a horned devil; your men Cuckolds
hide teir horn so, you no see a great manies; I long to see how te devil wear
his.


Sh. 'Twere worth seeing indeed: but let every Cuckold wear his own horns, and
as he pleas himself: this is a bachelor devil; one though that having no apes
to lead in hell, comes to lead a baboon into France.


La-g. Vat's dat? Vat's dat? I have great Curiosity
To look him in face.

Raw. Take heed, it is dangerous; he has a more dreadful countenance ten times
then thy old Master.


holding his hands. La-g. Gare, and he one I no mouche care for see now.

Raw. '^is sufficient he conduct thee into France;
Then see him, and spare not.

La-g. I look him out of Countenance, Ven I am dear.

Sh. Come, get up, get up.

horses him on a rail or hedge with a cushion under him. La-g. Vell Monsieur te
devil, do not quitte me, Ven you get me in one strange place, bring me safe in
my country, and den I can do vell enof vit out you.


Sh. Never fear him, he will not leave thee so,
ties him to it. Thou art too good a bit for him.

La-g. For Vat you tie so hard, Master Sift?
is it you, or te devil?

Sh. He Is afraid thou will slip from him.

La-g. No, no, I varrant's you, if he no run
Way from me.

Raw. If he does, ride after him;
Thou art damnably well mounted.

Sh. Is It easier now?

Let Us him a little looser. La-g. I, I, now it is vell; but vho untie me, Vhen I
come home, I can no do it my self, I no see.


Sh. It shall be done to thy hand,
When thou art at thy Journey's end.

La-g. O Sift, Sift, I forgot; Vill it is Jade carry in crouper, Vat you call in
England? double, double, carry double?


Sh. Why doe'st ask?


La-g. I take my felloe Beatrige along Vit me, she ride behind; very good
company for te devil, and for me too, very good in te vay.


Sh. Yes, too good for thee, old Jew; what ride double? aside. to him. No, no,
ride post to the devil, the old saying is; I could have ordered it so, she
might have gone too; but it is too late now, and thou must take the Journey
single, as thou art.


La-g. Vell, vell, it is no matter; I get an odre in France.


Sh. By this token know thou art within ken; a doleful Voice thou shall first
hear; at thy arrival, wrangling or confused talk, then louder Lamentations; but
fare thee well, set forward.


Raw. Commend us to our friends in Paris.

La-g. Yes, yes; dat I will.
in a hollow tone as from a far
Sh. Adieu, Monsieur La-gripe, adieu.

Raw. Adieu, La-gripe, adieu; with what speed thou flyest?

Sh. How he cleaves the air? he is gone, hes gone;
I can scarce discern him now.

La-g. I do perceive I fly very fast indeed, for now I hardly hear teir Voice,
my Ears take but te last Accents, as of one very remote.


Raw. A right Frenchman! bread in's pocket;

Sh. Where Is the Cheeze?

Raw. Oh, that is at his Toes to haut-goust.

Sh. Which he calls refining.

La-g. I be in France presant, I drink good Claret Vine, pure, pure; no mingle
mangle, red and white, as here in England.


Sh. Do, fuddle thy Nose, and if they pick thy pocket I Will pay the reckoning.


Having picked his Pocket. La-g. I take Sift for one little Quenave,
And he prove honest little Fellow.

Sh. Yes, I warrant you.

La-g. Rawman too, very well versed, experienced --

Raw. In thy Pockets.

La-g. Te beast tey set me upon, go as easy
Too, as no stir at all.

Sh. If it does, they are mistaken.

La-g. No shake, shake me; need no spur neider.

Raw. The ill manner'd Jade would hardly answer to it.

La-g. I be as still as in me Bed, sure I very good Horseman.


Sh. For the Woodden-Horse.

La-g. I no loose in te Saddel.

Sh. Nor in the Hilts?

La-g. It Is very wholesome air, I grow very hungry.

Sh. You stuffed your Pockets, as if you had known you should --


La-g. But Vat Vind it is? stinking Vind too,
R. Biows in's face with a pair of bellows. Tell me dear blow,
One Vind very cold, and so it is indeed,
I see he know all tings in te vay, as
He go it himself.

Sh. An other gale, an other gale.

La-g. Te Vind turn; sure my Beard freeze wit it is blow, blow. I fear my Nose
too for all it is good Capotte, I no dare feel how it is neider.


blows on the other side. Sh. There Is company come in to the garden,
We must away.

Raw. Jog on, jog on good Antiquity.

Sh. You Are almost at your Journeyes end.

Exit. Sh. Raw. Enter Bellamy, Clarinda with a thin hood on. Clar. Discovered
already? So soon betrayed
Unto my Fathers knowledge?
What hard fates, Bellamy, attend our Loves?

Bell. You stand yet* blameless in your Father's eye;
I wholly drew the Crime upon my self,
And rather chose to pass for a suborner,
Then you should forward seem, in the disposal
Of that he claims it is his right to give.

Clar. No, no; We do but fool our selves with hopes,
There is no ground left for that self-flatterie.

Bell. Soon as he taxed me with the Ring, I rendered it,
That precious pledge of thy unmatched affection:
Let not thy grief precede our misery though,
He neither showed, nor threatened any rigor,
He spoke but in his wonted tone, rather
Amazed then angry, and used me (trust me
Sweet he did) with much mildness still; and seemed
(By arguing the business with himself)
Something irresolute what course to take;
And I dare hope, if from thy self he hear
Thou do affect me, it may incline him
To allow thy choice.

Clar. I that will do it, I Will dry my eyes again,
We Will nere be wretched sure, when speaking truth
Can make us happy. If this may win him,
Clarinda's yours; once more I tell you so.

Bell. What grief is proof against this joy?
Or what misery has a name, which these words
Clarinda's mine, would not charm into happiness?

Clar. I Am yours for ever, or no Man's; he that can debarr me of this
felicity, shall not add to my affliction, being an others.


Bell. Such bliss in silence still is best received,
I want words to give full thanks.

La-g. I understand some noise of Tongues, some People talking a great way of,
sure I ride over some great City; Is it Canterbury? no, no, I hope I be pass te
Seas.


To them Beatrix running in. Clar. How now? Is there any body come in?


Beat. Oh yes, Sir Christopher, and the Astrologer forsooth; he is no body
without him now: he was wont to dote upon wealth, and then our House was
nothing but Aldermen, and Citizens, that write themselves Esquire, and Country
Knights, that never came to Town, but for a new Purchase: but that fit's over
now, and learning is his babble.


Clar. They interupt us too soon, I would not
Have him see you yet, Endimion being with him too.

Bell. Can I not slip out?

Clar. No, I know his walks, he uses at his entrance to take that, should now
lead you out; but step aside, in the close walk he will not discover you: and there,
if boldly speaking in our cause may carry it, you will hear me plead for you as
you were here your self.


Bell. You are all goodness, Madam.

Exit. La-g. Good Devil, look to me, if I be at Sea, for I can no swim.


To them Sr Christopher Credulous, Endimion, Bernard, Shift. End. A most
delicious garden this!

Sr Chr. It Is my Whore, Sir, it is my Whore;
Here I delight, and consume my self.

Sh. That Is even a Whore's trick indeed

Sr Chr. Here, Clarinda, here is thy Ring again.

Clar. Must I endure that object in my Eye?

To B. pulling down her hood. Turning it up. Sr Chr. What so coy, Mistress?
Will you not parley unveiled?


Clar. The Sun's too hot, Sir, I never walk in it
Pulling it down again. Without my Hood, I shall be tanned.

S^ Chr. And you be, and you be, it is but one Takes it quite off. lick more,
you have that in your Closet, I know, can fetch it off again; here Gentlewoman,
Throws it Beat. that belongs to your care.


End. I longed to see how Clarinda did behave her To Bern. self after all these
odd accidents, and how she'ld look upon me.


Bern. She Is too much discomposed;

End. She is, and I too well revenged; I pity her.

Sr Chr. It Is not a civil welcome this, of a person thou art so lately, and so
much obliged too; it is to him thou art engaged for the recovery of thy Ring; I
thought thou would have slown into his arms, had helped thee to it again,
thou were so lost for want of it.


Beat. Gladly into his, that had it.

To Sh. End. Your Father, Madam, is pleased to name an Obligation So slight, I
dare not think it one.


Sh. It Is one indeed, she con's you little thanks.
aside.
End. But if kind Heaven prosper what I intend,
A solid and important service shall
Prove the Zeal I have to please you.

Clar. You have already, Sir, obliged me, more
Then I can thank you for.

La-g. By te different noises I find I pass from place to place; and now I tink
I am at Callais; gare te Steeples, if I be.


To them Gratian, Lewis, Celia, Fannie, Luce, Sr Chr. Here Is more Company, What
Lady's that? or what would she?
She looks with an earnest, and a busy face.

Beat. With an angry one, methinks.

Sh. It Is a pretty little angry Rogue,
Would I had the pleasing of her.

Beat. You please her? please me? and hear the Lady.

Cel. Wonder not Sir, at so abrupt a visit,
I come for Justice to you; We are both wronged,
Both abused by one unconstant Man; one
That when a thousand Oaths had made him mine,
Your Daughter has stolen from me; nay, start not,
He seems amazed* She loves him infinitely; he nere had left
Me for an unkind one, no, no they burn
In mutual flames; and in your house, or Garden
Is he now concealed, now, this very minute:
Do me reason then, and your self Justice.

Great. I wish he be here, for I begin to fear,
aside Finding Clarinda without him.

La g. Sure it is is te doleful Voice, te lamentation; good sign, good sign, I be
almost come home.


Sr Chr. How! a man hidden in my house? a plot, a plot; fetch me my rapier
there, I Will poak him out of his hole; a plot upon my daughter.


Beat. Your daughter's plot upon you rather.
aside.
Clar. It Is an increase of misery this, I never feared;
aside. She Is very handsome; what then? nay, I think
eying Cel. Bellamy did love her once; no matter:
Coming just in the nick too, when he is here,
Silence my Jealousy,
I Have trouble enough without thee.

Sh. Pox of this bussle, 'twill land our Travellour too soon.
aside
Clar. My father, I hope, suspects not me
In any close contrivance --

Sr Chr. Nay, nay, it is best for you be clear; I will think well of thee so
long as I may; but if thou be faulty, th have lost a f iend of me: I le
rage no higher, till I see th'accusation proved.


Bell. Poor Clarinda!
peeping out. With what increase of trouble I see thine?

Lew. They are all to pieces now indeed.

End. I have a soder for em yet.

La-g. I am come home sure, I hear such confused tones, and lamentable voices.


Sr Chr. Come, Madam, first let us make the garden sure,
This way -- hah! what have we here?
This is a skare-crow --

La-g. It Is is te very noise, Sift tell me of; devil, devil, Vere be you, my
Lacquey-divell? untie, untie me.


Sr Chr. What Pageant's this: it is La-gripe's dialect.

Sh. It Is our Travellour, Sir.
to End. He thinks himself in France already.

End. A hasty Monsieur indeed; but
It Is no time for this mirth now: help him down.

La-g. Now I be come, now I be come; never make being got off. Journey vit so
much ease. O my Mother Earth, I must kiss dee for Joy.


Sr Chr. Why how now?


La-g. You be got into my Country too? but ease me of one scruple, how you
come? he lend you one pad-nag too? vat co*lour your Vorship's devil? mine
Orenge-tawny, dat his colour^ of old, you know: I dare swear now my Master's be
one aside. horned fiend and dat I fear is horn to horn.


Sr Chr. He Is mad sure; see where thou art, in London,
In my garden; see thy young Mistress too, Beatrix. --

La-g. Begare I be so indeed. I be base besheat, stares about him gets up,
searches his pockets. my purse gone into France, or some Vere else ah dou
dog-rogue Sift, I have thee by the ears present.


Sh. If the devil pick thy pocket, can I help it?

Ex. La-g. running after Shift. Sr Chr. This is not the concealed Lover, you
mean, Madam;
It Is a disguised one rather I think this.

Cel. I look after no such moldy ware, Sir.
'T was not this. I hope, you brought me to see.
to Great.
Great. Madam you will find things yet, as I gave 'em out to you.

Clar. If they would search no further now.

End. You Will pardon, Sir, my Man's boldness, I hope,
to Sr Chr. That plays the knave thus with yours.

Sr Chr. It Is easily pardoned to preserve your friendship:
But to our other business, our serious trouble.

Bell. They turn this way; better show my self,
peeping out again Then be found sneaking here.

Cel Let Us seek this way.

Bell. Seek him no further, Madam, here he is.
steps forth.
Cel. Ungrateful, faithless Man!

Sr Chr. Hah! Is it he?

Fan. You perjured man, you; have we found you?

Bell. Nay, never rail, nor throw at me those undeserved
Reproaches; there is a Lady here, can vouch my constancy.

Sr Chr. What Planet was my Girl born under troe?
I seek her Lover, and find a thief, a Pick-pocket.
You lay perdu upon some new design now, there are more Jewels in the house,
Cabinets unrifled; I pray God there be. Ent. Shift again. This is their trick
to a hair; slip in the dusk of the Evening, and when we are all fast, open the
doors to an inundation of Vermin. A pox on this thieve's handsel, I knew there
was worse to follow.


Cel. The Man's beside himself sure, to wrong a Gentleman thus barbarously;
though I have reason not to think him innocent, yet I dare pawn my life, the
base guilt you charge him with, is none of's crime. What mean you then by this
abusive Language?


Sr Chr. Alas! he understands me, Madam.

Bell. Not very well, Sir.
What draws this scandalous reproach?
I am no thief, my Enemy, I dare swear,
If I have any, will answer for me:
My mind is set on nobler objects far,
My name and family free from the least stain
Of such ignoble ways; nor have you ought
In all your vast possessions I value,
But your daughter.
It Is her I love, this year and more she has
Bin Mistress of my life and hopes; the Ring
You taxed me with, from her hand I newly
Had received: and if the sternness of a
Father's brow fright not a timorous Maid from
Free discovery of such thoughts, ask her, and
What she makes not good of all my story,
Repute me liar in; a name
I would not for your wealth deserve.

Sr Chr. Speak, Clarinda, says he true? do love him?
Speak boldly, and the truth, what ere it be,
It shall be welcome to a father's ear.

Clar. Heaven knows I need not blush to own it,
And yet I do, I love him, Sir,
And have done this --

Sr Chr. Nay, nay, then the rest is plain enough: well
We must make the best of a bad market.
Sr Chr. and End whisper Endimion your advice.

Fan. Nere advise with him, he is a mere impostor.

Clar. Now will he raise a new storm.

Beat. Never fear him, his Astrologie's well worn out by this.

Bell. Let my Poniard prevent his malice.

Sh. He Is born to be hanged I see; because he proves no thief, he will commit
murder.


Bern. Celia's yours, I tell you; Endimion
Has no love for Clarinda, I know he has not.

Great. That assurance revives me.

End. Assist me now, kind Stars,
To put a period to these Lovers pains,
aside. And I Will nere trouble you with an other Suit.

S Chr. My honor lies at state; what shall I do?
To End.
End. A fatal chain these several accidents
Are linked together in, no breaking;
Yield, yield to what heaven has decreed, and
Is indeed above half done to your hands;
These Lovers were made for one another,
I almost told you so before, in the
Description of the Man she is ordained for;
And since one rich in Virtue, not in Land,
Must be your Son in Law, where could you better choose,
Frank Bellamy is nobly bred, as born:
Give free consent then to their happiness,
Let it a fruit of your indulgence to 'em,
And not a forced allowance now appear;
That mingled with the joys we shall wish them,
Our thanks to you on their behalf may flow.

Sr Chr. Well, what must be, must be; I cannot fail however in following that
path Heaven has traced out for me. Bellamy, I embrace you as my Son, my
Daughter's yours.


Bell. And I for ever to your goodness bound.
Oh my Clarinda, now you are mine indeed.

Cel. Is it thus you keep your promise, Sir Christopher?
This the Justice I looked for?
My honor suffers still.

Sr Chr. There was no other salve for mine; and Charity begins at home, good
Lady; remember that still. As much reason, for ought I know, to Marry, as to
Christen my own Child first.


Cel. to Bell. to go, follow that misleading light,
Triumph in thy inconstancy, and let
Thy now-Mistress taste of it in time too;
It Is that, it is that will do me right.
Come, Gratian, I Will keep my word with you;
We Will straight to Church.

Great. Most willingly; sweet Lady, I must take her in the fit.

Fan. 'T would soon be over else.

End. Nay, let us not part in anger, Madam; there
Staying her, She slights him. Are Weddings toward, We should be friends,
And merry then; Lewis call Gratian back.

Lew. Stay.

Bell. A Woman's anger is soon over.

Fan. And a Lad's Love as soon out.

Bell. Or let it last, who cares?

Fan. Or the other, who is the better for it?

Cel. Come, let us hear now, what fine new device you stay me for; Oh! you are a
sweet Gentleman, to pass for an Astrologer, and have no more skill then my
Chambermaid, or Fannie there.


Fan. Truly nor so much, for we began to smell him out.

Clar. When the fit takes you next to make love, Sir,
Jeeringly. Trust to your merit, and not your science,
That you see has deceived you; the match is made now
You set all your Engines a work to break.
How shallow is this art you bragged of?
Or, How little are you versed in it?

Cel. You told me 'twas but to make trial of me,
Bellamy courted Clarinda, and that
'Twas I he loved, when the first sight of him
Proves the contrary; the Stars lend you but
A dim light, it seems, that can no better
Read our destiny by it.

Great. Did you not persuade me too, that Celia
Ceased to love Bellamy? when Heaven knows
What torture the continued expressions
Of her kindness to him, have put me to.
Burn your books, Sir, burn your books for shame,
Your lying books.

Bell. It Is well for him now, I nere was curious
Enough to peep into my destiny,
Nor given that inquisitive way;
I must have had a fling at him too,
Which needs not; there are malcontents enough
To worrie him without me.

To them Lagripe, Rawman. La-g. If te Damoisells have done vit teir tale,
please you have mine, It is a foul tale, I assure you, of accusation against
it is Astrolog too, Did you no promise send me into France fine new way, and me
be here in London still? I be Judge by all te Company, if me no here: and vat
is very worse, you say I go wit out Robbing, and begare me loose my Purse.


End. Your grievance is of weight indeed.


La-g. Of veight? gare my grievance be, you make me lighter by all my Money.


End. That Is easily redressed, give him his Purse again;
And no more of these slippery tricks.

Sh. 'Twas but a trick of wit, Sir;
I hope you will remember the Ensurer, Monsieur.

Giving it him. La-g. Yes, I assure you one halter, if you play more such trick
of vit.


End. Now to my pretty chiders:
For even in that, Ladies, you upbraid me with,
Have I matter enough to make my peace.

Cel. With help of some strange hard non sense,
Your Worship's terms of Art.

End. In plain English, but first your pardon, Sir,
That I durst play the Astrologer with you,
When nere in all my Studies, nor my Travells
I spent a serious minute to become one.

Sr Chr. You are no Astrologer then?

End. None, in good sooth, Sir.

Sr Chr. You told me so before indeed;
Though my itch of Learning would not let me
Credit it: but now I do believe you*
He Would nere degrade himself in public thus,
Could he maintain the height
My credulity had raised him to.

End. And thus may you the better now forgive
The error you have been in, that still were deaf
To whatsoere I said to disabuse you.
If sooner, Madam, then you durst expect,
To Clar. A Father's liking crown your Love, and his,
You may thank me for it; your ma^ch had nere been
Clapped up thus of the sudden, had he not on my
Insinuation believed it made in Heaven.

Sr Chr. Truth, I think it had not.

End. Nor have I done less for you, if well considered,
Was it fit so fair a stock of beauty
To Cel. Should lie begging of a beggar still?
I ve placed you where you will brightest shine,
Where love with interest will be paid you back,
Kiss for kiss were poor retaliation.
Bellamy, whom I saw adore Clarinda,
Was not an Idol fit for you to worship;
While Gratian's heart became a burning sacrifice
With fire shot from your killing eyes.

Bern. Now he tickle's her.

Lew. She Will forgive all her enemies
For such another clawing speech.

Bell. Let them complain that suffer, I have my wish;
Nor is your share, I see, so small in the
Procurement often, but it has made me yours.
I might have percht in Gratian's Cock-loft still,
But for Astrology.

Great. As you have made me no less happy, with
As sincere affection, I vow my self
Your servant: yet let me tell you,
I began to think there was not
Much Astrology in the business neither,
What ever we conceited of you.

End. Happiness, Gentlemen, is happiness still,
I take it, which way so ere arriv d at.
Something in every design we stalk with
To take the Vulgar eye, when that which does
The work indeed, being unperceived,
It often is ascribed to a wrong Cause.
I designed both these matches, Lewis and
Bernard there can witness for me,
And to your joys and mine I see 'em made,
Be it with real or fained skill in
What I took upon me, that matter's not.
The pleasures you reap from it are no fictions,
That we all see.
And I expect my thanks accordingly.

Sh. And you, Sir travellour, that were promised you should not be robbed by
the way; prithee, how could, if thou had gone thy Journey, when I had
secured thy money here before?


La-g. Vell, vell, vit one bottle or two de Vine, it is shall be satisfaction;
and sirrahs, keark you, no tell my master, you know vat.


Raw. No, no; we would not hang thee.


Glar. Bellamy might think that were not my felicity, he has acknowledged you
a furtherer of, did I not pay my thanks too; you have obliged us both, Sir.


Cel. If my Compliment be somewhat colder, Sir, then others you have had from
this thankful Company, impute it to a certain blindness, allows me not yet a
full view of the happiness you have placed me in; but as my sense of it increases,
so shall my Gratitude.


Fan. I would fain thank you too, Sir; but truly I m beholding to you for
nothing, but frighting me with the vision of Bellamy.


Sh. Now for our squeakers.


Ex. Raw. End. Why I passed for an Astrologer, or how, without being one, I
knew enough of your adventures to make the opinion good a while, Beatrix can
partly tell.


Bell. The distaff was of Counsel.

End. The rest may better come from Lewis there, or Bernard; and be part of
their Apology.


Bell. They in the Intrigue too?

End. Grand Intriguers.

Sr Chr. All this we will hear at leisure; 'twill make an excellent story, when
we have it all together: but now let us in, the air grows cold, though love and
youth keep you from feeling it -- what fiddlers?


Music Sh. Yes in truth, Sir; I saw there would be a Wedding or two, and made
bold to invite 'em in; there is no mirth without Music, Sir.


Sr Chr. Why God-a-mercy; come, strike up there,
A kissing dance to please these Wenches.

Sh. A kissing dance! nay then, I will make one,
I Am resolved on it. Come Beatrix.

Fan. You may dance, Sir; but we will have no kissing,
It Is not come to that yet.

Sh. You are not quite come to 't indeed;
But here are riper lips.

Cel. She tells you true, Sir; it is not come to that yet.

Fan. Play my delight.

Sh. Thy Mistress forbids no kissing.

Beat. No, I warrant her.

Raw. She goes to it with a better stomach.

Sh. And they wont kiss
They shall dance by themselves for Shift.

Beat. And for Beatrix too.

Dance. Sr Chr. Brisk youths on my credit: come, to supper; nothing but welcome
can I promise though of the sudden; but when my Girl is married

I Will feast you all, and nobly, that are here;
So your dislike blast not our Wedding cheer.

FINIS.

