A COPY OF THE ARTICLES Agreed upon at the surrender of the City of BRISTOL*
Between Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, Governor of the said City, on the one
Party, and Colonel Charles Gerrard, and Captain William Teringham, for, and
on the behalf of Prince Rupert, on the other party, the 26. of July, 1643.

With a Letter hereunto added, in which this Copy of Articles was Enclosed:
wherein is manifested how well those perfidious Cavaliers have kept the said
Articles* and may serve as a warning to the whole Kingdom, how to trust again
the Faith of such CAVALIERS.

Published according to Order.

LONDON Printed for Henry Overton in Pope's Head Alley.

ARTICLES AGREED ON, AT THE CITY OF BRISTOLL, Between Colonel Nathaniel
Fiennes, Governor of the said City, on the one party, and Colonel Charles
Gerard, and Captain William Teringham, for, and on the behalf of Prince Rupert,
on the other party, the 26. of July, 1643.
THat the Governor Nathaniel Fiennes, together with all the Officers both of
Horse and Foot, now within and about this City of Bristoll, Castle and Forts,
may march out to morrow morning by 9. of the clock, with their full Arms,
Horses, bag and baggage, provided it be their own goods; and that the Common
Foot Soldiers March out without Arms, and the Troopers with their Horses and
Swords, leaving their other Arms behind them, with a safe Convoy to Warmister,
and after not to be molested in their March by any of the Kings Forces, for the
space of three days.

2. That there may be Carriages allowed and provided, to carry away their Bag
and Baggage, and sick and hurt Soldiers.

3. That the Kings Forces march not into the Town, till the Parliament Forces
are marched out, which is at 9. of the clock.

4. That all Prisoners in the Cite be delivered up, and that Captain Eyres, and
Captain Gookin, who were taken at the Devises, be released.

5. That Sir John Homer, Sir John Seymoure, Mr, Edward Steevens, and all other
Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, and other persons, that are now in the City, may
if they please, with their Goods, Wives and Families, Horses, Bag and
Ba^gage, have free Liberty to return to their own homes, or else where, and
there to rest in safety, or ride and travel with the Governor and Forces; and
such of them and their Families as shall be left behind, by reason of sickness
or other cause, may have liberty, so soon as they can conveniently, to depart
this Town with safety, provided that all the Gentlemen and other persons,
shall have three days liberty to reside here, or depart with their goods,
which they please.

6. That all the Inhabitants of this City, shall be secured in their Persons,
Families and Estates, free from plundering, and all other violence or wrong
whatsover.

7. That the Charters and Liberties of this City, may be preserved, and that
the ancient Government thereof, and present Governors and Officers may remain
and continue in their former condition, according to his Majesty's Charters and
pleasure.

8. That for av^yding inconveniences and distr^ctions, the Quartering of
Soldiers be referred or left to the Ma^or and Governor of the same City for
the time being.

9. That all such as have carried any goods into the Castle, may have free
liberty to carry the same forth.

10. That the Forces that are to March out, are to leave behind them all Cannon
and Ammunition, with their Colors, and such Arms as is before expressed.

A Copy of a Letter sent from Bristoll.
Sir,
SInce my last unto you by the Post, and the post hitherward intercepted by the
enemy, the case is changed; for on Thursday last we rendered the City of
Bristoll, as by the Articles here enclosed you may perceive, but what faith
has been kept there after, let the robberies and spoils of every particular
person declare; amongst which, I praise God, I am escaped with my life to the
town of Southampton, with my son John; but before I could come forth of the
gates of the City of Bristol, I was deprived of my money, plate, and baggage
from behind my servants, who were thrown off their horses, and the same cut
off their backs, and utterly lost, and themselves and their horses in like
condition, for ought I know, and only we our selves, with some other
gentlemen, escaped hither with our lives on Friday night last; and on Saturday
came in also the late Governor of Bristoll, Col. Fiennes, and his brother,
with the remainder of the whole soulderie, who were served with the like sauce,
such is the faith held with the present Victors. My wife and family in all this
time not knowing whether we are alive, or where we are; nor know we which way
to send home, in regard all the Ways are full of the enemies sorces, unless
the Carryer of Wells hold his course from London thither, which if he does, I
pray let your man Jonathan by that Carrier, present his mother with a line or
two of our safety in this place and still beseech you, though our fortunes be
altered, to show your good affection to Jonathan and Joseph, with my best
respects to my loving Gossip and your self, remain

Your faithful friend and servaut, I. P.
Southampton, July 31. 1643. Pray let your man Jonathan write out two or three
copies of this enclosed, and deliver one of them to my son Chillingworth, with
my love to him and my daughter; a second to Mr Shephead, with my commendations,
in hope to see him and you all, with what speed we may, which should be very
speedily, did not the Kings horse lie in our way to London; and a third to Mr.
Peter Va^depu^t, my commendations also to him and his wife, etc.



FINIS.

