The manner of the discovering the KING at Southwell, on Tuesday the 5. of
April, 1646. who is now in the Parliaments Quarters before Newarke.

Banbury taken in, with the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition.

AND The Treaty with Sir Charles Compton from OXFORD.

ALSO The Copy of Sir Thomas Fairfax's Proclamation, commanded to be read in
all Churches near Oxford.

AND The Copy of the Summons sent to LUDLOW, and the Governors Answer: And a
Copy of Colonel Birch his Letter.

These are commanded to be printed by the Original papers, and published
according to Order of Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop and J. Coe. 1646.

The manner of discovering the King at Southwel on Tuesday the 5. of April,
1646. who is now in the Parliaments Quarters before Newark.
ON Tuesday the fifth of April, 1646. General Leven having notice of the Kings
being at Southwell in Nottingham shire, with the French Agent in the Scots
Quarters, acquainted the English Commissioners therewith, by two Commissioners
sent for that purpose; As also that he had waylaid the town in several
places, that so His Majesty might not go away: the Commissioners of both
Kingdoms sent up to London to acquaint the Parliament of England therewith,
and to know their pleasures therein; this it as hoped, will be the sudden peace
of these Kingdoms, which God grant.

Colonel Birch his Letter.
SIR, In order to that Command, which the Right Honorable, the Committee of
both Kingdoms were pleased to entrust me with, I have laid close siege to
Ludlow; and doubt not, but to give such an account of it, considering the
shortness of the time I have been before it, and the strength of the place,
may be expected from me; whose endeavors are ambitious in nothing more then to
serve the Public, and really manifest my self

Your most thankful, and obleidged Servant, J. BIRCH.

Colonel Birch his Summons to Ludlow Castle.
GEntlemen, It is far from my desire to be an occasion of shedding of blood or
ruining the estates of any* And for that I conceive your ^^es are sensible of
the danger of both, in case we proceed on without restraint of that violence
which the Soldiers will be ready to execute (which I hope you will join with
me to prevent) I have thought good out of my real affection unto, and earnest
desire of your preservation, To let you know, that it is yet in your power to
prevent your own total ruin, and in my power to grant you such terms, as
may be honorable to the Military part, and profitable to those who have other
resolutions then to live by their swords. And that which makes me confident
that you cannot reject this opportunity, is, That if you shall, you are so
far from doing that, which otherwise in honor you are bound, that in this
case (which you are not ignorant of) you make your selves, and all others who
shall put themselves under your protection, incapable of any thing but
extremity; there being neither any visible force in the Field, nor any Garrison
unbesieged, which can yield you the least hopes of relief. I need not tell you
of Exeter, Barnstable, the Mount, and sundry other places of strength,
maintained by men of honor, who have conceived it prudence (and not without
good reason) to make those places happy by terms of honor, which they knew
they must make miserable by refusing the opportunity offered. For an example of
the latter you need not seek far to find those who have not only to their
great dishonor destroyed utterly those under their protection, but have now
thankfully within few days embraced such terms, as that their lives are at
the Parliaments mercy: Their own unadvisednesse having been such, that they
had very near made the Besiegers incapable of granting them that. And if you
shall not now yield unto this Summons, which in the name of both Houses of
Parliament I send you, for the delivery of this Town and Castle of Ludlow unto
me, for them who have found it necessary for the good of His Majesty and
Kingdom, to command the same, but shall make me by your delay (which is the
best you can promise) also by a superior command incapable of giving you that
which now I offer, and that all kind of misery follow which the sword
necessarily brings with it, I beseech you impute it not to him, who willingly
shall approve himself

From my Leaguer this 2. of April, 1646. Your very loving friend, J. Birch.

Gentlemen, the weightnesse of this business is such, that I conceive it will
require some time of consultation; and I am loath to debar you of that, or any
thing else that may tend to your safety; therefore it shall content me to
receive your Answer to morrow by 12. of the Clock: And in the mean time, if
you desire it, all acts of Hostility shall be forborne on the behalf of

J. B. For Sir Mich: Woodhouse, Governor of the Town and Castle of Ludlow,
and the Bailiffes and Aldermen of the same Town.

The Governors Answer.
Sir,
I Received yours, directed to many, but finding my self particularly
entrusted by His Majesty's Commission in what you demand, I return this to
your several Objections. As for the avoiding of bloodshed, or ruin of any, I
shall ever endeavor it, so far as my condition affords in discharge of that
trust reposed in me, and shall be assenting to what may procure the same, as
befits the loyalty of a subject, and faith of a Soldier, resolving to sacrifice
all, rather then to violate either, but shall willingly embrace any general
preservation. Sir, you seem to be careful of us in this Garrison, but in
following this your advice, I and the rest shall forfeit more then we can
regaine; but your civility obliges, wherein a soldier may requite, I cannot
admit of your several reasons for delivery of this place, neither are the
actions of others cited by you, without farther consideration, any warrantable
president at all for me. As for the terms that others have had which you call
Honorable, I cannot find any at all Honorable for me, at this present,
without receiving His Majesty's Command for what I act. Indeed I wonder this
Garrison should be demanded of me, for I have been certainly informed that His
Majesty has made a free offer of it himself to the Parliament, and in
delivering of it, I might prevent His Majesty's intention, and prejudice you,
for doubtless it should be more acceptable from the Master, then the Servant;
As for any under my protection, I shall endeavor their preservation as my own,
and what ruin or extremity shall happen, doubtless it will be imputed to the
Actors of it: As for your Summons to this Town and Castle, I cannot assent unto
it, neither with my allegiance, or honor of a Soldier, in the condition I am
now in to resist you; but to show my self willing to avoid the appearance of
ruin, which must necessarily fall upon many, if extremity be made choice of,
I shall willingly condescend to what may avoid it, as befits a Soldier, and
shall if you condescend unto it send two Gentlemen to the King to know his
pleasure, which I conceive will be the easiest way for both Parties. Sir, to
this I desire your answer, and rest

Ludlow Castle, May 2. 1646. Your humble Servant, M. WOODHOUSE.
Postcript.
Sir, I desire that this Trumpeter upon the delivery of the Letter, may be
returned, and I shall be ready to receive your Answer, when you shall be
pleased to send it.

For Colonel John Birc^ these,

SIR, On Friday the 1. of this instant May, the General faced Oxford within
musket shot of the works; the Enemy only looked on us: that night the Genesis
quartered at Garsington, on Saturday the 2. the General marched to Heddington,
within a mile of Oxford, which for ought I know, will be the place for the
Headquarters, till Oxford be surrendered, or taken by storm: we have set out
several Posts, viz. at Hedding^on, two Regiments, the Generals and Col.
Overtons: At Marston two Regiments, Major Genesis S^ippons, and Col. Harlowes: At
Cowly two Regiments, Sir Hardresse Wallers, and Col. Herberts. The Train of
Artillery is at Elisfield. Prince Rupert sent a Letter to Col. Trever, to have
liberty for himself and others to be admitted to pass forth, for their liberty
and safety, as many as can steal away. The Lord St. Paul, the Lord Storton, the
Lady Digby, and the Countess of Hartford, and others of quality would fain
come in; but the General will treat only for the surrender, and all together,
where His M^j^sty is, neither we, nor the Soldiery in Oxford can ^^ll. Last
Wednesday they kept a Fast in Oxford, and then the Priests told them in their
Pulpits, that the King is gone to London; but their eyes being opened by a few
days experience, I believe they will be willing to surrender Oxford. The
General has sent Col. VVeldens Forces to block up Wallingford on the one
side, as the Forces from Reading and Henley do it on the other: On Sunday the
third of this instant, we took some Packets that came from London directed to
the King, and others. This day a great part of the Enemies Foot came over the
Bridge, and made a flourish on this side the River; but we no sooner began to
move, but they immediately vanished: we are raising a Work within musket shot
of the Enemies Works of Oxford, they have shot two pieces at us, but done us
no harm at all* Sir Marmaduke Roydon the Governor of Farringdon is dead. I
have sent you here enclosed, the Copy of a Proclamation that was published in
all the adjacent Parishes near Oxford, by order from the General.

Your Servant, W. T.
Heddington the 4 of May, 1646.

Sir Charles Compton has come from Oxford to treat with the General for Sir
William Compton about B^nbury, and agreed, that it shall be surrendered, with
all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition, to Colonel Whaley for the use of the
Parliament.



By Sir Thomas Fairfax, Knight, Commander in Chief of the Parliaments Forces.
Whereas I have appointed a free Market to be kept every day in the week (the
Lords day excepted) at the Leaguer before Oxford: I do therefore hereby
strictly Charge and Command all and every the Inhabitants of the Countyes of
Oxford and Berks within two miles of the said Leaguer to provide and bring in
or cause to be brought into the head quarters in the way of a free market,
competent provisions of Corn, Flesh, Cheese, Bread, Butter, Hay, Oats,
Beans, and all other kind of Victuals, provisions, and other necessaries for
the use of the Army, for which they shall receive ready money, and herein I
expect their ready conformity, as they tender the service of the State, and
will answer the contrary at their peril.

And for their better encouragement, I do hereby strictly charge and command
all Officers and soldiers, and other persons whatsoever, that they do not
presume upon any pretense whatsoever, to stop, seize, impresse or take away any
of the horses, cattle, or goods, passing or repassing, to and from the said
market, upon pain of death without mercy, and touching the regulating of the
sail market, and for the preventing of disorder therein, I do by these presents
prohibit all forestalling, and retailing in the same: commanding that no
soldier, or other person or persons whatsoever, presume to buy, or cause to be
bought, any provisions, or things whatsoever, coming toward the said market
to be sold there, before the same be in the head quarters, to be sold in the
open market, upon the forfeiture of the value of the goods so by him or them
bought, and suffer punishment, as by the Council of War.

Given under my hand and seal, at Heddington this 4. day of May, 1646. T.
FAIRFAX.

FINIS.

