A Copy of the ARTICLES FOR THE SVRENDER OF The City of YORK.

July the 16. 1644.

depiction of thistle depiction of Tudor rose

LONDON, Printed by G. B. for Robert Bostock, and Samuel Gellibrand, Dwelling
in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

Articles agreed upon between Alexander Earl of Leven, General of the Scottish
Forces, Fardinando Lord Fairefax, and the Earl of Manchester, Generals of the
English Forces about York, on the one part; And Sir Thomas Glemham Knight,
Governor of the City of York, and Colonel General of the Northern Army, on
the other Part, anent the surrender and delivery of the said City, with the
Forts, Towers, Canon, Ammunition, and furniture of War, belonging thereunto,
in manner after specified, to the said Generals, for the use of King and
Parliament, the 15. day of July, 1644.
I. THe said Sir Thomas Glenham, as Governor of the said City, shall surrender
and deliver up the same, with the Forts, Towers, Canon, Ammunition, and
furniture of War belonging thereunto, betwixt this and the 16. of July
instant, at or about the Eleventh hour thereof, in the fore-noon, to the said
Generals, or any in their names, for the use aforesaid, in manner, and upon
the Conditions after written.

II. That the Governor, and all Officers and Soldiers, both of Horse and
Foot, the Governors and Officers, and Soldiers of Clifford Tower, the
Officers and Soldiers of the Sconse, the Officers and Soldiers belonging to
the Train and Outworks, shall march out of the City, on Horseback, and with
their Arms, flying Colors, Drums beating, Matches lighted on both ends,
Bullet in their mouth, with all their Bag and Baggage, and that every
Soldier shall have Twelve charges of Powder.

III. That the Officers and Soldiers shall not March above Ten miles a day;
That they have Accommodation of Quarter, and conveniencie of Carriages; That a
Troop of Horse out of every of the Three Armies shall attend upon them for
their Convoy in their March. That no Injury nor Affront be offered them to
Skipton, or the next Garrison Town, within 16. miles of the Princes Army.

IIII. That such Officers and Soldiers that are sick or hurt, and cannot march
out of the Town, shall have liberty to stay within, until they be recovered,
and then shall have Passage given them to go unto the Princes Army, wherever
it shall be, or to their own Houses and Estates, where they may rest quiet, or
whether else they shall please. That it may be recommended to my Lord Fairefax
for their subsistence, during their Cure, or being ill.

V. That all Officers and Soldiers Wives, Children and Servants now in the
Town, may have liberty to go along with their Husbands, or to them, or if
they please to return to their own houses, and Estates to enjoy them under
such Contributions as the rest of the County pays. That they may have liberty
to carry with them their goods, and have a convenient time, and Carriages
allowed them to carry them away.

VI. That no Officer, or Soldier be stopped or Plundered upon their March.

VII. That no man shall entice any Officer or Soldier, as we march out of the
Town, with any Promise of preferment or reward, or any other ground whatsoever.

VIII. That the Citizens or Inhabitants may enjoy all their Privileges, which
formerly they did at the beginning of these Troubles, and may have freedom of
Trade both by Land and Sea, paying such Duties and Customs, as all other
Cities and Towns under the Obedience of King and Parliament.

IX. That the Garrison which shall be placed here, shall be two parts of three
at the least of Yorkshire men, and no free Quarter shall be put upon any,
without his own consent, and that the Army shall not enter the City.

X. That in all Charges, Resiants and Inhabitants shall bear only such part
with the County at large, as was formerly used in all other Assessments.

XI. That all Citizens, Gentlemen, Resiants, Sojournors, and every other Person
within the City, shall at any time when they please, have free liberty to
remove themselves, their Families and goods, and to dispose thereof, and of
their estates at their pleasures, according to the Laws of the Land, either to
live at their own Houses, or else where, and to enjoy their goods and estates,
without molestation, and to have Protection and Safeguard for that purpose, so
that they may rest quietly at their own aboads, and to travel freely and
safely about their occasions* and for their better removal, they may have
Letters of safe Conduct, and be furnished with Horses and Carriages, paying for
these Carriages reasonable Rates*

XII. That all those Gentlemen and others whatsoever that have goods within the
City, and are absent themselves, may have free liberty to take, carry away, and
dispose of those goods, as in the last Article.

XIII. That neither Churches, nor other Buildings be defaced, nor any
Plundering or taking of any man's Person, or of any part of his estate, and that
Justice according to Law, within the City, shall be Administered in all cases by
the Magistrate, and be assisted therein, if need be, by the Garrison.

XIIII. That all Persons, whose dwellings are in the City, though now absent,
may have the benefit of these Articles, as if they were present within the City.

Tho. Glemham.

FINIS.

