A LETTER OF THE EARL OF CORK, TO THE STATE AT DVBLIN; AND Sent over from
thence by the Governor, to his LADY in London.

Wherein is showed the barbarous cruelty the Rebels have lately used to twenty
of the Lord Barrimoores men at Cool, killing and spoiling all the rest of the
English there.

And how my Lord Barrimoore burned and spoiled their Country, and killed all
the Rebels he could light upon.

Also the taking of Rochfords Castle, killing the Captain and four hundred of
the Rebels

Another defeat wherein two hundred and forty of the Rebels were killed, with
little loss to the English: Likewise the taking of Barnehely Castle, wherein
were found a thousand barrels of Wheat, with other provision and Victuals.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Blackmore, May the ninth, 1642.

A Letter of the Earl of Cork, to the State at Dublin; and sent over from
thence by the Governor, to his LADY in London.
THe Earl of Barrimoore making a visit here to me to see his Lady and
Children, had ten of his horse and ten of his foot, all proper men and English,
surprised in the night time at Cool by the Condons; Who set Mr. Baynards house
afire wherein they were, which they defended and killed several of the Rebels,
till the house began to fall down about their ears; The Rebels seeing their
resolution, offered them quarter, which they accepted, upon promise to depart
with their horses and Arms: But the English Soldiers no sooner came forth,
but they contrary to their promise, disarmed and stripped them; the Rebels
being three hundred in number, of which the principal Leaders were Richard and
John Condon, two Sons of David Condon, who is now in custody in Dublin. I pray
therefore move the Lords Justices, that he may be committed to the Castle, for
those two wicked bloody sons of his and their Followers; after they had
disarmed and stripped the Soulders, and possessed themselves of their Arms and
their (...) horses; they most savagely hacked and hewed them in pieces, cutting
out their tongues and their privy members and killed and spoiled all the rest
of the English in that my Town; neither age nor sex, exempted any; For they
killed old women, blind men, and such women as were with child, and ripped the
children out of their bellies and left them lying dead together. The news
whereof being brought to the Earl of Barrimore, he presently posted home, and
with his Forces burned and spoiled their whole Country, killing all he could
light upon; giving them no other quarter than the Condons gave his men at Cool.

Sir Robert Trevers his Castles of Rochfords Town near Cork, was the
rendevouz of the Lord of Muskery, and for all the prime Gentlemen that were
Rebels in the Werstern parts, which they termed the Catholic Camp, and
fortified it by the directions of old Colonel Garret Barry, who with the Lord
of Muskery was a little before retired to Kinsale, which unhappy Town is
revolted and given up unto them. So as we have no Towns in Munster, holds good
for the Crown, but Cork, this Town Youghall, and Bandanbridge: For Limrick has
taken of the Wards of the Castle, imprisoned them, and M. Courtney Constable of
the Castle; This City entertaines all Rebels that come to them, and therefore
it is easy to be judged what their inclinations are.

The eleventh of this Month, Muskery employed a strong party of men to take the
prey that was under the walls of Cork, whereof they being possessed, and the
Lord President being sick within the walls; the Lord of Insequine, and Sir
Charles Vavisor, the one with the horse, and the other with the foot, sallyed
out, but the nimble foot kerns got such a start of them, as our foot were not
able to overtake them; whereupon the horse galloped after them, and entertained
them in fight till our foot recovered up, who with great courage set upon them,
recovered the prey, and killed so many of them as they could serve upon; for
the bog that was near them; With which good success they being fleshed, they
resolved in their return to attempt their best upon the Fortification and
Castle of Rochfords Town; Whereunto they gave a great and fierce assault, and
Captain Seogave, Master Finunis Brother having chief command there, made a
strong defense, so long as his Powder lasted, (for thanks be to God, with that
commodity they are sparingly furnished) which is a great part of our
happiness: But in in the end our men's courage overcame all opposion; So as
they entered and gave them Condons quarter at Cool, for they killed their
Captain, and all the rest that were in it, being about four hundred, except
three Pipers, whom they caused to play before their Captains head, which they
brought upon a Pole to Cork, and there they were put out of tune and their
music ended, for they were all hanged up; They found in the Castle very good
booty and provision, and amongst the rest, choice Armor of the Lord of
Muskeries, M. Carty Teaghe, and Swallirant; and all the choice of them are
retired into their sevetal Countries, expecting to be supplied with Powder by
some shipping to come into the West, and have left the Lord Roach in great
discontent and distress to shelter himself, in an open Champion Country,
where I hope we shall give him work enough. If we had more men and money, of
which two principal materials we are very defective, and are likely to be till
God sends my son Dungarven back, who was employed by the Parliament to the
King at Tork, which will retard his return with such aids as hinders many of
our attempts.

The day following, this defeat given to the Lord Muskery, my Castle of
Rathgogg^^, wherein Sir Pierce Smiths Father-in-law, M. Robert Mend is my
Constable, and wherein I keep a strong Ward, being besieged and distressed for
want of fuel only, was relieved by Captain William Ieps^^, and Lieutenant
Downing, and their Forces, which being done, they burned and preyed the
Country: and in their return, Sir Edward Fitz-Harris Bartonet, with some five
hundred of the Lord Roaches tatter demallians, intended to intercept them and
their prey, but they politikely drew them from their strength, till they got
them into plain ground where their horses might charge them, which they did so
furiously, as they killed their Captain, took the Lieutenant with the Ensign
and his Colors, and killed above two hundred and forty of them, and so
returned without any great loss. Goggans Castle of Barnhely which stands upon
the Sea in the Barrony of Kerry-wherry, was the Magazine of store for the
Rebels in that Barrony; On Friday last, Sir Charles Vavisor boated from Cork
two Pieces of Ordnance with a party of Musketeers, and failed thither, and
landed one of his Pieces of Ordnance; The Lord Insequine with his horse went by
land and met him there: And upon discharging of the first Piece, the Ward
desired quarter, which was given them to depart with their swords and skeins
only: The Castle being surrendered, they found in it above one thousand Barrels
of wheat with other provision and vittuals; wherein they placed a Ward of
forty men, and returned to Cork unfought withal.

Thus you see how God in his mercy after the severe punishment he has laid
upon us for our sins, turns his favorable countenance upon us, and goes out
with our Armies, which I hope his grace and power will strengthen and defend
with like good success; If we might be supplied with more men and money hither
before they receive more Powder and Munition. When the Lord of Muskery and
Chieftaines in Carburry, and the rest after their loss had separated
themselves, as M. Carty Teagues people were marching near Bandon Bridge; my
Son Kinnalmeck with his Forces of horse and foot, sallied out of the Town and
set upon them, and as I hear had a very good day, but the certainty thereof is
not yet come unto me, for the ways are so blockt up with numerous Rebels, that
I have not since heard from him, but what I have by flying reports, which I
dare not certify without better assurance, although God be praised in all his
attemps hitherto he has had good success. My Son Broghill has drawn out
all the Musketeers that can be spared out of my Wards of the several Castles,
which I keep in those part, Mocollop Connyge Castle, Mogally Bally^^^ Castle,
(...) and Lisinny, with two Companies, which he takes with him from Lismoore
and (...) and two troops of horse with two Companies, that I mean to send over
this night by boat from hence to meet him about (...) has a design tomorrow
before day (God bless him) to scour all the Country to (...) and (...) and to
try his best upon Sir Nicholas Welsh, Captain (...) Captain Fitz-Gerrald and
the rest, that with their Banners dispayed daily, affront us in the sight of
this Town, the good success I hope shortly to relate to the Lords Justices and
Counsel,

Signed, Cork.
From Youghall the 20 of April, Badmily writ this later part.
My Lord Broghils troop and my Lord Dungarvens with some foot from Lismore, and
Capoquin, and Captain Thornton out of this Town; with a hundred and fifty foot
went over the water, and have burned Antony Russels house and all the houses
for the most part there abouts, and have killed three hundred of the Rebels
already, and still are in pursuit of them, and have pillaged all the Country.



Die Martis 3 Maii 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled; That the Persons
entrusted with the ordering of the Militia of the City of London, shall have
power to draw the Trained Bands of the City into such usual and convenient
places within three miles of the said City, as to them from time to time shall
seem fit, for the training and exercising of the Soldiers, and that the said
Soldiers upon Summons shall from time to time appear and not depart from
their Colors without the consent of their Officers, as they will answer their
contempt to the Parliament.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliam.


