A Humble ENDEAVOR Of some Plain and Brief EXPLICATION OF THE Decrees and
Operations of God, About the FREE ACTIONS of MEN: More Especially Of the
Operations of DIVINE GRACE.

Written by Mr. JOHN CORBET, late Minister of CHICHESTER.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel, 1683.

THE PREFACE.
THe things here discussed I have studied many years; and what, by the Writings
of Learned Men, and by discoursing with them, and by my own ratiocination,
grounded on the Holy Scripture, I have apprehended* nearest the Truth, which I
have been feeling after, I have collected in this narrow Scantling. I have been
led into this search, not out of vain Curiosity, but an honest Desire to gain
as clear a Knowledge in these Points, as I can reach to, that I might be able
with more assurance to unfold the same to others, as far as is requisite for
their Edification.

Though the Counsels and Ways of God cannot be found out unto Perfection, yet
the Light, of Scripture and Nature leads us to think and speak of them so as is
most agreeable to his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and so as his Justice and
Truth may be cleared, and the freeness and largeness of his Mercy magnified,
and that the glorious Power of his Grace, and the deplorable weakness of Fallen
Man, may be acknowledged, and that penitent Sinners may be sufficiently
encouraged, and that the impenitent may be evidently self-condemned.

That which is set down in this Enquiry, is mostly in order to the clearing and
confirming of the Principles here following.

1. The help of Divine Grace is the prime and main Cause of all the Good that
dwells in us, and that is done by us: But our own Wills are the main Cause of
the Evil that is done by us, and of our abiding in that Evil State into which
our Nature is fallen, and God is no Cause thereof at all.

2. God does decree to bring some to Salvation by his Free Grace and Love: And
he does not decree to damn any, but for sin, as the Cause of their damnation;
which sin he does not decree, nor effect* but foresee.

3. God does ascertain the Conversion and Salvation of his Elect; but he does
not effect it without their own concurrence in a subordinate way. I speak of
those that attain to the use of Reason, not of Infants, Idiots, and Madmen,
whose Case is of different and peculiar nature.

4. Though Election does infer a Certainty that the Elect shall attain to Grace
and Glory; yet Non-election does infer no Necessity of the sin and damnation of
the Non-elect, save only that which is called Necessitas consequentiae, or
Necessity in order of Argumentation, and is Necessity but improperly so called,
and implies no Necessitation of the Event.

5. Though God does not simply will the Event of the Conversion and Salvation
of all, to whom the Gospel is made known; yet he wills it so far, and in such
manner, as does abundantly declare his good will toward men; and does assure
the diligent of good success in their endeavors; and does convict the
negligent of being inexcusable despisers of his Grace toward them.

6. God has given us all some help of grace, more or less, in order to our
Spiritual Recovery. The said help may be improved by us to the obtaining of
more* And it is not Gods ordinary way to deny more help, or to withdraw what is
given, but upon the abuse of what is given, and the resisting of what is
offered, and for our not doing not only what we ought, but what we might do.

According to these Principles I have proceeded. My endeavor has been
accompanied with a sense of my own great defectiveness in the Knowledge of
these things: But I have done, as I was able, and am willing to know wherein
soever I have erred. The perfect clearing of all things, and the solving of all
doubts in these Mysterious Points, may be above the reach of mortal men. The
great Apostle said, We know but in part. But Truths of the greatest Moment and
Evidence may not be disbelieved or doubted of, because we cannot solve all
Difficulties about lesser and obscurer Questions relating to those grand Truths.

PART I. Of the Decrees of God about the Actions of Men.
1. What the Divine Decree of an Event does import.
TO Decree a Thing, is to will and purpose its coming to pass; and it supposes
that the Thing is judged Convenient. If it be a sure Decree, it implies that
the Decreer can and will so provide, that it shall infallibly come to pass.

Gods Decree of an Event, is a willing and purposing of it as Convenient. Its
Convenience he knows by the knowledge of simple intelligence; and being decreed,
he knows it as a Future Convenient, by the knowledge of Vision, and is pleased
with it.

As Gods Efficience is concerned in the Event decreed, the Decree of the Event
includes the Decree of the said Efficience. That whatsoever God does in time,
he has eternally decreed to do, I suppose is unquestionable. And for as much
as no Humane Act comes to pass without his concurse, he has undoubtedly
decreed the concurse that he yields to it. And there is the same reason of the
Decree of whatsoever on Gods part is antecedently necessary, as the giving of
all Necessary Power, Preparatives, Means, Concauses, Objects, all which are
unquestionably decreed of God.

2. The Divine Decree does not infer the Necessitation of the Event.
THough the Existence of the Event depends upon Gods Efficience, yet something
thereof he may put under the Creatures undetermined Liberty. Under this Liberty
he may put the comparative determination of the Will to act rather than not to
act, and to act toward such an Object rather than another. Surely it is too
high presumption for man to say, that God cannot Decree or firmly Will that
humane act, which is in part suspended on man's Will; for instance, to say God
could not decree Adam's Perseverance in the state of Innocence, if it were in
any part left to his own liberty to stand or fall.

Now if such an Assertion be an apparently presumptuous limitation of God,
besides other great inconveniences to be objected against it, then it may more
safely and rationally be held, that Gods Decree of a humane act is very
agreeable to the leaving of it in some part to the undetermined liberty of man's
will, though to unfold the Agreement be very difficult to humane Understanding.
In short, though the Decree cannot consist with the contrary Event, yet it may
consist with the possibility of the contrary, and so it does not in it self
infer a Necessitation of the thing decreed.

3. The Negation of the Decree does not infer an impossibility of the Event.
GOd's Decree is not necessary to an Event, by way of causation; Consequently
the negation of the Decree, is not a negation of what is causally necessary
thereunto; and so it does not infer an impossibility thereof. As for Example,
the Negation of Gods Decree of the Persevering Obedience of some Angels, was
not a negation of what was causally necessary thereunto, for then their
Perseverance had been impossible, which a sober judgment will not admit. The
nonexistence of a thing not decreed, follows the negation of the Decree, only
by a necessity of logical illation, but not of causal deficiency, or by a
negation of any necessary Cause.

There is a Power properly so called, or an adequate Power to an act,
wheresoever there is all the necessary causality of the first Cause, also the
Object and its necessary Position, and the Capacity and necessary
Predisposition of the Subject, and an aptitude of the Natural Powers, and the
necessary concurrence of all Concauses. And all these necessary Antecedents to
an Act may, and commonly do meet, where there is no Divine Decree of the Act,
as is undeniable in the Case of the lapsed Angels, whose Perseverance was fully
Possible, yet certainly not Future.

As Man has a power to do that which God foreknows he will not do, so he has
a Power to do that, which God has not decreed that he shall do.

As it is rightly said, that it Cannot come to pass that any Good will exist
without the Divine Decree; so it is as rightly said, that it Cannot come to
pass that any Good will exist without the Divine Prescience. But the Cannot in
both Instances is in respect of Illation, not of Causation.

4. The indetermination of Man's Will does not infer the Uncertainty of God's
Decree.
A Thing may be certainly Future that is under the undetermined liberty of the
Will. Man's Power and Liberty of doing otherwise than God has decreed, does no
more infer a possibility of the frustration of his Decrees, than his Power and
Liberty of doing otherwise, than God has foreknown he will do, does infer an
uncertainty of Gods foreknowledg. Now it is undeniable, that God can certainly
foreknow, that a man will do that which he has power not to do; and that he
will not do that which he has power to do. Adam had power to resist the
Temptation, which God foreknew he would yield to.

The Power it self to do otherwise than as God has decreed, is foreknown and
decreed; and it is also foreknown and decreed, That the said Power shall not do
otherwise, God's Decree is according to his Foreknowledg, which is to us
incomprehensible.

5. God decrees all the Good that comes to pass.
IT is the perfection of God, as God, to be the Author of all Good as well
Moral as Physical, as well of common as of saving Grace. And to be the Author
of it, is to decree and procure that it be done.

As it is the perfection of the Divine Intellect to understand all that is
Intelligible; so it is the perfection of the Divine Will to choose all that is
eligible, or fittest to be chosen to come to pass.

It is agreeable to the perfection of Gods Providence, that all the Good that
is done in the World, should be decreed, and infallibly brought to pass by him.

As undoubtedly God does effect every good Act that comes to pass, so
undoubtedly he does decree it. For whatsoever is the Object of Divine Operation
is also the Object of Divine Volition.

Every good Act is an End, or a Means to an End, in the Course of Gods
Providence; and therefore it is decreed of him. All the Ends of Providence are
determined, and consequently the Means to be made use of for the same are
likewise determined.

Though I do not affirm, that Gods Foreknowledg and Decree are of equal extent,
yet it seems not congruous that his Foreknowledg should be active, and his
Purpose or Will not active to any future Good.

Gods Foreknowledg of Evil infers, though not a Decree of it, yet a Decree
about it, that it shall be so and so disposed of for good; so that by those,
who do what he wills not, he accomplisheth what he wills.

6. God does not Will or Decree Sin.
IT must needs be held that whatsoever God does, he wills to do; and whatsoever
is the Effect of his agency, he wills the same. Consequently, whatsoever he
does about a sinful Act, he wills to do it; and whatsoever is the Effect of his
Agency about the said Act, he wills the same. Now there is a concurse of God,
as the Universal Cause, to every Act, and therefore to every sinful Act as an
Act; that is, to so much as is in the general Nature of the said act. And so
much as this comes to, he wills, which is not Sin, but only the Substratum
Peccati.

But as he does not concur to the sinful Act, as it is this Act in specie, and
not the contrary; so he does not Will and Decree the Act, as such in specie.
How the Divine concurse is yielded to sinful actions, shall be explained in it
proper place, under the Head of Gods Efficience.

God Permits Sin. But to Permit Sin is not to Will it, but only not to
Prevent its coming to pass.

God does not Will the Essence, therefore he does not Will the Event or
Existence of sin. For the Existence of sin is but its Essence extra causas, or
in actual being. To say that God does not Will the Essence of sin, but that the
Essence thereof exist, is very odd, and to me unintelligible. The Event or
Existence of Sin is the Object of Gods Hatred, therefore it cannot be the
Object of his Will. For the does not Will what he hates.

If God wills the Existence of Sin, he wills the committing of it; and if
he wills the committing of sin, then the committing of Sin is the fullfilling
of his Will; and if it be the fullfilling of his Will, it is the Object of his
Complacence, and then he has Complacence in the Violation of his Law.

Sin has no Good in it, and it works no good. It Is not sin, but the feeling
knowledge of sin, that works Humillation and repentance.

It is to be noted, That God does not Will whatsoever he does not Nill. Between
Volition and Nolition there is a middle thing, viz. Non-volition.

Though God does not simply Nill the Existence of sin, yet he Nills it so far,
as that he hates it, and severely forbids it, and gives Necessary Power to
avoid it.

7. there is no need of holding that Sin is decreed of God.
IF the aforesaid Arguments be not strong enough to prove, That God does not
decree Sin; yet there is no need for any one, in order to the salving of Gods
Providence; to hold that he does decree it.

The Existence of Sin, foreseen indeed, but not decreed, God makes advantage of
for his Holy Ends, it being under his Ruling Power. He Wills the Good
occasioned by Sin, but he Wills not Sin as the occasion of Good. All the Good
that follows Sin (not as the End follows the Means, but as health follows the
disease) is decreed of God.

Seeing God overrules all the Inclinations and Actions of his Creatures, his
not decreeing of Sin does not at all lessen his Providence about sinful Actions.

8. A Decree to permit Sin is not necessary.
TO Permit, is not to Act, and not to Act is nothing; and of nothing there is
no Decree, at least there is no need of a Decree. No more is needful to a
Not-being, than Gods not Willing and not Effecting. Consequently, there is no
Decree of the Permission of Sin, at least, there is no necessity of holding
such a Decree.

It may be Objected, That a Non-esse is the Object of Gods Will, when he wills
that some Evil Action shall not come to pass. The answer is, That in such a
case the thing that God properly wills, is his restraining and limiting of men's
evil Inclinations and Actions, and the Non-esse of those Actions is said to be
willed by him, but improperly and reductively, as being the Consequent of that
which he properly Wills. And his Will is further terminated on the good
Consequence of his preventing the said Evil Actions.

It may be likewise objected, If a man may rightly say, I will or Purpose to
permit, why may not God rightly say so? The answer is, that when a man makes
such a Determination, it commonly means a Purpose of restraining the
Inclination or Will, that is or may be in him, to hinder the thing; and the
said Purpose is further terminated on the Consequents of the Permission, and
the ordering of them. So God may be said to Will, or Purpose a Permission, as
he wills or purposes the limiting of his restraining Agency, and as this Will
and purpose is also terminated on the Consequents of the thing permitted, and
the disposal thereof by his Providence.

9. The Effect of Sin may be the Object of Gods Decree.
THough God decree no man's sin, yet he may decree the Effect which sinners
cause by sin. So God decreed the death of Christ, and the passive constupration
of David's Concubines, but he decreed not the sin of the Actors. Accordingly
such places of holy Scripture, as seem to import Gods Willing the sins of men,
do indeed signify no more than the Effects of their sins as willed by him.

Though sin has no Good in it, and works nothing Good in it self, and cannot
be willed of God as a thing convenient, or conducible; yet it may be an
occasion of the greatest Good, and it may work an Effect, which, though bad in
it self, (I mean Physically bad) may be conducible to Good, and so far the
Effect may be willed as convenient.

If it be objected, That a Decree of the Effect (one would think) does imply a
Decree of the Cause. The answer is, 1. That the mere decreeing of a thing,
includes no more than a willing that it shall be, joined with a Knowledge of its
convenience. And so a Decree of the Effect of sin, does imply a Foreknowledg of
the conducibility of that Effect to some Good; yet it no way implies a Decree
of the sin, but only a Foreknowledg of it. 2. Though God does not Decree man's
sin, yet he decrees his own concurse to the Act in its general nature, but not
as morally specified. He decrees also the disposing and ordering of all
Concauses and necessary Antecedents of the Effect, which sinners accomplish*
And this, with his Foreknowledg of the sin it self, suffices to a Decree of
such an Effect

10. Of the Futurition of Sin from Eternity.
THat the Futurition of sin is from Eternity, is no Argument that Gods Decree
is the Cause thereof. For Futurition in not a real Being distinct from the
thing future, but it is merely a respect of reason or conception of the mind
about it; and it requires no distinct Cause from the Future thing it self. No
real Being is Eternal, but God, and Eternal Futurition is but ens rationis; and
an extrinsick denomination of the Divine Mind as conceiving it.

The Cause whereby a thing does exist in Time, is the Cause whereby it was
Eternally Future; though the Cause did not exist from Eternity; as the Cause,
whereby a thing sometime was, is the Cause why it shall be a thing past even to
Eternity, though that Cause do not exist to Eternity.

11. Of Gods Eternal Prescience of Sin.
GOd does Foresee whatsoever is Future, and of determinate verity, by the mere
Infinity and Eternity of his Understanding. And no other Cause is to be
supposed necessary to his Foreknowledg of sin.

That there can be no Futurity, of a determinate Verity, the Causes whereof are
undeterminate, must be proved by the Asserters thereof. That a thing will be,
suffices to the truth of its Futurity, without consideration from what Cause
it will be. And who can say that Futurity is not by it self intelligible, or
that God cannot Foreknow what a Creature, acting freely and contingently, will
do? Let it be noted, that the thing under consideration is, what the Infinity
of the Divine Understanding can reach unto.

12. In what Sense Benefits are absolutely decreed of God.
IN whatsoever Order God does bring any thing to pass in Time, he decreed from
Eternity to bring it to pass in the very same Order.

There (...) (...) use of Means requisite to the bringing to p^ss of that Good
which is decreed; and God wills also, that those Conditions shall be
performed, and those Means used; and so in the issue he absolutely wills all
those Benefits that come to pass.

That which God does not, but upon conditions, he absolutely Decreed to do, and
he absolutely Decreed to do it upon such Conditions. So that the Decree is
absolute, though the thing Decreed be Conditional.

13. Punishments are not alike absolutely Decreed, yet in some sense absolutely.
THough the Favors and Benefits, that are given conditionally, be absolutely
decreed, because the giving of the Conditions is decreed also; yet the
Punishments, that are inflicted, are not alike absolutely decreed; because the
sins, which are the Condition, or the Meritorious Cause thereof, are not
decreed. But in regard of Gods certain Foreknowledg of those sins, which merit
the decreed Punishments, the Decree thereof does not hang in suspense, and it
may be rightly said, that the Punishments are so far absolutely decreed.

He that certainly foresees the Condition of the decreed Event, absolutely
wills it, though he wills not the Condition. And so God's Omniscience
proves that he has at no instant a will properly Conditional, that is,
suspended upon a Condition, as to the Act it self, though the Event decreed be
so suspended.

14. Of the diversity and order of Gods Decrees.
ALl the Decrees of God are one, as in him; but they have a formal diversity in
respect of the Objects and Effects, in which regard we must necessarily think
and speak of them as diverse.

According to this diversity Predestination includes diverse Decrees, among
which these are notable, viz. a Decree of Redemption, a Decree of the first
Saving Grace, or Conversion, a Decree of Perseverance, and a Decree of Glory.

All the Decrees of God are executed in certain Order, the Design whereof was
eternally included in the very Decrees. And the Order of the Decrees, as to our
apprehension of them, is most safely and conveniently laid down according to
the order of their Execution. But to insist upon a Priority and Posteriority of
Intention in the Divine Intellect and Will, is found lubricous and
incommodious, and it is no way necessary.

15. Diverse Decrees have diversely qualified Objects.
IN the Divine Decrees, diversified from their Objects, the Objects are
considered as diversely qualified. Gods Decree to glorify a Person, has the
Object otherwise qualified, than the Object of his Decree of giving Faith; it
being certain, that the condition which is necessary to Glorification, is not
necessary to effectual Vocation.

It is to be noted, That though the diverse Decrees have their special Objects,
considered or foreknown as diversely qualified, yet none of them have any
Exterior Cause. It argues no more dependence of God on the Creature, to
terminate his Volition or Decree only on a Qualified Subject, than to terminate
his Efficient Power and Will on such a Qualified Subject, and no other, as it
is most certain that he does. And that hereupon his Decree is not a thing in
suspense, has been already showed.

16. Of Absolute Election.
THere is a Predestination or Absolute Election of Particular Persons to
Eternal Life. For God does decree to give Eternal Life upon certain Conditions,
and he does also Decree to give those Conditions to Certain Persons.

That God does in Certain Persons effect all the Conditions of Salvation, or
that he gives and maintains in them from time to time that Grace that shall
infallibly end in Salvation, is undeniable by them, who believe that any are
saved. And the Donation of such Grace does evidently prove his Eternal Purpose
thereof. For nothing is more evident, than that God Decrees whatsoever he
Effects.

This Absolute Election proceeds according to Gods Foreknowledg, I mean the
Foreknowledg both of the infallible Efficacy of his own Grace which he has
purposed toward his Elect, and also of the Free Determination of their Wills
by the same Grace. So that God foresees no Good in them, but what he has
decreed to give them; and it is also true, that he Foresees that they will use
their own Liberty under his Grace as they ought to do.

17. Of a general Conditional Decree of Salvation.
GOd does not decree the Salvation of those that are not saved. To say that God
does decree the Salvation of all, upon Condition, is, I think, an improper way
of speaking. There is indeed a Decree, that all, without exception, by whom
God's Conditions are performed, shall be saved. But this is no other than the
decreeing of the general Law of Grace, and is wholly another thing than the
Decree of Election. General Election sounds as a Contradiction in the Terms.

18. Of Non-Election.
FOr as much as God has not decreed such Grace to all, as does infallibly end
in Eternal Salvation, there are some Non-Elect.

Mere Non-Election is no Decree. It is not a Nolition to give that Grace which
accompanies Salvation, but a bare Non-Volition thereof.

There is indeed something more than a bare not-willing, even a nilling to give
such Grace. But then it is a positive will of a judicial Denying of Grace,
which never takes place, but upon supposition of precedent wilful sin; and it
is a thing much different from Non-Election.

19. The Non-Election of some, agreeable to the Wisdom, and consistent with the
Goodness of God.
IT is agreeable to the Wisdom of Gods Government, to Decree the salvation of
some, but not of all; And in not decreeing the salvation of all, there is no
want of Goodness in God. For that any miss of Salvation, it is not through any
omission on God's part, but through men's neglect to do their part.

That the Non-Elect are not under an impossibility of being saved is evident
from the Position before proved, That the negation of Gods Decree does not
infer an impossibility of the Event.

20. Of Positive Reprobation.
POsitive Reprobation, or the Decree of Damnation, is not Arbitrary; nor is it
absolute in that sense as the Decree of Salvation or Election is. For where God
decrees to save, he decrees likewise all the pre-requisite Conditions of
Salvation. But he decrees Damnation only upon foresight of final Impenitence,
or dying in a state of sin; but that Impenitence or sinful state he does not
decree.

Indeed the Obduration, that is Judicial, God decrees, yet not Arbitrarily, but
upon Foresight of men's Voluntary Impenitence and Hardness. And in this Judicial
Obduration, I do not mean that God decrees the penal sin it self, but his own
Righteous Judgment, upon which the sin follows.

There is no Positive Decree that Few shall be Converted, only the Conversion
of the greater number is not decreed.

Nor does God Decree the Salvation of men upon such Conditions, as make the
Salvation of most men impossible; but the Conditions of being saved are such as
do abundantly testify the Goodness of God in the salvability of men in general.

21. In what sense God is said to Will the Conversion and Salvation of all.
THe Conversion and Salvation of men is sincerely designed in Gods Public
Declarations and Proposals, as the nearest and proper End thereof.

That they should turn and live is pleasing to his Will by a simple
complacency; and he has no complacence in their Sin, nor in their damnation,
as in it self considered.

He is so far willing of the Event, as that he does most earnestly and strictly
command it, and persuade it by most powerful and gracious Motives, and gives
such a measure of help, as will make them happy, if they make use of it; and
leaves them without excuse, if they do it not. And nothing is lacking on his
Part, that is meet for him to do toward it, in point of Justice or Grace.

But it is certain that he does not simply and absolutely Will the Event, that
never comes to pass. Nor is it congruous to his Government of men in their
state of trial, in order to a Future State of Recompense, that he should
absolutely Will the Event of all that he commands to be done.

Nevertheless Gods will is effectual to that which he wills, so far as he
wills it. His will of the Event is always effectual, as to the Event. His
Will of Command, Counsel, and Persuasion is always effectual as to the making
of Duty, and to the unfeigned signification of his Grace toward men, and of
his simple Complacence in their Happiness.

PART II. Of the Operations of God about the Actions of Men.
1. God is the Cause of all Good.
AS there is a Divine Decree, so there is a Divine Efficience of all the Good,
as well Moral as Physical, as well of common as of saving Grace, that ever
comes to pass. It is the perfection of God, as God, to be the Author of all
Good; and to be the Author of it, is to Decree and Effect it.

2. Of Gods Agency about Humane Actions, and the Natural Liberty of Man's Will.
GOds part in all Humane Acts is to us unsearchable; but this is sure, that the
way of his Operation on man is agreeable to the Nature of Man, who is a free
Agent.

The Natural Liberty of the Will is not a perfect Indifferency, but an
Indetermination with a Power of self-determining.

This self-determining Power of the Will makes us capable Subjects of Gods
Moral Government by Laws. And its present indetermination between Good and Evil
is not a state absolutely best, but most suitable to a Creature during his
Probation in Order to a Future Confirmation.

3. The Self-Determining Power of the Will is no Derogation from God.
THat which is ascribed to the Creature, does not always detract from the
Creator. For much of his Honor is in the nobleness of his Creature. It his
honor to make a Creature of so noble a Faculty as is this of
self-determination. And the Faculty and Exercise of it Exists no otherwise,
than as upheld and actuated by him.

The denying of this Self-determining Power, in design of ascribing the more to
God, is clogged with these incongruities; 1. Of limiting his Power, as not able
to make a Self-determining Creature. 2. Of overthrowing his Moral Government by
Laws.

Notwithstanding this noble Faculty, man's will is not independently free, but
God is still Lord of it, and disposes it according to the counsel of his own
will, and can do with it as he pleases, by a sapiential Government, without a
necessitating hand over it. Yet that there may be, and sometimes is, a Divine
Predetermination of it, is not here denied.

4. Of Gods Physical and Moral Operation upon Man's Will.
IT is most congruous to the Nature of reasonable Creatures, that the general
course of Gods Government over them should be by Moral Means. And it is also
congruous that the Father of Spirits, the God in whom we live, move, and have
our being, should have an inward and most intimate access to our Spirits in his
Operations.

God acts by his Essence, and not by an Act, that is an accident in him. In his
Physical Agency what there is between his Essence and man's Act, effected by the
said agency, may be above the understanding of mortals to apprehend. Some
Express it by an inward urgency to the act, whereby the mind is more disposed
to it, than it was before. All that I can speak of it is this, That the said
urgency denotes no act of God besides his Essence, but it is God himself so
urging or influencing the mind of man without any alteration in himself.

5. Of Commmon Concurse and Gracious Operation.
IT is most generally and safely said by Divines, that Gods Acts on the part of
the Agent are all one, and all Eternal, as being his Essence; and that on the
part of the Objects and Effects they are many, and some of them new and
temporary. It is likewise wisely and humbly said, that the comprehending of
this passes the understanding of mortal men.

In a sinners turning to God, and in every holy act, there is besides a common
concurse from God, as the Fountain of Nature, a special Influence from him, as
the Fountain of Grace. The diversity of the said Concurse and Influence is
undiscernible by us in it self, but in the Effects it is made manifest to us.
And that, which on Gods part has no difference, is diversified to us in the
Effect.

6. God does not Operate to the uttermost.
GOds Agency upon Man's will is not always in the same, but generally in very
different degrees. For he does not operate to the uttermost, or to the infinity
of his Power, in every Effect that is wrought by him. It is true, that God is
Infinite in Power, and whatsoever he does, he does it with an omnipotent
facility. But that his Power is equally or always irresistibly put forth in all
his Agency on the Creature I apprehend not. For if it were so, it would follow,
that whatsoever is brought to pass, comes under the highest Necessitation.

7. God may so operate as to leave the Effect in part to Man's Will.
THat in some Cases God should Irresistibly Predetermine the Will to a good
Act, is not against its Essential Liberty. For such Predetermination is not
inconsistent with a Self-determining Power, but only supposes it to be subject
to God's Omnipotence. And it being to a good act, it is a Premotion perfective
of our Nature, and to its well-being, and therefore not unbecoming the Goodness
of God.

Nevertheless the being of all Moral Good does not necessarily require such
Predetermination, but God may so operate, as to leave the Effect in part to the
liberty of Man's Will. Otherwise a man could do no good, to which he is not
necessitated. Yet when man does his part, he does it not independently on God,
but in a total subordination to him, and by the Power and Liberty which God
only gives, upholds, and actuates.

8. How God is a Total, and not a Partial Cause, and wherein a Sole Cause.
THe Notion of a Partial Cause is properly applied to that which is in
coordination with other Causes, and therefore not fit to be applied to God, to
whom all things are wholly subordinate, and nothing coordinate. Yet seeing
there are other Causes evidently in conjunction with him, their own share in
producing the Effect may be ascribed to them, without Impeachment of his
honor. But it must be also considered, that they have all their Causation from
him and in him.

God, and nothing besides him, is the Cause of his own Act, and so far he is
both a total and solitary Cause: But he is not the sole Cause of Man's Act,
because man himself is a Cause thereof in Subordination to him. Yet he is a
total Cause of the Act done by man, as it is an Act, and of all that is
laudable in the Act. For none is coordinate with him or assistant to him in his
Agency. And whatsoever man does, be it that wherein his Privilege is greatest,
viz. the determining of his own will, he does it altogether as therein upheld
and actuated by God, and dependent on him.

9. Gods Agency is not determined or limited by the Creature.
MEn do variously receive Gods Agency, but they do not determine or limit it,
any otherwise than the various terminating of it may be called a determining or
limiting of it. And the variation is not of Gods act, absolutely considered,
but as variously terminated on men, according to their various disposition. God
has enabled men freely and variously to receive his Influx. So that it is not
the Creature, but God himself, that determines his Agency by the condition of
the Creature, according to his own Will. And men do not limit Gods Will, but
only the Effect, which Gods Agency would produce, if man's will concurred.

10. How Gods Operation on man is never without Effect.
IF the good Effect in man does not follow the Operation of God that is
designed thereunto, yet that Operation is not without Effect. For by it there
is wrought in man a Power or Capacity for that Effect, which does not follow.
And that the Power in Man is not brought into act, it is for want of
Self-excitation.

God does act wisely, and sutably to his Government over man, in giving him
Power to such Effects as come not to pass I mean a Power properly so called,
and which is adequate to' the Effect.

11. God in giving ^e Power gives the Act, whenever the Act follows.
GOd gives the very Will and Deed, in giving the Power to will and to do. If
any have devised this Distinction, that the Power of Willing and Doing is from
God, but that the very Willing and Doing is from men themselves, it is a
Distinction that I understand not. For, the Act is from him that gives the
adequate Power to it, more than from the Immediate Agent.

The Power here supposed to be given, is seated in the Will; and the Will by it
is supposed to be fully enabled and sufficiently excited to act. For God to
give to will and to do, I cannot comprehend what it is, more than to give that
complete Power by which man does will and do; that is, to give man the Faculty,
and rightly to dispose the Faculty to act, and to sustain it in acting; and
likewise to ascertain the Act by his Decree, according to his Prescience, in a
way unsearchable to us.

Though the power be one thing, and the Act it self another thing, yet
undoubtedly he that gives the said Power, does therein give the Act it self. He
that gives the Power of Self-excitation to the Act, and of all other Endeavor,
gives that very Self-excitation and Endeavor, when it is in Act. And how God
should have an Influx upon the Act otherwise, than by his Influx on the Agent,
to give him active Power and Virtue, I cannot conceive.

12. Of Gods Agency about Sinful Acts.
GOd, as the Universal Cause, does concur to that which is the Substratum of
Sin, but is not Sin, viz. to the Act as an Act, or considered in the mere
Nature and Physical being of an Act. This is not so to be understood, as if the
Effect of Gods Concurse were a Non-Existent Universal, but a singular Act only,
according to its general Nature; and as such, it has no morality or sinfulness

In the Hatred of God, the Physical Entity of Hatred is not Sin, but as it is
unduly terminated on God. The Morality of a sinful Act (or if you please to
call it Immorality) is as it is exercised on an undue Object, and in undue
Circumstances, and as such God does not concur to the effecting of it.

To concur to the effecting of the Act, as having an undue Object, Order, End,
etc. and not the contrary, is to effect it as sinfully qualified, or according
to its moral specification, and the formale Peccati. For it is to effect the
fundamentum of the Relation of disconformity to Gods Law, which Relation is
called the formale peccati, and follows the said fundamentum by a bare
Resultancy, without any further Causation. But no sober judgment will ascribe
to God the Causation of the formale peccati.

13. Gods not Effecting the sinful Act, as morally specified, infers not the
Creatures Independency.
THe denying that God by his Efficience causes man's Will to choose the
Forbidden Object, and Refuse the contrary, or to Will rather than to Nill the
forbidden Object; and the affirming that the sinful Act, as morally specified,
or exercised upon the undue Object, or in undue Circumstances, rather than the
contrary, is to be resolved into Man's Will, as the first Determining Principle,
not predetermined, is less to be dreaded from the imagined Consequence of the
multiplication of Deities, or the Creatures Independency, than the contrary
Opinion is from those Consequences which really and palpably follow upon it.

The truth is, that Faculty, which cannot act without an irresistible
Predetermination to all its Acts, is not a Self-determining Faculty. And was it
ever proved a contradiction or utter impossibility for God to make a Creature
with a self-determining Faculty?

Duly to consider how much every action of the Creature is from God, and what
that is which is left to undetermined liberty, would not make one judge that it
does infer the Creatures Independency on God. Let it be noted, That Action is
very much held to be not properly ens, as distinct from the Agent, but only a
Mode of the Agent. But however that be held, the thing that is now in debate,
is not so much as Action qua Action, but a Mode of Action. And be it
considered, whether in such a Mode of Action the Humane Will may not be the
first determining Principle, without the multiplying of Independent Beings,
when the very self-determining Faculty, and its Power of acting in such a Mode,
is wholly of God, and is conserved in active power by him in every Instance;
and when God does concur to that Act in genere Actus, and that, which is left
to the Self-determining Will of Man, is no Physical Being, but only a
comparative circumstantiated modifying of a Being. In loving or hating an undue
Object, rather than a due, there is no Physical Entity, which is not in loving
or hating a due Object rather than an undue. In both there is no more Natural
Entity than what is in the general nature of Love or Hatred as such.

14. Of the Consequences that follow Physical Predetermination to all Humane
Acts.
THough I have a veneration for some men, both for their Learning and
Godliness, who held Physical Predetermination to all Humane Acts, as well bad
as good; yet I cannot receive the Opinion in regard of its Consequences. For
from this Opinion it will follow, that all the sin that is done in the world
can no more be avoided, than Omnipotence be overcome; that a man could no more
do that Good Act, whereof his sin is the Privation, than he could make the
world; that all the sinful Deficiency that is in the world inevitably comes
from the Negation of that Divine Efficience, which is absolutely necessary to
prevent it; that the Covenant made with Adam in innocence, and all the Laws of
God that have been violated, were impossible to be observed; that when God has
Necessitated the Violation of his Law, he Punishes that Violation with
Everlasting Punishments.

I do not charge those that held the Opinion, but the Opinion it self, with
these Consequences. And in this case, to say that man sins Voluntary and upon
Choice, and therefore deservedly incurs the Punishment, is but to put off a
very harsh matter with fair words. For if it be a Choice, it is such a Choice
as is made under an Invincible Necessitation. And if this be not to sin under a
mere Natural Necessity of sinning, what is?

15. Whether God does Cause sin as it is a Punishment.
THat God does punish sin with sin, is undeniably evident from the Scripture;
he punishes Voluntary Hardness of heart with Judicial Hardness. Nevertheless,
though to Punish be Gods Act, yet he does not properly cause the penal sin; but
in his Righteous Judgment he denies to give that help of Grace, which is
needful to keep a man from such sin, and which is forfeited by the abuse of
Grace already received; He does also justly expose the sinner to more and
greater Temptations. Hereupon the sin, which is the Punishment of former sin,
certainly follows. But there is no Causation or Agency of God to the effecting
of the sin; only by his Righteous Judgment it is ordered to be a Punishment of
former sin.

16. Sin does not necessarily follow the permission of it.
IF the Humane Will had been bent to sin by a Natural Inclination, as the fire
burns, sin must have necessarily followed upon the permission of it. But first
man sinned with Freedom and Choice, and without any previous inclination to it,
and therefore the bare Permission of it, which is no more than a
Non-prevention, does not infer a Necessity of sinning. Nor did it causally
ascertain the Event of sin. For it has no Causation in it.

Yea, the first man sinned not only by Free Choice, and without a Previous
Inclination to it, but also against a Holy Inclination to Obedience, called
Original Righteousness. This holy Inclination, though it was not so natural, as
burning is to fire, that is, naturally inseparable, yet it was necessary to
Humane Nature in its right state, and as it first came out of its Makers Hands;
and under the Necessary Influence of God, which was with him, it was so fully
sufficient to his Perseverance in that state, that his sin was a matter of
inexcusable Ingratitude, and high Contempt of the Divine Goodness toward him.

In the state of Fallen Nature the Will has lost its Freedom to acts
conformable to Gods Law, and is enslaved to sin. And while God permits him to
abide in this state, man sins Necessarily; yet not by reason of Gods
Permission, but his own Vicious Inclination. This Necessity of Sinning is not
purely Natural but Moral, which is also Voluntary, being from no other Cause,
than the obstinate Depravedness of the Will it self, which is not to be
conquered by its own Power. Moreover, it is not a Necessity of the very
particular sins which men run into, as if they were inevitabe. For ordinarily
the particular sinful deeds committed might be forborne, and the Duties omitted
might be performed, as to the outward deed. But the meaning is, whatsoever an
unrenewed person does, has necessarily, in the manner of it, a disconformity
to Gods Law. A Corrupt Tree cannot bring forth Good Fruit.

PART III. Of the Operations of Divine Grace.
1. What is signified by Divine Grace.
FOr the clearer understanding of all Points to be discussed touching Divine
Grace, it is requisite that the meaning of Grace in general, and of all the
kinds thereof, be explained.

By Divine Grace in general is understood, whatsoever is graciously vouchsafed
on Gods part, in order to man's Duty and Felicity, whether it be the Divine
Operation or the Effect hereof in man. Sometimes men call the first saving
Operation of God to the renewing of the Soul, by the name of the First Grace;
but it is not so indeed. For abundant and manifold Grace is vouchsafed before
that. Whatsoever is from God over and above Humane Nature, and Faculties, and
his general concurse, in themselves considered, is to be comprehended under
this Term.

Nature, and Gods upholding thereof, in it self considered, is not to be called
Grace; but Gods reprieving of Nature, in order to its recovery, is his Grace
through-Christ; and so the continuing of our Reason and Free Will, and all our
Faculties in this state of Trial, is of Grace. And Nature, in it self
considered, is the Subject that Grace works upon* For Grace does not put into
us any such thing as we call a Natural Faculty, but the Rectitude of the
Faculty, or that which tends thereunto. And all the degrees of the healing and
restoring of our depraved lapsed Nature, are so many degrees of Grace obtained
for us by Christ. In sum, under Divine Grace, in general, may be comprehended
Gods Ordinances, Providence, secret Influences, and Eternal Purposes, or the
gracious Effects and Consequents* thereof in man.

2. The meaning of some Distictions of Grace, that are commonly used.
THere is Grace Objective and Subjective. By Objective Grace is meant the Law
or Covenant of Grace, which is styled in Scripture, the Grace of God that
brings salvation, together with all the external Signs and Evidences thereof,
either in the Works of God and the course of his Providence toward Mankind, or
in his written Word. By Subjective Grace is meant all internal gracious
operations of God on man, over and above his general concurse, together with
the impression and disposition made thereby in the Soul.

There is Grace Common and Special. By Common Grace many understand that which
is common, not to all, but to more than the Elect; and by Special Grace that
which is peculiar to the Elect, or to a state of Salvation. But these terms are
not necessarily restrained to this meaning. For there is a common Grace, not
only as given to more than the Elect, but as given to all men. And there is a
Special Grace, wherein God freely favors one man more than another, and yet it
may be below that which is peculiar to a state of Salvation.

Grace of the same kind may be considered as given to several persons in equal
or unequal measure.

There is also Grace Sufficient and Grace Effectual. Sufficient Grace is that,
by which we can do the Good, to which it is said to be sufficient, and without
which we cannot do it; and therefore it is also called Necessary Grace.
Effectual Grace is that, which, as such, does take Effect, and is never
frustrate.

3. Of Universal Grace.
I Think the Notion of Grace ought not to be restrained to Favors or Benefits
vouchsafed to some and not to others; but whatsoever God gives, which in his
Justice according to the Law of Works he might refuse to give, is truly called
Grace, though it be given to all. And the most Common Grace is so far of
free-choice, as that God might justly have refused to give it.

That there is an universal Objective Grace, appears by the general Law of
Grace, or the Conditional Grant of Life and Salvation to all Mankind.

The Grace of the external Signs and Evidences of the said General Grant is
likewise Universal in some degree. For in the course of Gods Providence toward
Mankind, his mercy to sinners is very legible, particularly his
Reconcileableness to them upon their Repentance. The Mercy of God toward men
in general tends to lead them to Repentance, and seeking after God. Act. 17.
27. And this supposes God to be reconcilable, otherwise there were no ground
for Repentance.

If there be such Universal Objective Grace, what hinders that there should not
be Universal Subjective Grace proportionable thereunto? viz. some Help from God
to dispose the Minds of Men to own and accept his Mercy, and to seek to be
reconciled to him. Yea, I think that the former is in vain without the latter,
because it cannot be made use of. So far am I from apprehending that Universal
Grace is a repugnancy.

It may be further noted, That in this Unversal Grace, that Notion of
Free-choice in preferring one before another, takes place so far, as that it is
vouchsafed only to Fallen Men and not to Angels.

4. Every one has a Stock of Divine Help to be improved.
SOme help of Divine Grace is given to all, more especially to all those, who
live under the Revelation of the Gospel; and this is to be made use of by all
in order to their spiritual recovery. The Divine Help already given is a Talent
that may be improved for the obtaining of more Help. The diligent using of Gods
appointed Means of Grace, is a part of the improving of Divine Help already
received. The exercise of present strength in doing good and shunning Evil, and
stirring up of every Gift and Indowment given us of God, is another part of
improving Divine Help.

This improving of the Help of Grace already received is the ordinary way of
obtaining more, and none have any ground to expect it otherwise, whatever God
may do as a free Benefactor and Arbitrary Disposer of his own Gifts.

I see no Heresy in saying that God will not deny more Help to him, who does
what in him lies from the Help already given. If we suppose that those words of
our Savior, [To him that has shall be given] are to be understood only in
eodem genere, even then he that improves the more Common or Preparatory Grace,
shall receive more in that kind, and he that improves Renewing Grace, shall
receive more in that kind.

Many do not improve the Divine Help already received, and they do not attain
to that more abundant Help, that would enable them to do Actions savingly good,
because they are wanting to themselves. A Price is put into the Hand of a Fool
for the gaining of Wisdom, and he has no heart to it. So that men perish for
the neglect and abuse of those Helps which they have received, and for want of
those further Helps which they have resisted and rejected.

5. Of Grace sufficient to that Good which is not Effected by it.
THat is sufficient Grace, which gives a Power, properly so called, that is to
say, an adequate Power to that Good, which should be effected by it. A Physical
without a Moral Power, that is, a Natural Faculty without a due disposedness,
and much more with an obstinate depravedness, is not an adequate Power to a
morally good Act, that is, to an Act conformable to Gods Law. But he has a
Power adequate to a good Act, who is able to move his Will to it, and to bring
it forth without the addition of more Power, or more antecedent Help of Grace,
and whose indisposition to it, or disposition to the contrary, is no other, but
what may be, and sometimes is overcome by that Power.

The Grace, that gives the Power here described, is rightly called sufficient
Grace. The existence of this Grace does well consist with these Principles,
that God is the Author of all Good, as well Moral as Physical; and that there
is a Divine Predefinition and Efficience of all the Good that ever comes to
pass. But it supposes also, that all Moral Good does not depend on Gods
Physical Predetermination, or Necessitating Premotion of Man's Will thereunto,
but that good Acts may be effected without the said Predetermination or
Premotion.

If there be no such Divine Grace or Help, as is sufficient to some Good, which
is not effected by it, then no man has or ever had a Power, properly so
called, to do more Good than he does, and to avoid more Evil than he does, for
lack of further Necessary Help from God. And if no man has or ever had Power
to do more Good, or to avoid more Evil than he does, for lack of something to
be given him of God, as causally necessary thereunto, then all sin of Omission
and Commission is resolved at least into Gods Non-Volition and Non-efficience,
as the prime Reason thereof, in the Negation of his Necessary Help.

Though Gods Providence toward his Rational Creatures be a Depth unfadomable,
yet who would easily admit such a Position, the evident Consequence whereof
will be the resolving of all sin into the Will of God? Nor may that be admitted
for the only way of Divine Efficience on Man's Will, the continued existence
whereof is repugnant to the Wills defectibility, and the Negation whereof
infers a Necessity of its Defection, and so brings all its Acts under a Kind of
Fatality. I doubt not but God has afforded us so much light into his
mysterious ways, as to clear them from any such Consequences.

6. Some undeniable Instances of Grace sufficient.
THat Adam had Divine Help, and a Moral Power sufficient to his Perseverance,
though he did not persevere, must be granted, or else it will follow, that God
antecedently to his Fall was wanting to him in Necessaries, and that he fell,
because he had not Power to stand, which Consequence is intolerable. His posse
stare si vellet, could be no less than a posse velle stare.

Whether Adam's Original Righteousness were to be called Natural or
Supernatural, it makes no difference in our Inquiry. For most certainly it was
the Gift of God, and his Workmanship, and it was upheld in him, while it
remained, by God's Conserving Influence; and God gave him that Inherent
Rectitude, and that assistant Influence which was sufficient for him. And
though it was not remedying Grace, which is proper to fallen man, yet it was
Divine Help, which suffices to the point here in question. And it may be
properly called Grace, because it came from God, not as the Fountain of Nature
only, but of Grace.

It is more than can be proved, that Adam had not that Assistant Grace, and
that Power, which had the same proportion for his perseverance, with that Grace
and Power, which the Elect Angels had for their Perseverance before their
Confirmation. Yea, it cannot be proved that the Elect Angels had more Help of
Grace from God before their Confirmation, than the Reprobate Angels had before
their Fall. But how ever it be, the Reprobate Angels unquestionably had
sufficient.

Regenerate persons have that Help of Grace, whereby they are enabled to do
more Good in the Saving Kind, than they do. And the unregenerate have that Help
of a moer Common Grace, whereby they may do more Good in the Common Kind, than
they do. Both Regenerate and Unregenerate have not only a Physical but a Moral
and adequate Power to many good Acts of Saving or Common Grace, which are not
done.

In the aforesaid Instances it is to be noted, that the sufficient Grace is
efficax ad posse; and in this regard that Rule, posita causa in actu sequitur
effectus, is not here gainsaid. For sufficient Grace, where the good Act does
not follow, is causa in actu only of the posse or moral Power, which Effect
exists, and so the Operation is not without Effect. And the good Act does not
follow, because the Moral Power given by sufficient Grace is in act of
Existence only, but not of Causation.

7. Of Grace sufficient to Conversion that does not effect it.
THat grace may be sufficient for one, which is not sufficient for another. And
that is properly Grace sufficient to Conversion, which is thereunto sufficient,
with respect to the persons particular condition and necessity.

There may be Grace sufficient to certain Acts tending to Conversion, which is
not immediately sufficient to Conversion it self. And there may be grace
sufficient to Acts more remotely, and in a lower degree tending to Conversion,
which is not sufficient to acts more nearly, and in a higher degree tending to
it.

Grace sufficient to an Act tending to Conversion may be called grace mediately
sufficient thereunto. And if so be, that, upon the improvement of it, more
grace from time to time gradually follow, it may end in Grace immediately
sufficient.

If Grace immediately sufficient were given to Adam for his Perseverance, which
did not effect it, if the like be given to the Regenerate, whereby they are
enabled to do more good in the saving kind than they do, and to the
unregenerate also, whereby they may do more good in the Common Kind than they
do, I discern no Reason why there may not also be Grace immediately sufficient
to Conversion, which does not effect it.

I grant, that a sinners Conversion may be an Effect of greater grace, than
Adam's Perseverance would have been, and than the good Acts of the Regenerate
are. For there was in Adam, and there is in the Regenerate an active holy
Principle or Disposition. I grant, that Man in his fallen state does need a
change of the Will, which Adam before his fall did not, and the Regenerate do
not need. But this Change of the will is no other than Conversion it self. And
why there may not be sufficient grace to change the Will, when it is not
changed, I cannot discern. If any shall say there is no such Grace, he ought to
prove it from the Evidence of Scripture, or from the impossibility of the thing.

8. Whether the Holy Habit be effected before the first Act of turning to God.
IT may be objected, That the effecting of the Habit, Inclination, or Principle
in the Soul, wherein man is merely passive, is first in order of Nature, and
the Soul's act of turning to God, is consequent to it. And consequently there
can be no Sufficient Grace to Conversion, but that which does effect it, and no
man has a Power to turn to God before the Holy Principle is infused.

To this I answer, That this Hypothesis (to say the least) is unnecessary and
unproved. In what the Nature of a Habit does consist is not easy to be
understood, as whether it be the firmness and vigor of the natural Faculty to
such acts, or a secret inperceptible constant act in the soul. But whether it
be the one or the other, there is no reason, why it must needs go before the
act. I apprehend that the Act of turning to God is before that Holy Habit or
fixed Principle which is called the New Nature; at least that it may be so, and
that most ordinarily. This way is more congruous to Gods Means of Conversion,
which work in the Nature of Moral Causes, that do not immediately beget the
Habit, but the holy act or acts, and the habit by the mediation thereof. And in
this case the influx and impress of Divine Grace is instead of the holy habit.
And the habit may be said to be infused, when the Spirit of God does excite the
soul to the act, and by that act or acts bring it to a settled habit. Any other
way of infusing habits, I confess, I am not able to apprehend.

If the Will does, without a precedent habit, move to a spiritual good by the
influx of the Holy spirit, it does not follow, that a man moves without a
Principle, merely by an extrinsick agency. For the Will it self, excited by
Divine Grace, is an intrinsic principle of Motion. As a man moves himself by
the locomotive faculty, so he wills the Object by the volitive faculty; and the
act of Conversion is not by Gods extrinsick agency alone, but also by an
intrinsic Principle, the will it self.

It is not necessary that the Will of a drunkard be habitually changed from
drunkenness to sobriety, before any acts of sobriety can be performed by him.
And though there be a greater change in sanctifying than in civilizing a man,
yet as a civil or common act may precede a habit, so may a holy act.

If a man may commit a sinful act, without a previous sinful Habit, as Adam
did, and that from the intrinsic Principle of his own Free Will, why may he
not by the assistance of Divine Grace bring forth a Holy Act, without a
previous Holy Habit?

9. The actual Prevalence of sin does not gainsay the Sufficiency of Grace.
WHen man's evil Inclination hinders the good Effect that might come to pass
through Divine Grace, it is not because the evil Inclination is in it self
stronger than the Grace, which we call sufficient, but because the Will makes
not use of that sufficient help. In this case the Will is not so far weak or
obnoxious to depraved Inclination, but that by the assistance of the Grace
given it might prevail against it, and effect the Good that is designed in that
Assistance. God gives sufficient Help, and they to whom it is given, neglect
it, and give way to the prevalence of Corruption, which might have been
overpowered by it. Though none will say that Medicaments are Sufficient, which
are not Effectual when they are duly applied; yet sufficient. Medicaments when
not duly applied, may prove uneffectual.

If it be objected, That the will it self resists the Divine Help that is
given, and as stronger than it overcomes it: I answer, that which is here
called Resistance is not the Wills reaction upon the Divine Help, or a breaking
of its force; but it is partly its wilful aversness from making use of that
Help, and its not acting according to it, and partly its willful rejecting of
it, and hardening it self against it. In the mean time the said Divine Help is
in its full force and virtue, and sufficient to the designed Good, and so
remains, till God withdraws it in his just indignation against the sinners
wilful neglect and abuse of it.

10. Equal Grace is not given to all, whose condition toward God antecedently
is equal.
THe measure and proportion of Divine Help given, whether it be alike to all,
is to come under consideration. In equal Grace there is not only an equality of
Divine Influx on the Soul, but also of External Means and Helps, and an equal
felicity of concurring Circumstances, which make for that good which is to be
effected thereby. Yea that Grace may be in every respect equal, there must be
an equality of need in the persons receiving it. For where there is more need,
the same degree of Divine Help is a lesser degree of Grace, respectively
considered, than where there is lesser need; as the same sum of money given to
one, that is more in want, is a lesser aid to him, than to another that wants
less.

A lesser degree of Divine Grace in one kind, may be made up by a greater
Degree thereof in another kind; and so he that receives less in one kind, than
what another has received in the same, may be equal in the receiving of Grace
with that other, by receiving more than he in another kind.

It is not against the Righteousness or Goodness of God to vouchsafe a greater
Degree of his Gracious Help to some more than to others, whose condition
toward him antecedently, and in themselves, is equal. God, considered as a
Rector, renders equally to all that are of equal merit or condition; but as a
Proprietor, or Lord of his own, he is not bound to equality. For he may do with
his own what he Will, and none can challenge him for doing more for some than
for others, when he does for all, as much as is meet for him to do. And
thereupon he gives to some, as he pleases, such proportions of Grace, to which
he gave them no antecedent right by his Law of Grace, or any Promise.

11. Of unequal Proportions of Grace in respect of outward Means.
TO some the Gospel is revealed, to others it is not revealed, and yet the
condition of them both antecedent to Gospel-Revelation was the same.

Of baptized Children of Christian Parents, under the Turkish Tyranny, being of
equal condition toward God, some are educated under their Parents in the Faith
of Christ, and others are taken from them in their Childhood and educated in
Mohammedan Infidelity.

In a place, where true Religion is established, and the true knowledge of God
is taught, two Females of equal condition may in their first Childhood be
taken, the one into a most Religious Family, and there educated; the other into
a house of common Whoordoms, and there educated. There are innumerable such
instances of different Grace toward those, whose condition toward God
antecedently was not different.

12. Of unequal Proportions of Grace, in respect of Divine Influx on the Soul.
IF it be so evident that unequal or special Grace, in respect of external
means, is given in this manner, what hinders but that Special Grace may be
given in respect of Divine Influx on the Soul, and such secret distinguishing
Providence, as are past our finding out. And that there is a special Divine
Grace toward some more than others, under the same outward means, seems
clearly deducible from the Scripture.

Our Savior gives this reason, why some of his Hearers did understand and
receive his Doctrine, and others not, because to some of them it was given to
understand the mysteries of the Kingdom, and to others it was not given. Mat.
13.

Of those that hear the same Doctrine of Salvation, they only that obey the
Doctrine are said to be taught of God, and their being taught of God is set
forth as the special Reason of their Obedience, and a peculiar Benefit, whereby
they are discriminated from those that obey not. Joh. 6. There was therefore a
special teaching of them that obeyed, different from the teaching of them that
did not obey, though both had the same outward means.

The Father's drawing of some to Christ, and not others, of those that heard
him preach, Joh. 6. must needs be understood of such Divine Grace vouchsafed to
some, as was not to others. For our Savior renders this Reason of the
different Effect of the same Word preached among his hearers, that some were
drawn to him by the Father, and others not.

13. A Stock of Grace is ordinarily given in unequal Proportions and
arbitrarily.
THough every one has some stock of Divine Grace to be improved, yet I
conceive that it is Gods ordinary way to give the same in unequal proportions
and arbitrarily, according to that distribution of the Talents in the Parable,
Mat. 25. without respect to antecedent different worthiness. But as the Lord
did arbitrarily distribute the Talents, so he did it according to discretion.
In like manner does the Wisdom of God guide him in the free distribution of the
different Measures of his Grace. Herein the depth of the Riches of the Wisdom
and Knowledge of God is wonderful, his judments are unsearchable, and his ways
past finding out. There are unconditional Favors, and in the arbitrary
bestowing of them in unequal Measures, God proceeds most agreeably to his own
Absolute Dominion, as also to the state of Sinful Man, who can merit no such
favor from him.

14. Of the Notion of Effectual Grace.
THe denomination of Effectual Grace is not to be taken merely from the Event,
but from the State and Quality of the Grace it self. Now this term Effectual
thus taken needs explication. 1. It may signify that which has sufficient
Power to effect. For sufficiens ad esse est efficax ad posse; In this sense
Sufficient and Effectual Grace is all one. 2. That which in the Nature of it
has a necessary connection with the Effect, as necessitating Causes. 3. That
which as such does infallibly produce the Effect, and is never frustrate.

15. Conversion is the Effect of Grace qua talis effectual.
THere is such Divine Grace, and that consisting not only in the preaching of
the Word, and other External Means, but also in the Internal Operation of the
Spirit, as is rejected by men, and becomes in vain to them. There is also such
grace, as is qua talis effectual, and does infallibly produce the Effect, for
which it is given. And all Moral Good, more especially man's Conversion, is an
Effect of such Grace, being an Operation of God proceeding from an Absolute
Will, that it shall not be made void.

God says, Ezekiel. 11. 19. I will put a new Spirit within you, and I will take
the stony heart out of their flesh, and give them a heart of flesh. This
promise signifies that God will effect the Change by an Operation that shall
not fail, and which implies the removing of any Obex that man's Will lays
against it.

St. Paul says, Phil. 2. 14. It is God that works in you to will and to do
of his own good Pleasure. These words of working to will and to do of his own
good pleasure, can import no less than his infallible producing of the Effects
of Willing and Doing. Here note, That for God to cause our act of willing, and
so of turning to him, is to cause our Faculty so to will, by a gracious influx
upon it, which shall not fail.

Our Lord Christ says, Joh. 6. 37. All that the Father gives me, shall come
unto me. Also, v. 45. Every man that has heard, and learned of the Father
comes to me. It is here plain, that all and every one without exception, who
is so given to Christ, and so taught of God, as is there meant, do certainly
come to him.

It will never come to pass, that he, who receives this Effectual Grace, should
continue averse or in suspense, but he will surely determine himself to act
according to that Grace. The partakers of this Effectual Grace are they that
are said, Romans 8. 28. to be called according to Gods purpose, which is his
purpose according to Election, Romans 9. 11.

16. The Position of this Effectual Grace is not repugnant to the Sufficient
Grace before spoken of.
FRom the former Position there seems an Objection to lie against the existence
of a Sufficient Grace, which is not effectual. If Conversion be the Effect of
that Grace only, which infallibly produces it, it seems that no other grace is
sufficient to it. And it may be further said, how can that Grace be sufficient,
which never produces the Effect. To this it is answered;

1. That something be Sufficient to an Effect, and yet not produce it, is no
repugnancy; and that God should give a Sufficient Grace to some, and more than
merely sufficient to others, is no inconvenience.

2. Who knows but that in some Instances the same Divine Influx and External
Means may be only Sufficient in some, and Effectual in others? And to them, in
whom it is Effectual, it may be said to be formally and in it self Effectual,
and not Eventually only; it being certain, that whenever the Grace given
takes effect, it does so according to Gods Preordination and Decree; and that
Decree is according to his fore-knowledg, the way whereof is to us
incomprehensible.

3. That Grace, that ascertains the Effect, is not necessary to make it
possible. The negation of the Decree of the Effect in some does not make it
impossible to be in them, as has been before proved. The negation of the
decree of Adam's Perseverance did not make it impossible.

4. There is no repugnancy that something be sufficient to an Effect, and yet
never produce it. For if the Effect may not follow in one instance, it may
possibly not follow in a thousand, or ten thousand instances of the same
Reason. This holds undoubtedly in Effects produced in Free Agents, and to which
their free concurrence is requisite; and that the Effect does not follow, it
comes not from any antecedent Necessity, or because something necessary to the
producing thereof was wanting.

17. Grace Sufficient is not altogether in vain, where the Effect follows not.
WIthout Sufficient Grace, there is not a Moral and adequate Power to a Good
Act; and when it is given, the Good Act is fully possible, and thereunto God
has done his part to the full.

The aforesaid Doctrine of Sufficient Grace, is an encouragement and engagement
to all to stir up themselves to do their part in hope of good success.

That the Salvation of the Impenitent was not impossible for lack of something
necessary to it, in way of Causation on Gods part, makes for the
unexceptionable clearness of his Proceedings with them.

18. Grace more than merely Necessary is not needless.
IT cannot be said that whatsoever is more than simply necessary to an Effect,
is needless or superfluous. For God may delight, where he pleases, to
facilitate the Effect, and to give not only what is enough, but more abundant,
and therein glorify his Wisdom and Goodness. And we are to pray not only for
help of grace merely necessary to the Good we are called unto, but for more
abundant help, that we may do it more freely and perfectly.

19. In what manner of Operation Grace formally Effectual does consist.
EFfectual Grace is a special Operation of God on the Soul, by Internal Influx,
in conjunction with all suitable means, (wherewith the Infinite Divine Wisdom is
furnished to every purpose) by which the Effect is ascertained. But what is the
special manner of this Operation is not easily to define. God can work
effectually in diverse Ways, and by us incomprehensible.

I cannot say, that his Physical Predetermination, or Necessitating Premotion
of the Will to a good act, and particularly to Conversion, cannot in any case
be, nevertheless it need not be insisted on, because by a way of Moral Agency
God can infallibly cause the Will to determine it self.

In this way of Moral Agency God can put forth an insuperable Efficacy of
Divine Grace, so as therein to take away the Moral, though not the Physical
Power to the contrary. Which to do is not against the Liberty of the Will, but
makes it more perfect. For an indetermination of the Faculty to Will or not to
Will, the Good that ought to be willed, is but its liberty in a state of trial.

Moreover God can work effectually by such a degree or manner of Operation, as
leaves in the Will a Moral Power to the contrary, or which leaves the Effect in
part to the un determined Liberty of the Will. And in this manner he can
certainly bring to pass man's Conversion. Who can say that God could not have
infallibly effected Adam's Perseverance by such an Operation, as should leave
the Effect in part to his Will, or that he did not in that manner effect the
Perseverance of the Elect Angels before their Confirmation?

That a thing should be ascertained, to the Opposite whereof the Will of man
will determine it self, is indeed a repugnancy. But it is no repugnancy that a
thing should be ascertained, to the Opposite whereof the Will of man may
determine it self.

20. Of congruous Vocation.
THat Divine Grace, which effects man's Conversion, not by a naturally
necessitating Premotion, but by Moral Agency, may be conceived to ly ordinarily
in a certain contemporation of the Divine Call and Free Will, which being put,
the Effect follows infallibly. This is by some called congruous Vocation, in
which there is a Divine gracious Influx upon the Faculty, and the powerful
Motives of the Gospel presented to it, with all concurring suitable Providence,
by which the Will is infallibly carried to the saving Effect, by a free and
sweet Motion, without any proper Necessitation.

The Doctrine of congruous Grace is not to be rejected for the Jesuits sake,
if it cannot otherwise be discovered to be erroneous. Nor am I hereby compelled
to rest upon their Notion of Scientia media; and whether it be any way
satisfactory to their intendment, it is not necessary to be examined in this
place.

Against the explication of Effectual Grace here given, if it be Objected, That
the supposed Grace, which takes not effect, must be judged incongruous; it may
be thus answered, that by congruous is meant that which is so thoroughly
adapted to the Effect, that it will follow infallibly, though freely; but
Grace, merely sufficient, may be ordinarily not so thoroughly adapted to the
Effect, being not in so high a degree or specialty of Convenience to such a
particular Will; and yet it may not be simply incongruous, but so far
congruous, as to be fully so much as is necessary and sufficient to produce the
Effect, though it follow not.

21. Grace Effectual, and merely Sufficient, are variously diversified.
THough in Effectual Grace God so operates, as that the Effect shall follow,
yet it cannot be proved that there is always a difference, ex part influxus
divini, between that which effects, and that which effects not; It may lie in
the different congruity of the Means and circumstantial Helps, and in the
different receptivity of the person. And it is to be noted, That the said
congruous Means, circumstantial Helps, and Receptivity of the Person, are all
of Gods own Ordaining and Effecting.

By Receptivity here, I mean not the soft heart, opposite to the heart of
Stone, which is the Effect of Grace effectual, and which is no other than
Conversion, or the heart turning it self; but an antecedaneous disposition,
which is also the Gift of God, and may be a considerable while before
Conversion, or only in the instant immediately foregoing it: and it is a better
disposedness to the using of Divine Helps both Internal and External.

22. Of Men's ordinary Preparedness for Grace Effectual.
I doubt not but Effectual Grace may take hold of a less prepared Subject, I
mean less prepared even in the instant immediately before Conversion; also that
it may work by less suitable means. Yet I believe, that as in the Works of
Nature, so in the Works of Grace, God does more ordinarily work upon the more
prepared Subjects, and by the more congruous ways and means.

That Scripture, Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his mercy he saved us, expressly speaks of Salvation, and not
of the first Conversion. And it does not intend the excluding of Faith,
Repentance, and Obedience in order to Salvation, but the Works of Legal
Righteousness. If the first Conversion be comprehended in the Salvation there
spoken of, yet it does not intend the excluding of Necessary Preparedness, but
it may intend to exclude the necessity of the Works of Natural Righteousness,
and that kind of Virtue that is in mere Natural Men, and was found in many
Heathens.

As for Paul's Conversion, it is an extraordinary Instance, and may not be
urged against what is done in Gods ordinary way. Toward unprepared Souls,
suddenly converted, there is an extraordinary Operation of God, both in respect
of the Internal Impress on the Soul, and the extraordinary Outward Means.
Moreover, none can disprove a more special preparedness in Paul or Manasse, or
other most heinous Offenders, in some instant of time before the Saving Change.

Receptivity and Congruity for Grace does not always-lye in men's fair carriage,
or more orderly behavior, or in being less notorious sinners. Our Savior said
that Publicans and Harlots should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven before
Scribes and Pharisees, as having a greater aptness than they to close with
Grace, not by reason of their greater sinfulness, but their Conviction and
Humiliation occasioned by the review thereof.

23. How the Effect of Grace, left in part to undetermined Free Will, can be
ascertained.
WHatsoever Contingency be in the Created Will, and uncertainty thereupon in
the Created Intellect, with God there can be no Uncertainty, no nor
Contingency, any otherwise than as it denotes Liberty.

To remove Uncertainty about Events from God, I conceive it is not necessary to
hold either a naturally necessitating Premotion, or an insuperable Moral
Operation upon Free Agents to all their Acts. All that I can say in this
difficulty is, That God can and does, in a way past our understanding,
ascertain Events left in some part to man's Undetermined Liberty.

It is undeniably evident as concerning sin, that though God cannot be said to
ascertain it, because he does not decree nor effect it, yet he does certainly
foreknow it, though man's Will does freely and contingently determine it self to
it. Surely the Scantling of our narrow Apprehensions, and our manner of
Knowledge, is no Rule or Standard whereby we may confidently determine of the
Ways of his Foreknowledge, whose Understanding is Infinite, Eternal and
Unchangeable.

It is most certain that God foreknew the Fall of Mankind, and of some Angels,
which was contingent in it self, and from no Necessitating Cause, in respect of
any Creature, or any Divine Decree or Operation. And if God has the
Foreknowledg of one Future Contingent, by the same Reason he has the
Foreknowledg of a World of them.

In this incomprehensible Divine Foreknowledg, and ascertaining of what is left
to the undetermined Liberty of the Will, there is no repugnancy in Reason; nor
do there follow from it any such Inconveniences in Gods Government, as do
evidently follow either a necessitating or an insuperable Premotion of the
Human Will to all its Acts.

24. Man's Will does not that which is more and greater than what Divine Grace
does, when the Effect is in some part left to it.
THere is an Objection, which though somewhat curious, must be taken notice of.
The Act of Repenting and Believing is something more and greater, than the
Ability or Power to Repent and Believe, and is more conducing to Salvation. Now
though the Power of Repenting and Believing be made the Effect of Grace, yet
the Acts themselves are made the Effects of Man's Will, if they be left in part
to the undetermined Liberty thereof. To this it is answered,

1. Though the Acts of Repenting and Believing be more and greater, than to
have Power to the said Acts; yet to give the whole Power, which is Gods part,
is more and greater than both the Power, and the consequent Acts. Therefore,
though in actual Repenting and Believing a man does more to salvation than in
having the Power; yet God in giving the Power, as a total Cause thereof, does
that which is more and greater in order to Salvation, than Man himself does,
who receives the Power, and acts according to it. The Glory and Praise of an
Act is infinitely more to be ascribed to God, who as a total Cause gives the
whole Power to do it, than to man that does it. And so the glory of Man's
Salvation, yea and of his Conversion, is infinitely more to be ascribed to God
than to man.

2. In the present case, the actual willing to Repent and Believe, though it be
of the Will formally, as its Act, yet it is of God effectively as his Work. And
so in every good Act, though man be the subject of Willing and Doing, yet it is
God that works in man to Will and to Do. I cannot comprehend what it is for
God to work in us to will and to do, more than to be the total Cause of all
that Power by which we will and do. And I do not understand any other immediate
influence of God into the Act it self, than that which is into the Agent Power.

25. The Help of Divine Grace is inferred from the Law of Grace.
THe supposing of a matter to be our Duty, does not infer that we may in our
Fallen state reasonably expect a Sufficient Help to perform it. It is our Duty to
Keep Gods Law perfectly, but Sufficient Grace thereunto is not given. God may
justly require of us, what he once gave us Power to do, after we gave sinfully
lost that Power.

Yet when God has made with men a Conditional Covenant of Grace, and has
required of them the acceptance of his Covenant, and the Performance of the
Conditions, upon a Promise of the Benefits, let it be considered, whether it
does not thence follow, that it is agreeable to his Wisdom and Goodness, to
vouchsafe them that Help which is necessary thereunto. By Necessary Help, I
mean that which is immediately or mediately sufficient; that is to say, either
immediately to per from the Conditions themselves, or to perform mediate Acts
tending thereunto, upon performance whereof more Help comes, till it reach to
an immediate Sufficiency.

Let it be considered, whether it be agreeable to the Mercy of God declared in
the Covenant of Grace, to leave those, to whom he has propounded it, under an
impossibility of being saved by it; And whether the Gospel-offer be an Act of
Grace, tending to Salvation, toward those that are utterly destitute of that
necessary Divine Help, without which their Conversion and Salvation is morally
impossible. An offer of Mercy upon Impossible Terms, one would think is no
Mercy or no Offer.

If Grace necessary to the acceptance of the Gospel-Offer be utterly
withholden, let it be considered, how the non-acceptance of that Offer can be a
greater sin than the bare transgression of the Law of Works, and be called the
Condemnation, or the great damning sin.

26. The Duty of improving the Help of Grace, proves the Sufficiency thereof.
IF God had not vouchsafed to Fallen Man that Help that is necessary for his
Recovery, he had indeed been inexcusable in his abiding in sin, as the Devils
now are; but I cannot see how he had been inexcusable for the neglect of his
Recovery, if he had been utterly destitute of that Necessary Help. But now Gods
giving of outward Means and inward Helps of Grace, infers our Duty of improving
them, and our inexcusableness in the neglect of them; and this seems to me
necessarily to imply, that they are in themselves improvable, and that we have
Power to improve them.

Every man is culpable in not fulfilling the whole Law, without the least
breach thereof, because the unalterable Law of God, and the Power that was once
given, but now lost, obliges him to it: But no man is culpable for not
improving the Help of Grace to that perfect fulfilling of the Law, because no
man has received a Help Sufficient thereunto.

An unconverted person is culpable in not turning to God, because the Law of
God unalterably obliges him to cease from sin: But he would not be culpable
for non-improvement of Helps and Means if they be not Improvable, but utterly
Insufficient thereunto. Not Improving evidently notes ones not doing not only
what he should, but what he might do, and that he is wanting to himself, when
nothing necessary is wanting. Nothing is Improvable beyond its Sufficiency; and
Means in themselves Improvable, are not Improvable with respect to us, if we
have no Power of Improving them.

If the case were such, that men shall be condemned for the Non-Improvement of
any Helps external or internal, when they are destitute of a further Help,
without which it is impossible that they should Improve them, any one would
think that it were better for them to be without those Helps. And indeed how
can they be truly called Helps or Means to those that are under a Moral
Impossibility of Improving them to that intent whereunto they are said to be
vouchsafed.

27. Of Gods Expostulation. Isa. 5. 4.
GOd in expostulating with his People, says, What could I have done to my
vineyard, more than I have done in it? this may be as well rendered, What should
I have done, etc. or what had I to do more? This Expostulation is very
congruous to the Covenant of Grace under which the Jews were. And it supposes
that they had Sufficient or Necessary Grace to do the Good they did not, and
immediately sufficient to Acts tending to Conversion, and mediately sufficient
to Conversion, and that they had Internal, as well as External Help; and that
God did for them as much as was meet on his part, in reference to the said
Covenant.

28. Of the different states of men in respect of Divine Help.
MAnifest Experience shows that all men have not Help immediately sufficient to
Conversion and Salvation. For many are under a present Moral Impossibility of
performing any Saving Acts, as Obdurate Sinners, and such as are ignorant of
things absolutely Necessary to be known and done. Such may have had formerly
more Help, which now they have sinned away. Nevertheless, I conceive that all,
who have the use of Reason, may have Help immediately sufficient to
intermediate Acts tending to Conversion, by the use whereof there may be
advancement to further Help, and a nearer approach toward Salvation.

Though the mere Non-donation of more special and abundant Grace be arbitrary
with God, yet the positive Denegation of further Necessary Grace is penal, and
the Act of a Righteous Judge toward those who neglect what they have received,
Isa. 6. 9. Matthew. 13. 14. yet God may and not seldom does remit that Penalty,
and vouchsafe that further Help which was forfeited, according to the pleasure
of his own Will.

Many, that are in a state of Judicial Hardness, are not destitute of Help
Sufficient to many Acts materially good, and to avoid many sins, especially of
the outward deed, which if they would then make use of, as they are able, and
hold on therein, they might recover that greater Help that is withdrawn.

29. The most hopeful Way of receiving more Grace.
THough God, for the glory of his Free Grace and Rich Mercy, sometimes converts
those who have more wilfully and heinously opposed his Grace, yet the greater
opposition does not make Conversion more hopeful, but more difficult and less
hopeful, though not desperate. So far we are hopeful, as we are yielding to
God. The gradual progress of earnest Care and Industry in using the Grace
received, is the very Way, and the only ordinary way, by which God effectually
calls those who have attained to the use of Reason.

Even they, who are Converted, do before their Conversion in some degree resist
the Spirit of God, and some of them more heinously, yet when God draws them by
his Effectual Grace, they come freely with heart and Good Will. And because
there is a reluctance in part, in the very time, or in the instant immediately
before the Turning Act, made by the opposite Principle, Converts in turning do
not only yield to God, but earnestly reach after him with a striving against
the opposite Principle.

30. Encouragement to wait on Gods Grace in his Way.
COmmonly men are forward to venture great matters in the world upon hopeful,
yet uncertain Issues. Therefore none should grudg to venture their care and
pains in waiting on Gods Grace in his way. To do our uttermost in the use of
Means for Conversion is manifestly our Duty, and we are sure to be no losers by
it, which men are not sure of in their great Adventures and Undertakings for
the things of this world. A man's continued making use of that Moral Power,
which he has toward Conversion, from one degree of Preparatory Grace to
another, will at length terminate in Grace immediately sufficient, if he live.
And I incline to believe that God will not by death cut off a person, that
continues Endeavors, in some good measure answerable to his Help, to advance
toward Conversion, before he becomes a Convert, though his Endeavors be
mingled with some Defects.

31. Whether God has promised Grace Effectual to those that use Grace received.
GOds Command to use Means for any End, contains an Encouragement to use the
same in hope that it shall not be in vain. And if we be to use Means in hope
toward God that it shall not be in vain, it is supposed to be not a groundless
but a grounded Hope. And every grounded Hope rests upon some signification of
Gods Will for the obtaining of the Thing hoped for.

If Gods Positive Denegation of further Grace be penal, why may not his
conferring of further Grace be premial, according to a conditional Promise? Our
performing of the Condition of such a promise depends primarily on Gods
Preventing Grace, yet subordinately it may depend on our own well-disposedness,
which is always the Effect of a former Preventing Grace.

The Endeavors of a man yet unconverted, which are not accepted of God
immediately unto his Justification, may be accepted according to their degree;
namely, unto the bestowing of Benefits tending to Conversion and Justification;
and so may be the Condition of obtaining such Benefits.

It does not derogate from the Honor of Divine Grace, nor tend to beget
arrogance in men, that God should ordinarily give further Grace upon the good
use of former Grace. For it is not the value and worth, but the congruity and
meetness of what is done by man for the receiving of more Grace, that is here
considered. And it is very congruous, that the acts of Divine Grace toward men
should not be perfected at once, but by degrees, as men make use of the former
degrees.

32. Equal help of Grace may have different Effects.
WHere equal Help of Grace is vouchsased to several Persons, it is possible
that the good Act, for which it is given, may follow in one of them, and not in
the other. And where equal Help is given to the same person at several times,
it is possible that the good act may follow at one time, and not at another.
Otherwise whenever a good Act is done, a greater help, than that which is
given when it is not done, is supposed necessary. And if greater Divine Help,
than what is given, be causally necessary to all those enjoined Acts, which are
not done, all sinful omissions would be ultimately resolved into Gods not
giving what is necessary to the opposite Good Acts; which to admit, is, as I
suppose, a great inconvenience.

From this supposition that the same Grace sometimes takes effect, and
sometimes not, it does not follow that the same Efficience is not the same. For
as the term Efficience connotes the following act, it is not the same
Efficience that does and that does not take effect. Yet it may be said the same
Efficience, if the word be taken for the operation in se, and not respectively
with connotation of the Effect.

33. Whether any be Converted by such Help of Grace, as leaves some Unconverted.
THat there is Grace sufficient to Conversion which does not effect it, has
been already argued. And that more Grace, than what is immediately sufficient,
is not necessary to it, the very terms do make plain. And if it be not in the
nature of the thing necessary, that more be given than what is immediately
sufficient, who can prove that God does always give more, where Conversion
follows?

If in several Persons or People receiving Equal Grace unto common Good Acts,
the Events have been different as to that kind of Good, I do not understand why
in several Persons receiving Equal Grace to saving Good Acts, the Events may
not be different as to that kind of Good. But indeed I judge, that in this case
we are not so much concerned to know what is done, as what may be done, and
what would be done, if men were not wanting to themselves.

It may seem by our Saviors words, Mat. 11. 21. If the mighty works, which
have been done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago, etc. That some would certainly have been converted by that
very Help of Grace, if it had been given them, which did not convert others, to
whom it was given. His upbraiding the People to whom he spoke, as more
unyielding to God than others would have been, does show that an Equal Help of
Grace would have converted others; I mean equal in it self; but whether it
might be called equal respectively to their need, I confess I cannot say. For
they might need a greater Help than others to prevail against their greater
aversness. Yet this may be rationally hence inferred; That in some instances,
by that Help of Grace, which is in it self Equal, some may be, and actually are
converted, and not others, by reason of the unequal disposedness of the Persons.

Whether some be converted, and others not, by that Help of Grace, which is
Equal not only in it self, but also respectively to the need of both, if we
know not, there is no great need to know. But I think it is hard for any to
show cause why it cannot be so, and that it never is so. In this Case the
undetermined Liberty of the Will suffices to make a diversity of the Cause to
a diversity of the Effect in the several Persons, notwithstanding the same
Disposedness, the same Object, the same Helps, the same Impediments, and all
other Circumstances the same.

Howbeit, none are Converted, whose Conversion is not antecedently ascertained
of God. For this, if any thing, must not be left to uncertainty. Here it is to
be noted, that the non-ascertaining of an Event does not render it impossible.
And the non-ascertaining of Conversion does imply no necessity of
Non-Conversion, but that which is called necessitas consequentiae, or of
Logical Inference, and imports only a Certainty, and no proper Necessity of the
thing inferred.

God does ascertain Conversion, by the vouchsafement of such Grace, as does
infallibly produce it, according to his Foreknowledg and Decree. Gods gracious
Efficience, proceeding from an absolute Decree of the Success, is the formalis
ratio of Effectual Grace.

34. In man's Conversion and in all Good God is always Chief, yea all in all.
GRace always takes effect according to the pleasure of the Divine Will. And
man's Conversion to God, and Perseverance in Grace, and whatsoever good is done
by the Creature, which way soever it be brought to pass, is to be referred not
to the Created Will, as the origo or first rise thereof, but to the Decree of
God ordaining, and his Providence disposing the whole traduction of a sinner
from death to life. All Good is entirely the Gift of God, and man's Will does it
as wholly thereunto empowered of God.

The undetermined Liberty of the Will, and the different success of equal
Grace, is not derogatory to the interest of Divine Grace in all good acts. For
though the Will be a Self-determining Principle, yet it is under the
Sovereignty of God, who has the Hearts and Ways of all men in his own hand,
and can in innumerable ways, to us unknown, ascertain all Good Events that are
Decreed by him.

35. Of St. Paul's Question, Who made thee to differ from another?
WHen one is converted and not another, if there be a specialty or inequality
of Divine Help in any Kind vouchsafed to the Convert more than to the other,
the Cause of the difference is clear and unquestionable, viz. that special or
more abundant Help, whatsoever it be; but if the Help vouchsafed to both be
altogether equal, it requires some disquisition to assign the Cause of the
difference.

Here it is to be considered, that difference or dissimilitude is a Relation,
and has no other Cause than the Cause of its fundamentum, from which it
arises by bare resultancy. In the present case, as there be two Subjects,
there are two dissimilitudes, to each whereof there is its proper fundamentum.
The Believer differs from the Unbeliever by believing, that is, his believing
is the fundamentum of the dissimilitude on his part. Now of his believing God
is the Chief Cause, and he himself is the Subordinate Cause, totally dependent
on God; and consequently God is the Chief Cause, and he himself but the
Subordinate Cause of the relation of dissimilitude on his side. The Unbeliever
differs from the Believer by Unbelief, that is, unbelief is the fundamentum of
the dissimilitude on his part. Now of his Unbelief he himself is the Chief
Cause, and God is no Cause thereof at all; and consequently he himself is the
Chief Cause of the relation of dissimilitude on his side, and God is no Cause
thereof at all.

This Solution is not so curious as plain and evident. In this Case, God giving
Equal Help to both, all that can be said by an Objector, is, That the
difference on the Believers part comes not from Gods different help. But
withal it is manifest that it comes from his Gracious Help, as the Chief
Cause, upon which Man's Will the subordinate Cause is wholly dependent; and the
praise of this difference must go accordingly.

In short, Man's Will is the subject of the difference on both sides; and on the
Believer's side God is the Chief and man the Subordinate Cause: but on the
Unbelievers side man is Chief, and God is no Cause at all of the difference.

As for the Apostles words, Who made thee to differ, they may be well thus
expounded, who gave thee that by which thou differest? as he himself expounds
it in the words following, what have thou, that thou have not received?

36. Special and more abundant Grace may be ordinarily vouchsafed to the Elect,
and wherein it lies.
IT is probable that God gives from time to time a more special and abundant
Help of Grace, for the more abundant securing of the Salvation of the Elect,
though it be not necessary to make their Salvation possible, nor (for ought I
know) to make it certain. I say this is probable. For who can absolutely
determine of the manner and degree of the Operations of God? And who can say
how much he must necessarily do, if he will ascertain an Effect? It suffices
us to know that God does effectually what he will have to be done, though we
know not the way and manner of it.

And who can tell, whether this more special and abundant Help, here supposed
to be probable, be given always in the same way, or in diverse instances in
diverse ways? There may be in it (for ought we know) a specialty of Divine
Impress on the Soul; and (for ought we know) the Divine Impress being equal
with that on others, the specialty of the said Help may consist in more
thoroughly congruous Means, and happily concurring Providence, Seasons, and
Circumstances, all which depend on Gods wise disposal of all for the Salvation
of his Elect according to his Eternal Purpose. Because we cannot trace the
Almighty in the ways of his Infinite Power and Wisdom, we cannot find out
wherein the special differencing Grace does in various Instances consist.

27. In what respect there is always a specialty of Grace toward the Elect.
WHatsoever equality of Divine Help in respect of Internal Influence on the
Soul, and the congruity of External Means, and all concurring Providence, may
be imagined toward several persons, in some of whom the saving Effects follow,
and in others not; nevertheless there is always a specialty of Grace toward
the Elect, in respect of the Divine Decree, Gods gracious Purpose of the Saving
Effect is comprehended under the term Grace. The Scripture mentions the
Election of Grace, Romans 11. 5. Gods purpose and grace, 2. Tim. 1. 9. And being
predestined according to the purpose of him, who works all things after the
counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11.

Whomsoever God saves, he Eternally decreed to save them. For it is undeniable,
that whatsoever God does in Time, he Eternally purposed to do the same, and in
the same order. Though the Decree of God, which never fails, does ascertain
the Salvation of the Elect, yet the negation of the Decree (as has been before
showed) is not the negation of any thing causally necessary to the Event, and
does not make the Salvation of others impossible, any more than the negation of
his Prescience does. And God has not discouraged any, by telling them they are
not Elect: but he has put all men upon a fair Trial in hope.

38. It becomes God to ascertain the Salvation of some, but not of all.
UPon the great performance of Christ in the Redemption of the World, that some
should be saved is evidently congruous to the Divine Wisdom and Goodness; and
thereupon that he has Eternally Purposed the salvation of some, is as evident.
He has indeed Eternally Willed all the Good that comes to pass, and therefore
more especially the Salvation of them that are saved. It is also evident, that
according to that Purpose, he does ascertain their Salvation by such an
Operation of Grace toward them, as shall infallibly effect it, whatsoever
degree of Free Agency under Divine Grace they themselves have about it.

From how absolute a Decree soever the salvation of the Elect does proceed, yet
it is effected no other way in those that have the use of Reason, than upon
their performing the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace. Though the
Perseverance of the Elect be absolutely decreed (I mean absolutely in the sense
before given under the Head of Election) yet this Crowning Gift is received
upon condition of their care and diligence, both to prevent their Falls and
Backslidings, and when they have fallen, or slidden back, to recover themselves.

But the Wisdom and Goodness of God does not lead him to ascertain the
Salvation of all. It suffices that his Goodness has made all men Salvable;
but it is very agreeble to his holy and wise Government of men in a state of
trial, that there should be various measures of the Gracious Helps and Means
that he affords, and that there should be various Events and Issues thereof.

That few comparatively shall be Saved is Christ's own assertion, and that it is
so, it is not through any omission on Gods part, who has amply provided for
the Salvation of those, to whom the Gospel is published; and to the rest of the
World the Justice of his Grace is not wanting. They have the Natural Revelation
of Gods Reconcileableness to Sinners upon their Repentance and Conversion to
him, which, if they were not wanting to themselves, might be improved to the
obtaining of Supernatural Revelation, or at least such greater Helps as might
be sufficient for them.

FINIS.

