A COPY OF 1. The letter sent by the Queens Majesty concerning the
collection of the Recusants Money for the Scottish War, Apr. 17. 1639. 2. The
Letter sent by Sir Kenelme Digby and Mr. Mountague concerning the Contribution.
3. The Letter sent by those assembled in London, to every shire. 4. The names
of the Collectors in each County in England and Wales. AND 5. The Message sent
from the Queens Majesty to the house of Commons by Master Comptroller the 5.
of Febr. 1639.


Printed at London in the year of the discovery of Plots, 1641.

Henrette Marie. R.

We have so good a belief of the loyalty and affection of his Majesty's
Catholic Subjects, as we doubt not but upon this occasion, that has called
his Majesty into the Northern parts for the defense of his Honor and
dominions, they will express themselves so affected as we have always
represented them to his Majesty; So in this common consent, which has appeared
in the Nobility, Judges, Gentry and others, to forward his Majesty's service
by their persons and states, we have made no difficulty to answer for the same
correspondency in his Catholic Subjects, as Catholics: Notwithstanding they
all have already concurred to this his Majesty's service, according to the
qualities whereof they are, when others of the same quality were called upon.
For we believe that it became us, who have been so often interested in the
solicitation of their benefits, to show our selves now in the persuasion of
their gratitudes. Therefore having already by his Majesty by other means
recommended to them this earnest desire of ours to assist and serve his
Majesty, by some considerable sum of money, freely and cheerfully presented:
We have thought fit (to the end that this our desire, may be the more public
and the more authorized) hereby to give you Commission and direction to
distribute Coppies under your hand of this testification thereof, unto those
that have met in London by our direction, about this business: And unto the
several Collectors of every County. And as we presume the sum they will
raise will not be unworthy our presenting to the King; so shall we be very
sensible of it, as a particular respect to our selves, and will endeavor in
the, most efficatious manner we can to improve the merit of it, and to remove
any apprehension of prejudice, that any (who shall employ themselves toward
the success of this business) may conceive; by this they may be assured that
we will secure them from all such objected inconveniences: And we are very
confident that this our first recommendation will be so complied with all, as
may not only afford us particular satisfaction, but also, facilitation toward
their own advantages.

Given under our Signet at White Hall this 17. of April, 1639.
Sir Kenelme Digby and Mr. Mountagues Letter concerning the contribution.
IT is sufficient already known to every one, the extraordinary Graces and
Protections we owe the Queens Majesty, to whose favorable intercession we
must ascribe the happy moderation we live under; So as we doubt not, but an
occasion of the expression of our gratitudes will joyfully be embraced by
every Body; which the present estate of his Majesty's affairs, does now offer
us. We have already by our former letters indeavored to prepare you to a
cheerful assistance of his Majesty in his declared journey to the Northern
parts, for the securing of his Kingdom, and such other purposes as his Royal
wisdom shall resolve of: That so you may really demonstrate your selves as
good Subjects, as God and nature requires of you. Now her Majesty has been
graciously pleased to recommend unto us the expressions of our duties, and
zeal to his Majesty's service, by some considerable gift from the Catholics.
And to remove all scruples (that even well affected persons may meet with) she
undertakes to secure us, and all that shall employ themselves in this
business, from any inconvenience, that may be suspected by their or our
forwardness and declaration in this kind. It will easily appear to every body
how much it imports us, in our sense of her Majesty's desires to press every
body to strain himself even to his best abilities in this proposition, since
by it we shall certainly preserve her graciousnesse to us, and give good
Characters of our devotion to the King and State; of whose benignity we have
all reason to give testimonies, and to endeavor to produce arguments for the
prosecution and increase of it.

Now for the best expedition of this business (which is the chief
circumstance that imports in it) we have thought fit to recommend it to your
nominations of such persons as shall in your opinions be agreed of for the
ablest and best disposed in every several County, not only to solicit, but
to collect such voluntary contributions, as every bodies conscience and duty
shall proffer: And we shall desire you to give us an account of what
acceptance his friends, which we cannot but expect very successful, and
answerable to the forwardness we meet with here about London, for which we
shall offer up our prayer to God.

W. Mountague. Ke. Digby.


The Copy of the Letter sent by those Assembled in London, to every Shire.
THe enclosed Advices and motives being so ample, as you will perceive by
perusing them, it will not be needful that we enlarge our selves upon any
particulers concerning the conduct of the business, which they direct the way
in. This therefore serves only to convey them to you, (as we are entreated by
those that have met here, and have undertaken to do) and desire you to repair
immediately unto those persons to whom they be directed, and to deliver the same
unto them in the name of all the Noble men and Gentry (together with our
selves) assembled here at London by the Queens commandment to set forward
this work. And we pray you assure them in the most efficacious manner you can
(engaging all our credits for the trust thereof) that it is the sense of us all
both Ecclesiastical and lay persons, that besides the discharging of their and
our duties to God and the King, it mainely imports the good of Catholics to
have their business take good success. Therefore entreat them to deal
actively and efficaciously and speedily according to these advices and motives.
We are so well persuaded of their devotion to put forward so pious a work,
that we doubt not but they will be as well satisfied in the needefulnesse of
the thing, and be as ready to employ themselves in it, receiving the assurance
thereof, and persuasions thereunto, only from our hands, as if they came by
all the most formal ways that can be imagined; which in a business of this
nature cannot be expected. And although the Advises and motives be directed
only to lay Gentlemen yet we desire you, (and have answered for you) that you
will employ your selves and all those that depend on you, sincerely to
solicit and dispose all their minds that you have relation unto, as
powerfully as you can, to contribute cheerfully and bountifully upon this
occasion; which is the first that ever we labored in of this kind, so we hope
in God it will be the last: there being no probability of so pressing and
urgent a necessity to occur any more.

London April, 1639. Yours, etc.

The names of the Collectors for gathering the Recusants money.
Bedfordshire. Mr. Church, Sir Robert Charnock, Mr. Robert Hewet. Barkeshire.
Mr. Anthony Inglefield, Mr. Tirrell. Buckinghamshi. Mr. Robert Dormer, Sir
Edward Manfield, Mr. Throgmorton, Mr. Bringhurst. Cambridgshire. Mr. Hon.
Huddlestone, M. Charles Paryes, Mr. Barker. Cheshire. Mr. Bidulph of Bidulph,
Sir William Massey, Mr. William Stantey, Mr. lames Poole. Cornwall. Mr.
Victor, Mr. Burlacey, Mr. Trevilian. Cumberland. Sir Francis Howard, Mr. Joseph
Porter. Darbyshire. Sir Francis Willoughby, Mr. Aere of Hassop Mr. Poole of
Spinckill. Devonshire. Sir. Sir Edward Carey, Mr. Berry, Mr. Anthony Gifford,
Dr. Chichester. Dorsetshire. Mr. George Penny the elder, Mr. George Arundell,
Mr. Web of Lanford, Mr. Wells of Purbecke. Durham. Sir Ralph Conniers, Mr.
George Collingwood, Mr. Edward Smith. Essex. Mr. William Peter's, Mr. Thomas
Wright, Mr. Richard White. Glocestershire. Sir John Winter, Mr. Wakeman, Mr.
Benedict Hall, Mr. Atkinson. Hertfordshire. -- Huntingtonshi. Mr. Price of
Washingley, Sir Tho. Shirley, Mr. Tho. Cotton. Herefordshire. Mr. William
Bodenhum, Sir John Wigmore, Mr. William Moore of Burrop, Mr. John Harp.
Hampshire. M. John Arundell, Mr. George Penny the younger, Mr. William Owen.
Kent. Mr. Benjamin Wyborne, Mr. Clement Finch, Mr. (...). Lancashire. Mr.
Bradshaw, Sir Cecill Crayford, Sir William Gerrard, Mr. Molineaux of the wood,
Mr. Townley of Townley, Mr. Anderton of Lostock. Lecetershire. Sir Francis
Englefield, Mr. Golding. Lincolnshire. Mr. Anthony Mounson, Sir John Thymbleby,
Mr. Robert Constable. London and Middlesex. Mr. Cape, Mr. Thomas Rox, Mr.
Becket, Mr. Richard Betham, Mr. Edward Harp, Mr. Morgan, Mr. John Chapperley,
Dr. Kirton. Norfolk. Mr. Everard, Mr. Charles Walgrave, Sir Hen. Beddingfield,
Mr. William Paston. Northamptonsh. Sir William Saunders, Mr. John Poulton.
Nottinghamsh. Mr. Thomas Smith the elder, Mr. Thomas Smith the younger.
Northumberla. Sir William Fenwicke, Mr. Haggerston, Mr. Withrington, Sir Edward
Ratliffe. Oxfordshire. Sir Richard Farmer of Kiddington, Mr. Will. Stone, Mr.
Ralph Sheldon. Rutlandshire. Mr. Nicolas Cripps, Mr. William Andrews, Mr.
Alcock, Mr. James Digby. Shropshire. Sir Basil Brook, Mr. Plowden, Mr. John
Harrington. Sommersetsh. Mr. Rayno, Mr. John Ewnis the elder. Staffordshire.
Mr. Brook of Lapley, Mr. Stamford of Perry Hall, Mr. Phillip Draycot. Surrey.
Mr. Edw. Cotton, Sir Rich. Weston. Sussex. Sir John Shelley, Sir John Carroll.
Suffolk. Sir Francis Monnocke, Sir Roger Martin, Sir Edward Sylyard, Mr. Tho.
Beddingfield of Beddingfield. Warwickshi. Mr. Anthony Dormer Mr. Thomas Morgan,
Mr. William Sheldon, Mr. Rich. Middlemore. Wiltshire. Mr. William Arundell, the
Lord Baltimore, Mr. Edward Stilling. Worcestershi. Mr. William Abingdon, Mr.
William Sheldon. Westmerland. Mr. Anthony Ducket, Mr. John Leyborne, Mr.
Fleming. Yorkshire. East Riding. The Lord Dunbarre, Mr. Brigham, Mr.
Longdaill. West Riding. Baronet Vavasar, Baronet Gascoigne, Mr. Thomas
Waterton, Mr. Phillip Hungate. North Riding. Mr. Craythorne the younger, the
Lord Fairfax, Mr. Anthony Mennell, Mr. Laurence Sare.
Isleof Wight. -- Anglesey. -- Brecknockt. Mr. Winter, Mr. Bevan, Mr. Maddock.
Carnarvon. Mr. Lewis. Caermarden. Mr. Towley. Cardigan. Mr. Lewis. Glamorgan.
Mr. Turbervile the younger. Denbigh. Mr. Richard Floyd, Mr. Crew. Flintsh. Sir
John Connoway, Mr. Pennat. Monmouth. Sir Charles Sommerset, Mr. Morgan of
Lantarnam, Mr. Morgan of Itton. Mountgomery. Sir Piercy Herbert. Merioneth. --
Pembrookesh. Mr. Towley of Arnostill. Radnorshi. Mr. Thomas Crowther.
A Message sent from the Queens Majesty to the House of Commons by Mr.
Comptroller, Febr. 5. 1640.
THat her Majesty has been ready to use her best endeavor for the remooving
of all misunderstanding between the King and Kingdom.

That at the request of the Lords who petitioned the King for a Parliament, her
Majesty at that time writ effectually to the King, and sent a gentleman
expressly to persuade the King to the holding of a Parliament.

That she has since been most willing to do all good offices between the
King and his people, which is not unknown to diverse of the Lords, and so shall
ever continue to do as judgeing it the only way of happiness to the King,
her self, and Kingdom.

That all things be justly settled between the King and his people (...).

That her Majesty having taken a knowledge that having one sent to her from
the Pope is distastefull to the Kingdom, she is desirous to give satisfaction
to the Parliament within convenient time she will remove him out of the
Kingdom.

That understanding like wise that exception has been taken to the great
resort to her Chapel at Denmark house she will be careful not to exceed
that which is convehient and necessary for the exercise of her Religion.

She further takes notice that the Parliament is not satisfied with the manner
of raising money for the assistance of the King in his journey to the North, in
the year 1639. at her entreaty from the Catholics, she was moved there unto
merely out of her dear and tender affection to the King, and the example of
other his Majesty's subjects* she seeing the like forwardness would not but
express her forwardness to the assistance of the King.

If any thing be illegal, she was ignorant of the Law, and was carried therein
only out of a great desire to be assisting to the King in so pressing an
occasion but promises to be more cautious hereafter, not to do any thing but
what may stand with the established laws of the Kingdom.

Her Majesty being desirous to employ her own power to unite the King and
people and desires the Parliament to looke-forwards and pass by such mistakes
and errors of her servants as may be formerly, and this your respect she
promises shall be repayd with all the good offices she can do to the house,
which you shall find with real effects as often as there shall be occasion.

FINIS.

