A COPY OF THE PRISONERS IVDGMENT CONDEMNED TO DIE FROM NVGATE On Mundaie the
13. of December: 164^.

With the Examination of the Bishop of Calcedon, and the rest of the Jesuits
condemned to die: and the names of the other prisoners condemned, and the
matter for which they suffer

Whereunto is added the names of those who deny the oath of Supremacy.

Showed first to the Officers of the prison and after to one of the Jury that
so the truth might be printed.

London, Printed by Thomas Pain: in Goldsmiths-Alley in Red-Crossestreete 1641



The Statute of this Land.
FOr any Jesuit, Priest, or other Ecclesiastical person (borne within any the
Kings Dominions) and made by any authority from the Bishop of Rome, to come
into, be, or remain, in any of the Kings Dominions, contrary to diverse Statutes
made for the safety of the Kingdom, since the first of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, is high Treason; To receive, relieve, aid, or maintain, any such
Jesuit, etc. (being at liberty, and knowing him to be a Jesuit, etc.) is
Felony, without benefit of Clergy. 27. Eliz. cap. 2. P. Jesuit. 1.101.

The judgment against the Jesuits.
1. THe first of them that was convicted by London Jury, was one Abbot, alias
Rivers; who was convicted of high Treason, for executing the office of a Romish
Priest: being born in this kingdom, and received Orders by Authority from the
Bishop of Rome, for which he was condemned to die as a Traitor, and to be drawn
to the gallows on a Slead.

2 Also one Wilmore, alias Wigmore, alias Turner, an Englishman also; was found
in the same nature guilty of high Treason.

3 John Hammond, alias Iackson, was condemned by the clear evidence of a
Captain and others, to be guilty of high Treason, for officiating under the
Pope, to seduce many people where he came to Popery: he was carried thither in
a Sedan, he said he was the Queens Servant.

4 Edmond Canon, (called the Bishop of Calcedon) who was an Englishman born;
and coming before the Bench to the Bar, and being there to answer for
himself, desired that he might have a Chair to sit down, in regard of his age:
which favor was granted to him; so that he answered before them sitting in the
said Chair, and held the Recorder a great while in examining of him, in
defense of the Romish Priesthood; pleading for some particular circumstances of
favor by some grounds which he alleged. But the Recorder answered him
worthily, that that place was for justice, and not connivance (or to that
effect) this Bishop of Calcedon, Edmond Canon (as before) as it was then
reported, seduced many people to Popery a long time; And a particular
Countess of this kingdom was then instanced before the Bench.

Report came in against him also, that he had an office of a Treasureship, and
was Treasurer for the Papists under him in this kingdom, who was adjudged also
to be hang^d, drawn, and quartered, as before.

5 Walter Coleman, a tall black man, being also charged with high Treason for
officiating in this his native Country, as a Priest under the Pope, and by his
Authority: but could say very little, and was convicted of high Treason also.

6 Edmond Friar also an old man, of a great age, and very feeble, in so much
that he could scarce go at all, was convicted of high Treason for the same fact.

7 Peter Wilford, a great notorious Jesuit, who had seduced abundance of
people to Popery (as it was there reported) and caused some to go out of the
Land to live in other Countries; who kept a Maid in his house, that was
troubled with the Mother, by whom he seduced many people to believe that she
was possessed, and that he wrought strange wonders upon her by Popish rights and
customs, which he used with her, his crossing her breast, Popish charms, and
such like notorious Innovations of Popery he caused amongst many people, that
notwithstanding his peremptorinesse and bold carriage, he was clearly proved to
be guilty of high Treason, and therefore condemned to die, as before.

There was also one Henry Rickman of St. Sepulchers Parish, and another called
Henry Minerst, but nothing could be proved against either of them, whereby they
were found guilty as the other seven were.

A Speech made by one of them to this effect.
I Am, and if it shall please this Honorable Bench, an Englishman born, and a
professor of the Romish faith; and whereas I am questioned for the office of
priesthood, it is a most honorable calling, the excellency whereof I am
unworthy in the least degree to officiate. I will not accuse my self, here I
stand before you; whosoever can accuse me really of it, let them come forth
against me.

8 Charles James, an hansome gentile young man, was convicted for Robery and
Burglary.

9 Garrat Conoway a young proper man was convicted for Burglary.

10 Matthew Tedder, a young gentleman, was convicted for Burglary, which was
found out by occasion of his robbing of a Carrier: amongst which his Robbery,
was carried away a piece of red Bays; for he being taken of suspicion for the
Burglary, the said Carriers Bays was found in the house which was robbed:
which the Carrier hearing of, went to see the said Tedder, and (as it has
appeared) knew him to be one of the men that robbed him: for which he was
convicted.

11 Edward Sanford was convicted, for Horse-stealing, for it was proved against
him, by one Richard Bird, who found him with the Horse in Smithfield.

12. John Hodskins, a fine Scholar, a pretty fellow, yet wanted grace.

13. John Davis, a lusty stout personable man.

14. Francis Middle-field, a pretty Youth, and a good Scholar, convicted of
fellonie.

15. Francis Fleming, was convicted of Mansslaughter, for cutting of a man's
left hand, and slew him thereby: coming into an ancient shooe-make^^ shop,
abused him in his own shop, and threw the shoes at his head, so the
shoemaker returned harsh words back again to him, which moved the said
Fleming to draw his Sword: and striking at his head, the said shoemaker held
up his arm to save himself; whereby just at his wrist, his hand was cut off, he
bled about a pottle of blood, as witness declared: and after a days
languishing in misery dyed of it.

16. Steeven Wooldright, Convicted for Felony.

17. John West, Convicted for Felony.

18. Thomas Randall, an High-way-man.

19. Edward Dawson, an High-way-man.

20. William Bennet, an hansome personable young man, Convicted for Felony.

21. Henry Smith, an High-way-man.

22. Spooner, Convicted of Treason, for Coining, the most of his Coin was
halfe-crown-peeces, and some shillings, and six pences: three pound of his
Coining, was showed in the Court, he was an ancient man, and as did appear,
had used it a long time.

23. Thomas Parmond, for Horse-stealing.

24. Matthew Chenering.

25. Elizabeth Lee. Both of them, for stealing of a Cloak, a Gentleman, (as
she said) was to lie with her the said Eliz. Lee, and the mean while Chenering
conveyed a way the Cloak.

26. Thomas Gates, for Horse-stealing.

27. James Evans, a Serving-man, for breaking of an House.

28. Edward Hartford, a Cooks Boy, sometime servant at the Castle in
Pye-Corner, for Rape, and Buggry.

29. Another man, for Felony.

30. Margret Hethersall, for picking of a Pocket: but by reason she is with
Child, she is reprived.

31. Last of all, Richard Martin, a complete Gentleman for person, was by
himself in the last place adjudged for Felony.

The Names of those that were questioned before his Matis. Justices, Oyer and
Terminer, refusing the Oath of Supremacy.
1. John Horsley, 2. John Skeele. 3. Robert Curtis. 4. Nicolats Harper. 5.
Walter White. 6. Francis Harris. 7. Thomas White. 8. Henry Haskell. 9. Henry
Potter.
FINIS.

