CORINNA; OR, Humane FRAILTY.

A POEM. With an Answer to the E. of R -- 's Satyr against Man.

Virtus est, vitium fugere, et Sapientia prima,
Stultitia caruisse.
Hor. ep. lib. 1.

At bona pars Hominum, decepta cupidine falso
Hor. ser. lib. 1.

Qui color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo.
Ovid.

LONDON, Printed by I. W. and Sold by I. Nutt, 1699.

CORINNA; OR, Humane Frailty, etc.
NOT all the Precepts of Philosophy,
The Sages Rules, or sad Catastrophe
Of perverse Men, who like Mon'ments are set,
To warn the erring World, to avoid their Fate,
Can keep in Reasons Bounds the ungoverned Will,
Of heedless Youth, inquisitive of ill.
The middle Road of Safety they despise,
And only by Experience will be wise.
This juv'nile Age, with soareing Fancies blessed,
In all their Limbs, Beauty and Strength's expressed.
An elate Pride in what they say or do,
Disdain of all but of themselves does show.
Not a young pampered Steeds unbridl'd Rage,
More Mischief or Destruction does presage.
But sooner much their Feirceness may be rein'd,
Then stubborn Youth from follies be reclaimed.
There Is no example no advice can win,
Them from experimenting untryd Sin.
A secret pleasure's thought in what is unknown,
Which they will attempt, though sure to be undone.
Nor only Youth, but all Mankind is led,
By this fond itch which in our Natures bred.
Not all the Shipwrecks on the treacherous Seas,
Can hinder Man from vent'ring of his ease,
And happy quiet in a safe retreat,
To purchase Wealth, to make his heirs live great.
The ambitious Man, on the last Statesmans fall,
Raises himself the Favorite of all.
Where for a while he like a meator Shines,
Forgetting there must be a change of times.
Until another envious Fool does come,
And plot his ruin to supply his room.
The Tradesman with his callings not content,
But to the War his rigid purpose bent.
Leaving his Wife and Family behind,
Honor and Riches in big hopes to sind.
At last returns with loss of Limbs and Blood,
The wretched pity of his Neighborhood,
But if succesful in some things Men prove,
How restless and uneasy it is they move.
Until some other project they have begun,
Some new Invention to loose what they'v won.
The chastest Wife that never could be brought,
In deed to wrong her Husband, will in thought.
And many Cuckolds made with an intent.
Only to try a new experiment.
Whether a Lover can more pleasure give,
Then what from Spouse they lawfully receive.
Though no temptation in the Man there be,
There is enough in the variety.
Venture for change, divorce and civil broile,
As Men for Honor sweat, aspire and toil.
So longing Virgins yield to Men they hate,
Only to be informd of the Marriage State:
But why should I all others faults cry down,
Who have as great a Number of my own?
Often I Have by Friends, by Books been told in vain,
Loves pleasures were not equal to its pain.
The many ills which by the Fair were wrought,
And what destructions, they on Men have brought,
Of Cittys sacked, Countries made desolate,
By plighted Vows, which they did violate.
Of Jealous pangs, of Murders, and the train
Of all their mischeifs, but 'twas all in vain.
For bright Corinna drove my fears away,
Like frighted Spirits at approach of Day.
A thousand Beauties charmed my willing Sight,
Her every touch gave fancy, new delight,
Nor could a wish raise joy to greater height.
What sudden raptures filled my swelling breast,
When in my longing Arms she Love confessed.
Convulsive tremblings sei'sd my Limbs all ore,
And vital Spirits flew from every pore.
Such modest Coyness she at first did use,
As ripened Maids unwilling to refuse,
And begged, I Would not her easiness abuse.
Such faint resistance, made my feirce Desire,
But rage the more, like Winds opposed to Fire.
She cried to see if any help was nigh,
No I replied, nor any wittness by.
Secure within this shady lonely Grove,
We may enjoy the blessings of our Love,
She sighed, and blushed, and yielded as she Srove.
Wrapped in each others Arms entranced we lay,
As if our hovering Souls were fled away.
A pointed pleasure through our Bodies run,
And Life with joy was almost overcome.
Ah Heaven! as I recovered breath, I cried,
How has the World, and Friends this Sex belied.
Can there in Nature be a higher Bliss,
Or Heaven afford a greater happyness.
Speechless She lay, with languid Eyes half closed,
Her naked Beauties to my view exspos'd.
Nothing was ever formed so wondrous Fair,
As her white Thighs, and bright dissheveld hair.
Such glories did my dazeld Senses charm,
As would the blood of an old Hermit warm,
And Priests decayed, with new desires alarm.
I took her to my trembling Arms again,
More willing now to ease my amorous pain.
In various Shapes her Beauteous Limbs did twine,
She claspt me with a rage as great as mine.
Millions of mutual kisses gave, 'till we,
Breathless and fainting lay with exstasie.
As two feirce warriors who with equal bent,
Had fought 'till all their mighty Strength was spent.
Rest by consent their Spirits to refresh,
Panting and gasping on the bloody Grass.
So we our softer combat did renew,
And did the genial work of Fate pursue.
Often we met and solemn Vows would take,
That no strange Love or interest should break,
The dear Engagements, which we then did make.
Often we walked into that silent Grove,
Where first we made a Sacrifice to Love.
Where often she would call to mind the happy Hour,
In which she yielded first to Loves soft power.
Point to the mossy place where first we laid,
More blessed then Kings on beds of Purple made.
Nor was her Wit less charming then her Face,
In all she said or did there was a Grace.
An air such as in Shining Courts is seen,
And Innocent as Nymphs upon the Green.
How would she chide me if I chanced to stay,
Though against my will, beyond the promised Day.
Go cruel Man, some other shares your Heart,
Whom you will betray no doubt to equal smart.
If that her passion can compare with mine,
Such will her torture be, for your base crime.
Good God! that I should think you could be true,
Whose charming Tongue the whole Sex can subdue.
Whom every Woman must dote on like me,
And all be ruined by your perjury.
While I the most transported Man alive,
For false evasions do not meanly strive.
But flying to her Arms by vigor prove,
And manly strength, my constancy in Love.
With strict embrace, melting in rapturous Joys,
The extreme bliss, her causless fears destroys.
Confesses my wronged Faith she had abused,
And that it was a Jealous trick she used.
In this blessed State, I thought to live and die,
Nor would have changed to gain a Monarchy.
But lasting happiness to Man's denied,
Least pleasure flowing with a constant tide,
Should make him forget Heaven, by too much pride.
So my Feirce Joys a period quickly found,
When I least though it received 'its mortal wound,
Like blasted Fruit, upon the fertile Ground.
And for the mighty bliss Heaven did ordain,
That I as many Sorrow's should sustain.
One Night as I without appointment came,
Prompted by Fate and an impatient flame.
I saw a Man, whom she, I thought carest,
With all the Love and passion could b'exprest.
Saying and doing those things ore and ore,
Which she so often, had done with me before.
So Lais entertained the Grecian Youth,
And gave to every wise Man bliss enough.
Fruition was the only joy they sought,
Not those vain pleasures in the Fancy wrought.
For when Enjoyment's past, all other Bliss,
Is but jmaginary Happiness.
Not the intelligence of Lovers Eyes,
Nor the shot lightning from the blazing Skies,
Is half so quick, as was the jealous Fire,
A sight so unexpected did inspire.
Reason by Rage and Madness overcome,
With my drawn Sword I flew into the Room,
And this unhappy Rival gave his doom.
But Gods! the astonishment which seized my Brain,
When I perceived 'twas Drusus I had slain.
Drusus my Friend, whom I had early Loved,
And in a thousand Trials honest proved.
Drusus though rough, yet generous brave and wise,
Bred up together from our infancies.
The constant Partner of my tender care,
And in all Fortunes had an equal share,
Our sports when Young and studies were the same,
Together in the War, we fought for equal fame.
From whom I never would any secret hide,
But in his Breast did all my thoughts confi'de.
To him the Stories of my Love would tell,
What my Corinna, and my self befell.
Describe the Beauties of her Face and Mind,
How innocent she was, how just and kind.
Which he reproving me would never hear,
But his aversenss to the Sex declare.
'Twas his belief no Woman could be true,
Or if they were, less passion was their due.
That her fair Face my Senses did beguile,
False was her Love, and treacherous her Smile.
Besides it did emasculate my mind,
And take my thoughts from things of higher kind.
Which friendly libercy I near took ill,
But with a Smile, would contradict him still,
Love one, and seem complying to his will.
Thinking no greater blessing Heaven could send,
Then such a constant Mistress such a Friend:
But soon the Scene was shifted, and I found,
Horror and dismal ruin all around.
With what relenting pity was I stroke,
How with amazement filled when thus he spoke.
Forgive me, Friend, that I this Trial made,
Which has my life and your content betrayed
When I succesless found all means did prove,
To wean you from the dotage of your Love.
Thinking no Woman without magic Art,
So wholly could possess a Wisemans Heart.
I did resolve to see this tempting Fair,
And break, those spells, which did your Soul ensnare.
But ah! how frail are the resolves of Man,
How little able Loves power to withstand.
By my own policy I was undone,
And taken by those charms I should have shun.
Her crafty Maid, that cursed Implement,
Subtle as the first Serpent to invent.
By such as whom, all Virgin's are seduced,
Matrons debauched, all Innocence abused.
And without such no Woman can be won,
Though e're so lewd, or in her Nature prone.
Gained by my Man, and Bribed with powerful Gold,
The entrusted Secrets of her Mistress told.
Brought me acquainted with the charming Fair,
At certain times she knew you would not be there.
Where under a false Name I did pursue,
The mad design to prove if she was true.
Declared I Loved her better then bright Arms,
Then Victory or Fame which Soldiers warmes.
That to win her, would much more pleasure yield,
Then all the Trophies of the conquered Field
Kingdoms and Empire would despise for her,
And thought her Slave a happier Man by far,
Something in my rough way, there was did Please,
'Twas new, and so succeeded with more Ease.
Cunning Letitia too did never Fail,
To use such Elogies as would Prevail.
My shape and unaffected Sense to Praise,
And every Virtue might her Passion raise.
Moved by the feirceness of my Warm Adress,
The Merits of my Person did Confess.
And had she no Engagement, she did own.
I Would been Preferred to all she ere had known,
With such a Grace, and Charming Modesty,
To every thing I said, she did Reply.
A tender Pity in my Breast did Rise,
And Love began to Kindle at her Eyes.
I did Repent. that I so far had gone,
Fore saw the Dangers I was Running on,
Endeavored to Retreat, but all in Vain,
With too much force she did my Heart Detain,
And thought to Die was a much lesser Pain.
Her Friendship, or at most Platonic Love,
Was all that I Durst Hope or she Approve.
And more I Feared then you would think was Just,
To be Enjoyed without a Breach of Trust.
But my Desire was grown too Violent,
Only with her Esteem to be Content.
My Feirce Tempestuous Flame began to Rage;
With that Fury no Reason coud Aswage,
In all she did such Melting Charms appeared,
That my own Faith was Justly to be Feared,
At last with many Struglings in my Breast,
With Agonies of Love and Conscience Pressed.
To Fly this Fair Inchanter did intend,
This Wretched Life in Painful Travel end,
Rather then Wrong so Generous a Friend.
I just was Taking of my last Adieu,
Concealing still my Self, and Love from you.
Her Eyes all Bathed in Tears, and I half Dead,
More of her Yiedling, then my Death Afraid.
The Moment we were Tenderly Embraced,
Sighing as though that Moment was our Last.
Then you Rushed in and Freed me from my Pain,
And by my Death that quiet I Attain,
Which in my Life I should have Sought in Vain.
Forgive Corinna Since it was my Crime,
Let her not Suffer for the Fault of Mine,
My Friend -- Forgive me too. Was all he Said,
A Ghastly Paleness ore his Face was Spread,
And his Life Issued with the Crimsoned Flood.
Unhappy Youth I with Loud Sorrow Cried,
I wish to Heaven that I for the had Died.
Ah! Why Corinna, new Friends did you make,
When I Forsook the whole Sex for your sake?
Thou think, because thou never did Consent,
In deed to Wrong my Love, you are Innocent.
But thy Minds Adulterate, and no more,
Shall I Enjoy such Pleasures as before.
Now do I prove the Ills I was forewarnd,
Whom no Example or advice alarmed.
Far from thy Sight, I will my Self Convey,
Least to more Ruin thou shoud'st me betray.
False as Bewitching Sirens are thy Smiles,
The Men more Cursed are taken by thy Wiles.
Amazeing as a Bright Consuming Fire,
Safe only at a Distance to Admire,
For all you Touch with Anguish do Expire,
Beauteous as the Destroying Angels are,
Noxious your power as a Malignant Star.
To some Lone Village I will Far Remove,
Far from the Fatal Sor'cry of your Love,
For ever Mourn, my Friend Untimely Slain,
And never Venture in the World again.
Let my unhappy Fate, an instance be,
Of this Worlds change and Mutability.
That no Man on his Fortune may rely,
Be Proud and Vain, or things forbidden Try.
Nor led away by the Aereal Phantom Love,
More Bliss imagine, then he e're can Prove.
Place too much joy in any thing on Earth
Pleasures he must resign too with his Breath.
And are the Torment and the Sting of Death.
An ANSWER TO THE SATYR, Against MAN.
Propria Vineta Caedit. Hor. Ep.
WERE I a Spirit free (which Thought's as Vain,
As it is to alter what the Heavens ordain)
To choose what form of Flesh and Blood I Would please
To Live in, both for happiness and ease?
I would not wish to change from what I am,
And be unthinking Brute rather then Man.
I grant indeed that Man degenerate,
By far is in a more deplored State,
Then Orig'nal Beast, which by instinct lead,
Acts to the Principles, in's Nature, Bred.
And wilful Men, I own, very often do,
Things against Reason and their Nature too.
Self preservation's Natures chiefest Law.
And yet how many do themselves destroy?
Reason obliges likewise, all Mankind,
To use that justice which themselves would find.
Yet what Oppression what Deceit is used,
And how are honest Men by Knaves abused.
These are not Actions proper to our kind,
But the Effects of a corrupted Mind.
And when by Lawless Passions we are subdued,
Not acting by the Reason we are indu'd.
We only do retain the forms of Men,
And are no longer what we outward seem.
Nabuchadnezzar from his Throne was driven,
For's Blasphemy, 'til he acknowledged Heaven.
Seven Years among the Salvage Kind he ran,
Fed on the Grass, and was no longer Man.
Restored to reason, and his former State,
Blessed his Creator, and his change of Fate.
You will object perhaps, to be a King,
" And a poor wretched Man's another thing,
" A Dog is a more happy Animal,
" And void of Pain, then he that is rational,
" Cursed with a brawling Wife, both Sick and Poor,
" Forced for Releif to Beg from Door to Door,
" For succor to his reason flies in Vain,
" The more he thinks the more 'Taugments his Pain.
Deplorable indeed would be our Fate,
If after this Life were no other State.
Yet to aleviate his mighty Grief,
Reason alone can give him most Releif.
Let him with Patience his Misfortunes Bear.
The Times will change or Death will end his Care,
And a new Life reward his Sufferings here.
But Brutes insensible of future Bliss,
No other Life has to Enjoy but this.
In Vain the Allmighty's Image do we bear,
If any Beast we to our Selves prefer.
In Vain on thankless Men did Heaven bestow,
Reason and Knowledge and his Likeness too,
If other Creatures had more Excellence,
Then what Resembles his Omnipotence.
And how, I Swear, I cannot conceive in the least,
(...) Man of Sense could wish Himself a Beast.
(...)esides the Impiety of such a Thought,
(...)s would deface the Image Heaven had wrought,
No advantage can by the change be got.
For Beasts by Nature on each other Prey,
Excited by no Hunger yet they slay.
And were it not for the Industrious Swain,
That Folds his Kids and Lambs upon the Plain,
There'd few but of the Rav'nnous Kind remain.
So fell Actaeon when he was transformed,
Mangled by the devouring Dogs and torn.
The Gods did punish Inhumanities,
Frequently by a Metamorphosis,
As impious Lycaon for his Sacrifice.
Much better had the Poet wished that all,
Mankind would live like Creatures rational,
Rather then Brutes, and monstrous Animals.
In all our Actions we might Reason show,
And do to all as we'd be done unto.
Princes Despotick power would not claim,
Subjects more True and Loyal would become.
Priests would throw off their damned Hypocrisy,
And Lords no more their Words would Falsify,
Nor any live by thriving Villainy.
Laws would not be broke, nor Judges bribed,
Nor Honest Men by a packed Jury tried.
None would make use of power to oppress,
Great ones, like Beasts, would not devour the less.
None would his Mistress or his Friend betray,
Or Bridgroom Cuckold on his Wedding Day.
Phisicians, Bawds, all in their Trade be True,
And the Old World would be reformed a new.
Then Men according to themselves would Live,
And be the happiest Creatures which do Breath.
FINIS.

