CORNU-COPIA, OR, Room for a Ram-head.

Wherein is described the dignity of the Ram-head above the Roundhead, or
Rattle-head.



London printed for John Reynolds, 1642.

CORNV-COPIA OR Room for a Ram-head. Being a Dialogue between a Man and his
Wife.
Wife. WHat now Husband? Are you grown horn mad? What do you mean to assume
such a head to make your self ridiculous, and a laughing stock to all the
world? And to bring shame and disgrace unto me, as if I were an unhonest woman,
who have been loyal unto you all my life, I vow I will have them off.


Husband. But vow you shall not, for I take more pleasure and content in them
then in any thing in the world beside, esteeming them as a goodly ornament unto
me above all other men, 2. as a testification to all the world of my innocence,
3. it is unto me a strong defense against all adverse power, 4. horns are so
serviceable and useful that no man almost can live without them.


W. But why did you attempt such a thing without my consent?


H. Good wife be content, for there are very few wear horns without their
wives consent.


W. But you do, and that I am sure of.


H. Will you take your oath of that?


W. No indeed, I am not so rash, I do not use to swear you know, yet this is
enough to make any one swear and curse too, especially considering that not
long since your head was as round as a ball.


H. But when my head was round, I could neither pass along the street nor sit
in my shop without receiving a jeer from one knave or other, some calling me a
troublesome fellow, some saying I was a despiser of government, others telling
me I was an enemy to Bishops and the discipline of our Church. If I had a head
full of wit, I should be called, or at least suspect me to be either a
projector, or a crafty knave: should I wear long locks, I should be esteemed a
roaring boy or a swaggerer; and all this laid upon me, though I were innocent
of them all. This judgment passed upon me for my head; but who says so of me
now? They may well gaze at me, but judge me to be no other, but an innocent
harmless and contented man.


W. But why are horned men called more innocent and harmless then other men?


H. Because they have no harm in them, for where horns are there is
innocence: As for example, we may see in the very animal, these whom nature
has horned, are of all other most harmless in themselves, and most
beneficial and serviceable to man, as sheep, oxen, goats and the like, who
never offend any, and yet wondrous strong in their own defense, as you may see
in the fiercest of them all, which is the Bull; when shall you see him run at
any dog, but pass by a thousand of them without regard or fear, but if they
run at him he with his horns toss them up into the air, and causes them
oftentimes to garter their legs with their own guts. How many comely headed
Rams pass by the Butchers doors, against whom no dog moves his tongue,
and if they should, his horned head is a sufficient defense to push them down
backward.


W. But what is that to men that wear horns?


H. Is there not an old proverb, that one pair of legs is worth two pair of
hands? but I say in a new proverb, that one pair of horns is worth ten pair
of legs. If the old Lord Keeper had had a good horned head, he needed not to
have borrowed a Finches wings to transport his massy body over the seas, he
might have staid at home and been safe, for what virtue is there in birds
feathers comparable with horns? What defense is there in a delinquent Prelates
three corner cap? Or in a Popes miter? Or in a Cardinals cap? Would not one
pair of horns well planted in one innocent head be worth all these? Who can
deny it? Surely no man. Sir John Suckling with his six score troopers, was
forced to fly, whereas I stay at home with my horns in quietness, amongst
many of the forked order, and no man envies me.

Moreover Horns are a great commodity both here and beyond the seas, many
living comfortably thereupon, and the company of horners greater then can be
known: I could wish that all my kin were horned, then I might happily get
something at their death, whereas now I am like to get nothing. But let me dye
when I will, if I leave my heirs nothing else, I bequeath unto them my horns.

Again, Horns are of such necessary use, that the Commonwealth cannot want
them, being used of most sorts of people, even from our infancy to our dying
day. For no sooner can children walk and talk, but they are put to their
horne-booke to learn the first rudiments of all Liberal Sciences; and when
they grow greater, to recreate themselves with a horn Top, both in Schools,
Houses, and in the Streets.

In every Country house where you come, you shall see the first thing the good
man seeks or enquireth for in the morning, is his horn to draw on his
shoes, and for assurance of not missing it, has it oftentimes made fast to a
post with a chain. Nay Tom of Bedlam is mad when he wants his horn. How
long might the Sow-gelder walk both City and Country ere any one knew him from
another man, except his horn proclaim him, and then all look out. Who dare
stay a Post upon the high way, when once he joins his horn to his head and
winds it. It is a hanging matter. Many dainty Dames have I seen sewing with
horn Thimbles on their fingers, when they have either sold, pawned, lost or
laid by their silver ones. Many Bakers when they are ready to set their Oven,
put the horn to their head to warn their customers in. How many a gallant
Gentleman riding a hunting both in field and forest, has a horn about his
neck in a silk string or scarf, which when he has lost his sport, windeth
his horn both loud and shrill, the meaning whereof the envious dogs well
know, and by nature are forced to obey, willingly, cheerfully and speedily come
to their game: but first the huntsman must set the horn to his head, or else
it has no virtue to work this effect. For the horn and the head have a
special relation one to the other.

What Round head or Rattle head may then compare with the horned head? They
trouble a Commonwealth, these benefit it sundry ways, as you see.

How many aged persons of all degrees, both men and women, are beholding to the
horn, which they place in the midst of their faces, not far from the place
where they should grow, to hold up a pair of spectacles, when their eyes grow
dim: whereby their sight is so renewed, that they can discern the smallest
Atome, or mote in the Sun beams?

What man or boy scorneth to carry an Inkhorne in his pocket to serve him upon
all needful occasions?

Some have been so proud they would not, but have had their Clerks to carry
them after them, but after this contempt they have proved delinquents, and came
short of Westminster.

Nay the Drunkard himself often conveyes so much good liquor to his head with
the horn, that he is not able to come home without the help of another, which
is a Lantern to keep him from falling in the kennell, or justling every post
he meets with.

How many sorts of fine spoons are made of horn, with which we need not be
ashamed to sup as good broth or pottage as Giles Calfine ever seasoned or
crumb'd?

In North-Holland there is a renowned City styled by the name of Horn, famous
through the world for shipping, merchandise, and trading.

Lastly, there is in some horns a wonderful virtue: the Hearts horn has
power to expel poison, and is excellent for use in painting and liming.

But who is able to express the virtue of the Unicornes horn; one of them
being valued above a Kings Ransom.


Wife. Well Husband, your Reasons have overcome me; neither I, nor any honest
woman, is able to gainsay them: Therefore I give my free consent unto you, to
wear horns unto your dying day.


Husb. I thank you loving wife, you have now given me full content, according
to my hearts desire. But yet to set forth at large the whole benefit and
commodity of horns, would be tedious: Therefore to conclude with that which
has been spoken, wishing no man to despise the Horn: For the proudest he
whosoever he be, may (by chance) or must (of necessity) use or wear the horn.


FINIS.

