Roman Catholic PRINCIPLES, In Reference to God and the King, Explained in a
LETTER to a Friend, And now made Public to show the Connection between the said
PRINCIPLES, And the Late POPISH PLOT. The Third Edition, Revised.

Matthew. 22. v. 21. Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and and unto
God the things that are God's. John 11. v. 48. If we let him thus alone, all
men will believe on him, and the Romans shall come and take away both our Place
and Nation. Printed in the Year, 1680.

SIR,
I Find your last as full of Doubts and Inquietudes, as your former was of Heat
and Zeal: Whether mere Compassion has altered your Judgment, or that You Fear
your own Turn may be next, I cannot tell; But I easily percieve, You, and the
greatest part of Honest Thinking Protestants, as well as You, begin, (tho
late,) Miseries inflicted on Catholics.
) to suspect, That Catholics have Wrongfully Suffered the loss of their Fame,
their Goods, their Fortunes, and many their Lives. Nor do I wonder to see you
touched with some Concern at our Miseries; For besides the sad Spectacles of
Bloodshed, (which I mention without any Resentment, or Disrespect to the
Government,) the Prisons have been filled with Us, whole Families Ruined and
Exiled; poor Widows and Innocent Orphans have Perished through Distress, the
very Woods and Deserts have not wanted Men Dying with Cold and Hunger; And all
this upon account of a PLOT, (Horrid indeed, and Detestable in it self,) but
which could never yet be Proved against Us, by any One Credible Witness, or
Probable Circumstance evincing the Crime.

True it is, Through the Perjuries,
Dr. Oats, Captain Bedloe, and others of Debauched Lives, and Desperate
Fortunes, have Positively Sworn, (if bare Positive Swearing, without any other
Probability of Truth, Of Wicked Men.
may stand for good Evidence,) to a multiplicity of Particulars. But these Men
have been, and still are, so notoriously stigmatized with all sorts of Vice and
Infamy; Their Oaths have been Confronted with so many Self-contradictions;
Their Forgeries accompanied with such Incredible, such Impossible
Circumstances; Their Lies and Fables so stuffed with Absurdities, Nonsense,
and Follies; The Crime of Perjury so often, and so plainly proved against them.
In short, both their Past and Present Villainies are now become so Apparent and
Perspicuous, that the greatest part of the Nation has an Abhorrence of Them.

But You tell me, (and You are in the right,) That the Thing which has rendered
Credible the Testimony of otherwise Incredible Witnesses, against Us, and which
has Invalidated all contrary Evidence given in our behalf, is a Persuasion
many Protestants have, Evil Principles wrongfully Imputed.
That the Catholic Religion is made up of Traitorous Principles, Destructive
to Peace and Government. You say You have been Informed by Common Report, by
Printed Books; Nay, by some Ministers in their very Pulpits, That Catholics
hold it an Article of Faith to Believe, That the POPE can Depose KINGS, Absolve
their Subjects from their Allegiance, and Dispose of Kingdoms to whom He
pleases: That to Murder Protestants, and Destroy the Nation by Fire and Sword,
for propagation of the Catholic Faith, are Works of Piety, and Meritorious of
Heaven. These, and the like Horrid Aspersions; together with I know not what
Feigned Idolatries, Superstitions, and Abuses, are (as you have rightly
Intimated,) laid to the Charge of Roman Catholics, whereby to render both
their Faith and Persons Odious to many, (otherwise Well-meaning) People, who
not sufficiently examining the Truth of Things, but taking all for granted,
Judge nothing Ill enough can be said or done against Men so Principled.

And is it not Strange and Severe, That Principles, and those pretended of
Faith too, And always disowned by Catholics.
should be Imposed upon Men, which They Themselves Renounce and Detest? If the
Turk's Alcoran should in like manner be urged upon Us, and We hanged up for
Mahumetans, all we could do or say in such a Case, would be patiently to Die,
with Protestation of our own Innocence. And this is the Posture of our present
condition; We Abhor, We Renounce, We Abominate such Principles; We Protest
against them, and Seal our Protestations with our Dying Breaths. What shall We
say? What can We do more? To Accuse Men as Guilty in Matters of Faith, which
They never owned, is the same thing as to Condemn them for Matters of Fact,
which they never did.

You press the Question, and say, some of our General Councils, several Papal
Decrees, and many of our Doctors and Divines, assert the forementioned
Principles. Sir, I have been Instructed in the Articles of my Faith, and I
acknowledge the Lawful Authority of General Councils; Yet I profess I never
learnt, or found asserted in any of them any such Principles. And I propose
unto You, this plain and short Dilemma; Either the abovenamed Principles are
esteemed by Us ^^ Matters of Faith or not: If they be, what further can be
required of Us, than to Deny, and Forsake such a Faith? And this We constantly
do. But if They be not Matters of Catholic Faith, nor owned by Us as such, why
are Catholics, as Catholics, punished for them? Why is Our Religion
Persecuted on that account? Let those in Gods Name, if any there be, of what
Religion soever, who hold such Tenants, suffer for them: Why should the
Innocent be Involved with the Guilty? There is neither Reason nor Justice in it.

Hereunto some Persons, An Objection,
(I hope out of Zeal and Misinformation, rather than Malice,) stick not to say;
That Dispensations, and I know not what Indulgences and Pardons, wereby to
Legitimate the Crimes of Lying and Forswearing, when the Interest of our Church
requires; is a main part of our Religion: And by Consequence, the Denial of our
Principles, is no sufficient Justification of our Innocence. Answered.
I answer; First, It is in the highest measure Censorious in any one, to Impose
upon all Our Ancesters, and the greatest part of Mankind, who are, or have been
Members of our Religion, such an Excess of Folly and Wickedness, as must needs
have perverted all Humane Society. Secondly, If We could Lawfully Deny the
Principles of our Faith when Interest requires; Why have We lost Our Estates,
Our Liberties, Our Lives for the Profession of it? To what purpose are Oaths
and Tests devised to entangle Us? How Impertinently is the frequenting the
Protestant Church, and Receiving the Communion, proposed unto Us, and Refused
by Us? Thirdly, Though many Men may be induced to Lie, and Forswear, when they
have some Hopes or Prospect thereby of Temporal Advantage; Yet that Persons
Dying for their Conscience and Religion, (as diverse have done, and those no
Fools, even by the Confession of our Adversaries,) should be so stupendiously
Sottish and Mad, either to imagine, that Lies and Perjuries, for concealment of
Treason, Murder, Massacre and Destruction of others by Fire and Sword, should
be Acts of Virtue, pleasing to God, Dispensable by the Pope, and Meritorious of
Heaven: Or that, on the contrary, Knowing, and Believing, (as needs They must,)
such Monsters and Horrors to be Odious and Detestable in the sight both of God
and Man, They should nevertheless, upon the very brink of Eternity, Wittingly
and Willingly cast Themselves Headlong into an Assured Damnation; and this at
a Time when they might have saved both Bodies and Souls, by merely Discharging
a good Conscience, in acknowledging the Truth, and becoming Honest Men. This, I
say is Inhumane, and contradictory to all Sense and Reason to believe.

Now therefore I am come to what you so often, and so earnestly press me to,
(viz) to satisfy the World, and clear my Self, my Fellow Sufferers, and my
Religion, The Intent of this Epistle.
from the Imputation laid upon Us, on pretense of such Principles, by a True
and Candid Explanation of my Belief and Judgment, in the Main Points of Faith
and Loyalty, Controverted between Catholics and Protestants, as they severally
Relate to God, and the King.

PARAGRAPH I. Of the CATHOLIC FAITH, and CHURCH in General.
1. THE Fruition of God, Redemption in Christ,
and Remission of Sin is not attainable by Man, otherwise then Ephesians. 2. 8. 1*
Cor. 15. 22.
in and by the Merits of Jesus Christ, who gratis Purchased It for Us.

2. These Merits of Christ are not applied to Us, applicable by Faith.
otherwise than by a Right Mark 16 16. Heb. 11. 6.
Faith in Christ.

3. Which is but One,
This Faith is but Ephesians. 4. 4. etc,
One, Entire and Conformable to its Object, being Divine Revelations; to all
which Jam. 2. 10
Faith gives an undoubted Assent.

4. Supernatural,
These Revelations contain many Mystcries 1 Cor. 1. 20. Mat. 16. 17
transcending the Natural Reach of Humane Wit or Industry; Wherefore,

5. It became the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, By the Divine Providence to be
Learnt,
to provide Man of some Isa. 38* 8.
Way or Means whereby he might Arrive to the Knowledge of these Mysteries;
Means Joh. 9. 41
Visible and Apparent to all; Means Mat. 11 25.
proportionable to the Capacities of all; Means John 15. 22.
Sure and Certain to all.

6. Not from private Interpretation of Scripture.
This Way or Means is not the Reading of Scripture, Interpreted according to
the Private 2 Pet. 3. 16. Pro. 14. 12. Mat. 29. 29
Reason or 1 John 4. 1. and 6.
Spirit of every Disjunctive Person, or Nation in Particular; But,

7. It is an Attention and Matthew. 18. 17. Luk* 10. 16
Submission to the Doctrine of the Catholic or Universal Church, established
by Christ for the Instruction of all, Psalm. 2. 8. Isa. 2. 2. etc. cap. 49. 6*
Matt. 5. 14
Spread for that end throughout all Nations, and visibly continued in the
Succession of Pastors, and People throughout all Ages: From which Church Isai.
59. 21. Joh. 16. 13. Eze. 17. 26 Ephesians. 5. 25* etc. 1 Timothy 3. 15 Mat* 16. 18
Guided in Truth, and secured from Error in Matters of Faith, by the Mat. 28
20. Joh. 14. 16.
promised Assistance of the Holy Ghost, and guided by the Holy Ghost for that
end.
every one may, and ought to Deu. 17. 8. etc. Mat. 23. 2.
Learn both the Right Sense of the Scripture, and all other Christian Mysteries
and Duties, respectively necessary to Salvation.

8. This Church, This Church is the same with the Roman Catholic,
thus Spread, thus Guided, thus visibly Continued, Can. 6. 8. Joh. 10. 16. Romans
15. 5. Joh. 17. 22. Philip. 2. 2.
in One Uniform Faith, and Subordination of Government, is that Self-same which
is termed the Roman Catholic Church, the Qualifications abovementioned,
(viz.) Unity, Indeficiency, Visibility, Succession, and Universality,) being
applicable to no other Church, or Assembly, whatsoever.

9. From the Testimony and Authority of This Church, From the Testimony of
which, we receive the Scripture to be Gods Word.
it is, that We Receive, and Believe the Scriptures to be Gods Word: And as She
can Mat. 16. 18 1 Timothy 3. 15 Mat. 18. 17*
assuredly tell Us, This or That Book is Gods Word, so can she with the like
Assurance, tell us also the True Sense and Meaning of it in Controverted Points
of Faith; The same Spirit that Writ the Scripture, Isai. 59. 21. Joh. 14. 26.
Enlightening Her to Understand, both It, and all Matters Necessary to
Salvation. From These Grounds it Follows,

10. Divine Revelations only Matters of Faith.
All, and only Divine Revelations delivered by God unto the CHURCH, and
proposed by Her to be Believed as such, are, and ought to be esteemed Articles
of Faith; Divine Revelations only Matters of Faith.
and the contrary Opinions, Heresy. And,

11. As an Obstinate Separation from the Unity of the Church, What Heresy, and
what Sckism!
in known declared Matters of Faith, is Formal 1 Cor. 11. 19.
Heresy; So a wilful Separation from the Visible Unity of the same Church, in
Matters of Subordination and Government, Mat. 18. 17
is Formal Tit. 3. 10 1 Cor. 1. 10 cap. 12. 25
Schism.

12. The Church proposes unto Us Matters of Faith: How Matters of Faith are
proposed by the Church.
First, and chiefly, By the Joh. 5. 39
Holy Scripture, in Points plain and Intelligible in it. Secondly, By Acts. 15.
per tot.
Definitions of General Councils, in Points not sufficiently Explained in
Scripture. Thirdly, By 2 These. 2. 15. cap. 3. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 2.
Apostolical Traditions, derived from Christ and his Apostles, to all Succeding
Ages. Fourthly, By her Jam. 2. 18.
Practice, Worship and Ceremonies, Confirming her Doctrine.

PARAGRAPH II. Of Spiritual and Temporal Authority.
1. GEneral Councils (which are the Church of God, What is the Authority of
General Councils.
Representative) have no Commission from Christ to Frame New Matters of Faith,
Gal. 1. 7, 8.
(these being sole Divine Revelations,) but only to Deu. 17. 8.
Explain and Assertain unto Us, what anciently was, and is Received and
Retained, Mat 18. 17.
as of Faith in the Church, Act. 15. per tot.
upon arising Debates and Controversies about them. Lu. 10. 16.
The Definitions of which, General Councils in Matters of Faith only, Heb. 13.
7. 17.
and proposed as such, Oblige, under pain of Heresy, all the Faithful, to a
Submission of Judgment. But,

2. It is no Article of Faith to believe, That General Councils cannot Err,
either in Matters of Fact or Discipline, An Explanation of the same Authority.
alterable by Circumstances of Time and Place, or in Matters of Speculation or
Civil Policy, depending on mere Humane Judgment or Testimony. Neither of these
being Divine Revelations 1 Timothy 6. 20.
deposited in the Catholic Church, in regard to which alone, she has the Jo
14. 16.
promised Assistance of the Holy Ghost. Hence it is deduced,

3 If a General Council (much less a Papal Consistory) should underta^^ (...)
depose a King, A Deduction from thence concerning Allegiance
and absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance, no Catholic as Catholic is
bound to submit to such a Decree. Hence also it follows:

4. The Subjects of the King of England lawfully may, A second Deduction
concerning the same,
without the least breach of any Catholic Principle, Renounce, even upon Oath,
the Teaching, Declar. fac. Sorb.
Mantaining, or Practicing the Doctrine of deposing Kings Excommunicated for
Heresy, by any Authority whatsoever, as Repugnant to the fundamental Laws of
the Nation, Injurious to Sovereign Power, Destructive to the Peace and
Government; and by consequence, in His Majesty's Subjects, Impious and
Damnable. Yet not properly Heretical, taking the Word Heretical in that
connatural, genuine sense, it is usually understood in the Catholic Church; on
account of which, and other Expressions, (no wise appertaining to Loyalty,) it
is, Of the Oath of Allegiance.
that Cathoclicks of tender consciences refuse the Oath commonly called the
Oath of Allegiance.

5. Catholics believe, The Bishop of Rome Supreme Head of the Church but not
Infallible.
That the Bishop of Rome is the Successor of S. Peter, Mat. 16. 17.
Vicar of Jesus Christ upon Earth, Lu. 22. 31.
and Head of the whole Catholic Church; Jo. 21: 17.
which Church is therefore fitly styled Roman Catholic, being an universal
Body Ephesians. 4. 11, etc.
united under one visible Head. Nevertheless.

6. It is no matter of Faith to believe, That the Pope is in himself
Infallible, separated from a General Council, even in Expounding the Faith: By
consequence Papal Definitions or Decrees, though ex Cathedra, as they term
them, (take exclusively from a General Council, or Universal Acceptance of the
Church,) oblige none under Pain of Heresy, to an interior Assent.

7. Nor do Catholics as Catholics believe that the Pope has any direct, Nor
has any Temporal Authority over Princes.
or indirect Authority over the Temporal Power and Jurisdiction of Princes.
Hence, if the Pope should pretend to Absolve or Dispense with His Majesty's
Subjects from their Allegiance, upon account of Heresy or Schism, such
Dispensation would be vain and null; and all Catholic Subjects
(notwithstanding such Dispensation or Absolution,) would be still bound in
Conscience to defend their King and Country, 1 Pet. 2. v. 12, etc.
at the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes, even against the Pope himself, in
case he should invade the Nation.

8. And as for Problematical Disputes, The Church not responsible for the
Errors of particular Divines.
or Errors of particular Divines, in this or any other matter whatsoever, the
Catholic Church is no wise responsible for them: Nor, are Catholics as
Catholics, justly punishable on their Account. But,

9. As for the King-Killing Doctrine, or Murder of Princes, King-Killine,
Doctring Damnable Heresy.
Excommunicated for Heresy; It is an Article of Faith in the Catholic Church,
and expressly declared in the General Council of Constance, Conc.
that such Doctrine is Damnable and Heretical, Constable.
being contrary to the known Laws of God and Nature. S^ss, 15.


10. Personal Misdemeanors of what Nature soever, Personal misdemeanors not to
be imputed to the Church.
ought not to be Imputed to the Catholic Church, when not Justifyable by the
Tenants of her Faith and Doctrine; For which Reason though the Stories of the
Paris Massacre; the Irish Cruelties; Or Powder Plot, had been exactly true,
(which yet for the most part are Notoriously misrelated) nevertheless
Catholics as Catholics ought not to Suffer for such Offenses, any more then
the Eleven Apostles ought to have Suffered for Judas's Treachery.

11. It is an Article of the Catholic Faith to believe, that no Power on Earth
can License Men to Lie, No Power on Earth can authorize Men to Lie, Forswear,
Murder, etc.
to Forswear, and Perjure themselves, to Massacre their Neighbors, or Destroy
their Native Country, on pretense of promoting the Catholic Cause, or
Religion; Furthermore, all Pardons and Dispensations granted, or pretended to
be granted, in order to any such ends or Designs, have no other validity or
Effect, than to add Sacrilege and Blasphemy to the abovementioned Crimes.

12. The Doctrine of Equivocation or Men^al Reservation, Equivocation not
allowed in the Church.
however wrongfully Imposed on the Catholic Religion, is notwithstanding,
neither taught, nor approved by the Church, as any part of her Belief. 2 Cor.
1. 12
On the contrary, Simplicity and Godly Sincerity are constantly recommended by
her as truly Christian Virtues, necessary to the Conservation of Justice,
Truth, and Common Society.

PARAGRAPH III. Of some Particular controverted Points of FAITH.
1. EVERY Catholic is obliged to believe, Of Sacramental Absolution.
that when a Sinner Ez. 18. 21.
Repents him of his Sins from the bottom of his Heart, 2 Cor. 7. 10
and Ps. 32. 5. Pro. 28. 13.
Acknowledges his Transgressions to God and his Act. 19. 18.
Ministers, the Dispensers of the Mysteries of Christ, 1 Cor. 4. 1.
resolving to turn from his evil ways, Lu. 3. 18.
and bring forth Fruits worthy of Penance, Jam* 5. 16.
there is (then and no otherwise) an Authority left by Christ to Absolve such a
Penitent Sinner from his Sins; which Authority Christ gave his Joh. 20. 21, etc
Mat 18. 18.
Apostles, and their Successors, the Bishops and Priests of the Catholic
Church, in those words, when he said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose Sins you
shall forgive, they are forgiven unto them, etc.

2. Though no Creature whatsoever can make Tit. 3. 5.
Condign satisfaction, Of Satisfaction by penitential works.
either for the Guilt of Sin, or the Pain Eternal due to it; 2 Cor. 3. 5.
This satisfaction being proper to Christ our Savior only; yet penitent
Sinners Redeemed by Christ, may, as Members of Christ, in some measure Act. 26.
20.
satisfy by Prayer, Jonas 3. 5. etc.
Fasting, Alms, Deeds, and other Works of Piety, for the Temporal Pain, which
by order of Divine Justice sometimes remains due, Psa. 102. 9. etc.
after the guilt of Sin, Ps. 109. 23.
and Pains Eternal are (gratis) remitted. Dan. 9. 3.
These Penitential Works are notwithstanding satisfactory no otherwise than as
joined and applied to that satisfaction, Jo^^ 2. 12.
which Jesus made upon the Cross, Luk 11. 41.
in virtue of which alone, Act. 10. 44.
all our good works find a grateful 1 Pe. 2. 5.
acceptance in God's Sight.

3. The Guilt of Sin, Indulgences are not Remission of Sins, but only of
Canonical Penances.
or Pain Eternal due to it, is never remitted by Indulgences; but only such 1
Cor. 5. 3. etc.
Temporal Punishments as remain due after the Guilt is remitted; These
Indulgences being nothing else than a 2 Cor. 2. 6.
Mitigation or Relaxation upon just causes, of Canonical Penances, enjoined by
the Pastors of the Church on Penitent Sinners, according to their several
Degrees of Demerit. Abuses herein not to be charged on the Church.
And if any abuses or mistakes be sometimes committed, in point either of
Granting or Gaining Indulgencies, through the Remisness or Ignorance of
particular Persons, contrary to the ancient Custom and Discipline of the
Church; such Abuses or Mistakes cannot rationally be charged on the Church, nor
rendered matter of Derision, in prejudice to her Faith and Doctrine.

4. Catholics hold there is a Purgatory, There is a Purgatory or State, where
Souls departing this Life with some blemish are purified
that is to say, a Place of state, where Souls departing this Life, with
Remission of their Sins, as to the Eternal Guilt or Pain, yet Numb. 14. 20,
etc. 2 Samuel 12. 13. etc.
Obnoxious to some Temporal Punishment still Remaining due, or not perfectly
freed from the Blemish of some Pro. 24. 16.
venial Defects or Deordinations, Ma. 12. 36. and cap. 5. 22. 26.
(as Idle Words, etc. not liable to Damnation) are Mat. 5. 26 1 Cor. 3. 15.
purged before their Admittance into Heaven, where nothing that is Rev. 21. 27.
defiled can enter. Furthermore.

5. Catholics also hold, Prayers for the Dead available to them.
That such Souls so detained in Purgatory, being the Living Members of Christ
Jesus, are Relieved by the 1 Cor. 15 29. Coll. 1. 24. 2 Mac, 12. 42, etc. 1 Jo.
5. 16.
Prayers and Suffrages of their Fellow Members here on Earth: But where this
place is? Of what Nature or Quality the Pains are? Superfluous Questions about
Purgatory.
How long each Soul is detained there? After what manner the Suffrages made in
their behalf are applied? Whether by way of Satisfaction or Intercession? etc.
are Questions Superfluous, and Impertinent as to Faith.

6. No Man, though just, Jo. 15. 5. 16.
can Merit either an Increase of Sanctity or Happiness in this Life, Of the
merit of good Works, through the merits of Christ.
or Eternal Glory in the next, Independent on the Merits and Passion of Christ;
Nevertheless in and by the Merits of Christ Jesus, Mat. 16. 27
the good Work of a just Man, proceeding from Grace and Charity, are acceptable
to God, Cap. 5. 12.
so far forth as to be, Cap 10. 42.
through his Goodness and Sacred Promise, 2 Cor 5. 10
Truly Meritorious of Eternal Life. 2 Timothy 4. 8.


7. It is an Article of the Catholic Faith, That in the most Holy Sacrament of
the Eucharist, Christ really present in the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
there is Truly and Really contained the Mat. 26. 26.
Body of Christ, Mar 14. 22.
which was delivered for us, and his Blood, which was shed for the Remission of
Sins; Lu. 22. 19.
the substance of Bread and Wine, 1 Cor. 11. 23. etc.
being by the powerful Words of Christ changed into the Substance of his
Blessed Body and Blood, Cap. 10. 16.
the Species or Accidents of Bread and Wine still remaining. Thus,

8. Christ is not present in this Sacrament, But after a supernatural manner.
according to his natural way of Existence, that is, with extension of parts,
in order to place, etc. but after a Supernatural manner, one and the same in
many places, and whole in every part of the Symbols. This therefore is a real,
Substantial, yet Sacramental Presence of Christ's Body and Blood, not exposed
to the external Senses, nor Obnoxious to corporeal Contingences.

9. Neither is the Body of Christ in this Holy Sacrament, Whole Christ in
either species.
Separated from his Blood, or his Blood from his Body, or either of both
disjoined from his Soul and Divinity, Hence Communicants under under one kind
nowise deprived either of the Body or Blood of Christ.
but all and whole Jo. 6. 48 50, 51. 57. 58.
living Jesus is entirely contained under either Species; so that whosoever
receives under one kind, Acts 2. 42.
is truly partaker of the whole Sacrament, and no wise deprived either of the
Body or Blood of Christ. True it is,

10. Our Savior Jesus Christ left unto us his Body and Blood, under two
distinct Species or Kinds; Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
in doing of which, he instituted not only a Sacrament, but also a Sacrifice;
Luke 22. 19, etc.
a Commemorative Sacrifice distinctly 1 Cor. 11. 26.
showing his Death or Bloody Passion, until he come. For as the Sacrifice of
the Cross was performed by a distinct Effusion of Blood, so is the same
Sacrifice Commemorated in that of the Heb. 13. 10.
Altar, by a distinction of the Symbols. Jesus therefore is here given not only
to us, but Lu. 22. 19.
for us; and the Church thereby enriched with a true, proper, and propitiatory
Mal. 1. 11.
Sacrifice, usually termed Mass.

11. Catholics renounce all Divine Worship, Wo^ship of Images wrongfuly
Imposed on Catholics. Yet there is some Veneration due both to Pictures,
and Adoration of Images or Picturs. Luk 4. 8.
God alone we Worship and Adore; nevertheless we make use of Pictures, and
place them in Ex. 25. 18.
Churches and Oratories, to reduce our wandering thoughts, and Enliven our
Memories toward Heavenly things. 1 Kin. 6. 35
And farther, Luke 3. 22.
we allow a certain Honor and Veneration to the Picture of Christ, Number 21. 8.
of the Virgin Mary, etc. Acts 5. 15.
beyond what is due to every Profane Figure; not that we believe any Divinity
or Virtue in the Pictures themselves, for which they ought to be Honored, but
because the Honor given to Pictures is referred to the Prototype, or things
represented. In like manner,

12. There is a kind of Honor and Veneration Respectively due to the Bible, to
the Cross, to the Name of Jesus, And other sacred things.
to Churches, to the Sacraments, etc. as Jos. 7. 6.
things peculiarly appertaining to God; Exodus 3. 5.
also to the Jo. 12. 26.
glorified Saints in Heaven, Psa. 99. 5.
as Domestic Friends of God; Phil. 2. 10.
yea, 1 Pet. 2. 17.
to Kings, Magistrates, and Superiors on Earth, Luke 3. 16.
as the Vicegerents of God, Act. 19. 12.
to whom Honor is due, Honor may be given, without any Derogation to the
Majesty of God, or that Divine Worship appropriate to him. Ron. 13. 7.
Furthermore,

13. Catholics believe, Prayer to Saints lawful.
That the blessed Saints in Heaven replenished with Charity, Rev. 5. 8.
pray for us their Fellow Members here on Earth; that they Lu. 15. 7.
Rejoice at our Conversion; that seeing God, they 1 Cor. 13. 12.
see and konw in him all things suitable to their happy state; that God is
Inclinable to hear their Requests made in our behalf, Ex. 32. 13 2 Chronicles. 6. 42.
and for their sakes grants Us many Favors; That therefore it is Good and
Profitable to Desire their Intercession; And that this manner of Invocation is
no more Injurious to Christ Our Mediator, nor Superabundant in it self, than it
is for one Christian to beg the Prayers and Assistance of Romons 15. 30.
another in this World. Notwithstanding all which, Catholics are taught not so
to Rely on the Prayers of Others, Yet so as not to neglect our Duties.
as to neglect their own Jam. 2. 17. 30, etc.
Duty to God; in Imploring his Divine Mercy and Goodness, Romans 13 14.
in Mortifying the Deeds of the Flesh; in To. 12. 2.
Despising the World; in Loving and Gal. 5. 6.
Serving God and their Neighbor; in Following the Footsteps of Christ our
Lord, who is the Joh. 14. 6
Way, the Truth, and the Life: To whom be Honor and Glory for ever and ever,
Amen.

The Conclusion.
THese are the PRINCIPLES, A Conclusion from the Premimises.
These are the TREASONS, These are the IDOLATRIES, and SUPERSTITIONS, which,
though no other than what We have Received of our Forefathers, and what the
greatest part of the Christian World now profess, yet have drawn upon Us poor
Catholics in ENGLAND such Dreadful Punishments. I Beseech you Sir, consider
our Case, without Passion or Prejudice, and I am confident you will see, We are
not such Monsters as our Adversaries Represent Us to be, nor entertain such
Principles as are Inconsistent with our Duty to GOD, and the KING.

You seem to say, This very PLOT with which We are charged, An Objection
Answered.
proves Us Guilty of wicked Principles. But, under Favor, You here commit a
Vicious Circle in way of Arguing: For first, here are wicked Principles
alleged to make good the Proof of a PLOT; And these being denied, the PLOT is
introduced to make out the wicked Principles; As if a Man should say a thing,
because he thought so, and give no Reason why he thought so, but only because
he said so; which instead of Proof, is to beg the Question. Certain I am,
Catholics both Taught, and Practiced Principles of Loyalty, at a Time when the
KING and Kingdom felt the Dire Effects of contrary Persuasions.

You add, A second Objection Answered
The two Houses of Parliament, the Judges, and in a manner, the whole Nation,
seemed to Believe, and cry up the Evidence given of a PLOT. I answer, The most
Upright Persons, and those even of Supreme Authority, may sometimes be
misinformed, and consequently abused, by the Perjury and Malice of wicked Men;
Especially when Minds are exasperated, Jealousies heightened, and Forgeries
abetted and multiplied by the clandestine endeavors of a Malignant Party, who
love to Fish in Troubled Waters; and who by raising Feuds, and Fomenting
Disorders, make their way to sinister ends. You your self are sensible, there
are a sort of People, who under a colorable Zeal against Popery, (as they term
it,) strike at Monarchy, and undermine the Government. I shall not need to
dilate on this Subject; our Nation has once had a sad Experience of this Zeal,
and I heartily wish the same Tragedy may not be Acted over again.

In Fine, whatsoever is pretended against Us, Catholics suffer for their
Religion.
it is manifest We suffer for our Religion, wrongfully traduced. It is a
farther Comfort to Us, that our Sufferings (God be praised) are in some
measure, not unlike to those of Christ our Lord; Their Sufferings not unlike to
those of Christ our Lord.
For it was laid to his Charge as it is to Ours, that he was a Traitor to Luke
23. 2
Caesar; That he perverted the People, and endeavored the Jo. 11. 48
Destruction of Church and State; Nor were there wanting, then as now, an OATS
and BEDLOE, Matt. 26 60*
two false Witnesses to Swear all this.

Thus God, I hope, has Predestined Us, Romans 8. 29
(as the Apostle says) to be conform to the Image of his Son; to the end, that
Suffering with Him, Ver. 17.
We may (through his Mercy) be Glorified together with him.

Sweet Jesus Bless our Sovereign, Pardon our Enemies, Grant Us Patience, and
Establish Peace and Charity in our Nation.

This is the daily Prayer of,

SIR, Your Faithful though Distressed Friend, M. B.

Errors escaped in the Marginal Texts,
Page 6. against Numb. 5. for Isa. 38. 8. r. Isa. 35. 8. Page 6. against Numb.
6. for Mat. 29. 29. r. Mat. 22. 29. Page 12. against Numb. 1. for Luke 3. 18.
r. Luke 3. 8. Page 13. against Numb. 2. for Acts 10. 44. r. Acts 10. 4.

Psalm 35. Verse 11. FALSE WITNESSES did rise up; they laid to my Charge things
that I knew not. Matthew 5. Verse 11. Blessed are ye when Men shall Revile you,
and Persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil against you FALSELY, for my
sake; Rejoice and be glad, for great ir your Reward in Heaven.
