engraved portrait of Richard Carpenter, in clerical dress and holding a book,
with a beam of light entering his left eye or temple from above; top left, a
pope, robed, enthroned, and wearing the triple diadem, embraces by the
shoulders a tonsured monk kneeling before him; in the background to this a ship
or galleon Aetatis suee 33
Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after;
that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life.

V. 6. And now shall mine head be lifted up above mine Enemies round about me.

Quod innuebat, facio; non quod Volebat.

Mitto te in Angliam ad pascendos Catholicos, et Haereticos reducendos

W. Marshall sculpsit. 1641


THE Downfall of Antichrist. OR, A treatise wherein is plainly discovered: 1.
That the Pope is Antichrist, and that Rome is Babylon. 2. The several
deceitful workings, and enticing means that the Babilonish whore has used to
intoxicate the Kingdoms of the Earth with the wine of her fornication: as
likewise what Agents have been sent into great Britain and Ireland for this
end -- 3. Probable conjectures that the Antichristian party have seen their
best days, and that the Popish Relion and all the power of Rome shall more and
more decay throughout all the Churches of Europe, as it is foreshewed by those
symtomes of death that are to be found in the limbs of that man of sin which
may be so many Predictions unto us, that he is giving up the Ghost, and that
all these Commotions that he has raised in England, Scotland, and Ireland are
but the pangs of dying Popery amongst us. 4. That the destruction, and
exterpation of Antichrist shall make way for the setting up the Kingdom of
our Lord Jesus Christ in its glory and beauty, which alone is that which makes
a People or a Nation truly happy --


Babylon is fallen, is fallen, Revel. 14. 8. By R. C. an unworthy admirer of
these things.

Printed at London for John Stafford, 1644.

TO THE HONORABLE House of Commons assembled in Parliament.
MAy it please you, who are called by the Superior Powers, both in Heaven and
Earth, to bring into the light, abscondita tenebrarum, the hidden things of
darkness; to cast your eyes down upon the ground, where you shall find, lying
in a corner, a poor man tossed by the course of the World, from Darkness to
Obscurity. There is nothing more eminent, and more admirable in God, than his
Providence: And therefore, no instruments are more glorious than the
instruments which he employeth in the setting forth, and illustration of it. I
had great reason to fear, because through all the chances and changes of my
life, some kinds of darkness did still haunt me, that I should never have
appeared in the perfect light, till I should have come to the light of Heaven:
But animated with the reflection of your countenance, I shall have better hopes.
O ye good, and great Protestors against the pride and profaneness of the
Church of Rome, Ponder, I most humbly beseech you, the mayn things that I have
learned from the mouths of Popish Priests, beyond the Seas, where every man
speaks freely; which in part, are these.

First, that their number in England is so great, and the Houses of all
Papists, who are able to go under the burden, so full, they cannot, but with
much hardness, live by one another. And it must needs be so: For, the man is of
little account amongst them, that will not mayntaine a Priest; and many receive
many.

Secondly, That they convey many thousands of pounds every year, to their
Houses. For, the Bodies resident in their Houses are such, that the parts are
either all homogeneous, and of the same kind; as, all Jesuits, all Monks, all
Friars; and these have great Relief sent them from England: or heterogeneous,
and of a different kind; as Jesuits, and Scholars; and these are sustained by
Lands, or by Pensions; where the Scholars are set apart for Priesthood, as in
Rome, Sevill, Valladolid: to other places, as to their Colleges, of Saint
Omers and Doway, a very great part of their means, and maintenance, comes out
of England. And that, for this purpose, and the safe passage of their Goers and
Cemmers, young and old, the Jesuits are Masters of a Ship, furnished with many
kinds of Colors, and many sorts of Countrymen, in which Ship, I my self
should have passed.

Thirdly, that banished out of England, going from one Port, they must
presently return to another: because their Priestly Function has not leave
from the Pope, to apply it self to action, and exercise, but in the Dominions
of England, Scotland, and Ireland; (and so their Faculties run:) And their
places of Residence in other Countries are loaded.

Fourthly, that they win souls to them, every day in England, and almost, in
all parts of it: hoping greatly, to undermine us by little and little; and grow
up (we not minding them) to the greater number. Wherefore, they are strangely
cunning in their carriages; taking the shapes of Physicians, that in a more
covert manner, they may visit the sick: (which as the general voice goes, was
acted in my poor parish, a little before I came to it; and the effect was,
that the woman died a papist, who had lived a protestant; and her husband soon
after, made a papist, and rewarded by a great person, with a service:) And the
habits of Beggars, Soldiers, Captains; and of Countrymen, bearing long staves
upon their necks: And they will be Servingmen too, if occasion give way. And
there is scarce a House, that looks like a House, which they have not fitted
with private doors and conveyances.

Fifthly, that the Jesuits have two Houses in England; one in London, known to
them, by the name of Saint Ignatius: another in the Country, called, Saint
Xaverius his House. And that both the Jesuits, Monks, and Friars have received
Novices, which have wore their Habits, and performed their Novice-ships, even
in England. And that the Bishop of Chalcedon, in the time of his abode here,
ordained Priests. And that they are, or have bin furnished with secret presses
under ground, for the printing of Books.

Thus far, in the first encounter, I do charge the Popish Priests of
England; having truly, faithfully, and religiously brought them, as witnesses
against themselves. And if men may be judged out of their Serve nequam, ex tuo
ipsius ore judicaberis.
own mouths (as one was judged by the Judge himself,) they may be likewise
accused out of their own mouths: because right judgment proceeds according
to just accusation. And when men of these dark ways, men of pragmaticall, and
working heads are also bold, what will they not dare to endeavor? What will
they leave unattempted? And are they not very bold, when Franciscus a sancta
Clara, a man of a holy name, because he named himself, but a subtle one, and
of my old acquaintance, durst vent the relikes of his old Dictates in a form,
bending us, and the profession of our Faith, by which we are entitled to
Heaven, to a Reconciliation with them? And this being done, follow me, almost
to my own doors, in the Country; and having took his standing in a great
House, near me, give matter, and heart to his evil Instruments, to dishonor
me, and make a sport and scorn of me, in my own Parish, and within my own
small fold? Are they not unsufferably bold, when a Priest came to my Lodging,
and there, in his fury, attempted to draw a sword upon me? If you graciously
assist me not, I have bin saved abroad, to perish at home, with all my friends
about me: or at least, to lie buried in secrecy, and contempt. Pardon me, if I
am hot. I have bin hitherto chill: and lukewarmnesse is highly blameable. I
have bin wrought upon, through all my life; and bowed to serve other men's ends:
And have ignorantly suffered my self to be moved, and fashioned in order to
them. But now the vizard is off, I will throw them off, one here, and one
there; and only serve God, who is my true end. It is remarkable, that the
Papists turn our lenity, and gentleness toward them, into an argument against
us: inferring that we have no zeal, no religion. O consider the flocks and
multitudes of ignorant people, that came to me, when I lodged in London, crying
for satisfaction in matters of belief: Every one of them, being divided
betwixt a Protestant and a Papist; and not knowing where to find rest for
their souls. And some came under my hands, whom the papists, by their continual
persuasions, had wrought into a distraction; some into madness. This others
know, with me. God will require an account of these souls. O that it were
granted to me, but first to the glory of God, that while I have leave to
behold this good light, both of the Sun, and of the Gospel, I might speak in
the light, (as our Savior commands us) what I have heard in darkness! and
that I might be always at hand, to bind up the gaping wounds of afflicted
spirits; even where they are most wounded, because there are most Enemies.
Neither do men, says Mat. 5. 15.
our Savior, light a candle, and put it under a bushel: but on a candlestick,
and it gives light to all that are in the House. The Candlestick is the place
of the candle; be it small or great. Shall the zeal of the true Church, be
overcome in religious forwardness, by a false one? It is not all my purpose,
to labor in the prevention of Popery. Part of it is, to teach plainly and
truly, the Faith professed in England; and the piety of a Christian life, even
to the perfection of it; as will appear to the Reader. It is our Saviors
Rule, commended to Saint Peter, When thou art converted, Luke 22. 32.
strengthen thy Brethren. God has abundantly performed his part toward me:
the performance of my part remains, toward him, and my Brethren. And no
zeal is like to zelus animarum, the zeal of souls. It somewhat suits, which
the Bridegroom said to the Spouse: My Cant. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13.
beloved spoke, and said unto me, Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come
away: For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over, and gone. The flowers
appear on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice
of the Turtle is heard in our land. The fig tree puts forth her green figs,
and the vines with the tender grape, give a good smell. Arise my love, my fair
one, and come away. When God calls, who loves because he will love, and
therefore says, first, My Love, and then my fair one; (and he first loves,
because we are not fair, but by his love. And he seems to love without reason,
and to do what he does as women do, because he will do it: but it is the
greatest of all reasons, that his will should be done. And this, is confessed
by the Schoolmen in the resolution of other great difficulties.) and when he
calls so movingly, and so prettily, it is high time to go. But, before I go, I
beg of all the zealous and noble spirits, included in my Dedication; that they
will so far listen after me, and remember Gods work in me; as to take
notice, and observe what becomes of me. And so, God that in his good time has
remembered you, and us, remember both you and us all in the end; and world
without end. Which humbly prays

Your humble servant, Richard Carpenter.

EXPERIENCE, HISTORY, and DIVINITY.
The first Book.
CHAP. 1. Let not my Reader reject many easy things being joined with a few
that are not so easy; because in the best book, the Elephant swimmeth, and the
Lamb wadeth.

THe Divines, authorized by Saint John in the beginning of his Gospel, whom
therefore Gregory the Great calls Evangelistarum Aquilam, the Eagle of the
Evangelists, beginning their discourses of Christ, with his eternal
Generation, style him, the word.

The Reason, is reason. Because as verbum mentis, the word of the Mind, even
after it comes of the mind, does still notwithstanding remain in it; the
word of the Tongue perishing with the sound: So the Son of God, coming of his
Father by a most ineffable, yet most true Generation, receives a personal
distinction, and yet remains with and in his Father, by a most unseperable
Unity of Essence. This blessed word, I call to witness, before whom we shall
answer for every idle word; that my words here, in the matters of Experience
and History, are so far agreeable to the Divine word, that they are true:
which is the first excellency of words as they are words. The matters of
Divinity will stand by themselves. I have read in the Schoolmen, that Omne
verum est a Spiritu Sancto, Every Truth comes from the Holy Ghost. I will be
sure to tell truth: and upon this ground, truth being told, every man may be
sure from whom it comes; and fix upon it in the deduction of the Conclusions,
it virtually contains; as upon the firm Principles of a Science. I am not
ignorant, that sometimes it is a sin to speak truth: because there may be a
falsehood committed, though not spoken: as a false breach of true Charity, which
many times obliges to secrecy. And these times, the speaking of truth, is
indeed a lie; because such a sin, and against God, who is Truth, even as he is
Truth. But I know it for a Maxim: Against a public enemy of the Church of
God, we may lawfully and religiously speak all Truths. It is a rule amongst
Casuists: Certa pro certis habenda; dubia ut dubia sunt proponenda: in a
Relation, certain things are to be proposed as things certain, and doubtful,
as doubtful. Let no man doubt, but I will certainly dress every thing in
clothes according to its degree.

Hence follows a lesson, and it falls within my lesson. God was in all
eternity, till the beginning of the World; and but one word came from him, and
that a good one, as good as himself: and not spoken, but as it were, only
conceived. Words are not to be thought rashly; and if not to be thought, not
to he spoken; because we think not in the sight of our neighbors; but we speak
in the hearing of our neighbors: and if not to be spoken, not to be written;
because we write with more deliberation and more expense of precious Time; and
words are more lasting, when they are written. I will hear what Christ says to
his Church, in the Canticles, Thy lips are like a thread of Scarlet, and thy
speech is comely. Saint Can. 4. 3.
Hierome translates it, Sicut vitta, thy lips are like a Fillet, or
Haire-lace. They are compared to a thread of Scarlet, for the comeliness of the
color: and therefore it follows, And thy speech is comely. Thomas Aquinas his
lips are like Scarlet, and his speech is very comely, in the Exposition of this
place. He sais, that, as ordinarily, women use a Ribon, or fillet, in the
gathering up of Thom. Aquin. in Cant. 4.
their hair, an extravagancie of Nature: So ought we to bind up our lips, and
keep under knot, the looseness of vain and idle words; that loose thoughts may
not gad abroad into words, and lose themselves and the Speaker; and then our
speech will be comely.

CHAP. 2.
GOds great, and last end in all his actions, is himself, and his own Glory.
For, the end of the best, must be the best of Ends: and the best of Ends, must
be the best of things. Our ends, if conformable to his end, do borrow more, or
less light, and perfection from it, in bending more, or less near to it. Our
chief end, that is, our end, which all our other ends must observe, and wait
upon, ought to be the same with his end, in the World: because it is the same
with his, in Heaven; the sight, and fruition of him. A good end will not
sanctify a bad Action. Howsoever we are called, we are not Religious, if we
set on fire the Hearts of Princes, and stir them to arms; that by the burning
of Cities, the depopulation of Countries, and the murdering of men, women, and
children, and by unjust intrusion upon the right of others, the holy Church may
increase and multiply. We are not of the society of Gods people, if we devise,
and labor to blow up the joy, and flower of a Kingdom, with a powder-mine;
moved by a pious intention, to promote the good of the Catholic Cause. These
pious intentions, and pious frauds, have played the very devils in the world:
and they are the more dangerous, because they go dressed like Angels of light,
and are believed to come from Heaven. The Divines teach good Doctrine, when
they say, Bonum ex integra causa, malum ex quocunque defectu; Good must be
complete in it is kind, and furnished with all requisites: one of which being
wanting, the action is not complete in morality, and therefore, not so good as
it should be. The matter of the Action must be good: the manner of the
performance good, and the End good. Which though it be extrinsecall to the
Action, is intrinsecall to the goodness of it. I suppose, if the matter and
manner be indifferent, they are good in some degree; but the End crowns the
goodness of the work; for, it is the most eminent of all that stir in it.
Non est faciendum malum vel minimum, ut eveniat bonum vel maximum; The least
evil is not to be done, that the greatest good may follow the doing of it. And
it stands with good reason. For, the smallest evil of sin, as being laesio
infinitae Majestatis, the traitorous wounding of an infinite Majesty, would be
greater, than the good which could follow. And moreover, committed in that
kind, would cast a most foul aspersion upon God: to wit, that, he were,
either not able, or not willing, to bring about in it is appointed time, the
good he would have done, but by evil performances. It appears here, that the
performance of good, is hard: of evil, easy. My end is good: and more then
good, superlatively good. For, it is God's end; God and his Glory in the first
place; and in the second, the good and godliness of my neighbors: that some
may cease to do evil, learn to do well; others stand fast En su ser y 1 Es.
16 17
puesto, as the Spaniard speaks, in the being and position of wel-being, in
which God has placed them; and that all may love God, and praise him; and when
they see, or near of this little Book, may look up to the great one above,
and sing to him, a love-song, the song of the Angels, that best know how to
sing; Glory be to God in the highest. And 2 Luke 14.
as my end is good, my action is not evil, either in the matter, or manner, or
circumstances: because the mild relation of one truth, which may be lawfully
related; and the zealous defense of another, which may be lawfully defended:
and all this, in a good, and acceptable time.

CHAP. 3.
BUt, all is not required on my part. The Reader likewise has his task. It was
an old custom in the Grecian Church, in a time, when the current of zeal, and
religion, ran more pure, because more nigh to the fountain Christ Jesus,
that, in the beginning of divine Service, the Deacon appeared in the full view
of the Congregation, and cried aloud, Sacra sacris, holy things, to holy
things: holy souls, to holy services. S. Chrysostom and Basil. in Liturgiis.
The Reader is now, upon a high service; and his soul must be all Angelical.
There is a certain kind of shell, that lies always open toward Heaven; as
it were looking upward, and begging one fruitful drop of dew: which being
fallen, it apprehends the greatness of the purchase, shuts presently, and keeps
the door against all outward things, till it has made a pearl of it. Every
man desires naturally, in the first motion of his desire, the conservation of
himself: in the second, the bettering of his own estate. It is in the reading
of pious Books, as in the hearing of Sermons. If we open our shells, our
souls, the Heavens will drop their dew into them, the fruitful dew of
Grace: to be employed worthily, in making pearls of good works, and solid
virtue. Here is matter of Meditation, and matter of Action: and they are both
entirely conformable to the mixed life, which is the most perfect. It is the
life of the Angels. Abram requiring a sign of God, by which he might know,
that he should inherit the land of Canaan, received this answer; Take me an
Heifer of three years old, and a she Goat of three years old, and a Ram Genesis
15. 9
of three years old, and a Turtle Dove, and a young Pigeon. His Sacrifice must
consist of creatures that fly, and creatures that only go upon the ground.
The Goers must all be of three years old; in their full strength, and vigor
of Nature. The Flyers were only, the Turtle Dove, and the young Pigeon; whereof
the first is a mourner; the second, a most harmless, and quiet Liver. As our
Books, so our life's must be divided betwixt action and contemplation; and the
action must be the Action of youth, and strength: and our thoughts, that are
all upon the wing, and the Ministers of Contemplation, must first be mourners,
and then, white, harmless, and heavenly: and this will be to us, a sure
sign, that we shall inherit the land of Canaan. And because the devil is an
old Thief, that cares not from whom he steals: we must learn of Abram, of
whom it follows; And when Verse 11.
the fowls came down upon the carcasses, Abram drove them away. The devils
temptations cannot be hindered from making toward the sacrifice; or, from
settling upon it: but we may drive them off, before they fall too, they must not
carry a bill-full away. Quod emit, says S. Austin of Christ, tanti S. Aug.
emit, ut solus possideat: What he bought, he therefore bought at so high a
rate, that alone he might possess it all.

CHAP. 4.
I Shall now expose my self to the censure of people, that have diverse
natures, and diverse religions: and some will frown, others laugh; others
speak merrily, some furiously, as their affections move them; and as the
present state, in which they are in, shall prompt them. But how diverse soever
they be, I shall be still one and the same. Yet I could wish, we were all of
one mind, not that they might speak well of me, (for, I am too too pliable
to the temptations of Pride, and shall be glad to be humbled by them) but that
they might please God. It is a high and deep observation, which the Bishop of
Pontus has in his Epistle to Leo the Emperor, Cum nullus Episcopus Ponti, in
ep. ad Leon. Imp.
ignoret, quia Sanctae and laudabilis Trinitatis primum bonum sit pax, and
indivisio. Vnde and Deus unus and est, and esse creditur; No understanding man
is ignorant, that the first good thing in the blessed Trinity, considered as
the Trinity in Unity, is peace, and indivision. Wherefore God both is, and is
believed to be one, by virtue of this peace, and indivision. And as our God is
three and one, I would to God, we were many and one. But this will never be,
while the Pope commands so much, and the Jesuits obey so much. One of the less
principal ends of my writing, is the same with the end of war, to speak
with a Council, ut in pace vivamus, that I may live in peace. Bonum Tho. Aq.
part. 1. quaest. 1. art. 5.
exercitus, says Thomas Aquinas, ad bonum civitatis ordinatur. An Army is not
raised, but to maintain the peace of a City, or Commonwealth. And before I
have done, it will be acknowledged, they have endeavored to disturb my peace.
As for welldisposed people, I desire them to learn; that God speaks not in
his own person to us. For, besides that he stands infinitely above us, in
greatness, and majesty: he is a spirit. He sends messengers to us, some in
the freshness of the morning, some in the heat of the day; some from one
place, some from another; some from beyond France, and Germany, and even from
Rome it self; and those, of the same form and fashion as we are, that we
should not start at the apparition, with the privilege of this fair promise
to them: He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you, despises
Luke 10. 16
me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Here is a
gradation, without a fallacy: and the strength of it relyes upon the mission,
by which, Apostles are sent by Christ; and Christ was sent by his Father; and
upon the authority of the Commission given to them. Where note, that the Father
sends, but is not sent; for, mission supposes in the sender, at least a kind
of priority: the Son is both sent, and sends; the holy Ghost sends not, but
is sent. The children of Israel desired, that Moses, one of their own company
and acquaintance, might speak to them. For, God was so loud, and terrible in
the delivery, that he seemed to crush, and over whelme mortality. Speak thou
with us, (said they to Moses,) and we 20 Ex. 19.
will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we dye: For, he speaks
thunder and lightning; and the trumpet sounds when he speaks, and perhaps, he
is preparing for a battle: and when he speaks, the mountain smokes, and the
fire cannot be far off. I will say something: And yet, I will not say it. But
if I should say it: what can the Papists say? The Church which gives a mission,
gives it as she took it from Christ. As she took it from Christ or his
Apostles, she was a pure Church. As she was a pure Church, she gave, and now
gives because she has been a pure Church, and received her warrant in her
purity; when she gives a mission, authority to preach against all impurity
both in faith and manners, either in her self, or elsewhere. And behold,
being sent, I am come. Now, let us answer in some kind to Gods kindness. It
is one part of wisdom in a serpent, commended, and commended to us, by one
who loved us dearly: that going to drink, he cleanses every secret corner,
and dark turning of his mouth, from poison. Be ye wise as serpents. Moses was
commanded to put off his shoes, because it was holy, and consecrated ground.
All terrene thoughts, and earthly affections, bemired with treading deep in
the world. All sinister opinions, and judgments, steeped in prejudice, are here
to be laid down, or purified. Almighty God has indeed, a little good ground
in the world: but it is duly and daily weeded and manured; well cleared from
stones and briars, before the heavenly sower comes to work. Here therefore,
even here, before we take another step, let us turn the face of all our
thoughts toward God, to stand like officious, and dutiful servants, attending
upon the nod, and pleasure of our great Lord, and Master. Behold, as the eyes
of servants look unto the hand of their Masters, Psa. 123. 2.
and as the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress: so our eyes wait
upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us, says the sweet
singer of Israel. We must place our eyes upon the hands of our Lord. For, the
hands are the instruments of work: and it is in our duty, to be ready, when God
gives, as it were with his finger, the first touch of actual grace, that we
may join our souls by his help, with him, in virtuous action.

CHAP. 5.
IT is an old Axiom, as old as Philosophy, Veritas una, error autem multiplex,
Truth is one, and error manifold. Truth must needs be one, because it has but
one first origin, and such a one as is most constant to it self, and can
never be found in two contrary tales. And error must needs be manifold, because
it has many fountains, and such as seldom mingle their streams, and seldom
agree wholly in any thing, but in this, that they all err, and run beside the
channel. There are many ways out of the way, and but one true way: as there
is but one health, yet many sicknesses; but one way to be borne, yet many ways
to dye. And man, ever since he first erred, is very prone to err: and having
erred, stops not in the first error; but adds presently error to error, by
loving, and admiring his own error. And error is not always desirous to be
a neat, and a fine error, but now and then, it will be gross. The snow is
evidently white. Who will say, in the hearing of a reasonable creature, that
snow is not purely white? And yet, a wise Philosopher, whose name, and memory
have out-stayd the melting of many snowes, believed it was black: and the maine
point of his doctrine was, that sense played foul with reason, and snow was
black. We are all mortal: some of us dye every day; and all, in a due time.
Yea, says S. Ambroso, Vitae hujus principium, mortis exordium est: nec prius
incipit augeri S. Ambr. lib. 2 de vocat. Gent. cap. 8.
vita nostra, quam minui. Cui si quid adjicitur spatii temporalis, non ad hoc
accedit ut maneat, sed in hoc transit, ut pereat. The first entrance into this
life, is the beginning of death: neither does our life begin to be increased,
before it begins also to be diminished. To which if any time be added; it
does not come to remain with us, but to leave us, and come no more. Those, who
lived in the Age before us, our Fathers and Grandfathers, are dead, and turned
to dirt; and we now in their places: we also, must shortly dye, and turn to
dirt, and others succeed us; and they likewise, must take their turn: and
thus, we all turn by turns, one after another, into plain dirt; and this is
the mean, and homely end of all our bravery. And yet, an infamous sect of
Heretics in St. Justine, firmly believed, they forsooth were immortal, and
should never dye: and this, although they saw the brethren of their Sect sicken
and dye like other men; and then be buried in Graves, and there lie still. The
old Annals of Egypt, and Italy, tell us, that Floods, Trees, Mice, Cats, and
Crocodiles, were honored by the Egyptian Sages, for gods; and when the Cat
killed the Mouse, they said, one god in his anger, destroyed the other, the
more great, the lesser: and as mean creatures, by the Roman Senators. And as
S. Justine observes, S. Just. Apolog. 2.
the same creatures were esteemed, as they were, Beasts by some; by others used
as Sacrifices to please the gods; and by a third sort, adored as gods. Three
things S. Austen would have seen, if God had so ordered it in his providence;
Paulum in ore, Romam in flore, Christum in corpore, Saint Paul the divine
Orator, in his flourishing time of preaching the Gospel, Rome in her flower,
Christ in his body. And in Rome, when she was in this pompous estate, the Ague
was honored as a Goddess; and there also, by ill fortune, ill Fortune had her
Temple: Fear, Palenesse, what not? The Lacedaemonians, all the time of their
life, adored death. Amongst another wise Generation of people, rich Altars were
dedicated to Poverty, and old Age. Another grave Tribe believing fire to be a
most powerful God, traveled from Country to Country, in the reign of
Constantine the great, and provoked by a general Challenge, the Gods of other
Countries to encounter their God, And overco^ming them, as being compacted of
wood, or other matter, subject to fire; they came at last, to Alexandria in
Egypt, where the River Nile, by the due spreading of which, that Country is
fatned, was accounted a God, The statue of Nile being brought forth, as it was,
hollow and full of water, having on every side, little holes covered with wax,
and fitted in all points for the purpose, and fire being applied, for a set
battle, the wax melted, the water found way, and the victorious God Fire was
put out; and there was an end of the journey. And all these people, cried up
for Gods, the things they conceived to be good, ut prodessent, that they might
help, and profit them: and the things they found to be hurtful, ne nocerent,
that they might not hurt them.

CHAP. 6.
MAhomet in his Alcoran, describing the Turks Paradise, says, it is beautified
with pleasant Brooks, enriched with beautiful fruits, adorned with rich
hangings, and the like. We may fitly say of him, as Eusebius says of
Cerinthus, an old Heretic, who thought and taught, that the happiness of the
other life consisted in the pleasures of marriage, to be enjoyed in the
fullness of delight, for a thousand years, in Jerusalem: Quarum rerum
cupiditate ipse Eusebius. li. 2. Eccl. hist. cap. 22.
ducebatur, in eisdem beatam vita^ fore somniabat; He dreamed, happiness to be
placed in those things, with which himself, was tickled. And the Thalmudists,
the stricter, and more rigid part of Jews, have stuffed their Expositions with
most idle Stories: as, that God does punish himself at certain times, for
having been so rough to them; and the like stuff. The Indian Priests were as
vain. who instilled this doctrine into all their simple Followers; that when a
Master should dye, the Servants ought all to kill themselves, that so, they
might readily serve him in the other world. A grave Author writes of a people
so fond, that the first thing they saw in the morning, was their God, for that
day: and so perhaps, they loved as many Gods as they lived days. It has been
always the maine plot of the devil, to canker, and corrupt the world, with
false opinions; and chiefly, with the practice of Idolatry. For, as the
understanding is opinionated; so the will works: and if we fail in the
keeping of one of the two first commandments, we strike at the head of him
that enableth us, in the keeping of all the rest. The devout Christians in the
Primitive Church, went in great numbers, to see the places, wherein Christ was
borne, was conversant, and was crucified. But the devil had quickly so stirred
in the business, and squared the matter by the power of the Pagan Emperors,
that the Christians coming afterward, and thinking to find the crib in
Bethleem, found the image of Adonis, Venus her white Boy; and found nothing of
the Crib, but only, that it was not to be found. And turning from thence, to
mount Calvarie, they found the seen changed there also; and beheld the statue
of Venus, placed with such evident signs of open war against Christ, and the
profession of his name and faith, Vt si quis Christianorum Ruffi. Eccl. hist.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
(says Ruffinus) in illo loco Christum adorare voluisset, Venerem videretur
adorare; that when the sincere Christian should come with a rectified will to
adore Christ; his action, if not his devotion, might go awry, and honor
Venus. The devil would feign have taught them, to adore an Image, which they
saw, rather then God, whom they saw not. And even amongst Christians, the
devil, who in other matters, is always the wild Author of Confusion and
Disorder; has yet, opposed the Articles of the Creed in order. For first,
Simon Magus, Marcion, and others, strove against the title of God the Father
Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. Secondly, Arius in the first general
Council of Nice in Bithynia, labored against the Divinity of Jesus Christ his
only Son, our Lord. Thirdly, Macedonius planted his Engine against the Holy
Ghost, and was condemned in the Council of Constantinople. Which observation
may be also made plain, in the other Articles. And because the Holy Ghost is
the great directour of the Church, and enemy to the devil in his oppositions
of it; he still had a blow at the Holy Ghost, first in Theodoret, who denied
the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son; and now, in the Grecians. But we
shall hear more of him anon.

CHAP. 7.
What mervaile now, if green in Age, and shallow in experience, I gave up my
soul, into the black hands of error? The causes of my closing with the Church
of Rome, were three. First, a consideration of the great sins of this
Kingdom: and especially, of that open, scandalous, and horrible sin of
Drunkenness; which my soul hates. And I weakly argued from a blemish of
manners, in particular persons, to a general, and over-spreading corruption of
Faith. My thoughts represented a drunkard to me, sometimes in this manner. What
is a Drunkard, but a beast like a man, or, something lower then a beast? When
he is in his fit, no sense will perform his fit office. Spectacles in all
figures, appear to him: he thinks, he sees more shapes, then God ever made. A
cloud settles in his eyes; and the whole body being overflowne, they seem to
float in the flood. The earth seems to him to nod, and he nods again to it;
trees to walk in the fields; houses, to rise from their places, and leap into
the Air; as if they would tumble upon his head, and crush him to a Cake; and
therefore, he makes have to avoid the danger. The Sea seems to rore in his
ears, and the Guns to go off; and he strives to rore as loud as they. The
Beer begins to work; for, he foames at the mouth. He speaks, as if the
greater part of his tongue were under water. His tongue labors upon his words:
and the same word, often repeated, is a sentence. You may discover a fool, in
every part of his face. He g^^^ like-like what? nothing is vile enough, to
suit in comparison with him; except I should say, like himself, or like
another drunken man. And at every slip, he is feign to throw his wandering hand
upon any thing; to stay him with his body, and face upwards, as God made him.
Vmbras saepe S. Ambr. lib. de Elia, and jejunio, cap. 10.
transiliunt sicut foveas, says S. Ambrose: Coming to a shadow of a post, or
other thing in his way, he leapes, taking it for a ditch. Canes si viderint,
leones arbitrantur, and Idem, ibid.
fugiunt, says the same Father: if he sees a dog, he thinks it to be a Lion;
and runs with all possible have, till he falls into a puddle; where he lies
wallowing, and bathing his swinish body, like a hog, in the mire. And after
all this, being restored to himself, he forgets, because he knew not
perfectly, what he was, and next day returns again to his vomit. And thus he
reeles from the Inn, or Tavern, to his house, morning and evening, night and
day; till, after all his reeling, not being able to go, he is carried out of
his House, not into the Tavern, alas, he cannot call for what he wants; but
into his Grave. Where being laid, and his mouth stopped with dirt, he ceases to
reele; till at last, he shall reele, body and soul, into hell: where,
notwithstanding all his former plenty, and variety of drinks, he shall never
be so gracious, as to obtain a small drop of water, to cool his tongue. Then
if it be true, as it is very likely, which many teach, that the devils in hell,
shall mock the troubled imagination of the damned person, with the counterfeit
imitation of his sins, the devils will reele in all forms before him, to his
eternal confusion. In vain does S. Paul cry out to this wretch, Be not drunk
with wine wherein is excess: but be filled with the spirit. For, the same
vessel Ephesians. 5. 18.
cannot be filled with wine, and with the spirit, at the same time. In vain
does he tell him, that we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present world. So^rie, 2 Tit. 12.
says S. Bernard, nobis, just proximis, pie autem S. Bern. in Sermon. sup. Ecce
nos reliquimus omnia.
Deo: Soberly, in our selves; righteously or justly, toward our neighbors;
and godly, toward God; always remembering, that we are in this present world,
and that it is but (...), the present point of Time, and but one instant, that
we enjoy at once. And sometimes, in this manner, my thoughts showed me a drunken
man. He is a most deformed creature; one that looks like the picture of a
devil; one, who stands knocking at hell-gate, and yet it is not able to speak
a plain word, and call for mercy; one that could stand and go, but now, lies
all along in his own filthiness; one, that is loathed by the Court, and all
the Citizens of Heaven; one, that for the time, does not believe, that there is
a God, or that Christ died for the sins of the world; one, that may be
lawfully thought, a man of little wit, and less grace; one, who is the Owl of
all that see him, and the scorn, and abomination, even of his drunken
companions; one, who if he should then dye, would certainly be a companion of
devils, in hell fire for ever; one, that is ready to commit adultery, murder,
treason; to stab or hang himself; to pull God out of Heaven, or, do any thing
that is not good. And if it be a firm ground, that, putting our selves into
the occasions of such and such sins, we are as guilty of them, as if we had
committed them; although we did not formally, and explicitly intend them: how
many great sins, has one act of drunkenness, to answer for? Drunkenness is
most hateful to God, because it puts out the light of Reason, by which, man
is distinguished from a beast, and all better lights with it; and throws a man
beneath Gods creation; and therefore, drunkenness is more or less grievous,
as it more or less impeacheth the light and sight of Reason. Natura paucis
contenta, Nature is contented with a little; quam si superfluis urgere velis,
says Boethius, Boet.
which if you shall urge, and load with superfluous things, you will destroy.
And one over-chargeth his stomach, and vainly casts away that, for want of
which, or the like, another daily cries in the streets with a lamentable
voice, Good Sir, for Gods sake, pity these poor fatherless children, ready
to starve; one is hungry, and another 1 Cor. 11. 21.
is drunken. And the great end of the Creator, was, to supply necessity, and
the necessity of every creature. And Sobriety, and Temperance are fair
virtues; which even the Glutton, and Drunkard do praise, and magnify. If we
turn aside into the Churchyard, we shall find it a dry time there. There
are no merry meetings under ground; no music, no dancing, no songs, no jesting
company: Every body sleeps there, and therefore, there is no noise at all.
Perhaps indeed, as men pass to the Church, or to their places in the Church,
they point to such a Grave, and say; There lies a drunkard, he is sober enough
now; but much against his will. And thus, his memory is as loathsome to all
good people, and those who pass by his Grave to their devotions; as his
rottenness. These representations winned me to think, that the Practitioners
in this Art of Beastliness, could not be of any Religion: because S. James
binds Religion down to practice. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God,
and the Father, is Iam. 1. 27.
this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted from the world. But although I had learned in some sort, to
compound, I had not yet learned to distinguish.

CHAP. 8.
MY second Reason of joining hands with the Church of Rome, was; because I
framed to my self, the imagination of an excellent Sanctity, and a spotless
Recollection of life, in their Orders of Religion. And my thoughts fed upon
this, and the like matter. The last end of man, and his Creation, is
Blessedness; being the vision, or fruition of God; which is, an eternal
Sabbath, or, an everlasting day of rest, in him. And therefore, the soul of
man, which bends toward this end, chiefly desires rest. For, God would not,
(I had almost said, could not) create man for an end, and not imprint in him, a
strong desire of it. Heavy things, belonging to earth, will not of themselves
move toward Heaven; nor yet, stay loytering betwixt Heaven and Earth, unless
arrested, and held by force: but haste to the center of the world, the earth,
their true place of being, in which, and in which only, they take their
natural rest. And the nigher they come to the center, their soft bed of rest,
(if we may believe Philosophy) the more have they make. The gentle Dove, before
the tumult of waters began to settle, could find no place to settle in; no
sure, no solid rest for her foot: and the silly thing had not learned to swim.
This tumult of waters in the world, will never end, till the world ends. And
therefore, O that I had wings like a Dove: for then would Psalm. 55. 6.
I fly away, and be at rest. Not feet like a Dove, but wings. I have gone
enough. I have been treading, and picking upon dunghills a long while. And now,
I would feign be flying. And not hanging upon the wing, and hovering over
dunghills: but flying away. And not flying away, I know not whither; but to the
known place of rest: For then would I fly away, and be at rest. And not wings
like a Hawk, or Eagle; to help, and assist me in the destruction of others: but
wings like a Dove; by which I may secure to my self, the continuance of a
quiet, and innocent life. I would look upon the earth, as God does, from
above. I would raise my thoughts above the cold, and dampish earth; and fly
with the white, and harmless Dove, when the fury of the waters began to be
assuaged, to the top of a high mountain, the mountain of contemplation:
standing above the reach of the swelling waves, above the stroke of thunder,
and where little, or no wind stirs. That, as our dearly-beloved Master,
Christ Jesus, prayed upon a mountain; that is, sent up his flaming heart to
Heaven, from a mountain: yet farther, was transfigured upon a mountain, that
is, brought down a glimpse of the glory of Heaven, to the top of a mountain;
and beyond either of these, ascended, himself, to Heaven from a mountain: So
I dwelling upon the mountains of Cant. 8. 14.
Spices, as it is in the Canticles, may enjoy a sweet Heaven upon Earth, and
sweeten the air, in every step, for the direction of others who shall follow,
drawn by the sweet savor of my example. And standing over the world, betwixt
Heaven and earth, I may draw out my life in the serious contemplation of both:
singing with Hezechiah, I will mourn as a Dove. Here will Is. 38. 14.
I rest my weary feet, and wings: and my body being at rest, I will set my soul
a work. I will mourn as a Dove: my thoughts having put themselves out of all
other service; and now, only waiting upon my heavenly Mate; and uttering
themselves, not in articulate, and plain speech, but in groans. And at last,
set all on fire from Heaven, I may die the death of the Phoenix, in the bright
flames of love toward God, and man; and in the sweet, and delicious odours of
a good life. Come, my beloved, let us go forth Cant. 7. 11.
into the field: let us lodge in the Villages, Says the Spouse to the
Bridegroom. Come then, my beloved, O come away, let us go forth, there is no
safe staying here: we must go forth. And pry thee, sweet, whither? into the
field: you and I alone. The field: where is not the least murmr of noise. Or
if any, but only a pleasant one (such music as Nature makes) caused by the
singing of Birds, and the bleating of Lambs, that talk much in their language,
and are always doing, and yet, sin not. Or, if we must of urgent necessity
converse with sinners: if the Sun will away, and black Night must come: if
sleep will press upon us, and we must retire to a lodging-place: hear me,
(and by our sweet loves, deny me not) let us lodge in the villages, out of the
sight and hearing of learned dissimulation, and false bravery: where sin is not
so ripe, as to be impudent; and where plaine-fac'd simplicity knows not, what
deceit signifies. In the field, we shall enjoy the full, and open light of the
Sun: and securely communicate all our secrets of love. And when the Body calls
to bed, and says, he has served the soul enough, for one time; we may
withdraw to yonder Village, and there we shall embrace, and cling together
quietly; there we shall rest arm in arm, without disturbance. And do thou
hear? when we wake, we will tell our dreams, how we dreamt of Heaven, and
how you and I met there, and how much you made of me: and then up, and to the
field again. O, did men and women know, what an unspeakable sweetness arises
from our intimacie, and familiarity with God: and from our daily conversation
with Christ: What inwardly passes betwixt God, and a good soul: and how
lovingly they talk one to another: and how they sometimes, as it were whisper,
sometimes speak aloud: sometimes deliver themselves merrily, sometimes in a
mournful tone: and how prettily the soul will complain, and cry to him, and
relate her griefs over and over: and how orderly Christ keeps his times of
going, and coming again: and what messengers pass betwixt them, in his
absence: and afterward, what a merry day it is, when they meet: and what
heavenly matter Christ preaches to the soul: and how after the Sermon, the
soul condemns the world, and abominates all the vanities of it; and would
feign be running out of it, if it could tell which way, and not run from
Christ: all the sweetness of this world, would be gall, and extreme
bitterness to them: they would relish nothing but Christ: they would scarce
endure to hear any man speak, that did not speak of Christ: his very name
would give a sweet taste in their mouths: they would seek him; and they would
be sick, till they found him: And having found him, they would let go all, and
hold him fast. And then, the remembrance of their labor in seeking him would
be sweetness it self to them. Our Savior before his passion, ascended according
to his custom to the mount of Olives: and there drew himself, even from his
own Disciples. For, as St. Luke describes it, He was withdrawn from them about
a stones cast, and kneeled Luke 22 41
down, and prayed. About a stones cast, for the peace, and privacie of his
own Recollection: And but a stones cast, for the safety, and security of his
Disciples. And cursed be the Traitor, that brought a vile rabble of seditious
persons upon him, to break his mystical sleep, and to cut the fine thread of
his calm and quiet devotions. Thus did my thoughts spread themselves:
imagining, this could not any where be found, but in a Monastery. My last
reason was, because being carried away with a great stream, the desire of
knowledge; it being the Philosophers Principle in the first grounds of his
Metaphysics, Omnis homo Arist. 1. Met. cap. 1.
natura scire desiderat, Every man by nature desires to know: I plunged my
self into the depth of profound Authors, Bellarmine and others; and was lost
in the bottom. And hurried with these motives, I left with a free mind, Kings
College, and the University of Cambridge, upon Christmasse Eeve; that I might
avoid the receiving of the Sacrament, the next day: for which I was in
particular, warned to prepare my self. But the divine Providence went with
me, and plainly showed me by my own eyes, and by my ears, and by other
knowing powers, perfected with knowledge in some measure, with which God has
endued me, that my reasons were as weak, as I was young.

CHAP. 9.
I Shall now, (and I cannot help it) lay open, and uncover the faults of
others. But who am I, that I should do this? Have I not great faults of my
own? O, I have. Lord, have have mercy upon me, a miserable sinner: and upon
them, and upon all the world. I am one of those, to whom God gave a fair
pre-eminence over all other earthly creatures. I was shaped by him in my
mothers womb; and took up by him, when I fell from her. I was guided through
all dangers by him, in my weak infancy, and ignorant childhood. I was
reserved by him, for the law of grace, and the faith of Christ. I am furnished
by him, with all kinds of necessaries, for the fit maintenance of life: and
have been delivered by him, from a thousand thousand mischiefs, bending the
bow both at soul and body. I had lost my life the other day, and been carried
hence with all my sins upon my back; had not he stepped in to help me. I have
been moved every day to goodness, by his holy calls, and inspirations. He
puts bread and meat into my mouth, every day; having strangely brought it from
many places, by many ways, through many hands, to me. He covers my
nakedness, every day. He has preserved, and restored me from sickness: and
disposes all my affairs, with all gentleness. And yet, I have played as
foul with him, as any man. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did
Psalm. 51. 5.
my mother conceive me! I am thronged with unruly passions, madd, if let loose
to wickedness. I go and grow crookedly, and stoop very low, under a mighty
burden of sin: and am prone to all mischief, and of my self, ready for all
attempts, and wicked enterprises against God. For, if God should withdraw his
preventing Grace, I should quickly be guilty of any sin, that ever any man or
woman committed. It is granted that I am the void, and empty Cave of ignorance;
the muddy fountain of evil concupiscence; dark in my understanding, weak in
my will, and very forgetful of good things: and that, left to my self, I am
not my self, but a devil in my shape. All this is true. And yet, I have been
the Captain of an Army against him, by whom only, I can be set at liberty, and
freed from all these evils. God is so perfectly knowing, so completely wise,
that no sin, though lying hid in the dark thoughts, and quiet privacie of the
heart; though covered with the mists of the morning, or the darkness of the
night, can escape his knowledge: so thoroughly good, that no sin can please
him; so wonderfully powerful, that no sinner can fly from him, though he
should have wings to help his feet. He is the endless, boundless, bottomless
heap of all perfections. He is infinitely stored with all kinds of perfect
worth, and beauty: and therefore, most worthy of all true love, and honor. And
this All of perfections, is my all in all: He is one, and a great one, that I
make very angry with me every day; and yet striking, he shakes his head, pulls
back his hand, and is very loath to strike: He would, but will not. He bears
with me from day to day; and hopes well of me: breaths upon me, blows upon
me with his holy spirit: waters me with his heavenly grace, and benediction:
diggs about me, with lessons and instructions of all sorts, and with good
examples on every side; expecting good fruit from me. And this good great God
have I struck with many faults.

CHAP. 10.
VErily, I have deserved, that, because I have defiled all the Elements with my
sins, as I go, the earth at every step should sink under me: that it should
open, and swallow me with a wide throat, into hell. That water, when I first
come where it is, should leap into my face, and stifle me: that, when I open
my mouth, to receive the sweet benefit of air, nothing but mists, and foggs,
and the plague should enter: that fire should not only cease, and deny to
warm me; but also, fly upon me, hang about me, and burn me to ashes: that
heat and cold should meet together in the clouds, and without much threatening,
break out upon me, as having bin neither hot nor cold; and strike me dead with
a clap of thunder: that, because all my zeal was but a flash, a flash of
lightning should burn me to a coal, and leave me standing without life, a
blasted man, all black and dried, to scare others from sin. That, because I
played the Beast, in erring against the rules of reason; beasts, and
unreasonable creatures of all kinds, should lie every where in wait to destroy
me: that the Birds of the Air, should break into my House, catch the bread out
of my hand before it comes to my mouth, and carry away the very meat from my
Table; because they deserve it, better then I: that Spiders should empty their
poison, into my drink: that because I stripped my soul, and robbed her of her
wedding garment; no kind of garment should ever be able to hang upon my back. I
have deserved, that, because I have infected my Brethren by evil example, the
hearts and hands of all men should be turned against me; that, as I pass in
the streets, men and women should laugh at me in scorn; and mock me, as they
do fools and mad men: and that, because I have been a stumbling block to
youth, Boys and Girls should run after me with a noise; and that their
Parents, and people of all sorts, should throw dirt in my face. Indeed, I have
deserved, that because I have sinned in the sight of the Angels, the Angels of
Heaven should arrest me in the Kings name, whom I have offended; take me, and
deliver me to all the devils of Hell; and that they should throw me with all
their might, into the bottom of Hell; and follow after me with an outcry,
that should make the foundations of the earth shake. For, having played the
notorious Rebel against the Creator of all things; I have most justly deserved,
as often as I have sinned that all things, all creatures should rise up in
arms against me. And with what heart, or face shall I stretch out my hand,
against the faults of others? But, it is not my own quarrel. I speak in Gods
behalf.

CHAP. 11.
I Was reconciled to the Church of Rome in London, by an English Monk: and by
him recommended to a Jesuit: who sent me to the English College at S. Omers in
Flanders. And the better to pass at Dover; I was put by an English Monk, into
a habit like an Italian, and indeed, like the Monk as he goes in London: and
joined in company, with a young Gentleman an Italian Traveller, who was now in
his return toward his Country. Having passed for an Italian, not only in
clothes, but in Country; and being landed at Calice in France: it happened, that
I traveled from thence to St. Omers, with a Jesuit, and a young Scholar,
which he brought with him out of England: and they had come in the Ship wherein
I passed. He was apparrelled like a secular Gentleman, and wore a little
Poniard by his side. And we three mingling discourse, as we journeyed; he told
us, that the Poniard was given him by a Catholic, a dear friend of his; upon
a condition, that he should kill a Pursuivant with it God knows, I lie not. By
a Pursuivant, he meant one of the Kings Messengers, which are employed in the
search, and apprehension of Priests and Jesuits. But O my Lord, and my God, can
this be the vein, and the spirit of the Primitive Church? or, does it taste of
the meekness, and gentleness of Christ our sweet Savior, either in his life,
or doctrine? With the first, it cannot agree. For St. Cyprian is plain in the
matter: Nos laesos divina ultio defendee. Inde est, quod nemo nostrum S. Cypr.
ad Demetriad.
se adversus injustam violentiam, quamvis nimius, and copiosus sit noster
populus, ulciscatur. God will revenge our wrongs. And therefore, not one of us
does lift up his hand against unjust violence, although our people be many, and
our strength great. We are patient, not that we cannot resist the power of our
persecutors; but because we may not resist them, having received power from
God: to which we ought to submit our selves, wheresoever we find it. With the
second, it may not hold, in either of the two branches. It sures not with the
doctrine of Christ; who says to Peter, having smote off the care of an
inferior servant, though he had left his head behind: Put up again Mat. 26.
52
thy sword into his place: for all they that take the sword, shall perish with
the sword. It is not of the same color, with the life of Christ; of whom Saint
Paul testifies, that he humbled 2 Phil. 8. 9.
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him. He was first depressed, and then,
exalted: and he was therefore exalted, because he had been depressed: and he
was highly exalted, because he had been depressed as low as death, and the
death of thieves, and murderers: and he depressed himself, but he was exalted
by God. Well now. It is not agreeable with this, or with that. Yet, I well
know, with what it agrees. And you shall know, as well as I. With the
doctrine, and practice of the Church of Rome. God turn the hearts of her
children. But, I must turn to Christ again. Me thinks, it is a mervailous
pleasant thing, to look upon him. The obedience of his humility waded as far
as it could find bottom. It is a witty difference, which St. Gregory makes
betwixt obedience and sacrifice. Obedientia victimis praeponitur; quia per
victimas aliena caro; per obedientiam S. Greg. lib. 35. Moralium in Job cap. 12.
vero, voluntas propria mactatur. Obedience is preferred before sacrifice:
because in sacrifice, other things; in obedience, our own wills are killed;
that is, mortified, and offered to God. And therefore, the night before our
dear Savior was made actually obedient unto death, he discovered two wills,
in one soul. His humanity, having a revelation of what he was to suffer; and
now, sweating blood in the serious contemplation of it, his inferior will
cried out, O my Father, if it be possible, let this Mat. 26. 39
cup pass from me. But the superior will, soon ended the controversy:
nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. The inferior will was it
self, in the reasonable part; or it could not have been capable of such a
high kind of willing. A little more obedience to Christ, and his law, would
not ill become those great Professors of obedience. Christ allows us to run
in our own defense; but not to resist; if the power be lawful, that opposes
us, and we subjected to it: and if it comes from God, it would be lawful,
though it should not do lawfully, what it does: lawful in it self, though
not lawful in the exercise of it self: and it can not be resisted in the
exercise, but it must be resisted in it self: for, power is never seen in it
self, but altogether in the exercise of it self.

CHAP. 12.
IT is the course of the Jesuits at St. Omers, to send every year in the time
of Harvest, two missions of English Scholars, into remote parts of the
Christian world: one, to Rome in Italy; And another to Valladolid, or Sevil in
Spain: and these places in Spain, receive their missions by turns. In all
these places, are English Colleges: Whereof the Superiors, or Governors, are
Jesuits: the rest, Scholars, chalked out for secular Priests. By secular
Priests I understand, not regular Priests; neither Jesuits, nor Monks, nor
Friurs; but Priests, without any farther addition: whose primarie charge in
their Institution, by which they differ from others, is, to teach and instruct
secular people, and to reside in Benefices, and be Parish Priests. Here, I have
a notable trick to discover, and I shall ever stop, and stand amazed, and
ponder the malice of the Jesuits, when I think of it. Their best, and most able
Scholars, they send always, to Spain: and only, their weaker vessels, to
Rome; in their ordinary proceedings: whereof some are lame, some crooked,
others imperfect in the natural part of speaking. The reason of it, is
excellent knowledge. The Scholars being with them, and subordinate to them in
their Colleges, and now, far from their Country: it is a great portion of
their labor, to win them by favors, promises, threats in the by, and much
cunning, to be Jesuits: and so, they never leave any (if all they can do, will
do withal) for the Secular Priests, but the lean and bony end, and the
refuse of them. For, the Jesuits and the Secular Priests, are great opposites;
and much contrary in their opinions: and the weakness of the one will help
negatively, to the strength of the other. The Pope being informed of this
Jesuiticall device, gave a command at Rome, where his power is absolute in all
kinds: that every Scholar, the year of his probation being expired, should
bind himself by an oath, not to enter into any order of Religion; till after
three years durance in England. And then, they began to set on foot the trick
I told you of. But, if one desires admittance into a mission, who by reason of
some defect, (for example, the defect of having entered into an order, and
returned with dislike) cannot according to their rules, be a Jesuit; if he
comes with strong, and able commendations, they will send him to Rome, though
he be a deserving man; that he, and such as he, may stand like a good face, or
a fresh color, over the device, that lies inward. They have a very
godly-fac'd answer to this objection: and say; these imperfect creatures are as
God made them; and they are sent over by their poor friends, to be Priests;
and we that wear out our bodies, and life's in the education of Youth, have
good reason to choose the sounder part: and they which come to us, are not taken
from the Church, but restored to it, in a more excellent manner. But, first,
according to their own Principles, they are bound to go along with the
Founders intention; and the Founder intended the maintenance, for able men.
Secondly, they do not perform their obligation of Charity toward the body of
the Clergy, which they notably maime, and disable: and yet, in those places
they are only Stewards for the Clergy. Thirdly, they do great injury both
to their Church, and their cause; which suffers oftentimes by such Martyrs of
Nature, and such unskilful Defenders: Some of which, cannot read Latin, nor
yet hard English. See how God works for us, by their sins. Fourthly, they
delude the Popes command concerning the oath, and wholly frustrate his purpose;
and their fourth vow of obedience to his Holiness, stands for a cipher in this
business. And much more. What remains now, but that malice is predominant in
the action; and that they make themselves Gods, and turn all to their own
ends?

CHAP. 13.
AT St. Omers, their manner is, to make trial of every one that comes; what
nature, and spirit he is of, and what progress he has made in learning;
partly by applying subtle young Lads to him, which keep him company, and
turn him outward, and inward again, and make return of their observations to
the Jesuits: and partly, by their own sifting him, either in discourse, or
examination, or in some other more labored exercise. Which trial when I had
undergone, an old Jesuit, gray in experience, and a crafty one, and one, whose
name you have in your mind, when you think Not, being then Vice-provinciall of
the English Jesuits, looked soberly upon me, and told me of a spiritual
exercise, in use amongst them, which would much prefer me in the service of
God, if I was pleased to make use of it. I yielded. And the next day, in the
evening, I was brought into a Chamber, where the Curtains were drawn, and all
made very dark; only, a little light stole in at a corner of the window, to a
Table; where stood pen, ink, and paper: and order was given me by my ghostly
Father, a cunning man, a man that did not walk in the light, that I should not
undraw the Curtains, or speak with any person but himself, for certain
days; and what the spirit of God should inspire into my heart concerning my
course of life, I should write; there being pen, ink, and paper. And he left a
Meditation with me, the matter of which, was indeed, very heavenly; and he
brought every day two or three more. He visited me two or three times a day;
and always, his question was, after, how do you child, and so forth? What?
have you wrote any thing? Feel you not any particular stirrings of the spirit of
God? And always, I answered plainly, and truly, no. Having been kept in
darkness, some days; and always left to a more serious, and attentive
listening after the holy Ghost; and perceiving no signs of a releasement; I
began to suspect, what the man aimed at. And I prayed heartily, that my good
God would be pleased to direct me. Think with me: Had these Meditations been
appointed merely, and precisely for the elevation of my soul to God, they had
been excellent: but perverted, and abused to serve men's ends, they were not
what they were. But I thought, I would know farther e're long. The holy man
came again, and still enquired, if I knew the mind of the Holy Ghost. My
answer was: I did hope, yes; but I was loath, because ashamed, to speak it.
Being encouraged by him, I said; That in my last Meditation, the spirit of God
seemed to call me to the Society. He knew the phrase, and the sense of it,
was, God moved me to be a Jesuit. He presently, caught up my words, and told
me, I was a happy man, and had great cause to bless God for so high a calling;
with much, to that purpose. And when he had his end, my Meditations had their
end, and the Curtains were drawn, and having been enlightened from Heaven, it
was granted, that I should enjoy the light of the world; and there was all the
good man looked for. But, had not the Holy Ghost spoke as he did, he would not
have been thought, to speak like the Holy Ghost. And now, I was brought down
from my dark Cell, with great joy, and lightsomnesse; and all the Boys were
unexpectedly sent abroad with me that afternoon, to recreate their spirits,
and be merry with the newborn child. Yet afterward, a performance being
required of what I had promised, my heart gave back. For, I had been counseled
by some of the less Jesuited Scholars, to go in a mission, and read farther
in the practice of the Jesuits, before I took their habit. Which the Jesuits
labored to prevent, telling me, their numbers in their missions were full. I
stood to it, and gave them no ground; saying, I would return to England, if I
went not: and so, they sent me in the mission, to Valladolid in Spain. But I
saw with both my eyes, they were in good hope, to gain me afterward. Many are
of opinion, that a great cause of these great disturbances in the world, is,
because men walk not in those vocations to which God has called them. The
ordinary vocation is, when a man finds, (after a sit imploring of Gods help)
in the due examination of his heart, that he can best, and most proportionably
to his abilities, serve God in such an honest course, lying within the reach,
and condition of his life. And undoubtedly, these soul ways, are so many
wrestings of Gods spirit. Me thinks now, a man may thoroughly meditate, every
day if he please, both whence he came, and whither he goes, in little
England: where he may do it freely, and sweetly; and where, in the doing of
it, no man will have a plot upon Him, or urge him to exact upon the Holy Ghost.
And lest the Jesuits should imagine, we are here altogether destitute of such
helps, and for the benefit of my neighbor, I will set down a Meditation in
this kind: and he ownes it, that desires with all his heart, to serve God with
all his might; and by him, they may guess of others.

MEDITATION. I.
I Will fold my self inward, and ponder seriously, what and where I was, some
few years ago: what and where, before my Father was borne, or, when he was a
child. If I lay aside an odd trifle of days, if I take away a short course
of running time, No man or woman now living was alive. Creeping things, though
they could but creep, did live, and rejoice in a comfortable being. And other
little creatures had wings, and were able to fly readily, here, there, and
here again; and other ways, upwards, and downwards. And we, who now go
with such a grace, and look so full-eyde, and build to our selves such Babels
in our imaginations, had no kind of Being. These Churches, these Towns, this
Kingdom, this heap of Kingdoms the world, were as we see them: but we
were not heard of, not because we were a great way off, but because we
were not. Were not heard, were not seen, were no where, and all, because
we were not. Quae Arist. lib. 4 Met. cap. 4. text. 16.
non sunt, quomodo ambulabunt, aut loquentur? says the Philosopher. The things
which are not, how shall they walk, or talk? The very same Sun, that rises
and sets for us, did shine, now red, now pale, upon the world; and constantly
run his days journey, and keep the same times. Such birds of the same
colors, did sing merrily to the same tunes; and hop from branch to branch, and
fly from tree to tree, as now they do. Beasts and Fishes, in the same, the
very same diversity of shapes, followed their several instincts of nature. The
Bees made honey, that differed nothing from ours, but only because it was not
the same. The vvindes blew cold, and vvarme; and vvarme, and cold again. The
Beech, and Poplar; the Cedar, and Oak did grow, upwards and downwards; and
every one was known by the leaf, by which, we distinguish them. Brooks
took their courses. The Sea ror'd. Men and women, such as we are, did as we
do: And we were nothing. O vvonderfull! A little while before yesterday,
the best of us all, and the most knowing, knew not, that there was a world;
that there were Angels; that there is a God; that such as we, were afterward
to be: because we had no knowledge; no being, the foundation, and ground of
knowledge.

MEDITATION. II.
OPretious pieces that we are! we were all, as it were, borne of the Night, and
called from a dark Nothing. And yet truly, the most unworthy, and most
contemptible matter that is, yea, the Devils, and Damned in Hell, the lowest in
the present order of Spirits, are placed many steps of vvorth above nothing, as
being Gods creatures, and bearing his colissons; though branded with the
foulest marks of dishonor. For, God is honored, even by the Being,
Punishments, and Dishonor of the damned; in which, the divine Justice
triumphs. But from Nothing, no honor can rise to him, only that he made
something of nothing. Nothing is so base, that for it is mere baseness, we
cannot conceive it: nor speak of it, but in disgrace, by denying it to be any
thing: which neither sense, nor understanding can apprehend. It has no figure,
shape, or color: and is no where, because it is nothing. It cannot be painted;
and though the Devil is painted under the form of another thing, yet that
cannot: (that? what? nothing:) because it is the mere negation of a thing. O
cursed negation! God never made thee. For, had God made thee, thou had been
something. And had thou been any thing, there had been as many things for
ever with God, as things had been possible by the power of God. It cannot be
described, but by saying, it is not: and of nothing, we cannot say, it is, but
by adding, nothing. Of which now thinking, or speaking, or writing; I think, or
speak, or write of nothing. And so, we being, and yet truly, not truly being,
but being nothing, God gave us the noble being we have; and made us Kings, and
Queens of all corporal things, when he might have made us with his left hand,
Toads, Vipers, or Snakes: Spiders, to be always watching in catching Flies,
and to weave out our bowels, to fill our bellies: Snails, to pass over all
our time in creeping, and in our passage from place to place, to linger in the
way, and wait for our destruction: worms, to be trod to pieces without any
pity, or thought of what is done, or that such a step was the death of a
worm: Flies, to play in the light, and presently perish, by day in a Cobweb,
by night in a candle: leafes of sower grass, or fading flowers: unworthy
pieces of wood, to be carved into any, yea, the vilest shape, or perverted to
the basest use. We might have bin Idols, or Images, set up in dishonor of God,
which every one that loves him, would not have been for all the world: or, some
other inferior thing, provided for the use of man. I will remember the
young man, that weeping at the sight of a Toad, and being asked by certain
Bishops, as they passed in the way where he was, the cause of his grief;
answered, and softened every word with a tear; that he wept, because he had
risen to such a bulk of body, and height of years, and never yet given thanks
to God, for not creating him so foul an object of contempt, as the Toad: when
he was to God his Maker, as willing and easy clay in the hands of the Potter.
O Lord, I thank thee for him, and for my self, and for us all.

MEDITATION. III.
ANd the Lord God formed man of the Genesis 2. 7.
dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostr hills the breath of life, and
man became a living soul. For, when the Angels, enriched with such absolute
gifts, and dowries of nature, by occasion of their shining, and beautiful
nature, had lost, and lost beyond recovery, the fairest beauty under Heaven,
which is Grace; God turning his Omnipotency to the Creation of man, made, as
if he feared the like inconvenience, all that is visible in Him, of Earth: of
base, and foul earth. Which, lest it should continually provoke a loathing, he
has changed into a more fine substance, and covered all over, with a fair, and
fashionable skin: but with a condition of returning at a word, and half a
call from Heaven, unto Earth, and into Earth. That, although he might
afterward, be lifted up in the scale of his soul, he might be depressed
again presently on the other side, by the weight, and heaviness of his body;
and so, might lay the deep, and low foundation of humility, requisite to the
high, and stately building of virtue. If now, God should turn a man, busy in
the commission of some heinous crime, into his first earth: that presently in
steed of the man, should appear to us, an Image of clay like the man, and with
the man's clothes on, standing in the posture, in which the man stood, when he
was wholly took up in committing that high sin against God; Should we not
all, abominate so vile a man of clay, lifting himself against the great God of
Heaven and Earth? And God breathed upon his face, rather then upon any other
part of his body, because all the senses of man do flourish in his face; and
because agreeably to his own ordinance, in the face the operations of the soul
should be most apparent, as the signs of fear, grief, joy, and the like,
wherefore, one calls the eyes, (...), the most exact, and accurate images of
the Damascenus in vita I sidori.
mind. But stay. I grant, that God in the beginning, first raised all things
by a strange lift, out of nothing. And I confess it is true; not that which
Pythagoras his Scholars had so often in their mouths, Ipse dixit, and no
farther; but, ipse dixit, and facta sunt, as the Prophet David sings: God
spoke the word, and all this gallant world rose presently out of nothing: as if
senseless nothing had heard his voice, and obeyed him. And I am sufficiently
convinced, that God brought our first Father from common earth, that we cannot
touch without defiling our fingers, to earth of a finer making, called flesh.
But how are we made by him? we come a natural way into the world. And it is
not seen, that God has any extraordinary hand in the work. Truly, neither are
the influences of the Sun, and Stars apparent to us in our composition; yet
are they necessary to it. Sol and homo generant Arist.
hominem, says Aristotle: The Sun and a man betwixt them, beget a child. The
reasonable soul is created by God in the body, at the time when the little
body now shapen, is in a fit temper to entertain it. For, the soul is so
noble, and excellent both in her substance and operations, that she cannot
proceed originally from any inferior cause, nor be but by creation. And if God
should stay his hand, when the body is fitly dressed, and disposed for the
soul, the child would be borne but the meanest part of a man. And doubtless,
God uses Parents like inferior officers, even in the framing of the Body.
For, if the Parents were the true Authors, and master builders of the body,
they should be endued naturally with a full and perfect knowledge of that,
which they make. They should fully, and perfectly know, how all things are
ordered, and fitted in the building. They should know in particular, how many
strings, veins, sinews, bones, are dispensed through all the body: in what
secret Cabinet, the brain is locked up; in what posture, the heart lies; and
what due motion it keeps; what kind of Cookery, the stomach uses; which way,
the rivers of the blood turn, and at what turning they meet; what it is, that
gives to the eyes, the principality of seeing; to the ears, of hearing; to the
nose, of smelling; to the mouth, of censuring all that passes, by the taste;
and to the skin and flesh, the office of touching. Nor is this all; But also,
when the body is taken up, and borded by a sickness: or, when a member
withers, or is cut off: truly, if the Parents were the only Authors of the
body; they might, even by the same Art, by which, they first framed it, restore
it again to it self. As the maker of a clock, or builder of a house, if any
parts be out of order, can bring them home to their sit place, and gather all
again to uniformity. So that every man naturally should be so far skilled in
Physic, and Surgerie, and have such an advantage of power, that his Art should
never fail him, even in the extraordinary practice of either. To this may be
added, that the joining together of the soul and body, which in a manner, is
the conjunction of Heaven and Earth, of an Angel and a beast, could not be
compassed by any, but a workman of an infinite power. For, by what limited art,
can aspirit be linked to flesh, with so close a tie, as to fill up one
substance, one person? They are too much different things: the one is (...), as
S. Gregory Nazianzen speaks, a ray of the S. Greg. Naz
Divinity: the other, a vile thing, extracted from a dunghill. Nor is there any
show of semblance, or proportion betwixt them. And therefore, to make these two
ends meet, is a work, which requires the hand, and the only hand of the Master
Workman. The Divines give three special reasons, why God joined a body to a
soul. First, moved by his infinite goodness; because he desired to admit a
body, as well as a spirit, to the participation of himself: and all creatures
being spiritual, or corporal, a body could never have been partaker of
blessedness, had it not been joined to a spirit. Secondly, for the more
general exercise of virtue in the service of God: for, a soul could not have
acted many virtues, without the aid of a body, as, the virtues of temperance,
and chastity. For, the Devils are not delighted with the sins contrary to
these virtues, but for our guilt. Thirdly, the perfection of the universe. For,
as there are creatures, only spirits, as Angels: and creatures only bodily, as
beasts and trees: so it was a great perfection, that there should also be
creatures, both spirits and bodies. By which, it is evident, that God placed
man in a middle condition betwixt Angels and beasts, to the end, he might rise,
even in this life, with Elias, to the sublime, and superior state of Angels:
not descend with Nabuchodonosor, to that inferior, and low rank of beasts. And
by the more frequent operations of the spirit, in high things; we become more
spiritual, and indeed, Angelical: By the more frequent exercise of the body,
and the bodily powers, in the acts of sensuality; we become more bodily, and
bestiall.

MEDITATION. 4.
ANd God gave us a being, so perfect in all points, and lineaments, that lest
we should fondly spend our whole life's in admiration of our selves, and at the
lookingglasse; he wrought his own image in us, that guided by it, as by a
finger pointing upwards, we might not rest in the work, but look up presently
to the workman. The image consists in this. God is one: the soul is one. God
is one in Essence, and three in persons, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost: The soul is one in Essence, and three in faculties, the understanding,
the will, the memory. The Father is the first person, and begets the Son; the
understanding is the first faculty, and begets the will, I mean the acts of
willing, by the representation of something which it shows amiable. The Holy
Ghost is the third person, and proceeds from the Father, and the Son: the
memory is the third faculty, and is put into action, and being, in a manner,
jointly by the understanding, and will. But, here is a strange business: The
Son, the second person, came down into the world; and yet stayed in Heaven:
The will, the second faculty, and she only, goes as it were out of the soul,
into outward action, that we may see the soul of a man in the execution of his
will; and yet, remains in the soul. God is a spirit; the soul is a spirit.
God is all in all the world, and all in every part of the world: The soul is
all in all the body, and all in every part of the body. Phidias, a famous
Graver, desiring to leave in Athens, a perpetual memory of himself, and an
everlasting monument of his Art, made a curious image of Minerva, the matter
being precious Jvorie; and in her buckler, upon which in a fair diversity,
he cut the battails of the Amazons and Giants, he couched his own picture,
with such a rare singularity of Art, that it could not any way be defaced,
without an utter dissolutio^ of the Bucklar. This did God, before Phidias was
ever heard of, or his forefathers through many generations, in the soul of
man: the image of God, though not his likeness, remaining in the soul, as
long as the soul remains, even in the damned: To this image God has annexed
a desire of him: which in the world, lifts up our hearts to God: in Hell,
begets and maintains the most grievous pain of loss. And to show, that this
desire of God, is the greatest, and best of all desires; nothing, which any
other desire longs after, will satisfy the gaping heart; but only, the object
of this great desire. Ad imaginem Dei facta anima rationalis, says S Ber. Ser.
de divinis.
S. Bernard, caeteris omnibus occupari potest, repleri non potest: capax enim
Dei, quicquid minus Deo est, non replebit: The reasonable soul, being made
after the image of God, may be held back, and stayed a little dallying with
other things, but it can never be fully pleased, and filled with them: for the
thing that is capable of God, cannot be filled with any thing, that is less
then God. The heart is carved into the form of a Triangle; and a Triangle,
having three angles or corners, cannot be filled with a round thing, as the
world is. For, put the world, being sphaericall, or circular, into the triangle
of the heart; and still, the three angles will be empty, and wait for a thing,
which is most perfectly, one and three. And that we might know, with what
fervor of charity, and heat of zeal, God endeavors, that we should be like
to him, he became like to us. For, although God cannot properly be said like to
us as God, as a man is not said like to his picture, but the picture to him:
yet, as man, he may. And therefore, as he formed us with conformity to his
image in the Creation; so, he formed himself according to our image, and
likeness in his Incarnation. So much he seeks to perfect likeness betwixt
us in all parts; that there may be the more firm ground for love to build
upon: when commonly, similitude allureth to love, and likeness is a special
cause of liking. It is the phrase of S. Paul, who says of Christ, that he was
made in the likeness of man. 2 Phil. 7.


MEDITATION. V.
ANd woman being made, not as man, of earth, but of man, and made in Paradise;
was not taken out of the head, that she might stand over her husband; nor out
of the feet, that she might be kicked, and trod upon; nor out of any forepart,
that she might be encouraged, to go before her husband; nor yet, out of a
hinder part, lest her place should be thought amongst the servants, far
behind her husband: but out of the side that she might remain in some kind
(...) ^quality with him. And from his heart side, and a place very near the
heart; that his love toward her, might be hearty. And from under his left
arm, that he might hold her with his left arm close to his heart; and fight
for her with his best arm, as he would fight to defend his heart. It is one of
the great blessings, which the Prophet pronounces to him, that fears the
Lord, Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by Psalm. 128. 3
the sides of thine house. The vine branch may be gently bended any way; and
being cut, it often bleeds to death. And the wife is a vine by the sides of the
house: her place is not on the floor of the house, nor on the roof; she must
never be on the top of the house. But there is a difference: the woman must be
a Vine, by the insides of the House. But now begins a Tragedy. It is not
without a secret, that the Devil in his first exploit, borrowed the shape of a
serpent; of which Moses, Now the serpent was more Genesis 3. 1.
subtle then any beast of the field. The knowledge of the Angels, is more
clear, compared with the knowledge of the Devils; and moreover, is joined with
Charity: but the knowledge of the Devils, is not joined with Charity, Justice,
or other virtues; and therefore, degenerateth into craft; according to that of
Plato, (...). Plat. in Menexeno.
Knowledge, not linked with justice, and other virtues, is not wisdom, but
craft. And the serpent is crafty: For, if he can pass his head, his long
train being less and less, will easily follow: He will wind, and turn any
way: He flatters outwardly, with gaudy scales; but inwardly, he is poison: He
watches for you in the green grass, even amongst the flowers. We see, that
God suffers not the Devil to take a shape, but such a one as will decipher his
practices. And the serpent which deceived Eve, was crafty in a high degree of
craft: for, many write, that his making was upright; and that he was
beautified with a head and face, somewhat like hers. And he, that had been
thrown from heaven, because he desired to be like God; comes now with a trick
to the weaker of the two; and his first temptation, is a motion to the desire
of being like God: Ye shall be as Gods. He knew by experience, Gen 3. 5.
that the desire of being like God, was like enough to lay them low enough
under him. And because they would be like God, Christ would be a man. And he
comes with a fair apple; a pretty thing for the curiosity of a woman, to look
upon, and desire to touch, and play with. The holy Scripture gives three
reasons, which moved her to eat of it: three reasons, besides the Devil's
temptation; every one being gathered from some conceived excellency in the
fruit. And when Genesis 3. 6.
the woman saw, that the tree was good for food: and that it was pleasant to
the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, alas foolish woman! she
took of the fruit thereof, and did eat. She loved her belly too well: She
delighted in glittering shows; and she would be wise above her condition. And
these are three great faults amongst Eves daughters. But as the profession of
wisdom, so the desire of wisdom, which involveth knowledge of things above
our degree, and out of our end; is an adjunct of folly. S. Paul says of the
old Philosophers, Professing themselves to be wise, they became Romans 1. 12
fools. And she, desiring to be wise, became a very fool. And now, Adam and
his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord Genesis 3 8.
God among the trees of the Garden. They add folly to folly; they hide
themselves from the presence of him, that is omnipresent. And they are fools
indeed, to think, the trees of the garden will be more true to them, then to
God: or, that the Trees will hide an injury, done to one of the best trees in
the garden. And they do not hide themselves only, but also, their fault; and
toss it from one to another. The man cries out: The woman whom thou gave to
be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. The Gen 3. 12.
woman cries out louder then he: The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. They
hid Ver ^3.
their sins, and incurred a curse: We, to avoid a curse, must confess our
sins, and lay them open. But, the woman makes her excuse with less fault,
because she was the weaker party, and taught by the example of her husband.
And he throws the fault upon his wife; she not back upon him, but upon the
Devil. And the serpent, the Devils instrument in his appearance, was laid upon
his belly for it: and bound to hard fare, to eat dust, all the days of his
life. And God goes in his curses, as they proceeded in their sins: he first
curses the serpent, then the woman, and afterward, the man, who sinned after
them all. But had he stood, say the Interpreters, we never had fallen. And the
Schoolmen give a sufficient reason; for, he was the root both of Eve and us.
And he cannot be freed from the greatest fault. For, it was more in him, to be
deluded by his wife; then, in her, to be deceived by the Devil.

MEDITATION. VI.
GOd being now constrained to banish Adam and his wife out of Paradise: stayed
them notwithstanding, within the sight of it. They were not banished into a
far Country: that they might know, they should be shortly restored: and that,
having Paradise always before their eyes, they might loath sin, the deadly
cause of their expulsion. God created all this fair globe of the world, for
man; and therefore, did not fashion him before the sixth day, till the house
was furnished, and made in all points, fit for his entertainment. All the
strange variety of creatures, abiding either in Air, Earth, or Sea, were made
such and such, to help him forward in such and such manner, to his
supernatural end: and therefore, God gave to no creature, an upright stature,
and a tongue to speak, and praise him, but to man: because all the benefits,
he cast upon other things, were not given to them for themselves, but in order
to man; being rather his, then their benefits. And both Angels, and man, having
fallen from God, he turns away from the Angels, and turns with a sweet face,
and with loving embraces unto man. For, the Angels being endowed with most
eminent abilities of nature, and that, highly perfected by Grace; and having no
clog of body to weigh down the spirit, sinned of mere malice, without a
Tempter, and without an example; and therefore, fell beneath the benefit of a
Redeemer. One reason of this love of God to man is prettily expressed, by way
of History: A man, and a woman were found guilty of theft; whereof the woman,
was bigg with child. The man having nothing to say for himself, is condemned,
and sent away to the place of execution. The woman cries, and pleads, she is
with child; and though condemned, is only sent to prison; where she gives
such efficacious signs of her sorrow, and Repentance; that after a while, she
and the fruit of her womb, are set at liberty. Now the history turns to a
similitude; and the fable becomes true history. The Angels had nothing to say,
and their generations were complete, one Angel does not beget another, and
were immediately sent to the place of execution. But Adam and Eve were both with
child, their number was not up; they radically contained in them, thousands of
thousands that should come after them; and they were spared for their childrens
sakes, till they were spared for their own sakes, and yet all were spared for
Christ his sake, and wholly for his sake. And God has so played the good
Alchymist, with the sin of our first Parents, extracting many goods out of
one evil; that some curiously question, whether we may, or may not be sorry,
that Adam sinned. For, if we are sorry, that he sinned; we are sorry, that
God's dear children, as they still increase their years, still increase their
blessedness. For, where good and evil meet in combat, as now, after the days
of Innocence, there is opposition, and resistance in the performance of good:
where is resistance, there also is difficulty: and where we discover a
difference, and diversity, as well in the measure, as in the manner of
resistance, there occur also, degrees of difficulties: and, the greater the
difficulty; the more precious the reward. If we are not sorry that he sinned,
we are not sorry, that God was abused, and his very first command broken. If
we are sorry that he sinned; we are sorry, that many fair virtues have entered
upon our knowledge, and practice, which otherwise, should never, either have
been practiced, or known: no patience of the best proof, but occasioned by
an injury; no injury, guiltless of sin: the cleannest exercise of our
Charity toward our neighbor, supposes in our neighbor, the want of a thing
requisite; and all want of that generation, is the poor child of sin: the
most high, and most elevated, praxis, or exercise of our charity toward God,
then flames out, when we seal our belief with our blood, in martyrdom; no
martyrdom, but usherd with persecution; no persecution free from sin. If we
are not sorry that he sinned; we are not sorry, that millions of millions of
souls, shall now be lost eternally, lost, never to be found again; which, if
Adam had stood upright, had certainly shone with God in Heaven, as long as
he. And, if we are sorry that he sinned; we are sorry, that Christ joined our
flesh and soul to his Divinity; expressed his true love to us by dying for us;
was seen by us here in the world, and will feast even the corporal eye in
Heaven, with the most delightful sight of his blessed body, for ever. And,
howsoever some think otherwise, if Adam had not sinned, Christ had not took
our nature; for, he was not so much delighted with humane nature, as he was
desirous to die for mankind. And if we are not sorry, that he sinned; we are
not sorry, that one sin was the cause of all sins; and all sins, the
cause of all punishments; and that, one punishment is behind, and waits for us
in another world; with which, all other punishments, put together, and made one
punishment, are in no kind comparable: and that I, and my neighbors, and he
that is abroad, and perhaps now, little thinks of such a business; are all
ignorant, how we shall dye, now we are borne; how we shall end our life's, now
we are alive; now we are put on, how we shall get off: and when the Ax is
laid to the root, which way the Tree shall fall; and what shall become of us,
everlastingly. Be we sorry, or not sorry, Adam sinned. It being done, God's
will be done. And yet, because it was but, his permissive will, his will of
sufferance: and he suffers many things against his will; not of necessity, but
because he will; I will be sorry that Adam sinned, that is, offended God. God
made the soul of man, as upright^^ his body, and clothed it with the white
garment of original Justice. God being the fountain of all power, grace, and
sufficiency, could have hindered (...); but because he was not his neighbor,
nor obliged by any law, (for, who should give a law to the first Lawgiver?)
and to demonstrate the full extent of his dominion over his creatures, he would
not: and having left man in the hand of his own counsel, and set within the
reach of his hand, fire and water; and man having wilfully played foul, God
strived to make the best of an ill game: and therefore, he drew from the fall
of Adam, besides the former benefits, a more ample demonstration of his power,
wisdom, justice, providence, and chiefly, of his charity; the trial of
reason, the triumphs of virtue in all kinds; and the greater splendor of his
Church. It is as plain, as if it were wrote by the finger of God, with the
Sunbeames, which St. Austen says, speaking of God, Non sineret malum, nisi ex
malo sciret Aug. de corrept. et great. cap. 10.
elicere bonum: He would not suffer ill, if he did not well know, how to strain
good out of ill, and sweetness out of sowernesse. O sweet God, I have
committed a great deal of sower evil; come in thy goodness, and draw good
and sweetness out of it; the good of Glory to thee; and the sweetness of
peace to me, both here and hereafter. Thou have held my hand in all my
actions, as well evil as good; as a Master, the hand of his Scholar, whom he
teaches to write; and in evil actions, I have pulled thy hand, thy power,
after mine, to evil; which was only evil to me, because I only intended it:
in good actions, thou did always pull, hold, and ove^ (...) hand; and truly
speaking, it was thy good; for I of my self cannot write one fair letter. And
I know, thou have not suffered me to run so far into evil, but thou can
turn all to good. An infinite wisdom, joined with an infinite goodness, can
join good in company with evil, be it as evil as it can be.

MEDITATION VII.
ANd if now, I clip away an odd end of ensuing time; a little remnant of black
and white, of nights and days; a small, and contemptible number of evenings,
and mornings; we strong people, that now can move, and set to work, our arms,
and legs, and bodies at our pleasure; we that look so high, and big withal;
shall not be, what now we are. For now, we live, and pleasing thoughts pass
through our heads. We run, we ride, we stay, we sit down; we eat, and drink,
and laugh; We rise up, and laugh again; and so, dance; then rest a while, and
drink, and talk, and laugh aloud; then mingle words of complement, and actions
of courtesy, to show part of our breeding; then muse, and think of gathering
wealth, and what merry days we shall enjoy. But the time will suddenly be
here, (and it stands now at the door, and is coming in) when every one of us,
from the King (God bless his Majesty) to the Beggar (God sweeten his Misery)
shall fall, and break in two pieces, a soul, and a body. And the soul be
given up into the hands of new Companions, that we never saw; and be carried
either upward, or downward; in a mourning weed, or in a robe of joy; to an
everlasting day, or a perpetual night: which we know, there are; but we never
saw to be, nor heard described by any, that saw them. And when the body shall
be left behind; being now, no more a living body, no more the busy body it
was, but a dumb, deaf, blind, blockish, unsensible carcass; and now, after
all the great doings, not able to stir in the least part; or to answer to
very mean, and easy questions as, how do you? are you hungry? is it day or
night? and be cast out for carrion, (it begins to stink, away with it) for most
loathsome carrion, either to the worms, or to the birds, or to the fishes, or
to the beasts. And when the holy Prophecy of Esaias will be fulfilled: The mirth
of tabrets cease, the noise of them that rejoice ends, the joy Es. 24 8. 9.
of the harp cease. They shall not drink wine with a song. Nor yet, without
a song: And there shall be no joy, but the joy of Heaven; no mirth, or noise of
them that rejoice; no singing, but in Heaven. O wrethed Caine, that built the
first City upon earth, because he was banished from Heaven! Ille primus in
terra fundamentum posuit, says St. Gregory, S. Greg.
qui a soliditate coelestis patriae alienus fuit; He first laid a foundation
upon earth, who had no foundation in Heaven.

MEDITATION. VII.
THere are, I am certain there are, many poor forlorn souls now in Hell,
and burning in the bottom of it; grovelling beneath all the crowd: and some
now, at this instant dying, and sending out the last groan, brought mournfully
from the lowest depth of their entralls; that would give if they had it, all
the treasure of a thousand worlds, for one hour of life and health, to run
through all the acts of virtue in. But they cannot come back: nor shall we
when we are gone; and going we are every day, whither God knows, but
certainly, to some new, and strange Country, by Death. The den of a Dragon is
a dark place, and full of bones. There is a vast, and hideous den; and the
bloody monster, that dwells in it, is called Death. In the way to which, all
the prints of the footstepps, look toward the Den; not one backward: vestigia
nulla retrorsum: no coming, no sending back, to inform our friends, what
kind of entertainment we have had, since we left them: no sending a
description of the place we are in; or a relation of the several passages,
betwixt us, and our companions. There is no distinction of persons. The great
Emperor must come down, must, he cannot hinder it with the power of all the
World. The great Emperor must come down from his imperial Throne, into his
Majesty's grave: and be covered with earth; like that, we now tread upon.
And his powerful Subjects, the peers of his land, must stand quietly by, and
see him buried. We never yet, heard of a soldier, so valiant, and fortunate,
in his adventures, that he conquered Death. If Alexander, after all his
victories, could have enjoyed the privilege of not being at last led away
Captive by Death, he would have given all his winnings, the whole World for
his ransom. But it might not be, it could not be. Great Alexander is dead;
and all his greatness buried with him. And great Alexander, for whom, one
World was too little, because he was so great; has now left to be great; and
is become little himself, a little handful of dust, or clay, or dirt; and is
contented with a little, a little room under ground, or in a worse place. O the
sweet equality, which God as a Creator, and a Provider, observed in the
disposition of humane affairs! The Prince, and common people, do eat, and
drink, and sleep, and see, and hear, and smell, and taste, and touch, and
speak, and laugh, and cry, and stand, and go, after the same manner. One is
made in all parts, like the other: And all creatures but man, give as little
respect, and yield as little obedience to the Prince, as to the peasant. The
Sun does shine, the fire burn, the rivers do run equally for all. And both the
king and subject, are sick, and die the same way, their heads, and their hearts
ache alike; And they both die by giving up the Ghost: And they both look pale,
and black, and groan before they give it. And when they are both dead, and
buried, howsoever when they lived, their conditions were very much different,
and they scarce ever saw one another, their bones and ashes are sociable, they
will mingle together. And then, the cleerest eye cannot discern or distinguish
the one from the other: no man can truly say, this dust is the softer, the
finer mold; look you, this is royal dust.

MEDITATION. IX.
THe Prophet Jeremy speaks out: O Ier. 22 29.
Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the word of the Lord. Stay, great Prophet; why
thrice Earth? Earth indeed, we are: but, when you have once called us so, it is
the most: yes truly, and all you can say. You seem to multiply terms, and
the same terms, without necessity. No; I do not what I seem to do: Earth,
thou that wast in the beginning, framed of Earth, Earth, thou that art now
compacted of Earth, howsoever cast in a new mold: Earth, thou that must shortly
resolve, and drop again into Earth: Hear the word of the Lord. The second, and
middle condition of these, placed betwixt, made of Earth, and to be turned
again into Earth, is but a mean state, to heap up wealth, and build fair
houses in. S. John Baptist was called a voice; not that he was like the
Nightingale, to which one says, Vox es praeterea nihil, thou art a voice, and
nothing but a voice. He was called a voice, as the forerunner of Christ; because
in speaking, the voice is always heard, before the word: And so it was, when
God spoke to the world the best words, and by the best word. The voice said,
Cry. And he said, what shall I cry? All flesb is grass, and all the
goodlinesse thereof, is as the Esaias 40. 6.
flower of the field. This voice was not a voice only; for it spoke, and said,
Cry. An unusual way of proceeding. Sure we shall hear of some great, and
weighty matter. Let me understand holy Scripture with the same spirit, with
which it was written. He does not say, as the flower of the garden. For (we
know) the Garden is commonly hedged in, and strongly defended from the
incursion of beasts, well furnished with shades, and shelters: But as the
flower of the field, the wide and open field; 32.
where the flower is soon parched, and dried to a powder, by heat; soon
pinched, and left for dead, by the cold: quickly eaten by beasts, which know it
not to be a flower; quickly cropped by a silly girl, to wither in her bosom:
or, if it escape all this, at least, bruised and trod upon by passengers, or
(which is worse) with the rough feet of cattle. And if Heaven and earth
should be still, and not afford a danger; one betwixt both, the middle region
of the Air, would knock it down with hailestones. And as the goodlinesse of
flesh, is like the flower of the field; so flesh it self is as grass; which
though it be somewhat more durable then the flower; has but a very short time
to be green, or to grow. Amicitia, says Aristotle, quae super inhonesto
Arist. Ethic.
fundatur, durabilis non est, The friendship which is grounded upon dishonesty,
cannot endure. And the soul and body agreeing in sin, cannot long agree;
their peace will be quickly broken by sickness, and then perhaps, they part.

MEDITATION X
ANd therefore, the memory of death, shall stand like a Seal of virgin Wax
upon my heart, to keep the World from looking into the secret. Methinks, I see
now, here, before me; a man lying very sick upon his Death-bead. How pale he
is! He had a fresh and youthful color, the other day, heu quantum mutatus ab
illo! alas, how much he is changed from the gallant man he was! How his breath
labors! how every joint shakes for excess of pain! How every vein trembles!
His skin is drawn strait to the bone through all his body. His eyes fix
constantly upon one thing, as if there he saw the dreadful sentence of his
eternity. Two black circles lay seige to his eyes on every side; and it
seems, that for fear, they are sunk inwards, as if they would turn
presently, and look upon the deformity of the soul. Hark; with what a
lamentable accent he groans; I remember, I have heard some, that soon after
came to this point, sing, and laugh heartily. Poor man, how little all his
pleasures have profited him! Such a rich purchase, the favor of such a noble
man, such and such a merry meeting, what do they help in this agony? his
friends are present: yet of themselves, they are miserable comforters: they may
look sorrowfully, speak mornefully, cast themselves upon their knees, and
pray for him; but they cannot do the deed, they cannot help him: humane power
stands amazed, and can do nothing. You, do you hear? what think you now of
going abroad, and being merry; your old companions are at the door: Look to
your goods, and your selves, your house is on fire: not a word. And the little
life, which as yet, keeps weak possession, is so dulled, and over clouded with
the pangs of Death, that he cannot raise from the fog of his body, one clean
thought toward God, or Heaven. He is ready now to leave every thing, but his
sins, lands, house, friends, gay clothes, the gold in the box, and jewels in
the Cabinet, and all. See, see; he is going, he stands upon the threshold,
Death lurkes in yonder corner, and aims at the heart; and though it move so
fast, Death will not miss his mark. He has been an Archer ever since the
world began. There flew the arrow. Here is a change indeed. His Soul is gone:
but it would not be seen; Not only because it could not, but also because it
was so black. Now dismiss the Physician; and pray him to go, and invent a
preservative against the poison of Death, Close up the dead man's eyes; he will
see no more. Shut his mouth; he has left gaping for air: all is past, he
will never give an other cross word. Now cast the beggarly wretch an old
sheet; and throw him out to the worms; or after three days he will poison
us; and then, we shall be like him. It is a true speech of saint Hierom, with
which, he puts the latter stamp upon the soft heart of Paulinus, to whom he
writes, Facile contemnit omnia qui se semper Hier. ep. ad Paul.
cogitat esse moriturum; He does easily contemn, and with a violent hand
throw under him all things, who thinks, he stands always with one foot, in
his grave. O my soul, hear me: let me talk to thee in a familiar way. The
corporal eye, this eye of man, sees nothing but figure or fashion, and
color; no man ever saw a man, only the figure or fashion, and color of a
man; and these are outward, and superficial things, which only flatter the
eye. And S. Paul says worthily: The fashion of this 1 Cor. 7. 31
World passes away. The man dies, the lid is drawn over the eye, and the
fashion or figure disappeareth; is not seen. The Hous-keeper has changed his
lodging; and the windows are shut. Call him at the doors of his ears, tell
him that his wife and children are in danger of their lives, and that they call
to him for help; the windows remain shut still. Here is the mind, which has
wisdom. There is nothing in this great World, for a mortal Reve. 17. 9
man to love, or settle upon. He that will love, ought to love wisely; he that
will love wisely, ought to love good: Good is not good if it be not permanent:
and this World passes away. Nihil tam utile est quod in tra^sit it Sen. ep. 2.
prosit, says Seneca; nothing is so compleately profitable, as to profit when
it only passes. And verily, this world has bin always a Passenger: for, it
has passed from age to age, through so many hundred generations, by them, and
from them, to us. Adam lived awhile, to eat an Apple, and to teach his
posterity to sin, and to dye: and the world passed by him. Caine lived a
while, to kill his honest brother Abel, and to bury him in the sands, as if God
could not have found him, or the wind have discovered what was done, and
afterward, to be haunted with frightfull apparitions; and to be the first
vagabond; and the world passed by him. Noah lived a while, to see a great
flood, and the whole world sink under water; to see the weary birds drop
amongst the waves, and men stifled on the tops of Trees and Mountains; and the
world passed by him. David lived a while, to be caught with a vain
representation, and to commit adultery; to command murder, and afterward, to
lament, and call himself sinner; and when he had done so, the world shufl'd
him off, and passed by him. Solomon lived a while, to sit like a man, upon his
royal throne, as it were guarded with Lions; and to love counterfeit pictures
in the faces of strange women: and while he was looking Babies in their eyes,
the world stole away, and passed by King Solomon, and all his glory. Judas
lived awhile, to handle a purse; and, as an old Author writes, to kill his
Father, to marry his Mother, to betray his Master, and to hang himself; and
the world turned round as well as he; and passed by the Traitor. The Jews lived
awhile, to crucify him, who had chosen them for his only people out of all
the world; and quickly after the world weary of them, passed by them, and their
Commonwealth. The old Romans lived awhile, to worship wood and stones; to
talk a little of Jupiter, Apollo, Venus, Mercury; and to gaze upon a great
statue of Hercules, and cry, he was a mighty man: and while they stood gazing,
and looking another way, the world passed by them, and their great Empire. The
Papists live awhile, to keep time with dropping Beads, or rather, to lose it;
to cloth images, and keep them warm; and to tell most wonderful stories of
Miracles, which God never thought of, but as he foresaw, and found them in
their fancies; and in the midst of a story, before it is made a complete lie,
the world passes by them, and turns them into a story. The Jesuits live
awhile, to be called Religious men, and holy Fathers; to frame a face; to be
very good and godly in the outside, to vex, and disquiet Princes; to slander
all those, whom they cannot, or gain, or recover to their faction: and the
world at length, finding them to be dissemblers, dissembles with them also, and
looking friendly upon them, passes by them. The painted wall tumbles; and then,
Woe to you Hypocrites. We live awhile, a little little while, to put our
clothes on and off, to show our selves abroad; to be hurried up and down in
Coaches, and to be proud that we pass with such a noise; to hear news, and
to talk vainly; to heap sin upon sin; and the world weary of the burden,
passes by us: and presently, God heapeth punishment upon punishment. Foolish
men and women, how we sweat, and spend our selves! we see the spade working,
and deep graves dug every day; and yet live, as if we did not believe we
should dye. In the streets, one goes this way, another in have, that way; a
third crosses the way, turns again, then looks behind him, and would feign
go two ways at once. It is wonderful. How stirring, and busy we are about
the present things of this world, (...); so called by the Apostle, because
nothing is ours, but what is present. He is a fond, and miserable man, that
pleases himself in the thought of any thing, but God and Heaven. Fix here, my
soul, and thou shall find more true, and solid pleasure, in one meditation of
Heaven, though it is absent, then in all earthly things, although present, and
before thee.

MEDITATION XI.
THe soul being creared for God, and bearing his image, or stamp; God is the
most proper end of the soul: as the earth (if it be lawful to compare great
things with little) is the most proper place of a stone. And therefore, a stone
being tossed from the earth, as soon as it can shake off vim impressam, the
impression of the force which moved it; that being out of breath, and spent: if
there be no stop, it presently returns with all possible haste (as it were
glad being let go, and set at liberty) to the earth, which ownes it. And so,
the just soul to God. The soul in statu conjunctionis, in the state of her
conjunction with the body, being wedded to it, as to a fellow-helper; sees by
the eyes, hears by the ears, and in a manner, feels by the body. Now, the
soul having been created in the body; and never yet used, but to this kind
of knowing by the senses; is so busied, so kept in continual work, and so
amused with the representations of the senses, that she is little urgent in
the desire of her end; as being took up with great diversity of other
employment; which being always new, and therefore strange, begets a zealous
attention in the soul; and so, turns her from God. It is true: if she listen
to the whisper of an inspiration, or, hear a discourse of heavenly things; she
likes it well, and feels a pleasant tickling of sweetness, because it is
agreeable with her end: and then perhaps, the desire of her end awakes, and
sits up: but other occurrences, calling earnestly for admittance; the soul
gives way; and the desire of the last end, lies fairly down, and sleeps again.
But the soul, being now in statu seperationis, in her state of separation from
the body, they having been newly divorced: and missing her body, and her
accustomed way of knowing by the senses: missing the former use of the world,
and the things she saw, and heard in the body; thinks presently, where am I? I
am another kind of creature. Then being freed from all hinderance, she begins
to stir toward her end. For now, she is like a stone, as far in the air,
as it can go; where it cannot rest, but quit of the force, gives back: and
furnished with Guides, she flies with all readiness to God, in his
Kingdom, the place of installment, as to her last end. Here I have the reason,
why the Divines say, that whereas there are two much different pains in Hell,
poena sensus, the pain of sense, caused by the fire of Hell; and poena damni,
the pain of loss, by the loss of God: the pain of loss, is the greatest.
For, the reprobate soul, being thrust out of the body, and having received her
doom in the very place of her expulsion; is struck presently with a strong
apprehension of her end; and of the worth, and excellency of it; and of her
miserable solitariness without it: from which, she being turned; the wound
bleeds, and she suddenly cries out, wanting a Comforter, My end, where is my
end? I miss something, the best thing, what? God. O, where is God? I miss my
end. And then, she catches at him; and misses: and missing cries out; and
catches again: and still misses, crying, I want rest, in my end, in God. Where
is my end, that is God; and God, that is my end? There is no rest for a soul
out of the body, but in God: as there was no true rest, for a soul in the
body, but in God. I have bin long at hard labor, and now in the end, I would
rest, in my end. For, I cannot be at rest, without my end. O my end I while I
continue without my end, my torment will continue without end. O, what shall I
do? Where shall I begin? How shall I end, without my end? And then, catching at
her end, she is caught her self away to hell fire, and carried farther from
her end. Where she shall be always catching, and always missing: always
seeking, and never finding: always complaining either of her pain, or, of her
loss, (but most, of her loss;) or, of her loss of all, but her pain, and
her loss; which she would feign lose, but cannot: from which most woeful
estate, God deliver me. But the just soul, presently after the first
apprehension of her end, shall be joined unseperably to it: in which end, shall
be the end of all earthly motion, and therefore, all rest. Blessed are the
dead, says Revel. 14. 13. Dionys. Areop. in ep. ad Joan. in exilio agente. Ver
11.
St. John, whom Dionysius salutes by the name of Divine, which dye in the Lord,
from henceforth, yea, says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors.
But of the damned, he says confidently in the same Chapter, they have no rest
day nor night. Have I heard a malefactor, appointed by judgment to be starved,
after the gnawing, and devouring of his own arms, crying, bread, bread? If I
suppose, he cries, rest, rest; it is the voice of the damned person.

MEDITATION. XII.
WE see many times, and most commonly, men and women, lying on their
deathbeds, some little while before their passage, or departure, in wondrous
traunces, took away from their senses. At which times, some look very
cheerfully, smiling like Angels; and send from them, shoots of joy, and
gladness. And some look frightfully, and fill their death-chamber with
shreeks, and clamours. We cannot in the general, give the causes of these
different effects. For the most part, it is thus. At such a time, the soul
hears her house crack, and now, threatening a fall. And she sees, that after
the fall, all the house will be so confused, and out of order, that she will
not be able to stir about, or do any thing belonging to the keeping of a
house: and that then, there will be no reason, why she should rather be in her
house, then in any other part of the world. And in a manner, rising to go, and
likewise being called, and also, thrust forwards, she puts on. And going, she
holds by the heart, and stands, as it were, with one leg in the house, and
one without: and peeps abroad, to discover, whither she is going: as never
having been out of the house before. And according to the sight of the place,
she must now take to; she frames, and alters the body in her departure. And
certainly, in this point of time, the man being shared betwixt life, and death,
betwixt this world and the next; the soul sees, either a breaking of day, or a
beginning of night. And so, turning again to the body, either to bid it
farewell, if she be happy: or, with a desire to catch hold again, and stay, if
unhappy; works upon the body according to the apprehension, she has of the
place she goes to, gained in the discovery. Here will I wish well to all
persons: O that they were wise, that they understood this, Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
that they would consider the latter end. The wise man, will understand it; and
the understanding man, will consider it.

Good Lord, Lord God bless us, and give us grace; at all times, morning and
evening, day and night: in all places, abroad, and at home; in bed, and at
board, to prepare for this dangerous passage. When we must be turned going,
one half of us, and the half, we never saw; and yet, the better half; and
that alone: and be posted out of doors, from a fleshly Tabernacle; from a
house, which of all houses of that kind, is only known to us: a house, which
was built for us, and which falls, when we go from it: to a new kind of
being, which as yet, we cannot conceive, nor know by any kind of intelligence.
When we shall go from place to place, we know not how; and see, we know not
how; and express our minds to spirits like our selves, we know not how; and
receive their minds, and meanings again, we know not how; and do many other
things, we know not how; nor can any man, that never did, tell certainly. O
what a joyful time will it be, when we shall have put off our body, and left
it amongst our friends, as Joseph, his garment in the hands of Potiphars wife,
and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got Genesis 39 12
him out: and shall have escaped out of this wicked world, innocent! when our
sins shall not come crying after us: as they do, after the wicked soul. I am
thy drunkenness: I did often drown thee, and wash thee away from God: but
thou did never drown me, and wash me away from thy self, with tears of
Repentance: Though I am thy drunkenness, I have found the way after thee. I am
thy sin of swearing: I was stayed in the Porch of thy body, in thy mouth, to
thy last hour in the world, and I swear, thou shall not cast me off now. I am
thy wantonness: I was thy chamber-sin; and I will not now, be turned abroad. I
am thy covetousness: and I did so far covet to be with thee, and thou with
me, that Death could never part us. I am thy Anger; and I am not so angry, but
I know what I do: I will not be so base; after all our great aquaintance, to
leave thee in my anger, when thou have more use of me: For now, thou shall be
most outragiously angry with God, and all goodness. I am thy Pride: and now I
have done my part in the world, I am only proud of thy company: it is all my
ambition, to follow thee. But the just soul goes away quietly, joyfully, and
securely, guarded with Angels; and is troubled with no such noise.

MEDITATION. XIII.
When a man has long dwelt in a strange Country, divided; yea, far distant
from his dear Father, and friends; and now at length, begins to travel
homewards: how often in his way, does he fashion to himself in his thoughts,
the face of his beloved Father, his words and gesture. Indeed, as he goes, he
takes many a weary step; he sweats often; he blows; and is sometimes ready
to faint: But, he cheeres, and cleares up himself; he calls up a good heart,
and thinks: when I come home, (and at the very name of home, the poor man
looks cheerfully) they will run, and tell my Father, I am come. And my Father
will presently start, rise up, and say, Are ye sure it is he? (I shall hear
him, before I see him) And not staying for an answer, he will make have toward
me: and seeing me, change his countenance, and run to me, and embrace me with
both his arms; and, if he be able to speak for joy, cry aloud, welcome child:
and then, his joy having gone through all the expressions of joy, will borrow
tears from sorrow; and then, he will laugh; and then, cry again; and then,
again laugh: and the good old man will be so merry. And though I be a little
wet, and weary now; this will have a quick end; and I shall have warmth, and
ease enough then. We are here, poor banished creatures, in a strange land;
very far from our Country: we are traveling homewards, or woe to us: We
stick oftentimes in the dirt; and stumble in the stony way: we are wet, and
weary: we sweat: every bone of us aches, heart and all. But the comfort is: All
this will have an end suddenly: and when we come home, we shall see our Father,
whom we never yet saw. (For, we were took from him being very young.) And,
without the help of a Messenger to carry the news, he will know, we are
come: and rise up, without stirring: and be with us, without running to us: and
embrace us, and hugg us in his arms; and cry to that man, and to this woman;
vvelcome child, dear child vvelcome. We shall look upon him, and he upon
us: and at the first sight, we shall know him to be our Father, though we
never saw him. It is very strange, but more true: Should God conceal, and hide
himself from us, when we come to Heaven, and leave us in his room, the
most glorious Angel of them all, to look upon; we should naturally know,
the Angel were not God. The soul out of the body, knows naturally, God to be
God, Angels to be Angels, Devils to be Devils: as we naturally know, and
distinguish men and beasts: and as Adam in his Innocence, knew to call every
creature by his proper name. The Septuagint, or seventy Interpreters, in the
fifth Chapter of Esther, Transl. sept. interp. in 5. cap. Est.
have related the Story of Esthers coming into the presence of King Assuerus,
seated in state upon his royal throne: to whom, no man or woman might
approach, but entertained with the sentence of death, not being called; more
largely, then the ordinary vulgar editions have. They report, that when she
first appeared before him, her countenance was divided betwixt fear, and
shamefastness. First, a modest blush ran over all her face; and then, a
palenesse: quickly after, she began to faint, and suffer a kind of eclipse of
Nature: She fell into the arms of one of her mayds; and she was not able to
look upon him, or stand before him: till he rose from his throne, caught her
into his arms, and said, What is thy request? Est. 5. 3.
it shall be even given thee, to the half of the Kingdom. Fair more vveake,
and afflicted, would be the case of a soul, appearing in the presence of God;
did not God himself enable her. The splendor of his Glory, would appear so
bright; that he could not be looked upon. The greatness of his Majesty,
would show it self so terrible; that hee-could not be endured. And therefore,
he does as it were put out his hand, and lift up the soul, being fallen
before him; and then, she takes courage, and runs upon him, as a pretty
little maid into her Fathers arms.

MEDITATION XIIII.
BUt the wicked, besides their present punishments, must expect a dreadful
sentence in the Lords day: Depart from me ye Mat. 25. 41
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. What
horror, what fearful trembling, what a mighty confusion of several cries,
what howling, what bellowing will there then be? how they will be
tormented, even before they are dragged to the torment? Depart from me. O
gracious God, (perhaps they may reply) remember, we are thy creatures: and
thou can not but remember; for, we depend now, in our being, of thee. We
were made by thee, and for thee: let us not, O let us not be divided from our
last end: for, after such a divorce, we shall never enjoy repose, or take any
rest: which every thing, with all the bent of nature desires. If we should
go from thee now, we should never know, where to meet with thee again. We
are made according to thine own image: O drive us not from our pattern. Shall
we part from thee, in whom are met the excellencies of all creatures, in a most
excellent manner; purified from all stain of imperfection: and in whom, all
finite perfections are infinite? From thee, who art the great sea, out of
which, all Rivers run; and to which, they ow themselves, and return. We were
the masterpiece of all earthly creatures: When thou had created all the
spacious Universe, thou did draw an abridgement, and Epitome of it, again
in us: and nothing was found in the whole Volume, which was not touched, and
mentioned in the Epitome. All other creatures were framed looking downwards,
toward the earth; as having nothing heavenly in them, or in heaven to hope for:
thou gave us faces, erected toward thee, and heaven. And since we have
looked toward thee, so long; let us be with thee now in the end, we beseech
thee. No: Depart from me. Ye have no part in me. My merits, by which, ye hope
for mercy, are so far from helping ye, that they rise in judgment against
ye. Depart from me, and go to him ye served; demand your wages. If then we
must go and go from thee; at least, good Father, give us your blessing before
we go. Set a mark upon us: that when we are found by thine, and our enemies,
they may know, to whom we belong; and spare us, for fear of thee. Thou that
have so great store of blessings to give; we hope, have one yet, in store for
us. We crave but a small blessing. O, it is a little one. Thou art our Father,
(witness Genesis 19. 20.
our Creation) and it is a chief property of a Father, to bless his children.
No. Depart from me ye cursed. In place of a blessing, take the full curse of
your Father; as having been most prodigal, and disobedient children. I catch
from ye, all your title to me, and my Kingdom: and because ye have followed
him, who had my first curse, share curses with him. If, if then, we must go
from thee, and go accursed; Yet appoint us, blessed God, a meet, and
convenient place for our residence. Create a fruitful piece of ground: let a
goodly Sun daily shine upon it: let it have sweet, and wholesome air; and be
stored with fruits and flowers, of all forms, and colors: Give us
under-creatures in great variety, to serve fitly for our uses. And because we
are enforced to go from thee, the source, and fountain of heavenly
sweetness; afford us plenty of earthly pleasure, which may in some sort,
recompense our pain of loss. Speak but the old word, Fiat, let it be; and
such a place will presently start up, and show it self. No: Depart from me
ye cursed into fire: Though I intended not the burning of spirits, and souls.
For, I am feign to lift, and elevate fire above it is nature, (O the wisdom of
God!) to such an extraordinary way of action, because sinners have transgressed
the Law of nature in disobedience. You sinned against nature: I punish above
nature; because I cannot punish against nature, who am the prime Origin of
nature, and may not proceed against my self. Fire? Alas that ever we were
borne. Of all the four Elements, of which, the world consisted, it is the most
active, and curious, and searches farthest: and where it but only touches a
sensible thing, it is seconded by a pain unsufferable. Thou did create fire
for man's use; and shall it now, rebel against man, as man against thee, and
become his tormentor? Who is able to rest in fire? The very thought of it,
burns us already: we are tormented: Come, come, let us run away, but whither?
Lord God, if it be irrecoverably in thy Decree, that we must go thus naked,
as we came into the world, and went out of the world; into fire: let the
sentence stand but for a very short time, quench the fire quickly: half an
hour will seem a great while there: and be always mindful, that they are
thy creatures, who are in the fire: that they are men and women, whose nature
thou have exalted to a personal Unity, with thy Divinity. No: Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire: It was kindled by my breath: and it has this
property, amongst other strange qualities; that it is an unquenchable fire: as
long as I am God, it shall endure, and ye broile in it: which being the most
active, and powerful amongst inferior creatures, has a charge to revenge the
injuries done to God, and all other creatures, by man. O horrible! Yet heavenly
Judge, a lot to us some good Comforters, whose smooth and gentle words may, if
it can be, sweeten our torment, and somewhat dull the most keen edge of our
extremity: Let the Angels recreate us with Songs, and Hymns of thee, and thy
blessedness; that we may hear at least, that sweetly delivered, which others
in a full manner enjoy. No, no: to the rich man in the Parable, I did not grant
one of his requests, which he made from hell: nor will I meet your desire in
any thing. Therefore, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels. They shall be your good comforters:
such as will triumph in your miseries; and your most deadly enemies: who will
now discover to ye, all the deceits and by-ways, by which they led ye
captive from me; and give ye every hour, new names of scorn, and reproach.
Here will be a noise, and clamorous out-crie, shall fill all the world with
shreeks. O the divine excellency of holy Scripture! It will not be long, to this
time. And then, the world will be gone, or going, and all on fire. Shall I ever
forget this day? Shall any idle mirth, or vain tickling of pleasure, or
profit, put me beside the most necessary thought of this day? Shall not the
consideration of this day, crush out of my heart, many good, and ready
purposes? As, Lord, open my eyes; touch them with earth, and cure my
blindness: that I may see, what I am made of, and perceive the truth of
things: For, sure I will here stay, and begin a new course in the way of
Heaven: I will no longer be blind, and senseless. That side, in which, I am
weak and battered, with Gods holy help I will repair: I will now wash my
garment; and afterward, hold it up on every side: When a Temptation stands up
in arms against me, I will sight valiantly under the banner of Michael the
Archangel, against the Dragon: what if the common Soldiers be fearful, and
timorous creatures? our General is a Lion: I will search with a curious eye,
into my heart, and dig up all the roots of sin. My soul is continually in my
hand, says holy David; And my Psalm. 119. 109.
soul shall never be out of my hand: that turning it continually, I may
observe, and wipe away the smallest spot: and make up every cranny, by which,
the devil enters. O Lord, hold thy hand now, once more: forbear a little; and
all my study shall be, to please thee: in all companies, in all places I will
temember thee: And when a sin, to which, I have been formerly accustomed, shall
come again for ordinary entertainment, I will fright it away with the
remembrance of these powerful words. Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

I will ask my self one question; and then, I will have done, that I may begin
to do. Can thou dwell with eternal fire? If thou can, and vvilt do
nothing for love; go on in the old way. But if thou can not dwell with
eternal fire; stop here, and repent; that thou may come at last, where they
are, of whom it is said, The souls of the Wisd. 3. 1.
righteous are in the hand of God, and there shall no torment touch them. For
then, Tout va bien, as it is in the French phrase, All goes well. I most
earnestly commend these Meditations, and others in this Book, going under the
name both of Meditations, and Considerations, to all good Christians: that they
will vouchsafe to make use of one or more of them, in a day: that the Jesuits,
and others beyond the Seas, may cease for very shame, to boast so vainly, that
none do frequently meditate upon God, and good things, but they. For their
Meditations, which treat of true Subjects, I commend them sincerely: But, all
their Meditations, are only naked, and short points, (as they call them) and
they leave him that meditates, to discourse upon them; which many cannot do,
and but few can well do. Saint Austen has given us an order, which they
observe not.

CHAP. 14.
BEfore I leave St. Omers, I must needs give you a gentle touch of the Jesuits
Hypocrisy there. For, besides other follies of that rank; they have set up a
large picture, in a fair room above stairs, where the Scholars come every
day. In which are pictured two ships at Sea; and one is taken by the other: A
ship of Hollanders, takes a ship of Spaniards, wherein many Jesuits are. The
Hollanders look fierce, and cruelly: the Spanish Jesuits, have all good, and
heavenly faces. The Hollanders having bound the Jesuits, hand and foot; and
thrown them overboard; they sink, and dye like men, a spectacle full of
horror; only some of them appear floating upon the water, (I suppose, their
galls are broken) with faces very like dead Saints. But one of them amongst all
the rest, can neither dye nor sink, because he bears a Crucifix in his hands,
though they are bound; and the Painter has given him a better face, then all
the rest. I would to God, these people did either love God truly, or not make a
show, they love him. And their labor is not only, to bring the Scholars in
admiration of other Jesuits by false ways: but also, of themselves. For, they
had one in their house at that time, who had been stung by the old serpent;
and was more crafty, then religious, in the report of all disinteressed
persons, that knew him: Concerning whom, part of the zealous Boys believed,
(and whence could this come, but from the Jesuits suggestions?) that he had
seen the virgin Mary: and that upon a time (for so, every tale begins) she had
appeared to him, when he was hot in his prayers. And when their business led
them to his chamber, they would whisper one to another: that is the place,
where the virgin Mary appeared to Father Wallys; and they would observe that
corner with reverence. The Jesuits have always Secular Priests, Adherents to
their body, stirring men, and such as they are sure of; whom they keep warm
with a promise, to receive them afterward into their order; but will not
presently, for some ends: either that they may stay with them, and buy
purchases for them, which they must not be seen to look after, and the like:
or, to deal some other cunning businesses abroad, which will not beseem them
to act, in their own behalf: or, to write books in their defense, or at least
to prefix their names before the Books; that they may be defended, and praised
by other men. One example will not take up much room: A Secular Priest of this
quality, was sent from England, not many years ago, into Germany: and there,
presented a petition to the Emperor, to which many English Papists had
subscribed their names; (I suppose, all Jesuited Papists.) And the matter was,
to beg an English College in Germany, which might be governed by the Jesuits:
which appeared a very fair Petition, because the Messenger was a Secular
Priest. Sure, the Apostles of Christ, had little of this wisdom. Such a man
there was, now at S. Omers: who showed often, to the young Frye, a precious
Relic; calling it, a feather plucked from one of the wings of S. Michael the
Archangel. I know, there has been a Story related formerly of them, somewhat
like this. And I am certain, that most, if not all their tricks, are fashioned
in the likeness of things formerly done, or said to be done, for many reasons.
Invention is not so happy, as it has been. And all wonders must be like, that
they may seem to proceed from the same Father. But they now say, this was an
act of merriment. I answer: My Author, a Scholar, and a discreet person there
present, did not conceive it so; nor yet perceive, that it entered in that
form, upon the apprehension of others: And, it is not safe jesting with
exercises of Religion. One thing must not pass, though many do: The Jesuits
are the most sweet, and most honey-tongu'd people, that ever I heard speak.
Some of them, are ancient, and grave men, and now, stooping toward their
grave: and yet, after every word, even when they speak to young green Boys,
they come with, yes forsooth, and, no forsooth; their Caps being off, and a
courteous form of duty expressed: and forsooth, with, yes pray if you please,
and no forsooth pray; take up a great part of their discourse.

CHAP. 15.
IT has been always, the custom of wanderers in Religion, to guild their
deformed errors with Hypocrisy; and to put on all shapes, for the manifold
advantage of their Profession. Simon Magus, the first, that ever displayed the
banner in this kind, against Christ, and Christian Religion, by the power of
the devil, as Nicephorus recounteth, Niceph. lib. 2. Eccl. hist. cap. 27.
taught Images to walk, stools and dishes to pass from place to place without
a Guide: He would appear in the midst of a great flame, untouched by the
fire: he would fly in the air: turn stones into seeming bread; take the
fearful shape of a Dragon, and of other Beasts; that he might with the Kings
of Egypt, amaze, and terrify the world. Now he would show himself with two
faces: and now again, seem to be all gold. Doors, strengthened with able
bars, and locks, he would open with a word; break iron fetters; and in
bankets, present a show of sporting Images, in many forms, and diverse colors.
Shadows did go before him, which he interpreted, to be the souls of dead
persons. And thus, he would seem to work miracles in trivial, and unnecessary
matters. Intruth, he was any thing, the spectatours desired to see. And yet, a
statue was consecrated to him, by the wise Romans, with a glorious inscription,
Simoni Deo Sancto, to Simon, the holy God. S. Just. in Apolog. 2.
Behold here, the Father of Hypocrites. Tully does not praise Catiline, when
he says that he was made up of the mixture of all other men's natures. Nor
does Homer extol Proteus; of whom, a pious Author most elegantly sings,
Spumat aper, fluit unda, fremit Leo, sibilat anguis: He foames like a Boar,
he flows like the water, he roares like a Lion, he hisses like a Snake. Now I
shall dive low. God is so fair, and excellent, that he can never appear to
any creature, which he has made, or can make: to men, or Angels: or any
creature possible to be made, more perfect then an Angel, so excellent, and so
fair, as in himself, he is. The reason is ponderous, and worthy to be
pondered. God can never appear to any power, in his complete fairness;
except that power be of capacity to comprehend his fairness: no power can
comprehend his fairness, except the power be of an infinite capacity, because
God is infinite: no creature can be of an infinite capacity, because no
creature can be infinite. The last proposition, and the reason of it, flow
naturally from the premises. But, look farther. Because God in his own
Essence, being, and nature, being by nature most near to him; is infinitely
excellent: and therefore, neither does, nor can appear in his full shining to
any creature; he does hate especially, hate inwardly, hate from his heart, an
Hypocrite: and can by no means, be at peace with one of those; who being
endued with shallow perfections, are but a small particle of what he is, a
mere arome of his excellency; and yet, make a noise with the shallow brooks;
and chiefly desire to appear more then what they are; and seem to be, what
they are not. If the thoughts of man, were as audible as his words, he could
not bear one thing in his heart, another in his tongue: But in the creation of
man, the heart was shut up by it self; and lies open to none, but him that
made it; whose privilege and prerogative it is, to be (...), the searcher of
the heart; and therefore, there may be Hypocrites in respect of us, but not, of
God. And no man aspireth to a seeming excellency above himself; but one
stretched with the swelling of pride, beyond the condition, in which he
stands; and pride has many Companions. By which, it appears eminently true,
that Hypocrisy is not a melancholy, and single sin; that it goes not without
a train; that it comes in the midst of an Army, as if it had proclaimed open
war against Heaven; and therefore, is hateful to God, for many respects.

CHAP. 16.
OUr Savior cries, as if he would never have done crying: Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for their Math. 23.
hypocrisy had many faults, and therefore, many woes were due to them, as
hypocrites. When God deals with servile natures, he begins to frown, he
threatens woe, and torments: because the Slave is of a hard skin, and is more
stirred with a blow, then with soft, and gentle admonitions; and therefore, the
hypocrite is of a rough, ragged, and servile disposition. And when God
threatens pain, and woe, it is clear, that those with whom he deaseth,
cannot be raised by any other means. For, we have driven God to his last
refuge, when he flies to threats: and therefore, the hypocrite is, as his
Father was, in the gall of bitterness: Act. 8. 23.
and, neither the gracious promises of the true Father; nor the grievous
performances of his Son, and our Savior; nor yet, the glorious perpetuity of
Heaven, can heat, or kindle him. You must tell the thief, (for, he is a
thief, as robbing God of his rich, and precious honor) of the whip, and the
lash; of the Jayle, and chains; that he will never leave, till he be hanged;
and that there is a dark dungeon below; and devils, and damned spirits, and
fire, and brimstone, and perpetual horror. It is remarkable, says S.
Cyprian, that Christ under the name S Cypr. lib. 4. ep. 9.
of Scribes and Pharisees, reprehendeth even the Priests, and High Priest. For,
lest he should seem to thwart the Priesthood, and chair of Moses; striking
also, at the Priests, and high Priest, he says only, Woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites. The outward acts of divine service, being performed in
the old Law, by way of shadow, and figure; and with resemblance, and relation
to the perfection of the new Law; and being, as it were, the first lineaments
of perfection: we may not think, that God would Levit. 11.
have excluded the Swan, out of the sacred number of his victimes; without a
firm, and solid reason. He was not tempted with the choice cleanness of her
feathers; nor with her fore-stalling of death, and singing her own obsequies:
but because her skin, the root of her feathers, and her flesh and entrals,
the organs of her music, were black; he rejected her, as an unclean creature,
not worthy to teach the world. The Ostrich likewise, was esteemed profane, and
never admitted into Gods holy Temple; because notwithstanding all his great,
and glorious furniture of feathers, he cannot lift his dull, and drossie body
above the ground. The Moon shines; but because it does not heat, it is not
suffered to shine by day. It is the property of good, to shroud, and cover it
self. God the chiefest good, though he fills heaven, and earth, with his
glory: yet, he will not be seen. Christ, though he was perfect God, and equal
to his Father: yet nothing was ordinarily seen in him, but a poor homely man.
Who ever saw the soul of a man, his only jewel, as he is a man? Christ said
to his Apostles, Ye are the light of the world. And again: Let your light so
Math. 5. 4 Ver. 16.
shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father
which is in Heaven. It must be light, and therefore, a true light, not a
counterfeit, and seeming light; it must be your light, every man's own light:
it must be a light, by which men may see, not only the good light it self,
but also, our good works by the light: and it must shine only to the end, that
our heavenly Father may be glorified. All light is commonly said to be derived
from the Sun: and the cause of all our shining must be always referred, and
attributed to God. And truly, when a man, for example gives alms; kindled
only with an intention, that his neighbor seeing him, may glorify his
Father, which is in Heaven: his intention is clean, and sufficiently good; but
he must be a man of proof, that gives place to such intentions: for he lies
wide open to the ticklings of vainglory, and hypocrisy. But I feel a
scruple: Good example is highly virtuous, and in some sort, worthy of reward,
especially, in persons of eminent quality; because good example is more seen,
more admired, and goes with more credit, and authority in them: and therefore,
does more edify, in respect of the high conceit we have of their wisdom,
and knowledge. Now the hypocrite teaches as forcibly by example, as the sound,
and thoroughly virtuous man. For, we learn in the great Theater of example, by
what we outwardly see: and the hypocrite is as outwardly fair, as the sincere
Christian. It seems now, that an hypocrite does please God, in playing the
hypocrite. Not so: because his intention is crooked: for, he does not intend to
bring an increase of good to others, but of glory, to himself. If good by
chance break in upon his action, it falls besides his intention; and it
belongs to Gods providence, as to it is proper fountain, which crusheth good
out of evil. As likewise, the prodigal man, when he gives prodigally to the
poor, does not intend to fulfill the law of God; but to satisfy his own
wild lust of giving. St. John Baptist was a lamp, burning and shining. Which
moved St. Bernard to say: Ardere parum, lucere vanum, lucere and ardere
perfectum. It is S. Bern. in Sermon, de nativ. S. Io. Bapt.
a small thing, to burn only; a vain thing, to shine only; a perfect thing,
to both shine and burn. Nothing is more naturally proper to the fire, then to
burn; and in the instant, in which it first burns, it gives light. Which is
the cause of those golden words in Synesius, (...): Synes. Contra Androm.
It is the nature of God to do good; as of the fire, to heat or burn; and of
the light, to give light.

CHAP. 17.
ANd certainly, if we search with a curious, and piercing eye, into the manners
of men; we shall quickly find, that false Prophets, and Deceivers, are
commonly more queint, more various, and more polished in their tongues, and
public behavior, then God's true, and faithful Messengers, who conform
themselves to the simplicity of the Gospel. And, if we look near the matter,
God prefigured these deceitful creatures, in the creation: (for, he has an
admirable way of teaching, even by every creature:) it being the property of a
cruel beast, called the Hyaena, to feign the voice of a man: But when the
silly Shepherd comes to his call, he ceases to be a man, tears him
presently, and preys upon him. Each Testament has a most fit example. Ioab
said to Amasa, the head of Absolons Army, Art thou in health, my Brother? Could
danger lurk under the fair name of 2 Samuel 20. 9.
Brother? or, could death hide it self under health, a perfection of life?
They could, and did. For, Ioab, making forward to kiss him, killed him: and
robbed him both of health, and life; whom he had even now saluted with, Art
thou in health, my Brother. Surely, he did not think of Cain, when he called
him Brother. Judas came to Christ, and saying, God save thee Master, Math. 26.
49.
kissed him. He talks of God, and of Salvation, God save thee. He confesses,
Christ to be his Master. He kisses too. And yet, in the same act, gives him up
into the busy hands of his most deadly enemies. Wherefore St. Ambrose, one
that had a practical knowledge of the great difference of Spirits, which he
had seen in their actions; dissuading us from the company, and conversation of
these faith Impostors, says, Nec S. Ambr.
vos moveat, quod formam praetendere videntur humanam; nam etsi foris homo
cernitur, intus bestia fremit: let it not move you, that they bear outwardly,
the likeness, and similitude of men: for, without a man appears; but within,
a beast rages. And that, which St. Hierome says of a quiet Sea, is of the
same color with the conceit of St. Ambrose: Intus inclusum est periculum,
intus est hostis: S. Hier ep. ad Heliodor.
the danger is shut up within; within is the Enemy: like a rock, watching under
a calm water. St. Cyprian advises us, to betake our selves presently to our
feet, and fly from them. Simus ab eis tam seperati, quam sunt illi de Ecclesia
profugi. Let us fly as far S. Cypr. in ep. 3. lib. 1.
from them, as they have flowne from the purity of the Church; and that is a
great way. St. Cyprian in the same place, exhorts us very seriously, not to
deal with them, not to eat with them, not to speak with them. O the foul
corruption of our Times! O for some zealous power, that may reform the abuses,
mine eyes have seen! It is one of the first endeavors of the Papists in
England, which they exercise toward the society of men; to gain the good
wills of Ministers. For, if they purchase the Ministers good will, and good
word; they clip the wings of the Law; and hold him fast, that has a great
stroke in matters concerning them. And where the Papists have great means,
they are very free to Ministers in their entertainments, and send their Coaches
for them, and their wifes. But when they have been merry, and are gone; their
good name, which they left behind them, has not as good entertainment, as
they. For, the Papists say, (and I have heard them,) These Ministers are the
veriest Epicures, mere belly-gods; if we fill their bellies, we shall be sure
to have them our friends; when the bag is full, the Pipe will go to our tune,
a long time after. Modo ferveat olla, if the pot sees, and there be warm meat
providing for dinner, what care they, whether there be a God, or no? If we
licker them thoroughly, with strong Beer, and good sparkling Canary; and call
them to ride, and hunt with us; they will talk familiarly with our Priests,
and hear them jest at their Religion, and at the Professors, and Defenders of
it; (and as freely jest as they:) and yet, will honestly keep counsel: they
are not Christians, but Atheists. And thence the Papists fetch, as they think,
a strong argument against our Religion. And whilst these Ministers frequent
their houses with a pretense of converting them, (for so they tell ignorant
people, that groan under the scandal) they subvert them utterly. Truly, a
Minister, and a daily Guest of the Papists, enquired when this Book, (which I
intended for the service of God, and the detestation of Popery) came into the
light; that (said he) I may sit by the fireside, and laugh at it: and I
believe, he will, if he can spare so much time from drinking. The Lord forgive
him, and teach him to be practical in the practicable things, in which this
Book is doctrinall. But why should I be opposed in my reasonable proceedings
against the Adulteress of Rome, by my own Mothers own children? and so often,
by so many of them? or why should entertainments, or private ends be more dear
to them, then Gods truth? Let every man observe, what great Christmasses they
keep, and how they abound in dancing and revelling; striving thereby, to make
the hearts of the Country people, which are soon taken with such baits, their
own; lest they should at any time, either accuse them, or bear witness
against them. And in their houses, many, if not the greater part, of their
servants, were lately Protestants. O Lord, whither do they pull us, one by
one? I know, where having one of a Family, they made the number up five
presently; and the Father had bin but a while before a Churchwarden: and these
are all Attendants upon a rich Papist. I would their devotion did not blaze so
much, and so often, like an Ignis Fatuus, lead poor Travelers out of their
way. It is my opinion, grounded upon experience: In every day of the year, O
pity! Some, and more then we dream of, in this little corner of the world,
are drawn with queint devices, with smooth terms of Art, with trim speaking,
and eloquent behavior, from us, from our own body, by them to them. O weak
people, to be thus drawn! weak in life, or understanding: or at least, weak
in resolution, selling Christ for a mess of pottage, or for thirty pence at
most. If the Papists go on, there will be quickly, I say not few, but fewer
found hearts in England. Take notice of this all good people. Existimemus.
If we have no zeal, we have no religion, no Church: and zeal is like fire; if
it be, it burns. We carry our selves perinde quasi S. Chrysostom. hom 1
adversus Iudaeos.
nihil accideret grave, says St. Chrysostom, cum membra nostra putrescunt: as
if no harm did happen to us, when our own limbs drop away in corruption, from
our bodies. But I turn to the matter in hand.

CHAP. 18.
THe Teachers of the Arian Heresy, by which, Christ was thrown down from
Heaven, to the degree of a mere creature; were the most affable, and most
insinuating people, that lived in those days. How subtle were they, both in
the propagation of their faith, and the carriage of their manners? they showed
the poor plain people, three corners of their handkerchers, saying, Here are
three, and these three are not one: how then, can three persons be one God? And
they did not juggle only, with the simple sort. For, they deluded Ruff lib. 10
Eccl. hist. cap. 21.
six hundred Bishops, by a cunning proposal, whether they would worship
Christ, or (...): who, because they were not skilled in the Greek language,
answered, they would worship Christ, and not (...): little thinking, they
denied Christ to be consubstantiall with his Father. And, how cunningly did
they serve themselves into the favor of great-ones; moving one by another, as,
Constantine by his sister Constantia? What did they not attempt against holy
Athanasius? they suborned a false woman, to accuse him of rape; they brought
in, the arm of a dead man, with an intention to soil him with murder, and
sorcerie: they would have pulled him limb from limb, in the midst of an
honorable Assembly. In very truth, no people were ever so like these heretics
in their practices, as the Popish Priests, and Jesuits of these days. I have
heard from themselves, that one Jesuit sat singing in a Cobblers shop, with his
apron before him, to hide himself from the Officers, that pursued him:
another, counterfeited himself to be drunk, and acted it rarely, that he might
put a trick upon a Constable; and that a third, dancing with a Lady, heard her
Confession, sin after sin, as he met her, because he wanted better opportunity.
These are but pranks; yet, the good Fishermen would not have done so. What
black sin will they not fix upon him, that is their enemy, though a friend to
Christ? But here I cannot stay. Yet note: God has laid a curse upon
dissemblers, that if you nearly follow their life's, and actions with your eyes,
you shall clearly perceive them, often tripping, and plainly discovering the
foul disorder of their hearts; in crooked proceedings, that do not savor of
Evangelicall doctrine, or Apostolical gravity. It is the prophocie of Esaias,
The Esaias 15. 6.
waters of Nimrim shall be dried up. Some English it: the Panthers waters shall
be dried up. The Panther (say the best writers of natural History) being
exceedingly spotted, does seek out secret fountains, wherein to wash, and rub
it self: thinking by this means, to put off the foul badge, and corse livery
of nature, and the color of its coat, which it likes not. But the Panthers
waters, shall, one day, be dried up. No figge-leaves, good son of Adam; no
painted veyle of sincerity; no long cloak of dissembled holiness. If you are
found naked, you must appear so, before a great Assembly, made great by all
the great Assemblies, that ever were. I am a plain man, and I must speak
plainly, because I do not judge rashly; the judgment of experience is certain.
The good Bishop of Rome, who lived when there were good men there; Evaristus,
says worthily, writing to the Bishops of Egypt, as he is alleged by
Gratianus: Deus autem omnipotens, ut nos a praecipitatae sententiae Evar. ep.
2. ad Episc. Aegypti.
prolatione compesceret, cum omnia nuda and aperta sint oculis ejus, mala
Sodomae noluit audita judicare, priusquam manifest agnosceret quae dicebantur.
The omnipotent God, to draw us back from the precipice of rash judgment,
although all things are naked, and open to his eyes; yet would not judge the
sins of Sodom upon a single relation: he would manifestly see the truth of
the matter in practice, and draw an experimental conclusion. Not that God
acquireth knowledge by experience, or other ways; for experience is a
knowledge of things, which we knew not: but, for our learning. Vnde ipse ait,
says my Author, Descendam, et videbo utrum clamorem, qui venit ad me, opere
compleverint, an non est ita, ut sciam. Wherefore God says, I will go down
now, and see whether they have done altogether according Genesis 18. 21
to the cry of it, which is come unto me: and if not, I will know. We had lost
many good things, had not Gratianus been in the way; and this was one: First,
God will go down, and take pains to see the truth of what he has heard; and
then, he seems, not to know what he knows, that we may learn, and know what
we know not. Knowing and seeing, he went down to see and know. I knew not,
and I went to see; and having seen I know. Scientia est ejus, cujus est
demonstratio, says the Philosopher, we know.striA
that, which is evident to us by a demonstration. And that I may cement the
discourses of men with truth; and because the contrary has been preached, and
mightily defended; and it is my part, to maintain truth on all sides: here I
cannot hold from plain-speaking. In all the Churches, which ever I saw,
belonging to the Church of Rome, in France, Spain, Italy, and the low
Countries, and also in Rome it self; the high Altar, where the Sacrament is
kept, and delivered, and which only can fitly be likened to our Communion
Table, in regard it is but one, is encompassed with Rails: which Rails are
commonly placed above the steps, by which they ascend to the high Altar: within
which Rails, the Priest only, and he that serves at Mass, do abide, except in
the singing of high Masses, when he is accompanied with the Deacon,
Subdeacon, Master of Ceremonies, and two Acolythi: Upon which Rails, in all
Communions, is laid a long cloth of linen, which the Communicant holds with
his hand toward his mouth, while he does communicate: and at which Railes, the
people do always receive the Communion. I contribute this Testimony toward
the satisfaction of Truth-maintainers: Oyee Ministers of England; ye are, or
ought to be, the light of the world, the salt of the earth: Shine therefore to
the world, and season the earth by your good examples: Be humble, as Christ was
humble; Be temperate; be contented sort vestra; be laborious: But above all,
seek peace; and pursue it. And forget not to be direct, and sincere Preachers
of the Gospel of Christ. If the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall
prepare himself to 1 Cor. 14. 8.
battle? I confess, I am bold. It is my love that speaks, mixed with a fear,
lest we should fall into the foulest scorn of proud Rome. I will close up all
with an Apostolical Admonition. Now I beseech you, Brethren, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
by the name of our Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that
there be no divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in
the same mind, and in the same judgment. And spare, O spare the seamlesse
garment of Christ. And what I know, I can demonstrate. This shall end this.
Priests (if they will be called so) are like stars, upon the powerful
influence of which, depends all the course, and disposition of this inferior
world. If they be stars of a gentle, and mild aspect, they bring health,
peace, plenty, every good thing; if otherwise, plague, war, famine, all
mischief. Either what we preach, let us preach over, and over, and over
again, by example; or we shall, after all our long talking from the Pulpit,
only cast an offensive block before our weak brethren; put innocent Christ to
the blush, whose royal person we present; and vilify our doctrine. It is
said: Jesus began both to do, and Act. 1. 1.
teach. And this way ran the stream of his doctrine, He that shall do and
teach, shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. First, let us do; and
afterward, teach. For, then it is believed, that we believe our own doctrine,
when we teach it, preach it, proclaim it the second time, in the school of
Manners. Salvianus says truly, Atrocius sub sancti nominis professione
peccamus, We sin Salvia. lib. 4. de guber. Dei.
more grievously, when our sin breaks out, from under a glorious
profession. I will not deny while I live, but that, as Unity is the due
perfection of a Thing; so order, of things. For, in a diversity of things,
there must be order, or confusion. If not confusion, a unity in diversity;
which lest it should be liable to frequent divisions, must be dealt, and
disposed by order: from whence rises that fair good Greek word, made for the
purpose (...), fair goodness. For, things are good, as things; and fair, as
ranked in order. Dionysius gives us an example in beauty, where every part,
feature, and color is proportionably placed in order. I grant willingly, that
the Church of Rome is outwardly one, and orderly; but this may be policy, not
religion. If she be one, and orderly, as she ought to be; she must be one in
faith, and doctrine with the Apostles; and the same in doctrine, and practice.
The Cameleon (they say) shows all colors on her skin, but white and red: and
yet, those only set out perfect beauty. And the fairest in the Canticles, is
white and ruddy; and his Spouse like him, In operibus candida, in sanguine
purpurea, white in works, and purple with blood; snowwhite, not whited like a
wall.

A word here, pray. It is past my graspe, to comprehend, (and I believe, beyond
the Sphere of all our Activities) how the notes, and marks, by which the
Romanists profess to know the true Church, when they see it; may in reason be
noted for such. Antiquity is an accidentary thing, a thing seperable (if a
thing may be said seperable, which was never joined) from the true Church; and
a thing common to it with other Churches. Accidentary, because it founds not
the Essence of the Church, but happens to it by the fluencie of Time.
Seperable, because the old Church in the days of Adam, and the new Church in
the time of the Apostles, stood firm, and was it self, without it. Common,
because the Antichristian falsehood, which triumphs in the Synagogues of
Satan, was borne almost as soon as truth; and unchristian falsehood, before
her. Multitude is not so proper to the true Church: because it agrees neither
always, nor alone, nor altogether to her: Not always, because neither to the
primitive Church, nor to the Church in the Arrian, and other persecutions. Not
alone to her, it is as well known, as the Sun. Not altogether to her,
because although many are called, yet few are chosen. Of successions, there is
one of doctrine, another of persons: the first is a mark, the second is a mark
to the sense, not to the soul. There is also, a twofold Union, one mystical,
and spiritual, in the bond of faith; another external, in the bond of
profession. That is a plain mark, not this. And Union is not proper to the
Church alone. For, the wicked, and the world of Infidels, are often united. The
Kings of the earth set themselves, Psalm. 2 2.
and the Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his
Anointed. It is a close Union, when they join both their persons, and their
Counsels. And Union does not always agree to the Catholic and Universal
Church; because particular Churches are oftentimes divided, and torn with
dissentions. As, the Church of Greece differs in many points from the Church of
Rome, which the Roman Church dealing with us, calls matters of faith; and yet,
the Church of Rome will turn about again, and style her only, a
Schismatic part of the true Church, cut from the communion, being external,
but not from the body of the Church: And her Priests, with license from his
Holiness, may say a Grecian Mass upon a Popish Altar. And high Mass after
the Grecian custom, is sung every year upon S. Athanasius his day in Rome,
even by Grecians. And many particular Churches, and private Doctors amongst the
Papists, cry up for matters of faith, the points which others throw into the
number of private opinions: and these all deem themselves to stand under one
and the same Vertical point of Religion. These marks may suit as agreeably
with the Beast, in the Apocalypse, as with the Church.

The second Book.
CHAP. 1.
NOw I am come to the English College, at Valladolid in Spain: where, at my
first entrance, I saw terribiles visu formas, terrible shapes, and
representations. For, people are no sooner entered into the College, but they
are put in mind, what the Jesuits have suffered in England, for the Catholic
faith; in this manner. There stand in an open place before them, as they enter,
the pictures of Father Garnet, (that suffered in the matter of the Gunpowder
treason) and others: wherein great Knifes are pictured opening their breasts, to
their very hearts, the blood running out in abundance. And the Spaniards do
make faces, when they see them. S. Cyprian was not of their faith, who writes,
S. Cypr. ep. 24.
Vt appareret, Innocents esse, qui propter Christum necantur, infantia
innocens ob nomen ejus occisa est: That it might appear, those who dye for
Christ should be harmless, his very first Martyrs, baptized in their blood,
were innocent children. And if I remember aright, as men go farther into the
College; there offer themselves to their eyes, pictures of late persecutions
in England: where they have pictured us in print, throwing the Papists, being
covered with beasts skins, to dogs: but their invention has some ground, in
the Primitive Church. Some things I learned in this College, which brought me
into an extreme loathing of the Jesuits: As, that a Jesuit preached in a
public Assembly, the fall of the house in London, upon the Papists, assembled
in Black Friars, to have been caused by the Puritanes, who did undermine it.
And that in the time, when the Gunpowder treason was in hatching, a Secular
Gentleman came from England to Valladolid, where the Court was then resident;
and lodged in the College: And his business was, to solicit the Council of
Spain, for aid toward the perfection of the Plot: but the Council would not
yield, answering, that such a case might in time, be their own. And yet, the
Jesuits would now feign put upon the world, that the Plot was not intended, or
as much as fore-knowne by them. Let God witness for me; that in this College,
I heard two, whereof the one was a Jesuit, the other, a Jesuited Scholar,
talking after this manner. It was very near, said the Jesuit, that I should
have been one in that Plot of the Gunpowder treason; and though it was
discovered, I would to God, I had been one of the sufferers in that cause. I,
said the Scholar, now it took no effect, every one speaks against it; but had
it been prosperous in success, it would have been extolled to the Heavens,
by all our side. Let every man take his own way: It is my belief, that the
Jesuits were the first Plotters of it, and the chiefest Actors in it. Another
reason, which here created in me, a loathing of the Jesuits, (to pass by, many
others) was; because I heard it, and saw it come reeking from an Arch-Jesuits
mouth; that the Conversion of England to them, could never be effected, but by
blood. And it has not been known (said he) that so ripe haeresie was ever
suppressed, but by the shedding, and effusion of much blood. The man looked
bloodily, when he spoke it. But my Masters, and you that with me, have
protested against the corruptions of the Church of Rome; one question: What
security can we promise to our selves, that are beset in all places, with such
bloody Butchers of men: one of whose chief Principles it is, that we must be
laid wallowing in our own blood, or they cannot compass their much desired
ends? I have stayed too long, from the relation of one passage: In the first
voyage of the English to Cales in Spain, be like, one of our Soldiers, seeing
a fair Image of the Virgin Mary in one of their Churches, and thinking to
prevent their farther worship of it; cut it more then once, over the face with
his sword. The English Navy being gone; order was presently given, and taken,
that whereas such a gallant Image of the Virgin Mary, had been irreverently
abused by the English, the English again should use it reverently. And it was
presently sent to the English College in Valladolid: where it stands over the
high Altar, with a cut face, the skars yet remaining, as marks of honor; but
dressed most richly, and adorned with a precious Crown: And this they call,
whatsoever they think, our blessed Lady. She has a rich Wardrope, and great
change of Gowns: one of white Satin with gold lace; another of red; another
of green Satin, and yet another of blew; besides her cloth of gold, for high
days: and the worst day in the week, the Image goes in Satin (while the poor
are naked;) and farther then all this, is as brave in action, as in clothes;
for, it works a wondrous store of miracles; but I had not the honor, to see
one of them. Only, one of the Jesuits came one day after dinner, hastily to us
Scholars, and told us with much laughter, how he had persuaded a good old
wife, that she was cured of her infirmity by the Virgin Mary, though she did
not feel ease suddenly; and that she must not fail to bring the figure in
wax, of the part cured, and hang it up with other figures of that kind, before
the Image, in honor of the Virgin Mary, and to preserve the memory of the
Miracle.

CHAP. 2.
I Will not have to do with Controversy, but as it lies in my way. For, if I
turn my style altogether, from the sweet and peaceable comforts of the Spirit,
to the noise, and loud alarums of Controversy, I am a fish took out of the
water. And therefore, I profess, if they write a thousand times, and I answer
as often; I will never stir a foot, from this very spiritual way of writing:
let them object a disability on my side, or what they please. The command of
Christ, to my soul; is, Go and preach; and every thing that comes from me,
while I am I; shall be, if it be holy, an act of obedience to that command.
But, I lose time. This Image Worship, performed with much bending of the knee,
and body; is a learned kind of Idolatry. Nicephorus, entitled by them,
Scriptor Catholicus, the Catholic Writer, confesses, it was a custom
introduced first, in imitation of the Pagan Idolators. But who can give a law
of religious worship, which took not beginning from Christ or his Apostles? God
forbids all worship of this ugly stamp, in those holy words of the law: Thou
shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them. We see, that Exo. 20 5.
the prohibition imposes a tie upon the outward gesture. And their answer will
not hold together; that we are only commanded, not to make, or bow down to an
Image, which we make as well our God, as our Image; and bow to, as to our God:
because God in his law, immediately adds: For I the Lord thy God am a jealous
God. Jealousy in us, is a superfluity of love, and being mingled with fear,
and suspicion; fears every shadow, and appearance of neglect, and suspecteth
every likeness of evil. And therefore, howsoever they change the phrase, and
plead, that the worship dwells not in the Image, but lodging as it were, at
the sign of the Image, goes on her journey to God, and to the Saint: Yet God,
being still a jealous God; his jealousy will be very fearful, and suspicious
of all worship, which is not directed the next way to him: for, though his love
be clean from all defect; acting with us, now his part is the jealous Lover.
And what a puzling is here, of ignorant peoples brains, with these ordinations,
and terminations? And this holy parcel of holy Scripture, Josephus the Jew
with us, makes a part of the second Commandment. But, with what threats, and
promises, God keeps us to the keeping of this Commandment? Visiting the
iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, Ver. 6.
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me. And showing mercy
unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments. The iniquity
of the Fathers, shall be punished in the children, if they be also children of
their sins, and idolatrous practices: but he will show mercy unto thousands,
whose Fathers abhorred such odious ways, yea though their children are not
inheritors of all their Fathers virtues; because he is more prone to mercy.
And as far as thousands exceed in number, the third and fourth generation; so
far will his mercy be more active, and operative, then his Justice. And this
odd kind of worship, is exceedingly scandalous to all the heathenish world of
unbeleevers; and especially to the Jews: who yet ache both in body and soul,
and know they do so, partly for their Fathers old sins of Idolatry. There
stands a great wooden Image of the Crucifix, in St. Paul's Church in Rome.
But why do I say, it stands? Alas, it cannot stand. Out of which, they
teach, that Christ talked with St. Brigit. And the Curtain being drawn, the
people fall down before it, and sigh, and knock their breasts: and then, the
little beads drop. I have seen an Image of the Sun, through the mouth of
which, in the old time, the devil spoke to the people. But while I am
reasonable, I shall not believe, that God would ever speak out of an Image, and
tempt some to Idolatry; and confirm others in it. And, it does not suit with
his greatness, to come so near the devil in his ways; who long deceived the
world, by a counterfeit way of speech in Oracles; and who practiced to speak in
Images, almost from the beginning of the world. Indeed, the great Doctors of
the Church, commonly call the devil, Gods Ape; because he much labors to be
like him, that he may pass for him, and deceive with more Authority: But no
good man has ever said in express terms, that God does imitate the devil:
for, when we imitate another, we learn something of him. And they will not
deny, if they be not brass all over, but, as well their Priests, tutored by
the devil, as the old Priests, in imitation of the devil, have spoke to the
people from the mouths of Images. And the dressing of Images in silks, and
velvets, what is it, but the baby-sport of children? only, the little child
has more wit, then to worship his idle Baby. I have seen an old worme-eaten
Image of the virgin Mary in Rome, carried with all earthly pomp and triumph in
Procession; to which, the people kneeled, where it came, with as humble
submission, as they could have done to God himself, if he had there appeared,
with all his Court of Angels, in his Glory: And before this Image, I, because I
was somewhat dexterous in observing the State of their Service; was admitted,
even to the saying of Mass. Shall man, the living Image of God, worship the
senseless Image of a man or woman, being a more ignoble creature then
himself? As the perfections of all things join hands in God, with an infinite
access of excellence: So the perfections of all things but God, scattered in
them, embrace one another in man; in a finite, and bounded manner. Man has
being with a stone; is, lives, and increases with a plant; is, lives,
increases, and is sensible with a beast; is, lives, understands, and is
spiritual on the surer side, with an Angel. It is a strange saying, but as
true as truth: An Angel is more perfect then a man; but a man is enriched with
more perfections then an Angel; and comes more nigh to his Maker this way,
then an Angel. David says of him, Thou have made him a little lower then the
Psalm 8. 5.
Angels. The Angel indeed, is more completely perfect, as being of a finer
substance, and borne with large natural knowledge, and without the troublesome
connection of a body. But man is stored with a fairer number of perfections;
albeit those perfections, which the Angel has, spread farther in fairness,
then these of man. Shall this fair creature, the noble work of God, worship
the mean work of man, an Image? which is but ashes in the likeness of an
Image: and which, the Popish Doctors confess, if a Papist or other person, be
driven with extremity of cold, he may burn, to relieve his body. Go now
man, and worship him, who, when thy body falls to the poor condition of a
stone, or block, or of the Image, that men would persuade thee to worship; and
stirs only as it is moved by a living power; and shall be left, not a man,
but the Image of a man; the Image of God being departed with, and in the soul:
shall acknowledge his own Image, if not defaced with the worship of Images, or
other sins; and call thy soul, and his Image, home to his rest.

CHAP. 3.
I Cannot come so nigh, but I must needs have one pluck at the invocation of
Saints. By what device can we invocate the Saints, without great injury to Gods
glory? For, the more help we crave, and expect from others, though with some
reference to God, the less we seem to depend upon God; and want of
dependence, be it real, or rational and only in appearance, breeds neglect.
And a simple wretch, believing, that in what place soever of the world he is,
he is there heard by his Saint, and his petition granted, and as they teach,
more easily granted: do you think, his heart is not vehemently prompted to
deifie his Saint? I have heard an Italian say in Rome, (and he spoke to me,
when he said it) being transported with a high thought of the Popes greatness,
so like the greatness of God; that he did exceedingly pity the poor blind
Englishmen, who believed aright in some things, and embraced many verities, as,
that there is one God, and three persons, and the like: and yet, did not
believe so plain, and open a matter, that the Pope is God upon earth. But,
they meet me, as I go: A vile sinner is unworthy to appear before God in his
own person. Is it so? Why then does Christ make public proclamation? Come
unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, Mat. 11 28
and I will give you rest. We must come unto him, that gives rest. And all
must come, even they that labor under the weight of a burdened conscience;
they that are in labor, and desire to be delivered of a Hedghog, that wounds,
and tears them in their tender inside. The spirits labor, when men are upon
dying: and we that labor to keep life and soul together, must come to him.
And it is God, who, as the Prophet David says, Humilia respicit in coelo, and
in terra, looks back upon the humble things of heaven and earth: For, as the
low things of earth, are humble in respect of him; so also, the sublime, and
high things of Heaven. But he bows down his attention to all as the Sun
visits with equal clearenesse, the garden of flowers, the green meadow, the
field of Lillies, and the dirty ditch. One example is eminent. And behold, a
woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and Mat. 15. 22
cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me O Lord thou Son of David, my
daughter is grievously vexed with a devil. She was a woman of Canaan, but,
for her unworthiness, her name is concealed. And she came out of the same
coasts, but what coast, or where her house stood, or whether or no she had a
house, we must not learn. And yet, she boldly cries unto him for mercy. She
gives him his titles, by which she acknowledges his power, and his gentleness.
For, she calls him Lord, and the Son of David, a meek man. And she goes to
him for a remedy against the devil, that came to destroy the works of the
devil. Her daughter was possessed with a devil: and, quod possidetur, says
Thomas of Aquine, expounding the definition Tho. Aqu. 1. p. q. 10. art. 1.
of Eternity, given by Boethius, firmiter, and quiet habetur: We hold fast, and
quietly, the thing we possess. Yet she hopes, and fears; and fears, and
hopes again, and in that hope, goes to him courageously. Now, certainly, he
will come running toward her, and meet her above half way. It is quite
otherwise. But he answered her not a word. O poor woman! why then Ver. 23.
the Popish doctrine will appear probable. Christ will not answer a word to a
vile sinner, speaking in her own person. Had he but looked upon her with a
compassionate eye, and said, Alas poor woman, she would have called him, Son
of David, once again. But he answered her not a word. And his Disciples came,
and besought him, saying, Send her away, for she cries after us. She followed
still: and her cries went before her: if he will not see her, he shall hear
her; and he shall know, that she is a woman. His Disciples begin to think, that
she is as much vexed with a devil, as her daughter, she cries so loud; and
beseech him to send her away. But he answered, and said, I am not sent, but to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Ver. 24.
Poor wretch, what shall become of her? She is lost, and lost again; lost in
her self, and lost in her daughter: but she is not of the sheep of the house
of Israel. And therefore, if he be sent to none, but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, he will never find her, though she be lost, and he find
what is lost. Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me. Make
room, Ver. 25.
give way there, now she comes. She breaks through the press, and down she
falls upon her knees before him; she fears that she was rejected, because
she had not worshipped him; and now, she humbles her heart, and her body, and
lifts up her hands, crying, Lord help me. Is it possible now, that Christ
should not melt into compassion, and thaw into sweet drops of tears, and
mercy? But Ver. 26.
he answered, and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast
to dogs. What? a dog? If she be a dog, she is not a cursed dog. Was ever a dog
heard to cry, Lord help me? I wonder, she breaks not out: Am I a dog? I would
have you well know, I am not a dog, I am a woman. You a man sent from Heaven,
and call a woman dog? Had I been called any thing, but an unclean dog, I had
not cared. I do not remember, that I ever barked, or bit any man. And must I
now, be called a dog? Her language is of another strain. And she said, Truth,
Lord: Ver. 27.
yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their Masters table. The woman
will be a dog, or any thing that he calls her; and she confesses, that her
place is the dogs place, under her Masters Table; and all that she desires,
is, that she may lick up the little crumbs, which fall from his trencher. But
Christ could hold no longer; his very bowels yern'd; and he gave her, her full
desire, good measure, pressed down, and running over. St. Chrysostom, a great
enemy to Popish impositions, shows plainly, that he was not of the Popes
Latin Religion, in these golden words: En prudentiam hujus S. Chrysostom. hom. 12
de Cananea.
mulieris; non precatur Jacobum, non supplicat Johannem, non adit ad Petrum,
nec Apostolorum caetum respicit, aut ullum eorum requirit, sed pro his omnibus
poenitentiam sibi comitem adjungit and ad ipsum fontem progreditur: Behold the
prudence of this woman: she bends not her prayer to James (He begins with
James, the Lords brother, not with Peter, and goes on with John, the Disciple
whom Christ loved, and of all that he names, Peter is the last) she does not
make her Supplication to John, she runs not to Peter; she regards not, that
the Apostles are all together; neither does she request any of them: But in
place of all this, she and her repentance go on to the very fountain it
self. And again in the same Homily, he strikes down the Pope, and all his
Cardinals at a blow: If thou, O sinner, would have access unto God; Nihil
opus est atriensi servo vel intercessore; sed dic, miserere mei Deus: Is enim
te audit quocunque sis loco, and undecunque invocetur: There is no need of any
Court-creature, or other, to intercede for thee: but only, say, Have mercy
upon me, O God; for wheresoever thou art, he hears thee, and from what place
soever he is called upon. But the old objection, now it comes: They go to God
by his Saints, as Subjects to their King, by his Nobles and Servants: And
because I have begun to mow up their dry Sophistry with Fathers, I will
proceed. St. Ambrose speaks thus: Solent misera S. Ambr. in Romans 1.
uti excusatione, dicentes, per istos se posse ire ad Deum, sicut per Comites
itur ad Reges. Ideo ad Regem per Tribunos and Comites itur, quia homo utique
est Rex: ad Deum autem, quem utique nihil latet, suffragatore non est opus, sed
mente devota. Vbicunque enim talis locutus fuerit, respondebit illi. Some are
wont to use a miserable excuse, saying, By Saints they may have recourse to
God, as by Nobles, to Kings. We therefore by the Kings Officers and Nobles go
to the King, because the King himself is a man: But to go to God, (from whose
eyes nothing is hid) there is not any need of a spokes-man, but of a devout
soul: For; wheresoever such a one cries to him, he will answer her. And now,
this with many others, has crept on, and at last, stepped out, and stood up
for a point of faith in the Church of Rome.

CHAP. 4.
IT is my belief, that the Invocation of Saints is a by-way, which the devil
has sought and found, to divert man from the due, and true service of God. All
the temptations of the devil, says Nilus, are thus and thus ordered, to
disturb or pervert us in our prayers. And, we see, he has already so far
gained ground, that where they offer up a hundred prayers, they give but ten in
the hundred to God. And they proclaim it, an infallible sign of
predestination, to flame in devotion to the virgin Mary. And where the Church
of Christ prays in divine Service, O Lord open thou our lips; they began
their Office of the virgin Mary, Domina labia mea aperies, O Lady open thou my
lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise: till the Pope ashamed of them
and their open lips, shut up their lips with shame enough. And they seldom say,
praise be to God, without a profane addition, and to the virgin Mary; dividing
their praises in the same breath, and (it is to be suspected, they are also
quick, and many so ignorant) most commonly in the same gift of the mind,
betwixt Christ, and his Mother; betwixt the Creator, and the creature. It has
bin openly confessed to me in Spain, that the common people there, for the most
part, believe, that the virgin Mary is as really present in the Sacrament as
Christ; and some excuse it, saying, that the flesh of the virgin Mary is there,
because Christ took his flesh from her. And so, it is very near to certainty,
that the ignorant sort especially, part equally their praises and thaksgivings
of this condition; and give half to Christ, and half to his Mother: to who^, I
believe, Christ has given so much in heaven, that she need not part stakes
with him here. It is the definition of prayer in the Logic of John Damascen
(...) Io. Damasc. lib. 3. de fide orthodox. cap. 24.
, Prayer is the ascent of the mind to God. Three things are required to every
action, that is both perfect and noble. First, the action must be of a perfect
kind; and such a one is the action of ascending. Secondly, the action must
flow from an honorable beginning, or principle; and such a one is the mind,
the most pure, and most refined part of the soul. And thirdly, it must tend to
an excellent object; and God excells all objects, but himself. I cannot
perceive, how God being so prone of himself to goodness, that he has made
himself in a manner, visible in his creatures: that he sent his own dear
Son from his warm bosom, to bleed to death for us: there is now, the
ransom being fully paid, so great necessity of mediators, to put the
sweetness, and love of heaven and earth, in mind of his promise to Man. For,
they cannot enlarge their own glory, by what they do in Heaven. There is yet,
a strong necessity of prayers, and other duties on our part. But is there yet,
need of Saints, to blow the coals, and to stir up his halfe-extinguished love
to man? and all this, when the Son of God, is also the Son of man, both God and
man, to interpret betwixt God and man, and to deal the cause on both sides.
One Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus: as St. Paul writes to
Timothy. One Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
both for the maine matter of reconciliation, and the continuance of it. It is
added, the man Christ Jesus, that we may go boldly to him; we men, to the man,
Christ Jesus. It cannot be denied, but he sits at the right hand of God, and
makes intercession for us; and if so, why should any be joined with him, in
maintaining the continuance of the league betwixt God and man, which he made? I
mean, any that we must look up to, and that shall deal the same business in
the same place, and with more assurance of reconcilement, then he. The Minister
is a Mediator betwixt God and Man; but not one, that is invisible; and above,
as God is. Certainly, God could have given his blessings, without the motion of
prayer; but the device was, to exercise us in humility, and obedience toward
him, us here below; and in the performance of charitable offices toward our
neighbors; for our greater advancement hereafter. And should it be freely
given to them, to the Papists, that the Saints express their charity to us, in
praying for us; it will not presently follow, that we must be Petitioners to
them: For, they may pray for us, that is, for the achievement of our last end;
and yet, not know the particularities of our conditions; and not be able to
hear our prayers. It is a great way to the place where the Saints dwell, and
we pray softly. And therefore, God hears us, because he is every where, Intra
omnia, sed non inclusus; extra omnia, sed non exclusus, says Isidorus, within
all Isid.
things, but not shut in them, without all things, but not shut out of them,
And although the Saints should behold in the vision of God, in whom are all
things, what we do, and pray for: yet still they are finite, and their powers
limited. And if the whole world, should pray to a Saint at the same time, it
would be a great employment, to give hearing to all the multitude. He that sees
him, who sees all things, sees but a little of what he sees, that sees all
things; And the blessedness of the seers, does not so much, as partially
consist, in the seeing of what is done below: And that God imparteth to them,
any such revelations, by which they may appear to us, so like to him; we are
not warranted to believe. I rather think, that the wills of the Saints and
Angels in Heaven, lie fast asleep in the will of God. No Saint would grieve
for his Father, though he should know, he is now broiling in the most searching
flames of eternal fire: because his will is wholly resigned to the first, and
superior will in the order of wills, the will of God. He grieves not for him,
because the sentence of God has past upon him; and the sentence is
irrecoverable, because it is absolutely willed. And who can make it credible,
that the Saints know, what sentences are past, and what are yet to pass? I was
borne a poor beggar; When I could not beg; and I live a beggar, and shall dye
one. My cry shall ever be; Good Master, my Master, and Master of all the world;
give somewhat to a poor beggar, for Jesus Christ his sake.

CHAP. 5.
I Blame exceedingly in the Jesuits, and others, their neglect of holy
Scripture. An old man amongst them, and a profound Scholar, said in a vaunting
way, that he had never read a word of holy Scripture in holy Scripture, but as
he found it scattered, and cited in other books. And when I made a Latin Play
amongst them, and (God in his tenderness, forgive me for it) acted the part of
a Minister, and preached upon the Stage, having took for my text, those holy
words of Christ to St. Thomas, Blessed are they that John 20. 29
have not seen, and yet have believed: Moving excessive laughter at every
word; I was not reprehended by them, but highly commended. And in Rome, when I
composed a Play of a mixture of English and Latin, and still personated a
Minister, though I much profaned the words, and phrases of holy Scripture; all
past for very well done. Nothing almost, is more common with the Italians, then
to frame their jests, of the phrases, or passages of holy Scripture: which
because they are witty; please and spread exceedingly. It is worthy to be
learned, that as in all subordinate Sciences, they so contrive the states and
resolutions of their questions, that they may serve the better to the settling
of their Doctrine in Divinity; so they have the like aim, even in their
ordinary carriages; if the carriage be capable of it. And running with this by
as, they neglect even outwardly, holy Scripture; that in Divinity, they may the
more seemingly infer the insufficiency of it in the decision of
Controversies; forming an argument out of their own practice; with which
argument, though no argument, they are patiently convinced, to whom their
practice is a Canon, and indeed, holy Scripture it self. There came to this
College, when I was there, a poor old for lorne Spanish Soldier; and his
arrant was, to beg an alms. This is ordinary; and wherefore should I relate
it? The extraordinary is to come. He confessed weeping, to some of the
Scholars; that he had been a busy man in the great Fleet, that came for
England in Queen Elizabeth's days: and that the heavy hand of God had so
waighed him down in all his enterprises, since the foul attempt of that
mischievous Plot, that he could never prosper in his common affairs: nor yet,
see any man, who had engaged his person in that business, that prospered: I
may ad out of his words; that seemed not to bear with Caine, or like a
wandering Jew, the curse of God upon his forehead. O all ye true English
hearts, love God, and serve him. The Jesuits perhaps will deny, they had any
hand in that Invasion. But lest they deceive you, I will tell you some news
from Rome. It is known there, that the Pope took, and the Jesuits gave, the
better half of the Colledgemeanes, sold outright, to the use of that Fleet:
And that the Scholars were over-thrown with the Navy; For, the number of
Scholars being great, and now, greatly neglected; part of them, by the fearful
judgment of God, were forced to beg from Town to Town. And I have heard of a
great Extremity, into which some of them fell; but the form of it is quite
fallen out of my mind. Still praise thou, God, o my soul. I have read a Latin
book in Rome, written by Father Parsons (the Jesuit that I told you, sat in
the Cobblers stall) after Gods expression to us in the overthrow of the Fleet;
where he labors to reduce that overthrow, (as Fa. Floyd the Jesuit, did the
fall of the house in Black-friars) not to an act of Gods good pleasure, but of
his sufferance: and where with many arguments he encourages all Catholic
Princes to the like attempt; and where he confesses, that the Spanish ships
had many Engl-Priests in the^; but he says, they came only, to mitigate and
temper the severity of the Spaniards; and to give the distinction betwixt
Catholics, and Protestants. It is very ordinary in Policy, to give fair
causes for foul ones; Non causam pro causa, That which was not the cause, for
the cause it self. Every cunning man does so. My memory bears me witness, I
have been told by them; that either at the time of the Spanish fleet, or of the
Gunpowder Treason, the Jesuits thought themselves so secure of a success,
agreeable to their minds; That they had cast, and written, how all things
should be ordered in Parliament for their advantage; and for the prevention of
differences betwixt them, and the Monks, concerning Houses. Which was one of
the Reasons, why Leander Jones, an English Monk, wrote his Book concerning the
Houses and Lands in England, due to his Order. But now I speak of the Monks; I
must come to them anon; for I came to the^. Every wise, and indifferent person,
and the person, that is but indifferently wise; will plainly see, that I had
reasonable motives, (and yet, these were not half) sufficient to induce a
discoursing man to forsake the Jesuits; if not, the Popish Religion. But,
though I had enough of the Jesuits, I still desired to be seeing, in the
weighty matter of Religion. And of my own accord, I forsook the Jesuits, and
Spain; and betook my self to the English Monastery at Doway, in Artois. For, I
thought, if any where, there was the beginning of the life of Saints, and
Angels. I had a companion with me, whom in the journey I found, to have done
amiss in his departure from the College; but he is a private person, and his
fault is private; let him go, and thank me.

CHAP. 6.
IT is too early to take my leave of Spain; Every day came to our ears a new
description of the abomination of desolation in the practices of the Spaniards:
Their sins were common talk; and namely, the fleshly commixtions of men with
women, of men with men, can we bend our imagination farther? Of men with
beasts; O most holy God! And I remember, a Drunkard did fright me in England.
Their religious persons are much tainted with these abominable acts of
Irreligion. And these are not Spains sins only, but also, the sins of Italy,
where the Pope dwells; and of Rome it self, where his best house is, and where
he is to be seen for the most part: Why now the holy Prophecy of the Reverend,
and godly Bishop Paphnutius, in the Council of Nice, is come about: and the
branding of lawful Marriage in the Clergy, has put the^ on, to break all the
ties, and ligaments of Nature, and Religion; and to tread deep in the dark, and
dirty ways of mischief. They have pleased, to give out here, that I marry not,
because I judge it unlawful, and forecast a return to them. But let them know
that I remayn free, as from Marriage, so from any tie, pulling that way; for
two Reasons.

First, to take off the sharpness of the scandal, which they raised of me,
that I changed my Religion for a Wife.

Secondly, because as yet I lie dead and buried in an obscure Village, where no
man that is an Inhabitant, except the Clerk, brings a Book to Church; and
where no man is able to judge of my Vocation; or of the wonderful things,
which God has showed to me, and commanded me to tell upon the housetop.

But when GOD in his mercy, shall make me a fixed Star, and settle me in a
constant abode; I shall not be ashamed to marry, as many good servants of God,
as well ordered as I, have done. I was called to Orders, to the sweet yoke of
Christ; to which the Pope had annexed a yoke of iron: I could not, where I was,
put on the one, without the other. The Church of Rome did not force me upon
Orders; but she forced me to put on the iron yoke with Orders. And because I
put it on by enforcement, and the enforcement was unlawful; I may lawfully
shake it off, and say; of all Rules, Scripture is the best. A promise not
regulated by the Word of God, will never befound obligatory. It will be much
for me, to promise to God, or to my self, and assurance of Chastity; because
Christ has not bound himself, to furnish us always with extraordinary Graces.
His intention is, to bring us to salvation by the common rules of
Christianity; and by Graces, which ordinarily do gratos facere, as the
necessary Graces of Sanctification: In higher matters; as, in Graces gratis
datis; those of Edification, and the like; he will be always at his own choice.
Only this. The condition was Antichristian, the will was forced, not
absolutely, but by a slight; and the matter of the Promise, was unlawful. Some
are Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven: but these hang from day to day upon
Gods extraordinary Grace, which does not forsake them: they do not promise so
high a grace to themselves, by vowing the performance of a duty, which falls
not within their power, according to the ordinary process; and to which they
are but Gods Tenants at will, in all respects.

CHAP. 7.
THe Spaniards are odiously proud, and boasting both in their words, and
carriage. But the Jesuits have a plaster for the deformity; and say: The pride
of the Spaniard, is only the outward representation of pride, and the acting
of a proud man's part; but the Englishman is proud in heart, and the true
Lucifer. But what man, can measure the abundance of the heart, but by the
outside? Their women paint, till they are old; and then, their faces being
corrupted, (as God will have it) they are most ugly. But the Jesuits cover this
too; saying they must paint, to keep their Husbands from other women, and in
due respect to them.

I remember a word, which an old Monk, and a deep one, said to me, speaking of
Religion; Nothing is so foul, but words, and S. Cypr. lib. de discipl. and
habit. Virginum.
discourse will white it over. Saint Cyprian was not of their Religion, who
introduces Christ, saying in the Day of judgment, of such a painted Sepulcher,
Opus hoc meum non est; nec imago haec nostra est: This is not my work; nor is
this, my Image. I do not like the Cruelty of the Spaniards, who burned a man,
differing from them in opinions, part after part, limb after limb, beginning
at his toes, with a slow, and gentle fire: till he was driven into such
horrible outrages of desperation, that he cried out with a lamentable tone, and
asked the people a hundred times over, if they would send Letters to the
Devil; for he was going, (he said) and would carry them. They say, their
intention was, to convert him. But, Lord deliver my body, and my soul, from
being converted by them. All in God, is most excellent; but we call that, more
then most excellent in him, which We are best acquainted with, his mercy, and
his Gentleness. And, not to be like God in that, in which he most shows
himself to us, is high neglect. You see, I take but here and there, and where
I take, I do but touch. I will keep some thing for hereafter, to be used if
they go on to trouble the peace of my sweet reposall in the bosom of my dear
Mother; the Church of England. In Spain, according to the Law of the Realm
(but not according to Gods Law) if a man find his wife in the actual
commission of Adultery, he may kill both his wife, and the Adulterer.

The Jesuits know a Gentleman, who sent a dish of hot meat covered to a Friary,
the shaved head of a Friar; and it was presented to the Friars being at dinner;
with this Message, that such a Gentleman, a good Benefactor of theirs, had sent
them a dish from his Table; and many thanks were given, with acknowledgment,
that they were much beholding to him, and always bound to him by new favors.
But the Messenger, uncovering the dish, began with the other end of his
Message, and fairly told the Friars, that as many of them as came where he was
found (for, he had spared his wife) his Master would serve with the same sauce.
Had this Friar married, he might have died with his head upon his shoulders.

Upon the last good Friday, which I saw in Spain; the upper part of a Church
fell, standing in a Town, not far distant from us. And, as the manner is, the
women sitting in the body of the Church, many of them were oppressed. The
Preacher, seeing it when it first yielded, turned to go down: (the Pulpit was
joined to a side pillar:) but he was beaten down, and lost the use of both his
legs. The noise went presently abroad, and brought in, all sorts of people.
And, the women wearing many Rings, they pulled them off, and where they came
not at the first pull, cut off their fingers, when many of them were alive, and
only stunnied. And presently came down another part of the roof, and
destroyed them, and their cruelty. This is the day, when the Cross is adored,
crept to, and kissed; and brought into the Pulpit, and there spoke to. And as
my Discourses are altogether occasional; so, here, in place of these follies
of Devotion, I will give matter of Meditation for this, and other good times.

MEDIT. 1.
CHrist being promised to the sick, and wounded World, in those acceptable
words, The seed of the woman shall bruise Genesis 3. 15.
the Serpents head: God in his wisdom, suffered the World to walk many
hundreds of years, by the twilight of Nature: And then also, there was a
Church, and Melchisedech was a Priest of the most high God. The breach of this
Law, bringing a deluge upon the whole World; and an overflow of corruption upon
Faith, and Manners: God gave an addition of the written Law. But that likewise,
little helping to the perfect cure: and the World having now fully seen in the
Glass of long Experience, that man of himself, was altogether unable, and
that there was extreme need of a Savior; God sent his own and only Son, in
the fullness of time; the Prince of Peace, when the World was settled in a firm
peace; Esaias 9. 6.
to promulgate the Law of Grace, a Law which binds, vinculo pacis, with the
bond of peace. And when both the Law of Nature, and the written Law, passed by
the manifold necessities of the miserable world; the good Samaritan performed
all the business, with a little Balsam. It is generally true, which is
commonly said, that example does more forcibly move, then words. For, it is not
only true of ordinary words, delivered by the tongue, the hearts Interpreter:
but also, of that great Word, the Son of God: by whom we were not so strongly,
and efficaciously moved, when in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
John 1. 1.
with God; and when he remained invisibly with the Father: as when the Word was
Verse 14.
made flesh, and dwelt among us. Every man was lost, and lost before he was
found, and lost for ever: and a great Father without a Father, sent his Son,
being also a Son without a Son, and without a brother (for there could not be
many such Sons) to labor till he dyed, in the recovery. And lest vain men
should say, God made the World, indeed a goodly piece of work: but a less, he
brought about all this fair diversity of building, with a word or two, and a
word is soon spoken. He said, let there be this, and let there be that, and
both that and this came presently, and showed themselves: but he did not
labor, he did not sweat in the performance: his works are great, but they are
not painful. Dealing now, the great work of our Redemption, he labors to
extinguish the flames of sin, with tears, (for, he was often seen to weep,
but never to laugh) with sweat, with blood; with sweat of blood. And as the
Unicorne is taken in the Wilderness, by laying his head in a Virgins lap, and
there sleeping, till he is bound, and carried away with his precious horn, the
sovereigne cure of poison: So while Christ laid himself down in the Virgins
lap, he was bound and carried away, to be the only cure of spiritual poison.
No marvel now, if the whole World favored the time of his birth, and the
great Sea was at quiet, while the little Halcyon was in building her Nest.

No marvel if, as in his eternal generation, he has a Father without a
Mother; so, in his temporal generation, he came of a Mother without a Father;
and from her, into the World, without opening the door in his entrance. No
marvel, if the Kings of the East, animated with the prophecies of Job, or
Balaam, came hastily to him, under the strange conduct of a newmade Star. No
marvel, though as he entered into Egypt, the trees, to which, others bowed,
and gave idolatrous worship; bowed themselves to worship him: and though the
Idols fell in pieces. No marvel, if Oracles lost their voices; and that of
Apollo answered Augustus, Me puer Hebraeus, etc. An Hebrew Boy has silenced
me: and no marvel, if a false God complained the very day of Christ's passion,
to certain Mariners at Sea; that he was now utterly destroyed. For, that, to
which, these wonders were directed; or, from which, they were derived, was it
self superlatively wonderful: The Son of the Ever-living God, being life it
self, died for us.

MEDIT. 2
THe terms of Divinity are to be taken into the mouth, as the Canonists speak,
cum grano salis, with a grain of salt, that is, wisely tasted, and understood:
otherwise, they will not prove good nourishment. The Son of the living God was
crucified; and being God, was crucified: but God was not crucified. Saint Paul
says, Had they 1 Cor. 2. 8.
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. But he does not
mean, that the Lord of glory was crucified. For, the nature of the Deity is
not passible; neither is glory liable to pain: As likewise, it is said, No man
goes up into heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, the Son of Man. And
yet notwithstanding, it was only the Son of God, that came down from Heaven:
for he was not yet, the Son of Man. In respect therefore, of the personal
Unity in Christ, the things which are proper to God, are sometimes referred to
man: and the things, which pertain to man, are ascribed to the Divinity. It is
a similitude much approved in the Council of Chalcedon; Conc. Chalc.
As, when the body of man suffers, the soul indeed knows that, and what
the body suffers; but in it self, remains impassible. So Christ suffering,
in whom, the Godhead was; the Godhead in him, could not suffer with him. If, as
in God there are three persons, and one nature; and three persons in one
nature; so in Christ, we consider two natures in one person; and lay them out
to their proper acts; all is easily perceived. Excellently, Cyril of
Alexandria, alleged in the first general Council Cyr. Alex. in Conc. Ephesians.
1.
of Ephesus, Factus est homo, remansit Deus, servi formam accepit, sed liber ut
filius, gloriam accepit, gloriae Dominus, in omnes accepit potestatem, rex
simul cum Deo rerum omnium: He was made man, but he continued God, he took the
form of a servant, but he remained free as a son, he received glory, but was
the Lord of glory, he received power over all, but was King, together with
God, of all things. With what a ready finger, the holy Evangelists touch every
particular string, in the dolorous discourse of our Saviors Passion? They were
not ordinary men, drawn every way, with carnal desires; but extraordinary
persons, carried aloft upon the wings of a divine spirit. For, in the relation
of those things, which manifested the glory of Christ, and pertained to the
demonstration of his Godhead; they do not stay; they give a naked declaration,
and pass to that which follows. But in the cloudy matters of his disgrace,
and especially, in the Funeral Song of his Passion; they are copious, and full
of matter. Which, if they had vainly affected the glory of the World, they
neither should, nor would have done. Thus evidently showing, they did not glory
in any thing, but with Saint Paul, in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Saint Luke, opening the glory of Christ's Nativitie, opens and shuts all,
as it were, with one action: And suddenly Luke 2. 13, 14.
there was with the Angel, a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and
saying, Glory be to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward
men. That strange coming of the Wisemen, or Eastern Princes; Saint Matthew
comes as quickly over: And fell down, and worshipped him: And Mat. 2. 11.
when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him Gifts, Gold,
Frankincense, and Myrrh. In blazing the Transfiguration of Christ, they put it
off without any blazing figure, without a transfiguration of words: as willing
only to insinuate, that Christ opened a chink of Heaven, and gave a little
glympse of his glory before his Passion, to prepare and confirm his Disciples.
And forced at last, upon his Ascension, it falls from them in short, He was
received Mar. 16. 19
up into Heaven. All which, they might have amplisied by the help of their
infused knowledge, which virtually contained the inferior art of speaking;
with glorious descriptions. But in the doleful History of his Passion, we
have a large discourse of apprehending, binding, judging, buffeting, whipping,
scorning, reviling, condemning, wounding, killing; and if any thing slip under
the rehearsal, it is to be a scarff over the face, and to show, the grief
could not be expressed; and moreover, to stir men's thoughts, to express more
in themselves: to which, we may refer that of Saint Luke, And many other
things blasphemously Luke 22 65
spoke they against him. These blessed Evangelists proved themselves to be the
true Disciples of Christ: For Saint Matthew says, Mat. 16. 21
From that time forth began Jesus to show unto his Disciples, how that he must
go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders, and chief Priests,
and Scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day. The Resurrection
had but a very little room: and it should have had no room; had it not fitly
served, to sweeten the relation of his sufferings. He did not much stir his
head in his passion, without a Record, without a Chronicle. Saint John says,
he bowed John 19. 30
his head. And thus does the flower, when it begins to wither. He bowed his
head, and gave up the ghost. He bowed his head. Stay there; it is too soon to
give up the ghost. Father of Heaven, will thou suffer this? O all ye
creatures, help, help your Creator. But, they stir not; because he has bowed
his head; the most high, and most majesticall part of his body. Did he bow his
head? He, the great God of Heaven, and of the World; betrayed by his own
Disciple, crucified by his own people, led by him to the knowledge of him,
when all the World was given into their own hands; and brought by a strange,
and a strong hand, out of Egypt, the house of bondage, the black figure of this
World; into the Land of Canaan, the Land which flowed with milk and honey, the
beautiful Emblem of Heaven? Did he bow his head, no instruments but his own
creatures, being used to his destruction; when the weighty sins of the whole
world were laid upon his guiltless back; and when he could in one quick
instant, have turned all the World to a vain, and foolish nothing? And shall
one of us dirty creatures, frown and be troubled, lift up the head, speak
rashly, and kick against the thorn, moved by every small, and easy occasion?
Shall we murmr, and trouble all with the smoke, and flames of angry words?
As thus, (for the deceits of the Devil are wonderful) If that Miscreant, that
shape of a man, had not put my honor upon the hook, I had not been troubled.
Such another man is not extant, me thinks, he has not the face of an honest
man. The carriage of his body is most ridiculous. God forgive me, if I think
amiss: my heart gives me, he never says his prayers. Pray God, he believe in
Christ. This makes the Devil sport. What are we? How soon we take fire? how
quickly we give fire? how long we keep fire? In what mists, or rather fogs we
lose our selves? Why did God send some of us now living, into the World, and
not rather create us in glory; if he did not mean, we should pass through a
field of thorns, into a garden of flowers; through the Temple of Virtue, into
the Temple of Honor; by pain, to pleasure?

MEDIT. 3.
HE gave up the ghost. They say, men that die, give up the ghost. Did Christ
die? It cannot be. Yes: and more. He died willingly, like a meek Lamb sobbing
out his life. For, he gave up the ghost; it was not taken from him. And
therefore, a good man has not feared to say, that Christ held his life by mayn
strength, some little while, beyond the date of nature; that it might not seem
to be taken from him by force of arms. Greater love has no man then this,
that a man lay down his life for his friends. Joh. 15. 13.
Life is the last of all our possessions in this World: and laying down life,
we lay down all: and love, that lays down all for one, loves one better
then all. It was an unspeakable act of love, and not sufficiently utterable by
the great Angels of heaven, that the most glorious Majesty of God, not capable
of pain; nor yet, able with all his power, to inflict pain upon himself,
should come down, though not in his Majesty, and close with a body subject to
pain: in which, he would experimentally know all that, which man could bodily
suffer: and more then all: for, no man ever suffered in such a delicate
constitution of body: and therefore, no man ever endured such rage, and
vehemency of pain. O Lord, whither do thou come? we are creatures: yes
truly, bodily creatures; we must be fed, clothed and kept warm: we are liable
to pain, and shook with a little pain, we turn color from red to pale Lord,
the Angels, they have likewise fallen; and their nature is more noble; as being
free from gross, and earthy matter. What stirred thee to put thy self in the
livery of our frail nature? thy love, thy will, thy most loving will. Look
upon him, o my soul, thou daughter of Jerusalem; look upon thy dear Friend,
who died temporally, that thou may live eternally; and who, out of his
singular tenderness, would not suffer thee to burn in Hell, for a hundred
years, and then recover thee; by which not withstanding, he might have more
imprinted in thee, the blessed memory of a Redeemer: but expressly required in
his Articles, that if thou would cleave to the benefit of his Passion, thou
should never come there: now look upon him. He hangs upon the Cross, all
naked, all torn, all bloody; betwixt heaven and earth, as if he were cast out
of heaven, and also, rejected by earth: betwixt two thieves, but above them,
tanquam caput latronum, as the Prince of thieves: he has a Crown indeed, but
such a one, as few men will touch, no man will take from him; and if any rash
man will have it, he must tear hair, skin and all, or it will not come: his
hair is all clodded with blood; his face clouded with black and blue; his
eyes, almost sunk in the swelling of his face: his mouth opens hastily for
breath, to relieve decaying nature: the veins of his breast rise beyond
themselves; and the whole breast rises and falls, while the pangs of death do
revell in it. Behold: he stretches out his arms to embrace his Persecutors;
and they nail them to the Cross, that he cannot embrace them. Look you: he
sets one leg before another, with a desire of coming to them: and they nail
his legs together; that he cannot come. Now trust me, he is all over, so
pitifully rent --: I will think the rest. My soul, this, Christ did for thee:
and this, Christ would have done for thee; if thou had been the only Sinner,
and wanted his help. What a grievous mischief, is sin? by which, this great,
great? I have not words: most great, most glorious passion of Christ, is trod
under foot, and spoiled of the latitude of its effect: and which makes Jews of
Christians. For, by sin Christ is every day crucified by me; every day forced
to bow his head, and give up the ghost. I have farther to go. If from the
price, and quality of the medicine, we may in reason, draw arguments, to
prove the state, and condition of the soar: Sin is indeed, a grievous wound: I
never heard of such another. Agnosce, o homo, says Saint S. Bern. Sermon. 3. de
Nativit.
Bernard, quam gravia sint vulnera, pro quibus necesse est, Dominum Christum
vulnerari: Acknowledge, o man, how grievous those wounds are, for which it was
necessary, our Lord Christ should be wounded. He goes on: Si non essent haec ad
mortem, and mortem sempiternam, nunquam pro eorum remedio Dei filius moreretur:
Had they not been even to death, and to eternal death, the Son of God
assuredly, had never given his dear life for the remedy. If I go to the depth
of it: the Jews did not kill Christ, sin killed him.

MEDIT. 4.
AS sin killed him, so he kills sin. Then let every sinner come, and my self
with them: and open his wound, and receive his Cure. The young of the Pelican
are stung by a Serpent, and she bleedeth upon them, even the blood, wherein
her vital spirits harbor. Is a man a Drunkard? Let him soberly consider, what
haste he makes to purchase a Fever, or a surfeit; which might suddenly pass
him away to hell: let him ponder, how often he has drowned reason, and grace,
and quenched the fire of Gods Spirit in himself; how often he has bowed Gods
good creatures, and put them besides the just end of their Creation; and how
often in his cups, he has defiled Gods white, and holy Name, and beat hard
upon his patience: and let him now come hither, and give all again, in tears,
and cry with the Centurion in the Gospel, Lord, I am Matthew. 8 8.
not worthy that thou should come under my roof: For, my house is a sink of
dregs, and lees, and loathsomeness: but speak the word only, and my soul
shall be healed. And truly, o thou that did complain of thirst upon the
Cross, I will hereafter, thirst with thee. Is a man a covetous person? Let him
search the Scriptures, and learn what Saint Paul learned in the third Heaven,
that the love of money is the root of all evil: For, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
what evil will not a man commit, to get the money which he loves? and money
being ill-got, is not well spent; and sooner, or later, The love of money is
the root of all evil. Let him think, how he sweats, and breaks himself in
catching flies; in gathering dirt and trifles, which give no settled rest to his
desire; and, to use the words of a good one, quibus, solutus corpore, non
indigebit, Diodor. apud Max.
which when he has laid down his body, he shall not have, or have need to
have: And let him now come hither, and be fully satisfied with the unvaluable
riches of Christ his precious death: let him take off his heart from passing
riches, and betroth it to Christ's passion: let him look upon him with the eyes
of faith, and conceive, in what a poor, and neglected manner, he hangs upon
the Cross; and lament for his own manifold oppressions of the poor: let him
pity the desolate nakedness of Christ, and in his absence cover the naked:
and let him say, Sweet God, I do here lay down all my vain, and boundless
desires, and wholly desire thee, and nothing but thee, and nothing with thee,
but thee. Is a man, a burning firebrand of rage, and anger? let him
understand, that ira furor brevis, anger is a short madness, and a long
vexation; that it subverteth the whole work of Peace, and all the fabric of
piety in the heart: robs it moreover, of the sweets of life; and leaves a
man, a silly man, to be the daily subject of other men's laughter, and scorn:
let him consider, that the God of peace, dwells not in a troubled and
discontented soul: And let him now come hither; and the shedding of this blood,
shall satisfy, and still his anger: for, the blood of Christ will break the
Adamant of his heart, and let out the passion; he has crushed water out of a
Rock: For what Lion hearted man can be angry, when he calls to mind, how
this innocent Lamb, heaven and earth being moved above and beneath him,
remained calm in the midst, and died in the fullness of content and patience:
and let him say, come, O come, great example of sweetness, open thy arms
wide, wider yet, yet wider, that I may run into the Circle of thy sweet
embraces. O my beloved Lord, I am a spotted Leopard; and yet I am not, for, I
am all black: and one drop of thy clean blood will transform all into perfect
beauty. O God, how beautiful are thy Tabernacles? I will praise thee in
Jerusalem, the holy City of peace. Is a man, a back-biter, or a talkative
person? Let him seriously think, that he has outdone the Basiliske, and
killed where and when he has not seen: let it sink into him, that he
scatters coals, and is able to set on fire a whole Kingdom: for, if all were
known to all persons, that is done and said; the dearest friends would bate of
their love, and there would be little, if any friendship amongst men: let him
observe, that words which have flown out of one mouth, fly from one mouth to
another, and never leave flying: and let him now come hither, and look upon
him, that opened his mouth in speech, but seven times in three long hours upon
the Cross; when happily another would have roared in the extremity, and have
declamed against the ravenous greediness of the Jewish cruelty: let him here
admire in silence; for, he will see that, which, if he would speak, he could
not speak worthily: let him here contemplate him, that knew the dark hearts,
and secret sins of all the world, and yet, did not reveal them to his tongue:
And let him say; Dear Lord, and Master, I perceive now, that I am not master
of my brother's good name, and that I ought not to break silence, and speak
every true thing; and though my neighbor has stained his credit in one place,
yet, if it be not wholly prostituted by him, if it be not a general, public
and over-spreading stain; I may not recount his weakness in places, where his
good name is firm, and entire, or at least, not bruised in that part. O my
blessedness, I will make a covenant with my lips, and a branch of the covenant
shall be, My lips shall praise thee. Is a man a lover of pleasure? Let it enter
into his heart, that as money profits only, when it goes from us; so
pleasure delights only, when it passes; and that it passes, as it comes;
and that never any earthly pleasure, did please when it was past: let him keep
in his mind, that whosoever is overcome with the vain ticklings of pleasure,
is more busied in the exercise of those faculties, which he has common with
beasts, then of those, in which he is like to Angels, and in the inference, is
a man-beast; and let him believe, (for, it is certainly true) that the greatest
pain, grief, and torment, which Christ suffered on the Cross, and all the time
of his life, rose from a foresight, in which he beheld, how many would dote
upon the short, and lightning flashes of the World; and how few would cleave to
the great, and ever-during benefit of his passion: and let him now come hither,
and fix upon him, whose whole life was a map of misery, and a sad history of
pain; who as he hung upon the Cross, suffered most heavy pains in every small
part of his body, died in pain, and left to his Church, a large legacy of most
painful sufferings: and let him say, O thou true lover of souls, I will
henceforth pursue pain, more then pleasure; I will prove my self to be a
natural member, and suffer with my head: O goodness, make me conformable to
thee; and though I weep, and bleed, and bear crosses, and though I am born up
my self from earth, and all earthly pleasure, on a Cross; I shall not repine
at my condition; because the servant is not more worthy, then his Master. Come
all kinds of Sinners, come on, come near the Cross; take a full view of this
bloody sacrifice, offered once for all: touch it, lay your hands freely upon
the wounds and bruises; they belong to you. Come, let us fall down before him,
and tell him, of what weak and glassie matter he has made us, how prone we
are to slip, what great enemies threaten our ruin; that the quarrel is,
because we bear his Image, and that we are persecuted even to death, only
because we are like to him; and that in the matter, it is his quarrel. And
then, let us humbly dedicate our parts that have sinned, to his service. For
doubtless, he that suffered Magdalene to wipe his feet with her hair, so
often kemb'd, sweetened, tied up in knots, let down in hooks, and spread in
Nets, to catch the careless youth of Jerusalem, and the Country; will not
reject you, or me; or yours or mine. He that has feet, which have been
swift to shed blood, and quick in accomplishing the acts of sin, let him
kiss these feet, and beg part of the satisfaction, which they have made for
the sins of the feet: he that has hands, dipped in blood, and bathed in all
the sinks of mischief; let him kiss these hands, and beg part of the
satisfaction, which they have made for the sins of the hands: he that has set
the casements of his curious eyes, wide open to vanity, and never shut them
against vain, and wanton sights, let him kiss these eyes: he that has
ears, blistred with slanders, and blurred with foul discourses, let him kiss
these ears: he that has a mouth, plenum amaritudine, full of bitterness,
delibutum mendaciis, bedaub'd with lies, and besmeared with oaths; let him
kiss this mouth, and beg part of the satisfaction, which this mouth has made
for the sins of the mouth: he that has a heart fraught with ill habits, and
always at work in ^^mmering sin, let him kiss, not with his lips, but with
his heart, this wounded side; and a mingled drop of blood and water, from this
royal heart, shall meet the lips of his heart; while he beggeth part of the
satisfaction, which this heart has made for the sins of the heart. Come all,
the dying man refuses no living man; you beggar with the crutch, come forward;
no man, woman, or child is excepted from the fruit of his passion. Every one,
that is endued with a reasonable soul, has title to it. It is only required,
that we believe in him, and keep his Commandments; (for we ought likewise, to
give evidence of our faith, by our works.) It is Christian doctrine, which
Christ teaches: As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness; even so
must the Son of man be lifted up: that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have eternal life. Saint Leo strikes home: Effusio pro injustis
sanguinis S. Leo.
justi tam potens fuit ad privilegium, tam dives ad pretium; ut si universitas
captivorum in redemptorem suum crederet, nullum tyrannica vincula retinerent:
The pouring out of the just man's blood for the unjust, was so powerful by way
of privilege, so rich by way of price; that if every captive soul had believed
in Christ Jesus, hell should not have held one damned soul in it. Who then, can
despair? He permitted himself to be fastened to the Cross, to proclaim, that
he could not run away from any man. Press on boldly, he cannot stir. His
feet are sure, and therefore, you may be sure, he cannot run away: Nor can he
free his feet with his hands, for the hands are as sure as the feet. And if he
were loose hands and feet, poor wounded man, he could not go far; for, he is
now parting with all the blood in his body. And when he does withdraw himself
from those that call upon him, it is only, that he may give them opportunity
to call more earnestly, and that he may be, more honored. These are the
cunning tricks of Lovers. Saint Gregory Nazianzen, writing to his Friend
Nicobulus, objecteth to him, (...): S. Greg. Naz. ep ad Nicobul.
you fly, when I follow you, loves practitioner, to make your self more
precious.

MEDIT. 5.
O Lord, how should a poor man do, to pass his life in the due, and solid
consideration of the great secret of Christ's Passion? to consider, that he
would appear to men, in a vile, and despicable manner; that he would wear a
Crown of thorns, an old purple Robe, and bear a Reed in place of a Scepter;
to be firm occasions of dispensing his heavenly gifts, and ornaments to us: to
consider, how Pilate and Herod joined hands, and met in his destruction; (...),
S. Greg. Naz.
and contraries concurred to his punishment; as Saint Gregory Nazianzen wrote
of a Martyr, burned alive in an old Ship, to whose death, fire and water did
agree: to consider, how the Sun, as Dionysius declares in his Epistle to his
Master Apollophanes, in ipsius verae lucis occubitu, lucere Dionys. ep. ad
Apolloph.
non potuit, in the setting of the true Sun, could not shine: to consider, that
he did not take a fantastical body in the Incarnation, that he might seem
to suffer when he did not, as some vainly thought; and that he did not chase
away the bitterness of his Passion by the power of his Divinity, as others
imagined; but that he drew up, and concealed his Divinity, and gave nature no
succor in her pain, when he gives to his Martyrs, power above nature: to
consider, that all the parts of the body, in which, sins are committed, were in
him, accordingly punished; even though the sins were not in him: to consider,
that he stretched out his arms, to embrace sinners; bowed his head low, to
kiss sinners; gave water with blood, to signify, that his blood was able to
make white the blackest and most deformed sinners: to consider, that he died.
He died, and yet, the World stands, the earth stirs not, and the cruel Jews
are not swallowed alive into Hell. O piety! O pity! whatsoever Histories
have mentioned, Verses have sung, Fables have framed, is to this a trifle. And
is he dead! Good soul, when he was alive, he was the best man living: And
when he died, he died sweetly; he bowed his head to all that were about him,
and so died. O the strange inventions of love! O the bottomless abyss of
love! Unhappy Jews! they sold Christ for 30 pence, and Titus, son to Vespasian
the Emperor, after the destruction of Jerusalem, sold them, thirty for a penny:
they cried, they forsooth, had no King but Caesar, and the Statue of Caligula
the Emperor, was soon brought, and set up in their great temple: they
crucified Christ, and were crucified themselves, under Florus the President,
till there was no room in the fields adjoining to Jerusale^, wherein to raise a
cross. The death of his forerunner was in like manner revenged: for, the body
of the dancing-maid slipped, under the ice, while her head was seen to dance
above it. And thus God dealt with Leo the Emperor (if the Popish Writers do
not juggle with us:) for having took by violence from the great Church of S.
Sophia Zonar. annal. to. 3.
in Constantinople, a precious Carbuncle; an ulcer rose in his head, called a
Carbuncle, of which, he miserably dyed. And shall not vengeance be severely
taken of those, that murder Christ every hour? I will strike my breast with the
Publican, and cry to my self; Remember always, when thou art brooding sin
in thy heart, that then thou art breeding a most bloody, and stubborn
intention to kill Christ; and that thou, bloody man, do to the full extent
of thy power, actually kill him; and therefore, thou art a murderer, a murderer
of Christ: and it is a wonder, that as thou passest in the streets, the stones
do not cry out from under thee, stop, stop the murderer; stop the man, that
killed his Master, his Lord, his Redeemer, his Father, his King, his God, and
all at a blow. Go thy ways, ungrateful world; thou have lost a jewel, of
the sight of which, thou were not worthy. Good God, how naked the world is, now
Christ is out of it? for when he was in it, it was very full. O my spirit,
since he is gone, solace thy self with his memory; and being dead, let him
live in thee; in thy thoughts, in thy discourse, in thy actions; he will be
very sweet company. And my spirit, go with me a little. Christ being dead, it
is pity, but he should have a Funeral. Let the Usurer come first, with his
bags of money, and distribute to the poor as he goes. The drunkard shall
follow with the sponge, filled with gall and vinegar, in his hand; and check
his wanton thirst. Then the young Gallant, barefoot-like his master; and with
the crown of thorns upon his head. Then the factious and angry person, in the
seamelesse coat; and carrying the Cross upon his shoulders. The wanton person
shall bear the rods, and whips, wherewith his Master was scourged; and fright
his flesh, The ambitious man shall go clad in the purple roabe. The proud
Magistrate follow, with the reed in his hand. The twelve Apostles shall bear
up the corpse with one hand; and with the other, bear every one, the instrument
of his own death. And the blessed virgin shall go after, sighing, weeping, and
at every other pace, looking up to Heaven. Then Mary Magdalen, divided betwixt
love and sorrow, with a box of precious ointment in her hand; and with her
hair hanging ready, if need were, to wipe his feet again. Then Lazarus with
his winding sheet upon his neck. And the lame men, whom Christ cured, carrying
their idle crutches under their arms. And the blind, with the boys that led
them, coming after them. And then, the great stream of devout people shall
follow, with songs of victory over sin, death, and hell. And all the mourners
shall go, bowing their heads, and looking, as if they were at hand, to give up
the Ghost, for the name of Christ. He shall not be buried without a Sermon,
and the Text shall be, The good Ioh. 10 11.
shepherd gives his life for the sheep. And in the end of the Sermon, (not
if the time will permit, but whether the time will permit, or not) the Preacher
shall take occasion, to speak a word or two, in the praise of the dead party;
and say: that being God above all Gods, he became man beneath all men, the
more conveniently to make peace betwixt God and Man: that he was of a most
sweet nature; and that when he spoke, he began ordinarily, with Verily, verily
I say unto you: that he was a virtuous man, a good liver; for, he never sinned
in all his life; either in thought, word, or work: that he did many good
deeds; for, being endued with the power of working miracles, he lovingly
employed it in curing the lame and the blind; in casting out devils; in
healing the sick; in restoring the dead to life; and that he dyed a blessed
death; for, being unjustly condemned, mocked, spat upon, crucified, and by
those whom he came to redeem from eternal torments; he took all patiently,
and dyed praying for his persecutors; leaving to them, when he had no
temporal thing to give, a blessing for a legacy. The Sermon being ended, and
the burial finished; every mourner shall go home, and begin a new life in the
imitation of Christ; who chose a poor, and miserable life, when he had his
full choice of all the life's in the world. And Lord, teach me to go after him
in his steps, at least with poverty of spirit.

CHAP. 8.
BEing deep in the consideration of Christ's passion, and of the worth, and
all sufficiency of it: I will declare my belief in one point. I believe, that
man may merit: and I believe, that men wonder, I believe it: I shall not easily
unclasp from this opinion. Still, I believe that man may merit. Do you ask
me, what? Hell, and damnation (give leave to the term;) not Heaven, or the
glory of it. But, if we merit hell, why not Heaven? The reason offers it
self: we merit Hell by doing ill, and we in our own persons, are the only
Authors of ill: Sin is begotten betwixt the malice, and corruption of our
own wills: But he, that is said to merit heaven, is likewise supposed to merit
it by well-doing, that is, by the solid acts of Christian virtues: and the
fair exercise of such virtues, proceeds, not from us, being sons of wrath;
but from grace in Christ Jesus. And therefore, by what Art can we merit, when
that, by which we are thought to merit, is not wrought, and accomplished by us;
but by the strong, and over-swaying force of a superior power; not forcing our
will to a good action, but sweetly drawing both to it, and through it. Ate
habeo, says S. Austin, quicquid boni habeo: St. Aug super Psalm. 70.
quicquid autem mali habeo, a me habeo: What good soever I have, I have from
thee, O Lord: from my self, the evil. Yea verily, Grace is so truly, and so
naturally the supernatural gift of God, and every degree of it; that a grave
Council, condemning the Massilienses, or Semipelagians, who affirmed, that the
beginning of salvation was derived from us, and did consist in a natural
desire, prayer, endeavor, or labor; by which, we procure the help of Grace,
necessary to salvation, says: Si quis per invocationem Conc. Araus. 2. Can. 3.
humanam, gratiam Dei dicit conferri; non autem ipsam gratiam facere, ut
invocetur a nobis, co^tradicit Isaiae Prophetae, etc. Whosoever affirms, that
the Grace of God is given by our prayers, and not Grace to cause, that it be
prayed for by us, contradicts the Prophet Esaias, or the Apostle speaking the
same thing to the Romans, I was found of them that sought me not: I was made
Romans 10. 20.
manifest unto them that asked not after me. In verity, if the four and
twenty Elders in Heaven, the place of highest perfection, threw down their
Crowns before the Throne of God; ascribing to him, all glory, Rev. 4. 10. 11.
honor, and power: the name of Merit in heavenly things, as the word in a true
sense imports, howsoever they crutch it up handsomely; cannot be spoke without
a Soloecisme, both in phrase, and belief. The man committed a Soloecisme, that
looked and pointed toward earth, when he spoke of Heaven. And true Christian
humility ought, even to speak humbly. But even the doctrine of the Papists is
bold, and venturous. Those habits of virtues (say they) which God, the Lord of
all spiritual Treasure, infuseth into the soul, are produced by God without
us, or our aid, and cooperation: but the acts of those habits, that is, the
exercises of virtue, are so produced by Grace in us, that we also, must freely
and readily concur, if we mean to put a price upon them, and make them
meritorious; to their production. But the will concurreth not, except enabled
with actual grace; and the child, I mean the action that is borne,
altogether resembles grace, as it is a virtuous action; and they will not call
it a meritorious action, but as virtuous; and therefore, the merit belongs to
Grace, not to our wills, or us; and partly, to the grace, by the motion of
which, we concur with grace. And it is the opinion of the prime Divines
amongst them, that a work, though very good and honest, and true go^d; if
performed without any pain and difficulty; if mingled with no gall, no
wormwood; may indeed, merit certain degrees of blessedness; but shall in no
wise be satisfactory. For, as it is proper (say these Doctors) to a good work,
in respect of the goodness and honesty of it, to be meritorious: so it is made
proper also, by another law; to a painful, and toilsome work, to render
satisfaction for sin committed. And thus, they both satisfy for their
sins, which merited hell, and by a surplussage of goodness, merit Heaven.
And very often, the roughness and asperity, with which God handles them, is
greater (they tell us.) then the satisfaction, due on their part: which falling
betwixt God and man, drops into his Treasury of Indulgences, whom they make
half a God, and half a man; there to lie in the same room, with the copious
redemption of Christ; and be conferred, when, and to whom, his Holiness shall
please; who, having two Treasuries, seldom gives out of one, but he takes
into the other. They seem to stand upon very even terms with God, or rather,
to go beyond him; and yet, he has been always observed, to reward above
good, and to punish beneath evil. How does the Scripture hold, that we are
unprofitable servants, if we satisfy in a fit kind, for what we have done;
and if we satisfy, both for our selves, and others? Here is a fair, and rich
harvest of profit. If satisfaction can be wrought by a man, why did not God
spare his Son, and send a creature to dye for us? I do not lean with my
whole body, upon this argument. Here is the pillar, and it is one of Hercules
his pillars, beyond which, we cannot go: That could not be effected by a
creature, because it was the great, and general payment of satisfaction; and
God required, the satisfaction to be true, and sufficient: but this, in their
opinion, can: and therefore, it cannot take the name of satisfaction, without
obligation to the satisfaction of Christ: and to share the titles, and
immunities of Christ's passion with him, is a strange kind of pride; from which,
Christ for ever hereafter, defend my soul. It is confessed, that the merit of
Christ, is merit in the rigor of Justice, because it ^^keth it is worth, and
nobility from the dignity of the person; and therefore, stands not essentially,
and with both feet, upon the favor of him that accepts it. But the merit of
man, cannot oblige God to give a reward. For, God naturally, has no
obligation, to make retribution to a creature. And whereas they say, he has
struck the stroke, and made a bargain, by which, he has bound himself to
retribution: and this bargain standing in force, our reward is due by Justice:
this truly, is the precious fruit of the divine liberality, and the mercy of
God in Christ Jesus, whom Synesius calls, viscerum ingentium partam, the
birth of huge Synes. in hymnis.
bowels: who satisfying the infinite Justice of an infinite God, for the
commission of sin, an infinite evil; the cause urged, that the merit also,
should be infinite. And if we compare his works, being of infinite valor, with
our works; betwixt finite and infinite there is a great (some say an infinite)
distance; all say, no proportion. Has God took all the ways, that invention
can possibly compass, to make up his full dominion over man; and to hold, and
turn all his faculties, by a little string at his pleasure: to lay him low,
and make him supple, to take the print of Humility? and shall he now merit in
any sense, not only, a particular blessing, be it spiritual or temporal; but
all that, which God professes, he has to give, Heaven and happiness; and
our found and sweet sleep in his soft arms, for evermore? It would be a
foolish passage of the worm, and it would deserve to be trod upon; if it
should seek to go with it is long train upwards: and it is not suitable with
earth, to desire the high place of Heaven. No pride is half so injurious to
Gods highness, as when we are proud of spiritual Graces. And the reason is
good metal: The gifts of nature, as, health, strength, the readiness of the
senses; although they are Gods gifts, yet are they naturally due, and proper to
the body: but the gifts of grace, are by no law due to the soul; for, a man is
complete in the state of a man, without Grace: and Grace, if not of free gift,
is not Grace: and therefore, to be proud of them, is especially grievous;
because we are proud of those things, which are altogether heavenly, and which
wholly belong to the King himself, and which he bestows with his own
hands, and which he most freely gives, and which he has set his own arms
upon, (for, the least degree of grace bears the likeness of God, and his
holiness) to move in us an acknowledgement of him, as the true, and only
giver. Let S. Austen speak, for he speaks to God. Quisquis tibi numerat merita
sua, quid tibi numerat, nisi munera tua? Whosoever numbreth S. Aug. in Confess.
to thee his own merits, what does he number to thee, but thy own gifts? In
his time, the bold use of the word, merit, taught vain people to number their
merits, in the presence of God, and to his very face. And many hundreds of
years after, even the Council of Trent, forced to deny their own word, in
the sense, and power of it; said of God, Cujus tanta est erga omnes homines
Council. Trid. sess. 6. ca. 16
bonitas, ut eorum velit esse merita, quae sunt ipsius dona: whose goodness
runs with such a great stream toward all mankind, that he permits his
own gifts, to take the title of their merits. Away then, with the scandalous
phrase of speaking. It is a wise fish, which presaging a storm, fastneth it
self upon a rock. Christ crucified is the rock, and upon him will I fix my
soul; and sing with S. Bernard, Meritum meum, miserationes Domini, The mercies
of S. Bern.
the Lord, are the whole substance of my merit. Then, let the Sun be
eclipsed, the earth tremble; let the veyle of the old Temple tear it self;
and afterward, let the proud Jews boast of their law, and works; I shall be
secure. There is no danger of Spiders, under this Canopy: he needs not fear a
thunderbolt, that sleeps in the shadow of a Laurel.

CHAP. 9.
1. THe Nunneries in Spain, are not altogether so holy, as they desire us to
believe. All the Nunns in one house, seated in Madrill, were, as the Jesuits
informed us, discovered to be Witches; even when I studied there. And yet, they
had gained such an estimation of sanctity, that they were famous for it; but
all, by impostures. For, they would hang betwixt heaven and earth in the sight
of their Novices; as if they were caught up from the ground in a rapture, or
ecstasy, and so full fraught with heavenly thoughts, that their souls putting
themselves on with much vehemence toward heaven, and assisted with Gods
helping hand, carried their bodies along with them. And their holy Nun of
Carrion, as I have bin informed by a Traveller of worth, is proved to have been
a Witch. Their famous Nun of Lisbon in Portugal, which gave her blessing to
the old Spanish Fleet, lying there at anchor; dyed, confessing, she had lived a
Witch: and yet, they report, that the wall of her cloister, would commonly open
of it self, and the Sacrament, the King of glory, pass through it, borne by
no visible thing, into her mouth. One thing I most highly detest, amongst them;
that, in their processions on Corpus Christi day, they act Plays, full of most
profane, and base matter, and stuffed with most ridiculous passages; in the
ways where the Sacrament is brought, both before, and after it passes: and
yet, their Players being of both sexes, are most wicked, and excommunicate
persons. And at other times, when the Sacrament is exposed in the Churches; the
Country Clownes come, trimmed up, and with their best clothes on, and dance by
the high Altar before it; in imitation of David, that danced before the Ark;
and the people stand about them, as they do in our Country Towns at their
Summer sports: only, the Altar-side is clear. And whereas the people were
infected with an evil custom, of giving reproachful names one to another, as
they met occasionally in the highways: the Pope has taught them a
Salutation, and bound a sufficient Indulgence to it, Alabado sea el santissimo
sacramento, Praised be the most holy Sacrament; which words they usually
pronounce one to another, as they meet. But I would, he had taught them to say
something, which he had learned of the Primitive Church.

CHAP. 10.
2. THe Bread, and Wine in the Sacrament, are signs and figures only, of the
body and blood of Christ; broken and powered out for us. The term, figure, is
used in this matter, by Tertullian, S. Austen, and others of the Latin Church.
Wisdom has builded her house, says the Wiseman. Pro. 9. 1.
By what secret passage can it enter into the heart of man, that the Son of
God, the wisdom of the Father, building a house, a fair house, a Church: and
building it in the defiance of Paganism, and to the ruin, and overthrow of
Idolatry, under the heavy burden of which, all habitable parts of the world,
all Kingdoms, Countries, people groaned; would now forget his main plot, and
so institute the masterpiece of Religion, that his Followers, coming to him
with a zealous contempt, and loathing of Idolatry, should be taught presently,
in the School of Truth; to adore the glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth, in
the likeness of a little piece of bread; to the great scandal, and aversion
of all, that should believe the contrary? For, what is more frequent at this
day, in the mouth, I cannot say, of an uncircumcised, but of an unbeleeving
Turk; when he mingleth discourse with a Christian concerning God, and
Religion; then to say in a reproachful manner, Alas good man, I pity you, you
make your God, that which I eat at my Table? And this Reason, though it be
drawn but ab improbabili, yet urges: because, besides that nothing is
improbable which is; God has ordained probability to be one of the first steps
to knowledge. If we go to the University, and ask the Philosophers: they will
tell us, it is requisite to the nature, and Essence of a body, that every part
should have his proper place: neither can a body be conceived to be a complete
body, without extensive distinction of parts; or to be, but in a place. And it
is the exigence of material Accidents, says Aristotle, as of quantity,
figure, color; to be rooted in a body. But here, they are supposed to stand by
themselves without a prop. And when a reason of these things, never thought of
in any kind of learning, either in themselves, or in their grounds, is
required; the greatest scholars in the world on their part, can say nothing,
but, we must go up with holy Abraham, the good old man, to the top of the
mountain: who, having a strong promise, that his seed should be multiplied as
the stars of Heaven; was yet, commanded to kill, and sacrifice his only
son Isaak: and we must leave the servants, and the ignorant Ass at the foot
of the hill; that is, the senses, and Reason. But, if the senses be servants,
they are faithful ones, and are not deceived in the knowledge of their proper
objects; due order, and conditions being kept on both sides: and if Reason be
an ignorant Ass, what distinction is there betwixt a man, and a beast? They
speak on: As the Captains of the Army, put off their garments, laid them in a
heap, and setting Jehu upon them, cried, Jehu is King: So we building a Throne
for Faith over Sense and Reason, must hold up our hands, and pray, that Faith
may have a long, and prosperous reign over us, Vive la Foy, long live Faith.
There was a far more searching kind of Philosophy taught in the sound, and
sincere days of S. Austen, who in his Epistle to Dardanus, thus draws his
argument from the deep grounds of true Philosophy, Spatia locorum toll
corporibus, and S. Aug. ad Dardan.
nusquam erunt, and quia nusquam erunt, nec erunt: toll ipsa corpora
qualitatibus corporum, non erit ubi sint, and ideo necesse est ut non sint:
Take away from a body, place; and the body will be no where, and being no
where, will not be: take away from a body, the qualities of a body, and there
will be no place for the body to reside in; and therefore, the body must be no
body. I yield, that in the part of Divinity, which treats of the blessed
Trinity, Reason must strike sail, and stoop: and Reason teaches us, that in
the scanning of such high things, Reason must be guided by a more certain,
though not a clearer light; and therefore, still we follow the safe conduct of
Reason: but in material things, proportioned to our capacity, and confined to
their natures by the God of nature; I cannot see with the eye of Reason, or any
other eye, why Reason should not be one of the Council, and pass her
judgment; as she does, and ever did in these inferior things. Answer me
now: Does it not follow, and flow out of these principles: that the body of
Christ in the Sacrament, has the being of a body, and the being of a spirit at
the same time? and that, if an Angel should take a particle of the Host, and
divide it continually for all eternity; because such a division can never
strike something to nothing, as likewise no creature can ever lift something
from nothing; still in that little thing, very like to nothing, and many
thousands of years before, not perceptible by any sense of man, Christ shall
be as truly, and as plentifully present, as he was in the world, and upon the
Cross? Answer me again: Do not they worship, as Christ said to the woman of
Samaria, they know not what? For, when the Priest is supposed to be a Ioh. 4.
22.
Priest, and is not; which often happens according to their Divinity, either
for the defect of Baptism, or for want of intention, either in the Priest, or
Bishop; or for want of orders in the Bishop; then certainly, they worship they
know not what. And it is a fearful thing, to draw the chief, and most noble
acts of Religion, within the lists of such notable danger. And the law of not
administering the Sacrament in both kinds, being one of the young handmaids,
which wait upon this doctrine; took earnest first, in the Council of
Constance. And Pope Gelasius cursed all those, who presumed to maime the divine
ordinance, and to receive it, only in one kind. And Transubstantiation, the
other feat waighting-maid, was hired in the Council of Lateran. By little, and
little, it was made a most huge Monster. The bramble grows; but who can say,
now, look you, even now it increases; though he may say, it has increased
since I saw it last.

CHAP. 11.
ONe passage more from Spain; and then, I my self pass from it; that I may
leave something, to come by the next Post, if they stir me farther. By great
chance, there came to my hands, a Book, called Regulae Societatis Jesus, The
Rules of the Jesuits: which Book, they have not formerly suffered to be
printed, but only, in the Jesuits College at Rome. And this Book, their
Superiors alone, make use of, and are permitted to have. It contains in
part, a strange kind of direction, how to square, and fashion their Novices,
in the time of their two years Noviship; and especially, how to sift them, and
search into their life's, and natures, at their first entrance. The quick, and
angry disposition most pleases them: because in persons, owing such
dispositions, all the passions are more lively, and stirring. How also, to
dispose of their young men in the diverse ways of their natural inclinations:
and how to deal with them, according to their several tempers; and chiefly,
if they begin to look another way; and to lean from them. And how, when they
send Letters from house to house, to mark them with private stamps in the
inside; lest the character going alone, should be counterfeit: with many more
cunning pleats of Jesuiticall government. And it is one of their daily brags,
that they live under Rule; we, without Rule. But, were their Rules seasoned
with more Christianity, and less policy; they would be more Christian. My
Reader shall have his Rules likewise, and live under them, if he please. Thus
much before I begin. It is not obscure to me, that these irreligious orders of
Religion, fit and prepare their young subjects in their Noviships, by turning
and twining their wills; with the sight of strange pictures, and with the
manifold acts of blind obedience; for great business hereafter, perhaps, for
the killing of Kings. The Doway-Monk gave Pius quintus in my presence, no
better name, then old doting Fool; because he called in, the Bull, which he
had published against Queen Elizabeth: wherein notwithstanding, he did absolve
her subjects from their Oath of Allegiance, and from all obedience to her; and
expressly commanded them to take Arms against her.

RULE 1.
LEt your understanding, which is the first, and superior faculty of your
soul, stand, not under, but over all your other faculties; and take a survay of
your Nature. And not this only, but also, learn exactly, the maine course,
and moreover, the diverse turnings of your own secret disposition. For, knowing
perfectly, our own natures, we can best direct them, a proper way, to God.
And the man, that perceives himself to be jealous, or angry, or otherwise
deficient, by nature; will upon occasion, more easily suspect an error in
himself, then in others: and consequently, discover, acknowledge, and
suppress with all readiness, the tumults of Passion: and indeed, will be more
sound, and able, in the managing of all his affairs, as well temporal, as
spiritual. Every man is composed of a man, and a beast: and the beast is given
to the man, to be tamed, and governed by him. He that desires to tame a beast,
desires also chiefly, to know the secrets of his nature, and all the queint
tricks of his inclination. This distinction in man, of man from himself,
rises from the two parts, or portions of the reasonable soul, the
intellectual, or superior part; and the inferior, otherwise called, the
sensual part: which though it may be said, if you will say so, a part of the
reasonable soul, while it continues in the body; is void of reason: and it is
hard, to direct one, void of reason. This is all: Be Master of your self: The
wise Master will know, and by his knowledge govern.

RULE. 2.
ROot evil Habits out of your Soul, and plant their contraries. Decline from
evil, and do good, says the Royal Prophet. For as a habit is gained, and
Psalm 34. 14.
strengthened by a frequent repetition, and multiplication of Acts, which are
of the same stamp, and color with the habit; as a habit of swearing is
gained, and strengthened, by swearing often: so it is abated by disturbing, and
abolished by destroying the course of such acts; as a habit of swearing is
abated, and abolished by him, that having often sworn, now seldom, or never
swears. It is not one, or a few acts, which generate a habit: nor a small
cessation from them which utterly corrupts it. And therefore, Children, entering
upon the first year of knowledge, and discretion, plant virtuous habits, with
great ease in their souls; and with much more facility, then people, whose
years, and sins are many; though much enabled with knowledge, wisdom and
experience. The Reason is open: They are like fair paper, ready to take any
inscription: these have much weedingworke, before they can turn to a new
Plantation. Here, I beseech thee, learn, to remember thy Creator in the days
of thy youth. Eccl. 12. 1.
It was a Law in the days of old, that Manna should be gathered in the morning:
And the rich orient Pearl, is begot of the morning dew. God requires of you,
the sweetness of the morning, the break of the day, and the dawning of your
life. Note, that we may sin grievously, put on by custom, though suddenly,
rashly, and without reflection: because we have not abandoned the custom, and
certain danger of sinning.

RULE. 3.
BEcause nothing can possibly stand without a Foundation; the Foundation of the
spiritual edifice, and Temple of God in your soul, can be no other, but
Humility. Humility lies very low. And the deeper the Foundation is laid, the
more strong will be the building, and more able to bear the injuries of Time,
and assaults of the weather. And this, as all other Foundations, must be laid
in the ground; in a deep and profound consideration, that you are all earth on
the one side, and on the other side, all filth, all barrenness, according to
that of the Prophet Esaias, We are all as an unclean thing, Esaias 64. 6.
and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Rags are of small use in
themselves; but, filthy rags are abominable: (It little mattereth, in whose
name he speaks these words; for, every man may fit them to himself.) And
according to that of our dear Savior: When ye shall have done all those Lu.
17. 10.
things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants; we have
done that which was our duty to do. Humility does not consist, in esteeming
our selves the greatest sinners; for, then it should consist in a lie; because
we are not all the greatest; but in esteeming our selves great sinners; and
ready to be the greatest, if God should pull away himself from us; and feeble
workers with Gods grace. Our Saviors case, was different: for, he was most
humble, yet could not esteem himself a sinner. O Humility, says Saint
Bernard, Quam facile S. Bern.
vincis invincibilem? How easily do thou conquer him, that is invincible?
For, man was made to fill up the now-disturbed number of the Angels; which were
created some while before the World; not long, for, it is not likely, that so
noble a part of the World should be long created, before the whole, to which it
belonged. They fell down, though not from the possession, yet, from the title
of happiness, by pride. Not from the possession; for, had they been united to
God by the Beatifical Vision, they could not have sinned, and therefore not have
lost it, by sin. We rising up to the seats, prepared for them; ascend by
Humility: rising by falling, and falling by rising, if we rise, before he
raises us, who, being dead, and buried, was not raised, but rose from death to
life, by his own power. Pride, and Humility are of contrary dispositions: and
moreover, they work contrarily upon the subjects in which they are lodged; and
are in the effect, and course of their proceedings, contrary even to
themselves. Pride was the first sin in the Angels; and therefore, Humility is
the first virtue in men; and all your thoughts, words, and actions, must be
steeped in it: Other Virtues keep within a compass; or only, now, and then
go some of them together, or always; or direct all Virtues outwardly, in
respect of the Virtues, as Prudence: but Humility is an ingredient in every
Virtue.

RULE 4.
IN your entrance upon every work, having first examined the motives,
ingredients, and circumstances, (for, one evil circumstance will corrupt the
whole lump, and poison a good action; and it is not virtuous to pray
ordinarily in the streets with outward observance, though it be virtuous to
pray:) and it being now clear to you, that your intended work falls in,
wholly; and meets in the same point, with Gods holy will; commend it
seriously to GOD. And when you go to dinner, or to bed, or turn to the acts
and exercises of your Vocation; begin all with a clean and pure intention, for
the love and honor of GOD. And even the natural work, to which, your nature
is vehemently carried, and by which, you gain temporally; being turned toward
the true Loadstone, and put in the way to Gods glory; does rise above nature,
and above it self; and is much more gainful spiritually: as being performed,
not because it is agreeable with your desire, but because it is conformable to
the divine will. And often, in the performance, and execution of the work (if
it require a long continuance of action) renew; and if need be, rectify,
smooth, and polish your intention; for being neglected, it quickly grows
crooked. And when you are called to a difficult work, or a work, that lies
thwart, and strives against the current of your natural inclination; dignifie,
and sweeten it often, with the comfortable remembrance of your most noble end.
And whereas we are openly commanded, so closely to carry the good deeds of
the right hand, that the left hand be not of the Counsel: and again, to turn
so much of our selves outward, that our light may shine before men: it is in
our duty to observe the Golden Mean, and keep the middle way betwixt the two
Rocks. Carry an even hand betwixt your concealing your good works, and your
being a light to others. You must not conceal all, neither must you shine
only. Hide the inward; but show the outward, not always, nor with a sinister
intention to the left hand; but to GOD; and those that will be edified. Every
Virtue stands betwixt two extremes, and yet, touches neither: whereof the
one offends in excess; the other, in defect. The one is too courageous; the
other is over-dull, but under the Virtue. Now the Devil delights much to
show himself, not in his own likeness, but in that extreme, which is like,
and more nigh to the Virtue, or at least, to the appearance of it; as
Prodigality is more like to Liberality, then Covetousness. God has true
Saints, and true Martyrs; which are both inside, and outside. The Devil has
false Saints, and false Martyrs; which are all outside, like his fairness. As
Prudence, is the Governesse of all Virtues, so principally of Devotion.

RULE 5.
KEep your heart always calm: and suffer it to be stirred only with the
gentle East, and West-winds of holy inspirations, to zeal, and virtuous anger.
Examine your inward motions, whether they be inspirations or no, before you
cry, come in: for, when God offers an inspiration, he will stand waiting
with it, while you measure it by some better known and revealed Law of his. And
be very watchful over such Anger. For, it is a more knottie, and difficult
piece of work, to be answerable to Ephesians. 4. 26.
the rule of Saint Paul, Be angry and sin not: (the Prophet David spoke the
same words, from the same spirit:) then not to be angry. As, the Curre taken
out of the kennell, and provoked to bark, will need an able, and cunning hand
to hold him. And maintain always, a strong Guard before the weak doors of
your senses, that no vain thing invade the sense of seeing, hearing, or the
rest: and use in times of such danger, Ejaculations and Aspirations, which are
short sayings of the soul to God, or of things concerning God; and are like
darts cast into the bosom of our beloved. These motions will do excellently at
all times, when they come in the resemblance of our pious affections: As, upon
this occasion: Lord, shut the windows of my soul, that looking through them she
may not be defiled O sweet Comforter, speak inwardly to my soul, and when thou
speak to her, speak words of comfort, or bind her with some other chain;
that busied in listening to thee, she may not hear thy holy name dishonored.
And upon other occasions: Oh that my head were waters, Jer. 9. 1.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night. O Lord,
Whom Psalm. 73. 25
have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides
thee. Take counsel my soul: Commit thy way unto the Psalm. 37. 5.
Lord: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. Hark my soul,
when we taste, the thing we taste, is joined to us; We neither see, nor hear
in this manner: and having tasted, we know; And when the Body tastes, we
commonly see first, and afterward taste. In our conversation with God, we
first taste, and then see. I speak not of Faith, being of another order. O
taste and see that the Lord is Psalm. 34. 8.
good. Holy Scripture will give us matter without end. This is a delicious
communication of our selves with God and our selves; when we are present only
with our selves, and with God. Keep the double doors of your teeth and lips,
the sorts of silence, close; that your nimble, and busy tongue speak nothing,
but what some way, directly or indirectly, pertains to Gods glory, agreeably
to his good pleasure. And therefore, always, before you speak, think, Is this
which I shall now say, immediately or mediatly available to the honor of God;
and does it help at first or last, to my spiritual profit? And when angry,
immodest, injurious, or other foul, and sinful words are spoken in your
presence; employ your best endeavor in diverting the course of the discourse,
if it be likely, that your labor, and counsel may pass without a repulse. If
otherwise, show a dislike, and suddenly withdraw your self, from the most
infectious company of so beastly, and so base an offender: of such a hissing
Serpent: of a vile thing, so venomous, that he voideth poison at his mouth,
For, he would not speak, if others did not hear him. And spare your self,
and the miserable offender: For, you having heard vain words, and especially,
words fighting with modesty; he may afterward, when he is at his prayers,
and when he little thinks of such a business, sin again in you. And in the
heat of these encounters, believe not every thing, which you hear; but reflect
upon the several dispositions, with which, the Report meets in her Travels;
and the strange desire of men to speak strange things. And consider, that Fame
takes a new Disguise from every man's Tongue, and speaks as diversely, as the
affections of men are diverse; being like the Tarrand, which walking in a
Garden, represents Philo de Temul.
the color of every flower on his skin. It is a truth, which Tertullian says
of lying Fame, quae nec tunc quidem cum aliquid Tert. in Apol. cap. 7.
very affert, sine mendacii vitio est; detrahens, adjiciens, demutans de
veritate: Which neither then truly, when it proposes a true thing, is without
the scarre of a lie; drawing from, putting to, and changing the truth. Of men,
some speak, as they have heard from old women and children; some as the tie of
belief, benefits, kindred or neighborhood obliges; some as the Passion
moves; some to gain their own gainful ends; and some speak by guess; few,
according to knowledge. And because the greater part of men are evil, you are
not bound by the Law of God, who leads no man into error; to trust, or
believe every man. And yet, you may not judge the person, or decide the doubt;
unless guided with a clear, and certain knowledge of evil. Wherefore,
suspend your judgment, and gather up your mind into it self. One branch is
yet wanting to this advertisement. You must continually stand waking, and
watching over your thoughts: for the fit ordering of our thoughts within us,
and of our senses without us, will certainly keep us from all distraction, and
from all occasions of turning aside, in our way toward Christ. And therefore,
upon every sally, or incurse of Temptation; turn quickly, from the suggestion,
and representation of it. Then humbly acknowledge your own weakness, and call
earnestly upon God for help. And lay up safe in your mind, that every show,
and representation of evil in our heart, is not evil to us; except it be
seconded on our part, either with a full, and absolute consent; or with a weak,
hanging, and half-consent; or with complacence: or except you did wilfully
thrust your self upon the near danger of such representations. For, the divine
Law commands us, to avoid even the occasions of sin. And he, that wilfully
touches upon the near, and catching occasion; or opens a little private
door to sin, or to the pleasures that wait upon it, as it were dallying, and
sporting with them; is commonly took with some odd picture in the
representation; by which engaged, he goes on, and still on, and a little
farther on: till he is swallowed up at last, into the great and deep Gulf of
sin. For, as it is written in Ecclus. Eccl. 3. 26.
He that loves danger, shall perish therein.

RULE 6.
ATtend always upon God, that you may know, when he beckens, or calls to you,
and which way he takes. At two doors Almighty God does commonly stand, and
call us to him: at the inward door of the soul, and at the outward door of
the sense: inwardly, by his holy inspirations; and outwardly, by his holy Word,
and Preachers; though indeed, the inward calling is more frequent. For, to
speak with a Council, Nec momentum quidem praeterit, in quo Deus non stat ad
ostium, Conc. Senonense.
and pulsat; A moment of time does not pass, in which, God stands not at the
door of our hearts, and earnestly knocks for entrance. To this end, take
special notice of the calls, illuminations, and inspirations, which daily you
have from Heaven. Which calls, and inspirations you may either totally reject,
or obey either in part, or considered in their full extent and amplitude. If
thou will be perfect, go through all, which the inspiration commands. If
the inspiration pronounce absolutely, follow me; do not confine him, that
neither can be limited in himself, nor will be limited in his commands, to a
certain compass; and desire to go first, and bury thy Father; lest the call
cool, and the inspiration be lost in the crowde of other occasions. You shall
discern an Inspiration from a Temptation, by the lawfulness of the action, to
which you are moved; and of the end. Take heed therefore, of committing evil,
under the fair, goodly, and godly pretense of a good end. The Devil has one
device above all this doctrine: He will sometimes move us, even to a godly
work; as, when he is informed by our beaten, customary, and daily practice,
that we shall draw a most heavy curse upon us, in performing the work of God
negligently. Observe, that God oftentimes withdraws himself, and yet I err,
not himself, but his inward lights, and those especially, which are tempered
with the sweets of comfort, from his nearest and dearest friends. And then
there will seem to be a continual night in their hearts; they will be very
dry, and desolate; as receiving no drop of sensible dew from Heaven; I mean,
of spiritual comfort, which glads the heart. And the Tempter will say, and
often say, they are forsaken of God. This, the holy One of Israel does: First,
for our exercise, and trial. You may reply: why for our trial? God knows
already, what we are able to do, and above this, what we will do, put upon
a trial. It is so. But he urges us upon the combat, that we may conquer,
and purchase the Crown, promised to the victory. No man shall gain a Crown,
but he that shall fairly, and lawfully win it in the Combat. Nemo potest, nisi
vicerit coronari; nemo autem vincere, nisi ante Amb. Commen. in c. 4 Lucae.
certaverit. Ipsi quoque coronae major est fructus, ubi major est labor: says
Saint Ambrose: No man can be crowned, except he be a conqueror; no man can
be a conqueror, except he fight: and where the labor is great, the crown is
more precious. It is the saying of old Epicharmus, cited by Xenophon in his
Memorables, (...) Epich apud X noph.
. All good things are bought with labor. In the last Psalm, where the Prophet
awaketh us with his praising God in all kinds of Instruments; there is but one
Instrument mentioned, (the Trumpet) upon which we play with the mouth only: in
the rest, we use our fingers, and hands: to declare, that but a small part of
Gods service is performed with the mouth: Action is the mouths evidence, and
the best Music. The discourse of the Mouth, signified by the Trumpet, is but
like the talk of a common Soldier; a rapsodie of brags, and boasting. And
although GOD foreseeth sometimes, that we shall be foiled in the combat, and
fall, both from the victory, and crown; it is not his error; for his helps,
are sufficient to gain the victory: and another courageously working with the
like helps, would gain the victory. For, says Saint Paul, We know that all
things Romans 8. 28.
work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the called
according to his purpose. The sufficient, and efficacious helps of God, in this
only differing; that helped sufficiently we do not, because we will not
work; helped efficaciously, we do. Secondly, that his presence when he
comes, should be more esteemed. If day should always continue; the Light and
the Sun would not be thought so fair, as they are: But because Day comes and
goes, shows his face, and then, turns aside; Night stepping betwixt day
and day, teaches us to value a benefit by the absence of it. And thus it is,
in our outward affairs; Prosperity and Adversity, making day and night in the
life of Man. Thirdly, lest we should vainly think, that Gods lights, and
inspirations are due to us; and that we have true title to them, and the
continuance of them: and lest we should be proud of the comfort; and believe,
that it comes tributarie to us, or as a payment for our service of God. Lastly,
lest we should love God more for the comfort, then for himself. And seriously,
there is much dross in the matter, when we are always comforted in our
prayers; for, the comfort is acted in the sensual part of the soul. Yet, at
our first coming to God, and in our conversion to him, he does cherish us
with many special comforts, which stay long with us; because we came lately
out of the World, all cold and torn; and there is now, more need of heat: Now,
we are little children, and must be moved to go, speak, and ask blessing
with Sugar, and with Delicates; and there is now, some need of dandling, and of
Songs, to make the child smile. As also, when God sets forward, sitting in
the midst of his judgments, toward sinners; he begins with soft, and fair
means; as we likewise ought, in all our dealings: showing to the life, that
Gentleness is a property, most proper to him; as taking place, and issuing
first out, upon all occasions.

To close up this Rule: By any means defer not the execution of inspirations,
now made intentions. Neither change Gods inspiration, for a new intention of
your own making; though seemingly good, and plausible. For, though it be good
in it self; it is not good enough, put in balance with the pure, and heavenly
inspiration: and perhaps, God sees that your eternal salvation (this is a high
point) depends upon your carriage in the use, or abuse of that inspiration: I
suppose, it points to some high matter. The Devil has learned it, of the
Partridge; which, seeing a man near to her nest, and apprehending danger,
rises a little, and puts forward with a weak and staggering flight: then
presently, tumbleth to the ground, as if there were a fault in one of her
wings. Thus again, and again, and perhaps, again: And plays the counterfeit;
till having tempted without the help of reason, the reasonable creature from
her nest, she proves suddenly, and strangely recovered of her hurt, and
flies strongly away. Thus the Devil will cunningly wind you out of one good
intention, into another, not so good, or not so good for you, in the knowledge
of him that knows you: draw you on, and on; step, after step; with great
variety of witty and pretty excuses, till at last, the plot gives, and you
behold your self naked, and wrought miserably out of all. He would be a mad
Devil, if he should tempt from very fair, to very foul. But he has a very
good wit of his own, though he does not use it well: he is a notable workman,
and forgeth choice, and curious pretenses. A malicious man, as big with poison,
as the Spider; will commonly say: Intruth, I do not intend to endamage my
Neighbor (far be that from me:) he, and I have been old acquaintance, I knew
his Father well: I desire only, to save my self; and with all, to make him
know himself; to humble him, as God humbles sinners, no otherwise; out of
mere charity: others will be good scholars, and great Proficients by this
example; I shall do a world of good. And thus, other evil doers. Now, your
end is indeed, evil: but you have pulled a very good end or two, and those but
imaginary, over it. And the evil end lies hid in the bottom, that in your
heat, and while the matter is upon the Anvile, and hot in the hammering, you
scarce know your own end, your self. Although the thoughts be white, and of a
fair skin, that beget the action immediately, and nearly; yet the remote
thoughts may sometimes be the Authors of it, and the other, but putative and
supposititious. Though the Father and Mother be white, if the Grandfather was
an Ethiopian, the child is sometimes black.

RULE 7.
LEt this be thy daily Meditation, or as often, as Time, and thy occasions will
give thee leave. Revolve in thy mind, the life and death of our most loving
Savior. Think, that Christ was borne in a journey, to instruct us, that this
life is nothing but a journey, which we take about the payment of tribute to
Caesar: that he was born in a Stable, because he came to seek men, that were
transformed into beasts: that he, who calls himself, the living bread, chose
Bethlehem, interpreted the house of bread; and a poor Village, for his
Nativity; and Jerusalem, the principal City, and seat of the Governor,
frequented with great resort of people, for his passion. It was the meditation
of S. Leo. Bethleem praeelegit Nativitati, S. Leo sermon. 1. de Epiph.
Hierosolymam passioni. Present thy self before the Babe, and offer with, the
three Kings, Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh; Gold, as to a King; Frankincense,
as to God; Myrrh, as to a man, liable to a bitter passion; the gold of
Charity, the Frankincense of Devotion, the Myrrh of Sufferance. Rise, away,
travel into Egypt, and help to carry the child; and in the way talk of the
Messiah. Up again; come back; go into the Temple; Sit down, and hear him
dispute amongst the Doctors; and observe God in a little Doctor, triumphing
over the greatest Doctors. Thrust Judas out of Christ's company: then, follow as
one of his Disciples, and make the number full. With admiration, hear his
doctrine; and be witness to his miracles. Look upon him in his
Transfiguration, and admire the beautiful glimmerings of his Godhead. Cast thy
garments in the way, and throw boughs before him: strip thy self of all, and
submit both them, and thy self to Christ. Be present in the Chamber, wait upon
him at the great Supper, and communicate in spirit, with him, and the
Disciples. And kneeling, hold the Towell, and Water, in the washing of the
poor Fisher-mens feet. Follow into the Garden; and conceive, that as Adam, and
we were made slaves in a Garden; So Christ, his Father having promised, was
took, and arrested for the payment of the ransom, in a Garden. Chide the three
Disciples for sleeping, and say, fie, fie, can you not watch one hour with
your Savior? and then, look with a pitiful eye upon him, and wipe the sweat
of blood from his brows, and cry, Alas poor Savior. Go after him, when
almost all the Disciples fly. Go with him, from Pilat to Herod: and
considering, that he speaks not to Herod, even urged by a question; Call to
mind, that Herod had killed his voice, John the Baptist, who said of himself,
I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness: and think, his voice being
gone, how could he speak? And from Herod, back again to Pilat. Behold his
purple robe, his reed, his crown of thorns; and ponder, what gay robes
indeed, rich Scepters, and crowns of gold and jewels; that is, robes,
scepters, and crowns of glory, and immortality, he has purchased for us.
Watch with him, all the night, and fear, it will never be day, he is so
tormented. And suppose, that thou see, hear, feel, what he saw, heard,
felt, and that thou smellest, and tastest the sweetness of his patience.
Accompany him the next day, and help to carry his heavy cross to mount
Calvary. And there, as if thou had been frozen hitherto, thaw into tears.
Run with all thy might, into his arms, held out at their full length, to
receive thee, whilst he hangs as he did, with his back toward the
ungrateful City Jerusalem. Think profoundly, that he has suffered his feet
to be nailed together, to demonstrate, that both the Jew, and Gentile go now
in one path. Weigh the matter: Because sin enters by the senses, therefore
his Head, in which the senses most flourish, is crowned with searching thorns.
O marvailous! what King is he, or of what Country, that wears a crown of
thorns? Surely, the King of all afflicted people, wheresoever they dwell.
Because the hands and feet are the outward instruments of sin: therefore, his
hands and feet are nailed to the Cross, for satisfaction. Because the heart is
the inward Fountain of ill thoughts; therefore his tender heart is pierced for
thee. And hence learn, if thou have sinned more grievously in any part of thy
body, or faculty of thy soul; with a special diligence to estrange that part,
or faculty from pleasure. Wonder, that the Thief confessed Christ on the
Cross, when even the Apostles either doubted, or altogether lost their Faith
of his Divinity. Here unburden thy heart of all the injuries, ever offered to
thee; with a valiant purpose, never to speak of them again. Lay down all thy
sins at the foot of the Cross, whither the blood droppeth; with a firm
confidence, never to hear of them again, and say from a good heart with S.
Austen, Ille solus diffidat, qui S. Aug. lib. de vera, and falsae poenitentia,
c. 5.
tantum peccare potest, quantum Deus bonus est: Let him only be diffident, who
can sin so much as God is good. See him, as far as thou can for weeping;
shaking, and dying; and mervaile, that thy own heart shakes not; and dye with
him, by a most exact mortification. Look pale like him, when he was dead,
with sorrow for thy sins. Behold him laid in the Sepulcher; and though the
Jews hide him, and bind him down with a great stone, and a strong chain
over it, fastened in both ends to a rock, as old History mentions: and though
the foolish Soldiers watch there in Armor; yet doubt not, but thou shall see
him again, even in his body: let him not shake thee off by dying. Come running,
and having out-runne thy company, find white Angels in the Grave; and pray,
that by thy Grave, thou may pass to Angels. Be with him, even upon the
mountain, where he ascended; and there, kneel before him, mark how his
wounds are closed, and be glad, they are healed again: kiss the very print of
his feet in the ground: look upon his face; talk to him, pray for a blessing
upon thy self, and the world; confess thy faults; uncover thy weakness; and
say, Lord, I am very tender in this part; beg the divine help: then, as it
were, dye for love, and ascend with him, crying; O Lord, leave me not, hitherto
I have followed thee, now take me with thee, to thy Kingdom: and after this,
give thy self gently up into heaven, and there see and hear those things,
which neither eye has seen, nor care has heard; and especially, the things,
which concern the entertainment of Christ.

RULE 8.
THat you may proceed, with more cheerfulness, both in your speculations, and
in the part of practical performance: If you desire to know, whether you now
be in the grace, and favor of God; know it by this, which is more easy to be
known: whether God be, I dare not say in grace, I hope I may say, in favor
with you. If he be, he can stir, and turn you, as he pleases: and it is
your daily care, to give him full content, and satisfaction. If you love God,
he loves you; for his love is always the first Mover; and it comes from his
love of you, that you love him. Indeed, God loves his Enemies, as we likewise,
ought to do: but his enemies do not love him; neither does he love his
enemies intimately, and familiarly, as he does his friends. For, there is
little commerce, little communication, (which is both the exercise, and
recreation of love) betwixt God, and his enemies. You love God truly, if
prompted by the love of him, you prefer him, and his law, in all cases, in
all causes: and when you rightly fit, and order the acts of your election; not
giving place to creatures, or sins, (which as they are sins, are not
creatures) before God; and in a manner, defy them. It would be strange above
ordinary, and extraordinary; that God should command me to love him, and
stirred by this love, to keep his commandments; and moreover, to give thanks
continually, for the spiritual good, which by his grace, he works in me: and
yet, I should never be able to know, when I, or others did love God; though
perhaps, it might prove a knot in respect of others. And certainly, he that
loves God truly, is highly in his favor. For the true love of God, virtually
contains Repentance, in which, the soul is united by Grace to God; and the
love of God it self, is nothing but a close Union of the soul with God. And,
that I may raise my discourse to an infinite height, The holy Ghost, being the
love of the Father and the Son, is a firm knitting of them together.

RULE 9.
When you see, or learn by relation, that another is oppressed with
sickness, or misery; go aside presently, and, as it were, take God aside with
you, and pray for the distressed party. And presently, if occasion give way,
visit the party. And afterward, when you are gathered up together, body, mind
and all, in some private place of Recollection, imagine your self stuck fast
in the like misery; or acting the mournful part of a dying man, with a
certain feeling of grievous pain; with a serious consideration of the
comfortless behavior of your friends; of the Physicians weakness, and
wretched ignorance in respect of Death, and her power, and policy; and of the
fickle nature, and transitory condition of riches; and how you (poor man)
shall be carried away in a sorry sheet, laid in the cold ground, and there left
alone, while those, who accompanied your body, will return cheerfully, almost
every one, to his own home, and now and then, talk of your past life, and
especially your sins, but little think either of your present solitariness,
desolation, or rottenness. And then, let your better, and more sublime
thoughts triumph, and insult over the vanity of the world. For always, when
you would more fully contemplate the greatness of Gods benefits, take a full
sight of his lesser favors, and of the persons, upon whom, the greatest
benefits are not bestowed. And when thou beholdest one overflowne with drink,
or otherwise offending God; laugh not; for laughing is ordinarily, the child
of delight: but, if it be possible, look pale upon him, and loath his beastly
practices. And be truly sorrowful, that so good a God, whom thou love, and
desire to love above all things, should be so foully dishonored. And let a
chief part of thy daily grief be, that God is every day, so much, and so
basely injured in all places, and has been, and shall be in all places, and
in all Ages. And whisper to thy self in a corner of thy heart, Now, now wicked
men swear, lie, profane Gods blessed Name, drink themselves to the base
condition of beasts, love beastly women more then God. These blows upon the
sweet face of God, rebound upon my heart. I would give my life, and all that I
have, to preserve God's honor. And, be glad again, because some few do serve
him, and because the Saints and Angels in Heaven, do perfectly honor him;
though not with honor, equal to his perfection. And say, I would, no man had
ever sinned, did now sin, or would sin hereafter: And for you, that love
God, go on with comfort, double the heat of your affection toward him, and
let the burden of the song still be, O God, I love thee. But beware, that in
hating a sinner, you do not hate the man, lying under the sinner. Hate sin
in it self, and also, hate it in such a person, but hate not the person. You
ought to make an incision betwixt the marrow, and the bones: love the men, but
hate their manners. For thy enemies, hate them with a perfect hate, and let the
highest point of thy sorrow be, that they are enemies to God, and that in being
enemies to thee, they crook thee to their devices, and use thee to forward them
upon the downfall of eternal damnation. It is a sin, as black as the devil,
to hate the devil; if we do not separate, and distinguish the object of our
hate, from God's white creature in the devil. Yet, make a broad difference
betwixt the imperfections of men, and their foul enormities. Bear the burden
of another's imperfections, for so thou shall fulfill the law of Christ, and
move God, and thy neighbor, to bear with thee. In a press of people, one
gives way to the other: Bricks are made square, to lay the pavement even.
God's dearest children have their imperfections, and their skarres, even in
their faces; that they may be humble, and acknowledge themselves to be what
they are: which imperfections are, as it were, the dross, and earth of the
soul. And yet, we may not consort with known, and professed sinners.

The Minister is not true to his Religion, that is a silent Companion of Popish
Priests: and it is not a good sign, or symptom, that Franciscus a Sancta
Clara, alias Damport, admitted him to a perusal of his Deus, Natura, Gratia,
before it was printed; and yet, he so far went on with that wicked, and
unworthily insinuating Book, that he suffered it to take it is course without a
discovery. How can this be characterized, but A holding of Counsel with Gods
enemies? He is my neighbor: but, the more holy, and more excellent Obligation
may not be broken, to set free, and save the meaner: when the one in reason and
religion, inferres the destruction of the other. He and I are Pastors, and
Pastors are so called, a pascendo, because they must feed their flocks. Of
strangers, the Shepherds, being admonished from heaven did first adore the good
Shepherd: and in the time when the Shepherds watched over their flocks, news
came to them of a Savior. It is not the Shepherds place, where the Wolves
haunt; except his business be, to catch them, or chase them away.

RULE 10.
HAve a most vigilant care, that neither your clothes, ordained only to cover
nakedness, and to put you in mind of original sin, and the first Garment of
fig leaves; nor diet be curious. What does it avail thee, whether thy meat,
or drink be sweet, or bitter? it stays but a little in the taste. Do not
over-load your self in eating, or drinking: but, when you are at the Table,
leave always some special thing, which indeed, you could well, and safely eat
or drink, but will not; because you will understandingly bridle your own
will, and sensual Appetite. Let not sleep hold you long in her arms, but
shake her off, and rise cheerfully to perform the will of him, that sent you
into the World. Let not your recreation be more choice, neither flow in a
greater measure, then due, and fit necessity requires. For so, you may please
God as truly, in the pleasing Acts of Recreation, as in the laborious, and
painful exercise of solid virtue. And the most precious Time, which others
vainly cast away in drinking, feasting, gaming, sporting, and in the pursuit of
loose, and idle vanities; fastening upon earthly things, because they are
altogether estranged from things heavenly; pass thou in fear and trembling,
in pious meditations, and in the thoughts of Angels: You must go always
holding up your clean garment, that it be not defiled.

RULE. 11.
WHen you are put on by a strong, and vehement desire, toward an indifferent
thing, by force bow the will another way. For in the full mastering of the
powers, and passions, stands absolute mortification; and consequently, true
perfection. And truly, when we desire, or love a temporal thing above an
ordinary manner, GOD does ordinarily, and extraordinarily chastise us in it, or
by it, or by the want of it: because it breeds a great expense of Time; and
the desire, and love due to God, are turned upon a creature. When we so love
our children, that we look over, or countenance vices in them; we are commonly
punished in them: they bring our gray hairs with sorrow to our graves. And
likewise, when we abhor, and are wholly averted from an indifferent thing,
God sends it in a full shower upon us: with a purpose to kill, and mortify
our wills, and affections. Some things, although not evil in themselves, may
not be lawfully desired; as our own praise, and honor beyond the strain of
our condition. The love of God can never be immoderate, because it can never be
greater, then the thing, which is loved: and the will in loving, if it be
carried directly to God, can never be disordinate.

Fast often. And if thy body be able to go under the burden, let not thy Fast
admit of any kind of nourishment. And then, ask the benefits, thou most
desire. And by the way, remember, that to fast, as also to hear Sermons, are
not properly virtuous Acts, but the ready ways to verture. And therefore, if
the Body be not laid under the Soul, by fasting; and the Soul farthered in
the practice of virtues, by hearing Sermons; no good is done, but harm in
abundance: God is tempted, Time abused, Holy days are profaned, The soul with
God's Image, defiled; and these outward acts puff us up, and we contemn
others, as profane persons. The Soul is Mistress (I say not, absolute Mistress)
of the Body. And therefore, her end being supernatural, and transcending all
other ends; to comply with it, she may curb and subdue the body, as she in
reason pleases. The Soul of the Co^fessor gives up his Body to punish meant;
and the Soul of the Martyr, his body to death and dissolution; in the pursuit
of their end. Zeno says, Remorabantur in luce detenti, Zeno de S. Arcadio.
quorum membris pleni erant tumuli: They remained alive, and conversed with the
living; with whose members, as, tongues, hands, fingers, feet, the Tombs of the
dead were replenished. Yet break not your body, by fasting; for so, you may cut
it off from the fit exercise of Virtue, and Gods service: and he, that
commands thee, not to kill thy Neighbor, will not suffer thee, to be thy own
murderer. Be not dejected, because you are weak, and cannot perfectly master
your Body; for God delights to manifest, and show his strength in your
weakness: Strength, and weakness are best met together. When you fall, catch
hold upon God, and rise: falling again, again rise. Indeed, he that goes
smoothly on, when all things smile upon him; and returns back, when the
wind blows in his face; will never come to his own Country. And here note,
that God deals with his Servants, and with all people, now by fair means,
and now again, by foul. But it is a very suspicious, and doubtful business,
when we have more fair, and flowery way, then foul, and stony: and it is very
likely, that God has now cast off the care of us. The badge of Prosperity is
one of Death's marks. The Ox is fed full, and fat for the Shambles. God
punishes his best Servants, to wean them from the World, and to better their
weight of Glory; He chastises every child, which he receives. And
therefore, when we sin, and our sin is not followed with punishment, but one
sin is punished with another, and that other, with another; it is a most
fearful case: for then God shows, he has a farther aim, then temporal
punishment. As likewise, when we have no sense, or feeling of our sins, no
spiritual tribulation, the soul is dangerously affected.

RULE. 12.
WHen thou art set on fire with a Temptation of the flesh, apply thy self
instantly, to some kind of employment: saying: Go Devil, now I read your
baseness in a big letter: Truly, now you begin to be a mere Fool; this is
plain filthiness. How strangely the Devil has besotted, yea, bewitched men!
Some love women, far inferior both in body and mind, to their wives, whom
they neglect: damping and discountenancing their loves. But God will perhaps
punish them, as his manner is, with punishments, like to their sins. Other
wives may succeed, that will dote upon their Husbands Inferiors. From love,
worse then hate; and from false women that fry with love toward other men,
their Husbands yet breathing, Good Lord, deliver us. For, they are like fair,
strong, and heavy Chests, that appear to the eye, and hang upon the hand, as
if they were rich in money, plate, and jewels; but are stuffed only with
stones, hay, and brown paper. As their gifts, so they.

The sin of the flesh is now more heinous, then it was before the Incarnation
of Christ, because it tainteth the flesh, which he took, and which he has
already glorified. Parce in te Christo, says one, Spare Christ in thy self.
And fright away the Temptation, with a loathing and execration of such
Beastliness, and with contempt of so base, and so quick a pleasure;
accompanied with shame, and with such a thought as this, I am a Villain; and
followed with shame, hate, and sorrow, much unlike Repentance.

After your Triumph over Temptation, or your escape from danger; run to God,
the only disposer of your affairs, when they turn to virtuous Good; and give
him, humble thanks. And reflect upon your misery, if you had fallen under that
Temptation, or Danger. Then search into the secret, and learn, whether you did
not by some former offense, pull the Temptation, or danger upon your self;
which God now used, as a warning. And look with a near eye, into the deep
craft of the Devil. And for the present; mark how painfully he kindles, and
blows the coals of emulation betwixt Brethren, Sisters, Scholars, men of the
same Trade, people living in the same House, Neighbors, Families, Countries.
How he creates mistakes, suspicions, jealousies, with a purpose to call up
Anger. I will tell you; A great Author is of opinion, that the devil does
oftentimes, set Dogs together by the ears, that he may provoke men to
quarrel.

By the falling out of two children, playing at ball, he turned all Italy into
a combustion, wherein many thousands lost their precious life's: passing by
degrees (as he does in all his Temptations) from children to men, from Parents
to all of the same blood, from them to friends, and from these friends to their
friends, and their friends friends: from houses to Cities, from Cities to
Countries; and all this began from the play of two little children. I will give
you a touch of his wonderful deceits, out of my Experience: One seeing a dead
man, and hearing the people that were present, say, it was a beautiful corpse;
was fired with a great Temptation, to kill himself; that it might be said of
him likewise, It is a beautiful corpse. This was a vainglorious end; now for a
seemingly virtuous end: Another would feign have killed himself, that he might
have revenged God's quarrel, and made an end of sinning against so blessed,
and sweet a God. The devil is a great Politician, he has his fair ends, and
his foul ends; ends to show, and ends, which he will not show; ends, that are
but veyles, drawn over his ends; ends, without end; many ends for one action.

This is not the rich Jesuits Rule, but the poor Carpenters Rule. And more
Rules of this kind, (because I must not dwell here, betwixt Spain, and the
Low Countries) you shall meet with, hereafter.

THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I.
I Am now a Monk in Doway, and shaved to the Scull; as I learned of them, for
three reasons especially: first, because all Slaves were ever shaved, and I was
now a Slave to God, and must come and go at the least beck of his pleasure.
Secondly, to give me notice, that all superfluities must be cut from me, in all
kinds. Thirdly, to make better room for a Crown of glory. But there are
Monks in the same house, yet living apart from the English, belonging to the
rich Abbat of Arras, that are not of so bare a cut: and no Courtier can set
out, and make more of the hair they have, then they do. It is in use with the
Church of Rome, both in the giving of their orders, and their degrees of
orders, and initiations to orders; and also, in the state of Episcopacie, and
the stairs of it, as the Bishop, the Archbishop, the Patriarch, and the Pope,
to shave the hair wider and wider, into a greater, and a greater circle, as
the persons more dignified; and therefore the Pope is the most shaved of them
all. In this Monastery, my dislike grew by little and little, from these
reasons. That which (I fear) heated some of them, chilled me. For, although I
was not permitted to eat flesh amongst the Monks, for the space of three
quarters of a year; yet, they sent me plenty of flesh, when I dined in my
chamber. And I had great variety of excellent meats, both in one place, and
the other. And lest I should be scandalized, it was suggested to me; that now
men's natures are not able to brook fasting, as they have done. I have not lost
it out of my memory; that I turned my eye aside one time in the end of dinner,
and saw a Monk leaning backwards, and stretching out his belly, as like a
Glutton as might be. I had forgot to tell you, that no King does fare better,
or is fed with more variety, then the Jesuits in their feasts; if we consider
how much a man can eat. Here follows another deceit of the Monks, somewhat
like the former. In the end of Lent, Father Prior, the head-Monke, washed the
feet of all his inferior Monks, in imitation of Christ, who washed his
Disciples feet: but warning was given the day before, and every one was
commanded to wash and purify his own feet; and yet when they came to the
Prior, he did scarce touch their feet, either with his hands, or with the
water; and here was all the imitation of Christ. Such another business, and as
like it, as an Egg is to an Egg, is acted by his Holiness at Rome, who is
said to wash the feet of certain poor Pilgrims. The man has not reason, who
says, these are any thing but the bare shadows of humility. The Monks in the
place of their meeting to their meals, speak not; but perform all by signs;
and they have a book which teaches the Art of making signs, either by way of
speech, or answer. But this is only an outward color, presented in public.
For, the Monk, whose only conversation I enjoyed, of all that were settled in
the house, being esteemed one of the wisest men in Christendom, was full of
words, and many of them were bad ones. He labored to beget in me an opinion
(to which I did incline for some reasons) that the Jesuits at my departure from
them, had poisoned me. And (said this Monk) poison of their giving may lie
gnawing insensibly in your body, and kill you at seven years end. The Jesuits
may remember, they had provided a Gammon of Bacon, which I should have carried
with me: If it was man's meat, they have the less to answer for. Another dish
I did eat of; the working of which, I afterward much feared. But in that
journey, the Sea cleansed my body thoroughly. Of this Monk I learned, that the
Pope had as deep a hand in the Gunpowder treason, as the Jesuits; and both
were very deep in it: (And the Jesuits, being so wryed, and so closely knit to
the Pope by obedience, durst not have attempted so high, and so public an
Treason, without his knowledge) That whosoever comes from the Jesuits,
exposes himself to the lash of so many foul mouths, as there are men
amongst them: that the Jesuits will nip a man, as if a man should nip a young
bud of a Flower, or Tree, or a Witch, a young child in the Cradle; that he
shall never thrive after. The great Cathedral Church in Cambray, near Doway;
uses a peculiar way of service, much different from the Church-demeanour and
service of Rome: And the Church of Rome has long endeavored there to
introduce her customs. And I know, said this Monk to me, that upon admission
of such a change, in the next age the Church of Rome would persuade the world,
that the Church in Cambray, did never dissent in any small point from her. This
is a great satisfaction to me, that the Church of Rome both is, and has been
a long while, altogether upon the catch; and that she leads her people, age
after age, still into more blindness. I condemn in this Monk, that he spoke
most irreverently of a person in high authority amongst us; and one of the
fairest flowers in Christendom: when he speaks the words again, I pray God
his tongue may ache. It is very common with our English Romanists beyond the
Seas, to speak very uncivilly of those in England, to whom they owe duty. This
Monk related a homely story: (and I had many from him; for it is their use, to
cheer up their subjects with merry conceits) When I lived in Spain (said he)
a certain man was possessed with a Devil, and the Priest exorcising him in
the Church, the people being present, a bold Spaniard stepped out, and said, O
Father, pray let me see the Devil, I would feign see the rogue come out of his
mouth: But the Devil answered by the man's mouth, that if he came out of the
man's mouth in whom he was, he would go in at the others-: you may guess what
part (the Monk spoke it plainly.) Whereupon (said the Monk) the Spaniard
immediately betakes himself to the holy-water-pot, and sitting down so deep
in it, that the water hid a great part of him, gives the Devil very foul
terms, and provokes him twenty times over, to come if he durst: But coward,
he durst not come. I will not tell all. I will keep some for a dear year,
and a rainy day. Yet you may gather from these premises, I could not but see,
that hypocrisy and malice in their full growth, dwelt even here, as well as
abroad; and that here, the purity was not to be found, the idea of which I bore
in my mind. Wherefore, it was my own first motion, and I left them, and
became a Friar; the Friars professing more strictness. A man may impute these
changes either to variableness, and inconstancy, or to the stirring of good
and able motives; and to Gods providence, that would carry me out of one room
into another, and show me all the inward Chambers of the Church of Rome. Take
heed, judge not. But if you do, I submit my neck, lay what weight upon me you
please, if you offend not God. For I deserve both your judgment, and your
scorn.

CHAP. II.
THe Monks have one story amongst them, and they make it a Pulpit-story. A very
devout Monk walking one day alone in a wood (and I think, they lose
themselves in this wood, when they relate the story) by chance heard a
Nightingale sing; and while she did variously descant upon her song, he laid
hold upon it as a hand from Heaven, by which he was lifted up to Gods
eminency, and to the picture and perfection of the Nightingale in him: and
there he stayed in contemplation, caught from his senses, till many years were
past, and all the Monks of his time, dead in the Monastery in which he lived.
All which time seemed to him very short, and to be merrily passed in hearing
the Nightingale. Yet (say the Monks) this Musician could not be a Nightingale,
though his heavenly meditation was indeed begun, and sung to, some while by a
Nightingale. But the Monk admiring an excellency in the creature, and being
quickly filled with it in the brook, went forward toward the spring, and rose
to that, from which it was taken in the Creator; and there he was easily sung
asleep, where he rested a hundred years, like S. John upon the soft breast of
our Savior. This passage is not much unlike the miracle of the Seven
Sleepers, that slept in a Cave, not as other men do, from the beginning of
night to the beginning of day, but from the beginning of one age to the
beginning of another. But as all their stories have their employment, so this
both tickleth, and serves to many uses: but above all, to give us a
resemblance of the profound meditation, with which God pleased himself before
the the world. It is a high matter: Yet I should desire in this, and other
things, to give more satisfaction then a story comes to, of a man in a wood,
that could not find his way out again. In lieu of their sweet story, take a
word from me, without encroaching upon a secret, which God has reserved to
himself.

CHAP. III.
THere was a Time, (if I may say so) when there was no Time: no world: none of
all these pretty things, we daily see; nor yet, the light, by which we see
them: no men and women like our selvers: no living creatures: no air, earth,
sea: no Infidel, no Jew, no Christian, no Hell, no Heaven, no Devils, no
Angels; no God I cannot say: For God alone had being before the world; as God
only now also has firm and true being. For, all other things that be, be not
of themselves, but gain their being only by participation from God. Et
aspexi, says Saint Austin, caetera infra te, S. Aug. l. 7. Confess. c. 11.
and vidi nec omnino esse, nec omnino non esse: esse quidem, quia abs te sunt,
non esse autem, quia id quod es, non sunt; id enim vere est, quod
incommutabiliter manet. And I beheld the things that are under thee, and I saw
them, neither to have a true being, nor altogether to want a being: I saw they
had a being, because they are from thee; and I saw they had no being, because
they are not that which thou art. For that truly is, which has a being
without change. If one of us should wish now, prompted by curiosity, to have
been before the world; it would be an idle wish, and with as little ground,
and foundation of likelihood to have been effected, as the world then had in
effect. For no place, no little corner had been, wherein to have been: no
air to have received, and restored again in, breath: nothing to have appeared,
or played with the smallest glimmering before the eyes. What God did before he
built the world, although Saint Austin says wittily, he was busy in making
Hell for vain and curious Inquisitours; (he means such, as will not be
quieted with any reasonable satisfaction) yet he well knows, who knows, in
what the divine happiness rests, and how absolute God is of himself, and
free from all necessary connection with creatures. All that which God now does
besides the actual government of the world, and the acts consequent to it; he
did before: we know and believe that he does now contemplate himself. For in
the contemplation of himself, consists his blessedness. Therefore we may
safely know, and securely believe; that he stood still in all eternity in
himself, taking a full view of himself, and his own perfections, which are
himself. He now sees in themselves to be, what before he saw in himself would
be. Nor was he ever idle before the world, otherwise then the Blessed shall be
ever after the world. And if the Beatificall vision, that is, the sight of God,
from which flows Blessedness, does so fully, and plentifully satisfy the
Blessed in Heaven, that they cannot turn aside the busied eyes of their
understanding, the transitory space of one minute, from that they see, even
though they should be enticed, and tempted to look aside, with all possible
delights: (and therefore, most ardently love, for the most amiable excellencies
discovered in it) was not God ever well busied, who ever had, and has an
infinitely more searching, and perfect sight of himself, then all the Blessed
either shall, or can ever have together? The divine perfections, as they have
many other, so they have also this prerogative; that always seen, they both
are, and seem still most fair, and as they lose naught of their substance, so
they never bate any thing of their beauty: Now whereas, not only the
perfections of all creatures that are; but also, of all that are possible, are
in God; and that in a most eminent and boundless manner: how can it stand that
God did not find matter in himself for perpetual exercise? especially, since
that nothing is come new to him by creatures, but their actual dependence upon
him, the style of Creator, and the Government: all that which is added, being
still out of him, or derived from that which is not in him; and consequently,
no part of his Blessedness: nor any thing which can throw the infamy of change
upon him. We may judge what is possible to be done, by what is done. And if
things are possible to be done, a power must be which can do them. And they
cannot come from him, when he does them, but because they were first in him.
For, nihil dat quod non habet, vel formaliter, vel eminenter: no Giver gives
but what he has, either so as it is given, or in a better strain. And they
cannot be in God, but as they are himself, and infinite. God does not depend
of the world, but the world of God. If the world had never yet been, he had
still remained the same God, most great, most glorious: A King, though without
subjects; because all things, be they future, or only possible, are as
actual, and present to him: Omnipotent; able to make the creatures we now see,
and far more excellent, to which we are not warranted to say, he will ever
bend his power. For therefore God leaves many things undone, which reason
teaches us may be done: to preach this doctrine, that creatures are not his
upholders. Contemplation in us, is a most noble exercise, because performed by
the most honorable faculty of the soul, the understanding: and by the highest
and most elevated acts of the mind. What then may we think of contemplation
in God? Synesius having turned his speech to God, has a sweet expression,
(...), eye Synes. in hymnis.
of thy self. For his understanding is the great eye, with which he thoroughly
sees himself. Besides, the eternal generation of Christ, the divine Word, of
which the Prophet Esaias, Who shall declare his generation? was, is, and shall be
for ever: as likewise, Es. 53. 8.
the procession of the holy Ghost. Thou art Ps. 2. 7.
my son, this day have I begotten thee: He means, a long day; diem
eternitatis, the day of eternity: a day so long, that there is but one of them
in all the year; and yet the year is the only true (...): for it is all and
wholly in it self, and has neither end nor beginning: a day that never yet
made room for night, nor shall ever be intercepted with darkness. The Heavens
are always in motion: the Sun takes no rest: Fire is always in action: The
Sea never sleeps: The Soul is always busy in the exercise of her powers:
The Heart always panting: The Eyes are always active when they are open: Life
keeps the Pulse in continual beating; and the Breath always a passenger,
coming or going. These are numbered amongst the choicest of Gods creatures; and
therefore, bear more likeness of him in themselves, then meaner things. These
ever work, and was he ever idle?

CHAP. IV.
ANother application of the former story, is to give us in a perfect form the
shape of their consideration, and contemplation. But why must they needs
consider and contemplate in a Monastery? And if they will contemplate there,
why is every man disinteressed from a lawful calling, by which he may concur
to the benefit of the Commonwealth? Homo nascitur Reipublicae, says the
Civill-Law, A man is borne for the Commonwealth. And the reason which
Aristotle gives, why a man may not kill himself, is, because he may not lop
himself from the Commonwealth, of which he is a branch. They answer with Saint
Austin, vindicating the Monks, upbraided S. Aug. l. 1. de Morib. Eccl. c. 31.
by the Manichees, Videntur nonnullis res humanas, plus quam oportet
deseruisse; non intelligentibus, quantum eorum animus orationibus profit: They
seem to some men to have forsaken humane affairs more then they ought to have
done, not understanding how much they exalt them by prayer. But without
question, the Monks of Saint Austins time, were no such idle bodies as now
they are. For then every man had his practical course of life, to which his
education had instructed him; and they which had none, labored in Gardens, and
other plats of ground, digging and sowing; and eating their bread in the sweat
of their brows. Nor is it a reasonable discourse, that because some few of the
old Christians, flying from the bloody hands of their persecutors, hid
themselves in Woods, Wildernesses, and secret Caves, and corners; we shall
step over the like cause, and take hold of the like action. Shall we make to
our selves an imitation of the rest of Heaven, without undergoing the toil,
which goes before it; of which toil, the rest of Heaven is the reward? And
they lose a fair number of weighty occasions which the world affords, and
which God ministers, as the food of virtue, and the gates of victory: and they
are feign to refer all to the first Act of entering into the Monastery; or
they would be much to seek. When I was a Roman, the Pope was solicited by the
Ambassadors of Spain to give leave, that the great increase of Monks and
Friars in their Country might be restrained; and the reason was given, because
it was feared, that the wars, and the Monasteries, pulling several ways,
would unpeople the Commonwealth, and deprive the King of subjects, necessary
to his Dominion. If such a grievance may rise from the excess, why may not a
reasonable complaint be made of every knowing and able member of a
Commonwealth, that buries his Talents in a Monastery, and seeks only
himself? In a Christian Commonwealth, the good of the Church ought not to be
preferred before the good of the Commonwealth; when by such an action of
preference, the Commonwealth is endamaged; because by the Commonwealth the
Church stands; and the Church is but a good part of the Commonwealth. And
after all, why cannot they consider their own estates, and the condition of
the world in which they are; and contemplate of high things; and admire Gods
creatures; either in their chambers, if they were in the world, or in the
fields, as Isaac; of whom we read, And Isaac went out to Genesis 24. 63.
meditate in the field at the even-tide? My Reader shall not want matter for
such a purpose, if he will be doing.

Meditation. 1.
One, a man like us, labors, and strains himself to know thoroughly the
nature of the Angels; their office; their properties: and how one Angel
differs from another in the perfection of nature, and glory. This learned man
presumes to instruct the world in strange things: and to say, that there are
nine Orders, or Quires of Angels: and that some out of every Quire fell from
God: and moreover, is bold to tell us, that Michael the Archangel in Heaven,
sits above Gabriel; and Raphael the Seraphin, above them both: and that so
many Angels may well stand together without much thrustingupon a needles point,
while the silly creature soaring above himself, forgets himself, and the
maine point; and knows not what he is that talks thus. Another dwelling upon
earth, has his dealing in Heaven amongst the Stars; and teaches for a truth,
that if we are born under such or such a constellation, such and such strange
things will certainly befall us: we shall die suddenly by fire, or by water;
or by a fall of a house, or from a house; or be the prey of a Lion. And this
profound man is certain, that if a Star should loose hold, and tumble
downward, it would more then cover all the world; and then, (says he) where
should we be? And the plain meaning people are amazed, when they hear him say
that the Sun runs some hundreds of miles in an hour. But this heavenly man
stands above himself, and above the sight of the creatures at hand, which
first offer themselves to his thoughts, and knows not what is here below.
Others cast themselves beneath themselves, and their souls; and are wondrously
taken up in the curious inquisition of inferior matters. The wise Physician is
able to reveal the great mysteries of nature, and the natural uses of almost
all natural things: but urge him upon a trial, and he cannot prescribe
Physic to his own sick conscience. Where is a Tradesman that does not
understand the secrets of his own Trade far better then the secret state of his
own soul? These wretched people have took a fall; and are under themselves:
they fail in the first ground, and foundation of all true learning. A man may
wisely ask the question, Why in the blind ages before Christ, the Devil
speaking from the mouths of Images, gave to men many good and solid documents?
The maine hinge upon which the question turns, is: The Devil not only does
evil, but also does altogether intend evil: what then has he to do with
good? I will take the true answer: The Devil well knew that the world was even
then abundantly stored with grave, and wise people; who were also morally
virtuous: and that if he did not answer in some sort, to their pious and
reasonable expectation, he would soon lose the reputation of a God. And
therefore, amongst diverse other sound instructions, delivered by the Devil in
oracles, this also was given, (...), know thy self. In which the Devil more
willingly dispensed with a show of sanctity; as knowing, that his admonition
would in the end prove uneffectuall: because no man can truly know himself
without the present assistance of Grace: of which the poor Heathenish people
were altogether destitute. Our blessed Lord, whose end was to dissolve the
machinations of the Devil, does as strangely, as excellently, exhort us to the
deep, and powerful knowledge of our selves; not in word, but in work; in the
working of a miracle. It is written, that he restored a man to sight, blind
from his birth. How did he restore him? by his will only? No: by his word
only? nor so. The manner of the cure is uncovered in these words: He spat on
the ground, and made clay of the John 9. 6.
spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay. But let me
see, is it clay? touch not my eyes with clay: it will rather put them out, then
cure them. Now I understand it, our omnipotent Lord, here works by
contraries: that it may be known, not the thing applied, but the power of him
that applied it, wrought the cure: while he clearly teaches us, that the
knowledge of our selves, and of our mean foundation, being, as Job speaks,
earthly; with a requisite application to our selves; is the only instrument,
which opens the eyes of a man blind from his birth, as we all are. And why
does our good Savior so pressingly stir, and invite us to the knowledge of
our selves? It is but one step to the reason. Knowledge puffs up, says S. 1
Cor. 8. 1.
Paul. All knowledge puffs us up, and swells us with pride, but the
knowledge of our selves. When we spread our feathers of pride and ostentation;
if we but glaunce upon the knowledge of our selves, our plumes fall, and we
begin to be humble.

Meditation 2.
MAn considered in his body, is a refined piece of dirt. A strong one? no. For,
make his image of stone, or wood, or almost of any vile thing; and it will be
more strong, more durable then he. I will set aside holy Scripture; and prove
my self to have been made of earth beyond all contradiction: Every
corruptible thing (and I may go to a dead man's grave, and find that I am a
corruptible thing) when it naturally perishes, turns into that of which it
was made: I perishing after a natural manner, turne-into earth: the conclusion
will follow, I cannot hold it: therefore I was made of earth. If I consider man
in his birth and life, it is the great blessing of God, (to his great praise be
it spoken) that he is not, ante damnatus, quam natus, condemned before he is
borne. He is borne with the great pain of his poor mother that bears him:
and he cannot be made more naked, more poor then he was, when he was borne.
If a man should look upon him here, and know nothing; he would little think
that the little thing could ever be the wild Author of so many foul stirs
and tumults in the world. A child being born, is cast out a poor naked thing,
Plin. in prooem. ad l. 7.
natali die, as Pliny says, on his birthday. He makes his birthday a day of
mourning: Procellas mundi, quas ingeditur, says Saint Cyprian, statim suo
ploratu, and gemitu, rudis anima testatur. The newborn S. Cypr. de patientia.
child presently gives testimony to the storms of this world, by his tears.
The Emperors children of Constantinople, though borne in a chamber, called the
Purple, because on every side adorned with purple; though received from the
mother, so quickly into purple, that they seemed to be born in little robes of
purple, and therefore styled Porphyrogenites; to hide the nakedness, and take
away the scandal of nature: yet notwithstanding all this shuffling, and
ruffling of purple, they came into the world as other children; all naked, and
with little tears in their eyes, to show they were then upon traveling from
their maker. Man that is borne of a woman, says Job, is of few days, and full
of trouble. Every man was borne of a woman, but Adam: and it was not Gods
highest will, that he should have been either of few days, or full of trouble.
It is a great while before we can go, before we can speak, before we can make
it plain, that we differ in the maine point from beasts, and are reasonable
creatures, before we know any thing. And then endeavoring to know, we learn
evil easily; good with great pain. And in our first lesson which the world
gives us, we learn to sin. What is that? to break the Divine Law, and
forfeit our souls to eternal damnation. And yet, as it is in Job, Man
drinks Job 15. 16.
iniquity like water: the sense is, it is as familiar with man to sin, as to
drink. The best, and most quiet half of our lives, passes away in a dream,
when we are asleep, and in a manner, dead: vitam nobiscum dividit somnus,
says Seneca, our life is parted betwixt sleep and us. In our youth we are
green, and raw, and the sport of ancient people: and for want of judgment,
and experience, lose our selves in a thousand thousand extravagancies; which
afterward appear, not like Stars, but like skars upon our lives. And having
at length climed above youth, we are yet troubled with some odd humor, and
crack in our nature: by which we are burdensome to our neighbors; and
hateful, even to our selves. Hither poynteth the old Litany, when it prays,
A me, salva me, Domine, From my self, good Lord deliver me.

Meditation 3.
OUr life is full of changes: we pass from one year to another; and the
faster the years go, the faster age comes, and we are changed. We change the
places of our abode, and with them, our selves. We change from a single life,
to the state of marriage; and new passages coming with new courses, hold us as
it were in discourse, and make us forget, that while they are new, we are old.
We desire to see our children grow: but, while they grow, we decay. The variety
of this life deceives us. Corruption unius, est generatio alterius, say the
Philosophers; the corruption of one thing, is the generation of another. The
end of one misery, is not only the end of one, but also the beginning of
another: and thus we live, tossed continually betwixt fire and water. We
believe, and go on a little: then we doubt, and there we stop: we hope, and
follow the good we hope for, like a wandering fire by night, and then we fear,
and grieve, and despair, and there we sink. In the reasonable soul of Christ,
good acts passed from one to another without any stop, or interposition (at
least, all the while he waked; I reflect upon him that says, I sleep, but my
heart waketh. Cant. 5. 2.) So that one virtuous thought followed another in so
close and pressing a manner, that they were not only broken or hindered with
the foul exercise of evil, but they were never at leisure, never sat idle in
the Marketplace, never out of the fair, and solid practice of good. For
example: when the deep exercise of Humility had kept the thoughts in work and
wages awhile, perhaps she gave up the keys, and government to patience. Then
patience farthered in good by evil men, put the Scepter into the hands of
Charity. Then charity changed into sorrow for the sins of the world. And
sorrow might beget strong resolutions of fortitude to die for them. And thus
the soul of Christ took her steps from virtue to virtue. But in us now love
reigns, and soon after, hate kills it with a frown. And then perhaps,
indifferent thoughts may step forward in the by, and the soul may wonder a
little without the known fellowship of good or evil. And then the sight of
money may break up all, and sell the heart to covetousnes. And then reflection
may cool it with a drop of sorrow. And then vexation may set all on fire with
anger. And then the love of drink may come washing the way, and quench anger.
And then the heart may reject what it loved, and presently desire the thing,
which even Salu. lib. 1. de gubern. Dei.
now it rejected. Humanae mentis vitium, magis ea semper velle quae desunt,
says Salvianus; It is the fault of the mind, always to desire the things
which are wanting. And at last, according to the Poet, Frigida pugnabant
calidis, etc. Hot, cold, moist, dry, fighting together, and striving to make a
new quality, of hot, cold, moist, dry; may breed confusion, and neither gain
the day. We make good purposes, and begin a new life; we turn up the eye, and
all in haste, we will be very good and godly men and women; we will be humble,
patient, sober: but our virtuous courage quickly droops; and in a short time,
we are the very men and women that we were before: And yet not the same, but a
degree worse; for grace neglected, draws a curse upon us. We are pretty
clear, and merry, and then comes a cloud, the loss of goods, or good-name, or
friends, or of a thing like these, which cooles and darkens all: and our
sweetest joys are sooner or later steeped in sorrow: we are now somewhat
pleasant; then dull; then outrageous; and for the time, lose our wits, and are
mad. Do all that we can, and all that God can enable us to do; we please
one, displease another: this man smiles upon us, the other frowns; and yet
both have the same motive. But the best is, it is the voice of Saint Peter, and
of the other Apostles, We ought to obey God, rather Act. 5. 29. S. Chrysostom.
then men. Certe, says Saint Chrysostom, quot homines in populo sunt, tot
Dominis subjicitur, qui vulgi laud gaudet: Truly, as many men as there are,
so many masters he has, who rejoices in the praise of people. Saint Paul
reads us another lesson: For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience: God 2 Cor. 1. 12.
grant, that if it may be done without sin, I may hear more of my dispraises
then praises: for otherwise, I am in great danger of swelling, and breaking.
The light which I steer to, is: our poor Savior, with all his knowledge, with
all his truth, did not please every man.

Meditation. 4.
WE are in health, and look fresh, and full: and then the head aches, a pain
lies heavy upon the stomach; and we look neither fresh nor full, but pale
and empty: and then will one say, O had I my health again! Happy are you that
enjoy your health: we are shaken with an Ague, or scorched with a Fever: and
sigh, and groan, and turn from side to side, but cannot sleep. It is the case
of him that turns from one falsehood to another: yea, the great ones are
sick, and suffer pain; lament, and shed tears as plentifully as we. And
moreover, the great ones are commonly sore clogged with a grievous disease,
that makes them a little greater, the Gout: which we poor plain people are
ignorant of; his name be blessed, that is worthily called the Father of the
poor. We are now rich, now poor; though indeed, most rich, when we are poor.
We are esteemed by the world; and then contemned, and condemned. The care of
catching after money, more and more, and still more, takes up all the time of
our life. A man is born to a good estate: with much care, and many sins, he
doubles it, and dies. But a prodigal heir comes after him, in the first, or
second generation, and turns it all into vain smoke; and so, the name fails,
the house falls; and here is the goodly fruit of worldly care, and of all the
pains the old man took. And yet riches cannot satisfy the heart of man.
Saint Austin has the reason of it in his Meditations, Domine, feeistinos
properte, and S. Aug. in confess.
irrequietum est cor nostrum donec pervenerit ad te: Lord, thou have made us
for thee, and the heart of man cannot be quiet till it come to thee, and rest
in thee. And the Prophet speaks not besides the matter: When I awake up after
thy likeness, I shall be Ps. 17. 15.
satisfied with it. There are holy meditations, and virtuous exercises, to
which we owe much time: and therefore, the Devil, a cunning dealer, keeps
the richer part of women busy, all the prime of the day, in dressing their
bodies, and undressing their souls, and in creating halfe-moones, and stars in
their faces; in correcting Gods workmanship, and making new faces; as if they
were somewhat wiser then God. Quem S. Ambr.
judicem, mulier, says Saint Ambrose, veriorem requirimus deformitatis tuae,
quam te ipsam, quae videri times? O woman, what more true judge can we require
of thy deformity, that is, thy ugliness, then thy self, who fear to be
seen? The Devil is always more forward in seducing women; because he knows
that women are of a soft, pliant, and loving nature; and that if they should
love God, they would love him tenderly. The Devil? whither can any of us, men
or women, fly from the Devil? Be sober, be vigilant, says Saint Peter,
because 1 Pet. 5. 8.
your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he
may devour. It is not enough to be sober, nor enough to be vigilant. He is not
our friend, but our adversary. And he is a busy Devil, he goes about; an
angry Devil, he goes about like a roaring Lion: a hungry Devil; for he does
not roar only, but he comes roaring, with a greedy purpose to devour: and
he walks, lest going with speed, he should run over you: and he keeps not
one way, but walks about: and does not only devour those who stand, or
meet him in his way; but he seeks whom he may devour: and he is always the
same, always a Devil; for when he has found his prey, fed upon it, and eat
up all; he is not satisfied, he goes on still seeking whom he may devour. God
bless every good man and woman from a roaring Lion. Sixtus Sixth. II.
the second, in one of his Epistles, directed to a certain Bishop, gives the
Devil no good report: Si in Paradiso hominem stravit, quis locus extra Parad.
esse potest, in quo mentes hominum penetrare non valeat? If he gave man a fall
in Paradise, what place can there be out of Paradise, in which he may not
insinuate, and wind himself into the hearts of men? Here is a picture of the
life we so much love, and so much desire to continue. And in the last place, an
old house falls, or an arrow goes out of the way, or our feet slip, or the
Devil comes to us in the outside of a Saint, (it is his course with drooping,
and melancholy spirits) and tells us religiously, that we shall give glory to
God, or at least, ease and comfort to our selves, if we cut our own throats,
or hang our selves; and we are dead, gone. Perhaps we may leave our pictures
behind us with our friends; but what are they? a merely, a mere deceit of
the Painter; our pictures are no part of us; neither do they represent us as
we are: we are dead, we see but one another faces when we are alive; we are
parted in substances; we cannot mingle into one another, as wine and water; and
therefore death pulls one out of the others bosom. And commonly when our hopes
are now ripe, and the things we long desired, at the door; Death comes and
overtakes, and takes us. And any man, being wicked himself, may send (with
Gods leave) a wicked man to Hell, in the turning of a hand: and then, what
would he not give to be with his friends in the world again? Here the reason
falls open, why never yet from the beginning of the world, any wise man died,
but if he could speak, in his last words, he cried out against the vanities of
life, and of the world. My prayer shall be the prayer of one, that knew what
he prayed for: O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I Ps. 39. 13.
go hence, and be no more.

Meditation 5.
IF I consider man in his death, and after it: He dies, that never dyed before:
He dies, that knows not what it is to dye. Which of us knows, what the pangs
of death are, and how going naked, agrees with the soul? It is as true, as
old; Death is of all terribles the most terrible. For, howsoever the holy
Spirit in holy Scripture is pleased to call it a sleep; it is not a sleep to
the wicked. It is recorded of Lazarus, Our friend Lazarus sleeps: and of
Saint Io. 11. 11. Act. 7. 60.
Stephen, And when he had said this, he fell asleep: And of the Patriarchs, and
Kings of Judah, that they slept with their Fathers. But this was the death of
the Saints, so precious in the sight of the Lord. And the soul of man now
leaving the body, carries no mortal friends with her; they stay behind: the
brother, and the sister, and the wife, and the pretty little children, with the
sweet babe in the cradle. No temporal goods, or evils rather: nothing but
good or evil Revel. 14. 13.
works; and their works do follow them. All the fairest goods, which made
all people in all ages, proud; are still extant in the world: and will be after
us, even to the end of the world. And although the living talk pleasantly of
their dead friends, and hope well: while one looks soberly, and says; I
doubt not but such a man, or such a woman, is with God: another, neither truly
do I: a third, he? she? there is no question of it: if he, or she be not in
heaven, what shall become of me? Yet, notwithstanding all this plausible and
smooth discourse, not one of these three tender hearted, and charitable
persons, nor any one living here in the world, knows certainly, whither they
were carried. This we all know certainly: Many of them are most heavily
tormented in Hell, and there curse the Father of mercies, and the God of all
consolation; and the world, and all their occasions of sin, and all their
friends, and themselves, and all Gods creatures, in the very span of time,
wherein their friends speak well, and judge charitably of them: while they
distribute their words without the least change of countenance, and little
think of their most woeful, and most lamentable condition. And the Devil,
though it is open to him after this life; yet cunningly keeps from us who are
saved, and who damned. If one of us were now in Hell, (but it is a dark and
horrid place, God keep us from it) he would quickly think: Had I my body and
life again; whither would I not go? What would I not undergo to shun this
woeful extremity? I would lie weeping upon the cold stones, all covered with
dust, and ashes; if it might be suffered a million of years, for my sins: I
would beg my bread of hard-hearted people in a new world, from one end of it
to the other: I would spend as many life's in trembling fear, and fearful
trembling, if I had them, as there be life's in living creatures: I would do
any thing. Now my soul do not grieve, that Hell is provided for sinners; for
such grief stands so far under the lowest degree of virtue, that it is a
sin: but give two tears at least, from the eyes of thy body; because thou
have sinned against thy good God. Such tears are Pearls, and rich ones, and
will in time make thee a rich man: The holy Fathers call these tears, the
jewels of Heaven, and the wine of Angels. And as the world was a gallant world,
and there were such creatures, and such doings, as we now see, before I was any
thing: so it will, unless God please, in the mean time, to cut off all by his
glorious and second coming, remain a very gallant world; and there will
again be such creatures, and such doings, when I shall lie quietly under
ground, corrupt and putrify, and by little and little, fall away to a few
wretched bones; and these shall remain, to mock at what I have been. And he
that is now so trim, and so much talked of, shall not be so much as remembered
in the world; his generation shall forget him; and people will speak, and
behave themselves, as if he had never been.

CHAP. V.
REader, beware; the Papists are crafty, and profound in craft. And they will
object, to relieve their cause, one of these two things, or both, (I have been
long trained in the knowledge of their ways) That I owe them thanks for many
devout observations. Something I have learned of them, and I thank them for
it: yet little, (if experience stand aside) but what I might have learned in
England. My friends know, that when I was a boy at Eton College, I began to
scribble matters of devotion. And I have seen much unworthiness in them
beyond the Seas, not to be imitated; which I could not have learned in England.
But, the knowledge which they work by, shall lie dead in me. Their other prop
will be, that my writings come not from the spirit of devotion, but of
oratorie. I am short in these revelations, that point at something in me, who
am nothing. Reader, thou have the language of my spirit; but I must dig
farther into this vein of Meditation, or Consideration.

Consideration. 1.
THe reasonable soul, though now of composition, is composed of three
faculties, the Understanding, the Will, the Memory. All faculties being active,
have one most proper act or exercise, to which they are most, and most easily
inclinable; if not restrained. The most proper act, or operation of the
Understanding, is, to see, or know Truth: Of the Will, to will, and love good:
Of the Memory, to lay up, and keep in it self, as in a Treasury, all
profitable occurrences. By the sin of Adam, the Understanding is dazzled in
the sight, or knowledge of Truth: By the sin of Adam, the Will becomes chill,
and cold in the willing, and loving of good; so cold, that it wants a fire:
And from the sin of Adam, the Memore has learned an ill trick of treasuring
up evil, where it shall be sure to be found again; and of casting aside good,
where it may be lost with a great deal more ease, then it was found. Where one
part is wounded, and one well, one part may succor and cherish the other; the
part well, the wounded part: In the soul, all parts are wounded. And therefore
there is great need of Grace, and supernatural helps; that strengthened by
them, we may recover health, and parts deperditas, the parts we have lost.
Lord, assist my contemplation with thy Grace. Wherefore the holy Apostle,
speaking of those, who in all their adventures were guided only by the weak
directions of nature, says, they became vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish Romans 1. 21.
heart was darkened: First, vain; and then more dark. Saint Hieromes
Translation speaks after this manner in Genesis: The earth was vain and
void, and darkness was Genesis 1. 2.
upon the face of the deep. What the Eye is in the body, the Understanding is
in the soul. The Eye is the natural guide of the body, the Understanding is
the natural guide of the soul. For, when we believe, as well as desire, the
things we do not understand, even then also we take a natural direction from
the Understanding; which he holds a conveniencie of such things in respect of
the motives, with belief, and desire; though not with Understanding. The Eye
sees the outward shape of a thing: the Understanding sees both outwardly, and
inwardly as being advanced more nearly in its degree, and therefore also in
its making to God. The Eye discernes one thing from another: the Understanding
conceives as much. The Eye judges of colors: the Understanding judges of white
and black, of good and evil. The Eye cannot see perfectly many things at
once: and such a one is the understanding: For, the more a power, be it
spiritual, or corporal, being finite, is spread and divided in its operation,
the less power it has in every particular. The eye sees other things, but I
cannot turn it inward to see it self: the Eye of the soul looks forward;
but in the body, it shall never obtain a sight of it self, in its own
essence. Indeed, the Understanding is a kind of Eye: and the Eye is a kind of
Understanding. Such an excellent sweetness of agreement there is betwixt the
soul and the body, which moved to the marriage, and union betwixt them. Now,
this Understanding, this Eye of the soul, is not altogether blinded by the
great mischance of original sin. For, omnia naturalia sunt integra, as
Dionysius says of Dionys. Areop.
the fallen Angels: all the natural parts are sound. How? from being broken,
not from being bruised. This Eye then, although dark, so far sees, that it
sees it self less able to see; somewhat dark in the sight of natural
things; and much more then somewhat dark in the sight of spiritual things. I
may stand betwixt both, and clearly behold the different case of the soul,
before and after the fall of Adam, in order to spiritual contemplation, and
practice: if I look upon the various condition of a man in health and
sickness; in order to the actions, and operations of life. The sick man is
weak, and ill at ease: his principal parts are in pain; his head, his heart:
He cannot use his mind seriously, but his head aches: he cannot look
steadfastly; nor at all, upon a shining object: discourse is tedious to him; if
it be of high things, he cannot endure it: he cannot taste aright; bitter is
sweet, and sweet bitter, to his infected palate: he has little stomach to his
meat, he loathes it: and when he eats, it will not stay with him; or if it
does, he cannot digest it perfectly: he cannot stand without leaning; he
cannot go without a staff: he cannot run without one. And why all this?
Because he is sick, because he is a very weak man. O Adam, what have thou
done? but in vain-. Had the best of us been Adam, he would have eaten, had
there been a Serpent, and a woman: perhaps, had there been a Serpent, and no
woman: perhaps, had there been a woman, and no Serpent: perhaps, had there
been neitheir woman nor Serpent: For, God being absent with his efficacy, he
might have been both woman and Serpent to himself. But, let him pass. It is
believed, that God has forgiven Adam, and his wife, who first brought sin
into the world: and we may have great hope, he will be a tenderhearted father
also toward us, that never saw the blessed hours of innocence. Nothing can
harden his tenderness, but our sins. And there are only two deformities in
our sins, conceivable to be most odious, and urging to revenge: the
greatness of them, the multitude of them. O! but the Prophet David, a knowing
man, prescribes a special remedy: Have mercy upon me O God, according to thy
loving kindness. Psalm. 51. 1.
The Latin translation gives it, Secundum magnam misericordiam tuam, according
to thy great mercy: great sins, great mercy; a present remedy. What comes
after? according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my
transgressions: a multitude of grievous sins; a multitude of tender mercies;
an approved remedy. There wants only a lively faith, and a virtuous life, like
two hands, to make the application, to bring them together; and it is done.

Consideration. 2.
THe light of the Understanding, which properly belongs to the Understanding,
is only natural; and that, less clear then it was. And a natural light
leads only to the knowledge of natural things, or of things as natural: for,
nothing can work beyond the virtue received from its causes. But man is
ordained for God, as for an end, which goes beyond the graspe, and
comprehension of nature; according to Saint Paul's Divinity, borrowed from the
Prophet Esaias: Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart 1 Cor. 2. 9
of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. And the end
ought always to be foreseen, and foreknowne by them, who are engaged to
direct, and turn the face of all their intentions and actions to the end.
Therefore, another light is necessary, a light above the knowledge and reach of
nature, of which, the Understanding by nature is altogether destitute. Here is
a wondrous defect. Who can show me such another? We naturally see, there is a
God. Farther, we naturally see that all things were made for us, and we for
God: (howsoever the Stoics thought one man was borne for another) And yet, by
the proper strength of nature, we cannot go to him, whom we see to be; whom we
see to be our end; and for whom, we see, we were made; nor yet, toward him.
Saint Austin, one of the most searching spirits that ever was, both a spirit
and a body, solves this hard knot of difficulty, in a discourse of another
lineage: Consultissime homini praecipitur, ut rectis passibus ambulet, ut cum se
non S. Aug. de perfect. Just cap. 7.
posse perspexerit, medicinam requirat, etc. The lame unable man is fitly
commanded to go; that perceiving his defect of being unable, he may seek a
cure, and be able. But, the cure, what is it? The grace of God and as a learned
Council speaks, gratia semper Conc. Senonense.
est in promptu, the grace of God is always in a readiness. I am not
commanded to travel for it: wheresoever I am, it is there also: I may lift up
my hands and take it: if I open my heart wide, it will drop into it. And, as it
was the nature of Original sin, to weaken the natural and to darken the
supernatural light of the soul: so likewise, it is the nature of actual
sin, to wound nature, and to kill grace; grace only, being directly opposite
to sin. And thence it comes, that still as we sin, still we are more
darkened: and that still, the more we sin, still the more we are deceived in
our judgments; and still err the more, in the sight and knowledge of truth.
For, why do wicked men, ingulft in wickedness, apprehend most horrible
sins, as trivial matters? because their Candle is out, the light by which
they saw, is darkened with sin. Why do weak Christians, change their
opinions from good to evil? from evil to more evil? Why do they grow more
strong and obstinate in evil opinions? Whither soever I go, I must come
hither for an answer: Because some private or public sins have removed their
Candle-sticke out of his place, and they are in darkness. God bless my heart
from the darkness of Egypt. It is a pretty observation, that although the
Israelites, and the Egyptians were mingled together; yet the plague of
darkness, which was a continual night, wheresoever it found an Egyptian; was
neither plague, nor darkness to an Israelite: no verily, though hand in hand,
with an Egyptian. O Lord, I learn here, that I am blind, and dark; and I
know that I am weak: and therefore, without thee, my contemplation will be
dark, and weak, as I am.

Consideration. 3.
WE see God in this world, not in himself; but per speculum creaturarum,
through the glass of creatures. It is worthily said by Saint Paul, The
invisible Romans 1. 20.
things of him from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made. Clearly seen to be, but not clearly
seen, what they are in themselves. For, if so, the things which are seen,
should be as exactly perfect, as the things which are not seen, as
representing them perfectly. It is a direct passage by corporal things, up to
spiritual. For God applies himself accordingly, to the nature of every thing,
in which he works. The Angels are Spirits, and therefore, their directions,
even before their union with God, were altogether spiritual. But we, being
partly corporal, and outwarly furnished with senses, are most commonly taught
by things, which offer, and present themselves to sense. And because the seeing
faculty is the most quick, and apprehensive; the sense of seeing has more
instructions. And seeing most like to understanding; what is seen may best be
understood. In all Gods creatures, as being the creatures of one God, there is
a strange kind of consent, combination, and harmony. In earthly things,
heavenly things are strangely set out, and proposed to us. For, if the way had
not some springlings of resemblance with the Country, we could not so easily
know it to be the way. Let a man, or an Angel give me the name of a creature in
the world, which will not afford us many good lessons of instruction,
concerning the Creator, and his dewlling place, whither we are invited.
Creatures of the lowest rank, void of life, sense, and knowledge, work for
an end: which evidently appears, because they tend, and bend always to that
which is most convenient, and suitable with their being: and proceed in their
actions, as if they were skilled in the compositions of knowledge. The Sun
knows he must run all day long, or the grateful variety of darkness, and
ease, will not succeed in due time. The earth knows, it is her part to stand
still, or she cannot bring forth, and bear as she does. The Sea knows, he
must still be stirring, or he shall be corrupted. Which could not be; that
is, they could not know without knowledge, had they not been directed in their
creation, by a most knowing power: and this is God. Mark that, my soul: here
thou have found him: hold him fast: let him not go, till he bless thee: Nor
yet then, till he pass his royal word, which shall never pass; that he will
bless thee, and bless thee, and bless thee again; till at last, he rank
thee among the Blessed.

Consideration. 4.
FOr, what is the reason, that Grace has such mavelous affinity with Glory?
because Grace is the way to Glory. The state of Grace is the waking of the day:
The state of Glory is the day up, and ready. The state of Grace is, pax
inchoata, the beginning of peace: the state of Glory is, pax perfecta, perfect
peace. And therefore, many of the works, (it is certain) which proceed from
Grace, are indeed, works which pertain to glory: As Ecstasies. Dionysius
discoursing of the love of God, says, (...); it causes an extasis, a trance;
and removes the lover from his own state Dionys. Areop. c. 4. de diu nom.
to a more high, and sublime condition. O, how shall I ascend hither? to this
high point of love toward God, our God, my God, all the Gods I have? There is
no way but the untwinding of my heart from all idle affection to these low base
things of earth: for then I shall rise. And as Grace is the true likeness of
Glory; so nature is not altogether unlike to Grace. For, Grace being the
perfection of Nature, according to the worn axiom of Divinity, Gratia
perficit naturam, Grace perfecteth nature: an agreement is required, and
supposed betwixt nature and Grace: and therefore, all the chief acts of nature
in the soul, are of themselves inclinable, and bendable to Grace; and yet, not
altogether of themselves, but by Grace: as the natural stirrings of the Will
to Charity. Here I have the music, or harmony betwixt Nature, Grace, Glory.
As for the correspondence betwixt Grace and Glory, because they are both in a
great part hidden, this needs a very careful search to find it. But the
corresponcence betwixt Nature and Glory, or Earth and Heaven, is such; that
because one extreme is apparent; because Earth is apparent, and always before
our eyes, one may be found by the other; Heaven by Earth. Because the creatures
of God in the Earth, are plain, even to the dullest of us: if they learn the
art of using creatures, as we do stairs; and go up step after step, from the
lower to the higher, from the less perfect creature to the more perfect, (and
if we go still upwards, we cannot miss our way) we shall come at last to the
most perfect, which is the Creator, blessed for ever. Stones, Trees, Beasts,
Men, Angels, God, the cause of these. Again, if we deal with any particular
Creature, as we do with a river; keep by the stream, till we come to the
fountain: we shall be sure always, as sure as sure can be, to find God in
the end of our journey. If I ask the flower, whence it has its beauty, (for,
I know it is a borrowed beauty, because it withers) it will perhaps at first be
ashamed to confess, how meanly it was borne: but it must answer at last, from
the earth. If I turn to the earth, and question her, whence came thou? She
will answer quickly, and gladly; From God. Nor could the earth, so foul a
thing, yield such a beauty, without the strange concurse, and help of one,
most beautiful: which is God. Here I have discovered certain sparks of the
beauty of God, in a flower. I will observe now, and admire how frequently holy
Scripture thrusts us upon this admirable kind of learning. I am the Flower of
the field: I am a Vine: I am the way: I am the light of the world. If I walk
abroad in the fields, I have a very fair and moving occasion, to lift up my
heart to him, who is the flower of the field. And when I see a fair flower
growing in my way, I shall do well to leave it growing still, with a desire,
thar others coming after me, may from the sight of it, look up to the beauty
of God. And another shall not do ill, that shall come, and crop the flower,
and smell how sweet God is. As I turn home to my house, I am desired to turn
my heart to him, who is the Vine. If I stir any way, I am stirred to think
of him, who is the way. If I stir no way, and but only open my eyes; I am
exhorted to climb up to him, who is the light of the world. If I will shut my
eyes, and pass through Gods world, like a blind man; it is impossible I
should behold, either the flower of the field, or the Vine; or the way, or the
light of the world. The Devil (his enemy who is the way, and his enemy, who is
in the way) has ways to keep us always busy; to possess our hearts, now
with joy, now with sorrow; now with hope, now with fear; now with love, now
with hatred; now with one affection, and now with another: that, if we consent
to it, we shall go sliding through the world; and at last fall out of it, as
ignorant of good things; as if we had never been alive. Gods book of
creatures shall be shut, and our eyes shut, before we have learned to know our
letters.

Consideration. 5.
IT was a principal point in the malicious doctrine of the Manichees, a rout
of Heretics, very strong on foot in S. Austins time: that there were two
prime causes of things, a fair cause of good things, and a foul cause of
evil things. The unhappy occasion of this opinion was, because they discovered
many pernicious, and hurtful creatures in the great storehouses of nature:
which they imagined could not with honor and conveniencie be attributed in
him, that we call the good God of all goodness. And Saint Austin has left
behind him a remarkable story of a Manichee, to whom when it was granted, that
the Fly for its troublesomenesse, and continual importunity, was from the
Devil; he did easily bring on his argument, as it were, underhand, and by
stealth, to other creatures, that had a greater substance, and a more noble
being. (Give not place to the Devil in small things.) But if these impious
Manichees had but stood a while, and rightly considered, by what crooked entry
hurtful things came into the world, at least with leave to be hurtful: and
how all things in the visible world, even now, after Gods heavy curse upon the
earth, offer themselves to be guided to good ends; and are for the most part,
used by Physicians, in the recovering, and conserving of health: or if they had
but examined, and scanned the perfections every thing has, in respect it is
honored with a being; they would have thought it no absurdity, to call God in
the sight of Heaven and Earth, Creatorem coeli and terrae, the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, and of all things in them. God has made one thing less
perfect then another; to the end, we may more highly esteem his better things:
For, as contraries, though enemies, are wont to set out one the other; and the
Swan seems whiter, when the Crow is in presence: so in adversity, the lesser
things make good the greater. And if diverse creatures had not wanted their due
perfections, many long stories of great Miracles had been cut off, and the
ignorant world had not known that it was he who made nature, by whose power
she was restored. And perfect men should not have had such open admonishment,
to reflect upon their own talents, and to praise God for his singular benefits
to them. If no man had ever been blind, who would thank God above an easy
and ordinary manner for his eyes, the windows of his soul? and if none were
deformed, who would praise beauty? And howsoever Aristotle, to bring in the
phrase, calls monsters (...), the sins of nature: God was 2. Phys. text. 82.
willing that nature should err sometimes in the right stroke, and looking to
his end, seemed to err with nature in the work. And never was any famous
picture, but the same end was intended by the Painter, in the pencilling. For,
monsters do serve in this great picture of the world, like shadows in
pictures, to give the eye a fairer view of the fairer colors. The darkness of
the night, though it has none in it self, yet gives a great luster to the
day: And Summer is more esteemed, because it was ushered into the world by a
withered and shaking Winter. By which it is manifest, that not only these
things pass with change, to avoid tediousness; which happens even in the
highest rank of things, if they be earthly; but also, that the meaner sort, by
only showing themselves upon the stage, help much to the value, and
estimation of the better. O thou delightful change and vicissitude, my
thoughts must needs change to praise thee. Albeit he made thee, who is
unchangeable; yet he well knew thou would show well in the world, though not
in him. I will no more, to every kind of change, give that foul name,
Inconstancy: I see now, that ordered changes are to be desired. But in
imitation of thee I must change again. It is more certain, then that which is
certain, or certainty it self; that he made all things, who moved the three
children in Daniel, as well to invite Dan. 3. in Apocryph.
to the praise of God, heat, fire, (they being then in the fire) cold, frost,
lightning, clouds, night, and darkness; as other creatures, though oftentimes
they bring in their train danger, and sometimes hurt with them: which
objection Saint Austin bends S. Aug. lib. de natura boni, c. 6.
against the Manichees. For, all creatures by waving toward the end, for which
God made them, praise God. The Sun runs apace to do his will. Let it go;
that many things were not fashioned in the first Creation, which, after the
quality of the earth was altered by the curse, were seen to appear in strange
and antic shapes; being indeed, the children of the curse, not of the earth:
as thorns, and brambles, which come against us with their pikes in so great a
number (and most commonly, without help of tillage, or other husbandry, or any
call, or sign from us) that a Rose cannot grow, but secretly armed with
thorns, even in the place where it is to be plucked. And for living creatures,
given up to man's use, they turn head against man, because Adam bore arms
against God, for whom he was made. And by this foul cranny, came all the
scattered troops of crosses into the world; and all hurtful creatures; which
were more hurtful to the Manichees, then all other people, as being cause of
their error. For the Jews have an ancient tradition; that Adam before his
fall, being seated on an eminent place in Paradise; other living creatures
passed by him in a decent order, and bowed their humble heads in sign of
honor and duty: at which time he gave them all names, some think,
conformable to their natures. Moses sings of God, his Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Psalm. 104.
24.
work is perfect: and David plays to the song, O Lord, how manifold are thy
works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches.

Consideration. 6.
GOD, as he is infinite in himself, so he does certainly steer all his
actions to an infinite end, which cannot be any thing but himself. All floods
wander out of the Sea, and finding they have lost their way, run hastily
another way to find the Sea. These subject creatures are given us, to stand in
diverse places, and take us by the hand, and so deliver us from hand to hand;
till at last they lead us to God, and put us safe into his hands: and to serve
us, upon supposition that we serve God: and therefore, I not serving God, am a
Thief, and a robber, if I take them in my wants to relieve me. Since all
bread, is the bread of children; I not being a child, cannot use it, but I must
abuse it. And a true lover of God does not converse, and deal with more
creatures, then will bring him with just conveniencie to his end: nor with any,
but in a measure proportionable to his end. And such a one was Saint Austin,
after he had been the space of nine years a Manichean, S. Aug. l. 10 Confess.
c. 11
and was now converted: who says, Hoc me docuisti, Deus, ut quemadmodum
medicamenta, sic alimenta, sumpturus accedam: Howsoever I lived before, when I
lived, and yet did not live; yet now, whereas Filius tantarum lacrymarum perire
non potuit, according to the prophecy of my great Master, Ambrose, A son of
so many tears, as Monica my mother shed for me, could not perish; this thou
have taught me, O God, to take meat as men do medicines, not for pleasure,
but necessity; to put me another step forward toward thee, and to maintain
the thread of my life still running upon the wheel, which I dare not wilfully
break. Nor yet are all creatures made for the necessary maintenance of life.
For, although the four Elements are requisite to the due continuance of it,
yet man may subsist, and stay in being man, without many creatures in them:
which God has provided, not to comply with necessity, but to conform with
delight, if embraced in a fit measure; and if we deal in them as Bees traffic
in honey; diligently observing that our wings be not entangled and catched
therewith: our wings of prayer, and contemplation, by which we rise from earth
to heaven, from the creatures, with a great flight, to the Creator. And God
made many things otherwise then we use them. Gold and Jewels were hid in the
earth, from man's sight; as if God had been unwilling they should be found. And
therefore Boethius complains, Heu primus quis fuit ille, Boet. Metr. S. lib. 2.
Auri qui pondera tecti, Gemmasque latere volentes, Pretiosa pericula fodit?
Alas, what unhappy man was that, who first dug up covered Gold, and
shamefast Jewels, that desired to lie hid, being precious dangers? And all the
shining colors of cloth, that so mock our eyes, from what a white simplicity
are they fallen? For, to argue with Saint Cyprian: Neque enim Deus coccinas,
aut S. Cypr. l. de disciplina, and habitu virginum
purpureas oves fecit; God made not Sheep, from which we take our Wool of a
Purple, or Scarlet colovr; but plain innocent white. And almost, all the
bravery that we see in the world, was brought by idle Art into fashion. But to
return from whence I set forth: All things were made for us, and our end; and
we may see, though they go several ways, how justly they meet all in their
end. We are the only visible creatures, that swarve from the maine end, which
is God. And all things as flames of fire, point always upwards, and like
heavenly Consid. 7.
signs, besides the knowledge of themselves, read us lessons of Gods power.
And although God became a Creator to divulge his power, and that glory might
be given to him, yet God is not proud. For, therefore we are proud, because we
exalt our selves above our selves, and snatch that glory to us, which is due to
God, and pertaining to him by way of royalty. But God cannot lift himself
above himself; Nor take from any that is above him, because he has the first
place. And in good sooth, this Book of creatures, if it may have a name, may be
entitled a large description of the Divine power. Bring me to a Man, or a
Spirit under God, that can create a bramble, a small hair of a man's head, or
an ignorant worm. Besides, these creatures of God are so strange, and
admirable in themselves, and such plain emblems of Gods wisdom, that
although we, who are bred up by little and little to them, and see them first,
when we have not the exercise of reason to judge of them; are by daily use, and
the ignorance of our childhood, brought up to a custom of not considering
them, and their Author, as we ought: yet, if God should create a man in the
ripeness of perfect age, when reason has gained the Scepter, as he did Adam;
doubtless he would be transported with admiration of every thing he saw: so
excellent, and so perfect is every thing in its kind. He would first admire
this light, the first fair creature, and the first thing that would come in
his eyes. Thence he would look up to the Sun. Then quickly spread his
dazzling eyes upon the heavens; and cry, O wonderful! Thence fall again to
earth: where he would be exceedingly taken with the strange sight of Trees,
Birds, Beasts, Fishes; to which a leaf, feather, hair, scale is not wanting:
of fire, and of its active flames, which wonderfully beget one another: of
air, that we take into our bodies, and yet see not: of water, that comes in
drops, and runs away in floods: of all things, of every thing. And most of all,
himself would wonder at himself. His tongue would always be striking the
same stroke; and he would still be saying, Who made these things? Where is he
that made them? I would feign speak with him, and behold how excellent he is
in his being, being so excellent in his wisdom. He would marvel, how a
plant, or flower should grow; and yet not be seen to grow, but to have grown:
a beast go pulling up, and letting down his legs in a strange order: a bird
move, and make circles in the air without falling; a fish swim over-head in
the water without being strangled: how a man shoudl speak, and by a little
noise from his mouth, exactly know the mind of his companion. And all things
which we do not admire, because we have seen them being children, before we
could ask what God was; this new-created man would not pass lightly over, as
Alexanders footman over the sands, without leaving the print of his foot-step;
but would constantly fix, and dwell upon, and would never stir from them,
except in a journey to the Creator, and back again. For infallibly, in their
degrees they are all perfect, and good, all worthy of admiration; and had God
been ignorant, and not known them before he made them, he also had admired
them: but he admireth not himself, because nothing is strange to him. And
moreover, God made all creatures to demonstrate his perfection: all the
perfections that are distributed amongst creatures, being united in God; as the
beams of the Sun, though spread upon all the world, through Sea and Land;
yet, meet all in the Sun, and never was a beam of the Sun divided from the
Sun, or held from returning to go on its journey with the Sun. And
therefore, as we for the weakness of our eyes, can better take a sight of the
Suns fairness and perfection by looking upon it at second hand on the earth;
and perceiving the comfortable effects it works both in air, water and
Earth: so likewise, for the debility of our understanding, we can better study
Divinity in the great volume of creatures, then in God himself, and in his
own original brightness, with which our understanding may not consort as it
is. For in himself he is best known to us, by not being able to be known of
us: of whom we can scarce say any thing, but by way of negation; as denying
those imperfections to be in him, which we find in creatures; at least, in an
imperfect manner, and as they are in them. O our Father which art in Heaven, I
have found thee, even in the creatures here on earth.

Consideration 8.
THe Prophet David begins one of his Psalms, it is the first stroke in the
Music; The Heavens declare the glory of Ps. 19. 1.
God, and the Firmament shows his handy work. And by this he declares unto
us the Divine doctrine, these noble creatures give us, both of the Glory, and
Power of God. It follows: The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul. By which he shows, that Verse. 7.
the knowledge we gather from creatures, is imperfect, and blurred with spots;
because the perfections of earthly things, are always mingled with
imperfections; and are much imperfect, compared with heavenly. And therefore,
the knowledge of God by creatures, did not convert the souls of the old
Philosophers: because they still wanting the sight of the perfections figured,
brought all to the rule of sense, and would not give a necessary step from what
they saw, to the better things, which could not be seen: But the Law of the
Lord is perfect, converting the soul. It is the memorable saying of Saint
Austin, that Socrates, a moral Philosopher, long before Christ, had some
respect to Christ, (...), as being S. Just. Apolog. 1.
in part, known of him. And doubtless, he points at his knowledge of God, in
creatures: but it was in part, he knew him by halfes; and therefore, the
knowledge of half God could not save all Socrates: and if not all Socrates, no
part of Socrates. It is my part so to contemplate the creature, that I do not
stick in it, nor stumble at the Imperfection of it; but ascend from the
creature, toward, or to the Creator. Toward the Creator, as thus: I behold
a worm crawling upon the ground: what says he? I may say, nothing. He says,
as much as I can say. He says: I am a little long thing without any
difference, or beauty of parts: I creep all the day long: I eat dirt, and that
is all my cheer: I bear no Image of God, but only a small print of his
foot-step; and therefore, I know, I was not made for him, but for men, that
follow him in his footsteps: and they look another way, and tread upon me,
and there I dye, and cease to be Gods living creature. O man, use me as thou
please; I am thine: but, let me, I pray thee, be an occasion to thee, of
doing God some little service. Bless him at least, for my creation, and for
thy own more perfect; and thank him heartily, that he would give the little
worm, to creep. Had I a tongue as thou have, let me tell thee, I would bless
him both for thee, and me. Had I been made looking upwards, how happy should I
have been, both here, and hereafter? To God, as thus: when I look upon the
Sun, I will comment upon it, after this manner: The Sun is one; God is one:
The Sun enlightens all the World; God fills all the Word: and all inward
light, is either of Nature, Faith, or Grace; and this is a threefold
excellency, coming only from the blessed Trinity: The Sun warmes
powerfully; God comforts efficaciously: The Sun melts the Snow, hardens the
earth; the one is pure, the other unclean; God works diversely upon the just,
and unjust; melting the one, and in a good sense, hardening the other: The Sun
shines equally, upon all creatures; but some creatures being more clear,
receive his beams more perfectly; God excepts no creature from his protection;
and ordinary providence; but some being apt, and disposed to receive more
beauties, and helps from him: The Sun is not defaced by spreading his beams
upon the mire; God is not debased by stooping to his work in these inferior
things: The Sun is hindered from shining upon us, by mists, and clouds, which
rise from the earth; The clouds of our sins, rising from our earthly
corruptions, keep off the beams of Gods grace from us: The Sun sets, but
rises again; God hides himself a while, but he will not be long absent;
Heaviness Ps. 30. 5.
may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. And would I require a
more exact visible Image of God? He that cannot read, can read in Gods great
book of creatures, if he has eyes; where the hand is fair, and every letter a
great one. Away with these brazen, stony, and wooden Images of God. Be they
silver ones, away with them. The Sun is an Image of God, of Gods own making:
and a more complete Image of God, then the wit, or Art of man can frame; set in
a high place over all the World; and to be seen by all, almost every day:
imitating God also in the spreading, and distribution of his goodness: and yet
no kind of law will give us leave to worship and adore the Sun. O but God
never appeared in that likeness. Shall I worship a Dove, or the Image of a
Dove; because the holy Ghost appeared in the likeness of a Dove? It
exceedingly behooves me to look about me, above me, under me, before me,
behind me, on each side of me, within me. O that I could beat it into my
heart! Every where I shall find the wonderful works of God; wonderful,
because not known; not known, either in themselves, or in that they signify.
It is proper to God, to ordain, not only, that words may signify things; but
also, that one thing may signify another: a thing in the World, a thing in
Heaven, or elsewhere; a thing present, a thing to come. The best of us has but
one life to live, and that being once ended, he shall never see Gods creatures
in this order, and after this fashion again. Is this a World wherein to be
idle; and to complain so often, we know not how to spend our time? I am amazed
at my self, at all people. If God should say to me, Go to the end of the
World, till you can find no more land or sea, that you may be saved; and go
bare foot, and go upon thorns; would I not go? And yet I now stand idle,
when his creatures come home to me, and are with me; wheresoever I am. Lord,
teach my hands, and my heart to work.

Consideration 9.
WE are sent hither, by the way of Father and Mother, being neither wholly
intellectual, as Angels; nor altogether sensible as beasts; but a mixed and
compounded thing, under the name of reasonable creatures. By Reason, we
perceive with a searching eye, what we commonly see, hear, or otherwise
conceive: and in some hard things, not plain to the first view of reason; we
step from confuse to clear, a minus noto ad magis notum, from a less perfect,
to a more exact knowledge, by discourse. The Angels have less occasion of
discourse then we: because their natural knowledge is in it self so
marvellously plain: and moreover, is illustrated with such variety of
supernatural lights; whereof some are constant to them, some come when they
are sent: that it represents many things to them in a fair character, and in
the lump; which we are forced to bring together, and home to our knowledge, by
discourse. The beasts have no ground, fuel, or instrument of discourse. For,
their knowledge is dark; and besides that it is alone, can pass no way but by
the common doors of the senses. And thus, for the defect of sound knowledge,
not knowing the true depth of any thing, they cannot properly infer one thing
from another. Man is placed in the middle Region, being half Angel, and half
Beast, half soul, and half Body: and peeceth up the greater, though not the
better part of his knowledge, by discourse. We then being understanding
creatures, and standing betwixt the nothing that we were, and and the new thing
which we must be: and being always upon the wheel, in a running, transitory,
and passing fortune; and brought into strange company: does not Reason give us
a most high, and most severe charge, to consider (...), the things that are to
come, and the things that are past? to look forward and backward: to gaze on
every side: to search, and enquire with all diligence, whence we came, where we
are, and whither we go. Alas, alas, how little have I pondered these matters
of most high importance! Sure I am blind: and yet, sure I see. Sure I am
reasonable: and yet, sure I am not reasonable. I know not what opinion to
entertain of my self: Lord, enlighten my understanding. Many wonderful
things are before me, behind me, and round about me; and they all concern me
exceedingly: and because I behold some of them every day, and hear others
spoke of as often, I regard them not. I plainly see, that Reason speaks
wisely, when she bids me consider: and I plainly see that I am a fool, and
mad if I do not: and I wonder at my self, that I do not: and yet I do not.
My Understanding is convinced; but my Will stirs not. Da Domine, quod jubes:
and jube S. Aug. in Confess.
quod vis. Lord, give me to effect, to do, to perform what thou command;
and command what thou please.

Dear Reader, read here again, and again, in this book of a poor creature;
that you may the better understand when you read in Gods book of creatures;
and consider that Aristotle speaks sense, when he says: Cognitio minima de
rebus maximis, Arist. l. 1. de Part.
major est, quam cognitio maxima de minimis rebus: The least knowledge of the
greatest things, is greater then the greatest knowledge of things little.

CHAP. VI.
I Spoke but a little before, of going to Heaven bare-foote: and it is my ownc
case. For now I am cut, and carved into a Friar. I am going a long journey, in
long coats, without a shirt to my back. I believe this was not Christ's
meaning, when he exhorted his Disciples, to be like the little child, which
he set in the midst of them. In this they are not unlike the Crosse-bearers in
Spain, who in their Processions, carry every man a Cross upon his shoulders,
and having took up their Cross, follow Christ. The Devil had wrought a
parcel of the old Monks into this fallacy, whom Cassianus much blames.
(Origin had a fault Joan Cassian. Collat. 8. cap.
too.) In my heart, I am of opinion, that a great and massy part of them, in
their Processions, wherein they whip themselves, are mere counterfeits. For,
it is their use in Spain, before they go to it, to desire their friends to
rub and chafe their backs thoroughly, with a woollen cloth: and the blood
being stirred, will afterward come from them in their lashing of themselves,
with little pain. Some will pause at certain places, and there whip themselves
with more severity. But what places are these, think you? Under their
mistresses windows; and they bear marks on their outward garments by which,
upon agreement, they are known of them. And I saw one of the greatest Peers of
the Realm, who going in a Procession with these Disciplinants, because their
faces are covered; went along whipping himself in state, and setting up one
arm in a circle to his side, as Gallants use to do; that he might be known
from all the rest. But I forget. I am in Spain, and my business lies at
Doway. I leave much plenty of matter behind me in all places, that I cannot
write, but I am pulled every way. Here I continued but a short while. For,
besides that I perceived the Friars, for the most part, to be most unhew'd, and
silly people: their actions were as vain, as they silly. Every night, being
met by the fire side, one of them played upon a kind of a small fidle, and the
rest danced in their long coats, and their wooden shoes, with their legs and
feet naked: which did not so well become those, that in the streets would not
be seen to look awry, or smile. And yet the Friars in England are as great
Gallants, as the best of them. And in their serious actions, they are as vain.
For, to exercise my patience, they commanded me to ride in the sight of them
all, as coated children do upon a staff: And another Friar as big as my
self, was commanded to run by my side, armed with a wand, and whip his
Worships horse for better speed. Is this the majesty of recollected and
christian practice? Another time they forced me in a general meeting, to sing
them a song; it was a vain one, though not a vile one: and afterward, to
spend some time in catching Spiders. But the top of all was: They set me one
day upon a high seat, like a Throne; and made me a little Pope for the time:
And the Friars came kneeling, and creeping before me; and after many
ceremonious expressions of humility, kissed my bare feet. They are as filthily
nasty, as foolishly vain. For, every Friday in the afternoon, the Bell rings,
and calls them together into a chamber, where a great fire is made. Here they
put off their inward coats; and two of them standing by the chimney, at each
corner one, hold the coat at length, and with white wands, beat off the Lyce
into the fire; which then fall like a shower. And they delight so much in this
abomination of nature; that if a man give a Friar notice of a Louse upon his
garment; he will thence take the poor benumbed creature within doors, into
his bosom; and this he does, because Saint Francis did so. Surely Christ never
gave way to this utter abjection of a man, from a man, and from the decent
inclinations of nature, Gods good gift, to a sordid beast. And these busy
vermin are doubtless a great hinderance to the quietness of their prayers,
and other devotions; and make them shrug, and attend to the Lyce, when both
their thoughts and bodies should wait upon God. But the Lyce were not the only
biters in the Friery. And here my Reader shall understand, what religious
hearts, these religious persons, that compose the monster of Rome, bear one
toward another. For, the Monk, by whom I was directed in the Monastery, is
now in the Friery another man; and confessed to be all knit together of craft,
and a great student in the art of policy, and overreaching. And the Jesuits
had their load too; as may appear by this story, which a superior amongst the
Friars, told me. A certain Friar of their coat, and company, coming to
speak with a Jesuit at his chamber in London, found him earnest in his study,
behind a curtain. After the discussion of their business, the Jesuit stepped
hastily down, to give order concerning the entertainment of his friend. And in
the interim, the Friar looked behind the the curtain, and found before his
chair, a written book. The title of the Chapter, which then lay open, was: By
what motives to stir a widow, (or other free person) to give her estate into
the hands of the Church: and how afterward, to dispose of her. The Friar, by
whom I was informed, named to me a principal man of his Order, who then had
one of these books lying by him. Whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees
practiced, I do not read that they commended the art of devouring widows
houses, to writing; for the information of their posterity. The fortune of the
book, as it was related to me, is this: The Jesuits dare not print it, lest it
should at any time slip besides their hands into the world. And the Jesuits
that are sober natured, and seriously given, are never suffered to hear of
this book: it is only permitted to practical men, and at such a time after
their entrance into the Order, but not before. I had formerly heard of this
book; and that it was full of damnable conveyances. My Reader may see with
half an eye, that I relate things briefly, and plainly; and that I build
upon the testimonies, which they give one of another; being a sure way. The
learning of books, plowes not half so deep. Another Friar struck both the
Jesuits, and the Monks, in one turning of his tongue, with these words: The
Jesuits are the daily plotters, and actours of businesses, which we can never
answer: And were not the Monks ashamed to give out, the other day; that a mad
man of their Order wrought miracles? These Friars have a slight, by which,
they confirm their young ones. They have printed under a picture of Saint
Francis: Saint Francis obtained of God by his prayers, that whosoever dies in
his Order, and has the benefit of confession, shall infallibly go to Heaven.
The Monks have made the like promise under the picture of Saint Benet. But let
them unloose this knot without cutting it. If their confession come from a
penitent heart, it will bring them alone to Heaven, in the opinion of the
Romanists: if it come not from such a bruised heart, Heaven is denied to it, by
all their Doctors. The Jesuits are a little more solid. They have a picture,
wherein are printed at large, the Prophecies of many Jewish Rabbines;
foretelling, that God would send a religious and learned company of men into
the World, in the decaying and old age of it, (as I imagine) for the elects
sake. Now I began to turn my thoughts a seeking again, because I had not yet
found what I looked for. And therefore I pretended the want of health; and loath
to continue a begging Friar, upon these terms, freely begged leave to depart.

CHAP. VII.
I Was now even cloyed, and surfeited with these vanities. And I meditated upon
a conversion to the Church of England. But although I staggered, having drunk
deep of the poisoned Cups of Babylon: yet my whole heart was never converted:
neither did I ever apply my self with an open profession, to the Church of
England, before this happy time. And still my heart gaped for more knowledge of
their ways. Wherefore I was commended to an uncloister'd Monk in Paris, with
whom I lived a while as a stranger; and enjoyed the great benefit of a fair
Library. This Monk communicated with the Church of Rome, but inclined very much
to the Greek Church. Yet his two Monks (for they were all his family) inclined
every way as they went, being seldom sober. In Paris I found the fault of
Doway: that many scholars lived by theft; and that men threw themselves into
danger of their lives, who stirred abroad in the black of night, as well near
the Colleges, as elsewhere. These are not good orders of Universities: neither
is this a promising, and hopeful education of Priests. In this Town I lay at
watch for a better occasion. You shall have more hereafter. Now only one
farewell to the Friars: They have many Rules of a stange outlandish nature,
and condition. He that will be ruled by reason, may judge of this Rule. A Friar
is licensed by his Rule, to touch and receive money with his Garment, his
sleeve, or the lappet of his coat, but not with his hand. He is utterly forbid
to touch it with any part of his flesh. I see there may be an equivocation
committed, as well in manners, as in words. And I saw this Rule kept by a
Friar, who received a French crown into a paper. In the defiance of this, and
all other Rules of the like profession, I give to him, who is pleased to take
with his bare hand, and heart; Rules directory in a Christian life, and
founded, either in themselves, or in their grounds, upon the received
principles of Gods holy word.

Rule 1.
REmember always that God is always with you, about you, in you, and in every
part of you, and of all his creatures: and that when you go from one place to
another; you leave God behind you, and yet he goes with you, and yet, you
find him where you come, because he was there before you came. And that,
although not always the same, yet some Angels, and Devils are always by you,
watching over you, and carefully observing your behavior; yea, and oftentimes
beholding your heart in outward actions. And let your thoughts and tongue be
always running, and repeating: Shall I commit an act of high treason against
so great a King; so just and severe a Judge; so good, so pure a God; and in his
presence? It is he, whom Joseph meant, when he said: How can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? How sweet is God, that sends his first
and most perfect creatures, his holy Angels, down from Heaven; with an
injunction of stooping, and attending to the mean, and homely affairs of men?
The Angels are daily conversant with us; and yet, are never discharged from the
glorious vision of God, to whom they are united, being present with them,
wheresoever they are: such a precious mixture, and composition of good things,
ought the life of man to be; it must be compounded of holy practice, and
heavenly contemplation. The Devil stands ready to dash out our brains; to
destroy the body, and to devour the soul; to disturb the peace of nature, to
confound the elements; to mingle Heaven and Earth; to trouble all: wishing
earnestly, and earnestly entreating, that God would turn away his mild face,
his gentle eyes, and say, Go my Executioner, revenge my cause upon the World.
And yet God will not. O the delicacie of the Divine sweetness! Learn the
nature of the Devil. In one thing especially, the fall of the Angels, was like
the fall of man. For, as man was more weakened by his fall, in his will, and
readiness to do good; then in his understanding, and knowledge of good: so
the Devil is far more blunted in his will, then blinded in his
understanding. As for his natural knowledge, it is rather dazzled, then
darkened. And by this notable sign, you may know, that his will is most
malignant. For, although it is plain to him, that for every temptation he
stirs up in man; the burden of punishment shall be laid presently, heap
after heap upon his shoulders; and though he knows exactly how many strong
ties he breaks by offending, perceives more thoroughly the quality of the
offense, and sees with a more clear eye the greatness of the Divine majesty
offended; yet, still the perverseness, and faction of his will carries him on
through all, to mischief. And if the Devil remains yet, so perfect in the
intellectual part, by knowledge; sans doubt he knows, and is versed in all
the possible ways how to invade us; which way our inclinations lean, which
side is most weak; and how he may plant his engine, with return of most profit
to his own cause; and what will best follow the fashion of our fancy. The
enemy which we see before us, in his own, and known shape, sense teaches us
to fear; and consequently, to withstand, or prevent him. But the Devil we
fear the less, because we see him not; because he has the art to go
invisible. Thomas Aquinas is of opinion, that every man being always
accompanied with a good Angel, and a bad one; some by reason of the foul
enormity of their sins, and desertion of God, who never forsakes, before he
is forsaken, and left alone himself; may be forsaken for a while, or totally,
by their good Angel. But I dare say that never any man was forsaken by his bad
Angel, the Devil. If one of us were but a little while haunted with a Ghost,
how he would fear, and tremble? every one of us is haunted continually with a
Devil; and yet, we fear not, because we do not see him. No man goes, but
the Devil goes with him: no man stays, but the Devil stays with him: no
man sleeps, (here his action changes) but the Devil waketh by him. And as he
is always with us, so he is also always so vigilant about us; that although
he does not know the thoughts of the heart in the heart, and cannot read them
in that book of Characters; yet he does oftentimes gather what they are by the
language of outward signs; and also by outward signs, forestall, and know,
even future occurrences, depending upon the will of man. He is a Tempter by his
profession. God also may be said to tempt us: but how? by scattering rubbs in
our way to make virtue more bold, and more laborious. What made all the
Conquerours famous, but because they conquered what was not easily conquered?
But the Devil tempts with a direct intention to sin. God tempts with a
strong desire of good, and of our salvation: the Devil, with a furious desire
of evil, and of our damnation. God tempts us not above our strength: the
Devil would, if God would suffer him. And as the Roman Conqueror, the Queen
having escaped, carried her image in triumph: So, because he cannot trample
upon God, who threw him down from Heaven; he labors to revenge himself upon
his Image. Suspect therefore all his proceedings. Facilius illicita Tert. de
cultu foeminarum.
timebit, qui licita verebitur, says Tertullian. He will more easily fear
unlawful things, who will be afraid, even of things lawful. Let this joy thy
heart: Nothing can happen, or stir, or be in the world, except sin, without
Gods approbation; nor yet that, without his permission. Please God, and you
have him your friend, that holds all chances, all stirrings, and the being of
all things, fast in his hands. And lastly, beg nothing of man, before you
first beg it of God.

Rule 2.
DIsingage your self from the world, (mistake me not) from the love of it. Old
Authors observe, that the Apostles were all clad outwardly, not with Friars
coats, but with mantles. And the mantle is a loose garment which hangs to a
man, but by a loope. If it prove troublesome, if it hinders in your journey;
put your finger to the loope, and the mantle falls away. The Apostles taught,
even by their garments: and the mantles served to demonstrate their neglect of
worldly things; and to give evidence by what tenure they held them. If riches
abound, set not your heart upon them; says he, that was both Prince and
Prophet. If they creep upon you, keep the infection from your heart; if they
break in upon the heart, they are mortal. Except a man shall renounce all
which Luke 14. 33.
he possesses, he cannot be my Disciple, says the Prince of Prophets. Then, O
rich man, either presently renounce all which thou possessest, or else turn
outlaw, and forbear to think thy self the Disciple of Christ. All. A term
of universality shuts the door against every particular. This is heavy news:
I fear the messenger will be ill paid. It is not. My yoke is easy, and my
burden Matthew. 11. 30.
is light, says he, under whose yoke we labor: Renounce the will and
affection to riches, and thou have fulfilled the Law. The affection of a ragged
poor creature, may be more closely tide to an old house, and a pewter dish;
then the will of a great person to a Palace, and the revenewes of a Prince. And
therefore, our Savior speaks plainly, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. For, poverty Matthew. 5. 3.
of spirit, even rich may have in a rich manner. And because they are poor
upon earth, they shall be rich in Heaven: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
And the Kingdom of Heaven is not promised to any kind of poverty, but the
poverty of spirit. And to that it is promised wheresoever God finds it. It is
easier for a Ca^el to go through Mat. 19. 24
the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God;
that is, for a rich man, whose love and affection, sit brooding upon his
riches. Some ancient expositors tell us upon this place, that there was in
Jerusalem, a little gate, which, for its extraordinary straitness, was called
the Needle; the passage through it, being accordingly named, the Needles eye:
and that, when the Camels came laden to this gate, their packs were taken off.
These Authors insinuating, that a rich man cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, before he has laid aside his burden, his pack of riches. He must be
master of them, and so manage them, that they are not a burden to him; he must
possess them, as if he possessed them not. And these Authors construe it, It
is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of the Needle, etc. With which
exposition, that other saying of Christ suiteth, Strait is the gate, and narrow
is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. Matthew. 7. 14
Thus it is profitable, for the rich man to be rich, if his heart stand off
from his riches; because he has a fair opportunity, and more occasion to
exercise charity, then the poor man: as likewise, it is gainefull for the
poor man, to be a poor man; if he take it as a ground of content, obedience,
and humility: For otherwise, God is no niggard of his gifts. Indeed, perfection
must sell all, and give it to the poor: all that which a man loves vainly:
and if all to the poor, part to himself; being poor, when all is sold. The
World is a dunghill, covered with Snow; The Sun shines, the Snow melts, and
the dunghill appears. It shines like a Glow-worme, but it warmes not.
Millions of Angels have fallen from God: their places are void: they are places
in the Court, places of great gain and honor. We are brought upon a stage, a
Theater of trial: He that acts the part of an honest man, shall have a
place. Yet, forgetting by what noble person; and for what honorable end we
were sent hither: we lick the honey, as John Damascen speaks, and do not
look Jo. Dam. in vit. Barl. and Ios.
down upon the Dragon, gaping to devour us. One rides hallowing after the
hounds: another quarrelleth with the poor for money to buy a purchase: A third
earnestly asks security for eight in the hundred. But where is one that duly
considers he was made to supply the most honorable place of an Angel? This
World is via, the way; Heaven, patria, the Country. Is he not an idle
passenger that gives himself over to delight in those things which occur in
his journey; and with which he cannot stay? or that marries his heart to a
painted Inn; from which in the break of day, his occasions call him? We
cannot labor so vehemently to gain the goods, and friendship of the world,
but with distrust of Gods providence. We do not remember him that said, Seek
ye Matthew. 6. 33.
first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you. We must first by Gods help, seek God and his righteousness;
and then, by the help of God and his righteousness, seek the reward of
righteousness, the Kingdom of God; and all these things, these, cum
contemptu, will follow; as being of the train, and servants to the King, and
Kingdom.

Rule 3.
BEware always of a warm, and stirring piece of deceit, called the flesh. An
enemy out of doors, may stand before he enter, till he is benumbed in every
joint with cold: And if he strive for entrance, perhaps he may be took in the
trespass. But the flesh is always at home with us, fed by us, clothed by us;
is almost all the visible part of our selves. We daily feed, and cloth our
deadly enemy; and every man is a malicious enemy to himself: man consists of
the flesh and spirit: and the flesh warreth against the spirit: there is a
civil sedition in this little Commonwealth of man. Consider therefore, that
as in dried dirt, hogs (in which only, our Lord suffered the Devil to enter)
can find no soft place for their wallowing: So neither can the Devil keep his
residence, and revels in a body dried with fasting. Parcus cibus, and venture
esuriens, tridianis jejuniis praefertur, says Saint Hierom, S. Hier. ep. ad
Furiam.
A sparing diet, and a hungry belly is preferred before a fast of three days.
And afterward he compares extraordinary fasting with a violent shoure,
destroying the fields. We shall do well, and wisely to keep the rebell-flesh
to a diet; to keep it low, and lean. For, the gate of Heaven is so narrow,
that good Saint Bartholmew was compelled to leave his skin behind him in the
passage: And by drawing its body through a narrow circle, the Serpent puts
off its old skin, and becomes young again. Alexander having but an outward
enemy to buckle with, slept always in the field, holding a silver ball in his
hand: that if sleep should fully seize him, the ball dropping into a sounding
vessel, might restore him again to his senses. And this he took by
observation, from the watchful nature of the Crane; being the experience of
his travels. For, the Crane, whose turn it is to watch out the night; taking
up one of his legs, and a stone in it, preventeth sound sleeping, with
attending to the danger of a sound, by the fall of the stone. The more near
the enemy is to us, the more carefully we ought to watch; and nothing can be
more near to us, then we to our selves. It is not required, that if thy eye
shall offend thee, thou shall presently pluck it out and cast it from thee. And
therefore Tertullian comparing the perfect, and heroical virtues of
Christians, with the cleaner acts of the most clean amongst the Heathens,
their prime Philosophers: and accusing Democritus for pulling out his eyes,
because he could not see a woman without desiring, what not being obtained,
moved him to grieve, says: At Christianus salvis Tett. in Appologetico, cap.
46.
oculis faeminam videt, animo adversus libidinem caecus est: but a Christian
sees a woman, and yet preserves his eyes; his heart is blind to lust.
Rectify the soul, and regulate the acts which guide the sense. And if the
sense be dangerously vain, and offensive; away with it: Use it not in those
acts, in which the danger lurketh. Be a rigorous keeper of David's covenant
with his eyes. For, amongst all the sins which man commits, we may better
dally, and play with any, then with the sin of the flesh, and the occasions
of it; one temptation comes so close upon another, and every one persuades
so prettily, flesh taking to flesh. The reason of this exposition is, because,
when the eye is not used in dealing with vain objects, it is pulled out, and
cast away from them, though not from him that ownes it. And the literal sense
of holy Scripture is always the meaning of the holy Ghost; but only when
Scripture seemingly jarres with it self. This resolution of shutting the
windows, will in the execution, keep out the vain love of woman, whom we ought
not vainly to love. Did I say love? Give me my word again. It cannot be true
love, (...), as Dionys. speaks, (...), but the Idol Dion. Areop. c. 4. de
divin. nom.
of love, or rather, a falling from true love. Behold the baseness of it in
Holophernes, that when he conquered others, could not make peace at home, and
conquer himself; but, because he suffered himself to be conquered, God
suffered him to be conquered. Sandalia rapuerunt oculos ejus, the Sandals Iud.
16. 9.
of Judith snatched away his eyes; so base, and such a creeping creature is
lust; and they did not take away his eyes gently, but caught them with a
snatch; the temptations of lust are very quick at their work; they live
altogether by catching and snatching. The French History has one, who Reymond
Lullius.
being full of vain affection to a virtuous Lady, she to cure his Fever,
uncovered one of her breasts, and there showed him a Canker, which had eaten
deep into her body, and was extremely hideous to the sight: adding these
words; See vain man what thou have loved. He recovering himself from the
fall, began to lament grievously, how vain he had been in loving that which
he did not perfectly know. All fond people would speak in the same phrase, if
the cloud hanging before their eyes, were dispersed. What amongst beasts, is
more fierce then a Lion? And yet a Lion is a Lamb in respect of a wicked woman.
What is more cruel then a Dragon? And yet a Vide Chry. homil. 15. in Matthew.
tom. 2.
wicked woman is more a Dragon, then the Dragon it self. What is more
devouring then a Whale? And yet a Whale is not a Whale, compared with a wicked
woman. Many Lions spared innocent Daniel in the Den; and yet one Jezabel
devoured holy Naboth. The Dragons, and all the great army of poisonous beasts,
feared S. John Baptist in the the Wilderness: But Herodias and her dancing
daughter cut off his blessed head at a blow; served it up to Herod's table, and
buried it in his Palace; that if it should talk again, as one writes;
again, being at hand, it might be quickly brought to the Axe. The whale kept
Jonas safe and secure in his belly: But Dalilah betrayed Sampson into the hands
of those that bored his eyes out. I praise the chaste, and modest woman. For it
is the nature of contraries, that the one is as good, as the other bad. Go
fond man, and visit all the brave women of the last age, the great gallants of
the Court, and City: court them in their graves: and consider with what a
little handful of bones the vain people of those times were so exceedingly
taken: what painted Images of dirt they sighed for: about what trifles of flesh
and blood they vainly spent their dearest hours; and for what lumps of
carrion, their weak heads so often aked. The Devil striveth to keep our love
at work upon vain things; because, by love only, we are united to Heaven.

Rule 4.
Bear a strong hand over your passions. They are mutinous subjects, and live
within the walls. Man is composed of four contrary elements. But they came to
this composition upon composition, upon fair terms of agreement. But, the
passions stand yet in the full force of passions. There are two great
contraries, in matters pertaining to morality; good and evil. The one we
naturally desire to obtain; to avoid the other. Good, considered within the
compass of its own nature, kindles love, the prime, and master-passion. If it
be, on seem absent, it stirs a desire of it self. If we desire it, and
conceive it possible, hope begins to grow big and we follow it. If impossible,
despair starts up, and if the good was great and good, plays the madman. But
when we fully enjoy it, joy smileth in us. On the other side, if we make a
discovery of evil, we hate it. If it be absent, we put wings to our feet, and
fly from it. If it show it self as inevitable, we fear it. But if it arrest
us, being present; we are chilled with grief. And then, anger, loves soldier
is at hand; ready to strike at every turn, and to turn all into a tumult. And
anger fights on both sides; for, we are angry with the hindrances, which
occur in our pursuit of the thing we love. We love before we hate, because
we hate nothing, but as opposite to a thing we love. But here is the block of
danger: when good appears in the form of evil, and evil in the shape of
good; or when one is apprehended as the other; no man loving evil, but gilded
with a pretense of good. For then we love evil, hate good; desire evil, fly
from good; hope for evil, fear good; rejoice in the purchasing of evil,
grieve in the achievement of good. Every thing runs a most unnatural, and
disordinate course: and all the little world of man is disturbed. (...) Solon
apud Phil. Judaeum.
, said the grave Solon; The Sea falls, rises, beats against the rocks, and is
grievously troubled with the winds: but if it be not angered with any loud
breath, or blustering; it is very smooth, plain, and gentle. When the passions
are subject to Reason, and Grace; the mind of man is the Commonwealth of
Plato, an even, and well-governed State. But if one wheel be out of order, the
rest stand waiting for little purpose: all the passions will adhere to the
passion then predominant. It is recorded, that Semiramis was an humble
Petitioner to the great King of the Assyrians, whose concubine she was; Aelian
de var. hist. l 7.
that she might take upon her the government of Asia, and command the Kings
servants, but for the transitory space of five days. It was granted. She came
forth adorned with a Princely robe: and her first words were (O wretch!) Go,
take the King, kill him. And by one venturous step, she climbed to a settled
state of Imperial government. Semiramis represents passion. Suffer it to
enter into your house, and it will keep possession; give it once the upper
hand, and it will claim the course of gift, as a privilege. A passion is like
fire which is pliable to good uses, while we keep it in the place, and office
of a necessary instrument: but if it pass without a guide, it will bring us to
an ill pass; the passion will turn to action, and make a great spoil of all
things. In all the uproare of passion, keep the mind calm. Yea, when anger
begins to inflame you, thrust off the passion by maine strength, and compose
your self in a sweet pleasantnes of mind, and face. And say inwardly: Sweet
God, how mild art thou, that sit quietly in Heaven, when thou see thy
divine Majesty most grievously abused here on earth? God does not require of
you to become Stoics, to pull up passion by the root, and to remain
unsensible. For, passions do give an edge to virtue, and are the supporters of
it. God desires only, that in anger, Reason should direct, and carry us
through the crowd: And that anger should stay in his own home, in the
inferior part of the soul, and not break in upon the mind; and that in all
the stirring, Reason should have her principal motion. For if passion be
first, she will blind Reason; and then draw her into her faction; change
opinion, alter judgment, work strangely upon the apprehension, turn the
discourse, and make another man. And as anger, so love, desire, joy, fear,
grief, and the rest; are all to be wisely tempered.

Rule 5.
KNow, that when any thing is well, and piously said, or done in your presence;
God speaks to you. And that when you see or hear of the miseries of other
people, God presents them to your eyes or ears, as warnings to you, and as
copious Theames of his praise. And that when your faults are objected against
you, even by furious and angry persons; the objection comes by way of
permission from God; intending your benefit. And that (which is more strange)
God many times speaks to you by your self: as when you instruct others. Yea,
by dumb, and unsensible creatures. And therefore hear diligently what they
say: which you may fitly do, in this manner. When you see a Lion, look up to
the preserver, the Lion of the tribe of Judah: and down to the destroyer, the
roaring Lion, with an earnest, and urging desire to follow the one, and to fly
from the other. And think of the royal mercy, and most noble sweetness of
God, couched under the terror of his Majesty: of which they plentifully share,
even when his justice rides in triumph, that lie prostrate before him, by
humility. When you see a Bear, cast your inward eye upon the Bears which
devoured the undutifull children, because their parents had not performed the
very first, and most common office of Bears, and licked their young into
form. Seeing a Hog, look down upon the prodigal child, (a very child) lying
all along by the trough, amongst his fellow swine: and take into your mind,
the base abjection of a sinner, wallowing in the filth, and mire of his own
lust, and carnal desires. When you hear a Cock, the bird of day, and usher
of the morning, crow: take Saint Peter by the hand, and go out or in, and
weep bitterly. When you see a bird, say in the private study of your heart; It
is God that gives meat pullis corvorum invocantibus eum, to the young of the
crew, calling upon him; feeding the little gaping Crows, forsaken of their
mother, as borne white, and which therefore she does not think to be of her
color, with the dew of Heaven. When you see a stirring, and painful Ant; go
sluggard to the Ant, and learn spiritual husbandry. When you see a Lilly,
think of him, who is the Lilly of the valleys; and presently infer that Gods
grace is not confined to a narrow circle, and tide to a certain sort of
persons, but open to all suppliants; and if it grows any where chiefly, its
most usual place is in the Valleys. Seeing all this fair wardrobe, and
furniture of creatures; say heartily: What will not he give us in our Country
who heapeth upon us such plenty in our banishment? How fair are the rooms of
Heaven within, if the outward parts are so gay, and so richly decked with
stars? We are removed a great way from Heaven, and are very nigh to Hell: we
play, as it were upon the tyles, on the top of the house: and if here we are
blessed, sure if we land in Heaven, we shall make the land Sea; and swim in
blessedness. If a hair does not perish from our head, the whole man shall be
kept as a choice piece. Times ergo ne pereas, says Saint Austin, to a
timorous, and diffident S. Aug. hom. 14. tom. 10.
person, cujus capillus non peribit? Si sic tua custodiantur superflua, in
quanta seeuritate est anima tua? Non perit capillus, quem, cum tondetur, non
sentis, and peribit anima, per quam sentis? Do you fear therefore, lest you
should perish, one of whose hairs shall not perish? If your superfluous things
are kept so warily, in what a sweet security is your soul? Your hair
perishes not, which being cut off when you are pold, you feel not what has
passed; and shall your soul perish, by which you feel? When you take a staff
in your hand, say: Thy rod, and thy staff, they comfort me: the one serving
for Psalm. 23. 4.
correction, the other for direction. Think at the sight of Bread upon your
Table; Through how many hands, and fortunes has God brought this good Bread
safe to me? It was Corn, then sowed, it dyed, lived again, grew, was green;
washed with the rain, brushed with the wind; dried with the Sun; then turned
color; it lay abroad many a cold night, was reaped, threshed, winnowed, ground
into meal, and bolted; kneaded, and made into very good Bread, and baked; and
all for me a sinner. Such is the state of a righteous man. And when thou art in
company, others wandering with other discourses, let thy reason travel by it
self, and make strange discoveries in the view of some one, standing by thee:
O man, who framed that fair Globe of thy head, the stupendous fountain of
all thy senses? Who decked thy head with hair, and a face wherein all parts
conspire and meet in a beautiful proportion; moving love and admiration? Who
drew a fair skin over thy flesh? Who provided for every sense its proper
object? delightful spectacles for the eyes; pleasant sounds for the ears;
flowers for the smelling faculty; dainties for the taste; and soft things to
please the touching power? Who made the little bals of the eyes, that rich and
curious piece of work, to keep watch, and sentinel for the safety of the
body; and spread curtains over them, to shut out every shadow, and show of
danger? The eyes are little, but see great things. Who formed the ears to be
the faithful scouts of the soul; and to lie out and lissen, on both sides of
the fort? Who taught the tongue to speak so perfectly, that all speech can
never sufficiently express the excellency of speaking? Who gave a law to the
stomach to send nourishment to every part in a measure fit for the part, to
which it comes? Who ranked the bones in order? Who gave strength to the
sinews, and confined the wandering blood to the veins? Who fitted the arms
and hands for outward action? Who shaped the feet to uphold the frame, and
maintain it with the face, looking toward our Country? He grows upwards
toward Heaven; and he is going thither; while earth lies under his feet. God
bless him in his journey. O the wisdom of him that sits upon the Throne in
Heaven! I will furnish you farther in this kind, afterward.

Rule 6.
EXercise these Acts as devotion, of occasion shall call.

An Act of Faith.
Coming into the world, as into a strange Country, and finding people for the
most part to believe, as their Country and friends believe, and as other vain
ties hold them: I do shake off all these idle obligations; and in imitation of
the Primitive Church, and of all holy men in succeeding Ages; I firmly believe
that the Scripture is the word of God; and that all things revealed in it are
true. And I believe, that as God made the world for himself, and his glory:
So, and more eminently he directs his Church to himself, and his glory. That
is therefore the pure Church of Christ, which casts all the glory upon God;
which leans, and relieth wholly upon the most precious merits and passion of
Christ; which cries to God only for help; which is thoroughly obedient for
Gods sake to lawful authority, be it amongst Heathens; which does not permit
and countenance sin, by which only God is dishonored. And she cannot be the
clean spouse of Christ, which God and his Truth being infallible, performs
the most high and most reverend Acts of Religion upon uncertainties. As,
prays absolutely for a soul turned out of the body, without a certain
knowledge of her being a determinate friend, or enemy of God. And worshipeth
that with the worship of God, for God; which, if the Priest be deficient in his
intention, or defective in his orders; is, in her own opinion, a creature. And
she is not the fair spouse which has lost her attractive beauty, and which
all Jews and Infidels hate and abhor; justly moved at least, with a
notorious show of Idolatry. And therefore I believe that the Church of England
is the Spouse of Christ, as being free from these blemishes, and conformable to
Scripture. And in the defense of this Faith, I stand ready to give up my sweet
life, and dearest blood. And if I die suddenly, to this Faith I commend the
state of my eternity.

An Act of hope in God.
I do hope in God, because he is infinitely full of goodness; and is like a
nurse which suffers pain in her breasts, till she be eased of her milk:
because he is most able, and most willing to help me: because he has sealed
his love with most unbreakable promises: and because he knows the manifold
changes, and chances of the world, the particular hour of my death, and the
general day of judgment; in all which, I hope greatly, this good and great
God will deliver me.

An Act of the love of God.
I, such a one, in perfect health and memory; able yet to revell in the world;
to enjoy wealth and pleasure; to sacrifice my body and soul to sensuality; do
contemn, and lay under my feet, all: (go behind me Satan, sworn enemy of
Mankind) and love God purely for himself. For, put the case he had not framed
this world, or been the prime cause of any creature in it: put the case he
had never been the Author of any blessing to me: yet excellency and
perfection of themselves are worthy of love and duty: and as the object of the
understanding is truth, so the object of the will is goodness; and therefore
my will shall cheerfully run with a full career, to the love of it. Saint
Austin S. Aug. hom. 38.
has taught me: Qui amicum propter commodum quodlibet amat, non amicum
convincitur amare, sed commodum: He that loves his friend for the profit he
reapes by him; is easily convinced, not to love his friend, but the profit.
Wherefore, although I should see in the Prophetical book of the divine
Prescience my self not well using the divine helps, not rightly employing the
talents commended to my charge, and to be damned for ever; yet still I would
love him, (away ill thoughts, touch me not) I would: insomuch, that if it were
possible, I would even compound, and make to meet hands, the love of God, and
damnation. For, although I were to be damned, yet God could not be in the
fault; and though I should be exceedingly miserable by damnation; he would yet
remain infinitely good, and great by glory: and though I did not partake so
plentifully of his goodness; yet, many others would. O Lord I love thee so
truly, that if I could possibly add to thy perfection, I freely would, but
because I cannot, I am heartily glad, and love thee again, because thou art so
good and perfect, that thou can not be any way more perfect, or good, either
to thy self or in thy self. And I most humbly desire to enjoy thee, that thy
glory may shine in me; and that I may love thee for ever and ever. It grieves
me to think, that if I should fail of thee in my death; I should be deprived
in Hell, not only of thee, but also of the love of thee.

Note pray, that other virtues, either dispose us in a pious way toward our
neighbor, as justice; or do order the things which are ours, and in us, as
many moral virtues; or they look upon those things which appertain to God,
as Religion; or they direct us to God himself, but according only to one
Attribute, or peculiar perfection: As the virtue of Faith gives us to believe
the divine authority, revealing to us Gods holy truth: Hope to cast Anchor upon
his help, and promises. But with charity, or the love of God, we fasten upon
all God, with respect to all his perfections: we love his mercy, justice,
power, wisdom, infinity, immensity, eternity. And faith, hope, patience,
temperance, and other virtues, leaving us at the gate of Heaven, charity enters
with us, and stays in us for ever.

An Act of Humility.
O Lord, if others had been stored with the diverse helps, the inspirations,
the good examples, the good counsel, the many loud calls from without, and yet,
from thee; which I have had: they would have been exceedingly more quick,
more stirring in thy service. Many Acts which I have thought virtues in me,
were only deeds of my nature and complexion. My nature is bespotted with many
foolish humors: I am unworthy dust and ashes, and infinitely more unworthy
then dust and ashes. A Sinner. I am not worthy to call thee Father, or to
depend in any kind of thee, to live, or to be. The foul Toade, thy fair
creature, is far more beautiful then I, a Sinner-Toade. Verily, if men did
know of me, what thou know, or what I know of my self; I should be the
rebuke, and abomination of all the world.

An Act of resignation to the will of God.
Whither shall I fly, but to thee, O Lord, the rich storehouse of all true
comfort? The cross which seems to me so bitter, came from thy sweet will.
Can I be angry with thy good providence? Is it not very good reason, that thy
royal will should be done in earth, as it is in heaven? And though perhaps it
was not thy direct, and resolute will that all my crosses should in this manner
have rushed upon me; yet the stroke of the cross being given, it is thy direct
intention, that I should bear it patiently. I do therefore, with a most
willing hand, and heart, take Gaul and Vinegar, delivered by thy sweet hands.
I do kiss, and embrace both the Giver, and the gift. And moreover, give up my
self, and all that I have, to the disposition of thy most sacred will: health,
wealth, that which I best love here; and liberty, and life, and all, are ready
when thou call. Crosses are good signs. For the more I suffer now, the
greater, I hope, shall be my glory. And therefore to thee be the glory.

An Act of content.
I am fully, and absolutely contented, O Lord, with thy glory. And it is the
head of all my comforts, that thou art God, and do reign over us. And I am
very well contented with the sweet condition, in which thy wisdom has placed
me. Thou art wisdom it self, and other wisdom, is not wisdom, but as
conformable to thy wisdom. And I do most humbly yield up my self, to comply
with the rank and quality in which I am by thy royal appointment. And I
remain indifferent, to have or to want, to be sick, or in health, to dye, or
to live. As thou please, so be it. And if I could learn thy farther and
utmost pleasure, I would go through the world to effect it; though I should
labor to death, in the performance.

An Act of the fear of God.
O Lord, I fear thee, because as thou have made me of nothing; so, thou can
reduce me to nothing, in one turn of an instant. Which perhaps, would be a
greater loss of my self, then to be lost in Hell. Because then I should not
be thy creature; I should have no being, no dependence of thee; but should be
lost branches, tree, root and all. It had been better for Judas that he had
never been borne; because then he should never have tasted of life, or being.
But when he was Judas; which was better for him, not to be, or to be miserable;
thou only know. I fear thee, because as thou art infinitely merciful; so,
thy justice is infinite. And because, finne being but a temporal thing,
quickly committed, and past over; and sometimes as soon almost forgot, as
committed, a mere flash; is answered notwithstanding, with eternal
punishment; as fighting against an eternal God. And yet, I fear thee not as a
slave, but as a son. For I have more love toward thee, then fear of thee,
though I much fear thee. And also my hope weighs down my fear. And though all
this be true, teach me to work out my salvation with fear and trembling; with
a great fear, which may cause trembling.

An Act of Praising God.
O God, I do praise thee for thy most infinite goodness, thy most infinite
power, and for all thy most infinite attributes and perfections. If thou had
not been what thou art, I had never been what I am. Yet, I praise thee for
the first, although the other had not followed; and yet, I praise thee, because
it followed. I do praise thee for all the benefits which have been, or shall
be hereafter bestowed upon the humane nature of Christ, and upon all thy
Saints, and Angels; one of which is the continuance of glory: Upon men, women,
and children, from the beginning of the world, to the end of it; and
especially, upon thy chosen vessels: for all thy benefits upon ignorant
persons, who did not know thee, and therefore, could not love thee, nor keep
thy commandments: for all thy benefits upon wicked persons that would not, and
upon dumb, and unsensible creatures, that could not praise thee. And upon me a
vile one. Thy blessed name be blessed by thy self, and by thy Angels and
Saints, for ever; and by men, women, and children, while they live; and by all
creatures, till they cease to be creatures. And let all the people say Amen.

We must be seriously careful, that these Acts in their exercise, be true; and
go to the bottom of the heart: not feigned, and superficial.

Rule 7.
WHen any thing comes to you by way of special blessing, or gift; kneel down
in some private place, and receive it, as immediately from the hands of God,
saying:

O God, This is not the gift of destiny, or chance; of men, or Angels: it is
thy gift; only, it passes from thee to me, by creatures appointed for the just
execution of thy good pleasure; (upon whom in this respect, I beg a blessing)
If thou had not first ordained it for me, it could not have thus passed from
hand to hand; and at last, been reached to me. From thee therefore, I take it,
O thou sun, sea, fountain, spring, treasure of all goodness: O thou good and
gracious giver of all good gifts, and graces: O thou good and perfect giver of
every good and perfect gift.

Catch all occasions to speak of God, and praise him, and stretch out the
discourse as far as you can. And be heartily glad, when you hear the holy
name of God glorified; or his goodness, mercy, justice, or other excellencies
magnified. Yea, out of the Devils temptations, raise occasions to praise God;
which is a most short, and compendiarie way to divert him: as when the Devil
hammereth evil words and actions into your mind, (as he does especially, when
you are angry) to be used at any times; turn upon him, and say; Blessed be
God, that keeps my feet from falling; Hallowed be his name, who threw down
proud Lucifer from the gates of Heaven. And always reserve a time wherein to
bless God privately for the gifts, which others do praise in you. And being
dispraised, rejoice.

Rule 8.
HAve always some pious, and short sayings, floating upon thy memory, at the
end of thy tongue, and in thy heart, like Arrows in a Quiver: which thou may
at every turn, dart into the lap of thy beloved; and use upon every call of
occasion. As at the sight, or hearing of another misery:

This very stroke might have bruised me, as it has my neighbor: why was not I
the man? I might have been as easily found out amongst the crowde, as he. But,
I am Gods favorite. And I should be more wicked, then he that is most wicked,
if God should withdraw his grace, favor, and helps from me.

At the sight of a blind man:
Lord, I see thee daily in thy creatures. O thou that art the eye of thy self,
and that look through the clouds, upon the world; I can look up to thee.

At the sight of a lame man:
I might have been like this poor imperfect creature; but now I will bestirre
my self, and go readily to thy house, and there say, and not faintly, but
heartily, O Lord, O God, O Lord God, thou art the giver, and preserver of all
things.

When thou look up to Heaven, say:
That way lies my Country, wherein God shines out upon his Saints and Angels;
to whom they now sing with heavenly music, and most melodious harmony; me
thinks I hear their voices. What good power will draw the curtains of
Heaven, that I may likewise see their glory?

And when down to the earth:
I do, or can walk daily, over the loathsome carcasses, and rotten bones of
thousands, that have been gallant men and women; and been carried up and
down in coaches: and when I have done all, I must die. This way lies hell; O
the confusion that is there! O the darkness!

In sorrow:
How can I be troubled, when God and his Angels rejoice continually?

In joy:
I will rejoice in the Lord: again I say, I will rejoice.

At other times:
My tongue and lips, which have concurred to speak against thee, shall now
join their forces, but what to do? to speak of the mavelous things, which
thou have done in our days, and in the ages before us.

My hands that have been so busy, and so movable in accomplishing the foul
acts of wickedness; shall now be as quick, and ready in the performance of
works, agreeable to thy sacred will.

My feet that have carried my body with such nimblenesse in the dark, and
dirty turnings of mischief, shall now strive one to go before the other, and
be as forward and swift in the fair, and direct way of holiness.

I let go the reins, and freely consent to all the acts of charity, justice,
patience, and other virtues, inward or outward, in earth, or in heaven, as
far as heaven is capable of them; before now, or hereafter performed: And I
pull up the reins, and withdraw my consent from all acts, contrary to God,
and goodness. Woe to me wretch: when I am out of thy favor, me thinks the
Lilies are black, and the red Roses pale: The Birds sing idle tunes; and the
Sun does not shine, when it shines. When the Clock strikes, say Lord, give
me true repentance; for the procuring of which, this hour is added to my
days. Or, Lord, give me grace to redeem the time. Or, Lord prepare me for my
last hour: and let not death rush suddenly upon me, unless in a time when I
am provided for thee; and have washed away my last sin with true repentance.
When thou go to bed, think of thy Grave, and say, if sleep this night
should steal away, and leave the possession to death, as it may easily happen,
how is my soul affected? When thou risest, think of the Resurrection, and say:
what if I were now called to an exact, and rigid account, for all the sins,
and disorders of my life? And let the last Trumpet cry always in thine ears,
with a mournful sound: Surgite mortui, and venite ad judicium, Rise ye dead,
and come to judgment. And let day and night put thee continually in mind of
Heaven and Hell. And remember that the accounts shall differ according to the
differences of talents, helps, and calls from God: For, some are by nature more
prone to some kinds of sins then others: And great persons have greater
temptations to sins, that are fed with plenty.

Rule 9.
EVery morning and evening examine your conscience, and call your self to a
strict and severe account, how you have offended God, that day or night. And
that you may the better render to your self the account of the day, think what
was your business, where you were, and with whom you conversed. Then confess
your sins to God; procuring by the help of his grace, sorrow for them; and
returning all possible thanks, because you have not waded farther into sin.
And at those times cleanse and purify your heart from the dregs of envy and
malice, and from the lees of ill desires, and vain affections. And so level
your self, that all who see you, may clearly perceive you are in perfect
charity with them, and with all the world. For it is not the last rule of our
obligation, to forgive our Adversaries, privately in our hearts: We must
likewise unfold, open, and express our selves to them; and if they have any
thing against us, as it is written, we must in a pious, and reasonable manner,
clear the matter. And also, in every examination of your self, try your
heart, whether it goes forward, or backward, in the clean path of virtue. For
the way to Heaven is Jacobs Ladder; you cannot stand still upon it. Two
special things are necessarily requisite to salvation, the one pertaining to
faith, the other to manners: First, to know, (I mean what they are) and
firmly believe by a faith given from Heaven, the chiefest, and most material
points of Christian belief. Secondly, to banish all complacence, and liking of
our former sins, and the close and implicit will of sinning hereafter; and to
wash away all our sins, yea the very last; I do not say, every one in
particular, but all considered in the lump, if the last be included; with true,
and hearty repentance; which is the gift of God, and supernatural, and full of
difficulties.

Rule 10.
When difficulties in the great affairs of conscience do occur: for example,
how you may give rules to your soul in such a case; in a case encircled with
such circumstances: whether such and such a bargain, or such and such dealing
will stand in conformity with justice: desire the grave advice of your Pastor;
or of some other virtuous, and learned person. As also, when you are
over-tempted, and exercised, though not above, yet to the full height of your
strength; fly quickly to your spiritual Physician, and open the secret of
your disease. For now he supplieth the most high place of God, who reveals no
man's weaknesses. And he knowing the soar, may fit his medicines accordingly,
and truly, work more effectually, then in the Pulpit; where for the most part,
he does speak to the present purpose, by guess; and where he cannot fit
himself to the sins of all his Hearers. You will urge perhaps, my Pastor is
not a man of a good life, and therefore, though his counsel may help me, his
prayers cannot.

I answer, that he is not a man of a good life, I am heartily sorry: But he
bears two persons in his own person; of himself, as he is a man, and like
other men; and of himself, as he has received holy orders from the Church, as
he is lawfully sent, and comes in by the door, and as he represents Gods
person. As he is himself, a wicked man; the remembrance of thee will be little
acceptable to God in his prayers; but as he is a Churchman, he may stand
betwixt God and thee, and keep off the blow. But if he neglect thee, or suite
not with thy devotion, fly to another.

Rule 11.
Endeavor to learn always by good example; Virtuosus (says Aristotle) est
10. Eth. c. 5. parum ante finem.
mensura and regula actuum humanorum; a virtuous man is a rule of life, by
which others ought to measure their actions. And to pray always by a
continuance of good actions; and always privately mark, how Gods attributes,
his goodness, mercy, wisdom, power, providence, do play their several
parts here in the world: and how strangely his justice does oftentimes fall
heavy upon sinners, and lay them open to the eyes of all men. No child would
grow to the ripeness of a man or woman, unless upheld daily by the special
providence of good.

And observe the miserable ends of drunkards, of lewd, proud, and profane
persons; and the condition of solitary sins, and of sins that keep ill
company; as Drunkenness, Adultery, Murder, which are many times found in the
same knot. And lay up all things in thy heart..

It happens oftentimes, that a man kills his neighbor, and by that foul
act, does execute the severe justice of God upon the man whom he kills, upon
himself, and upon friends on both sides.

Learn, that men being touched in a soar part, are most troubled.

Rule 12.
Speak not willingly of other men's faults, or imperfections, whether natural,
or moral. Judge no man: neither say, or think, that such a man is proud,
envious, malicious, that he has an ill look of his own, and so forth. Judge
not of things which are not plain, and open to thee, either for the present
secrecy, or for the future uncertainty; although the person is now black, it
is not far to the fountain, he may be quickly whiter then Snow. And he has
the same Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier, Benefactour, and Preserver with thee;
whom he calls Father, and to whom he prays every day; who will also be his
Judge, and thine.

Rule 13.
When you are afflicted with loss of health, or wealth, or good-name, or with
misery; meet it with open arms, and accept it willingly, as a small
punishment for your sins: saying:

How good is God, to be thus easily put off with a temporal punishment, an
eternal punishment being due? I have deserved more and more, and yet more: and
Christ has suffered infinitely more, in my occasions. I see now there is good
reason, why the blessed are called, Blessed of his Father; but not the cursed,
cursed of his Father. He blesses of himself, and never curses, but
exceedingly urged. And he did not prepare Hell for man, but for the Devil. And
Christ died rather for men, then Angels; because it was a more eminent work of
charity, to fasten the weakness, and to relieve the wants of men, then of
Angels.

God is said to harden the heart, because upon a refusal, and contempt of his
grace, and of him, standing at the door of the heart, with his looks all
moistened with the dew of the morning; he justly withdraws his helps, which
he is not bound to continue: after which follows hardness of heart.

And we see, that men of high calling, and good life, if they fall, fall to the
bottom; because they have neglected the more forcible moving, and urgent
helps of God.

Rule 14.
MAke a weekly Bill of Gods benefits, and thy sins: and always, when the
Lords day comes, (to which, come thou prepared by prayer and humiliation)
bless God more plentifully for those, and for all his other benefits, and
crave pardon more seriously for these, and for all thy other sins. And this
day principally, fold thy self within thy self, and look back upon God, as
he was before the world; Be present with him in the Creation, as Wisdom was,
which says, I was with him, making all things. Stand by and observe the
strangeness of the workmanship. Consider that which thou can not conceive;
the nothing that was before the world: the thought of darkness will come the
nighest to it. Listen and hear God say, Let there be light: Mark, with what
quickness Light follows: Admire it; and cry out, Lord, there was Light,
before there was light, for thou art Light, and in thee there is no darkness
at all. Consider the different state of the Church from Abel, through the Law
of Nature, the written Law, and the Law of Grace, to this hour. Mark how
strangely the providence of God has carried the public affairs of the world,
and the particular business of every creature in the world.

At length, come home to thy self, examine thy memory, and discover the
different tracts of Gods working with thee from thy childhood, his daily
discourse to thy heart, and the strange inventions, by which he has called
thee to him, and thy unkindnesse. On the other side, labor to lay open the
plots of the Devil, whether beaten, and ordinary, or strange, and
extraordinary; endeavoring to know, and fortify thy weakness. In thy
prayers imagine thy self to lie prostrate, before God, amongst the worms, and
amongst the sculs and bones of the dead: or at the foot of his Cross upon
Mount Calvarie. Mark what God inwardly says to thee in thy prayers, and thence
raise good purposes. Let thy demeanor in Gods house be seasoned with all
possible reverence; and with a decent composition of body and face; and
especially, with a watchful carriage of thy eyes. And lastly note, as to the
devotion of our morning prayer, the success of the day does commonly answer:
so from our behavior on the Lords day, every day of the week does commonly
take his direction.

THE FOVRTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
THe provincial of the English Jesuits, being my Kinsman, and the only Papist
of all my Kindred; (who died soon after) sent me to the English College in
Rome. And in my journey, when I came to Marselles, a Port-towne in the remote
parts of France; I was strongly conceited, that by the prayers of Saint Mary
Magdalene, (whose shrine, and chief relics were not far off) I should
gain the benefit of a good wind, and be conveyed (as I was informed, I might
have been) in four and twenty hours to Rome. And therefore I prayed
earnestly to her: but she did not hear me: and my conceit was very weak,
though it was very strong. For six long weeks passed before I could recover
Rome. It is worthy to be known, that in Marselles, when I passed through it to
it Rome: there were but four or five Jesuits; and those in a house, in the
best room of which they could scarce all together turn themselves round: but
two years after, when I returned; their number was exceedingly increased, and
they were seated in three fair houses: One, a casa professa, as they call it,
for their old men; another a College for their Students; and the third a house
for the tutoring of their novices. And it is not unworthy to be known that
there is not a Papist of any worth in England, whose worth in the matter of his
estate, the Jesuits do not exactly know, and have not set down in writing:
and that the Jesuits do every where profess and publish themselves to be in
debt; that they may be thought poor; and lie the more openly, open to the
Charity of people.

When I came within half a days journey of Rome, and beheld part of Saint
Peter's Church, I was taken presently, (and I have often wondered at it) with a
strange rising of Spirit against the City and Church of Rome: By which, I did
as it were, presage what I should afterward know. The Church of this College
is all painted in the inward. And the pictures counterfeit men and women, that
were hanged, or beheaded in England (as they speak) either in the profession
of faith, or the defense of virtue. And the painter played the counterfeit too.
For, he has cunningly mingled old stories with these of late days; the more
to deceive the beholder; and to pass them all under the same cause.

Truly, if my power had been poundwaight with my will; the Scholars should
have complained to the Pope of the foul abuses, which have besmeared the
Government of this College.

It was significant, that F. Fitz-Herbert wrote a book against Matchiavell:
for why? said one of our Scholars at Rome? that he might not seem to be what
he was a Matchiavellian; because our craft is void, if we are known to be
crafty.

In this Town the trick of counterfeiting, is in great request. For many vile
Caitifes are permitted to counterfeit themselves possessed with Devils, and
openly in the Churches, to make strange signs and motions with the eyes,
mouth, tongue, hands, and with the whole frame, and building of the body; to
impresse a belief into the soft, and ignorant Congregation, that the Devil is
more stirred, and they more tormented, with the sight of such and such
relics, of these and these Images, and the like: the learned part of people
knowing, and confessing they are foul dissemblers. Here I heard it confessed
that the Jesuits were openly convinced in Rome by the Dominicans, to have
corrupted Saint Austin. And that of Saint Brigit, and Saint Catherine; the one
had a revelation from God, that the Virgin Mary was not conceived in original
sin; and the other that she was. I heard it likewise avouched by themselves;
that in the Inquisition, when they combat with a person, whom they cannot
crook and bow to their own purposes, some young Ruffian appears to him by
night, in the most horrid shape of a Devil, who tells him, with a voice like
a Devil, that all of his opinion are damned in Hell; and that a very deep
place is there provided for him: which must needs work upon a man used to
darkness, and affliction, and to solitary thoughts. But the truth of God is
all-sufficient, and does not call deceit, to help her. My reader must think
in reason, that I could not but step aside into a corner, and say privately:
Have I forsook all my noble friends, and good fortunes, to spot my self with
deceit, and hypocrisy? Nothing is more certain, then that the Inquisition is
a Den of horror, and deceit. The English Jesuits and Monks have a great
account to give for a man, who was a Monk in Paris, and one of the most able
Scholars in the Christian world. This Monk wrote a learned book against
equivocation: And had formed another book; (but it never saw light) the
subject of which was, that the Pope is Antichrist. Him they carried (having by
cunning means bended the higher powers to them) into the Low Countries; and
laid up fast in a Castle near Brissels; and for more terror, they barred him
up in a comfortless chamber, hanging over a Water-mill: and had they but
stirred a certain device, made for the purpose; the whole frame of the boards
had turned under him, he lost his footing, fell down, and been ground into a
thousand pieces. But they reserved him to be a more public example. And the
like precipice they have at Rome, in the Castle of S. Angelo, receiving the
miserable creature that is thrown down, in every part of his body, with most
sharp pikes. This Monk they conveyed to the Inquisition at Rome, where they
so terrified him with the black thoughes of being burned; that they drove him
into madness. And he was then carried to the Bedlam of Rome; and there bound
in the neck with an iron collar, and secured with an iron chain to the post
of a bed: where he spoke the Fathers, both Greek, and Latin, to the great
admiration of all Scholars that were present. They are as cruel, as we
merciful. The Colleges both of Rome and Spain, are seldom without a
madman. In both places I saw examples. And the mad man in the College at
Rome, had been a fugitive from the Church of England. And his words to them
continually were, vos me fascinastis, ye have bewitched me: But he was the
daily jeere of them all. O that the Scholars in our Universities were all as
wise as they are learned!

CHAP. II.
THere is a holy place in a Church in Rome, called the Sanctum Sanctorum, where
they receive, as they say, that part of skin which was cut from Christ in his
Circumcision: and one of the Popes a great while ago, attempting to look upon
it; a mighty storm coming in thunder, and lightning, and a fierce wind
endangered the whole City, and frighted away his purpose.

It was an old objection, that in Rome, when they set a fresh Maid to sale in
the Stews, they hang a Flagge, (a known sign) out of a window. One of our
Jesuits in Spain, to blot out this objection, said, the hanging was exposed in
honor of the Sacrament. But I being in Rome (although some hangings are
exposed to glorify the Sacrament) found the objection to be true, and sound.
And it is not agreeable to the decency of Religion, that those eminent
Princes, the Cardinals, should behave themselves with such open courtesy
toward noted women, noted only for their public profession of wickedness:
or cover one nakedness with another; the naked walls of their Palaces, with
pictures, moving to lust, and venery. The deep Monk at Doway, recreated me
with a sweet historical relation; and affirmed the matter to have been done
within a few years. Their Agent at Rome, having recourse to a Cardinal, as
his occasions waved him; the Cardinal frowned upon him, and urged, that the
Priests in England, as he heard, were much given to women. The Agent being a
subtle head, and knowing the inclination of the Cardinal, replied, that
indeed, the English women were a powerful temptation; and that young comely
Maids brought the Priests every night to their chambers. The Cardinal gave an
Italian action with his shoulders, and answered, Friend, if it be so, you say
truth, the temptation is very powerful: and so the quarrel ended; and the
Cardinal began to be graciously kind.

Two chief things I much wonder at in the Cardinals.

First, that many of those high persons are men of mean, low, and inferior
learning.

Secondly, that a young stripling in a threadbare coat, his Uncle being chosen
Pope, is the next day, a most eminent Prince, and little differing from a King.

A notable thing passed in Rome, a small time before my arrival thither. It
was, that the Pope picked a quarrel with the Bishop of Spalato, (whom he had
received into Rome with great pomp, coming from us) under a colorable
pretext, that he inclined to the Grecian Schism. For he would not suffer so
great a scandal to go unpunished, lest it should draw others into its own
example: and he could not punish it without a color. And therefore he was
lodged in the Castle, where he quickly dyed of grief: and his body was burned
in campo Fiori, a place in Rome like Smithfield in London. I humbly desire all
religious people, when they talk of this pampered man, not to think of me. He
was not a native of this Country; and in many things he behaved himself like
an Atheist, and an Epicure: he was cut out into a Dissembler, when he was
young; for, he had been a Jesuit; I never was, but abhor the name.

In Ligorne, a Town lying by the Mediterranean Sea, and subject to the Duke of
Florence; I saw the man, upon whom, part of a wall fell, and held him to the
ground, while he was took in the act of villainy with a Calfe: and money had
redeemed him. And yet notwithstanding, it was one of the cherishing stories,
with which the notable Monk of Doway, did ease me of my burden: That an
Italian Gentleman having sent a wicked Varlot to cut off the nose of his enemy:
(and there are persons both in Italy and Spain, to be hired for such damnable
purposes:) And the deed bein done, the wronged person recollected his spirits,
and desired to know the sum, by which he was induced to that foul
enterprise. Which being told, he gave the like sum for the performance of the
same exploite upon the other. And the same vile instrument, in the very same
manner, upon the same conditions, cut off the nose of him that first employed
him.

In Italy they bury altogether in Vaults, and in the time of my residence
there, the Friars had conveyed a Maid under ground, and having abused her,
killed her in her grave. Salvianus is a great enemy to these Hypocrites. His
words in one place, are: Quid agis, stulta persuasio? Peccata interdixit Salv.
l. 5. de Guber Dei.
Deus, non matrimonia. Foolish persuasion, what do thou? the Law of God
forbids sin, not marriage. But why do I tax them for killing? It is
scarce so heinous in Italy, to kill a man, as to kill a dog. When a man is
killed in the streets of Rome, another perhaps will step to him, and look if
he know the face, to quiet his thoughts concerning his own friends: but he goes
his way again presently, and makes no strange matter of murder, it is so
common. The way of the Italians is, (as the College has taught me) after a
quarrel betwixt two, one devises presently how he may kill his adversary,
upon this foundation, because he must either kill or be killed. Yet in the
execution of a condemned person in Spain, I cannot (no, I cannot) but observe
one commendable passage; which I could wish that their practice would commend
to our imitation. Sure it would be a matter of high and public concernement.
The offender being dead, immediately stands up by him, hanging or lying as a
triumph of justice, a Priest or Minister, who presently makes a speech to the
people, not unlike a Sermon; wherein he treats of his offense of the Diabolical
delusions, in which he was ensnared by little and little: of his former life,
and of the manifestation of the divine justice in his end, and death. At which
time, he does so point to the dead body, and so often show it to the eyes of
the people, whose hearts are already struck with the horror of his present
ruin; and moreover, he does so charge, and warn the people by his example;
and cries so many times, look here you who are alive; that indeed he moves
exceedingly to good life. If I go on, I shall never have done.

CHAP. III.
OUr ghostly Father in the College, was an old Jesuit; who had said freely
amongst his companions, that he had labored in digging under the Parliment
house, till every thread of his shirt was wet. This man was not a fit Ghostly
Father for young Scholars, looking toward England. The words were proved
against him by the titular Bishop of Chalcedon: from whose mouth I received
them. Who showed me likewise a silver meddall, in which Father Garnet was
decked with the ornaments of a Saint, and joined with S. Ignatius Loyola. I am
bound also to his Lordship for the sight of two pictures of Garnets straw,
each representing it in a several form, and one being the second edition,
when the former had been formerly reprehended, even by me, said the Bishop. I
hope the Jesuits will not deny that I lived warily, and piously amongst them;
and glewed my self fast to my meditations when others neglected them, and
slept their time away; who, when the seven Sleepers were read in the
Martyrologe at supper, would merrily put off their caps in honor of them. But
I will only take my leave of his Holiness, and then go from Rome. For I was
sent hence by the Pope to England, to convert souls; and I brought out of his
Treasure, three thousand Indulgences with me, which I mean to keep till they
are dearer. The Pope is a Bishop, and yet a Prince. And the reason which Father
Fitzharbert gave me, why the old Ages paid to the Pope so little honor, was;
because they saw him a Bishop, and no Prince. If this may stand, the chief
honor is due to him as a Prince; and not as a Bishop. He is carried in a
chair of state, upon the shoulders of men: from which chair, his blessing
has often come and sat upon my shoulders. Kings and Cardinals may kiss his
hands: others of what degree soever, only the cross upon his pantofle. He has
the keys of Heaven and Hell, and also of Purgatory; he can turn the key open
and shut when he pleases. And he does assure the Priest, that saying Mass at
a privilege Altar; that is, an Altar to which this high privilege is given by
his Holiness; he shall free a soul out of Purgatory. He will give you very
liberally, a plenary Indulgence of all your sins: and remit all the temporal
punishment, due to the slain in Purgatory; when the guilt is removed by
confession. He will untie the Laws of God, and give you leave and freedom to
labor in servile works: as, to plough, sow, and reap, on the Lords day; to
take for your wife, your near kinswoman; to kill the subject of any Prince,
whom he does excommunicate. You may go to the Stews in the full and open view
of authority. I am able to name the man, whom they would have suffered to
commit fornication, under the pleasing title of a venial sin: Teaching out
of his chair, he cannot err; they mean, when he does instruct the world in
matters of faith. And though he be an Arrian, a Monothelite, or other
Heretic, the Spirit of God does not forsake him: for he has a double portion
of his Spirit; and one being lost by heresy, keeps the other. He claims to
himself a supreme Dominion over Princes, be they Christians or Infidels; and
presumes to disengage their true and lawful subjects from their obedience, to
which they are tied by God. He cannot be deposed for any crime, but heresy; he
will give you, if you please him, a piece of sanctified, and blessed wax,
which shall quiet a troubled Sea, divert the mischievous aim of witchcraft,
stay the rude course of a devouring fire, fright away evil thoughts, and make
the Devil run, and do many such feats. After your death, he will declare
you to be a Saint, and in Heaven; and give way that Altars and Churches may be
consecrated to your honor, and called by your name; and that the world may
pray to you, as freely, and as fervently, as to God; and that your withered
bones may be worshipped; but not till the age be past, in which he lived; and
the people gone, who were eye witnesses of your life. O the witchcraft of the
Devil! If we think that we came into the world to throw away our souls; we
are too blame. He that sees a great stream of water press forward in a calm
Sea, may be assured that a Whale passes. Here is the secret; the stream of
all things goes with the Popes greatness. And yet the Jesuits keep him in
awe, and in a kind of strict obedience to them. Indeed they keep other great
persons in subjection; and make them Benefactours to them, that their
greatness may be long greatness. The Pope dare not compose the quarrel
betwixt the Jesuits and the Dominicans; because he cannot, except he side with
one of them, and abandon the other: And Martin Luther cannot be forgot. And
the Monk, I so much speak of, threatened his Holiness home, in his Epistle
Dedicatory before the book, which old Leander transformed into good Latin for
him. The book was made in the heat of those deadly quarrels betwixt the
secular Priests and the Regulars; wherein they accused one another of heresy,
and of strange things.

CHAP. IV.
TO dry up this foul water in the fountain: The Pope is not head of the
Church; because this high, and superlative power would then have most shone
out, and appeared in the Christian Hemisphere immediately after Christ had
given the commandment, upon which they build this power, this Babel-Tower. Nor
could the rage of outward persecution hinder the perfect execution of
spiritual power. And what need could there be of the secular arm, to join in
the binding of the ready conscience with a law? especially, when Christians
were so forward, and prompt in the school of virtue, as then they were. Or at
least, persecution could not hinder the full acknowledgement of such a power.
And although we meet in the books of the Councels, with so many fair, and
flattering Epistles of the Popes to the Grecian Emperors, much degenerating
from Popish gravity; Because he has in his keeping, the Keys of Heaven, Hell,
Purgatory: yet still the Grecians did bandy against them, and desired to turn
this over-swelling power, into its own and proper channel, as they and other
ancient Churches do at this day. Does not here a man, a mere, vain, weak
man, exalt himself above God, and every thing that is called God? He is
adorned with three Crowns, for four reasons. Because there are three persons
in one God; he being the supposed Deputy, has three Crowns united in one
Miter. Because he is Christ's Vicar, who was a King, a Priest, and a Prophet.
Because he is Prince of Rome, Naples, and Sicilie. Let me give the fifth
reason: Because he was dirt, he is dirt, and he shall be dirt.

Constantine in the Council of Nice, expounded that place of the Psalm, I
have said ye are all Gods, and sons of the Highest, of Bishops. He therefore
exalting himself above all Bishops, and to a height above all his Brethren,
by the head and shoulders; lifts himself above all that is called God.

Let my soul go with Saint Austin. Neque S. Aug. l. 2. cont. Donatistas. c. 2.
enim quisquam nostrum Episcopum se esse Episcoporum constituit; aut tyrannico
terrore ad obsequendi necessitatem, collegas suas adigit. Not one of us does
make himself the Bishop of Bishops, or with tyrannical affrightment force his
fellow Bishops to the necessity of obedience. And Saint Austin has no
reflection here upon Constantine, who called himself in the Nicene Council,
(...), the Bishop of Bishops, in regard of his fatherly care over them: because
he speaks both of tyrannical terror, and of fellow Bishops. They say: It is
necessary to have an infallible Judge for the last resolution of controversies
in matters of faith. But if the Pope can stretch out his power to such
definitions at home, in his own Chair, by his fire side; to what strange end,
I pray, is all this repairing from all parts, to Councels? All matters of
faith, in their doctrine, are of equal moment; and slipping in one we go down
in all. And though every trouble be not so great, ut omnes vexentur nationes,
that al Nations should be troubled in the settling of it: yet exery growing
trouble of faith, which cannot be laid by argument, and ordinary means;
requires, that the whole body should help the part in danger of perishing.
Neither indeed, can a Council among them, be a true judge of controversies.
For they profess, that although the Pope as President of the Council, is tied
to join with the greater part of voices; yet there is a reservation behind,
that the Pope, though not as President; yet as the chief Prince of the Church,
may cancel the Acts of the Council, reverse the Decrees; and retract the
judgment. So that in the marrow of the matter, the judgment of a Council is
nothing but a vain flash of the Popes private opinion. And how stout he is in
the defense of matters pertaining to the royalty of his own greatness; the
whole world can testify. And for that great controversy, long tossed and
tumbled amongst them, concerning the power of the Pope, over the temporal
affairs of Princes: the Benedictine Monks, our Countrymen, denied lately the
lawfulness of such a power. But in the issue of the matter, seeing the Jesuits
more potent, and themselves sliding downward into disgrace; they drew back
their necks softly out of the snare, looked sorrowful one upon another, and
repented of their error. And is it not every day feared in Rome, that the
Sorbon Doctors in Paris, will at length give the lie to this great Authority,
and stately Seat, and See of Rome? O the vain swelling of a bubble! It is not
commendable in a Church-person, to be guarded on both sides with great Fans,
from the impudency of Waspes and Flies, and to keep the wind away; to be
ushered with Trumpeters; to be honored like an Emperor; to deck the head
with more Crowns, then God promises to his faithful child. And it was not
good, which Paulus Aemilius writes, Paul. Aemil.
that his Holiness suffered the great Ambassadors of Sicilie, to lie
prostrate on the ground, and at his gate; crying that part of the Mass, Qui
tollis peccata mundi, miserere nostri; Qui tollis peccata mundi, dona nobis
pacem: O thou that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us;
Thou that take away the sins of the world, give us peace. Go, the worms
shall eat thee, till they are poisoned with corruption. Wise men are mad.
Our feet slip, we tumble: and Lord have mercy upon us. The gay flower
withers, when the common grass remains green: And man is the silly fool
of his own fancy. God forgive him who said, that he, and three of his
Cardinals, were able to govern so many worlds, if God should make them.

CHAP. V.
HOw vain is the Church of Rome in teaching, that the Popes Throne does so
far overlooke all other Thrones; that he cannot be censured by an earthly
Judge, though ingulfed in the most horrible crimes, that in all the
extravagancies of the heart, were ever committed? Let him enter a Fox, reign
as a Lion, die like a Dog, as Pope Boniface. Let him commit whoredom upon
Altars, give Benefices to his Whores, and golden Chalices, consecrated to holy
services; which an honest Layman cannot touch, break open doors, burn
houses, put out his Godfathers eyes; cut off his fingers, hands, tongues, and
noses of his Cardinals, not remembering what he said, when he did first invest
them in purple, Ego te creo socium Regis, I create thee to be the fellow of a
King; and moreover, invocate the Devil, and drink to him; as Pope John the
twelfth. Let him be a most notorious Conjurer, and make himself over by
compact, body and soul to the Devil; as Pope Silvester the second. Let him be
carried with the Whirle-winde of ambition, and have poisoned six other Popes,
to hew out his own way before him, as Pope Hildebrand. Yet he sits above the
reach of censure; he flies with the Eagle above the Thunderbolt. That they may
give sinews to this doctrine, they produce an Act of a Council, celebrated in
Rome, which says, Neque praesul summus a quoquam judicabitur, Council. Romans
quoniam scriptum est, non est discipulus supra Magistrum. Neither shall the
chief Bishop be judged of any, because it is written, the Disciple is not
above his Master. And that they may add strength to this plausible falsehood;
they bring in the rear an eminent example; For, when Bassus and Marinianus
laid to the charge of Pope Sixtus the third, that he had in the rage of his
lust, defiled a consecrated Virgin; Maximus the Consul cry out, Non licet
adversus Pontificem dare sententiam: It is not lawful to give sentence against
the chief Bishop. Look how they shuffle the matter, and give it from one hand
to another, amongst themselves. But, is not this to encourage sin; to permit,
and flatter evil, and to suffer it, to grow out, and openly spread it self,
when it may be easily beat down in the blossom? This doctrine has so far
given heart to all kinds of wickedness; that if we search into every
succession of Bishops, scattered through the whole Christian world; and examine
every link of every chain; we shall not meet in any Sea with sins, that
deserve to be called sins, with relation to the foul enormities of Rome. Are
not these evil fruits, of evil doctrine? and yet no man almost does name the
Pope, but under the sacred title of his Holiness. But though his Holiness is
not liable to reproof, a man would think his wickedness should.

And how silly is the Church of Rome in teaching, that although the most holy,
and most learned Bishops that ever lived, should join their heads and hearts
in a Council, and there using the pious help of holy Scriptures, of other
Councels, and Fathers before them, and of humble prayers for the powerful
assistance of the holy Ghost; should with an unanimous consent decree, what is
to be preached: the Pope notwithstanding might come in the upshot, and though a
most wicked, and illiterate creature, lawfully pronounce all the Decrees to be
of no weight, no effect, no validity? The general Council of Chalcedon, upon
sound premeditation, made an absolute Decree, that the Bishop of Constantinople
should have equal power through all the great extent, and latitude of his
government, with the Bishop of Rome; which Canon Pope Leo, and Pope Gelasius
quickly rejected: and the single authority of one man took place, because our
Savior had said to Saint Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail
not. But every prayer of Luk 22. 32
Christ was granted: therefore the Pope cannot err. It must here follow, that
either the Decrees of Councels are fallible; or the Popes sentence. Is it not
strange, that God should communicate his holy Spirit to the contempt of
Council, more fully to a private person (for so he is in this matter, being
one) though a public sinner; then to the whole Church, the Spouse of Christ?
Let the Pope claim to himself, all power in all affairs; who now can chide
his ambition, or give the lie to his infallibility?

CHAP. VI.
ONe of my great admirations concerning the Church of Rome, is: that whereas
there are many Churches yet extant, of great antiquity: and some wherein Christ
was almost, if not altogether, as soon heard of, as in Rome: she will not
consort, and comply with them in things, which were wholly in use amongst the
Primitive Christians. If she desires with a Christian desire, and not with a
desire only of her own advancement to win them; why does she not come as
near to them, as it is most evident, they come to the Primitive Church? This
way of the Bishop of Rome was never Gods way. Which I will demonstrate in a
plain discourse, (though not plain to the plain) that I may a little ease my
reader in his journey, with various objects. God, as he was ever God, so he was
ever good. For the most eminent Attribute of God (says Dyonysius) is
goodness. The nature of goodness, is to spread, and diffuse it self. And
every good does spread, and diffuse it self according to the variety, and
greatness of goodness, which it has. And therefore, God the Father, being
infinitely good, does infinitely spread, and diffuse himself upon the Son. And
the Father and Son, being infinitely good, do infinitely spread, and diffuse
themselves upon the holy Ghost. And if the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, do
not in any kind spread and diffuse themselves infinitely upon the Angels, and
us; it is because, we being creatures, and by course of necessary consequence,
finite; are not capable of an infinite diffusion. The Charity by which a good
man loves good, might be infinite, if the subject could be infinite. Now, as in
the works of nature, and first diffusion of his goodness upon his creatures;
God the first cause, would first work by himself, and himself bring about
the most weighty matter of making all these fine things of nothing: and
moreover, of waking nature out of her dead sleep in the Chaos: that it might
appear to us, who should afterward hear the grave, and strange story of the
Creation; that he was all-sufficient, and could not be at a fault, for want of
help. Yet managing the continuance of the work, it pleased him to use the
mean assistance of second causes; as of Angels, and intelligences; that he
might add worth and honor to them, by so great employment. So likewise in the
works of Grace, and second diffusion of his goodness upon his creatures; the
great work of enfranchizing the world by his Blood, himself alone would
perform: but in applying the merits, and virtue of his Passion to the chosen
vessels of honor, and mercy; he does graciously call, in a manner, to his
aid, Apostles, and Apostolical men. And as God, being the Author of nature,
falls under himself, and works with every creature or second cause, in a
manner and measure, agrreable to their natural, and ordinary way of working:
So likewise, being the Author of Grace, and having never yet, (for some great
reasons, best known to himself) made two men with a perfect agreement either
of face or nature; sends Apostles, and Preachers; who have in their commands,
a special injunction of being like to him, who says, I am made all things 1
Cor. 9. 22
to all men, that I might by all means save some. And God himself, not only
in executing the general Acts and Decrees of his Providence over his
creatures; but also, and more especially, in the more notable praxis, and
special exercise of his providence over his Church, from the beginning of the
world, was all things to all men.

CHAP. VII.
GOD has full power, and absolute dominion over all his Creatures, because he
called, yea catched them out of nothing: and because (to speak in the Apostles
dialect) in him they live, move, and have their being. And therefore, he may
lawfully give Laws to them; to the due and strict observation of which, they
are strongly bound under pain of his high displeasure, seconded with most
heavy punishment. Wherefore, giving a Law to the Jews, by the mediation of
Moses, he begins with an argument of his authority, and dominion over them:
I am the Lord, thy God, which have brought thee out of Exodus 20. 2.
the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. This laid for the
cornerstone, I thus proceed in the building.

In the infancy, and childhood of the world, when sin was not as yet, so
active, so quick, so cunning, but dull, and clownish: and to foreshow the
backwardness of nature in matters pertaining to Heaven; yes, to natural
knowledge, and even humane society: and also that it might fully, and
plentifully appear to after-ages, how nature is wrought and polished, as in
material things by Art, so in spiritual matters by Grace: The Law, by which
God for the most part guided man, was only borne with him; was young as he was
young, and grew as he grew; non scripta, sed nata lex, as the Orator says;
being a Law not written, and sent in a letter to us from Lycurgus, Solon, or
Moses, but borne with us: or if written, written only in the soul of man;
where it continually remains in the shape of a light, discovering to the view
of the Soul, the beauty of good, and the deformity of evil. For Good is
fair, and amiable, and the clear eye of reason beholds in it, at the first
sight, a singular convenience with the will of man, and a sympathy with Heaven.
And therefore, they who were bound only with the looser ties of the Law of
nature; and who now in strange Countries, and in wild, and uncouth places
dispense their actions by the light of reason, bear a Preacher in their
hearts. Ill is black, and deformed, and reason in the first glance sees a
loathsomenesse, a Toad in it; and hears presently, as it were, a jarring and
disagreement with God, and Heaven. And therefore the drunkard, the lascivious
person, and others of the same torn, and ragged coat, loath in deed, not by
any pious act of Christian virtue, but by a deed of nature, their own
beastliness, and can by no means endure to be called what they are. For, as
the Beast runs, the Bird flies from danger; as the one prepares his den,
the other his nest: as they look abroad for daily nourishment, provide
carefully for their young; know, what will satisfy their cold of hunger; what
cool their heat of thirst; what complyeth with their different appetites:
follow the leading of their admirable properties; and by a secret instinct,
cheerfully perform the several acts of their nature: So man, since he dealt
with the Tree of Knowledge, naturally knows good as opposed to evil, as he
naturally distinguishes light from darkness. Again: some things are good in
themselves, and not good only, because God commands them to be loved and
embraced: and these in the first place, the light of nature shows to be good.
And some things are evil in themselves; and not evil only, because marked,
and branded with a prohibition; and these chiefly, the light of nature shows
to be evil. For, if the light or law of nature, in its own nature, did not
make it clear to Caine, that he ought not to have killed his good brother
Abel; how did he sin, or what branch of law did he break in killing him;
sin being the violation of a law? But certainly he trespassed upon that first
principle of nature in morality, Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne feceris,
what you would that men should not do unto you, do not you unto them. And
hither Saint Paul points, For when the Gentiles which have not the law, do
by nature the things Romans 2. 14.
contained in the law, these having not the law, are a law unto themselves. One
step more, and we are in the bottom: Although the the Sage Egyptians in
Damascius, cried out three times, in every performance of their heathenish my
steries, (...), an unknown darkness: yet by the plain, and easy search of
humane power, the old Philosophers found, that there was a God, and that he was
but one in Essence; that he was every where; that he was omnipotent; and the
like: though verily their knowledge, both of God, and his works, was rather
opinion then knowledge; it did so hang, and waver. For the Philosopher opening
his mind occasionally concerning the birth of the world, sometimes he was, and
sometimes again, he was not Aristotle. In one Arist. l. 1. de coelo. 1. Top.
c. 9.
book, he judges absolutely, that the world stood in the same state in which
now it is, in all eternity. In another he stops, like a man come unawares to a
place where the way is divided; and doubts which path leads to the truth. In a
third book, discussing the generation of living things, Lib. 3. de generatione
animalium. c. 11.
he says a man shall not believe amiss, who shall take it for certain, that
the first man and beast, upon supposition that they came of the earth, were
either produced out of a Worm, or an Egg; and at length, breaking the Egg in
long handling, concludes it is the most consentaneous to reason, that they both
drew their first parentage from a Worm. And thus he sought creepingly amongst
the Worms, for what he could not find, though very near him. In like manner
he played with the Immortality of the soul. It pleased him, and it displeased
him: He took it, and he threw it off again. And he was more willing in the
end, to disclaim it, then own it. And the flowings and ebbings of his own
brain, had he studied inward, might have urged him to a greater confusion of
thoughts, and more trouble of mind, then Euripus, in which Saint Gregory
Nazienzen teaches, he Greg. Naz. orat. 3. in Julian.
drowned himself. And this weak light, or dawning of the day, was truly,
most suitable, and more then most agreeable with beginners.

CHAP. VIII.
Sin being now more strong, more witty, and more various; and Nature being
sufficiently informed of her own weakness; God sent the world letters from
Heaven. De illa eivitate unde peregrinamur, S. Aug. con. 2. in Psalm. 90.
says Saint Austin, hae literae nobis venerunt: these letters came from the
great Imperial City, from which we travel. And Moses, the Messenger that
brought these letters of so great importance, from God to the world; delivered
his message with caution, and with respect to the Jews hardness: as it is
clearly gathered out of the words, in which Christ arguing with the Pharisees
concerning the permissive Law of Divorcement, says, Moses, because of the
hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away your Mat. 19. 8.
wives: but from the beginning it was not so. And so he corrected the Law, in
conformity to a more perfect condition. And therefore, the Greek Church with
us, does only break Matrimony in the case of Adultery: in which point,
Eugenius the fourth, labored to reconcile her with the Church of Rome at
Florence: but he could not. And even in the old days of the old Law, God
altered the phrase of his proceedings, with correspondence to the person, with
whom he dealt; and with whom he was to deal. For the old Law, being a Law of
fear, a Law of bondage: and a maine difference betwixt the old Law and the
new, being, as Saint Austin gives it, Aug. l. octoginta trium quaest. tom. 4.
Timor and Amor, Fear and Love: conversing now with the Synagogue, a servant,
a bondwoman, he styles himself God, the Lord, Jehovah, Mighty, Terrible. Yet,
meditating upon the new Law, being a Law of Grace, and liberty; and turning to
the sweet Spouse in the Canticles; to which Law, she did indeed, most properly
belong: he does as it were, cover his greatness, hide his beams, and draw a
great veil over his Majesty. For, he calls himself a Bridegroom, a friend, a
lover. And in the whole book of Canticles, we cannot find with both our eyes,
one proper name of God; not one of the ten great names of God, which are so
easy to be found in the old Testament; and which Saint Hierome does briefly
explicate in his learned Epistle to Marcella. God will not be known to S.
Hier. Ep. ad Marcel.
his bashful, and tender Spouse, by the names which move terror and
affrightment. For, he would not as (a man may say) for all the world, trouble,
or fright his pretty maiden Spouse: And uses only the titles which kindle and
cherish love.

CHAP. IX.
ALl this while there occurred, as well in the book of Creatures, as in the
loveletters from the Creator, many fair, and solid emblems of a Divine
providence, goodness, wisdom, mercy, justice, and so forth. And before
this, man might already learn sufficiently, that there was one God; even in
the Manuscript of Creatures, by turning before his lesson, from cause to cause,
till he came to the first cause; from motion to motion, till he came to the
first Mover. But the capacity of the childish young world, was yet too mean,
too shallow to receive in plain language, the mysterious doctrine of a
Trinity; the heart of man being, as it were, not yet altogether unfolded, not
perfectly opened into a Triangle. Nor did ever any spiritual Traveller to this
day, meet with the perfect likeness of the blessed Trinity in Creatures. For,
there is no principle in natural knowledge, no foot-step of God in Creatures;
by the direction of which any created understanding, either Humane or
Angelical, may reasonably close with the assent, or opinion, or even suspicion
of the blessed Trinity: or which can give us any true notice, that it is
possible. For, although the Understanding, Will, and Memory of man; in which,
as in the most during part, Gods image consists; are three faculties, and one
soul: yet they fall under being one and three, after the manner, as God is
three and one: nor is there such a difference in the faculties, as distinction
in the Persons. And if you distinguish the faculties really, with the Thomists;
the Persons will not be so really distinguished, and yet they will be truly
distinguished one from another; besides that every one will be the same in
Essence, and the whole Essence. If the learned urge, that the soundest part of
the heathen writers, speak honorably of the blessed Trinity, as Mercurius,
therefore called (though some think otherwise) (...); and Orpheus: and that
Plato speaks high things of the word and divine love; and other Platonists, out
of whose books S. Austin reports that he gathered these jewels, this golden
chain of holy Scripture, In principio erat verbum, and verbum S. Aug. l. 7
confess. c. 9. Io. 1. 1.
erat apud Deum, and Deus erat verbum; In the beginning was the word, and the
word was with God, and the word was God. As if the Eagle had not taken it in a
high flight from the holy Ghost, but stooped to them for it. I answer, these
Philosophers sucked the sweets of knowledge they had in this kind, out of the
Scripture. And Clemens Alexandrinus Clem. Alex. l. 1 Siromatum.
makes mention of a certain old Greek edition of the old Testament, before
that of the Septuagint; which came to the hands of Plato, and of other
Philosophers. And also, these Philosophers, as it is abundantly manifest in
Saint Justine, traveled all into Egypt, to better their S. Just. paranesi,
sive cohort. ad Gracos.
knowledge; where the Jews in their servitude, had left many visible footsteps
of heavenly learning. Yet where they speak of the word, and so plainly of the
blessed Trinity; they received their knowledge in the same strange manner, as
the Sibyls: and they spoke, as Plato said of the Sibyls, many brave matters,
(...), not Plat. apud Just. in paranesi.
reaching to the deep, and genuine sense of any word they said, and the spirit
failing, not being able to recover the least representation of what they had
said. And truly Theodor. lib. 2. apud Gracos.
Theodoret gives a most exquisite reason, why God was not willing to deliver
the knowledge of the blessed Trinity in a plain letter to the Jews; but in
characters, in a close and covered manner: because they first came from Egypt,
where a multitude of Gods was adored; and were afterward seated in Canaan,
where the like adoration was performed. And if God had talked to them in a
familiar way; in a worn, and beaten phrase, of three Persons; they moreover,
being an idolatrous generation, their corrupt natures might have easily
corrupted the Text; and believed as many Gods as Persons: especially, when they
were of themselves, such waxen creatures, so prone, and pliant to Idolatry;
that the only reason why they danced to a golden Calfe in the Wilderness,
was, because they had formerly seen the like sport, and practice in Egypt;
when they were busy, as it is recorded of them, in raising an Egyptian
Pyramid. Yet, God did often draw here a line and there a figure of this great
mystery, in the old Testament: that it might not seem to be new doctrine, when
it should afterward be delivered with the sound of a Trumpet in the new
Testament. And questionless, we shall know in Heaven, and behold in every
degree, and latitude of the beatificall vision, many great secrets, and
privileged mysteries (though not in so high a kind) which God is not pleased
ever to reveal out of himself, to the world; in consideration of humane
weakness, and distraction. This thrice high mystery of the blessed Trinity, is
only fit nourishment for an understanding thrice purified, thrice enlightened:
that is, by the light of Nature, the light of the Law, and the light of the
Gospel: And only we, by the only help of Grace, can thoroughly digest it. It
is our Faith only, which can say with a good courage to these humane sciences,
that vaunt so much of their clearenesse; as the Spouse in the Canticles to the
daughters of Jerusalem: I am black, but 1. Cant. 5.
comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem. I am black, seem black: I Will tell you
why; because the most noble part of my Verities stand over humane capacity; the
distance in part causing the error. And likewise, they seem not fair, not
because they are foul, but because they are veiled, and discover not their
choice beauty, to the dull, incapable and weak eye of reason. Yet, I am (...);
because the ground of my beaty is good, and can never decay; and because I and
my beauty stand upon a firm Basis, and fix upon the sound, and solid verity
or veracity of God; (who can neither deceive others in respect of his infinite
truth; nor be deceived in himself, in regard of the infinite light of his
understanding) from whom I descend by Revelation. The Kings daughter is all
glorious within; Ps. 45. 13.
says the Kingly Prophet. She is but glorious within, and yet she is all
gloririous. And the glory of the Kings daughter, of Faith, is from within; from
the Truth of God, upon which it secretly anchors. Let Moses speak: And the
Lord Exodus 13. 21.
went before them, before the children of Israel, in their journey toward
Canaan, by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way, and by night in a
pillar of fire, to give them light. Some fit this Text to the comforts, and
crosses of this life; God appearing a cloud in our earthly comforts; and light
in our crosses; and in both, a pillar. And some to Faith. For, God was both
black and comely; as our Faith, by which we are led toward Canaan, is both
dark and clear. We may best learn of our Masters, and teach our Scholars,
with Aquinas; that whereas there are two chief faculties of the Soul, the
Understanding, and Will; and with the Understanding we know; with the Will we
love: it is a greater height of perfection, to know the things which are under
us, then to love them: but for the things which are above us; it is more
perfect satisfaction, to love them, then to know, and understand them.

CHAP. X.
BUt here we must encounter a difficulty. It is the quaint observation of Saint
Bernard, that Caine was Fideicida, antequam S. Bernar. Sermon. 24. in Cant.
Fratricida, that he killed Faith, before he murdered his Brother. As
likewise, the great Doctor of our Western Church, Saint Austin says of Judas;
that he first betrayed Faith, and then his Master. For, an evil Faith is
commonly, the lewd, and common mother of evil works. And alas, Caine had
many children like him in this foul act of killing Faith. For, till God was
pleased after the death of his Son, to spread himself with an equal
stream, upon Jew and Gentile; we read but of one people, and some odd
persons; in the number of whom, were holy Job and his friends, that were his.
Why now, was not God all things to all men? The answer is not far off. He
was, and gave meat to every sick and diseased person, agreeable with the
qualities, and disposition of his stomach, supposing his disease. I will make
it as clear as the light. Saint John speaking of Christ, the true light,
says, That was the true light which enlightneth every man Io. 1. 9.
that comes into the world. Every man; not every man that is enlightened, but
every man that comes into the world.

Before the coming of Christ, God enlightened the Gentiles, by many fit helps,
and competent directions. As the three Kings, and people of the East, by the
doctrine, and Prophesies of some believing Gentiles. The Egyptians, by an old
Record, showing that when a Virgin should bring forth a child, their Idols
should fall before him, like Dagon before the Ark of God: in memory of which,
they set up in one of their great Temples, a fair Image of a Virgin, with a
child in her arms.

The people of Alexandria in Egypt, by the Hieroglyphicke of a Cross,
mentioned by Ruffinus: the interpretation of which, Ruffin. Eccles. Hist. l. 2.
c. 29.
was, vita ventura, life to come; with a Prophetical sequel annexed to the
interpretation; that their emblems, and obscurities should continue, till by
the Cross, life should come to the world. The great, and learned Travelers
into Egypt, by certain holy marks of life, and doctrine, left there as it
were imprinted by the Jews. And the whole world, by Jews dispersed here and
there, which gathered many to God, and to Jerusalem: And there were dwelling,
says Saint Luke, at Jerusalem, Jews, devout Act. 2. 5.
men, out of every Nation under Heaven. As likewise now, a great School of
holy Fathers teaches, they are all scattered, and dispersed, that they may
daily show to Infidels, the old Prophesies and predictions of what we preach.
And also the whole world by the Sibyls, who dwelling in Caves under ground,
were thought to be filled with a Spirit, rising like a dampe, from the
fruitful entrals of the earth: but were indeed, inspired from Heaven, and
filled like Conduit-pipes with sweet water, of which themselves did not
partake; as not understanding the drift of their own words.

And again, all the world, by the books of Plato, and other divine
Philosophers: by the strange agreement of the seventy Elders, in the
interpretation of the old Testament; called into Egypt by one of the Ptolomies:
and by the clear, and clearly Prophetical writings of the Jewish Rabbines.
For, whatsoever is well said, (...) S. Just. Apolog. 1.
, says Saint Justin, belongs to Christ, and to us Christians: The holy Ghost
being the holy cause of all caused truth. And certainly, their eyes used to
darkness, would hardly bear more then the small glimmerings of light. And
thus many, why stay I there? many thousands were saved, of whom we never heard.
And the like happened, says Saint Austin, in the Deluge: For, many being
convinced in their judgments, by seeing the Prophecy of the Flood, to become
History; repented of their sins against God, whom Noah had taught to be the
Author of the Prophecy; and believing, embraced their present destruction, as
a just punishment for their sins: and having been justified by a lively faith,
were saved. God did not take al into the number of his people; because his
people had not been so properly his, without an exclusion of others; and
because he would more endeare himself to those whom he took: as likewise,
his love is more glorious, in his elect. And after the coming of Christ, if
there be, or has been a Country, which has not sufficiently heard of
Christ, and his works; the people have not sufficiently performed their
duties, to which they were bound by the Law of Nature. From those that
correspond with the light of Nature, the light of Grace is never withheld:
neither was Christ ever, nor ever shall be concealed; but either is told, or
was foretold.

CHAP. XI.
BUt now at length, sin being very forward, and by occasion of the Law,
growing stubborn, and striving against the Law: and the world groaning aloud,
under the judgments of God, and the weight of the old Law: and the Prophets,
and servants little prevailing; and all, earnestly desiring a Messiah, a
Savior, the Redeemer of Israel; Christ himself, the Lord and Master of the
family. God knew in all Eternity, that it was in his power, and liberty, to
make other creatures, some above the degrees of Angels, some in the distance
betwixt Angels and men, with diverse endowments, and perfections; to whom he
might liberally, and with a full hand communicate himself: yet rejecting, in
the long and various catalogue, all the rest; being a rich God, he chose poor
man: intimating a great correspondence betwixt a rich Creator, and a poor
Creature; the one being very full, and most able to give; the other very empty,
and lying open to receive. And also, he knew, that amongst all the several
kinds of communications, none was so fit, and firm, as the joining of himself
to some created nature, in such a rich, and exquisite manner; that the Creature
might be, as it were, married to the Divinity, and make one only Person with
it: and therefore, he joined himself to man, by the mediation of the
Hypostaticall Union, (if the Schools say true, the most perfect Creature that
ever God made, as coming more near to him, not in being, but in touch) in
this most excellent kind of conjunction. And as the Sun turned face, and ran
back in the same steps it came, ten degrees in the days of Ezechias: so he
descended under the nine Quires of Angels, even to humane nature, the tenth,
last, least, and lowest degree of reasonable Creatures: taking it, to have and
to hold, for all Eternity. Quo altius carnem attolleret, non babuit, says S.
Aug. de praedest. c. 15. Vide ibi plura.
Saint Austin. He not only raised humane nature, as high as it possibly could
rise, or omnipotency lift it; but also, he brought down his Divinity as low
as it could come.

It was fitly sung by a good musician, and the strain was very sweet: He
bowed the Heavens also, and came down: and darkness Ps. 18. 9.
was under his feet. For, they being high, and we low; they were bowed down
by a strong hand, to us, and our condition; the hand of him, who bringing
light, trod darkness under his feet: And it is pretty to observe how God has
labored to unite himself with man.

The water being hindered in one passage, seeks another. For as likeness is
that from which love is taken: so likewise, Union is that, to which love is
carried.

First, man was no sooner man, but God fastened himself to him by Grace. Which
Union, though it was not the Union of God with man, but of his Grace; yet Grace
did present the person of God: and while she kept her Court in man, performed
the strict will of her Lord, her self, and so governed, that all the powers
where she was, did the same: Adam not falling sinfully before his fall. But God
seeing that this Union was quickly dissolved in Adams fall; and that being a
very unsettled Union, it was in danger to break at every turn; and foreseeing
what we now see, he made another more sure, and sacred cord of Union, in the
Incarnation; whereby humane nature is tied to the Divinity; and makes up the
same Person with the second Person in Trinity, without any danger of a divorce,
or breach of friendship. But because this Union is not the joining of God to
every man, but to the nature of man, and to no man's nature in particular, but
his own: he sleeps not here, but comes home to every one without exception,
in the Sacrament; marrying himself by grace, to the soul; applied in the
resemblance of bodily nourishment; to make the Union of Grace more strong with
a double knot: as laboring, if it were possible, to turn into the soul, and
be the same thing with it; as bread becomes not one of the two in carne una, in
one flesh; but una caro, one and the same flesh, with the body.

But because we are not yet come to that, which by the Grecians is called
(...), and signifies both the end, and perfection: and because this Union also
now is, and now is not; God has ordained a settled state of Union, by which
the soul of man in Heaven is tied with an eternal bond of peace to him;
humane understanding, to the divine understanding; the will of man, to the will
of God: and by which all the powers of man are fixed in a firm, and most near
connection, and subordination with, and to him for ever. How then ought we to
stoop and comply, if we sincerely desire a Union of all, not only with our
selves, for our own ends; but with the Primitive Church, for Gods end?

CHAP. XII.
THe Apostles, and Preachers of Christ, following the tract, and footsteps of
God; and of their Master, Christ: who also, conversed with Publicans and
sinners, though not in their sins; and spoke otherwise to his Apostles, to
whom it was given to know mysteries, otherwise to the people: were all things
to all men. Saint Paul to the Jews under the Law, though not a Jew under the
Law, became as a Jew under the Law. To the Gentiles, as one of them, though not
one of them. To the weak, though not weak, as weak.

The great Interpreters of holy Scripture, give three reasons why Saint Paul in
his Epistle to the Hebrews, does not begin after his accustomed manner, Paul
an Apostle of Jesus Christ.

The first was given by Theodoret, because he was more answerably, Apostolus
and Doctor Gentium, the Apostle and Doctor of the Gentiles, as himself proves.

The second by Saint Hierome, because he calls Christ in the same Epistle, the
Apostle, Galat. 2. Hebr. 3. 1.
and higb Priest of our profession, and therefore, lest he might seem to
thrust himself in the balance with Christ, he concealed his title.

The third, and last is given by the same hand, and happily to my purpose:
because he most pleaded for the abrogation of the Mosaicall rites; of which,
the Hebrews, though Christians, were yet zealous, as it is plain in the Acts
of the Apostles. Act. 21. 20.
And therefore, lest the mention of his name, should break the sinews, and
weaken the force, and energy of his doctrine; he is pliable to their passion,
and in a manner, denies his own name. And we know, that the wise Apostles in
the Primitive Church, gave way to the Hebrews in the use of many legal
ceremonies, until the full, and plenary promulgation of the Gospel; that the
Church might with more ease, be compacted of Jews, and Gentiles; and the parts
not stirred, close the better.

Saint Clement writes of Gamaliel, the great Pharisee, and Doctor of the Law,
that he was left, being now a Christian, by the serious appointment of the
Apostles, in the Council of the Jewish Elders; to qualify their heat, and
mitigate their cruelty. And in the Acts, he acts his part; he does comply Act.
5.
with both sides, and reach beyond them all.

This Milkie way went all the godly Prelates, who succeeded the Apostles, or
their Scholars, in all Churches: keeping an even hand betwixt innovation, and
stubbornness.

This ever was, and is, and ever will be, the known course of the holy Ghost,
even in the souls of men: especially, as he is, to borrow of Synesius, (...),
the Giver of Graces. But I am forced here to play Synes. in hymnis.
as I am wont, when I relate the foul prankes of the Papists; and imitate the
Painter; who endeavoring to show to the eye, a multitude of men; discovers
in some only, their faces; in some, the tops of their heads; in others, one
only foot: and sometimes, a cheek and one eye stands for a man; while he
leaves the rest for our imagination to paint: which truly, performs a fair
deal more in the Table, then the Painter.

He that is stung by a Tarantula, (I write what I have known) is presently
taken with a strong, and violent fit of dancing: and he is best cured, when the
Musician plays aptly with the current of his humor, and bending of his
fancy. But I fear I play to one that is stung, and yet will never be
recovered; because no good music has a note so high, as to consort with her
greatness. It is she that says in her heart, I sit a Queen. Rev. 18. 7.


Every man has his way of writing, and I have mine. I am sure this way
delights, and illustrates; and affords to every man, something which he loves;
and also keeps the devout spirit in action, both of him that writes, and him
that reads.

CHAP. XIII.
AFter many stormy dangers, and dangerous storms, by sea and by land; I
arrived safe into my dear Country, little England. My soul does magnify the
Lord, for it. And me thoughts, I came out of the noise, and tumults of other
Countries, into England, as into a silent harbor, and haven of rest; having,
as it were, left the world behind me: And if my comparison may lawfully bring
two different things together; as a soul going out of earth, comes into
Heaven. Truly, after the first step upon land, I kneeled down, and kissed the
very sands, and gravel on the shore. Being come to London, I presented my
self to my superiors; and showing my faculties, declared whence I came. But
they seemed fearful, having heard that I had formerly suspected their ways.
Yet, that was but a qualme, and I was quickly disposed of; and my walk
assigned to me. I was placed in a Parish, wherein there were and are many more
Papists, then there are people in the Parish in which I am now seated. And they
were many of them both rich, and of quality: There are all poor, and of a low
name. Any man may believe without straining his faith, that coming to England,
so top-full of the knowledge of Romish abuses, and corruptions; I wanted
nothing, but the very last degree of heat to the taking of fire: I wanted but
an occasion, to set one wheel a going, that all the rest might go with it. I
had gathered experience out of all their affairs, but only, their dealings in
England: And I desired a little thence, to make up the Talent. In the house
where I lived, all my employment was, my service of God in my way, and exercise
in my studies. I know my enemies will grant to me, that no man amongst them
followed his studies with more exact diligence, then my self. But my way
differed from theirs, for I always carried School Divinity, and other
learning, with an even hand before me; that the mildnes of the one might temper
the asperity of the other; and that the soundness of the one, might fortify
the weakness of the other; and that one might bring the other down to the
understandings of people, to be instructed by me. They were all for the deep
of Divinity: All, for diving. Whence it comes, that few of them are handy in
the conversion of souls (otherwise then by sleight, and cunning;) or able in
the faculty of preaching. In this house, I wrought the cure of a wound which
many Priests had been doing with, never any brought to a Citatrice but my
self. I reaped the benefit of gifts in the house, (indeed they were thrust
upon me) yet not so great; but a great Priest, (the famous Divel-Tamer) whom I
used in Counsel, secured to me, the taking of them in justice. Yet this
kindled a quarrel; such was the tenacious nature of the prime Litigant: and
grew to a parting. And this for a parting blow: (perhaps, my Reader may
understand it) Agnes, a tender soft Girl, having rejected the love of a noble
young Roman, to couple with the heavenly Bridegroom; called to her Headsman
with the voice of a man, as Saint Ambrose delivers it; saying, S. Ambr. l. 1.
de Virginibus.
Pereat corpus, quod amari potest oculis, quibus nolo: Let the body perish,
which can be loved with eyes, with which I would not it should be loved. He
that should have heard the words, and not seen the speaker; would scarce have
thought this had been little Agnes. I speak in the clouds, and I am loath to
come out of them, till I am called and urged to speak, what ought not to be
spoke without a command from necessity.

CHAP. XIIII.
MY Superiors now sent me, and one of them brought me to one of their greatest
houses in England, being the house of a very noble personage; where they were
destitute of a Preacher. But I repairing to London, while the matter was hot in
debating; rumor had carried to their ears, that I had opened my heart to some
Protestants of note, concerning my good will to the Church of England: which
blew up all their hopes. For, some passages of the Country where I lived,
which had passed in my time; had much bowed my heart to a consideration of what
I had formerly known. The passages in part, were these: To confirm the
doctrine of worship due to Images; it was spread amongst the Papists, that the
night before a certain holy Priest was apprehended by a Pursevant, all the
pictures in his chamber were seen to sweat.

And to bolster up the doctrine of praying to the Virgin Mary, and other
Saints; it was given out for a fixed truth; that a devout person, being frighted
in his bed, with the strange likeness of a Ghost; and calling upon Christ by
the holy name of Jesus; no help appeared: but at length, turning his speech to
the Virgin Mary, the Ghost with all possible haste, vanished. In these parts, a
great Priest (great in body) being most talkative in his own praises,
persuaded the weaker sort of his faction, that he had already cast four
hundred Devils out of a poor needy woman; by the vain exorcizing of whom, set
out with bold action, and a loud voice; he raises to himself, a great part of
his maintenance. For, he carries her from house to house; as poor men do
Apes; to show tricks with her. And he had took much pains to release her, in
the house where I lived. It is easy to delude fools; but, that wise persons
should go astray after a delusion, would be a contradiction in wisdom; and
prove, that wisdom were not so well united in it self.

I was present one time, when the play was acted. For, the fat Priest had
gathered together the refuse of Papists, being the poor silly sheep of people,
(I dare say, not one of them knew the biggest letter in the Alphabet) into a
house standing alone. He sat in a Chair, habited with his Priests ornaments.
The woman kneeled at his feet; and turned her mouth, and face into strange
figures. He spoke to the Devil, with a commanding voice: the Devil answered
by the woman. He asked the Devil, how many Devils had possession of the body;
The Devil answered, all were gone of so many hundreds, but only two. He
commanded the Devil to come up to the top of her longest finger: He did so,
and the finger was held out. Having got him there, he asked him his name. The
Devil answered, in a grave tone, Dildo. He commanded the other to the same
place; and likewise, asked his name: This Devil also answered, Dildo. But
there the woman's wit fell short; for, she should have given the other Devil,
another name. And here was all that is notable, which I saw in the best part of
a night; who notwithstanding, was very curious in seeing. And in the word of an
honest man, I saw nothing, but what might easily be; and what reason tells me,
was counterfeit. And all the while the poor ignorant people were all on their
knees, praying upon their Beads, knocking their breasts, groaning as loud as the
Patient; and crying, Our blessed Lady help thee. The root of the deceit, is:
They say, the Devil first entered into her, when she entered into one of our
Churches, to see the child of a Papist buried; to which she had been Nurse.
And still, the wonders pluck at our doctrine, as here people are frighted from
entering into our Churches, for fear of being possessed with Devils. The plain
simple truth is, (which I made good by enquiry) The woman was always a very
idle, and lazy person; and the child failing, grew poor, and discontented;
and so, either fell to her tricks, or was easily wrought into them. I am a
saver here, as in other places. Only, this I present to the consideration of
all wise people: If one small part of a County in the small time of a year,
gave plenty of these most ridiculous passages: what prankes do they play every
hour in England? what in the world? I kenw the Jesuit that came to the door
of a great house in England; leading an Ape, and professing to make sport with
him; The secret was, he desired to win a kinswoman of his, abiding in the
house. To whom afterward coming, as she walked in the fields in hay-time, and
not being able to bend her to him, he drew his knife upon her; and had she not
been relieved by an out cry, she might have been spoiled by him, of her life,
though not of her religion.

These, and the like strange carriages of heavenly matters, scanned in my
thoughts, moved me at first, to separate my self a little from the Papists. In
which time, they wrote a very persuasive letter to me. Which having perused, I
sent a letter to a person of quality amongst them; wherein (for I promised in
the beginning of my book, to speak the truth in all things) I signified to him,
that my heart failed me, and I feared to go on, in my new resolution. And in
so great a change, as the change of Religion; after the practice of thirteen
years amongst the Papists, and all the years of my knowledge; it would have
been a miracle, if the heart should not have imitated the Seamans Needle,
turning to the North Pole, and have shaked before it had fixed. Yet this happened
before I had actually took the the habit of a Minister. Let them show me,
that I gave them any solid show, I was of their mind, since I first made open
show of the profession, I now stick to; and they will show more, then they can
show.

CHAP. XV.
I Began soon after, to compare the two Religions; in these words. The
Protestants have one great Power, upon whom only they depend; and to whom
alone, they fly by prayer in all their necessities; observing that of Saint
Peter, Cast all 1 Pet. 5. 7.
your care upon him, for he cares for you. The Papists have as many hearers,
and helpers, as they have Saints and Angels. And yet, devotion being divided,
is less warm: and the expectation of a benefit from a heavenly power under
God, does engage us to perform the highest acts; at least of outward reverence
to a creature; as, to prostrate our selves before him, and to call upon him in
all places, as if he were every where. The Protestants lean wholly upon the
merits of Christ Jesus; desiring to suit with that of Saint Paul, For by Grace
ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves: it 2 Ephesians. 89
is the gift of God: Not of works, lest any man should boast.

Amongst the Papists, their good men, all merit; and to make the matter sure,
one meriteth for another. And yet, as no man can direct an intention to an end,
but he must also intend the means, requisite to the end: So, no man can truly
merit salvation, unless he likewise merit the means necessary to salvation:
the thing necessary to salvation, was the death of Christ; therefore, if they
merit salvation, they merited S. Aug. Sermon. 8. de verbis Apost.
likewise the death of Christ. But Saint Austin says, Neque enim illum ad nos
merita nostra bona, sed peccata duxerunt: our merits did not draw him to us,
but our sins. The Protestants have only two Sacraments; because Christ
intended to give life, and to maintain it: They have Baptism, to give
spiritual life; and the Sacrament of the Eucharist, or the Lords Supper, to
keep and cherish it. The Papists have seven Sacraments, as there are seven
Planets, and because there are seven deadly sins. And yet, if every visible
sign of an invisible gift, be a Sacrament; the old Law was exceedingly stored
with Sacraments. The Protestants give Christ to be eaten by faith: the Papists
wholly, and carnally; and in the same manner, as he is in Heaven. And
therefore, the sacred institution is maimed, and the poor Laity deprived of
the Cup; because they are believed to take all Christ his body, ex vi verborum;
and his blood, soul, Divinity; and the blessed Trinity it self, per
concomitantiam, in regard that Christ cannot be parted. The Protestants teach
according to S. Paul, that a Bishop may be the husband of one wife, which the
Papists 1. Tim. 3. 2
would feign turn to one Bishopric, or Benefice: but S. Paul cuts them off,
having his children in subjection with all gravity. Both the Verse. 4.
Bishop, and Priest with the Papists, profess to live a most Angelical life,
and to carry with them out of the world, an unspotted robe of chastity. And
yet, while they bring glory to their Church by a compulsive restraint of the
Clergy from an honest, and lawful act, they ruin the precious souls of many
thousands of thousands: as appears by the great and grievous complaints of
many devout persons in the Council of Trent; and by the beaten, and ordinary
practice of their Priests; who by force turned from the true channel, run
over all banks, into all beastliness. And I have from their own mouths, two
matters of notable importance.

First, that indeed, marriage had been granted to Priests in the Council of
Trent; had they not, upon the suggestion of the Jesuits, feared poverty, and
contempt: By which, it is as clear as Gods Sun, that they more aim in their
adventures at the glory of the Church, their visible Mother, then of God, their
invisible Father.

Secondly, that the Jesuits hewed the Council into this conceit, for this end;
lest, because the Jesuits can throw off their habit at their pleasure, all
their able men should have left them, and run a wiving. And it is a great
reason, of a great rule they have; that no Jesuit may be a Bishop, or
Cardinal, without an extraordinary command, and dispensation from the Pope;
because their houses would then be deplumed of Scholars.

I fear, the religious persons of the Church of Rome, clad so meanly; in the
greater part, think themselves as great, as the greatest. Tertullian says of
Diogenes, Superbos Platonis thoros, alia superbia deculcat, he kicks the pride
of Plato, being altogether Tert. Apol. cap. 46.
as proud as he. The Protestants are always humble suppliants to God, for the
remission of their sins; and still laying open before him, and recounting the
sins of their youth: And the uncertainty holds them always in a fear, and
trembling, and in a meek submission to God.

The Priest in Confession, will give to the Papists, a full, and absolute
forgiveness of all their sins; whenever they please to read, or tell them
over. And yet nothing is more dangerous to an ignorant soul, then a deceitful
security: they believe their sins are forgiven, and the care is past.
Confession cannot be necessary, necessitate absoluta; that is, necessary to
salvation; or in the list of Sacraments. For, why did the Greek Church, the
most devout, and most learned Church in the world, and the Nursery of our
greatest Doctors, moved only with one abuse ushered by Confession, abolish it?
Can the abuse of a Sacrament amongst reasonable creatures, and sensible of
their own condition, deface the use of it? And therefore doubtless, they held
it by the title of a good, and pious custom; not in the name of a Sacrament.
Turn another way: God, who commands every servant of his, to keep the doors
of his senses; and by all honest violence, to prevent the entrance of sin
upon the soul; will he give a Sacrament, wherein the soul shall under the
pretty color of sanctity stand open to all kinds of uncleanness? And he that
commands me to shut my ears against lewd discourses; will he now, outgoe
himself, and command me to hear them? They reply, the relations are now in
mourning, and delivered in a dolorous, and humble manner. But, the disease
being catching, we cannot be too cautious; and it is not likely, that God would
link a holy Sacrament, with a known temptation. It is a known truth, that
these confessions, and especially, of women, when they relate the Acts, and
circumstances of their fleshly sins, do make strange motions, not only in
the minds, but also, in the bodies of their Priests; which their Authors
confess, even out of Confession. Confession, as they use it, is an optic
instrument, through which, they look nearly upon the soul; that according to
that sight, they may govern. And therefore, it is one of the private rules
amongst the Jesuits; that in all their consultations, (which are many) the Bell
having rung them together, the Ghostly Father especially, shall be present, and
his counsel most observed. And although the Generals of their Orders, checked
by the Popes, have given public commands to the contrary: yet they are all but
a face, and a flourish. Confession, thought a Sacrament, is to many, the bane
of perfection: For, leaning heavy upon the pretended strength, and efficacy
of the absolution, they bate much of the sorrow, which is the principal part
of true repentance.

The Protestants keep one day in the week holy, in obedience to the
Commandment, given with a Memento; Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy;
and other special days, according to an appointment, Euod. 20. 8.
squared by the rule of the ancient Church.

The Papists have many Holy Days, and yet do not seriously observe the
Sabbath, insomuch, that the Jesuits boast, their Founder to have complained
much of Sabbath-breaking. A Council held under Guntranus Council. sub Guntrano.
complains too: Videmus populum Christianum temerario more diem Dominicum
contemptui tradere; we see the silly people, animated with a rash custom,
contemn the Lords day. First keep the Commandment; and then, let your
devotion stretch as God shall enable it. In this point, they are like
themselves, when they say their prayers; For, let my Reader imagine, that he
sees two persons on their knees, praying: The one speaks distinctly, and
lifts up his eyes, hands, heart, and voice together; and in a fit time makes
an end: The other looks here and there, and runs with his tongue and lips
so fast, that apprehension cannot over-take him; talks with any man, and then
again, runs away with his lips; but stays long in his prayer. Which now
of these prayers is most acceptable to the Divine will?

The Spaniards have a form of salutation which is always used as a prologue to
their discourses; and it is ever the same, both in words and form; and it
consists of several sentences, one answering to another. And it is pretty
matter of mirth, to hear how they run it over: Even so the Papists deal
with their Latin prayers, when they recite (as the term is) so many
Pater-nosters, and so many Ave-Maries. And these Latin prayers were but an
earthly invention of man, with a politic purpose, to keep all Churches in
Union with the Latin Church, and in subjection to it. I pity the poor Nuns,
that spend more then half their time of waking in running over, what they
understand not. And I have some pity for the English Papists, who are taught,
that it is an act of greater merit, to pray in Latin, though not understood,
then in English: because it has more of obedience, and greater affinity, and
is more coincident with Church Service. The Protestants quarrel about
ceremonies. But the Popish Priests, in my knowledge, have opposed one another,
in such a tumultuous manner, that they drew on both sides, great persons, and
whole States into their faction; once again verifying that of Pliny; Montes
duo inter se Plin. 2. c. 83 Not. Hist.
concurrerunt crepitu maximo, assultantes, recedentesque inter eos, flamma
fumoque in coelum exeunte, two great Mountains ran violently one against
another, smoke and fire rising up toward Heaven, with a great noise. The Pope
suffers them to cast away themselves, and their dear time, upon discourses
that hang like rotten carcasses upon a Gibbet, which every small wind bereaves
of a limb or two. Because the Psalmist sings of the holy City Jerusalem, Her
foundation is in the holy Mountains; the Virgin Mary is holy Psalm. 87. 1.
in the foundation, and consequently, free from original sin. Thus the
Jesuits. But the Dominicans fight likewise with Scripture. Non surrexit (say
they) major Johanne Baptista. There rose not a greater then John the Bapt. To
which the Jesuits answer merrily; Indeed, there rose not a greater then he; but
he was not as great as the Virgin, because she had never fallen, and therefore
could not rise. If I could part the fray, they should let go this vanity of
vanities, and preach Christ crucified, a little more.

A plain Monk said, and I was his Auditour; that he would never believe the
words, cited out of the Fathers by the Jesuits, except he had them in the
Fathers: because the Jesuits are such known corrupters of good things. And
corruption optimi, pessima, the corruption of the best things, is the worst of
corruptions.

Certain papers of an old Monk, came to my hands here in England; out of
which, amongst others, I took this note.

Dissentiones inter Jesuitas, and
1 Incarceratos in castro Wisbicensi. 2 D. Paget, aliosque nobiles Anglos, in
Belgio. 3 Sacerdotes appellantes. 4 Milites Anglos in Belgio. 5 Benedictinos in
Belgio. 6 Alumnos Seminariorum Romae, and alibi: He means Valladolid for
another place. 7 Moniales Gravelingae, Bruxellae, and caet.
I have given it, as I found it, and so I leave it.

The Protestants proceed humbly in the preaching of the Gospel, without paint,
or fallacy.

The Papists ground much upon miracles, and yet confess the world has been
much deluded by them. I have been resident, the space of eight years, a
quarter of my age, in their chiefest, and most eminent Cities, and places of
abode; and yet, was never present at the working of a Miracle. Besides, the
working of Miracles, is not an undeceivable sign of the true Faith. God has
wrought Miracles by an Heretic Bishop: yea, by the old Romans; for example, in
the defense of the innocent; or, to give weight, and authority to a close, and
covered truth. What if I should grant, that the Papists may work Miracles, in
the proof of the doctrine, which teaches a Trinity of persons in the
Godhead; the Incarnation of Christ; the redemption of the world, by the
shedding of his blood? But I will not be so liberal. Yet, God has wrought
Miracles by wicked and unbeleeving people, though not to sanctify their
wickedness, and countenance their unbelief.

The famous Epistle of Gregory the great, to Austin, the Apostle of England;
will easily fix, and fasten this point. And long before Greg. ep. ad Aug. S.
Just.
his days, Saint Justine the Martyr, was of the same mind; Licet (says he)
haeretici miracula faciant, hoc tamen non confirmat haereticos in errore, quia
miraculorum effectio non semper est pietatis signum, and demonstratio, ut
Dominus ostendit cum ei dicunt, Domine nonne in nomine tuo prophetavimus?
Although Heretics work Miracles, this notwithstanding does not confirm them
in their error, because the working of Miracles is not always an infalliable
demonstration of piety, as Christ shows, when they say to him, Lord, have we
not in thy name Prophesied, cast out Devils? The Papists have the name of good,
and recollected people. I can pass my judgment, not upon the hearts, but upon
the lives of three Families, which I saw. One of which was wholly taken up with
sporting, gaming, hunting, revelling. The Masters of the other were Spaniards
in all their discourses, rather then Englishmen; which I was sorry to hear:
And one of them, frequented our Churches with his body, but not with his heart:
otherwise, they were moral men. But Origin speaks as if he knew them: Multo
nocentior est haereticus bonae vitae, and plus in doctrina sua habet
authoritatis, eo qui doctrinam conversatione maculat: An Heretic of a good
life, is much more hurtful, and brings more authority to his doctrine, then
he that spotteth his doctrine with his life. And afterward, Idcirco solicit
caveamus haereticos, qui conversationis optimae sunt, quorum forte vitam non
tam Deus, quam Diabolus instruxit: Therefore, let us take diligent heed of
Heretics, who are of a refined conversation, whose lives perhaps, not God, but
the Devil has ordered. Their very orders of Religions are even frivolous in
many points of their Institutions: For, if they foresee a sin in the
exercise of obedience, they may not question the sufficiency of the command.
And both they and their Priests may with more leave, and a less breach of Law,
commit Fornication, or Adultery, or Sodomy, or beastiality, a thousand times
over, then marry; although Gods Law was antecedent to their vow of chastity,
and is of more validity; yea, though we should grant their vow, as the vow to
be ratified (with some limitation) by another Law of God, because the matter of
the vow, is of greater perfection. It came from the Monk of Doway, that not
long ago, it was a custom in Biscay, a Province of Spain, and observed with
all exactness of diligence; that every man, having married a wife, sent her
the first night to the Priest of the Parish. And that these different Orders of
Religion, did not take their beginning from the special inspiration of God; I
will manifestly prove out of their own Canons.

The Council of Lateran, celebrated in Council. Later.
the days of of Pope Innocentius the third, has this Canon, Ne nimia
Religionum diversitas gravem in Ecclesia Dei confusionem inducat, firmiter
prohibemus, ne quis de caetero novam Religionem inveniat: Sed quicunque
voluerit ad Religionem converti, unam de approbatis assumat: Lest the diversity
of Religions should trouble all, and raise a confusion in the Church of of God;
we firmly forbid any man hereafter to invent a new Religion: but whosoever
will be turned to Religion, let him apply himself to one of those, which are
already approved.

Mark the phrase of these Lateran Bishops, invent a new Religion; and I
suppose, they would not put limits to the Spirit of God: and for the confusion
here mentioned, it is as plain to be seen, as the Church of Rome; for in
dissension, is the destruction of love, and order; and consequently confusion.
And what true learning can the world expect from these people? who cannot
speak, or write the sincere meaning of their minds; because their tongues, and
pens are confined to the several opinions of their orders. Armed with these
grounds, I took up a good, and masculine resolution; and letting fall Popery,
made a confession of Faith, against which, the gates of Hell can never
prevail: in the words, and manner following.

CHAP. XVI.
I Believe, that the Church of England, comparing the weak, and decayed estate
of the Roman Church, in the beginning of this latter age; with the strong and
flourishing condition of the Primitive times, some hundreds of years after
Christ: and finding the Church of Rome, with relation to those times, so unlike
the Church of Rome, and so contrary to it self; had good reason to trust the
souls, and eternity of her faithful people; rather with the old purity of the
younger times, near Christ the ancient of days; then with the new belefe of
these old and dangerous times. It being confessed, and all Histories, as if
they had been written with the same pen testifying; that in those golden
times, the name of Pope was not heard of. The Bishop of Rome, was indeed,
esteemed a Bishop, a Patriarch; and there was a full point. All the supremacy
he could possibly then claim, rested in his being a supreme Patriarch. Which
supremacy gave him the first place, allowed him to give the first sentence;
and there he stuck. And how little the Council of Nice, of Constantinople;
and all the Grecian Councels, favored the Latin Church, and their Patriarch,
the Bishop of Rome; he that can read, and understand, may be a witness. And,
to consider the just ordering of Church-imployments: Constantine the first
Christian Emperor, (if I may style him so, without prejudice to Philip) ex
sacerdotum sententia, says Ruffinus, advised by certain Ruff. Eccl. Hist. l.
1. c. 1.
Bishops, called the Council of Nice. And he cannot be said, as Bellarmine
answers, to have executed the Popes commandment. For, the Author seems not
in his relation, to have thought of the Bishop of Rome: unless you will urge;
he thought of him in a confused manner, as being in the number of Bishops.
Behold here, the great height of Princely, and temporal authority. Edesius,
and Frumentius, laboring Ruff. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 9
to reconcile a great Kingdom of India to Christ; dealt their affairs with
Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria; they had not learned the duty of repairing to
Rome. Observe the indifferency of Episcopal, and Spiritual power. And
again, it being most certain, that in those clean and holy times, the
Sacrament of the Eucharist was not adored, and consequently, not believed to be
God: and was freely delivered in both kinds to the people. And I wonder that
the strange inconveniences, which the niceness, and curiosity of Rome
pretends, were not perceived by the clear eyes of the holy Prelates in those
days: who little dreaming of a real presence, little thought waking, that the
administration of the Sacrament in one kind, gave the things signified by both
kinds; the body and blood; and was therefore, sufficient to spiritual
nourishment. And moreover, it appearing plainly, in all the old Monuments of
Records; that the Scripture was then read, not to the ears, but through the
ears, to the hearts of people, in a known language. So that when the
supremacy of the Pope began to take place, then only his language began to
be supreme, as well as he. More a great deal may be said, but I have not time
to say it at this time.

Indeed, and indeed, the Church of Rome in my thoughts, is rather the carcass
of a Church, then the Church animated with the holy Ghost: and is like the
ruins of a City, burnt or decayed: by which we may perceive, there has been
a City. Her people may say, Fuimus Troes, we have been the beautiful Church of
Christ. It can do no harm, if it be known; that three days before I
preached my first Sermon; by which I declared my recantation; certain Papists,
very near to me in familiarity, came to my lodging; and desiring to dine with
me, furnished the table with provision of their own buying. But some hours
after, there rose such a tumult and combustion in my body, that I was forced to
take my bed; and keep it; and yet, leave it every half hour; that for three
days, I slept, if at all, but very little: And when I came to the Pulpit, I
was more like the wrack of poison, then a living body. And yet, God carried me
through that good work, with great power.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
HAving thus boldly behaved my self in the open Field, the Popish Priests, and
Papists; began to let their tongues go at me with all their power.

Potiphars wife threw slanders after Joseph, flying from her. The Dragon cast
rivers of water out of his mouth; thinking to drown the Woman with her child,
that had escaped to the Wilderness. The Plutarch.
Crocodiles are said to beat themselves, when they have lost their prey. Let
the Crocodile correct him^^^^^: but let him spare me.

Here I must advertise my Reader, and before the advertisement, I will
consider, that my Creator, my Redeemer, and my Judge, is present with me, and
observes how I manage my Pen. The Popish Religion, in the continuance of it,
stands upon these two maine props, as upon two mighty Pillars.

First, the spreading, and dilating of their praises, who fight under their
Banner.

Secondly, the vilifying, and debasing of those, who take arms against them.
And it is to me a certainty, that the world lies drowned in the bottom of
these two great floods; and is utterly ignorant, what persons have been able,
and good; what otherwise, for these many ages. Their end is: The hearts of
people, prepossessed with evil rumors, will be so filled with them; that the
doctrine of him, upon whom the rumors attend, shall either have no place, or a
very poor one: And such a person, or the good in him, shall ever be looked
upon, through the rumor; which like a false Glass, shall make a strange
creature of him. It is with the Popish Priests amongst themselves, that knowing
one another so well, they know not how to instill a belief into one another,
of what they say. I will give only a soft touch or two; because they are very
sore in this part. The Jesuits had a Scholar, when I was their Scholar,
marked for a Jesuit; and they voiced of him, that every word which came from
him in his exercises, was worthy to be written in gold. They had another
Scholar whose thoughts were not with the Jesuits, and he being gone, they gave
out a rumor, that he was in opinion an Adamite; and held, that we ought (and
might with less danger of sinning) to conform our selves, in the matter of
apparel, to Adam and Eve before their fall. The man branded with this rumor,
is now a Priest, and a Prisoner in England; but a plain one: and as free from
any such imagination, as the best of us all. If they be thus mischievous at
their own home; what shall become of me, that have another home; set up, in
opposition to their home? Where true Faith is the Mistress, Christian
simplicity is ever a waiter: But falsehood is weak, and always wanting; and as
she is false, so are all her attendants; and all her ways. The Scholars in
the Seminaries, believe nothing of the same rank, more truly, then that
Master Fox, who wrote the Martyrologe, was of so weak a brain, that he
thought his head was an Vrinall; and if it touched a thing of a hard substance,
it would break. Is not this a pretty way to transform people into a belief,
that all the doctrine and history, which came out of that head, was no better
then Urinall proof? A person of worth, and great virtue amongst the
Protestants, wrote against them: And if I have ears, they reported he was
took in the base act of Fornication with a poor Blackamore drudge: They would
not grant him the honor to have dealt with a Woman of his own skin. Was not
this a deep way to persuade, that his book was begot betwixt him, and the
Devil! I heard the man named, who wrote the book in the name of Bishop King on
his deathbed. The Bishop was abused: And yet the Church of Rome cannot blush.

But I cannot stay upon this Dunghill; because I see more foul way, in my way
concerning my self.

CHAP. II.
THey reported so basely of me, in the matter of my departure from them, and
from the place of my residence in the Country: that I was forced to repair to
the Master of the house, for a testimony under his hand, of my religious
demeanor; who being a direct man in his way, gave it me in ample manner; and
freed me both from the sin, and the suspicion of it on his part. And I can
make it evident to any middle, and indifferent person, that I could not have
proceeded otherwise, either in reason, or justice, or prudence; all
circumstances considered; and my knowledge of the present condition of things:
And yet, they have not feared to report a most execrable falsehood: that the
Master of the house took me in bed with his wife; and vehemently protested,
that if I had not been a sacred person, a Priest, he would have killed me.
And that the matter might seem more colorable, they employed a Minister of
the same Country, a friend of theirs, and a wild one; and a man of all
companies, to make it his pot-discourse: who in this, was not Christ's Minister,
but theirs, and the Devils. How much has poor England suffered, and how long
groaned under such Ministers, divided in their own hearts, and torn betwixt
Papists, and Protestants: neither altogether faithful to one, nor wholly true
to the other. Albeit I am sure, that as in all great works; so especially in
the service of God, the heart must be united in it self, that it may be more
strong in its motion.

But to turn upon the report: I may use extraordinary words, because I am
extraordinarily charged: As I shall ever desire to partake, either of the
promises of the Gospel, or of the merits of Jesus Christ, no such thing, nor
yet any shadow of it, was true. And in my conscience, I cannot tax the
Gentlewoman with any thing, but foundnesse, and indiscretion; to which, the
sex is very prone; and which she has practiced upon more then my self.
Witness the witnesses of our conversation, which either were of the house, or
of their Tenants. Think now, into what troubled streams he throws himself,
that kicks off Rome, and twines with the Church of England. If he be not
supported with strong hands, both inwardly, and outwardly; in truth, in truth,
he floats upon a very cold, and comfortless condition. What then, when his
own Brethren make him the jest and contempt of men, half metamorphosed into
beasts? But this was little to what came after. It was proclaimed with a
genenerall cry, that I was mad; and that I, and my wits had been parted this
many a year. But O my Father of Heaven, I thank thee, I have them still: and
my joy is, that as they were in thy gift, so they are in thy keeping. If they
answer: these were the noises of common people; and rumors are no sooner
hatched, but they have long feathered wings. What say they to the Scotch Priest
in Holborne, who reported to certain Protestants, that I was run away with
the man's wife, in whose house I lodged. And they doubting of it; do ye
think, (said he) that I know it not, who lodge very near to him? This rumor
was discovered in the mouth, where it was first borne. Having preached in Saint
Clements Church, I was no sooner out of the Pulpit, but the Reader desired me
to satisfy him in one particular; and related, that he had spoke a day or two
before, with an honest, and moderate Papist; who assured him, that in the
beginning of the week, I had ravished a maid; and such a Justice, naming a
Gentleman in Holborne, had sent me to Newgate. And they were as busy in the
Country. For, a Countrey-Papist came to my lodging; enjoined by his friends,
to see me: Truly (said he) it is credibly reported, and believed in the
Country, that you are dead, having cut your throat. O Rome, can thou
maintain thy greatness by no better means? Then, thou art a wretched Rome
indeed; and blessed be the hour in which I left thee. And lately, when by
reason of some words in my Parish, vomitted out of the black mouth of a Popish
servant, in the dishonor, both of me, and our Religion. I wrote to his Master,
desiring that my Parishioners might not be stirred in their service of God, or
averted from their allegiance to the King: inserting these words concerning my
self. Set aside the sweet name of Christ, I would rather choose to be a Turk
then a Papist. I discerned no change in the working of my letter; but only,
that I was defamed through the Country, and proposed as one that had more
inclination to Turcifme, then to Christianity in them; that part which
qualified the proposition, set aside the sweet name of Christ, being wholly
concealed, and set aside in the report and my intention evacuated. The occasion
of my inserting that clause was, because the Popish servant had said, he was
sure that I would quickly be theirs again; which is always a great part of
their plea, when the man that comes from them, is circumspect in his life. I
see, that where one notorious abomination dwells, all other sins are
neighbors.

This my letter was showed by the Papists, to one of my own cloth, and
profession. But one, whom the Papists have bought and sealed their special
friend by special benefits, and entertainments. He speaking as affection
prompted him, not as Religion: so far helped them on, both in their opinions,
and in their depression of me; that he persuaded them, the proposition which
they had chose for the instrument of their abuses, Set aside the sweet name of
Christ, I had rather be a Turk then a Papist; to be no other thing, but
elegant nonsense. His reasons were, as I received them from his own mouth:
First, because the sweet name of Christ could not be set aside. Secondly,
because the proposition being resolved into the sense of it, if it has any, is
this: Set aside the sweet name of Christ, I had rather be a Turk then a
Christian. I reply: This is the discourse of flesh and blood, or rather, of
hunger and thirst, and wanton appetite. Were there the greatest of all
connexions betwixt the name of Christ, and the Popish Religion, I might borrow
of the Philosophers, an hypotheticall, and imaginary separation, per
impossible. But, my meaning in the inwards, is; I do not conceive, there is
any mighty business of Christ amongst the Papists, but his name; and that
wheresover it is, is a sweet name, and a name without a thing, will easily be
removed by an Intellectus agens. And therefore it will stand as close, as this
man's tongue does to the Papists, Set aside the sweet name of Christ, I had
rather be a Turk then a Papist. And his second reason is most injurious to
his owe Religion, I mean the Religion which he professes; For it comes with a
long tail, and implies, that nothing is signified by the word Papist, but
Christian, they being termini convertibiles: and that every tenent of Popery,
is Christian, and derived from Christ. But, the wonder is, that I am forced to
defend my propositions, and assertions, by which I disclaim Popery, against a
Brother. The Father of Heaven, in his Son Jesus Christ bless, and continue
the Parliaments of England, or many a fair birthright will be sold for a
mess of Pottage. Two things I have learned, and experience was my
Schoole-mistresse, speaking to me from the lives of others: The first is, that
to divide and rend our selves betwixt two Religions, is the nearest path to
Atheism. And the second, that men so rent and divided, are company-keepers,
lovers of pleasure, hunters, gamsters, and caet. And by such, I shall joyfully
be resisted; having so good an assurance, that I fight Gods battles.

And that the Papists may rise as high as scandal can mount: they have spread
into the world, that I have took one of their Priests, by whose hands God has
been very kind to me. To this, I thus answer: First, that my obligation to my
Prince, the State, and the Parliament, being the representative body of the
whole Kingdom, does bind me far more strictly, then the private kindnesses
betwixt friend and friend. Secondly, as I desire to be washed with the blood of
Christ, I had no hand in the taking of that person, nor knowledge of it. The
man I took, was one from whom I was utterly disinteressed; a scandalous
person, a scandall-raiser, and one by whose practices I am as sick to the
Popish Religion, as I would be dead to its sins. The other my quondam
friend, I could have taxed in a fit place of this book, for his wily dealings
with a maid, said to be possessed with a Devil; and related, that the Devil
lurking in a lump of her flesh, would run from part to part, and could not
endure to be touched with his fingers, used in the touch, of the consecrated
Host. But I spared my friend.

I could be copious, if I should not be tedious, in these relations. Old wives
tales are odious: And Saint Gregory Nazianzen taxes Julian the Apostata, for
blowing the coals at the Devils Altar, with old women. How their wisdom is
confounded! It is vainly done of the Pelican, that seeing her nest fired by
Shepherds, comes in all haste, and thinking to redeem her young from the
danger; by the waving of her wings; blows the fire, and increases the flame:
and at last, applying her whole body, loses her wings, the safety of her body.

And these reports are in effect, the same: The flame of my devotion toward
the Church of England, is increased; and they lose their wings, and themselves
in the fire: when doubtless, they thought to escape away (like the Fish) in the
black ink, they cast round about them, upon their brother. O these reports!
They go, as Demosthenes says of the waves in the Sea, one confusedly tumbling
over the back of another, without any stop, or intermission. And he that flies
from Babylon, is like one of the Martyrs in the Primitive Church Church,
tormented in a brazen Bull. The bellowing, and roaring that you hear, is, in
the thing it self, the voice of the Martyr; but much altered by passing
through the wide throat of the brazen Bull. The torments of Marcus Arathusius,
were strange ones; described by Saint Gregory Nazianzen. The venerable S. Greg.
Naz. orat. 3 in Julian.
old man was drawn through the kennels, and through all sorts of unclean
places. He was hung up by the arms, and tossed from side to side, where the
boys stood with Pen-kifes, to receive his naked body. He was drawn up in a
basket, in the heat of a burning day; and all spread with honey, to gather a
meeting of Bees upon his body. But he was happy: And happy were the Martyrs,
who prayed, and meditated, walking upon hot fiery coals, as upon Roses. I
complained to one of them, of these scandals. And it was answered, that I might
be called an Adulterer, a Ravisher, and the like; because I had defiled the
Spouse of Christ, and turned to a Harlot. But why then is the crime delivered
without the comment?

Some days after the publication of my closing with the Church of England, a
Popish Priest came to me, having in his company, one habited like an English
Minister: and the maine point of his business broke out in these words: See
how God provides for his Church; you have left us, and here is one coming to
us from that, for the love of which, you forsook us. And thus speaking, he
pointed to the Minister. The Gentleman is now beneficed with us, and therefore
you shall not know his name, though you are acquainted with his fault, because
God has hid many of my faults from those that know my name. Yet I like not,
that he so much savoureth of the Popish practice, as to stigmatize me with the
brand of insufficiency in matter of learning, wheresoever he comes. For, if
he were come quite home to us, he would be one heart and soul with me: and
draw the practice of his life more near to his parts, both of nature and
learning: in both which, whatsoever I am, he is not unable: though both he and
the Priest were of a most horrid life.

Let Men and Angels hear me: If any member of the Church of Rome, or England,
can make it plain to the reason of competent and fit Judges; that from the day
wherein I first gave my neck into the yoke of the Papists, to this hour; I
have committed any scandalous action, scandalous in the judgment of the Church
of England: and moreover, have not lived a wary, sober, and recluse life: I
will restore again, the little I have received from the Church of England; and
beg my bread, all the days of my life. Let them go to my lodgingplaces in
the City, and to my Parish in the Country (they are well known) and when they
come home again, convince me either of immodesty, intemperancie, idleness, or
other such crime; and I will turn beggar in the very day of my conviction. And
yet I know, that the Church of Rome will set me out, (and Reader, remember my
Prophecy) in the form of a foolish, mad, ignorant, shallow, and odiously
wicked creature. And I am all this, but they know it not. And even now, I play
the fool; for, in the defense of my self, I commend my self. But I trust, my
intention is rather to defend the honor of the Church, from which, I did once
cut my self, and to which, God has joined me again. I have heard it spoke
in the corners of their Colleges; that they presently write the lives of
persons, who revolt from them; and put them, and their actions in a strange
habit. I shall be joyful to read my life; that I may weep for my sins, and
bless God for my deliverances; but if it be not written truly, he will write
it, that best knows it. If they come with falsehoods, I shall more and more
detest them, and their Religion; and believe, that all their good purposes in
the service of God, are but Velleities, Wills, and no Wills; Wills which would,
but will not. I desire peace, if it may be granted, with good conditions. I was
bound to satisfy good people, and stop the mouths of the evil. To many has
been denied the use of a sword; but no man ever was prohibited to use a
buckler; because a buckler is ordained only for defense: and in our defense we
kill; and yet are not thought to commit murder.

CHAP. III.
GOD has brought me home with a mighty hand. Had I sailed from Rome one day
sooner, as my purpose was; I had certainly been carried away by the Turkish
Gallyes; which swept away all they met the day before I passed. I was
dangerously sick in my journey toward England, at Ligorne: but, God restored
me. The Ship wherein I was, ran a whole night laid all along upon one of her
sides: And another time, began to sink downright: I fell into the hands of
thieves by the Seashore, that would have killed me: and all in my journey
toward England. And after all this, and much more, I am a convert to the
Church of England, in a time which needs a man of a bold heart, and a good
courage like my self; to resist the craft, encroaching, and intrusion of
Popery. Let a great Papist remember his ordinary saying, that he believed God
would work some great work by me. And I have great hope that the Church will be
pleased to look upon me, and fix me, where I may best be seen; and most be
heard. I am not of their mind, that move, and sue, and labor, in the
achievement of that, which ought to be cast upon them. The Lord knows, that
although the Church of Rome accuses me of ambitious thoughts, a small being
in a fit place, is the top of all my wishes. A Council said: Meminisse Con.
Aquisgr. can. 134 The Council of Aix.
oportet, quia columba est in divinis Scripturis Ecclesia appellata, quae non
unguibus lacerat, sed alis pie pertulit: We ought all to remember, that the
Church is styled in holy Scripture, an innocent Dove for her gentleness; which
chides rather, then tears, and having chid, is friends again presently, and
receives with all gentleness. Yet, I am bold to say, that it would be a noble
work, to provide for the present relief, and entertainment of Shollers, who
shall afterward desert the Church of Rome, and cleave to us. The Church of
Rome does exceedingly brag of her charity in that part; when (it is certain)
their common aim (if not their chief aim) is the strength, and benefit of
their private body; wherein they are all as one, that they may stand the
faster. I owe my prayers, and in a manner, my self, to many great personages.
The Lord pay them again what I received of them, in that money which goes in
Heaven. And persons of ordinary condition, refreshed me above their condition.
Let him, for whose sake they were so pious, reward them: I would the Levite had
been as earnest as the Samaritane.

CHAP. IIII.
ANd being come to the Arc, I desire not to settle only upon the top of the
Arc, but to come into it, and be pliable in all points. If I have committed an
error in this book, I shall presently correct it, after the least whisper of
admonishment which may have been easily committed; because I have not used
other books, borne with a desire of haste; but was contented with part of my
own papers: and certain extractions out of the Popish Libraries. I believe as
the Church of England believes; knowing, what she believes.

The Greek and Latin editions have in the 8. chapter of Genesis, The Crow went
out and returned not. But the English agreeing with the Hebrew, has: And he
sent forth a Raven, which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried
up from off the earth. For he went out, and now and then, returned to the top
of the Arc, flew to and fro, as Birds are wont. And though the Dove also went
out of the Arc; yet, because she could not find clean footing, she
returned: and He put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him
into the Arc. How ready the good old man was? He met her with his hand, and
took hold of her, lest the weary thing should fall; and succored her
weakness with his strength, and pulled her in; and did not leave her in
uncertainties; but pulled her unto himself. This man knew how to carry his
hand in God's Ark. But, what became of the Crow? The Crow (says Saint Austin)
fastened upon the floating carcasses of men, beasts, and birds; there feasted,
and delighted himself (abroad, out of the Arc, and in the midst of the
troubled waters) with filth, and carrion. The Papists lay to our charge; that
no man goes from them to us, but with a desire of more liberty, and
licentiousness. I am certain, that some have done so; whom the Devil has
tossed from one extremity to another; from a roughness, which God requires
not; to a rudeness which he hates. But, these have begun to be rude privately
amongst them; and then, have rather turned Atheists, then Protestants. And many
have run Saint Austins course, who having rejected the Manichees, and betook
himself to the Church of God; became a stout Defender of the one, and a strong
opposer of the other. God called me, and I heard him: he brought me, and I
came: And being safe come, I shall be valiant. Though a Partridge steal the
eggs of her neighbor Partridge; hatch them, and bring them up; yet,
whenever the young Partridge shall hear the call of his true mother; though
he was taken from her in the egg, before he could see her, or hear her, and
before he was a Partridge; he will forsake his false mother, and her covey, and
drawn by a kind of secret correspondence, return presently to the true one.
And so have I. I thank the Priest, that offered me entertainment at Doway, and
there, the honor to be made Doctor, if I would law down the Religion of
England: But I am well here, both soul and body, it shall suffice me for this
world, that I can be a Doctor, both here S. Ambr.
and there. Omnia habemus in Christo, and omnia nobis Christus, says Saint
Ambrose, I shall have all things in Christ, and Christ will be all things to
me. Quicquid amaveris, S. August. Psalm. 39.
says Saint Austin, ille tibi erit, he will be to thee whatsoever thou love.
And therefore, shall not I run after him, when he calls? O quam pauci post te
volunt ire Domine; cum tamen pervenire ad te nemo est qui nolit? O Lord, says
Saint Bernard, how few will go afcer thee? And yet, there is no man but would
feign come to thee. And a little after: Non curant quaerere, quem tamen
desiderant invenire: cupiunt te consequi, S. Bern.
sed nolunt sequi: they do not endeavor to seek, whom notwithstanding they
desire to find: they would overtake thee; and yet, they will not follow thee.
But, I will imitate Saint Ignatius, the Martyr, running violently through all
dangers, to God. Being sent from Syria to Rome, with ten Soldiers, to secure
his appearance, whom for their cruelty, he calls ten Leopards; in his
Epistle to the Romans, which he wrote in the way, he desires them by any
means, not to be an impediment to his Martyrdom: tells them, that he is Dei
frumentum, Gods corn, and must be ground with the teeth of wild beasts, or he
cannot be served as pure manchet to the Kings table; no man ever pleaded so
much for his life: adjoining that noble speech, Ignis, Crux, bestiae,
confractio ossium, membrorum divisio, and totius corporis contritio, and tota
tormenta Diaboli in me veniant, tantum Christo fruar: Let fire, the Cross,
beasts, breaking of bones, division of joints, and bruising of the whole body;
and all the torments of the Devil, fall in heaps upon me; only, what man?
only, speak: only, let me enjoy Christ. This last note of his, was very
sweet, and ravishing. Why, but blessed Saint, fair and so ftly: know first
what you do. Fire will burn, and burning is intolerable; when your flesh
fries, you will tell me another tale. The pains of the Cross, you may best
conceive by our Saviors Passion: he was wounded all over. And for Beasts, you
may see every day, they have teeth, and jaws, and claws too, and are commonly
hungry; and know not how to be merciful, because they want reason, by which,
mercy is known to be mercy; and a Lion is not a sociable creature; he will
roar, you may hear him a great while before you can see him. And what is the
breaking of the bones, thou may give a guess, if ever thou had but one
out of joint; they will ache, when they are broken. Judge of the rest. These
mischievous things are not thoroughly known, and conceived in the soul, till
they are thoroughly known and felt in the body. Sense (doubtless) did object
all these difficulties to his reason: yet, all could not stay him from the
Lions.

And that I may fore-stall, and prevent an occasion of idle discourse, I will
take off the seeming edge of a colorable objection. Perhaps, it may be said;
that I have scattered a word now and then, (and even in public) against those,
that now appear to be the cleaner, and most incorrupt part of Christians:
Those I mean, whom injurious tongues call Puritanes. I call the world to
witness, and answer with me: that I never used any such words, but with this
qualification, and seasoning of what was said; that my stroke was not intended
against such, whom rude livers called Puritanes, as running contrarily to their
practices: but against those that shrouding themselves under the specious
title, cast a deep scandal upon the true Israelites, by the corruptions of
their own lives. And I am no changeling, no Chamelion; For, with such I never
was, nor ever shall be friends. A little farther, I never was the Author, or
the Promotor of new inventions. I went always in the steps which I found trod
before me. Although I was commanded, not to preach in the afternoon: yet I
never omitted to expound the Catechism. I never taxed my Parishioners above
the level of their ordinary duties: I never vexed them with Lawsuits. More.
Although my annual means is quickly counted: I never took of it, what has
been taken; nor ever, what was due to me by agreement with me. And why? I am a
Shepherd, to feed and preserve; not a Wolf, to tear, and devour. Give me
leave. Did the world know, how poor my beginnings were, (I am not ashamed of
them) in what small helps I have rejoiced; when the Papists vaunted, they
doubted not to live and see me beg mournfully at their doors for a morsel of
bread: that my fortunes were carried on the top of the flowing and ebbing
waters, two years, from bank to bank, before I was fixed: and then, but
weakly settled in a dark nooke. Did men know, how I have been used, abused,
forced, threatened, reviled, discomforted, they would not be angry that I
desired to subsist, and to preach the good Gospel of Christ. But I will not
preach this doctrine till I am called.

CHAP. V.
ANd now, I thank the Papists, for my unconquerable resolution; growing from
the grossness of their scandals. Joseph's Brethren were very malicious against
him; they sold him to slavery; the Scene began to be tragical. God came to
act his part, turned the wheel; and made all this malice, and misery end in
the great benefit; not only, of the malicious, and undeserving Brethren; but
of Joseph himself, his old Father, and the whole Kingdom of Egypt. Judas sold
his Master, his Master, and the Master of all things, for thirty pence; the
money would go but a little way; he had an ill bargain. When his part was
done, God entered upon the Stage, and by the execrable perfidiousnesse of the
Traitor Judas, brought about the redemption of mankind, the salvation of the
whole world; and in effect, all the shining, that is, and ever shall be made by
glorious souls, and bodies in Heaven. I do not except the soul, and body of
our Mediator, and Advocate Christ Jesus: who though he did not redeem
himself; because he was not in captivity; yet came to be betrayed, and to
redeem his Betrayer, if he would have bin redeemed. By this law a prudent Mr.
of a family turns the rough nature of an angry Dog, to the benefit, and peace
of himself, and his family; and a wise Physician, the eager thirst of a
bloudthirsty horseleach, to the health of a sick person; although indeed, these
unreasonable creatures of themselves, aim at nothing, but to satiate their
own wild natures. Saint Austin speaking of evil men, says, Ne igitur putes,
gratis malos esse in hoc mundo, and nihil boni ex illis metere Deum; quia omnis
malus aut ideo vivit, ut corrigatur; aut ideo vivit, ut per illum bonus
exerceatur: Do not therefore think, that evil men are suffered to be evil
in this world, for no good purpose; and that God reapes no benefit by them:
For, every evil man, either therefore lives, that in time he may decline from
evil, and incline to good; or therefore lives, that the good man may be
exercised, and farthered in the practice of goodness by him: otherwise, he
should no live. There is a course of things, within the general course of this
world, pertaining to the order; to which, God brings all straggling chances in
the last act of the play; which if we did examine, as they come and beget
experience, we should enlighten, and enrich the understanding with heavenly
matters, exceedingly. We behold, how admirably at this day, moved by the
sinful occasion of Heresy and Superstition, the Church does watch, and pray:
and we know, that a multitude of souls, now crowned in Heaven, has learned to
avoid sin, by observing others punished for sin: which could not in
justice, have been punished, if it had not been committed: and how murderers
do open the gate of Heaven for Martyrs: and that the blood of Martyrs has
been the seed of the Church: for, if they had not died bodily, many had not
lived spiritually. And to go as high as may be: Good comes to God, by the
worst of evils; the good of glory by sin: For, to speak with Cassiodore:
Materia est gloriae principalis, delinquentis reatus; quia nisi culparum
Cassio. Var. 3. 46.
occasiones emergerent, locum pietas non haberet: The guilt of a Delinquent
person, is a principal matter, that nourishes glory: For, if there were no
sin, there would be no place for the exercise of mercy; which supposes
misery; which misery, supposes sin. And though I gather good from the evil
of the Church of Rome; yet, the evil of the Church, is to me, a sound argument
against the Church. That rule of Christ, Ye shall know them by their fruits,
Mat 7. 16.
is as true a mark, as a sign from Heaven. For as the Church of Rome was
first known by her works; so now likewise, she is known by her works: and
the works of her age, not being of the same birth and education, with the
works of her youth; show her to be different from her self: when works do
always answer in some proportion to Faith; and the Tree cannot be good, if the
fruit be generally evil. And as Saint Justine writes to the Grecians: S.
Justin. Cohort. ad Graec.
(...), the solid fruit of pious works, gives testimony to the true Religion.

I came from the last Popish College, of which I was a member, as I did from
all others; fairly, and respectfully on both sides: Their testimony of me, is
yet in my hands, made strong, and authentical with their own Seal. I will
give it here, word for word.

Thomas Fitzherbertus societatis Jesu, Collegii Anglorum de urbe Rector.

OMnibus in quorum manus praesentes venerint salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Fidem facimus, atque his literis attestamur, latorem praesentium, Reverendum
Patrem Franciscum Dakerum, (for this was the last name by which I was known
amongst them) Anglum Sacerdotem esse, nec ullo impedimento Canonico prohiberi,
quo minus sacrosanctum Missae Sacrificium ubique celebrare possit. Cum vero
etiam in hoc nostro Collegio sedis Apostolicae Alumnus fuerit, and modo
absolutis studiis in Angliam ad luerandas Deo animas proficiscatur; nos quo
illum affectu nobiscum morantem complexi sumus, eodem discedentem pattern
prosequimur, and omnibus ad quos in itinere devenerit, quantum valemus in
Domino commendamus. In quorum fidem, and caet. Romae ex Collegio Anglorum die
9. September. 1635.

Thomas Fitzherbertus manu propria.
Those, with whose understandings this will suite, are able to understand it,
without a translation.



The Faculties annexed by the Pope, to the exercise of my Priestly function,
were these: I have them under their own hands.

Ordinariae Facultates Alumnorum Collegii Anglicani.
1. FAcultas absolvendi ab omnibus casibus and Censuris in Bulla Caenae Domini
reservatis, in Regnis Angliae, Scotiae, and Hiberniae.

2. Vt possint illis, quos reconciliaverint, dare Apostolicam benedictionem cum
plenaria Indulgentia prima vice: Catholicis vero, congregatis ad Concionem, vel
ad sacrum in Festis solennioribus, Apostolicam benedictionem sine plenaria
Indulgentia.

3. Vt possint dispensare cum illis, qui contraxerint cum tertio vel quarto
gradu in foro conscientiae tantum.

4. Vt possint commutare vota simplicia, exceptis votis Castitatis and
Religionis, in aliud opus pium cum causa.

5. Vt possint benedicere vestes, and alia omnia quae pertinent ad Sacrificium,
praeter ea quae requirunt Chrisma.

6 Vt possint restituere jus petendi debitum conjugale, quando ex aliqua causa
omissum est.

7 Vt possint dare facultatem Catholicis legendi libros controversiarum, a
Catholicis scriptos, in vulgari lingua.

8. Quando non possunt far Breviarium, vel recitare officium sine probabili
periculo, suppleant aliquot Psalmos dicendo, vel alias orationes quas sciunt
memoriter.

9. Si aliis Facultatibus indiguerint, vel dubia circa horum usum occurrerint,
remittant ad Reverendum Dominum Archipresbyterum Angliae, ut illis satisfaciat,
prout ipsi in Domino visum fuerit: eique in omnibus obedire teneantur; quod
etiam se facturos promittant, priusquam hae vel aliae Facultates eis
concedantur.

The Grants of giving Indulgences, are either ordinary, or extraordinary. The
ordinary are ordinarily known: the extraordinary are these: their Coppie is
yet with me.

Formulae Extraordinariae
Indulgentiarum pro utriusque sexus fidelibus, qui penes se habuerint aliquam
Coronam, Rosarium, parvam crucem, aut imaginem benedictam, and caet.

1. VT quicunque semel saltem in hebdomada, officium divinum ordinarium, aut
Beatae Virginis, aut Defunctorum, aut septem Psalmos Paenitentiales, aut
Graduales, aut coronam Domini, aut Beatae Virginis, aut tertiam partem Rosarii
recitare; aut Doctrinam Christianam docere, aut infirmos alicujus Hospitalis,
vel detentos in carcere visitare, aut pauperibus Christi subvenire consueverit:
and vere paenitens, ac confessus sacerdoti ab ordinario approbato, sanctissimum
Eucharistiae sacramentum sumpserit in aliquo ex diebus infra scriptis, nempe
Nativitatis Domini, Epiphaniae, Ascensionis Domini, Pentecostes cum duobus
sequentibus, Corporis Christi, Nativitatis Sancti Joan. Bapt. Sanctorum
Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, Assumptionis beatae Mariae semper Virginis, omnium
sanctorum, dedicationis propriae Ecclesiae, Patroni vel tituli Ecclesiae; atque
ea die pie ad Deum preces effuderit pro Haeresium, ac schismatum
exterminatione, pro fidei Catholicae propagatione, Christianoru^ principum
concordia, atque aliis sanctae Matris Ecclesiae necessitatibus; in singulis
diebus ejusmodi plenariam omnium peccatorum Indulgentiam consequatur.

2. Vt quicunque in prima Dominica Quadragesimae, and Quadragesimale jejunium
salubriter celebrans, vere paenitens and confessus, sacraque communione
refectus, ut supra oraverit, itidem Plenariam.

3. Vt quisquis vere paenitens, ae si potuerit, ut supra confessus, and sacra
communione refectus: alioqui saltem contritus, in mortis articulo nomen Jesu
ore si potuerit, sin minus, cord, devote invocaverit, similier plenariam.

Let the Ministers of England (those I mean who dwell at home. and not in
Tavernes, who burn with zeal, and not smoke with Tobacco, and who steer not
toward preferment, but toward Heaven) judge, whether the man ought not to be
cherished, countenanced, and exposed in the light, and frequencie of people,
that has shaken off with great loathing, these wretched abuses, and the
Patrons of them. But I poor man (for so is the fortune of these times) like
him in the Comic Poet, -- Vivus vidensque pereo; live, and while I live,
perish; and perish in darkness, and yet, see my self perish: but am not
s^^^^e to perish; for then, sure I should not perish. But it cannot be thus,
long. And therefore, O all ye Scholars beyond the Seas, under whose
profession there lie secret thoughts of returning to the Church of England, be
cheerful: For, howsoever the clouds have shadowed me, the Sun will shine
out upon you. The Church of God has ever been subject to outward alterations:
And you shall be received, and clasped round about, with the arms of true
zeal, and charity. Gods children in England, will acknowledge his children,
flying from Babylon. And every good soul will have a sense of what you feel,
and a sight of what you want, before you can name it. They that are great,
shall be the greatest in godliness; and in all their greatness, shall think
themselves as little as you. And the golden age will come again. And
therefore, once more I say it, be of good comfort. And for me, I hope I shall
now sing with the Prophet, I will not dye, but live, and declare the works of
the Lord.

CHAP. VI.
O What a sweetness of heart it was to me, when I first entered into the
Protestant Churches, after my conversion, to hear the people answer, and see
them lissen in divine Service? O the poor Country people amongst the Papists!
who not understanding their Service, and seldom hearing Sermons; live more
like beasts, then men: I have seen of the Galiegos, and heard of some Country
people in Italy, who (they confessed) did not much differ from beasts, but in
the outward shape. And the case of all people in Rome, is to be lamented; whose
ordinary phrase is; Come, let us go and hear Music, and the Cardinals boys
sing, at such a Church. This is to please the sense, not God. I saw such a
representation of Hell and Heaven, in a Cardinals Palace; and the parts of
Saints and Devils so performed with singing and Music; and the souls in so
great a number, coming out of the world, into Purgatory; that it was
wonderful.

Shows of this nature are often seen in their Churches. Aristotle says well:
Omnis cognitio nostra a sensu initium habet; All the knowledge we gather from
below, begins at the sense. And these Scribes and Pharisees, do fool the
senses of their people exceedingly.

I have an old manuscript, wrought excellently with gold, and painting: In
which book there is a prayer with this inscription: Oration venerabilis Bedae
Presbyteri de septem verhis Christi in cruce pendentis: quam orationem
quicunque quotidie devote dixerit, nec Diabolus, nec malus homo ei nocere
poterit: nec sine confessione morietur: and per tringinta dies ante obitum
suum, videbit gloriosam Virginem Mariam, in auxilium sibi praeparatam. The
prayer of venerable Bede, Priest, of the seven words, or speeches of Christ,
hanging upon the Cross: which prayer, whosoever shall say devoutly every day
upon his knees; neither the Devil, nor any evil man shall ever hurt him;
neither shall he die without confession; and three hundred days before his
death, he shall see the glorious Virgin Mary in a readiness to succor him.
At the Busse in Holland, in the Church of S. Peter; they have pictured a Bishop
in a glasse-window. On one side of him, hangs Christ upon the Cross, with his
wounds bleeding: On the otherside stands the Virgin Mary, with her breasts
running. The Bishop in the middle, is made with a divided countenance; and
these words are drawn in a long roll, from his mouth: quo me vertam nescio, I
know not, to which of these two, to turn my self; either to the blood of
Christ, or to the milk of the Virgin Mary. And was not this an ignorant
Bishop? and was his flock like to thrive?

They lead their people strangely by the ears also: They send letters very
commonly to their Colleges, which are read in the Refectories, and
recreations, as their letters of news are; and wherein passages are far
otherwise related, then they weredone.

When I was a Spaniard, a Priest having been put to death in England, there
came presently a relation; that the quarters of the Priest, being brought to
the Judges house, he commanded them to be laid by a hanch or two of Venison,
(which by chance had been then presented to him) and most unhumanely compared
the one with the other; jesting, and scoffing at them. The English Jesuits have
beat the Spaniards into such a stupidity, by persuasion; that they scarce
either see them, or the Scholars, even in the streets; but they run to them,
and kiss their garments; thinking they will all very suddenly be Martyrs. And
sometimes they run upon confessed sins; that they may please, and flatter
the senses of people. Michael Angelo, a Painter of Rome, having enticed a young
man into his house, under the smooth pretense of drawing a picture by the sight
of him: bound him to a great wooden Cross, and having stabbed him to the
heart with a Penknife, in imitation of Parrhasius that had tortured an old
captive in the like cause; drew Christ hanging, and dying upon the Cross,
after his resemblance; and yet escaped without punishment. And this picture,
because it sets forth Christ dying, as if the picture it self were dying, and
with a show of motion in every part; and because it gives the death of Christ
to the life; is had in great veneration amongst them.

And that their Churches may not want singers, they take somewhat from their
children in their cradles; which, if many of their Priests did miss, they
would not be so much mischievous: neither should I, and others, have had ground
to suspect the young English Jesuits in their Colleges, that are so full of
sport, and play with the fairest amongst the boys. One example in a kind,
will suffice: it has been often in the mouth of an English Monk; that he has
wrought more conversions of ours to their way, in Tavernes, then ever any of
his Order has done, with all their observances of times, and places. But he
more loves Tavernes and Women, then souls; or the tongues of his fellow-Monks
are not true to him. Surely, this Monk deserves not to be kneeled to, when he
is first seen, for a blessing: as the Papists of England are wont to behave
themselves toward their Priests. He will give a curse rather, by drawing his
humble suppliants, if men, to the Tavern, if women, to his chamber.

It is no hard matter to varnish over these abuses. Reader be careful, Arts
are wondrous things; they will make new things, change old things, do all
things. If you be not very wise, and wary, they will deceive you, with excuses,
glosses, pretenses, professions, expressions, accusations. And he that suffers
himself to be deceived by another, is his fool. O how easy it is, with a
word, a gesture, a countenance, to make men ridiculous!

It is not possible to write, but many things will lie fair to the stroke of a
troubled, and carping disposition. Their way is known, they join their heads,
hearts, pains, and pens together. Some Index-men look into Authors, some
invent the matter. What pertaines to several Sciences, is distributed to
several Masters of those Sciences. One disposes the matter; another clothes
it in language. On my part there are but two; I, and my self: and one of these
two, knows no more then the other. They know me, and the secrets of my life:
their Authors, and their personal faults shall escape my knowledge. Thus
indeed, they stand on the higher ground. But, Christum loquenti linqua nunquam
defuit, says Prudentius; a tongue was never wanting to Christ's orator. And
every Christian has lived in open war, ever since he was christened, with
all the Devils in Hell.

CHAP. VII.
NOw that I may take my leave mannerly, I shall turn with an Apostrophe to the
Papists.

First, my old friends, pray leave to style your selves Catholics: at least
for this reason: If you be Catholics, our great ones, that are very great,
and yet more good then great, differing, and dissenting from you in many, and
those weighty points of faith, (as it is confessed on both sides) what are
they? you think mischievously, but speak if you dare. And what differs it,
to call them (I know the term) in express words, and to call them so by
necessary consequence? Well, well, go and leave it. It is too common with you,
to blurre, and stigmatize whole States; and like the Jtalian, to wound deeply,
even when you crouch humbly.

Secondly, be not so importunate for Mercy, before you deserve it. For,
Mercy being more nearly allied to goodness then to power, is not so much
engaged in the illustration of power, as in the preservation of Goodness. And
Goodness will not be Goodness, if it concur with Mercy in giving way to
the propagation of Evil; of Idolatry, and the doctrine of Devils; or in
countenancing the professors of superstition, and profaneness. The Prophet
David proclaims, that he was always an enemy to Gods enemies. And Mercy
has no proper object, (I mean both divine Mercy, and all other Mercy
regulated by it) but those mournful conditions, by the repeal of which,
either true Innocence may be restored, or Gods holy truth and service
advanced; and that, either in the fruit, or in the flower; either in the
perfection, or in the preparation; or God glorified, not in the by, but
directly. God is merciful to sinners, (else I am in a miserable case) but upon
supposition of their future amendment; not upon a demand, that they may remain
inwardly, in statu quo prius, in their former perverse estate.

Thirdly, do not pretend a submission of heart, except you be heartily
submitted. For men will not think, that you, who erewhile were generally (I
will not say so insolent, but stirringly disposed) that it was not easy for a
serious Protestant to walk on his way without reproaches, and afaffronts from
some of you; are now grown so humhle, and submissive on a sudden: except they
work, as you do, by enforcement, and force their understandings: to which
they are never bound, but in matters of Faith; when they lead them captive in
obsequium fidei, in obedience to Faith.

Fourthly, do not promise only that to laws you humbly will submit; but do
it. For, hitherto you have not. Which I thus make strong by proof. You have
fostered, and cherished many thousands of Priests in your houses, (and now do)
in opposition to, and in defiance of the firm laws of this Kingdom: who
cease not to trouble the whole State, and Kingdom, and to set all on fire,
with their scandalous and fabulous reports, and with their seditious, and
libellous Pamphlets: who daily pervert the Kings good subjects, and draw them
by as many devices as the great Plotmaster of Hell can hatch or invent, from
their duty to God, and allegiance to the King: then which there are no stricter
obligations, no ties more sacred. You promise to do, the contrary of which you
most wilfully perform, even while the promise comes warm from your mouths. Is
not this mere juggling?

Fifthly, be not so nominall; do not call them Fathers and supreme Judges,
and acknowledge their power to frame or change; of whom you believe otherwise
then you speak. It is the general Tenent of your Church (and if you be not as
ignorant of your Doctrine, as you are of your Service, you will confess it to
be so) that Judges; yea, Princes extra Ecclesiam Catholicam, out of the
Catholic Church, have not power to frame Decrees, or make Laws prejudicial
to your Faith. And therefore, your Church says, that your Priests are not
obliged, or bound by conscience to give a just account to such Judges of their
proceedings, even those which fall out of confession; because those Judges have
no true, and lawfully-derived power, by which to fasten any such engagement
upon them. And it is a received Maxim amongst your Jesuits, that even a Popish
Commonwealth, (when the Church and Commonwealth, in some sense, are in eodem
gradu atque ordine, in one and the same degree and order of Faith) cannot
validly decree any thing prejudicial to the glory of the Church, or to the
Canons, and constitutions of it.

Sixthly, do not mince your terms, (lest you are suspected in all things)
and shroud the most black attempts, and most bloody practices of the Romish See
against our State, with the faire-coloured Mantle of extraordinary proceedings:
They were extraordinary indeed, that is, above all ordinary ways of
wickedness. In truth you are extraordinary in your expressions, though not as
extraordinary, as your Church in her proceedings. And how dangerous are those
people, that call the top of all mischief but extraordinary proceedings? I
will not strain this point farther, lest I learn of the Jesuits, to break
into that Cabinet of secrecy which the Italian calls ragioni di stato. And
hear me, do not father the Gunpowder treason upon a few discontented
persons, but lay the greater weight of imputation, where the greatest weight of
sin was. O England, give me, I pray thee, a resting place while I live, and
when I am dead, a place of burial. For the Church of Rome, cast back into her
Ingredients, is nothing but deceit, and color. You shall find another lesson
in this book; and other Authors of that Aggregate of malice and mischief. And
whereas a gross part of our English Papists are Jesuited; let the world judge,
to what myriads of mischiefs we lie open.

Seventhly, do not plead so confidently, that you are in no wise guilty of the
wicked facts of your Progenitors, because you are guilty of their Religion,
and belief: in conformity to which, waighed down with a grain or two of
Ghostly persuasion; they became guilty of those wicked facts. And posita causa,
sequitur effectus, say the Logicians. The cause being put, the common cause,
the Catholic cause, the cause of Religion; the effect, helped home by the last
disposition of a little Ghostly instruction, may follow. And as you love me,
call not your errors, supposed errors: as if we supposed errors in you,
while you are certain of our error. I must tell you, that we are as
certain, you err; as we are certain, that God and his word err not. And
therefore let your truth be supposed, but not your errors.

Eighthly, leave the old trick, of closing with our Divinity, when it makes for
your present occasion, and turn; and again, forsaking it at every turn.
Whatsoever all Divines say now, belief was enforced in Queen Mary's days.
And suppose that Belief, as being opus Gratiae, a work, or effect of Grace,
is not to be enforced: would you be suffered to possess your innocent
children, sufficiently Baptized, with a strange belief? to increase your
number (another would say, your pestiferous and viperous brood, but I will not)
by threats, and promises, and rich rewards? (and thus you enforce belief,
while you think not of it) to win a maine part of our Clergy, though not to
your Faith, yet to your occasions; and by continual entertainments of them and
theirs, make them in many practices of high note and consequence, more yours,
then their own, or ours? especially when your Priests are still besieging your
ears, and there whispering, that you ought to labor at all times, and by all
means that are feiceable to set up the Popes Throne in all places.

Ninthly, be not so large in the blazoning of your due obedience: I will put
you a case. If your Prince, blown forward with the zeal of Gods truth, should
endeavor to pull the Pope, the grand Father of delusion and Idolatry, out of
his Chair, in which (men talk) he sits infallible; and utterly to extirpate
such a monster-power out of the Christian world. Answer me: would your Religion
permit you to assist your Prince in that most honorable cnterprise? And
therefore, all your promises, I turn over to his examination, that tries the
heart, and searches the reins. Only, take heed that a mental reservation is
not at the door. And if you are ready in good earnest, to minister assistance
with your fortuns: pray, turn the Channel, and that mass of money, which you
bestow on your deathbeds to Jesuits, Monks, Friars, and Priests, and to the
superabundant maintenance of their houses in strange lands, reserve for the
safety of your poor Country: which in your liberal contributions to Popish
uses, you take pains to ruinate.

Lastly, for shame do not hope, that your affairs may be settled in as great
peace, and security, as theirs; who are united in the same reformed Church,
with his Majesty; and not only, serve him faithfully, but also, believe
honorably of his profession, and are one soul with him: who send not their
children by stealth into foreign Countries, that soiled with strange manners,
and a strange Religion in strange Countries, they may return at length, to
teach and disseminate in his Dominions, (the peace of which you promise with
submission, and in all humility to preserve) a Religion coupled with manners,
dangerous to all that he calls his.

One thing I dare presume, that in this public Jubilee, it is not intended,
that Vice shall sit hand in hand, rejoicing with Virtue; or Error with truth.
And so farewell. And pray, when we meet again in this kind, be true and
real in omni apice, in every tittle of what you write. And think not, that
although I acted the part of a Minister, and a Changeling, and a Devil, and a
Turk at Rome; and all in one Comedy of my own composing: you shall ever make
any more then a jest of it, and but a poor one.

In our Colleges, they were most gracious, that most goared the Church of
England: the fond conceit of which, moved me to turn a Minister, by the
Alchymy of Action into all strange forms, that I might pass more plausible.

I am Countrey-plaine, and still short. Certain religious duties are to be
performed, of the same print with my present condition, and I have done.

CHAP. VIII.
HEre I will give certain forms of Christian duties, which in some part
belong to me, in regard of my former wanderings: and which I will not fit only
to my self; that others may use them upon emergent occasions. That God may be
glorified; and in conformity to his most holy Will, the sacred measure of all
goodness. I most heartily forgive all people that have trespassed against me,
whe^soever wheresoever, or howsoever. Now I look betterupon them, I behold my
own self in every one of them; or another me, very like my self, sent hither
into the world, the same way, upon the same business; and sweating here in the
Vineyard, as Idoe, for the same or like payment; (here I do not mean the
Papists) and perhaps, pleasing God betterupon earth, by some hidden virtues;
and to be seated more close to him in Heaven, then my self. Shall I be
displeased with any, with whom, God is pleased to be well pleased? Indeed, we
must be friends; for we hope to live together in one house, for ever. And
more: I behold the Image of God in them: and our only Savior Christ Jesus; in
the humane nature, which he took, and married to his Divinity; and clearly in
the body which he put upon him. For his sake, I will imitate Saint Stephen, the
boldest, because the first of Martyrs: who being oppressed with a shower, not
of hard words, or the like, but of stones: kneeled down, and cried with a loud
voice: His body Acts. 7. 60.
was as low as Earth, but his voice as high as Heaven; and he sent it thither
with a good will; for he cried with a loud voice: and yet, he cried not for the
help of others; (help, help) or for his own wrongs; but as his wrongs were
their sins: and he kneeled down, before he was beat down: and although
they might have beat him from his standing, yet they could not beat him from
his kneeling, before they had beat him from his life; nor with most hard
stones, beat down his prayer; which then, was his; and now, is mine. Lord,
lay not this sin to their charge. One thing I know: they were, both Gods
whips, and the instruments of his trial, in respect of me: And blessed be God
in all Eternity, that fitted and prepared to my hands so rich, so ample, and
such fine-weav'd occasions of patience, and humility. I bless not God for the
sin, that it was committed; but for his good intention toward me, supposing
the commission of evil, and for the good which he wrought by evil, when it
was committed.

O the blindness of anger! It is impossible to go, or stand, or spet, or so
much as look handsomely, in the troubled judgment of the angry person. Anger
thinks, that we poison the air when we breath, and so, is afraid of catching
the Plague: and that every thing we look upon, we infect with the eyes of a
Basiliske: and that what we touch is stung by a Scorpion; and therefore, the
part touched must be cut off: and that where we smell, thence we have
extracted the sweetness. And the mind of an angry person, says S.
Chrysostom, is a marketplace full of tumult, where is a continual S. Chrysostom.
tom. 4. hom. 24.
clamor of goers and comers; this man calling, that chiding; one asking,
another answering; a fifth murmuring, a sixth hallowing; one here singing, one
there lamenting; and all, with different voices: the land crying of Camels; the
rude braying of Asses; a confused noise of all sorts of workmen, incessantly
knocking on every side, with their several instruments. Here is noise enough
to make a man lose the right use of his hearing. Go, my soul, to the
Philosophers, that knew neither Christ, nor his Father, as we know them: to
Plato, and to his Socrates. Ask Cicero, if this be the mind of a virtuous
man. The Stoics would have thought such a man, not a man, but the Shipwreck
of a man.

It is the voice of the Psalmist, Righteousness and peace have kissed each
other. Upon Psalm. 8^. 10
which words, Saint Austin discourses, as he uses to do, most excellently:
and me S. Aug. super (...) allud. Psalmi (...).
thinks he speaks to me: Duae sunt amicae Justitia and Pax: tu forte unam
vis, and alte^^m non facis. Righteousness and Peace are dear, and
neare-united friends: you perhaps, would have one, without the other. Which can
never be; for they are as unseparable as their friendship: you shall not find
them parted: they are always kissing together. You desire the sweets of
Righteousness, but you have no mind to Righteousness that is sweet. The one
is to be done, the other to be enjoyed: If you will enjoy Peace, you must do
righteousness. Why then, Lord, I beg of thee, not Peace without
righteousness, but the Peace of Righteousness, that while they kiss together
in me, I may be kissing too, but what? thy sacred feet, nailed to the Cross,
and bleeding for me. Under which I cast all my wrongs, great and small. And for
the persons: if my wishes were as efficacious, as the first words of God in the
creation, Let there be Light: after which, immediately Gen 1. 3.
appeared that most gallant creature all in white: in the next instant; they
should all shine in glory with God and his Angels.

CHAP. IX.
NOw, let me look inward, and search the many turnings, and windings of my
heart, for sores that cannot be salv'd, except they be salv'd as well abroad,
as at home; and with different plasters: sores that ache in two places at once.
They are known by this name, injuries done to my neighbors. And they are like
the Serpent, which Pliny calls Amphisbaena,, headed at both ends; and at
both ends, they dispense their poison: for, they not only wound me with guilt,
but also in the same blow, my neighbors with hurt, damage, and loss of some
good thing, to which they have a just title, unjustly taken from them. Every
good action is tutored by some virtue: and the lawful change of the dominion,
which every one has over his own, lawfully made his own; must be regulated,
and informed by Justice. It is the Doctrine of Saint Austin: Non dimittitur
peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum: The S. Aug.
sin is not pardoned, except the thing taken away, be restored: there being a
greater (...), and foulness of injustice, in the keeping, and retaining; then
in the taking away of my neighbors goods: the act of retaining them, being
indeed, a continual taking of them; and accompanied with much more
deliberation: and consequently, a most deliberate negation, or denial of
sorrow for having taken them, and an implicit, or close and secret will, or
love of the same, and the like wicked action: and verily, an utter exclusion of
repentance upon this ground Repentance, by which we are grieved for the
commission of one sin or more, if it include not virtually a sorrow for all
our sins committed, is not Repentance: and therefore in it self, according
to the course, and order of Gods proceedings with us, even in Christ Jesus, not
pardonable. We cannot grieve with the grief of true repentance, for one sin,
or many, except we grieve for all: because repentance grieveth that we have
offended God, and every sin is a great offense against God.

Of this black stamp, are likewise certain offenses committed against God,
or his Church: As, when their honor, or goods are taken from them. All goods,
as goods, are his goods, that is most good. I understand by goods taken from
God, abused. Abuti, says Saint Austin, est uti aliquo ad usum non suum: To
abuse a thing, S. Aug. super illud Psalm. Loquens adversus justum in superbia,
and in abusione.
is to bow it aside, to an use, for which it was not ordained. Gods honor is
taken from him, in the commission of every sin: every sin being opposite to
his honor, and as far as it is able, destructive of it: because a violation
of his precept, and a contempt of his power. But the more eminent, and more
special taking away of his honor, which accordingly requires a more eminent,
and more special satisfaction; is the most foul and deformed act of speaking
blasphemous words, in the hearing of our neighbors: as being a plain act of
open defiance against God. The strong foundation, upon which this holy Doctrine
stands, is: Repentance implies a revoking of sin past, to the farthest
extent of our ability: For, it necessarily includes a will, which would, that
it never had been committed: but sin is not sufficiently revoked, if the
wrongs of our neighbors be not redressed: and certainly, they are not
redressed, without satisfaction, made or forgiven: for, the rent is not sowed
up. And again, Repentance supposes a performance of all the necessary
obligations of Charity: and one of the first and chiefest, is, to repair the
ruins of injustice.

Wherefore, with Gods efficacious help according to the Canon of holy
Scripture, And he shall make amends for the harm that he has done: I will
restore to God his Levit. 5. 16.
own; and because I am his, my self: set his honor free; and turn his goods
into the channel, where at first, they were by him, set a running toward him.
I will correct the judgments of the people, whom I have perverted: and labor
to rectify both their opinions, and lives: and because the Spanish word is
very significant disengannar, to undeceive them. I will restore, if need be:
and if I am able, increase, and preserve the goods, and honor of his Church.
And where I was injurious toward my neighbor, I will with all diligence,
piece up the loss: though by the weakening of my own estate. For, then I am a
very weak creature, when that, by which I am strong, is due by Gods ordinance
to another: and perhaps, another is weak, because I am strong by his
weakness. I will endeavor by all possible means, to know, if the goods
devolved upon me, have been well gotten: whether they be mingled goods, or
no; partly well gotten, and partly otherwise; and restore what is not mine. The
Preacher speaks like a Prcacher: There is a sore Ecclesiastes 5. 13.
evil which I have seen under the Sun, namely, riches kept for the owners
thereof to their hurt. I said, he speaks like a preacher; for, the riches that
are kept above the Sun, are not kept for the owners thereof to their hurt:
but under the Sun oftentimes, riches are kept for the owners, to their great
hurt: amongst which in the first place, are il-gotten riches: for, they have so
much of evil, having been ill-gotten, that they seldom turn to good, till
they are well-gotten again. And although God does not keep riches for the
owners thereof, to their hurt, because although he knows all the secrets of
future events, all his ordinances are pure, and undefiled: yet, their friends
do; for they must needs intend the hurt, because ill-gotten goods, without any
other addition of evil, are hurtful to their owners: and the reason is
clear: what is unjustly gotten, is detained unjustly; if the case be not
varied by length of time: and of all hurts, the hurt of wickedness is the
greatest.

The holy Ghost is the rule by which I work: And Zacheus stood and said unto
the Luke 19. 8. 9.
Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor: and if I have
taken any thing from any man, by false accusation, I restore him fourfold.
And Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come to this house. It is not, I
will give; but I give; and therefore, the reward is quick, This day. And
restitution is made, although the thing taken be small, and the person
damnified, of small account. If I have taken any thing from any man. And
howsoever the words here run; we must first restore, and afterward give. It
was Lord before, but the promise of satisfaction having interceded, it is now,
Jesus.

And therefore, where I have took away the good-name of any man; I will
recover it by the law of God, and give it again. (And why does not the Church
of Rome, which talks so much of satisfaction, give me my own again,
injuriously taken from me?) Sunt homicidae; says Saint Clement, S. Clem. ep.
1. ad Jacob
interfectores fratrum; and sunt homicidae detractores eorum: There are
homicides, who murder their brethren; and there are homicides also, that
detract from them. If my report was false, I will humbly acknowledge my
falsehood, before the witnesses of my report: who, if they be far distant,
shall be made also witnesses of my acknowledgement, by word or letter. If my
report was of a thing, wrapped in the clouds of uncertainty; which yet, I
published under the name, or color of a certainty: I will take all the work
to pieces again and propose all a fresh, as uncertain, but my own weakness.
If, of a thing true, and exposed in the light, but not in the light of the
Sun, but of a Candle, as being secret, or not known where I made it known:
I will conquer the wrong with charitable services. If the wronged person be
dead, I will, in matter of goods, perform my sacred obligation to his friends;
keeping my eye upon the just tenor of his will, and intention. In matter of
good-name, to his good-name: which, as it sickens not with him, so neither does
it give up the Ghost when he dies: but may live, and be in good and perfect
health, he being dead; and which, it self being dead, may be raised again,
without a miracle. For, when he is dead, and all other worldly titles are
buried with him; still in his soul and his ashes, he reserves a title to his
good-name. Where I am deficient by reason of disability, in making the
satisfaction complete, and absolute in all numbers; I will satisfy to the
utmost limits of my power: and what is wanting, make up, full, and running
over, with my prayers. If I am altogether unable; my spiritual satisfaction
shall be the more ample. If for an injury in matter of goods, no temporal
satisfaction be required: my satisfaction shall have two feet, or two wings;
and I will satisfy, both for the wrong and the courtesy, with love, prayers,
and Christian observance. Indeed, I will be singularly careful to restore my
self to God in watching, fasting, prayer; and all that is mine, or placed
under my care, and any way subordinate to me, every thing in its proper way:
And to make even with my neighbors, wheresoever the least shadow, or semblance
of obligation shall appear. It is the good counsel of Saint Gregory: Quales
vires habuisti ad mundum, tales habeas ad artificem mundi: With the strength
and courage, with which you did pursue the world, when you were of the world;
looking now above the world, you must apply your self to the Creator of the
world; in whom you may see the world, without the vanity of the world. And
Lord, give strength and age to the good thou have begot in me.

CHAP. X.
ANd I am most heartily sorry, that I, I vile wretch, the child of a weak
Woman; a base clod of earth, that having got to live, and be a little warm,
has learned to to go, and speak, and to put on clothes, and as soon as it
could sin, to sin: have so greatly, so grieviously offended a God
infinitely more fair, then the Sun in all his glory: infinitely more pure,
then the pure Angels, that having stood fast when their companions fell, not
for want of strength to stand, but with a desire to fall, because with a will
to quit their standing, and rise above the firm place where they stood; were
presently confirmed in all their admirable endowments of Nature and Grace, and
also beautified with a new, and that a complete and everlasting purity:
infinitely more good, then he that is most good under him. I have more to say:
infinitely more fair, pure, and good, then God with all his art and ability,
can make a creature. By whom the Sun was taught to run, and commanded not
to rest, with a promise that he should never be weary: whose powerful voice
the dull and senseless, yet obedient stones, borrow ears to hear: By whose
indulgence, the little worm without seete, creep joyfully; and the small
flies are carried strangely above ground, and make very pretty sport in the
Sunshine. The first, and original cause of all the Good, that ever was, is,
shall be, or can be: and after all this, and infinitely more, then I, or all
the Angels of Heaven can utter, my last end. O good Prophet, and great King,
lend me thy words, and thy heart: I have sinned against the Lord. 2 Samuel 12. 13.


CHAP. XI.
Dionysius Areopagita, Saint Paul's Scholar, and his only convert at Athens;
to whom he imparted the knowledge of the third Heaven; describes the God of
Heaven, as well as he can, (...) Dionys. Areop. de divin. nom. c. 1
, he is a supersubstantiall substance, an understanding not to be understood, a
word never to be spoken. Against what a sublime, and high thing, have I
offended in a most high manner? Against a substance above substance, I have
opposed a substance of no substance. Against an understanding, that for its
excellency cannot be understood, I have opposed an understanding, that for its
weakness cannot understand: And against a word, that can never be spoken, I
have spok words, which having spoke, I can never speak how bad they were; and
which I most heartily wish, had never been spoken. John Damascen says, Johan.
Damasc. lib. 3. de fide orthodox. c. 24
In deo quid est, dicere impossibible est, In God to say what he is, is a thing
impossible. I have done, I cannot say what, against I cannot say whom. Only,
this I can say; Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and Luke 15. 5. 18. 19.
before thee: and am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of
thy hired servants. Because we have Fathers in the world, from whom we come;
and we come from God; I can look up to him, and say, Father: And because by
sin I have forfeited all the joys of Heaven, I can say, I have sinned
against Heaven: and because I cannot sin, or be where God is not, I can say,
and before thee: And because I that did once love God with the love of a son,
for himself; flew wretchedly out of his house, both from his children and his
servants; and now, hoping to come into favor again, must stand aloof off
with beginners that first enter into his service, and have all their mind upon
their wages: I can say: And am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me
as one of thy hired servants. If God should appear to me in the meanest robe
of his beauty; But I speak vainly; for, his fairness is one of the
Attributes, which equally bestows it self upon all the other, all being
equally good, equally fair. But, if he should appear to me in a robe,
agreeable with our eyes; he would be so fair, that aided with a gentle gale of
his Grace, I could not possibly hold from running immediately with all
swiftness, and with all humbleness, into his most delightful embraces. For,
it is most true of God, which Tully speaks out of Plato, concerning
Philosophy, if it could be seen, mirabiles amores excitaret sui: The sight of
him, would stir up in the beholders, a most wonderful love of him; not only
in respect of his beauty, but also, in regard of the secret conveniencie, and
agreement betwixt the soul and its last end. O Lord, what have I done?

CHAP. XII.
I? and what am I? a little creature composed of a weak sickly body, and a
soul? and there is all I. A body, not taken out of the substance of Heaven,
lest I should seem more heavenly then I am; nor out of any shining star,
lest I should take a star for my heavenly Father; nor from bright fire, lest
I should be too fiery; nor yet from the goodly mines of gold, lest my mind
should be altogether upon gold; nor compacted of precious jewels, lest I should
think my self a precious jewel: but of earth, a dirty, filthy, foul thing,
that we, and all the beasts of the field, go upon; and which I wipe carefully
every day from my shoes. O man of earth, be not so rough, wipe it off gently,
remember thy Creation: and part of it, perhaps, was once part of as tall a body
as thine own. And for my soul, it was made of nothing: and if God should step
aside, and forsake it, one posting minute of time, it would presently give
back, and fall to nothing: and nothing can be so vile, as nothing.
Conservatio, say the Philosophers, est continuata generatio, Conservation is a
continued generation: and therefore, where the continuance of generation is
interrupted, conservation cease. The fire in the furnace, did not burn the
three children; because God as he is the worker of miracles, ascending, as it
were, above himself, as he is the Author of Nature, denied the continuance of
generation to the power of burning in the fire; and so the conservation of it
ceasing, it perished for a time; but the three children being removed, God
quickly remembered that he was the Author of Nature, and the fire burnt again.
And here was another miracle: For, God having suspended his concourse, and held
it from that part of the fire, where the children walked; doubled it above
Nature, upon that part of the fire, which destroyed the Persecutors, which now
was elevated above the ordinary condition of fire. And thus it is evident, that
my soul, now something, once nothing, has offended the best thing, in the
worst manner: upon which, it, and all things hang, both in being and
operations; and by which only, it is the hopeful thing it is: as if some
good, and merciful man should hold me up from being swallowed into a gulf, or
a deep Well, and in the mean time I should enrage him with foul words, and
stab at him. It is part of the first massage, which God sent by Moses to the
children of Israel, I AM has sent me unto you. He Exodus 3. 14.
calls himself, I AM, because he only is ens per se subsistens, a thing
subsistent by himself, he is the fountain of all kinds of being, he only
stands without a prop. And I AM, is Gods most ancient name, because Being is
the first thing conceiveable in him: And I AM, had best authority to send,
because his power cannot be derivative, or ministerial. I AM, could not be
deputed as a Delegate, to the office of sending. The quality of the injury, is
always proportioned to the quality of the person injured, and always measured
by it; with reference to the condition of him, who offers the injury. It was
said long ago by Aristotle, injuria crescit ex indignitate personae Arist.
lib. 5. Ethic. c. 5.
illam inferentis, the injury is more great, when it is offered by an inferior
person. And I, a person of no account, have injured most highly, three most
high persons: what high persons? the three greatest, highest persons in one
God; whereof all are so great, that all being most great, one is not greater
then the other. Lord help me.

CHAP. XIII.
BUt how have I injured God? by sin: the only means, by which he can be
injured. Now, to ask what a kind of thing, sin is; is to pose all kinds of
learning. Logic, from which we require the nature of a thing by a definition,
confesses, that she is altogether ignorant, how to define it. Divinity stands
amazed, and is troubled at the sight of she knows not what, breaking within
her holy bounds: it is so black, so deformed, such a monster, as being half
something, and half nothing, and wanting due parts, not to it self, but to a
good thing; and being imperfect beneath all comparison. It is no easy task
exactly to tell what is darkness, blindness, lamenesse, sickness, death. But
to tell what sin is, is so hard, how hard? so hard, that it cannot be done.
For, as the worthiness of God cannot be sufficiently expressed, for its
singular prerogative of excellence: so neither sin, by reason of its
particular unworthiness. It has a title, or a short description rather, and
that is, malum infinitum, It is an infinite evil: because extremely opposite
to an infinite good. It Is a thing, not a thing, which God, who is omnipotent,
and made all things we ever saw, and a great deal more: and who is able to
make more perfect creatures, then we have yet seen; yea, then the Angels;
cannot with all his heavenly power, be the cause of. For, although impotencie,
which includes weakness, may not touch him that is omnipotent; yet, some
things God cannot do, either because he follows the ordinary law, to which he
has obliged himself from all eternity: or because he is tied by a Decree, or
by a promise; or because himself has necessarily bound himself to himself,
to do nothing contrary to the perfection of his Attributes; and the commission
of evil, would be most contrary to the perfection of his goodness. Nam quid,
says Saint Ambrose, impossible est Deo? non S. Ambro. annot. in c. 23. Number.
quod virtuti arduum; sed quod naturae ejus contrarium. Impossible istud non
infirmitatis est, sed virtutis, and majestatis. What is impossible to God? not,
that which is simply hard, with relation to his power; but that which is
contrary to his nature. This impossibility is not an argument of his weakness,
but of his most perfect power, and most high Majesty. Mali nulla natura est,
says Saint Austin disputing against the Manichees, The evil of sin has no
S. Aug. lib. 11. de civit. Dei, cap. 9.
nature: for had it had a nature, God had made it. Sin is a mischief, so
maliciously grievous, and so grievously malicious, that no man, not the
greatest Doctor that ever flourished in the Church of Christ: that no Angel,
no not the greatest Seraphin of them all, notwithstanding all their deep, and
searching knowledge, sufficiently ever knew the malice, and grievousnesse of
one sin. And yet, I desperately commit many sins, and many sorts of sins,
every day. O good Lord, what do I, when I sin? God only knows how venomous
a thing, sin is. And the reason is as plain, as the doctrine is strange: God
only knows, knows perfectly, his own infinite goodness; and therefore, God
only, perfectly knows all extreme opposition to his own infinite goodness.
For, how can we, or any power under God, made, or possible to be made, exactly
know the nature of a contrary, as contrary, or, that we call the nature of it;
when we cannot fully graspe the perfection of that, to which the contrary is
contrary. But sin is only, and wholly contrary to God, and in the first
place, to his infinite goodness: and that, which is contrary to all an
infinite, must be infinitely contrary to it. Hence it is not deduced, but runs
of it self: that all Gods Attributes, (of which, every one is all his Essence)
his Goodness, Wisdom, Providence, Mercy, Justice, Power, Purity, Infinity,
Immensity, Eternity, and all, are exceedingly struck at in every sin. Struck
at? struck, beaten, buffeted: so that no little part, as I may say, of the
divine Majesty, is left unwounded, unmaimed, unbruised. And, as all the
perfections of goodness and honor, which are, and are found in creatures, by
creatures, as footsteps of the Creator; are also originally, and therefore,
most perfectly, and therefore, most eminently, and infinitely, in God: So (mark
this, my soul) because sin is Gods only enemy; and because there is a
combination of evil, the only contrary to all kinds of goodness, linked
together in themselves, because joined together in God: one sin contains,
and comprehends all kinds of filthiness, all kinds of deformity; the
filthiness and deformity of all other sins. Which is one of the reasons, why
it is said in Saint James, Whosoever shall keep the James 2. 10.
whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. Another cause is:
The sinner which breaks charity with God, and offends him in one point; the
way being now open, and the reasons why he ought not to offend God, violated;
is ready of himself, to offend him in another, and in all; and will, if power,
or occasions be not wanting. For, he can never give a good reason, either taken
from something in God, or from something concerning himself, why he should
offend God in one point, and not in another; because he can never give a good
reason, why he should offend him at all: and every offense of God, is most
contrary to reason. Sin is the chiefest evil, or rather all evil; and
therefore, so contrary to God, the chiefest good, or rather, all good: that
although it is permitted, because directed to a good end, by his Providence;
yet neither can it be so much as fathered by his Omnipotence; nor suffered by
his Justice; nor yet approved by his wisdom. And is it not a most wicked
business, to commit an act of that foul quality; that Gods Providence must
presently to work, and turn it to Good, or he lies open to a reproach, for
having suffered evil: and there must be that, which we name a thing, in the
world; and God the Creator of all things, must not be the cause of it, nor have
any hand in it: and God must be forced to strike with his justice, as if he
delighted in our destruction: And if he will know all, and be God, he must be
compelled to look upon that which his wisdom cannot like, because it has no
being in him, as it is the folly of sin, nor any connection with his wisdom?
I am certain, I think not of all this, when I sin. Sin is the destruction
of Grace. I have said enough. And Thomas Aquinas, disputing Tho. Aqui. 1. 2. q.
113. art. 9. ad 2.
of the difference betwixt the justification of a sinner, and the creation of
the world, in the worth of the Act; says: Bonum gratiae unius majus est, quam
bonum naturae totius universi: the good of grace in one man, though not raised
above one degree, is a greater good, then all the good of nature, pertaining to
the world: then the Sun, Moon, Stars, Earth, Sea, then any thing I ever
saw, or naturally can see: then the soul of man with Gods Image in it, though
of so pure a substance, that it cannot be seen. And Grace in the soul, may
be fitly compared to the light of the Sun in the world. For as there are
degrees and differences of this outward light, suiting with the time of the
day: So, there is the light of Nature, that is, of Reason in us: the light of
Learning; the light of Experience; the light of Grace. This fair light of the
Sun, the light of Grace, we in the mean time crucifying and killing Christ;
is all darkened with sin: as the Sun it self was darkened when Christ hung
dying upon the Cross. Sin is the Consumption of goodness: the death of the
soul, man's beter part, and that, by which he resembles his Creator, and is
allied to God. One evil thought, is a secret conspiracy against God, and all
the triumphant Court of Heaven. By every bad word, we scornefully spet in our
Saviors face. And with every ill action, we buffet him. This, to speak the
best of it, is Jewish cruelty. What? a Christian turned Jew? Now my eyes shut
your selves, unworthy to behold Gods good light or his Creatures by it; whose
Maker I have abused, and strived to disenthrone, though all Creatures, and my
self should have fallen with him. With sorrow of heart, I will open my own
sins before him, whether open or secret; which must be the more grievous,
because I was ashamed to act them before men. The desperation of Cain shall not
come near me. Mentiris Caine, says Saint Austin, major est Dei S. Aug. in
Genesis 4. super major est iniquitas mea.
pietas, quam omnis iniquitas: Caine, thou lie; Gods mercy is greater then
all sin.

CHAP. XIIII.
BUt, do not mine eyes run all this while? have not tears opened them? True
tears of repentance, as Chrysologus Chrysol.
speaks, extinguunt gehennam, put out, and extinguish Hellfire; which all
good men preach to be unquenchable. We see that when dark clouds cover the
Heavens, they seem, as it were, possessed with horror, and sadness: yet, the
wind has no sooner beat upon them and shaken them into little drops of Psalm.
126. 5.
rain, but the Heavens begin to grow clear, and by little and little to look
with a most pleasant face upon the world: For, they that sow in tears, shall
reap in joy: Because the seed-time was wet, and troublesome; it shall be fair
weather, and Sunshine all the harvest. The shedding of tears from the eyes of
a true Penitent, is a spiritual Baptism, by which the soul is renewed in
Christ: and when will the Sun shine, if not after so sweet a shower? Could I
behold such a sweet shower falling from another, I hope I should learn to
drop, my Luke. 7. 5. 37. 38.
self. Saint Luke has an eminent example. And behold, Behold, a watchword,
some great matter the Scripture has to say; And behold, a Woman in the City. A
Woman? what Woman? why, she, the woman so much talked of, the Sinner, A Woman in
the City, which was a sinner; she desires not to be known, or called, by any
other name but sinner. And if you call, sinner, where are you; She is quick of
hearing on that part, and she knows you mean her, and is ready to answer,
that is my name, here I come. And what with her, now she is come? Why, this
Woman, the sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisees
house, brought an Alablaster Box of ointment. Now, take a view of her
behavior. And stood at his feet. She durst not look higher then his feet,
and lower she could not look: and she was willing to be trod upon, if he
pleased. Behind him. She did not think her self worthy, that he should look
upon her: or that she, so wretched a sinner, and yet not a sinner, but the
sinner, should behold his blessed face. Weeping. All this while the clouds have
been in gathering; now it raines. But, where fell the rain? And began to wash
his feet. How? with what? with tears: now I understand you; she stood, but
her tears fell, and her heart with them. With tears. With raine-water that
never had been foul, never mingled with any kind of uncleanness; it was a
washing rain: water, that came but even now from Heaven. Here is not all. And
did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed
them with the ointment: and me thinks I smell it. Nay then, she did not stand
now: doubtless she came upon her knees, to wipe his feet with the hairs of
her head. And kissed his feet. O, the sinner has not as yet forgot to kiss:
and rather then she will not be kissing, she will kiss the very feet of him
she loves. And anointed them with the ointment. She did not anoint them with
ointment, to make her kissing sweet, or him sweeter; for, that she thought, he
could not be; but to express her sweet love. Here, head, and hairs, and
eyes, and lips, and hands, and heart, and all were at work. And was not this a
sweet shower? were not the tears sweeter then the ointment, though the
ointment was passing sweet? Now, my head, and eyes, and lips, and hands, and
heart, and all, can ye be lookers on, and not actors, and imitators of what
ye see? I am not worthy to take in, or give out the sweet air of Heaven.
What said I? Was it Heaven I spoke of? I am not worthy to name Heaven. And yet
still I name it, as if I did belong to it. No, no: not worthy to be the meanest
of Gods creatures; a Worm. A Worm is a pretty thing, of a little thing. Not
worthy to be a Toad. O poor, naked, miserable! what shall I call thee? And yet
still I live, and look upwards. O perfect bounty, with all her dimensions;
length, breath, and depth! I am very heartily sorry, that I am no more sorry. I
would I were as heartily sorrowful for all my sins, and for every one in
particular, as God can make a sinner. O my heart, be of good comfort, be
hearty; the desire of sorrow, is a kind of sorrow. I do hate, and even loath
all my most execrable abominations. O that I could revoke the filthiness of my
life! But fool, I wish to do more then a Power, which can do all, that can
be done: And that is, factum infectum facere, to make what has been done,
not to have been done. O then, that no such filthiness had ever been acted
by me! If I were now again, to make my first entrance upon the years of
Reason, and Discretion: I would in the word of a Christian, aided by Christ, I
would stand always like a Watchman over my self: I would be ever awake: I
would suspect all occurrences, that could in reason be suspected: and have an
eye upon every dark place; and upon every corner, where a Devil can hide
himself, or his black head. O my Savior, crucified for me; as truly, as if
there had not been another sinner besides my self I; do kiss with
reverence, the wounds of thy feet, hands, and heart: And now, all my offenses,
as well inwardly, as outwardly contracted, shall be washed away. Hide me, O
hide me. But, where shall thou hide me? not in Heaven; for that is too clean a
place for me as I am: I shall pollute it. Nor upon Earth: for there thy Fathers
anger will will find me in the places, wherein I committed my sins; which
may give him fair occasions to remember my sins, and to destroy me. Nor in
the Sea; for, all the water of the great Ocean, cannot make me white. But,
betwixt Heaven, Earth, and Sea: in the clifts of the Rock, and especially in
the large wound of thy breast; that I may lie close to thy heart: and sometimes
in thy heart, as in a retiring chamber; and sing aloud, that the Angels of
heaven may hear me, and sing their parts with me in the song: Blessed be
Jesus Christ, the Savior S. Bern. Sermon. 3. in Cant.
of the world, for ever and ever: and for fear, that ever should ever end, for
evermore. All this I beg, lying most humbly at thy feet, uhi sancta peccatrix
peccata deposuit, induit sanctitatem, where the holy sinner Magdalene laid
down her sins, and put on sanctity. What now is to be done? I will hereafter
be another kind of Creature, a Creature of another world: indeed, I will. But,
I am too quick. With the powerful, and active help of the divine Grace, I
will. Create Ps. 51. 10.
in me a clean heart O God. O pure God, O God the Creator: It is thou I call
upon. Observe my prayer. Create in me a clean heart: Create it, make it of
nothing, as thou did the world. For now, I am nothing, but a nothing of
uncleanness. And it is a clean heart I would have: for then, I shall be
clean all over, and clean in every part. And I know, it must be a clean
heart, if it be newly created by thee: For, nothing ever, that came immediately
from thee, was sent hither unclean by thee. And, although the soul comes
hither unclean, it comes not unclean, as coming immediately from thee, and
as thy Creature: but as created in a body, and as part of a man, which comes
from Adam; that having been made clean by thee, became unclean by his own
folly; both in himself, and in all his posterity.

CHAP. XV.
IT is not amiss here, to take the sovereign counsel of Saint Cyprian to
Donat, delivered in these words: Paulisper te creed subduci S. Cyprian ep. 2.
l. 2. ad Donatum.
in ardui montis verticem celsiorem, and caet. Let every one imagine himself
lifted to the the top of a high mountain, upon which he may take a full view
of all the world. Here he may see whole Cities, suddenly consumed, and emptied
by the Plague: a disease, which having arrested (for example) one of us, and
given him two or three tokens of death, will scarce allow him time to look up
to Heaven, and say, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner. There whole Countries,
miserably wasted, and unpeopled by Famine; while men do walk from place to
place like pale Ghosts, or living Anatomies, and feed heartily upon their own
flesh, paying the debt due to the stomach, out of their arms; and while the
hungry mother is enforced, as in the siege of Jerusalem, to return her dearest
child by pieces into the place, from which nature gave it entire. Yonder, a
great part of the world most cruelly devoured by the sword; where blood lies
spilt sometimes in greater abundance then water; and where is no respect had to
feeble old age, to weak women, or to innocent children; but all lie mangled in
a heap, as if no such thing had been ever heard of there, as mercy. Sin is
the wicked actor of all this. Here he may behold Fire, turning the labors of
an hundred years, in one small hour, into unprofitable ashes; and perhaps,
many a gallant man and woman burnt, and brought almost to a handful. There,
Water breaking out by maine strength from the Sea, and spreading it self over
Towns and Countries, to the destruction of every living thing, but such as God
made to thrive in the water: while the lost carcasses of poor Christians are
carried in a great number, from shore to shore, from Country to Country, all
swelled and torn, till they are washed away into fruitless scum, which
remains here, and there, on the top of the water, to obey all tides, and to
be tossed, and tumbled with every wind. Invention can assign no other cause
of all this, but sin. All the punishments that ever were, are, or shall be
inflicted upon men: All the evils, which ever did, do now, or shall hereafter
fall heavy upon Creatures, be they sensible, or unsensible, appointed for man's
use, draw life, breath, strength, sinews, and all their force from the foul
sins, and superstitions of the world.

Pause here a little, and give place to a pious meditation. If Almighty God did
so rigorously punish those adulterate Cities of Palestine, with Sodom the
chief head of them, that besides the present punishment of a sudden overthrow
by fire and brimstone from Heaven, as if justice could not stand quiet in such
grievous crimes; the Country, which once was a second Paradise, another garden
of the world, now at this day, lies so pitifully desolate; that nothing is to
be seen, but black and sutty ground, ashes and stones half burnt: there
remaining in the middle a great Lake, called by a scornful name, mare
mortuum, the dead Sea: from which a dark smoke continually rises, most
pernicious to man, and every living creature: where are no trees but such as
are hypocritically fruitful. Apples indeed, hang openly, and which, in the
judgment of the eye, are ripe: but come to them, enticed with their color,
and press them with the least touch, they scatter presently into vain dust.
The substance of this, we read even in Heathen Authors, Solinus, Cornelius
Tacitus; but especially, Solinus c. 84. Corn. Tac. l. 5. hist. Joseph de bell.
Jud. l. 5. c. 5.
and with a more free addition of circumstances, in Josephus the Jew, borne and
bred up, not far from this unfortunate Country. Behold here, a woeful
extremity. It was a rainy morning with them; and yet wondrous light. The were
burned to ashes, before they could rise, either from their beds, or their
sins. And because they were such deserving sinners, and yet, were not quick
in going to Hell; Hell came to them in fire and brimstone. Five great Cities,
and every part of them, were all on fire together: and it burnt so violently,
that all the Sea could not have quenched the flames. And was not Gods Anger
burning hot? me thinks now I hear the damned in Hell, cry from all sides,
fire, fire, fire: and yet, no creature will ever be able to quench the least
spark of it. O the goodness of God, that holds me up, over the great Dragons
mouth; and yet still out of his mouth, though he does crave, and whine, and cry
for me. If I say, God Almighty imprinted with an iron instrument, these horrid
marks of his anger, on the hateful forehead of one Country, for the sins
of some few people: what, O what will he do, or in what strange, and new kind
of anger, will he express himself in the black day of judgment, for the
sins of the whole world? Especially, since that sin is now grown
exceedingly more diverse, both in the species, and in the particulars, then it
was in the infancy, or childhood of the world. In the day of judgment, when
the Devil questionless, as Saint Basil observes, will say something before
the Bench, to aggravate the matter: Hear, great Lord of Heaven and Hell, I
created not these people, (nor could I bring them from nothing) Nor did I
engrave my great sign and Image in their souls. I did not take their nature.
I did not sweat blood, nor die for them. I did not send Apostles, and
Preachers, to signify my will to them, in a most powerful manner; or give
grace to effect it. I never wrought a miracle to bring weight to my sayings:
Nor did I promise them a Kingdom, or eternal blessedness: But truly,
prepared for them a dark Dungeon, where they shall lie, and die with me
eternally. And yet, behold mighty Judge, my cursed crew of reprobates is the
greatest by infinites: whom though I much hate, yet I much love their company.

And if we look before Sodom; God in his dreadful anger, drowned all the
world for sin; both man and beast: behaving himself in regard of man's
beastly sins, as if he scarce knew, which was the man, and which the beast. Had
we been (as we might have been) in the number of those poor lost wretches,
wherehad we been this day? Distressed creatures, they climed the trees; they
flew to the tops of the mountains to save their lives: Happy was he or she
that stood highest. But all in vain. The waters rose by some and by some, they
waiting with trembling expectation: the Flood gat up as high as they: the waves
took them, roaring as loud as they; and their sins sunk them. Part of them
cleaved to boards, plankes, and other floating movables for a while: the
drunkard to the barrel, the covetous man to his chest of money, as very
desirous to stay in the world, and sin again: but no creature of God was
willing to save his enemy. And every one that is like to Ulysses, praised by
Homer with this elogie, (...), he knew the Cities and manners of many people;
may quickly give us to understand, how strangely the world in many places is
defaced, and wounded for sin. Vae laudabili vitae hominum, says Saint
Austin, si remota misericordia discutias eam: Woe to the good lives of men, if
thou O Lord, shall discuss them without mercy; We then with our bad lives,
how many woes shall we undergo? And the rather, because it is most true, which
the same Saint Austin teaches, Multa laudata ab hominibus, Deo test,
damnantur; S. Aug. lib. 3. Confess. c. 9.
cum saepe se aliter habent species facti, and aliter animus facientis: Many
things praised by men, are condemned by God; because oftentimes, the outward
bark, and appearance of the deed, does not correspond, and fall in with the
mind of the Doer.

O Sin, it is a great virtue to hate thee. A Toad is a very pretty thing, in
comparison of thee. And now I remember, a Toad is Gods good creature; and if it
could speak, might truly say: Lord, such a one as I am, I was made by thee:
And howosoever I look black and cloudy, that I move hate in passionate men,
yet thou love me. Yea verily, the loathed Serpent might say, if it had man's
tongue, and understanding: Although I creep in the dirt, lick the dust of the
earth, and draw a long ugly train after me: though under variety of colors,
and a spotted skin, I shroud poison; it being observed, that the Serpent with
the brightest scales, hides the most dangerous venom: though my life is
wedded to such a body, as the Devil first abused to appear in: though men are
so far from yielding me any help, that they run speedily from me: yet I
have the same maker as they, and derive the worth of my being from as high a
descent as they do: and as they are sinful, I am more perfect, and
exceedingly more beautiful in the sight of God, and all his Angels. I do not
marvel now, that the holy Psalmist spoke so heartily, when he said,
Iniquitatem odio habui, and abominatus Ps. 119.
sum, I hated iniquity, and my soul had it in abomination. Go sin, the Viper
shall take place in our bosoms before thee. For, the Viper, that eats
through the tender womb of the mother, never saw the mother before that blind
act of cruelty; so that the Viper is only cruel before he is borne, and
before he ever saw a gentle creature, or this blessed light to which his mother
brought him. But the sinner sees God in his creatures. And the Viper does but
defeat the body, to bring a temporal death: thou the soul, to bring a death,
drawn out, and lengthened with eternity.

CHAP. XVI.
TO sin, is to turn our backs with great contempt toward God: Toward God,
standing in the midst of all his Angels, and holding up Heaven with one hand,
and earth with another: and to turn our faces, and embraces with great
fondness to a vile Creature. O that a true sight of this, like a good Angel,
might always appear to us, before we sin! As the proud man and woman turn
from God, the boundless treasure of all excellency, and sit brooding, and
swelling, as upon empty shells, upon the frail and contemptible goods of mind,
body, fortune. The angry man and woman turn from God, the sweetness of Heaven
and Earth, and side with their own turbulent passions. The Glutton, and
Drunkard turn from God, to whom the eyes of all things do look up for their
meat and drink in due season, and perform their devotions to their fat
bodies and bellies, quorum Deus venture est, whose God is their belly. Which
Saint Paul spoke, Phil. 3. 19.
as it appears by the verse immediately precedent, even weeping. The
lascivious man and woman turn from God, the Fountain of all true and solid
comfort, and take in exchange, the pleasure of Beasts. The covetous man and
woman turn from God, without whom the rich are very poor; and dance about the
golden Calfe, making an Idol of their money. For, Covetousness Coloss. 3. 5.
is Idolatry: The envious man and woman turn from God, from whom come both
(...), and not inward only, but all outward gifts: and stick to a repining at
Gods liberality in others. The sloathfull man and woman turn from God, whose
providence is in continual action and exercise, and give flesh, bones, head,
heart, and all to the pillow. Judas had thirty pence for Christ, but we have
little or naught for him. All the good gifts of the holy Ghost, are struck to
the heart by sin. S. John beheld in his Revelation, a great red Dragon,
having seven heads, and seven Rev. 12. 3.
crowns upon his heads. And again, a woman sitting upon a Scarlet-colored
beast, having Rev. 17. 3.
seven heads. The seven heads, are the seven deadly sins, which the great red
Dragon, the Devil begets upon the woman, the sinful soul: wherewith he
resists, and puts to flight the seven choice gifts of the holy Ghost. I
remember the woman, whom our Savior dispossessed of seven Devils; and the
Leaper, that by the Prophets appointment was dipped seven times in the river
Jordane. The Devil over-commeth the gift of fear (The fear of the Lord is
the brginning of wisdom) with pride, and presumption: which utterly expel the
fear of God. With anger he smothereth the gift of knowledge: For, blinded with
anger, we judge not according to knowledge. With envy, he stifleth the gift of
piety or godliness; For, by envy we bandy with our thoughts, words, and
actions, against our neighbors. With lust and luxury he destroys the gift of
wisdom, by which we are made brutishly foolish. With covetousness he
confounds the gift of counsel, by which we are violently drawn from all
good counsel, in the pursuit of base, but sweet lucre: Covetousness being
the root of all evil. With Gluttony and Drunkenness he kills the gift of
understanding, by which we are besotted, and left altogether unfit to know, or
understand. And with sloth he vanquisheth the gift of Fortitude, by which we
are made weak and infirm, and benumbed with fear and sorrow in the search of
good things. Here is a battle, wherein the weak overcome the strong; and
all, because the strong are fallen into the mischievous hands of a most
barbarous Traitor, a Traitor to God, and his own soul. To sin, is to betray
Christ, and give him over to death and destruction, that the sin, that is,
Barabas, the murderer may live. Here is a business, O Lord! And to sin, is
to banish the holy Ghost with all his gifts, to bid him go, go seek a lodging
amongst the rogues, and beggars. And being unwilling to go (as he is love it
self) and therefore struggling to stay; to thrust him out of the soul by the
head and shoulders; as desirous in our anger, to break a limb of him, if he
had one. O that we could remember at these times, that we are the Devils
officers! And when sin is not the privation of Grace, because it comes where
it is not: it the more dimmeth, and defaceth nature. Sin is the death and
burial of the soul, which only God can raise again: For, as the body dies,
and falls to the ground, when the soul forsakes it: so the soul dies, and
falls under the ground, to Hell-gate, when it is forsaken by God. O
Christian, says Saint Austin, non sunt in te charitatis viscera, si luges
corpus, a quo recessit anima: animam vero, a qua recessit Deus, non luges. O
Christian, there are no bowels of charity in thee, if thou mournest for a body,
from which the soul is gone: and do not mourn for the wretched, and
forlorn estate of a soul, from which God is departed. One sin is a greater
evil, greater above expression, then all the evils of punishment, that can be
inflicted upon us, by God himself, in this world, or in the world to come: A
greater evil beyond all measure, then Hellfire, which shall never be
quenched. One sin. O what have I done many thousand times over! It is the
truth, and nothing but the truth. And therefore, it is said of the sin of
evil speaking: The death thereof is an evil death, the grave Ecclesiasticus
28. 21.
were better then it. The words will bear another sense, utilis potius
infernus quam illa, Hell were more profitable then it. And this is proved as
easily as written, or spoken. For, the evils of punishment bereave us only of
limited and finite goods: as sickness depriveth us of health, death of life.
But sin depriveth us of God, the only Good that is infinite. And the
privation is always by so much the more grievous, by how much the good is more
good, of which we are deprived. The evils of punishment come from God, flow
naturally from him, as from their true source and cause. Go, ask the Prophet
Amos, he will say as much: Amos 3. 6.
Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? God has
nothing to do with sin, but four ways; in all which he stands off, and
comes not near it: In the hindrance, in the sufferance, in turning it to good
ends, and in appointing the punishment. And all the evils of punishment, which
God ever heaped upon man, on earth, and in Hell, or is able to heap, are not
fit punishment; my drift is not equal to the mischief of one sin, though
the Papists think otherwise of their venial sins: God always punishing
under the desert of sin, as he always rewards above virtue; as being more
prone to the acts of mercy, then of justice. And neither all Gods Creatures,
nor God himself (be it spoken with due reverence and respect to his
omnipotency) can shower down so great evils upon man, as he daily pulls
upon himself. For they can only sting his body with the evils of punishment;
he staineth his own soul with the evil of sin. And therefore Saint
Chrysostomes Paradox, out of which he has dreined a most learned Homily, is
not a Paradox: Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso. No man is hurt but by himself:
For, it is plain, that matters of punishment may be turned to virtue, which
does not hurt: but always from sin comes damage and hurt, because more is
lost then gained, though all the world be gained: it being sure, that by sin
God is lost, and cannot be gained. Sin, (to speak gently) is the sleep of
the soul. For, as he that sleeps, fears oftentimes what is not to be
feared: As, to be drowned in deep waters, to fall from the top of a high rock
into the Sea, to be devoured by a Bear, or a Lion, or some such vain thing,
of which he dreams; but the Thief, who comes now in earnest to cut his
throat, he fears not: So the sinner fears some few shadows of danger, but
not the sin that kills him. O foolish Horse, that starts at the shadow of a
tree, and when the Drums and Trumpets sound, runs gladly among the Pikes,
thrusting himself upon true danger! And as he that sleeps, believes
oftentimes, that he is in full possession of that which he has not. He
dreams of gold, and of a Palace; and in the act, the cobwebs of his poor
Cottage drop upon his face, and wake him. The sinner being in danger, dreams
of safety; and wakes, environed with danger. And lastly, as he that sleeps,
performs oftentimes the work of a waking man, but imperfectly; He speaks,
but brokenly, and with little sense: He rises, and walks, but seldom without
a fall. So the habits of virtues being destroyed in a sinner, have left a
warmth and facility behind them; which seem virtuous, when they are not; and
therefore delude exceedingly, both the person and all the witnesses of his
carriage. And such a person is more dangerously sick then the Hypocrite, who
knows his error; or may be soon convinced of it by the light of nature.
Phoenix in Homer, under whose government Achilles was brought up to that great
height and perfection of knowledge, was directed by the rules of natural
prudence, to be two Masters to him. For, the Poet describes him (...), a
director, not only of his words, but of his deeds also. But he that is warmed
with such a heat, when the fire is gone, believes that he is hot, rejoices in
it; and little thinks what kind of warmth it is, wherewith he is heated.

From these promises, I gather what I had lost. I had lost the princely robe of
justice, the rich garment of needle-worke, wherewith the Kings daughter was
adorned: after the loss of which, my soul was not the Kings daughter. I had
lost the name, dignity, and credit of Gods good child: the special
providence, and protection, with which he shrouds, as a Hen her Chickens,
covers, and spreads himself over the just: (O it is warm being under his wings)
and all the more special helps, which imparting to them, he denies to
sinners, I had lost. I had lost faith, and except hope, all infused virtues:
which are the strength, veins, and sinews of the soul, by which she is
enabled to do well and orderly in order to salvation; and which are, as it
were, the fair pearls, with which she is beautified. I had lost, O I had lost
the most unvaluable benefit of Christ's merits. Christ could not say then to his
Father of me; Father give him me, I have bought him. I had lost God, and
therefore was robbed of all good. He that is every where, was gone from me. He
was out of my reach, out of my call: and he would not hear me, but called by
earnest repentance: a hard task, and not possibly to be compassed, without
his powerful assistance, that was far from me. And (which is the top of
admiration) I had lost my self; and could by no means, learn whither I was
gone. Had I gone out into the streets, and asked all passengers, if any good
man or woman could tell where I was: Had I said, neighbor, pray have you found
me? I am lost. Whatsoever my neighbors had said, all sound Christians would
have answered, that I was lost, and so lost, that I could never be found, but
by an infinite power: and that for their parts they knew not where I was.
Indeed, I neither know, nor shall ever know fully, what I had lost. Go now, all
Merchants, and Tradesmen, henceforth hold your peace, speak no more of your
losses by Sea or Land. I had lost more, thou Land and Sea themselves. And
having lost all good, I staid not there, but also was overwhelmed with all
evil. It is a great evil of disgrace to be the child of a wicked man, or
willing to serve him. Sin had made me the child of the Devil, and more
subject then a child, a slave to him and sin. And therefore Christ said to
sinners, Ye are of your Father the Devil. He said likewise, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin. Sin then,
being all over evil, and all the evil that is: and I having committed sin,
and so, being the willing servant of sin, what a strange kind of evil was
I, that served so great an evil; when we all know, the servant is not higher
then his Master, but much under him? Here is a secret. It is an evil chance to
a house, when it falls into the most hard hands of a cruel murderer, or bloody
traitor. But sin had changed me into the most unhappy dwelling of the Devil.
And I that once feared to see the Devil, and who if I had seen him, would
have run; much more, feared to come near him, or to dwell with him in the
same house, or chamber; had then took both him, and Hellfire that he carries
about him, into my own self, and given him the closet of my own heart to
lodge in. Sin changed the Angels of Heaven from a pure white, to a most foul
black. And thus it had altered me. I know that some of Gods people, had they
seen me, would have said: What ere the matter is, you are wonderfully changed:
And then, I might well have answered, Truly I am not well, I am vexed with a
continual fit of a deadly sickness. And I am so weakened by it, that I cannot
distinguish betwixt good and bad. I have exchanged God for vile things,
hypocrisy and superstition, which I have preferred before God. For he that of
two things laid before him, chooses one, esteems that to be the greater good
which he takes, and prefers before the other. I know not what I do: For I
wound God altogether with his own weapons, with the same gifts, which I
received of him, with a condition to serve him: having turned all his gifts
into the sharp weapons of sin. I wound him with his own concurse, his power,
by which he does assist me in all actions, agreeable to my nature; so that I
force God to strike himself in very deed with his own hand, as if I dealt
with a child: and set God against himself, as it were, causing division in
the best, and highest unity.

But now being recovered of the disease, my understanding is more clear, and
more discerning; and knowing God here, my Faith and Hope give me a kind of
security, that I shall know him more distinctly hereafter, and see him face to
face. Man desiring to know, labors to know; and because knowledge is
honey-sweete, the more he knows, the more he labors to know, and the more he
knows to labor for knowledge. And in his laboring to know, one chief part
of the knowledge he gains, is, that although he still labors to know, and
still knows, and although he should live a thousand years, and still know;
still amongst the things which may be known, they would be more which he
knows not, then which he knows. And so still it would be, though he should
live in the world, for ever. But God did not plant the natural passion of
desire in the reasonable soul, with an intention, that it should always lie
gaping; but that it should at length be satisfied, when it should close at
last, with its last end. The like effect follows in pursuing other objects of
desire. If God should have made, after his conquest of one, another world for
Alexander; when he had done there, he would have been weeping again: while
indeed, he would not have wept for another world, but implicitly for God, who
only could have filled his boundless desire. The desire of man, is in a
manner infinite, because it desires one thing after another, into infinite: And
it can never be satisfied in this manner, because the things desired come not
altogether, but ever, one after another: as the day comes, but successively,
hour after hour, not altogether. And therefore it must follow, and it will
follow, and it cannot but follow, that it must be satisfied with a thing
actually infinite; which shall always feed, and yet always fill the soul with
knowledge, riches, pleasure, every good thing: ut semper quidem Deus doceat,
says S. Irenaeus, homo autem semper discat quae sunt a Deo: That God may
always teach, and man may always learn: every degree of light opening to the
soul a more ample and more clear sight of God, in himself, or in his
creatures. Desire and Love tend to union: we desire to have, and we love to
enjoy. And therefore, the powers desiring and loving, strive to bring home the
thing beloved: where desire ceases, and love remains. And thus also, in the
acts of knowledge. For alhough after our manner of knowing in this world,
because our knowledge is imperfect, it is not required, that the thing known
or understood should be joined to the understanding, by which we know; but this
is contented with a species or picture of it: yet when we know and see
clearly, God and the understanding come face to face; they meet in a close
union together. The Understanding being the first faculty, must, as it were,
first touch the divine Essence. I must not here imagine, that the union of the
blessed soul with God, is like the conjunction of Christ's humanity with his
divinity, whence resulteth one person, which we call Christ: but she shall be
joined to him, as a child to the mothers breast, where indeed it sucks, and
takes hold with the mouth, but the mother holds it fast in her arms,
supporting it, that it cannot fall, either to the ground, or from the breast.
And whereas these two faces are very different, the Understanding, be it
Angelical, or Humane, and the Essence of God: because God cannot stoop in his
Essence, though he does in his power and other Attributes, the created
understanding, as being very low, is lifted up to the divine Essence; that is,
strengthened with a light, which we call the light of glory. And this is a true
Comment upon the Prophet David, In thy light shall we see light. It was
excellently Psalm. 36. 9.
done of the Father of lights, in the creation of the world, in the first place
to produce light. For, as it was the first perfect creature, so it shall be the
last, I mean, the light of glory. He begins with light, he goes on with light;
look else: and he ends with light. And why so? because God is light, and
because he ever was, and is, and ever will be light. The soul shall see in God,
a most exact Unity branched into a Trinity; a most perfect Trinity gathered
together in an Unity: the most excellent independencie, or rather priority of
the Father, (because neither does the Son or holy Ghost in any proper sense,
depend) the most excellent generation of the Son, the most excellent procession
of the holy Ghost; whereof one is not the other, and yet, they are not three
most excellent, but one most excellent. O Mystery of Mysteries! How the Angels
in every degree depend upon God, and differ one from another! How because he
could not make a creature as perfect as himself, he goes in some kind, as
far as he can, gives them as much of him as he is able: imparting to them
unchangeablenesse and eternity, though not from everlasting, yet for ever and
ever! How fitly the chosen of God, fill up the number of the fallen Angels;
every one enjoying a different degree of blessedness; their works, and means
of their salvation having been different: and because of every one it might be
said, Non erat similis illi, qui conservaret legem Excelsi. He had not his
like, in keeping the law of the most High: because nature differing in all, the
means and courses did answerably differ. And whereas in the world, she saw God
in his creatures, she shall now see the creatures in God, which she saw, which
she saw not, and which humane eye never saw: which shall afford her
satisfaction, though not perfect her blessedness, according to S. Austin, He
that sees thee, O God, and thy works in thee, non propter illa beatior, sed
propter te solum, is not more happy for seeing them in thee, but for seeing
thee only. She shall see as much as God has set apart for her blessedness;
and though she differ from others in her extension of sight, she shall not
desire to share equally with them, because it is one of her perfections, and
indeed part of her blessedness, to rest perfectly upon the will of God, from
whence flows a blessed peace. From this beatificall vision, or sight of Gods
face, shall flame out a most ardent love of God. We behold in the world but
certain emblems of Gods mercy, justice, power, and the like; which are out of
God, and in creatures; and yet, the reflection sets us on fire with the love of
God. How then shall we burn in love toward him, when we shall see all we see,
in God, though not all in God, in whom all is God? Verily, this love will have
a Property above all loves. For the lover of God in Heaven, cannot but love
him. For, having once seen him, he cannot but look upon him; and looking upon
him, he cannot but love him. Many objects in this mean world, mean, in
respect of Heaven, at the first sight, stir us to love. Looking we love, and
loving we look, and the more we look, the more we love; and the more we love,
the more we look; and we cannot tell for the time, whether we look more, or
love more. Call away the soul that looks upon God; offer her a thousand
worlds for the present, and ten thousand hereafter. Bring all the cunning
enticements that the Devil can think of, or that God can give him leave to
forge: make here an assurance of all that God can give, besides himself: bring
Gods own hand to it. Go to her again, speak aloud, tell her of another
Heaven, where, although God is not to be enjoyed, yet there are Angels to be
seen, and delights without number, to minister pleasures that cannot be
numbered. Speak words as fair, as the soul you speak to: And cry with the
Devil, All these things will I give thee: not over one Matt. 4. 9.
world, O poor, O barren temptation! but over as many worlds, as God can make,
if thou will turn aside from God, but a little, a very little, or wink out
but one moment. She will not, she cannot: not that she will not, because she
cannot; or that she cannot, because she will not: but she neither will, nor
can. Nothing but Gods holy will can move her to turn aside, or wink, and that
she knows, is constant to her Happiness. O the baseness of this world! O
the beastliness of our lusts, and carnal desires! O the vileness of our
pride, and filthy bravery! How foul, how sordid, how beggarly they are, set in
comparison with the fight of God in Heaven? What poor things are they, to take
in exchange for eternal blessedness? Go, go presently, and sell your part of
Heaven, your part in God for these base things. O the vanities of earthly
Courts and kingdoms! Give us God, him, him, only him, and let all go. For in
God, we shall have riches without care, honor without fear, beauty without
fading, joy without sorrow, content without vexation; all good things, not one
after one, but altogether; and without the defects annexed to them in this
imperfect world. The Husband that loves the Wife of his bosom: the Mother that
loves the child of her womb: the children that love their Parents, whose
living Images they are: the friend, that loves his friend, for whom he would
endanger his life, though he has but one: they may frame a conceit of the
tender love of God to the soul, and of the soul to God: but they cannot
entirely, and comprehensively conceive it. For upon earth we may love one man
or woman most; yet we may love others, though not as the persons we love most;
and our love of others, may have no respect to the person we love most, and so
our love may be divided. We cannot love two most: (...), as Plato speaks,
there is but one best in all kinds, one best, one best-beloved. But in Heaven,
our love shall settle with all the force it can make, upon God; where only one
is to be loved: (...), says Saint Justin, for Gods most perfect unity
requires the perfection of a Monarchy. It is the most perfect government, where
is one supreme, Governor, and therefore one God. And though in Heaven, we love
Saints, and Angels, yet that love is a natural branch of the love of God. We
love them, because we love God: we love them in God; we love God in them, we
love God for himself, and we love them altogether for God. But where a Trinity
of persons is the Giver, in the highest gift of all, and the end of all other
gifts, there must appear a trinity of gifts: the sight of God, the love of
God, and a rejoicing in God. According to the good we receive, and the
intimacie of its connection with us, so natured is our joy. It must then be the
greatest joy, when we shall perfectly enjoy the greatest good. But what if the
greatest good be all good, shall we have all joy? yes, I write it with great
joy, all joy: the sight of all, all love, all joy: not that can be given, or
that can be received, but that we can receive. Quicquid recipitur, ad modum
recipientis recipitur: whatsoever is received, is received according to the
capacity of the receiver. And though perhaps some one or some few, shall
receive all that can be given to such a creature: (for, God now gives himself
out most freely) yet they shall not receive all, because no finite can receive
an infinite: nor all that a more perfect creature could receive. It will be no
small part of the souls joy, that Gods will is done in his Saints, in his
Angels, in the saved, in the damned. The righteous, Psalm. 58. 10
says the Psalmist, shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance. There cannot
be a knowledge and possession of God, without great joy. And will it not
afford matter of great comfort to the soul, to see in God, the dangers of this
world, both spiritual and temporal, which strengthened with a hand from
Heaven, she fairly passed? When she thinks, being now in full security: With
such a plot the Devil assaulted me at such a time; had not God been in the
combat with me on my side, I had been lost. Had I run such a course, that
run in my head at such an hour, I had run headlong to Hell. Had God
called for me, and for an account, at such a day, by land; by sea, when the sea
roard, the winds blew, the rocks watched for the vessel I was in; when the Ship
reeld to and fro like a drunken man, the Seamen staggered and trembled; I had
not been a blessed soul. Through what a strange world did I travel hither?
how every small corner was beset with snares? how the ways abroad; how the
houses and streets of Towns; and the very Churches were thronged with evil
Spirits, which I never saw till now? How sweet, how merciful God was to the
world, divided and distracted with so many errors; defiled with so many
sins? How could he suffer men to live out half their days? He that brought
the world from nothing to something, why did he not throw it away in his
anger, from something to nothing again? O sweetnsse, goodness, mercy, great,
exceeding, infinite; and there she dives. In this life, no joy goes without a
sorrow, without its Keeper; that our life is like the roof of the great Temple
in Jerusalem, which, as Villalpandus records out of Josephus, showed flowers
growing among gilded prickles: and surely, in the best day of our lives, when
we sung the sweetest, if we sink into the matter, we shall find, that we
had a sharp thorn at our breasts. But the inside of Heaven is without a cloud.
Every day, though new, and fresh, and shining, is like a Friars weed,
dishonored with a patch, a badge of our beggary, our misery.

The Romish Canon Law keeps the Popes so close to Religion, that none are
deposed ipso facto, but for the crime of Heresy. God the maintainer of this
joy can never be stirred; and therefore it must needs be a settled joy. And of
this Country I joy to speak, because I am now in the way to it. I will turn
my eyes a little upon the Queen of Sheba. She comes from a far Country:
what is her business? Only to see, and speak with Solomon. Which being done,
what says she? And when the Queen of Sheba 1. King. 10. 4.
had seen all Salomons wisdom; not heard, but seen, it was not only
wisdom of words. And the house that he had built: yonder house, above. Now I
shall take of the Text here and there: And the attendance of his Ministers: his
blessed Angels: and their apparel, their robes of immortality; Verse. 5.
there was no more spirit in her: and behold, the half was not told me: thy
Preachers Verse. 7.
could not speak half: Happy are these thy servants which stand continually
before thee, Verse. 8.
and that hear thy wisdom. A greater then Solomon is here. O Lord, so teach
me to converse with Christ here, that I may dwell with him hereafter.

CHAP. XVII.
BY night on my bed, (says the Spouse) I sought him whom my soul loves, I
sought him, but I found him not. It is very strange. For, that which the
Divines call Gratia prima, the first Grace, comes always by night. It being
always dark night, and indeed, the dead of night, before Grace comes. And the
first Grace does not find Grace where it comes: For then, it would not be the
first. But, the meaning is: the Spouse before she was the Spouse, or the soul
sought God without Grace, as the Philosophers, of which Saint Paul speaks,
Romans 1. sought him without him, as the Giver of supernatural Graces; sought
him by night, sought light in darkness; rejected the sufficiency of Grace
offered to her, and thought to do miracles, and work above nature, by the
help of nature. Or if it be a harsh note, she sought God without Grace: We may
say, that she was moved by the first Grace to seek God: but because she did
not work with it, as far as the Grace did enable her; she wanted the second
Grace, and did not seek him aright. For, she sought him on her bed,
sluggishly, and drousily: She sought him only in a dream: she sought him,
when the belly was full, and the bones at rest, betwixt sleeping and waking:
and therefore, by her leave, she was mistaken, her soul did not love him; For,
if her soul had loved him, her soul would have took another order with her
body, and she would have sought him otherwise, and might have found him; But
now, she sought him, and she sound him not: and why? She was mistaken both in
the time, and in the place. For, he was neither to be found by night, in the
darkness of a sinful life; nor on her bed: what should he have done there?
he neither slumbreth, nor sleeps. She should have sought him where he was,
and would be found. Nor can it in reason be imagined, that he would come to
her, come to be found, and enjoyed; and she neither move hand, nor foot, nor
eye in the search of him, but lie all along, with her hands and feet spread
abroad upon a bed of down, and with her eyes shut: and that should pass for a
sufficient seeking of all goodness; to be rewarded with Heaven. But, though
she has not found him, she has found her error; and she begins again. I
will rise now, and go about the City, in the streets, and in the broad ways,
I will seek him whom my soul loves: I sought him, but I found him not. Now
she will rise. The first beginning of good to be done on our parts, after the
kind entertainment of the inspiration, is the purpose of doing it. Well. She
is dressing herself hastily. But what will she do when she is up? We shall
quickly see. For, I heard her say, I will rise now; She will admit of no delay:
she will fall to work, while the inspiration is warm, and before it cooles.
But what does she mean to do? Go to the City. Hitherto she goes well. For,
the Wisemen, that came to seek Christ, wisely addressed themselves to the
City, and there enquired for him. And to declare, that they took a good
ordinary way, and that extraordinary help is ordained to supply the defect of
Gods ordinary assistance: extraordinary means failed them; for the new-created
star disappeared. In the City, she will find many good people, that will
gladly tell her good tidings of him, whom her soul loves; because their
souls have loved him, from their childhood; and ever since they knew what it
was to love. God gives her a will, and power to rise. And because thee rises
with him, he goes with her to the City. Her going with him, moves him again,
to go with her. But it is not well, that she will go about the City. For, if
she go not strait forward, but about the City; she cannot avoid distraction,
nor multiplicity of business: and the Bridegroom will either be neglected, or
not worthily regarded. And so it fell out. For, she went about the City in the
streets, where she met all sorts of idle company; a rabble of Nightwalkers;
and some, with whom the Communion, not of Saints, but of sins, had made her
acquainted. And now, she was full of business: and he, whom (she says) her
soul loves, was forgot. And she sought him in the broad way. The way to
Hell, and perdition, is a broad way. She sought the King of Heaven, in the way
to Hell. And therefore she found him not. And yet she was very forward in the
first onset: I will rise now. She had not made her own, the two lessons, which
are ever coupled together: Depart from evil, and do good. But Psalm. 34. 14
Verse. 3.
what happened? The Watchmen that go about the City found me: to whom I said,
Saw ye him whom my soul loves? Is it so, pretty one? you that rose up now,
and thought to watch out the night, are you took your self by the Kings
Watchmen, for a straggler? for a haunter of the streets, and the broad ways?
It will be questioned now, whether you be honest or no, both of your body, and
your hands? The watchmen will tell you, having met you at such a time, that you
do not look honestly; that your sin is plainly written in your forehead. This
affliction, I hope, will sift, and winnow you. You cannot bring the Watchmen
within the circle of your fault. It is their office, to go about the City, and
to surprise such as you are. Resolve them now, and with sound reason, whence
you came, and whither you would. The poor lost thing has grief enough: and
her afflictions have made her bold. She will not be questioned. For, before the
Watchmen can open their mouths, and speak to her, she is wondrous busy in the
examination of them, Saw ye him whom my soul loves? And now, she makes it
plain, that her soul loves him. She goes the right way to find him. She sues
for direction to her beloveds Watchmen. Do ye hear, you Watchmen, nay, pray
let me speak first; my late wandering is warrantable: I go in quest of him,
whom my soul loves; and my love cannot sleep. Speak one of you. Did ye see
him whom my soul loves? Were my love toward him, all tongue, or all face, I
could forbear his company. But because it is he, whom my soul loves; while I
have a soul, I cannot be without him. But did ye see him? I am in great
haste, pray tell me. While the Watchmen were getting up out of the deep
amazement, into which she had struck them, like an unwonted apparition by
night: She steps aside in a heat. And so I come to the rest, I would sing to
my soul. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my
soul loves: I held him, and would not let him go. As soon as ever I had
passed beyond them: presently after I had untwisted my self of company. And
what then? Let all the world hear, and rejoice with me. I found whom my soul
loves. O dear Lord, have I found thee? Where have thou been this many a day?
I have been seeking thee by night, and upon my bed, and about the City, and in
the streets, and in the broad ways, and I could not find thee. And I have
been found my self, and took by thy officers, (they are not far hence) and
had not my tongue been very quick and ready; and my wit good; and my cause
better; I had been sent to prison, and laid fast enough. But I presently took
them off from all their authority, and used thy name, and said, Saw ye him
whom my soul loves? But, thou have not yet told me, where thou have been.
Indeed, I was half afraid, I had quite lost thee. I believe, I do, I do;
that, had not thou sought me, more then I sought thee, we had never met
again. And thou did help me to seek thee: but I could not help thee to
seek me; as I could not help thee to make me. For, I was lost my self, not
only in my self, but also in my understanding: and I knew not, what directions
to give for the finding of my self, because I knew not where I was. But since
I have extracted from particulars, by the Chemistry of experience; what a
bottomless misery it is to be lost from thee: and what a solitary labor it is
to seek thee; now I have found thee, I will hold thee with my heart, and with
both my hands and arms; and I will not let thee go. The soul being now close
in the arms of her Beloved, must exercise her spiritual acts in a more
perfect manner. Let me kiss that middle wound, that has four lesser wounds
to wait upon it: O those blessed Quires of Angels! they sing marvellously
well. But when they have sung over all their songs, no music is like to
David's Harp, the old instrument of ten strings; to wit, the keeping of the ten
Commandments: by the which, Gods holy will is performed. This All-seeing
providence, that all overflowing goodness, that immensity, this infinity.
Lord, Lord, whither go I? I am quite swallowed up. No tongue can speak it.
Do what pleases thee. O most good, and most great, whose greatness does most
shine in goodness. O God, who can sadome thy eternity? And now, I cannot hold
up my eyes. I must needs fall fast asleep.

CHAP. XVIII.
I Know what will happen to many of my Readers. What I have wrote, will put
nature to the start, and a little fright the soul. And therefore, it will
work in them awhile, though at length, weakly and remissely. But other
passages pressing upon them, passages of mirth, of business; it will grow
colder and colder in them, wear away, and after awhile, be quite forgot the
Devil hammering out by little and little, a golden wedge with one of a base
metal. If the seed has not fell upon good ground, thus it will be with them.
And then let them think of me, and remember, that I foretold them, what would
happen. Aethiops in balneum niger intrat, says Saint Gregory, niger egreditur:
The Ethiopian goes black into the Bath, and comes again, black out of it.
The Prophet David has a divine expression: If he turn not, he will Psalm. 7.
12.
whet his sword, meaning God: he has bent his bow, and made it ready. Whom
do we strike with a sword? him that is nigh us. Whom shoot with a bow? one a
far off. Who is nigh God? the old man. For by the course of nature, he is
near death. Who seems to be far off? the young man: but God can reach him
with his bow. Lord help us. We are far gone. We cannot learn that which God
taught from the beginning of the world: And when people began to multiply,
taught every day, and hour: And that which he most teaches of all that ever
he taught. And what is it? that here we have no continuing City, but seek one
to come. Heb. 13. 14
Could we sinful creatures fore see our own ends, and the lamentable chances,
that lie watching for us, as we pass by such a day, and such an hour; the
hardest of us would weep: let us weep then, for the cause of all our misery,
our execrable sins. Christ wept over Jerusalem, because he saw the hearts,
and foresaw the ends of all the people in the City. He saw, perhaps one,
stretched out with pride, that should, after two months, die like a Dog in a
ditch. He saw another pawning his very soul for honor, that should not live
out the fourth part of a year to enjoy it. What silly fools the Devil makes
us? Here he saw one catching and scraping for money, that he was certain should
be called to a strict account, and cast into Hell, within the short space of a
month. There another, cheering up and pampering his flesh with dainties, and
still the the other cup, that the worms were within less then seven days, to
enter upon. Here he heard one swearing and tearing God, the holy name of God:
and there presently, he heard God also swearing, in his wrath, that he should
not enter into his rest. And here another, venting as many lies as sentences;
while he heard God say, cut him off, let him speak no more: it is my course:
for the longer he lives, he will be the more wicked. He might see two go
reeling in their drunkenness; one of whom the same night, should break his
neck from a window; and the other be stabbed to death in a riot. Two more
following the vile motions of their own filthy lusts, and in league with base
women, that the same week should cut their purses, and throats together. He
saw the greatest part of them, pursuing earnestly their own sinful desires,
and either diseases gathering to a head inwardly in their bodies; or Gods
judgments outwardly mustering their forces to send them to Hell out of hand.
These mournful passages Christ saw, and being very sorry to see them wept. He
pronounces the sentence of destruction against the City, and he weeps while he
does it. Hine illae lacrymae, Hence came those tears. He wept not, put on with
the thought of his own passion, though very nigh, but of their destruction.
And therefore he says, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, for whom
then, Lord? but weep for your selves, and for your children. Do we love our
children, our pretty little Babes? let us weep for our sins, that we may not
weep for them. And can we see Christ weep him that died for us weep, and not
offer our service to wipe the tears from his eyes? Saint Gregory Nazianzen
rapt out of himself in consideration of the poor condition of the poor,
cried out, (...), O my dainties, and their misery! And thus we may cry of the
souls in Hell; of some of our friends, and neighbors, that died lately: O our
joy, our quiet, and their miserable torments! which we ought not to pity, which
God pities not. When I have wrote all I can write, I fear, all will end here.
There is a blessed repose in God for good men, and a cursed prison for wicked
livers. But we are so busy in the world betwixt both, that we have no time to
think of either, to look upwards or downwards. Yet know, that we cannot stay
betwixt both for ever. We are certainly appointed for one, where we must
reside for ever and ever.

Good Reader, stand firm against the Devil, and against his two Factours, the
Flesh, and the World. Beware, you that think your selves to be moral men and
women, of little sins. Of sins, little in our weak estimation, because
they canker not our credits, nor cast upon us the stain of wicked livers. Do
we give to our endeavors in their commission, a command to please God or men?
Saint Austin speaks like himself: Noli quotidiana peccata contemnere, quia
minima sunt; sed time, quia plura sunt: Plerunque minimae bestiae, si multae
sint, necant: Do not contemn thy daily sins, because they are small; but
fear them, because they are many. Small beasts, if they be many, many times
kill. And the smallest sin that can be committed, but once committed,
troubles exceedingly, and offends the most clean clear eyes of God. If you
are still obstinate, the Devil is more good then you, the black Devil of
Hell. For Grace is not offered to him, and therefore, he cannot lay hold upon
it. It is offered to you with entreaties, and you refuse it. And moreover, the
Devil is confirmed in his obstinacy, you are not. God invites you, I am sure
of it, I am sure I came from him. The Angels and Saints from Heaven; all the
chosen of God from all parts of the world, pray you; as very desirous of your
company. The holy Church entreats you: for I came likewise from her, to you.
Lissen to your thoughts, mark there: your own poor souls beseech you,
trembling like the Heart shot near the heart, and struck with the fear of
eternal damnation: crying to you, we were made for God: O put us into his
hands. Our hearts are very sick of a very dangerous disease, worse then the
Plague, chillness in Gods service. Let us write upon the door in red letters,
as they do upon the doors of houses infected with the Plague; the pen being
dipped in the blood of Christ, Lord, have mercy upon us. Yes, yes, have mercy
upon us: and not for our sakes, not for our Fathers sakes, not for our
Ancestors sakes, not for the Saints and Angels sakes, not for the Virgin Mary's
sake, but for Jesus Christ his sake.

CHAP. XIX.
EXtraordinary occasions require extraordinary proceedings.

The Copy of a Letter, sent to my Lodging in Thames Street.
Mr. Carpenter,
AN old acquaintance of yours, sends his hand, accompanied with his heart to
you; although he dares not trust you, either with his person, or name.
Especially, considering, that you traduced an innocent man before the Bench, as
a seducer, because he loved you, and therefore desired you to remember from
whence you had fallen, and repent of your error. Poor man, I pity you: and
therefore I pity you, because I love you. Whither so fast? Look back, God is
a Father still; and his Church, still a mother: and each has many bowels of
compassion. You seemed to us a man of a good nature; and religiously inclined.
And I remember, when your Pen also was employed in the behalf of the Catholic
Church. And yet I understand, that you are not contented to speak, but that
you have wrote also, and are now ready to speak from the Press, the dishonor
of her, that was your own Mother, and is Christ's own Spouse. Think without
passion: Is not this, (...), to fight with God? And with what weapons, when you
fight with him, can you wound him, to hurt him? Or did he ever fight, and at
last went not away conqueror? As God has furnished you with gifts of nature;
which you by his help, have bettered with labor: so he requires the
employment of them in his own service. And if the employment, or use be not
reasonably paid, a severe account must be rendered. Can you, without a pressure
of conscience, call that a Church in which you are? a thing so torn, and
distracted. Can your soul, which has hungered after heavenly things, feed now
with the swine, upon such husks? God for his Christ's sake, open your eyes;
that you may see and know him and his Church, and also, your self. Which he
prays day and night, that loves you night and day.

The Answer.
Sir,
Whereas you style your self, my old Acquaintance, without any farther
illustration; I have greater reason to fear, and to fly, then to hope, and
pursue: because amongst my old Acquaintance, more have been evil, then good.
And by the sequel, it appears, that you stand in the rank of the evil ones:
And that you are my old Acquaintance, in the same construction, as the World is
old, of which one says: Mundus, qui ob antiquitatem sapere deberet, etc. The
World, which because it is so old, ought to be wise, grows every day more
unwise, as it is more old.

A hand I have received, and a good one, but that as good a heart came with it,
will not sink into my heart. The hand is fair; but how shall I know the heart
is not foul? Indeed, Aristotle says, that speech is the picture, or image of
the mind. But he means, when the speech is the minds true Interpreter. You
cannot be ignorant, that it is a received, though a close principle amongst the
Jesuits, We may be free of fair words: because they go not from us, as drops
of blood, or money with loss, or expense. O the riches of experience! Both the
Indies are poor, compared with them.

That you dare not trust me with your name, or person; gives evidence for me,
that I am more true to my Superiors, then to you. And good reason. Because I
conceive, there mediates no real tie betwixt you and me, but the worn and old
tie of old Acquaintance. And I never learned, that God obliging a man to his
old Acquaintance, joined them with the bonds of extraordinary love in the least
degree, or bound them to a performance of the acts, depending upon it. But I am
glewed to my Superiors, by the firm ties of extraordinary love and
subjection, and therefore, of duty and obedience. I am in reference to them, as
an inferior part in respect of the head, and shoulders. And therefore if my
old Acquaintance shall strike at the head, or annoy the body, of which I am a
foot; I shall kick him down, if I can, even to the ground: and say, there lies
my old Acquaintance.

The man, whom you propose to me under the title of an innocent man, and a
lover of me, and of my soul; would have been more truly described, if you
had said, A wild Priest, a swaggarer, a lover and haunter of the Tavern, even
when the sword of death hung by a small hair over his head. It was my chance
to meet him in the Kings highway, attired like a Knight or Lord, traveling
alone in a fair Coach, drawn with four great Horses, toward the house of a
Lady; whose Priests have been the pernicious cause of many grievous disorders
in the Country where I live: and this, in a most dangerous, and suspected
time. And having there endeavored to pervert me, and break the bonds and
ligaments of my duty to God, and of my Allegiance to the King; besides the
concealment of such a treason in regard of the Law; how should I have answered
such a concealment in foro interno, in the inward court of my heart, and at
the Bench of my conscience? Occisio Animarum, the murder of souls is the
highest breach of the Commandment, Thou shall do no murder. Was not this a
murderous attempt, in the Kings highway? And pray, does he that attempts to
murder the soul of a man, love the man? If he loved me, he loved all me, or
he loved not me. I confess, we argue differently, because our arguments
proceed upon different grounds, and suppositions. If my grounds stand fast, my
discourse will prove irrefragable.

You call me poor, man. And I am so: or I am sure, was so when you knew me.
And you pity me, and your pity is baptized, the child of your love. Saint
Gregory Nazianzen has a pretty phrase, when he says, (...): Many speak
golden words; but their speech, though it points at the practique, and the
object be some practicable thing; is both in the act, and in effect, all
speculative: that is, both the intention, and execution end, and vanish away in
speculation. It seems then, that your love is not unlike the water of
Aesculapius his Well, which no commixtion or approximation can urge to
putrify. Let those believe it to be sweet, that have not tasted of it. The
bitterness is scarce yet out of my mouth.

I am going in have, and you call after me, whither so fast? And shall I tell
you, whither? Shall I, in good earnest? I will then. I am going, (and my
business requires have) to see if I can find any Priests or Jesuits, lurking
in the secret corners, adjoining or neighboring to the Parliament house. I
know, that their life, though it be mixed, has so much of action in it, that
they must always be doing. You desire, me to look back. At your entreaty, I
do so. And looking back, I still find, that every where, there are whole
swarms of waspish, and turbulent Papists. For that, which follows, God is a
Father still, and so forth: I learned all that lesson in my conversion to the
Church of England. And I hope I shall never forget it.

You tell me, that I seemed to your people, a man of a good nature, and
religiously inclined. Here is a plain Jesuiticall flattery, with a sharp
sting in the tail of it. Why now, you seem too, seem to praise, when you
dishonor. But how will you make it seem, that I did only seem? It is very
natural and proper, that bonum reale, a real good, should be also bonum
apparens, should appear to be good. For otherwise, it would not trahere in
amorem sui, draw men to love it. But it is an Ethicall observation, that men
used to foul sins, are so conscious of them, and yet, so desirous to disavow
them; that their guiltiness still hammering upon their sins, their
obstinacy helped with their cunning, presently takes their tongues off from
acknowledging them to be in themselves, and because, if they be, being
accidents they must be in convenient subjects, fastens them upon others.

You remember one thing, and you understand another. I remember likewise, that
being a young stripling, I was active in bestowing my service upon your Church:
fomented with your envenomed suggestions. But give it me in a Demonstration, at
least a posteriori, that your Church is the Catholic Church, or Christ's own
Spouse. Your arguments are like your invincible Armado's, which in their first
appearance make a mighty Moon, but are burnt and confounded in the end, by a
bold English man, or an honest Hollander. It is rooted in me, that there is
little symmetry, little proportion betwixt you and the Spouse of Christ. She is
humble, harmless, bashful, compassionate, zealous of her Lords honor, and
jealous of every thing which may impeach or impair it: She is filled with the
holy Ghost, and doubtless, speaks all languages, when she prays; because
she prays in all her children with understanding, that she may offer from the
Altar of every heart, a reasonable Sacrifice. And I doubt not, but you have
your Emissaries, and Intelligencers abroad. Certainly, had not one of the
Presses, into which my Book unhappily dropped, been almost it self pressed
away, surcharged with your notorious and scurrilous Pamphlets, containing those
most horrible, and irreligious imputations of so many strange Sects amongst us;
those as false, as foul discourses of Adamites, and the like, moving, and
disposing to the ruin and overthrow, both of Church and Commonwealth, (which
my experience assures me were yours;) and moreover, had not your humble
Petition taken place in it, and wrought upon covetousness: it had been day
with my book long ago.

You will me to to think, and that without passion, if this be not (...). Your
will is to me a law. I do think, and think without passion. And now I have
thought without passion, I have learned that indeed, this is to fight against
God: stay pray, leave nothing behind you: if to fight against more then
Luciferian pride, against Blasphemy, against Idolatry, and against all other
sins, be to fight against God. Pardon me: He that railes, is unreasonable,
either in the matter of his speech, or in the delivery. When I believe, and can
make it perspicuous to a clear eye, that the Church of Rome is a corrupted,
and putrified body; head-sick, and heart-sick, and therefore ill all-over: do I
fight against God, if I labor to prevent, and keep off the infection, ne pars
sincera trahatur? Her head is so weak, that she thinks it stands as high as
the clouds at least, if not as high as the starrie Firmament. Her heart is not
well. For, she is diseased in that which is the very primum vivens, and ultimum
moriens of Faith, the doctrine of Christ's merits. And therefore, her tongue
speaks strange languages, she knows not what: Her eyes have not the gift of
discerning aright: An Image appears to her, a little God: Her ears are out of
order: they are more taken with melody, then words of edification: she does not
praise God in the musical instruments, because she stays in the noise, and
ends in delight: as it is in use with her, to sleep, and take her nights rest
in opere operato. Only her taste is right, and yet, she thinks it is not,
because she does not taste the very flesh and blood of Christ. Her hands are
weak; they give alms to force, and extort a reward. Her feet are worse; they
run to shed blood. And is she not a very sick creature? And therefore, you may
put up your dagger. For the words following, wound not: And with what weapons,
etc.

Concerning the gifts of nature, which you call mine, improved by industry, and
the account of both: Agnosco benefactorem, I acknowledge a heavenly
Benefactour. And though no man is obliged ad optima, to the performance of the
best things; yet, in this point, how can I better employ the Talents with which
I am entrusted, then in the service of Gods Church? But you come with a fresh
supply: Can I call a Church, a thing so torn, and distracted? Can I make a
bellyfull of husks? Was not the Church governed by the Apostles; vexed with
clamours of people, crying, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos? It is in the
body politic, and Ecclesiastique, as in the natural body. Every quick, and
sudden alteration, calls up all the humors, and they being up, draw the body
into parties; either pulling to themselves by Sympathy, or putting off by
Antipathy. The water is troubled, but expect a little, and it will settle
again. For the husks, I confess with sorrow of heart, there are many, and
those meat only for swine, dull, and drossie-headed people: as the profane
rudeness of shoo-makers, Bakers, Button-makers, in the sacred house of God:
the contempt of Divine Service, and of the Liturgy, and consequently, of
Ministers, and their Orders: the crying down of Learning, and of the reward of
it; conclusions sucked from Mahomet, and now the discourse of vulgar people
amongst Christians. With such (I proclaim it to the world) I and my devotions
shall have no communion; though they were able to lash me to death with their
foul tongues: but they cannot touch me with them. These earthy people do not
understand, that minus perfectum, ad magis perfectum referri atque ordinari
debet, every less perfect thing ought to submit, and be referred to the thing
more perfect; their weak apprehensions and erroneous consciences, to the
truth, and service of God. What if the Logicians say, that quae sunt eadem uni
tertio, sunt idem inter se; and yet, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, being
the same in Essence, differ in persons? Reason informs us, that as the Pope
forsooth, or a Bishop will reserve cases to himself, and his own Court, so
God may, and must reserve the knowledge of many things, and especially of
Mysteries to his own privacie. And it is very fit we should now be ignorant
of the things we shall not hereafter know. And every man understanding
according to the capacity of his understanding; why should not the ignorant man
stoop to what is sufficiently expressed to him with consideration to his
ignorance? Though ignorance has sometimes Ignorantia pura negationis.
an excuse, obstinacy has never any.

And the man that has but sipped of outlandish experience, will easily
believe, that a Papist was the malignant contriver of that swelling and wordy,
but chaffie, senseless, and empty Pamphlet; ballassed with the name of, A true
Relation of a combustion, happening at Saint Annes Church by Aldersgate, between
a stranger, sometimes a Jesuit, but now thanks be to God, reformed to our
Church, and one Marler a Button-maker, etc. Wherein the Author of the true
Relation, has scarce a true word, to bear witness, that he knows what is
truth. And if there be a true word in all the Pamphlet; it is that only,
reformed to the Church of England. For, neither was the Preacher a
Button-maker, but a Divine; neither did we join any kind of discourse;
neither came I near the Pulpit, though invited by the Minister, and Vestry-men.

Your prayer in the end, is charitable on your part: which, with your leave, I
borrow of you, and turn upon you again? But whereas you conclude all with:
which he prays day and night, that loves you night and day: it had been a
truth of truths, if it had run thus: which he prays day and night, that loves
night more then day.

And thus a slight work, I have answered with a work of as loose a composure.
CHAP. XX.
IN the first Chapter of Genesis, where the Verse. 2.
Latins turn it Spiritus Domini ferebatur super aquas, the Spirit of God was
carried upon the waters; the word in the Original, does signify, as Saint
Hierome observes, S. Hierom. quaest. Hebr.
incubabat, sat brooding; And I most heartily pray, that the Spirit of God may
still sit brooding upon my heart, and bring forth the plentiful fruits of a
true reformation. And because I am a sinner, let the Angels sing hymns, and
praises in my behalf, to him, as Saint Gregory Nazianzen S. Greg. Nazian. in
hymnis.
deliciously sings, (...), by whom are Hymns, by whom are praises, by whom
are the Quires of the Angels. And let every one that is a true lover of God,
that is sound at heart; give out, from the inwards of his heart and soul, with
an Echo, Amen. And keep safe in his mind, that golden saying of a sober
Council; Multa enim bona facit Council. 2. Arausic. c. 20:
in bomine, sine homine Deus: sed nihil boni facit homo, quod non faciat Deus,
ut faciat homo: Many good things God works in man, without man: But man does
no good thing, which God is not the cause, that man is the cause of. Let us
ponder always; that in all the Psalms, used in divine service, still the
burden of the song is; Glory be the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy
Ghost, As it was in the beginning. And why, As it was in the beginning?
Because, the Church acknowledging her extreme want of sufficiency, to glorify
God according to the just exigence of his greatness; or to add the smallest
point to his perfection: desires to give him the glory, which he had in the
beginning before the world: declaring, that she is so far contented, and
pleased with him, and it; that if he were now deprived of it, and it were in
her gift, she would restore it again to him, as to the most worthy, which is
in a manner, to give it him. And let us all imitate the Prophet David, Ps. 115.
1.
who cries, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory.
Pray mark his carriage: He thrusts glory from himself, and creatures, Not
unto us O Lord. And as if it did not yet stand far enough; thrusting it with
the other hand, he says; Not unto us. And then with both hands, thrusting it
home to the right owner, he speaks home; but, unto thy name give glory. That
glory may be well, and fully given to God; God must give it to himself. And
the same holy Prophet, who spoke, as he lived, after Gods own heart: stirring
us up with all his art, and his heart to praise God in all sorts of
instruments, that the Quire might be full; and as if the strain were not yet
high enough: in the end, as it were falling down for want of breath, with the
Nightingale; after the long varying of her delicate notes, sends forth in a
faint, but a forced manner, his last words; Let every thing that has breath,
praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord. As if he should have added. For, I have
none; I am out of breath. And so, being spent himself, he laid the charge upon
others. And therefore, Praise ye the Lord.

Psalm. 107. verse. 8, 9, 10. Oh that men would praise the Lord, for his
goodness: and for his wonderful works to the children of men.

For he satisfies the longing soul: and fills the hungry soul with
goodness.

Such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death.


To God be the glory of this work: not to the Virgin Mary; or any other Saint.
FINIS.
I humbly desire all clean-hearted, and right-spirited people, who shall read
this Book, (which because the Press was oppressed, seemed to have been
suppressed, when it was by little and little Impressed, but now at last, has
pressed through the Press into public,) first to restore it, by correcting
these Errata. Which if I had been always at hand to prevent, I should have
more erred in businesses of more present importance.

Errata, quae, legenti dicam an currenti, occurebant.
PAge 10. line 2. dele, in: p. 23. l. 24. d. it, p. 30. l. 27. read contemnes
and condemns, p. 57. l. 7. r. two, p. 62. in marg. r. Psalm. 128. 3. p. 63, l.
15. r. (...), p. 63. l. 16. r. (...), p. 65. in marg r. Romans 1. 22. p. 68. l.
24. r. in a combat, p. 78. in marg. dele 32. p. 81. l. 1. r. self, p. 89. in
marg. r. agentem. p. 120. l. 24. and 25. r. quasi existimemus nihil accidere,
p. 126. l. 7. r. Lord Jesus, p. 145. l. 9. r. cast it, p. 148. l. 24. r. all
so, p. 1. l. ult. r. more set out, p. 2. l. 9. r. are more, p. 4. l. 19. r. a
treason, p. 8. l. 1. 5. d. the, p. 17. l. ult. r. it is hold, p. 22. l. 4. r.
ingreditur, p. 28. in marg. r. S. Aug. in Medit. p. 31. l. 8. r. a mere lie,
p. 36. l. 7. r. void of, p. 37. l. 27. and 28. r. beholds, p. 39. l. 27. r.
with one, p. 44. l. ult. r. seeing being, p. 47. l. penult. r. we learn, p. 49.
l. 28. r. to him, p. 50. l. 15. r. to him, p. 51. l. 21. r. in a diversity, p
53. in marg. r. c. 16. p. 57. l. 5. r. coccineas, p. 62. l. 6. r. S. Justine,
p. 64, l. 2. r. receive, receive, p. 68. in marg. r. de part, Animal. c. 5. p.
69. in marg. r. c. 2. p. 69. l. penult. r, Disciplinantes, p. 70. l. 18. r. And
also the Priers. p. 71. l. 27. r. gifts, p. 76. l. 17. r. take them, p. 82. l.
26. r. even the rich, p. 88. l. 9. r. talking to, p. 96. l. 6. r. Crow. p. 112.
l. 19. r. before, now, p. 117. l. 16. r. of God, p. 118. l. 2. etc. pertinent
ad finem regulae sequentis, p. 119. l 21 r. locks. p. 124. l, 6. d. it, p. 124.
l. ult. r. Church, p. 128. l 22. r. reserve, p. 129 l. 21. r. me, p. 131. l.
16. Haec historia, quae in^^pir, And yet, pars est sequentis paginae, and l.
26. locum petit, p. 131 l. 24. r. being, p. 135. l 13. r privileged, p. 135.
l. 19. r. stain, p. 136. l. penult. r. you lived, p. 138. l. 22. Bcause, etc.
ad finem l 23. insert debent in sequentem paginam post. l. 9. p. 140. l. 18. r.
every, p. 143. l. 8. r. the fingers, p. 144. l. 7. r. cried, p. 145. l. ult. r.
counsel, p. 158. in fine marg. r ad Graecos, p. 160. l. 28. d. and, p. 165. l.
9. r. himself came, p 169. l. 19. r. is given, p. 169. l. 26. r. into, p 173.
l 8. r. safe at my, p. sequente l. 5. r. These are, p. 174. l. 9. r. Cicatrice,
p. 177. l. ult r. feet, p 188. in marg r. Plin lib. 2. p. 189. l. 18. r. had
read them, p. 190. l. 4. r. Bruxellis, p. 191. l. 20. r. and cast, p. 205. l.
27. r. your own throat, p. 208. l. 4. r. his own, p. 210. l. 21. d. Church,
p. 210. l. 27. r. Arethusius, p. 215. l. 13. r. percutit, p. 215. l. 27. r.
bodies, p. 218. in marg. r. S. Aug. in Psalm. p, 226, l. 3. r. (...), p. 230. l.
12. r. similiter, p. 233. l. 3. r. dixerit flexis genibus, p. 235. l. 13. d.
much, p. 236, l. ult. r. lingua, p. 251, l, 3, r. ground: Repentance, p. 257,
l. 16, d. to, p. 258, l, 14, r, worms, p, 259, in marg. d, 5, p, 268, l, 25,
r, strike us, p, 271, in marg, post Luke, 7, d 5, p. 272, l, 1, r, here, l, p,
274, l. 24, r, self. I do, p. 275, l, 2, d. will, p, 279, l, 21, r, They, p,
288, l, 1, r, Christian, p, 289, l, 14, r, is, not, p, 291, l, 1, r, works,
p. 296, l, 13, r, only, p. 299. l. 17. d. because, p. 301. l. 4. r. her, p,
317, l, 13, r, weep,.


