THE Country-Curate's ADVICE TO HIS Parishioners, In Four PARTS.

I. Directs us, how to serve God on the Lord's Day. II. On the Week Day. III.
How to discharge our Duty in our several Relations; as Husband and Wife,
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants. IV. How to prepare for Death.
By H. C.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1693.

TO THE READER.
REligion is the grand employment of our Lives, the main design and biass of
our rational Natures, the important work and task that Heaven has set us: and
calls for our greatest vigor and vivacity to attend it: and though perhaps it
may suffer some diminution from the meanness of the Person, who treats of it:
Yet it is not to be denied, that its own intrinsic worth and native excellency
are sufficient to render it most acceptable to all intelligent Minds, and
unprejudiced Understandings.

I pretend not to any high strain of Eloquence, or high flown Rhetorications:
for if I were Master of a very fluent Oratory; yet should I at this time wave
it, and study plainness; the Station I am in, a Curate: the Persons I write
unto, not Courtiers but Countrymen: oblige me to it.

My Office is to present my Reader with a Portraicture of Practical Religion;
especially as it has an aspect to the Duties which constitute our Devotion:
Here it is not proper to be quaint and florid, but to make Impression on Men's
Hearts; and bring the Deity into their Souls. This I have attempted to
accomplish in the ensuing Sheets: though I most frankly acknowledge how feeble
and languid my Enterprise has been.

Among the plain Directions which I have given toward the Consummating of a
Religious Life, I have placed those which respect the Lord's Day in the Front
of all: and with good reason; seeing this sacred time is the Queen and Empress
of all the Days in the Week; and has a just precedence of them by our
Savior's Institution, and the practice of his holy Apostles.

Religion commenceth here: he that begins not with the right Celebration of
this Day; will be extremely defective in all the other acts of Devotion and
Religion.

This therefore in the first place I most passionately recommend to all
Votaries of Christianity; that they would concern themselves in the due
Observation of this Divine Time: and accordingly I here offer them such Rules,
as will be a certain conduct to them, and fully instruct them how to behave
themselves, in all the Portions of that Sacred Day.

If this attempt be favored and encouraged by the Religious Reader: I shall be
animated then to aspire to a further degree of consulting his Spiritual
advantage, by committing to the Press those other Directions which I have
prepared for the guidance of pious Minds in the grand business of Religion.

In the interim, I bid such adieu, and incessantly implore the Tri-une Deity;
That these my weak endeavors may prove Auspicious.

H. C.

THE CONTENTS of this BOOK.
Chap. I. THE Preparation for the Lord's Day upon Saturday Eve. Chap. II. Of
Awaking with God upon the Sunday Morning. Chap. III. Closet-Prayer, and the
Preparations to it. Chap. IV. Of Family-Duty ere we go to God's House. Chap. V.
Of the great Obligation that lies upon every one of us to worship God in
public. Chap. VI. Of going to our Parish Church. Chap. VII. The Souls
Soliloquy as it walks to God's House, and behavior there. Chap. VIII. Of our
behavior at Church when the Minister is come unto it. Chap. IX. Of our due
behavior between Morning and Evening Service. Chap. X. Of resorting to the
Evening Sacrifice.
CHAP. I. Of Saturday's Eve Devotion.
I Shall wave all the Opinions I have read, concerning the beginning of the
Sabbath; because I would not here enter into a Controversy with any Man.

The Sentiments of Men are various, yet how different soever they may be
otherwise, sure I am, all agree in this: That a due Preparation the Even
before, will be a great help to perform the Duties of the Day following.

The Primitive Christians used to spend the greatest part of Saturday Night, in
Fasting, Watching, and Prayer; to fit them for the Duty of the subsequent Day:
from whence, I suppose, our Church borrows the Custom of reading the Collect
for the Sunday, upon the Eve foregoing. Nay, so zealous were they in God's
Service, that upon the ringing of the Bell to Church, the Plowman used to leave
the Plow, and the Tradesman his Shop, to join with the Minister in public
Prayers, for a Blessing on the Sabbath.

Which Devotion of theirs, because this our degenerate Age is, for the most
part, strangely averse to; and very few, if any, will have recourse to the
House of God, there to perform their duty: Let them repair to their private
Oratory; Let them enter into their Closets; Let Conscience there call an Audit
in their Breasts; and both impartially judge the actions of the Week past: and
how the Case stands, at present, between God and their Souls. Beg, O beg of
God, Dear Christian! to give thee a true sight and sense of all thy Sins: which
thou may do in this following Prayer.

O Father of Light, and God of Love, grant me true Light, true Love, and true
Wisdom; that I may clearly discern what does please, or displease thy Divine
Majesty: most earnestly desiring, even from my very Soul, to detest the one;
and embrace the other. Illuminate the Eyes of my Understanding, that I may
truly see my Sins, and Imperfections: strengthen my Memory, that I may duly
confess them: and rectify my Will, that I may resolutely amend them.

Return, O my Soul! to thy Self, and to thy God. Lament, Repent, Amend. The
Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak: therefore turn thou me, O
Lord; and I shall be turned. Convert thou me, and I shall be converted. Further
me, I humbly beseech thee, with thy continual help, that in all my Works,
begun, continued and ended in thee, I may glorify thy holy Name, and finally,
by thy Mercy, obtain Everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ Our Lord. Amen.

Questions to be put to our selves every Saturday Night.
1. How have I this Week kept my Heart? Have I been diligent in putting away
evil thoughts of sundry sorts? and have I kept my mind exercised with good and
holy Meditations? Have I thought humbly of my self? Charitably of my Neighbor,
and reverently of my Maker and Redeemer? 2. How have I this Week kept the Door
of my Lips? Have not I uttered many idle, vain, and unprofitable words? Have I
spoke of my Neighbor with that Love and Charity, as I would have others speak
of me? Have I had that compassion of others defects, as of my own? 3. What aim
had I in all my actions? Have I done them so purely for the Love of God, as I
ought? or had I any Worldly respect in the doing of them? 4. How have I kept my
Senses this Week? Have not mine Eyes gazed upon wanton objects. Have not mine
Ears listened unto filthy Communication? And my taste delighted it self in
Gluttony and Drunkenness? 5. Have I been so truly thankful for God's Mercies,
as I ought to have been? 6. Have not I, this Week, omitted my Prayers? Slovered
them over? or suffered my thoughts to wander in them?
Lastly, Have not I been guilty of some crying Sin, that might justly cause God
to reject them.

These Queries proposed, and thy Heart, O Christian! upon Enquiry, declaring
thee guilty: with me say,

Of these, and all my other Sins that I have committed from my youth up, unto
this present day, I most heartily repent me, O Lord my God! and I am truly
sorry for every thought, word, and act, by which I have provoked thy wrath and
indignation against me: especially for my disobedience of so holy a Law; and
extreme ingratitude to so bountiful a Lord. O God, I do acknowledge my self
unworthy the least of thy Mercies, and obnoxious to the greatest of thy
Judgments: but thou have revealed thy self a God of Pity and Compassion, for
giving the Iniquities of such as truly repent, and acquitting those that
voluntarily acquit themselves. Wherefore with a penitent and contrite Heart, I
confess my own guiltiness; resolving patiently to bear whatsoever affliction
thou laist upon me for my Sins: hoping for Pardon, through the alone Mercies of
our Savior Christ.

And now, O most gracious and liberal Benefactor! with my whole strength and
faculties of Soul and Body, I praise and magnify thy name, for thy great and
innumerable benefits, proceeding purely from thy bounty, and intended wholly
for my good. Particularly, for preserving the this Week in the midst of so many
dangers incident to my condition; and delivering me from so many Calamities and
Miseries due to my Sins.

Thou art my Creator, O my God! and gracious Protector: thou art the ultimate
end of my being, and the supreme perfection of my Nature, and under the shadow
of thy Wings is my perpetual repose: from the Light of thy Countenance flows
Eternal Joy and Felicity. To Thee be Glory and Honor, Adoration and Praise
from all Creatures, now and for evermore. Amen.

And since thou have ordained us the day to labor in, and the night to take
our rest: as I praise thee for the blessings of the day past, so I beseech thee
for thy Protection this Night. Let the Eye of thy Providence watch over me, and
thy holy Angels pitch their Tent about me; that being safely delivered from all
dangers, and comfortably refreshed with moderate sleep; I may be the better
enabled to perform the employment of my condition, and faithfully persevere in
the duties of thy Service to my Life's end. Amen.

Beware of sitting up late your self on the Saturday Night, or of causing
others to do so; Lest when you go into the House of God, to join with the
multitude in Prayer, you are fitter to sleep than pray: differing little from
the dead Bodies, asleep in their Graves. The one sleeps above the Earth; the
other underneath it.

And when you are laid in your Bed, let not your mind run on Worldly thoughts:
but think of the infinite Majesty of God, that you are then to meet, think of
the great weight and importance of the holy Ordinances, then vouchsafed you;
how they concern thy Salvation or Damnation, thy Everlasting Life or Death.
Meditate on the short time thou have to enjoy the Sabbath in: how near thy Life
is to an end: how easily God can take down this Earthly Tabernacle: how there
is no working, no labor, no striving in the other World, to which thou art
going; and continue thus musing till the fire of Meditation begin to burn. If
thou thus leavest thy Heart with God on Saturday Night, no doubt but you will
find it with him the next Morning.

CHAP. II. Of Awaking with God.
AS soon as sleep has unsealed thine Eyes, lift up thy Soul in Thanksgiving to
thy Maker for preserving thee that night, and affording thee a good beginning
of a new day; especially a Sabbath day; to labor for his Glory, and the good
of thine own Soul. And that you may be incited to perform this Act of praise,
consider these several motives.

1. That perhaps many others not so sinful as thy self, have been hurried from
their Beds to the Bar of Judgment; from a Bed of Down they have been cast into
a Bed of Flames: yet God in his infinite Mercy has spared you until now, to
Repent, and prepare your Accounts.

2. Consider that many others are visited by God Almighty with Sickness, so
that they cannot serve God in the Public Assemblies: while you enjoy your
health and free liberty, to go with the multitude into his Courts.

3. Consider that you are now brought to the beginning of another day, which
when past, you shall never see again.

Thou may possibly see more Sabbath Days; but that space of time when the Sun
is once set, thou shall never see again any more. How careful then should
thou be to improve this Day, so that it may turn to the best account. Solomon
sends Man to School to the Ant, to learn this good Husbandry ( Prove. 6.6, 7,
8.) Oh that we were as wise for the Bread of Life, that came down from Heaven;
as the poor Pismire for Bread, that springs out of the Earth!

The Sabbath is an Harvest; and he that sleeps away his time in Harvest, is a
Son that causes shame.

The Seaman, or Mariner, observes his Wind and Tide, otherwise he cannot get to
his intended Harbor: but Seasons of Grace are not like the Tides; of which, if
you miss one, you may get another. How careful then should thou be to improve
every Minute?

Our Savior Christ said to his Disciples concerning the Loaves and Fishes,
Gather up the Fragments that nothing be lost. The like advice I give you
concerning the Lord's Day: Gather up the Parcels thereof, Let no part of it be
lost, no not the least Minutes; which are precious: to this end, Spiritualize
all the objects you meet with in the Day; as thus.

When first awake, think that God Almighty can as easily awaken you out of your
Graves from the sleep of Death; as he has in your Beds, from the sleep of
Nature: Let the rising out of your Beds, put you in mind of the Resurrection.
And when you see the Sun, Let your Meditation be; That if the rising of one Sun
be so glorious, how glorious will that day be, when so many thousands of
Bodies, far brighter than the Sun, shall appear to accompany Christ at the
great Assizes? Consider that this great Star must run in one Day, ten or twelve
Millions of Leagues: and shall you make no progress in Virtue? Consider that
unwearied Harbinger is gone to take you up a Lodging in the Grave: each Minute
is so much deducted from your Life. Follow therefore the Counsel of the Son of
God, Work while it is Day; for the Night comes, when no Man can work. Let not
then this Light burn in vain; but endeavor by your own good Works, to let your
Light so shine before Men, that they may see your Works, and glorify your
Father which is in Heaven.

As thou art putting on thy Apparel, remember some of them were at first given
as coverings of shame, being the effect of Sin; and that they are made of the
Excrements and Offals of dead Beasts, so that thou have very little cause to be
proud of them. Nay indeed, thou have great cause to be humbled at the sight
thereof: seeing the richest Apparel are but the fine covers of the foulest
shame. Therefore as thou art Clothing thy Body, endeavor to Cloth thy Soul
with Christ's Righteousness, as with a Garment: Lest while thou art richly
apparelled in the sight of Men; thy Soul be found to walk naked in the sight of
God.

Before thou betakest thy Self to thy Closet, breath forth thy Soul to God at
thy first awaking, in this, or the like, short Ejaculation.

O Lord God, as thou have awakened my Body from last Nights sleep, so by thy
Grace awaken my Soul from the Lethargy of Sin, that at the general Resurrection
I may arise to Eternal Glory. Amen. CHAP. III. Of Closet-Prayer, and the
Preparations to it.
HAving thus fitted thy Self for thy Closet, before thou prayest take the wise
Man's Counsel ( Ecclus. 18.5.23.) Prepare thy Self, and be not as one that
tempts God.

Now for thy better preparation observe these few Rules.

1. You are to remember when you settle your self in Prayer, you then place
your self in the presence of God, whose Eyes indeed are upon all Men; but in a
more especial manner upon those that call upon him in Prayer.

2. The consideration of his presence is to put you in mind, with what humble
reverence both of Soul and Body, you ought to appear before so great a Majesty.

3. Lay aside all wrath and malice against your Neighbor. I will, says the
Apostle, that men lift up holy hands without wrath (1 Timothy 2.8.) St. Hierom
confesses this of himself, that when he was angry he durst not enter into the
Church, but totum animo and corpore contremuisse, He trembled very much both in
Body and Mind. The Spouse of Christ is compared to a Dove, which some say is
sine fell, without Gall. The very Heathens when they offered Sacrifice threw
the Gall of the Beast away: and will thou offer to God the Gall of wrath,
bitterness and revenge, with the Sacrifice of Prayer?

4. Banish all Worldly thoughts out of your Heart. Our Savior when he taught
us to pray, by the Preface to the Petitions tells us where our affections in
Prayer should be, viz. in Heaven: Our Father, which art in Heaven. Therefore
before you begin to pray, you are to resolve within your self, seriously to
intend the Duty you are about, that your heart may not wander, but go along
with your Prayers: Or if through weakness it happens to stray, to call it back
again, and ask Pardon for it, in some such Prayer as this:

Lord strengthen me, and restrain me, and lay not this weakness to my charge.
Having entered thy Oratory, propose these few Questions to thy Soul, and engage
thy self to an Answer.

O my Soul! Wherefore art thou now retired into this place? What is thy design?
What are thy Pretensions? Where is thy God, whom thou come to treat with? Is
he present? Does he hear thee? Is he merciful? Will he help thee? What is the
business thou art to negotiate? Is it the saving thy Soul, or the satisfaction
of Earthly desires? What words will thou use to move God to hear thee? What
humble Gesture? What profound Reverence? Do thou know who thou art before? Is
not Gods Eye upon all, to observe Head and Heart, Lip and Life? Dare thou
suffer thy thoughts then to wander? Will he be pleased with that Sacrifice he
has accursed, of drawing nigh to him with our Lips, when our Hearts are far
from him?

Answer thy self briefly to every one of these Interrogatories, as thy own
Conscience dictates to thee; for by this Discourse made to thy self, thou shall
be better prepared to discourse with God.

Having thus prepared thy self for Prayer, thou may then fall down on thy
Knees, and to thy ordinary Prayers (which must not on this Day by any means be
omitted) add these following Heads of Prayers: suitable in some measure, to the
solemnity of the Day.

1. You are to pray for the Minister, that God would give him the door of
utterance, that he may open his mouth boldly to publish the mysteries of the
Gospel: that he may speak the word truly, sincerely, powerfully, and
profitably; delivering that which is suitable and seasonable to your condition.

2. You are to pray for your selves, that he would banish out of your Head all
wandering, worldly thoughts, which may distract your minds in the hearing of the
word, and so choke that Heavenly Seed, make it Fruitless: and that he would
give unto you as attention to hearken; so Understanding to conceive, Wisdom to
apply, Judgment to discern, Faith to believe, Memory to retain, and Grace to
practice, what you shall hear: So that the word may prove unto you, not a
Savor of Death unto Death, but of Life unto Life; all which you may do in this
following Prayer.

O Lord God, from whom alone are the Preparations of the heart, the day is now
come, which being holy unto thee, I am to spend in thy more solemn Worship:
many Sins there are by me not duly repented of, which may justly bring upon me
a Curse instead of a Blessing; especially my crying Sins, (Here mention thy
particular Sins which thou have found thy Self guilty of; and also the Sins
committed by thee, the last Week) that may make my Prayer an Abomination to
thee. Accept, O Lord, this my Confession, and (at least) desired sorrow for
them; turn my heart from them for the future; and through the blood of my
Savior, so remove the guilt of them, that they may not hinder good things from
me. Let the effusions of thy Grace, both upon me and all the Congregations of
thy People, be ever plentiful: Let my heart be fixed, that no vain or worldly
thoughts harbor there; while I am in thy House. Quicken me with thy holy
Spirit, that I may draw near unto thee with a true Heart; that I may be fervent
in Spirit, serving thee; and that, receiving thy word with an honest and good
heart, I may understand and keep it: and bring forth fruit with patience, and
to perfection.

Remember thou thy Servants which are to dispense thy mysteries unto thy
People, and especially him upon whose teaching I wait: Pardon their Sins and
Frailties, open their Mouths, guide their Minds and Tongues, that they may
deliver thy truths in the demonstration of thy Spirit: and let thy Work so
prosper in their hands, that they may both save themselves, and them that hear
them, that both may be built up in our most holy Faith, to the perfecting thy
Church, and Eternal Glory of thy name thereby, through Jesus Christ our Lord
and Savior. Amen.

You may also add this Prayer.

O Lord! Holiness becomes thy House, and dutifulness becomes me to go into
thy Courts, and wait upon thee, and this is the great day of thy Service: thou
that have given me to see the light of this day, make me careful to do the duty
of it; timely to present my self unto thee; and reverently to behave my self
before thee; that when I go hence, I may return with fruit and favor from
thee, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen. When you go to receive the Sacrament, use
this Prayer.

O Thou in whose Temple every man speaks of thine honor, whose Glory no mortal
man can sufficiently express, whose Goodness no tongue is able to display,
whose Holiness transcends all the perfections we see here below! overaw my
Spirit, when I go with the multitude to the House of God, with the Voice of Joy
and Praise. O let me consider, that it is the All-seeing God in whose presence
I stand; and that holy Angels are sent to observe my Devotion! Give me sober
Thoughts, holy Affections, devout Postures, steadiness of Mind, ardent Desires,
modest Looks, and a grave Behavior: especially now I am going to receive the
Sacrament. Now, let all that is within me turn into holy breathings; banish
from me all undecent thoughts; and if thou do not think fit to free me from
temptations before they come, give me Grace vigorously to resist them, that I
may show my Zeal to thy Glory, by my abhorrence of all imaginations, that exalt
themselves against the obedience of Christ Jesus. Amen. CHAP. IV. Of
Family-Duty ere we go to God's House.
AFter thou have fitted thy Self for Church, thy next care must be carefully
and conscientiously to perform Family Duties: Jos. 24.15. Let others do what
they will, I and my House (says he) will serve the Lord. In order to the
performance of which duty, take along with you these following Rules.

1. See that your Servants and Children waste not away the Morning in sleep and
idleness.

2. Cause them to join together in Prayer, reading, or any other Godly
Exercise, Genesis 18.19.

3. Make them accompany you to Church, command their Bodies, though you cannot
their Souls.

4. Inform your selves and them, what a great and glorious Majesty and Master
you are to serve: a God so glorious, that the very Angels vail and cover their
Faces, not being able to behold the brightness of his Glory. And if this lowly
Reverence be performed by them, who are in such nearness to God; what posture
is low enough for us, who, in comparison of those Heavenly Spirits, are viler
than the ground we tread on.

5. Make them sensible, what poor Worms and wretched Creatures they are, Dust
and Ashes; their Hearts full of Putrefaction, and a sink of Sin: and therefore
ought to come crawling, crouching and trembling, to the Throne of Grace.

6. Examine what Preparation they have made for the Sabbath; whether they have
not spent more time and care to dress their Body for the Eye of Man, than to
deck their Soul for the Eye of God. Whether they have prayed in private for a
blessing on God's Ordinance.

7. Inform them seriously of the great work they go about, what a weighty work
it is, how that their Weeks Works are but toys and trifles in comparison of it.
What are Sheep, Oxen, or Shops; to Grace, Christ, and Heaven? Exhort them all
to be careful and serious in God's work, in Soul-Salvation-Work: and therefore
they ought to prepare themselves with all their might.

Remember the Fourth Commandment binds you to look to all within your care,
both Manservant and Maidservant, etc. Whosoever rides them unnecessary
Journeys on that day, the groans of the tired Beast, will rise up in judgment
against them, and condemn them for breaking God's Command.

As Motives hereunto, consider

1. That it is God in a Family, not Man only that makes it to prosper: so that
if thou would have it go well with thy Family; then ought thou to set up
the worship of God in it. The Lord blessed the House of Obed-Edom for the Arks
sake: so God will bless thy House, if the Ark, that is, his worship be there.
Would thou have thy Family flourish, set up the worship of God in it. Let no
wicked Person remain in thine House. He that will not pray and join in the
worship of God with thee; Let him not eat with thee. Make Joshua's resolution;
As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord.

2. Remember you must be accountable to God for those Souls he has committed
to your charge: you ought therefore to take care that they be trained up in the
fear of the Lord. See that none of your Family be given to any Vice, viz.
Swearing, Drinking, Lying, or the like. Make choice of such Servants as fear
God: choose for him somewhat, and not altogether for your self. Enquire in the
first place, whether they will submit to his word: if not, let them not come
under thy roof. As thou would not have the Devils Company in thine House; so
do not entertain any of his Friends and Servants; but rather let it be an
Harbor and Habitation of God's Children: for so shall thou be blessed. You
know that God blessed Laban for Jacob's sake: so may you likewise expect a
Blessing, if you entertain such in your House.

A Family Prayer before we go to Church.
O Lord, increase our Faith, and by thy holy Spirit prepare our hearts to pray
as we ought; and for Christ's sake accept this Morning Sacrifice of Prayer,
though weak and imperfect, which in his Name, and by his Mediation and
Intercession we offer up to Thee.

We humbly and heartily acknowledge thy infinite Wisdom, tender Love, and
Fatherly Goodness toward us thy unworthy Servants, most vile and wretched
Sinners, in that it has pleased thee not only to give us a liberal allowance
of time to do our own Works, and follow our own Callings and Recreations, for
the health of our Bodies, and the necessities of this present Life: but also to
appoint us one day in seven to attend upon thee, do thy Work, and fit our
selves to keep with thee an Everlasting Sabbath in the highest Heavens.

We know, O Lord, that we are bound in Conscience to serve and worship thee
every day of the Week; and every day to set apart some time for Spiritual and
Heavenly Exercises; yea, and when we are in Earthly business, to carry Heavenly
minds about with us: yet it has pleased thee further to allow us one day in
seven to attend wholly upon thee, and more thoroughly to acquaint our selves
with thee; with thy ways, and with our sinful and deceitful hearts: to wean
them from the Love of this World, and set them upon Heavenly Joys.

And now, O Lord, as thou have given us a day to serve thee; fit and prepare
every Soul to worship thee as we ought. To this end, give us the assistance of
thy holy Spirit, that we may learn to redeem time, and number all our days, our
Sabbaths more especially; that so we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom: that we
may now get wise, religious, believing and Repenting Hearts. O Lord, give us
Grace to consecrate this day, as a day of delight, holy and honorable to thee:
not doing our own Works, nor following our own Pleasures, nor speaking our own
words; but exercising our selves in duties of Piety and Mercy, publicly and
privately: in thy House and in our own. So that we may make this Season a day
not only of reconciliation for the Sins of the Week past; but also a day of
Preparation and spiritual Provision, furnishing our selves for the better
performance of the duties of the Week to come.

And now, O Heavenly Father, we are going to thy House to partake of thy
Ordinances, we beseech thee to go with us thither, and stand by us there; and
bring us back again: rejoicing when we shall find our Faith increased, our Hope
quickened, our Zeal kindled, our Hearts inflamed with the Love of thee and our
Brethren. Let us not, we beseech thee, make thy House, which is an House of
Prayer and Spiritual Exercises, to be a Den of Thieves: but let us look to our
Feet, that so we may be more ready to hear, than to offer up the Sacrifice of
Fools.

It is a fearful thing, when this word which should he a Savor of Life unto
Life, does prove a Savor of Death unto Death; as it does to many who regard
not what they hear.

Grant therefore, O Lord, that we may take diligent heed what we hear, and how
we hear: keep us we humbly pray thee, that we be not like unto them that be
compared unto the high way; who do not so much as bend their minds to regard
what is taught: nor to them, who are compared to the stony ground; who do it
but shallowly and superficially: nor to them that be compared to the thorny
ground; that do choke and smother it, with minding their ease, pleasure, gain
and profit over much. But give us Grace to be like the good ground; who coming
to the word with honest and good hearts, bring forth good Fruit, with Patience,
and in good Season: So that keeping this day as we ought to do; we may be
translated to keep an Everlasting Sabbath in the highest Heaven. Amen.

CHAP. V. Of the great obligation that lies upon every one of us to worship God
in Public.
NEglect not public Ordinances upon pretense of serving God in private: that
God Almighty gives his Blessing both to private and Family Duties, is most
certain; but to put God off with these, and neglect public Worship: is to rob
him of a greater sum, and pay him with a less.

It is worth our Observation, that the Sabbath and public Worship of God, are
by him joined together; therefore let no Man put them asunder: Ye shall keep my
Sabbath, and reverence my Sanctuary, I am the Lord your God. They then that
despise God's Sanctuary, cannot observe God's Sabbath. Do but consider David's
Tears for the want, and his Prayers for the fruition of Public Ordinances;
even then, when he had opportunity for private Performances: and surely then
thou will esteem the Ministry of the word no mean mercy. See his sorrow for the
want of them! I was driven (says he) from the Sanctuary, when I did but think
of it, my Soul was poured out like water; for I had gone with the multitude, I
went with them to the House of God. Psalm. 42.3. My Soul was poured out (that
is) was overwhelmed with grief, and even ready to dye; when I compare my
present condition with my former happiness, in the fruition of religious
Assemblies.

How bitterly and passionately does he plead with Saul? If the Lord has
stirred thee up against me, let him accept an Offering: but if men, Cursed be
they before the Lord, for they have driven me out this day, from the
inheritance of the Lord. (1 Samuel 16.19.)

How pathetically does he bemoan his own Soul? Woe is me, for I dwell in
Meseck, and have my habitation in the Tents of Kedar! The loss of his Father,
Mother, Wives, Children, Lands, Liberty, nay life it self; would not have gone
so near his Heart, as the loss of the public Ordinances. As his sorrow was
great for the want; so was his Soul most earnest for the fruition of them.

How many Prayers does he put up for the liberty of the Tabernacle Psalm. 43.3,
4.) and Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will seek
after: viz. That I might dwell in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and visit his
holy Temple. And (Verse 8.) When thou said, seek my face; my heart said unto
thee, thy face, Lord, will I seek. David at this time was banished the Temple,
and he among other reasons uses this argument to restore him to his happiness;
as if he had said: O God thou have commanded me to worship thee in the Temple.
To appear before thee is my delight; my heart desires to seek and see thy face
there. Thus he prays to God for the performance on his side, that he might be
enabled to obey God's Precept. Peter and John went up to the Temple at the hour
of Prayer (Acts 3.1.) and St. Paul reasoned in the Synagogue every Sabbath day
(Acts 13.14.) those that by their practices contemn public worship, have
neither Christ nor the Apostles for their Pattern. One of the Jewish Rabbis
has a saying, he that dwells in a City where there is a Synagogue, and comes
not to Prayers, merito dicitur vicinus malus: if thou forsakest the Assembly of
God; how useful thou may be to others Bodies, I know not: but I am sure thou
art neither to thine own Soul, or theirs; in neglecting God's service.

Consider the condition of Primitive Christians, who were forced to serve the
Lord with fear, and attend his Ordinances with trembling: who built Churches
under ground, rather than they would want the opportunity of serving God in
Public.

Consider also how David bemoaned himself, counting Swallows and Sparrows in
this much better than he, because they could build their Nests in the Temple,
while he was banished from it. (Psa. 84.1, 2, 3.) How amiable are thy
Tabernacles, O Lord? My Soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the
Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. Yea, the Sparrow
has found an House, and the Swallow a Nest for her self, where she may lay her
young: even thine Altars, O Lord of Hosts, my King and my God. Did David, being
abridged thereof, thus bemoan himself? Surely then we should count it a great
Mercy, that we have Public Churches and Oratories to go unto, without any let
or molestation; that we have no Tyrants, no Foreign Enemies, no Rods, no Axes,
no noise of War to affright us from God's public Ordinances: what cause of
rejoicing is here?

But yet, if this liberty of ours make us wanton, and the plenty God gives us
tempts us to Licentiousness: if instead of growing better we grow worse: if the
Manna we have, do not make us to hunger and thirst after righteousness: we may
have just reason to fear God will remove our Candlestick from us, and give it
to a Nation that brings forth better fruit than we have done.

Perhaps you say, you spend your time as religiously at home as you do at
Church; that you Read, Pray, Catechize, and the like: but I must tell you, you
do all this out of Season; you mis-time and misplace duty, and you should not
use one Ordinance or Duty, in plain contempt and neglect of another; you cannot
expect God's Presence, nor look for the gift of God's Grace, in a way of
Disobedience to his Command, and neglect of his appointed means.

When God sets up the Ministry of the word in any place, his Spirit then opens
his School, and expects that all that should be taught, should come thither:
Now (says the Learned Mr. Gurnal) whether is it most fitting, that a Scholar
should wait of his Master at School; or that the Master should run after his
Truant Scholar at play in the Field, to teach him there? And again, put Case
(says the Reverend Dr. Sherlock) any of you were a Father of a numerous
Offspring, and that without any express Command, most of your Children should
agree by common consent to visit you together, to ask your Blessing, and pay
their thankful acknowledgment to you for your care of their Education, and the
liberal provision you have made for them; but one or two of them should choose
to come in private, when no body sees them, and obstinately refuse to come with
their Brethren; though they were censured by them for undutifulness and
ingratitude. Now if Man would not accept of such a private acknowledgment:
shall we expect that God should? God is a public Benefactor, and upon that
account may challenge public Worship at our hands; nay indeed God himself
instituted it. In the Jewish Church the Sacrifices were publicly offered up by
the Priest: He likewise appointed a public place for Worship, viz. The
Tabernacle at Jerusalem, which would have been of no use, if there had been no
obligation to public Worship: and this is enough I should think, to satisfy
any reasonable Man, of their obligation hereunto.

CHAP. VI. Of our going to our Parish Church.
HAving thus fitted thy Family for God's House, repair with them to thy own
Parish Church: otherwise you will discourage your Minister, and set your
Neighbors an ill Example.

Remove all prejudices against thy Pastor, especially these two, which because
most common, I shall therefore instance in them. As (1.) Against his Parts.
(2.) Against his Life.

I confess it is a mercy to sit under a Pastor that has both Parts and Piety,
Gifts and Grace too: and were thou to choose thy Dwelling, I would advise thee
to bear with many outward Conveniences to sit under such a Ministry: but
suppose thy Teacher be, at least in thy thoughts, a Man of mean Parts, and his
pains will yield thee little profit, that is no excuse for thy not hearing of
him. Shall the Divine Herbert be Umpire in the case: Consult his Church Porch,
and Page 15 th, he speaks excellently to our purpose.

Judge not the Preacher, for he is thy Judge:
If thou mistake him, thou conceiv'st him not.
God calls Preaching Folly. Do not grudge
To pick out Treasures from an Earthen Pot.
The worst speak something good; if all want sense,
God takes a Text, and Preaches Patience.
He that gets Patience, and the Blessing which
Preachers conclude with, has not lost his pains.
He that by being at Church escapes the Ditch,
Which he might fall in by Companions, gains.
He that loves God's abode, and to combine
With Saints on Earth, shall one day with them shine.
Jest not at Preachers Language or Expression:
How know thou but thy Sins made him miscarry?
Then turn thy faults and his into Confession:
God sent him whatsoever he be. Oh tarry,
And love him for his Master; his condition,
Though it be ill, makes him no ill Physician.
A Condemned Person will esteem a Beggar when he brings a Pardon: How beautiful
then are not only the Lips, but the hands of those that bring glad tidings or
Peace?

Dear Christian Brother! I pray resolve me: Do the efficacy of the Ordinances
depend on the parts of a Man, or on the power of God? May not a costly treasure
be brought to thee in an Earthly Vessel? Thou may light a Candle as well by a
Brimstone Match, as by a great Fire. A small Damsel was instrumental for
Naaman's recovery both of his corporal and spiritual Leprosy: And who art thou
that none must instruct thee, but such an one that like Saul, is higher than
others in gifts and abilities? I wish it proceed not from the Pride of thy
Spirit: a picking Stomach argues a Diseased Body; and an itching Ear cannot
argue a sound Soul. The industrious Be sucks Honey from the Thyme, an harsh
and dry Herb. The Meat is as good in a Pewter, as Silver-Dish. If thou go to
the Table only for Sauce, and the Church for Style and Elegancy: I dare be bold
to tell thee, that thy heart is not right toward God.

2. As to thy prejudice against his Life which gives the lie to his Lips. I
must needs confess, the night ushers in more Stars than the day opens Eyes to
behold a Ministers Actions, Ears to listen to their deportment, and Mouths to
proclaim their actions through all Provinces: and they that forget their
Sermons will remember their faults to Patronize their own. But if the
Providence of God should place thee under such a Minister (which is no small
unhappiness) yet is he not to be rejected.

God Almighty fed Elijah by a Raven: and so may he feed thee with Heavenly
Manna, by a sinful Minister; who may convert thy Soul. The reason is (as
before) because the operation of the Word, does not depend on the Piety of the
Preacher, but upon the free Grace and Power of God. A blind Man may hold a
Candle and give light to others, while he himself remains in the dark. The
Scribes and Pharisees were many of them vicious Persons, yet sitting in Moses's
Chair, Christ commands his Disciples to hear them. He did not forbid them to
hear their Doctrine, but to forbear their doings.

CHAP. VII. The Souls Soliloquy as it walks to God's House, and behavior there.
ORder thy business to come before the Prayers; for many and mischievous are
the consequences of coming late.

1. You rob your self of the opportunity of private Prayers, for a blessing
upon the public.

2. You lose the benefit of public Confession and Absolution; which are of
huge esteem and value to all that are wisely Religious.

3. You willingly deprive your selves of part of God's public Worship, which
is both a Sin, and a loss of so great account, as cannot easily be expressed,
nor ordinarily believed.

As you are going to Church, you may make use of this Soliloquy.

O my Soul! Let Vzza's Death make thee careful, how thou enters irreverently
into God's House. If we be so careful to come with clean Apparel before an
Earthly Prince, much more should we with clean Hearts and Souls, approach our
Heavenly King. A Prince may not regard how his Servants go in his Kitchen; but
when they come into his Presence Chamber, he expects they should look to their
Carriage and Words. God indeed, O my Soul! expects more honor in our religious
acts, than in the ordinary actions of our Lives: for in the first, we directly
design his honor and service; and if we do not perform them seriously, the
greater is our Sin.

Think then, O my Soul! how choice God was in the Law, about all things
relating to his Worship: the Tabernacle and Temple must be of the best Wood,
the purest Gold, and the finest Linen. The Persons must be without blemish (
Lev. 2.17.) the Sacrifice must be perfect, without spot; the best of the Flock,
the best of the Beasts, the fat that covers the inwards. And what, O my Soul,
do thou think was the substance of these shadows; but this? that God will be
served by holy Men, in the purest and holiest manner: and that we must be
exact, both as to our Persons and Performances.

Great Persons are impatient of contempt and affronts; especially when offered
to them in their own Houses. God will sooner overlook thy forgetfulness of him
in thy Trade, or Travels, than in the Tabernacle. When thou drawest nigh to
him, he will be Sanctified, either by thee, or upon thee: if thou refusest to
give him glory in thy Service; believe me, he will get himself Glory by thy
Sufferings. His worship is his Presence, his Face; and look for his Fury, if
thou dare him to his Face.

The Waters of the Sanctuary, are like the Waters given to a suspected Wife: if
Innocent they witness her Honesty, and made her Fruitful, though Barren before.
But if guilty, they caused the Belly to swell, and the thighs to rot. If thou
make Godliness thy business in the Ordinances of God, it will make thee
fruitful, if barren of good Works: but if thou be formal and perfunctory,
and go thy round in religious Duties, never minding the true end of them,
nor thy Carriage in them: thy Prayer will be an abomination; the word, a savor
of Death unto Death; and the Sacrament a Seal of thy Damnation.

When thou come at the Church-Door, say; Surely the Lord is in this place:
how dreadful is this place? It is no other but the House of God; the Gate of
Heaven.

When you enter into the Church. O my Soul! where ever thou art, thou art under
God's Eye; and therefore should thou be no where profane: but now thou art
in his Church, thou art in his immediate Presence. How holy ought thou to
be? How devout thy Behavior? We read ( Exodus 25.37.) Moses was commanded to
light up seven Lamps in his Tabernacle, the place of his public worship: and
why seven Lamps? What was the substance of these shadows? in short this: that
nothing shall escape his notice. He sees what uprightness and seriousness
there is in thy Prayers and performances; whether thou art Praying, Reading,
Hearing, or Singing: and after what manner thou do them, whether slothfully
or diligently. His Eye is always upon thee; and his Eyelids try thy actions:
to reward or punish them.

When you view the Baptisterion or Font. Give hearty thanks unto God for your
Christendom, that by Holy-Baptism he has called you to a state of Grace and
Salvation through Jesus Christ: and humbly beseech him, that you may continue
in the same to your Lives end. For if you Apostatize, you are guilty of an
horrid Sin; and must answer for it at the great and terrible day of Judgment.

It was a custom in the primitive times, that such as were Baptized did wear a
white Stole: a Ceremony, to signify the purity of Life, the Baptized was to
lead. Eliodophorus, after his Baptism, turning a Persecutor of the Church,
Marilla the Minister that Baptized him, in an holy indignation, brought forth
in public the white Stole, saying: This do I keep against thy coming to
Judgment, to testify thy Apostasy from Christ. So be thou assured, O Christian!
that the Water with which, the Minister by whom, the people before whom thou
were Baptized, shall rise up against thee in Judgment; if thou do not walk in
newness of Life.

When you behold the Eleemosynary, or Poor's Box. How much am I bound to the
good Providence of my Heavenly Father, who has raised my condition in this
World to be in the number of those that abound, not of them that want, since
it is more blessed to give than to receive.

When you view the Communion Table say, What shall I render unto the Lord for
all the benefits I have received at his hands; I will take the Cup of
Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

When you view the Pulpit. Remember how many good Lessons you have received
thence, the which not being carefully practiced, will rise up in judgment
against you, in the great Day of your Trial: resolve therefore for the future,
to be a doer of the word, not hearer only, deceiving your own Soul.

When you view the Church-Bible upon the Desk. Remember, that this is the Book
of Life; the sacred Code; the Divine Volume; the infallible Oracle of Heaven;
and that you are obliged to consult it with all manner of Devotion, and to
inform your selves thence, what is the will and pleasure of the great Ruler of
the World.

When you have meditated a while on these objects, fall down on your Knees in
your Pew; and offer up this, or such like Prayers.

O Lord my God! There is no mortal Man worthy to stand at thy Door, much less
to appear in thy Presence: yet how often have I presumed to approach to thee;
without that preparedness of heart, without that dejection of Soul, without
that true and holy reverence which becomes thy Child. Pardon, O Lord, I
beseech thee pardon my irreverence in so sacred a place, and distractions in my
Prayers; and give me grace to demean my self so reverently and zealously, now I
am in thy House and Service: that my Prayers may come up before thee as
incense; and the lifting up my hands as a Morning Sacrifice. Grant this for
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen. Or

OPen my Mouth, my Lord and Maker, to bless and praise thy Divine Majesty.
Cleanse my heart from all curious, noxious, and destructive thoughts: enlighten
my understanding to know thee, my will to obey thee: settle my attention;
excite my Devotion to praise thee. That I may worthily, reverently,
religiously, perform this Morning-Sacrifice of Prayer; through the virtue of
those most pure and perfect Praises, which thou, O Jesu, my Redeemer, offeredst
up on Earth, to thy Eternal Father; Mine may be now acceptable in thy sight.
Amen. CHAP. VIII. Of our behavior at Church when the Minister is come unto it.
AS soon as the Minister begins the public Worship, lay aside all your other
Meditations and Prayers, and apply your mind to attend diligently, and to join
devoutly in every part and passage of Divine Service; considering it is the
great end of your coming to Church; and your business there is to serve the
Lord, with your Christian Brethren in public.

1. Therefore when the Minister exhorts you out of the Word of God, to confess
and acknowledge your Sins and Wickedness, harden not your heart, but with all
possible humility, both of Body and Soul, say after the Minister in the
Confession of your Sins; and endeavor to let your Heart even melt and bleed in
the bewailing your Offenses: and to this, and every act of Divine Worship,
neglect not to say, Amen. For that is as it were the Seal to confirm to your
Soul, the benefits thereof. The Hebrews have a saying, that whosoever says Amen
with all his might, opens the Doors of Paradise.

2. After Confession, when the Minister comes to the words of Absolution; bow
down your Head and say softly in your Heart: Lord, let this Pardon pronounced
by thy Minister, be effectual to my Soul; and Seal thereunto the Forgiveness of
all my Sins.

3. The Psalms and Hymns are to be answered Verse by Verse, with the Minister,
that so all may join and bear a part in the Service of God; for in his Temple
do every Man speak of his Honor: and here, though you cannot read, yet your
Heart may join with them that do read; and your Mouth also may show forth the
praise of God, by saying after every Psalm, Glory be to the Father: adding
always, Amen; to show and express how affectionately you desire the Glory of
God.

Be not silent, nor ashamed, publicly and audibly, to make Confession of your
holy Christian Faith, when you are thereunto called by the Minister; for this
is a duty you owe both to God and Man. It is an act of God's Worship, and a
Declaration that you hold the same Faith with all true Christians: and
therefore it is required of you, not only with the Heart to believe unto
Righteousness; but with the mouth also, that Confession be made unto Salvation.

And when the Confession of Faith is publicly pronounced, do not sit and loll,
as if you were not concerned at it; but stand up with the rest of the
Congregation: to signify and declare, that you will stand to this Faith, and
earnestly contend for it, as being the same which was once given to, or by the
Saints, the holy Apostles.

I have read that it is a Custom in Poland, that the Gentlemen draw their
Swords all the while the Creed is a reading: intimating thereby that they will
defend it with their Lives and Blood. Be you, Christians, as ready to assert
and maintain your holy Faith; and resolve to attest it with your dearest Blood,
if there be occasion.

If any Child be brought to Church to be Baptized; sit not still, as if not
concerned in that Office: but let it remind you of your own Vow; and put up
this short Prayer in behalf of the Infant.

Grant that all those that are to be admitted to the Fellowship of Christ's
Religion; (and to this Infant more especially) may eschew those things that are
evil; and follow after that which is good. When any Woman comes to be Churched,
reflect on the Mercies that thou receivest from God, to make thee thankful; and
with a low Voice, put up this Prayer to God.

O Lord, as thou have delivered this Woman, thy Servant, from the pains of a
temporal; so, I beseech thee to deliver both her and all here present, from the
pangs of an Eternal Death. When you see any come to be Catechized, make not
light of it, but after this, or the like manner pray.

O Almighty and Everlasting God! who ever make thy Church fruitful, with a
new, a numerous Issue: increase Faith and Understanding in our newly
instructed, that they being born again may be joined unto the Sons of thy
adoption, through our Lord Jesus Christ. When you hear the Banes of Matrimony
published in the Church, fall not into Laughter (as the manner of some is;) for
it ill becomes the Sacredness of the place, and argues out irreverence to God.
We should show our selves better Christians, by falling down on our Knees, and
praying at the same time for a Blessing from God on them. O let us then reflect
on our own Vow and Promise in Marriage, how we have performed it: and let us
make it also an occasion of a fresh Engagement in our selves, to keep it most
strictly.

I am not of the opinion of the Papists, that Marriage is a Sacrament; but I
look upon it as a most solemn engagement among Men, and Sacred: being a Vow
made before God, and witnessed by many: and therefore a subject proper for
seriousness and devotion. When you sing unto God, let your heart make melody:
Take heed, that when your Voice is high, your Heart be not dead, flat, and low.

1. When the Word is read and preached; mind it: and say, this is the Word of
God, it is his Command, and dare I disobey it? O that my ways were made so
direct, that I might keep God's Statutes!

2. When you hear the Curses denounced against Sinners, tremble if thou be
guilty of any of the Sins.

3. When you hear God's Calls and Invitations, his rich Promises and
Allurements, say: What, shall I refuse them? Does God knock at them: and shall
not the Everlasting Doors of my Heart fly open, that the King of Glory may
enter in?

Lastly, While the Minister is pronouncing the Blessing, post not away (a fault
too common every where) but hope, desire, and believe it shall come down upon
you. Remember the punishment of Judas, he stayed not for the Blessing, but went
away, and dispatched himself. That you may not forfeit God's Protection, and be
given over by the Almighty, as he was: I pray stay till the Blessing be
pronounced; and after it is ended, fall down on your Knees, and offer up this
short Ejaculation.

O Sweet Jesu! bestow on me this day thy Blessing, with this of the Minister:
preserve me from all Sin, and give me perseverance in thy Service; that at the
last and dreadful day of Judgment, I may receive that happy Benediction, among
thy Elected and Predestined Children: Come ye Blessed Children of my Father,
and inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World. CHAP.
IX. Of our due behavior between Morning and Evening Service.
At your returning home.
LET your return with your Family home be with the same gravity and care, as
was thy passage to the Church. Let your talk be rather of what you have learnt
or heard, than of any Worldly matters: except necessary occasions enforce the
contrary. If any of your Neighbors talk Heavenly, mind them; but if their
Discourse savor of the World, either reprove or leave them. This I mention,
because I perceive it the custom of many, as soon as the Word is out of the
Minister's Mouth, to have the World in theirs. The main Questions, as soon as
gone out of the Church, are usually these:

What News do you hear? How does Corn sell? What a Crop have you upon the
ground? Such a Person, has he not the best Corn in the Parish? Poor barren
Souls! empty of Grace surely; or your Discourses would be more savoury, more
seasonable, more Heavenly. Have you no better things to employ your Heads and
Tongues about? Ask rather, what good Word you have heard to day? How are we to
provide for Eternity? How strait is the Gate, and narrow the Path that leads
unto Life? and how few there be that find it? And alas! how miserable shall I
be, if I miss thereof?

The Devil is always upon his Watch, ever busy, and labors continually to
furnish Peoples Hearts with frothy and vain Discourse; by that means to hinder
the efficacy of the word, and the good of many a poor Soul. But alas! The
fourth Commandment ties up the tongue as well as the hands ( Isai. 51.13.) not
speaking thy own words. The tongue is there commanded to rest from talking of
Worldly matters, as well as the hand from servile and Worldly Works. How
blameworthy then are they, who make the Lord's Day a Day of reckoning with
Workmen and Servants: a Day of idle talk, about their Pleasures, Profits, or
other matters?

As soon as you are come home, before you refresh your Body, enter into your
Closet: offer up this, or such like Prayer.

I Do humbly and heartily thank thee, O Lord, Heavenly Father, for that
wholesome Doctrine and comfortable Instruction, which, this Morning, I have
heard out of thy holy word, by the mouth of thy faithful Servant: and I do
heartily beseech thee, that passing by my Sins and Infirmities of hearing, thou
would so imprint the same in my memory, and bless it unto me; that I may
believe it with my heart, and practice it in my Life and Conversation. Good
Lord, Let not the sweetness, and savouriness, of any bodily food, which I am to
receive of thy bounty, put the relish and remembrance of thy Heavenly word out
of my mind: but grant, that in feeding my Body, I may feed my Soul by holy
Meditation of the things I have heard: and together with my bodily sustenance,
may call to mind the food that never perishes. And as it is thy will, that I
should use thy good Creatures with Wisdom and Sobriety every day: So give me
Grace this day especially to do so: that they may not make me the more unfit to
partake of the spiritual food thou have prepared for me; to the glory of thy
name, and the good of thy Saints, and my own eternal welfare and Salvation,
through Jesus Christ, my only Redeemer and Advocate. Having finished your
Prayer in the Closet; depart to your Company, and the necessary refreshment of
your Body, which this Day was not appointed to abridge you off.

While you are at Dinner appear cheerful, eating your meal in singleness of
heart: rejoice before God; but let not your joy be, by any means, wanton, idle,
vain, intemperate.

At Dinner observe these few Rules.

1. Beware of making the Lord's Day a time of Feasting your Neighbors: For
though it be lawful upon this day to make such Provision, as shall be
convenient for your own Family, and for the relief of the Poor: yet to make
solemn Feasts upon it (as is the custom of too too many) whereby Servants are
kept from public Ordinances, and our selves and Guests are more indisposed to
the Duties of God's worship and service, must needs be unlawful: for though we
be not forbidden upon the Lord's Day, to kindle a fire for the dressing of
meat; yet we must take heed that we make not such a flame as shall kindle the
fire of God's wrath against us.

2. When you are set down to Dinner, having begged God's Blessing on the food,
eat no more than will fit and enable you comfortably and lively to serve God.
If temperance be required in our Meals, on the Week Day, as ( Luke 21.34.) much
more on the Lord's Day. Many fill their Bellies so full, on this day, that they
are fit only to lay their drowsy heads on the Devil's Pillow of sloth: and not
at all in a capacity of repairing again to a spiritual repast in the House of
God, and to partake of his Heavenly Viands.

3. Talk of God's Word sitting down and rising up. Let your Hearts be heavenly,
and your Discourse savoury, seasoned with Grace: a Table without some good
Discourse, differs but little from a Manger.

One of the Fathers wrote this of the Primitive Christians, that they were so
holy in their Talk at the Table, that one would have thought they had been at a
Sermon, rather than at a Supper. And Luther has a large Book in Folio, of the
pious Expressions he used at his Table: that indeed was his Pulpit, where he
read many profitable Lectures. When therefore thou art at a full Table,
consider God's Mercy in feeding thee; while there are so many Lazarus's, that
would be glad of the Crumbs that fall from the rich Man's table. When thou
eatest thy Bread with a good Appetite, say thus to thy self: If the bread be
thus savory to an hungry Body; how sweet, how savory is that which comes down
from Heaven to an hungry Soul! and then pray: O God, give me evermore of this
bread!

4. Forget not God's Servants, but invite the Poor to Dinner with thee, that
day. The poor ye have always with you, (says Christ:) and why have we this
Memento, think you? But we should exert our Charity, according to their
Indigence and Necessity? If we belong to Christ, we are to relieve the
oppressed, clothe the naked, and feed the hungry: himself will do it; though he
works a Miracle for it. Flesh and blood is not prone hereunto; and therefore
such munificence must needs argue a better and higher Principle than ordinary.
For as when we see the bank of a River, and the ground next to it, wet alone,
we gather that the River has overflown there: but when we see the furthest and
remotest ground wet also, then we know that the Rain has done that: so when we
see a Man doing good to his rich Neighbors, and Friends, we think this proceeds
but from good Nature in him; but when we see him doing good also to strangers
and unknown persons; when feeding the poor and needy ones, then we may well
believe, there is more than good Nature in that Man: it is more than probable
the Gift of Grace is there.

After you have eaten and drank.
I have now allayed the importunate craving of mine Appetite, and my body is
satisfied with material Food; but nothing can satisfy my Soul, but to behold
the presence of God in Righteousness. Therefore, Dinner being over, either
respect the Word heard that day, and read the Scripture, or some other good
Book; and call your own Heart and Family to an account for what you have read
or heard; and explain the same to them. This is commended to us by the Practice
and Example of our Lord himself, who when he was come home, said unto his
Disciples ( Mat. 13.5.) Have you understood all these things? viz. that he had
preached to the Multitude. And (Mark 4.34.) When they were alone he expounded
all things to his Disciples.

Whereupon one observes, That Christ by his Example does instruct every Master
of a Family, how to carry himself in reference to those under his charge on the
Lord's- day, after their departure from the public Congregation.

A treble Benefit will follow hereupon.

1. In respect to our selves: for the more you build up others, the more your
selves are built up in Knowledge, Faith, and every Grace of God.

2. In respect of your Children and Servants; for it will make them to hearken
more attentively to what is, in public, delivered: when they know they shall
be called to an Account for the same at home.

3. It will help much to the understanding and believing of what is heard: if
at home you repeat it, conferr of it, and examine the Proofs made use of for
its Confirmation.

2. Singing of Psalms is another Duty to be performed this day in our Families,
as well as in the Church. Holy David, that sweet Singer of Israel, recommends
it to us, (Psalm. 92.) the Title of that Psalm, is, A Psalm or Song for the
Sabbath: and it begins thus; It is good to give thanks unto the Lord; and to
sing praises unto thy name, O thou most high!

For the manner of performing this Duty, we have the Apostle's Direction, in
these words: singing with grace in your hearts unto the Lord.

1. It must be in, or with the heart, that is; our hearts must go with our
Voices: the one must be lift up as well as the other: for God is a Spirit, and
must be worshipped in our Hearts and Spirits, as well as with our Bodies.

Truly singing with the Voice, without concurrence of the Heart and Spirit, is
no more pleasing to God, than a sounding Brass, and tinkling Cymball.

2. As we must sing in the heart, so with Grace in the heart: (i. e.) we must
exercise the Graces of God's Spirit, as well as in praying; laboring to
express the same Affection in singing a Psalm, as David in the penning of it.

If it be a Psalm of Prayers and Petitions, then must our Affections be
fervent: if a Psalm of Praises and Thanksgiving, then must our Affections be
cheerful. Thus must the Affections of the Heart be suitable to the Quality of
the Psalm.

3. Another Family-Duty is Prayer; for if this Duty ought to be performed every
day, twice at least, viz. Morning and Evening: then more especially on the
Lord's- day; a day wholly dedicated to the Worship and Service of God.

CHAP. X. Of resorting to the Evening Sacrifice.
WHen it is now almost time to repair to the Evening Service, call as many of
your Servants as can be well spared, that they may accompany you to the public
Assembly: command their Bodies, though you cannot their Souls. And it may not
be amiss (but right edifying) if some one Person read a Psalm suitable to the
present undertaking, of going to worship God: such as the 84. Psalm. or the 119
th; one, or two parts of it being taken at a time, as occasion shall serve; to
which reading all ought reverently to attend.

And this being done, let the same Rules and Directions which were given
touching going to Church in the Morning, be observed in the Evening: and let
all (as before) resort to the public worship; where your carriage ought to be
the same, as was before directed.

Surely unless you and your House appear thus the second time before God; you
cannot be said duly to sanctify the Lord's Day: but only to do it by halves.
And now to move you to this duty:

Consider you are bound in justice to God to do it. Because God has set a day,
not a piece of a day apart for himself; and we should be more afraid to steal
away God's time, than to steal away Man's Goods: the one is Theft; but the other
Sacrilege.

God Almighty has consecrated to his own Service the seventh part of our time;
but if you come only in the Morning, you give him but the 14 th part of it:
nay, I fear, too many spare him only that time which their Morning attendance
takes up, in our public Assembly, on the Lord's Day. Now I appeal to thy own
Conscience, Christian Brother! Whether it be a meet and fit thing, that
rational Persons, Created by God, redeemed by Christ, should afford to the
Worship and Service of Christ, and the great Concern of their immortal Souls,
but two hours at the most on the Lord's- day: and that time perhaps spent in a
formal, customary, cold, heartless Worship of the infinitely holy and just
Deity; the tremendous, impartial Judge, both of Angels and Men. The Jews kept a
whole day* holy in a grateful Memory of the lesser benefit of the Creation; and
their Deliverance out of Egypt: and shall we grudge to spend a whole day, in
remembrance of our Deliverance from Hell, and Death eternal?

We have not only greater Motives, but we have greater Means: they had only
Moses and the Prophets; but we have Christ and the Gospel: they had the Shadow;
we the Substance. And shall we that have more Means and Helps, put God off with
less Duty, smaller Service, and shorter Performances? Nay, the very Heathens,
guided by the Light of Nature, gave whole Days to their Dunghill Deities: and
shall we Christians refuse it to a true God? You give your Bodies two Meals
a day, and will you feed your Souls but once? It was a rational Discourse of
Joseph to his Mistress, (Genesis 39.9.) My Master has kept nothing from me but
thee, because thou art his Wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and
sin against my God?

God has kept no Days in the Week from us, but only the First Day, because it
is his Sabbath: how can we do this great Wickedness then, and sin against him?
Nathan's Parable to David, may be applied to thee, O thou most profane
Sabbath-breaker! Has God only one Day, which he has kept to himself, and
sanctified to his Service, and laid as it were in his Bosom: and shall Men be
so unworthy, when their Hearts tempt them to Vanity, even to take this day to
please and gratify their own corrupt hearts in? When they are rich in time,
and have six days for themselves; To entrench upon the Lord's Day: it is
something too much. Nay, as it is unreasonable, so is it plainly contradictory
to our own Prayers that day: for upon every Lord's Day Morning, as we make it
our open Confession, so likewise a public Prayer, after the reading of the
Fourth Commandment: Lord, have mercy upon me, and incline my heart to keep this
Law. As much as to say; Lord, we acknowledge we have neglected thy Day; we pray
thee therefore pardon all our unchristian Sabbath-breaking for the time past,
and give us Grace to observe the Christian Sabbath better for the future.

Now shall we confess in the Forenoon, and transgress in the Afternoon? Will
you beg pardon in the Morning, and sin again the same Sin before Night? Will
you open your mouths to ask God's Grace, to sanctify and keep holy the
Sabbath Day: and, it may be, profane it in a graceless manner as soon as you
are out of the Congregation?

But now to draw to a Conclusion. You that God Almighty have blessed with
Families, I beseech you to take care of making any Visits on that day after
Evening-Service, for by that means you may become guilty of a double Sin. 1. In
neglecting to worship God your selves, in your Family. 2. In hindering others
from doing that Duty. But if the Weather invite you into the Fields, let your
Walk be such as Isaac's was, to meditate: and that you may not want matter to
exercise your Thoughts about; when you divert your self in the Field, meditate
on these Ten Particulars.

1. The Greatness and Goodness of that God that you paid your Homage unto. 2.
With the Vileness of Sin, and your selves, because of it. 3. With the Sweetness
of Christ, and the Greatness of his Love, and Mercy. 4. With the Excellency of
that heavenly Work you have been about, and the Gain of Godliness. 5. With the
Vanity of the World, and all things therein. 6. With the Worth and high Value
of your immortal Souls. 7. With the Rage, Subtilty, and Diligence of your Souls
Enemy. 8. With the Deceitfulness of your Hearts. 9. With the Terror and
Torment of Hell. 10. With the unspeakable and everlasting Glory of Heaven.
2. Endeavor to spiritualize every Object you see.

As you walk and travail by the King's Highway, say; I am the way, the truth,
and the life, says my blessed Redeemer: the Way I must follow, the Truth I
must believe, the Life I must hope for; the Way which leads me, the Truth
which teaches me, the Life whereunto he brings me: the Way is undefiled, the
Truth is infallible, and the Life without end; blessed are they that walk in
this way that leads to everlasting life.

When you behold pleasant Grounds, and variety of Objects; O Lord, how manifold
are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all; the Earth is full of thy
Riches.

When you perceive a gentle Brieze of Wind; Come, Holy Spirit, blow upon my
Garden, that the Spices may flow out; make my Mind calm, serene, and quiet,
breath upon me, and revive me with the Light of thy Countenance.

When you hear a Clock strike, or perceive by the Sun the Hour of the Day.

O how fast do hour after hour come on; Time hastening to be swallowed up of
Aeternity! So teach me, O Lord, to number my days, that I may apply my heart
unto Wisdom; wisely providing for that long day, wherein the Sun of
Righteousness shall rise with healing in his Wings.

When you see an high place: Thy Mercy, O Lord, reaches unto the Heavens, and
thy Faithfulness to the Clouds.

When you perceive a Dunghill: O make me to know my self, and discover to me my
false deceitful Heart, and the Odiousness and Loathsomness of my Sins, that I
may hate them with a perfect hatred.

When you behold a stately House. O God, make me in love with that City which
has foundations, whose Maker and Builder is God. Oh when shall this earthly
house of this Tabernacle be dissolved, and I received into that Building, the
House not made with hands, aeternal in the Heavens!

When beholding any Children or Infants. O Lord, out of the mouth of Babes and
Sucklings do thou prepare Praises for thy self.

When beholding a beautiful Woman. O Lord, let not this Creature's Face be her
Pride, or the Beholder's sin or shame.

If you see any Cattle to stray, think with your self. O God, how apt am I to
go out of thy way. I have erred and strayed, O Lord, like to a lost Sheep.

By such holy Ejaculations as these you may banish all Worldly thoughts out of
your Mind, and keep the Devil (that is always busy to hinder the good Seed of
the Word from taking effect) better out of your heart, than Teresa's holy
Water, or St. Anthony's Sign of the Cross.

When you come home observe the same Rules that were given you before to be
practiced after Dinner, viz. to read the Scripture, sing Psalms, meditate,
repeat the Word, etc. but when you have done all, look upon your selves as
unprofitable Servants, and that you come short of what God requires or deserves
at your hands. O what heavenly, fervent and zealous Prayers does such a God
deserve, such rich Mercy call for! God is worthy a better Tongue to praise him,
and a better Heart to love him. Disown therefore all your own Righteousness,
and expect all the Blessings you have prayed for, through the alone Merits of
Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XI. Evening Exercise.
THE Day thus happily sliding away, draws on the Night-season, and there
remains an Evening Exercise in order to even out Accounts with the great Father
of the Family, concerning our days labor in his Vineyard.

Before therefore you take your repose at night, look over your days work,
search back into every hour of the day, humble your selves, and be heartily
sorry for your miscarriage; bless God if you have received any good: Put these
Questions to your Soul ere you betake your self to your rest.

First, How did I ly down or rise up, was God in my thoughts or no?

Secondly, How did I put up my Prayers in my Closet, did they proceed from my
Heart, or Lip only? Have I gone this day with Joy into the House of Good, have
I heard ^he Word, and treasured it up in my Heart? Have not I aimed more at the
information ^f my judgment, than at the warming of my ^ffections? was it
curiosity or piety that led ^he thither? have I gathered my thoughts together
in the public Prayers of the Church, and have my heart and desires gone along
with the Supplications which the Minister of God put up to Heaven? Have not I
thought ^f my Farm, Trade, and Oxen, while I have ^een repeating after him?
Have I read in pri^ate, have I called my Family together, read ^o them,
instructed them, made them give ^e an account of what they did remember? When I
received the holy Sacrament, were ^y thoughts fixed on the Cross of Christ, and
were my Soul affected with the great ^ystery of God's Love, and did I meditate
^n the Word as soon as I left the Church? ^as not the World in my Heart as soon
as ^e word was out of the Minister's? Did not ^eat and drink at Table more to
please my ^ppetite than to repair the decayed strength ^f my nature? Was my
Discourse holy at ^^e Table, when I craved a Blessing? was ^ot my mind more
intent on the meat before ^e than on the God above me? have not I ^een
intemperate at my Meals, and eat and ^rank more than nature required? have I
af^^r Dinner set my Servants to read, and did I pray for them and with them.
Have not ^ this day been guilty of some crying Sin, for which God might justly
punish me as he di^ the Fool in the Gospel, with Death, etc.

If upon enquiry you find you have mad^ any progress in Virtue, got ground of
Satan and mastered your Corruptions; give Go^ the Glory, by whose Grace you
overcam^ them, and return him thanks in this following Prayer.

PRaise the Lord, O my Soul, yea, let all th^^ is within me praise^ his holy
name: praise be the Lord from the rising up of the Sun unto the going down of
the same: thou art my God, an^ I will praise thee, thou art my God, and I wi^^
bless thee, who have preserved me this day from falling into Sin, and have kept
me from t^^ power of the evil one; for my Soul is this d^^ escaped as a Bird
out of the Snare of the Fowle^ the Snare is broken and I am delivered: my he^
stands in the name of the Lord, who has ma^^ Heaven and Earth. But if upon
enquiry you find, that yo^ have been guilty of many Frailties and
Imperfections, if you have not been so devout (...) you ought to have been in
your Prayers: a^fect your Soul with the sense of your Sin i^ this following
Prayer.

AH frail, weak and wicked Wretch, art thou not ashamed to remain still in thy
wonted negligences and tepidities, to sing the same sinful Song after so many
Vows, Promises and purposes of better Obedience? wallowest thou still in the
same mire, and lie thou still snorting in the same Bed of Sensuality? O
horrid ingratitude, if thou were now summoned to give up thy just accounts,
what could thou answer for so much time misspent, so many inspirations
neglected, and so many Graces abused? thou approachest nearer Death and
Eternity, but recoilest backward in religious Piety and Perfection; will thou
still lie sleeping in this dangerous Lethargy? is this the grateful and dutiful
Service thou renderest thy Creator, for having afforded thee all convenient
means to repent, for having so patiently expected thy Conversion and amendment?

Alas, my Confounded Soul, what will become of thee, what course will thou
steer, and when and how will thou begin? Ah sinful Wretch, prodigal Child,
disloyal Friend, sue to thy Physician, return to thy Father, repent thee of thy
Disloyalty, request Pardon, Grace and Love; resolve to repent for what is past,
and amend for the time to come; and from this moment consecrate the remainder
of thy Life to his Service. And now, O my Lord, as thou have given me Grace to
frame this Resolution; so give me strength and courage to put it in execution.

But if upon Inquiry, you find you have greatly broken the Sabbath Day,
neglected his public Worship, relapsed into some crying Sin, which without
God's great Mercy will bring upon you speedy Death and Damnation; affect your
Soul with this Prayer.

O My good God, Father of all Comfort and Compassion, Creator of Heaven and
Earth, and Redeemer of my poor Soul! behold here a poor Worm prostrate at the
feet of thy Divine Majesty, humbly craving pardon for all the Iniquities and
Impurities that I have committed against thy Divine Majesty from my Youth up
until now; especially those that I have this day committed against thee (such a
Sin especially;) most justly provoking thy wrathful Indignation against me: the
remembrance of them breeds an extreme Shame, Fear, and Sorrow in my now
sensible, penitent Soul. Shame, for having left an infinite Good, to embrace an
empty, fading nothing: Fear, for having forsaken the Light of Heaven, and the
Life of Aeternity* to remain in aeternal Death and Darkness: Sorrow, for having
offended thee, my God, wh^ art so loving and liberal unto me.

Oh, that my Heart could rend asunder, with true Contrition and Compunction;
and my Eyes dissolve into a flood of Tears; for having been disloyal to so
faithful a Friend, and disobedient to so free-hearted a Father! Mercy, dear
Father, to thy prodigal Child; Mercy, dear Lord, to thy sinful Servant: Pardon
my past Faults, pity my present Follies, protect my future Frailties; that with
a clean, quiet, contented Soul, I may strive to please and praise thee all my
Life long hereafter, and, in the end, die happily in thy Favor and Friendship.

O my Crucified Jesu! my only Hope and Refuge: bathe me in thy Blood, beautify
me with thy Merits, bless me with thy Grace, by the Tears that issued out of
thy Eyes, by the Prayers that came from thy Mouth, by the Blood that gushed
from thy Wounds and Heart; by all the Pains of thy Body, and Pangs of thy Soul,
by all the Mercies of thy Divinity, and Merits of thy Humanity, by all that is
dear and near unto thee in Heaven and Earth. Cleanse, quiet, clothe, comfort,
content my sick, sinful, weak and wretched Soul.

O thou Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the World, take away the
world of sins that is in me. O thou that were my Savior upon Earth, be thou my
Advocate in Heaven, pleading and interceding, that none of these Evils my sins
have deserved, may fall upon my head.

Forget and forgive all the Crimes, Ingratitudes and Impurities of my Life
past, and in particular, whatsoever through my carelessness have escaped my
memory, and whatsoever my dreadful Judge may in the rigor of his Justice lay
to my charge, that at the end of my days I may receive the end of my hopes, the
Salvation of my precious and immortal Soul. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesu Christ
his sake, Amen.

Then fail not to add to this, this usual Prayer for the Evening.

Before thou go to bed, be sure to offer unto God thine Evening Sacrifice of
Prayer and Thanksgiving. This was shadowed out unto us under the Law, where the
Lord required his Evening Sacrifice, as well as the Morning: therefore much
more does he require it of us under the Gospel. And truly if thou lie down in
thy sins unrepented of, thou might happily awaken with Hell-flames about thy
Ears. Thou may better and safelier sleep with a Serpent in thy Bosom, than
with a Sin upon thy Soul; the one can only punish thee temporally, the other
torments thee aeternally. Before ever then thou suffer the Temples of thy head
to take any rest; beg, O Christian Brother, not only Pardon of thy Sins, but
his Protection from all Dangers: which you may do in this following Prayer.

ALmighty and Everlasting God, I yield thee most humble and hearty thanks, for
that thou have vouchsafed me of thy great Mercy and Goodness, to preserve me
this day from all evil, and I also beseech thee, for thy bitter Death and
Passion, most mercifully to forgive me, a wretched Sinner, all my Offenses,
which I have this day committed by thought, word, or deed; and hereafter to
preserve and keep me from all danger, as well of Body as of Soul; to the end I
may rise again in Health, to praise thy glorious Name, and joyfully to serve
thee with a clean Body, and chaste Heart. Whilst thou art going to bed,
exercise thy Mind with these holy and heavenly Meditations. As thou art pulling
off thy clothes, think how it will not be long before thou be stripped of all,
and go out of the World, as naked as thou came; as Job excellently expresses
it, Naked came I, etc.

And when thou art laid upon thy bed to take thy Repose, let it mind thee of
thy Grave, thy Sheets of thy Shroud, and thy Sleep of thy Death, which indeed
is the shadow of it; and labor to fall asleep with the sweet Meditation of it;
and to that end, while thou art awake, exercise thy Mind with these or such
like Meditations.

Beg of Christ, That you might imitate him in his Death, which you may do in
these short Prayers.

1. Jesus died patiently.
O my Soul, how ill have we imitated our sweet Savior in our Life and Manners;
let us at least strive to imitate him in his Death, by taking patiently
whatsoever Cross and Affliction he shall lay upon us, following cheerfully to
Mount Calvary.

O my Savior, though my Soul be not forced out of my Body by such a violent
Death as thine; yet imprint, I beseech thee, in my Soul such sweet Thoughts and
Affections as thou did feel when thou did die for my sake.

2. Jesus dyed willingly.
O my God, give me health or sickness, life or death; give me what thou
please, not my will, but thy will be done.

O my Savior, thou being God's innocent Son, dyedst in the flower of thine
Age, and shall I desire long Life, who am a Sinner, a Rebel, a Criminal? I
yield, Lord, I yield and submit to Death's Summons. Farewell, Earth; farewell,
World; farewell, this Vale of tears and miseries; Heaven is my happier home,
Paradise is much more pleasant and agreeable, and Death is my way to it.

3. Jesus prayed for strength and courage in the agony of death.
O my Jesu, when my Glass shall be almost run out, when my Senses fail me, when
my Strength decays, and my Breath almost spent; O do not thou forsake me, Dear
Jesu, when all things else shall leave and abandon me.

Thou art graciously pleased, Compassionate Creator, to take pity on the Fowls
of the air, and the Beasts of the Earth, and to succor them in time of n^^d. O
refuse not thy favors to a Soul stamped with thy Sacred Image and resemblance;
but pity me, succor me, comfort me, and protect me from the hands of the Enemy.

4. Jesus dying pardoned his Enemies, and prayed for them.

O my sweet Savior, in honor of this thy fervent Charity, I pray forgive all
them that have offended me in my whole Life time; it now heartily grieves me
that ever I hated them, and were they here present, how humbly would I embrace
them, and beg their Pardon. Give them, O my God, thy Grace in this World, and
thy Glory in the next.

Thus have I finished my imperfect Piece. And, O my God, as I began it by thy
Goodness, so I end it with thy praise. Let not the weakness and simplicity of
the Agent be the Readers discouragement: but, O my Heavenly Father, give me thy
Grace to live up to these Rules, lest whilst I preach and write to others, I my
self become a Castaway.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
BRief Directions for our more devout Behavior in Time of Divine Service. With
a Short Rationale on the Common Prayer, By the same Author.


