Sr Wm Lower

Pub May 21 1800 by WRichardson No 31 strond

HORATIUS: A ROMAN TRAGEDY.

BY Sir WILLIAM LOWER KNIGHT.

LONDON, Printed for G. BEDELL and T. COLLINS, and are to be sold at their Shop
at the Middle Temple Gate Fleetstreet. 1656.

The ACTORS.
TULLUS King of Rome. The old HORATIUS A Roman Knight. HORATIUS his Son.
CURIATIUS A Gentleman of Alba, Lover of Camilla. VALERIUS A Roman Knight, in
love with Camilla. SABINA Wife to Horatius, and Sister to Curiatius. CAMILLA
Mistress to Curiatius, and Sister to Horatius. JULIA A Roman Lady, friend to
Sabina and Camilla. FLAVIAN A Soldier in the Army of Alba. PROCULUS. A
Soldier in the Army of Rome.
The Scene is at Rome, in a Hall of Horatius house. HORATIUS: A ROMAN TRAGEDY.
ACTUS Primus, SCENA Prima.
Sabina Julia. Sabina. A Pprove my weakness, and suffer my grief, It is but
too just in so great a misery; such storms as these ready to power upon them,
will shake the stoutest courages; the least dejected masc'line Spirit without
disorder cannot exercise its Virtue; although mine receive amazement at these
rude alarmes, the trouble of my heart can nothing work upon my tears, and
amongst all the sighs it send's to Heaven, my constancy reigns still over mine
eyes. When one does stop the course of the Souls sadness and affliction, though
it be less then man, it is more then woman: in this extremity to command tears,
is to show strength enough in our weak sex.


Julia. Enough, and too much for a common Soul, that from the meanest danger
does expect but one misfortune; a great heart does scorn such an abasement, it
despaires of nothing, though in occurrents doubtful; the two armies stand in
battalia before our walls; but Rome knows not yet how to lose a field, we need
not fear her, rather lets applaud her; since she goes forth to fight, she goes
to conquer: then banish, banish quite so vain a fear, and conceive brave
desires worthy a Roman.


Sabina. I am a Roman, since my Hushands is so, marriage makes me embrace
Romes interest; but it should hold my heart like a chained slave, if it did
make me to forget the place where I was born. Alba, where I began to breath my
first air, Alba, my dear Country, and my first love, when between us and thee
I see the war commenced, I fear our Victory as much as our destruction. Rome,
if thou complain'st that I am partial herein, fix upon enemies that I may hate:
When I see drawn up'fore thy walls both Armies, my three brave Brothers in the
one, and my undaunted Husband in the other, can I pray for thee, and without
impiety importune Heaven for thy felicity? I know thy State, yet in its
infancy, cannot without war fix its puissance: I know it must grow great, and
that thy destinies will not at home be bounded with the Latins; I know the Gods
have promised to thee the Empire of the Earth and that thou can not See the
effect of it, but by the war: so far am I from offering to oppose this thirst
of Glory, which obeyes so readily the Gods decrees, and posteth to thy
greatness, that I would see thy Crowned Troops already pass the Pyrenees, carry
thy battalions into the East, plaint thy Pavillions upon the banks of Rhine,
make the proud columns of Hercules to shake under thy feet: But love a town to
whom thou owe Romulus: Ingratful, know that from her Kings rich blood thou
take thy name, thy walls, and thy first laws: Alba is thy original; stay, and
wisely consider that thou carryest the sword into thy Mothers bosom; turn
elsewhere the force of thy triumphant arms: her joy will break forth in her
childrens happiness; and overcome with a maternal love, her prayers will be for
thee, if thou art not against her.


Julia. This discourse surpriseth me, since from the time that we first armed
against her people, I have seen so much indifference in you for her, as if you
had been born within our walls: I admired in you the virtue that reduced your
dearest interests unto your husbands, and did pity you in the midst of your
plaints, as if our Rome had caused all your fears.


Sabina. Whilst they encountered but in light skirmishes, not strong enough to
cast each other down; whilst a glad hope of peace flattered my trouble, it is
true, I took a vanity to be all Roman: if I saw Rome prevail, with some
regret I suddenly condemned this secret motion; again, if I resented in her
contrary success any malignant joy in favor of my three brothers, suddenly to
smother it, calling my reason to me, I lamented when Glory entered into their
house. But now alas! that one of them must fall, that Alba become slave, or
that Rome sink, and that after the battle there remain no obstacle more to
the conquerours, nor hope unto the conquered, I should show an unnatural hate
unto my Country, if I could be all Roman yet, and should ask of the Gods your
triumph, at the price of so much blood which is so precious to me. I tie me not
so strictly to the interest of a man, that I should forget my Country: I Am not
for Alba nor am I for Rome; I am afraid for one, and for the other, in this
last conflict, and must be of that side which fortune shall afflict;
indifferent to both until the Victory, I will participate the ils without
assuming any thing of the glory, and will keep my tears in store for the
conquered party, and my hate for the conquerours.


Julia. How often we see such traverses as these arise* in diverse spirits
diverse passions! In this Camilla acts clean contrary; her brother is your
Husband; yours, her Lover* but she sees with an eye far different from yours;
her blood in one camp, and her Love in the other; when you did conserve a
spirit all Roman, hers irresolute and fearful, uncertain, feared the storm of
the least mixture, of either party hated the advantage, to the misfortune of
the vanquished still gave her plaints, and so she nourished eternal griefs;
but yesterday when she understood that the Armies did advance resolved to join
battle, on her brow a sudden joy appeared.


Sabina. Oh Julia, how I fear so quick a change! Yesterday in her fair and
pleasant humor she entertained Valerius; without doubt she quits my brother
for this happy rival; her spirit shaken by the present objects finds nothing
amiable in an absent one after two years. But pray excuse the heat of a
fraternal love; the care I have of him, does make me fear all things from her;
I frame suspicions from too light a subject, The day of battle is unfit to
change, with a new dart few hearts are wounded then, in so great trouble one
has other thoughts: But who can have such pleasant entertainments, and such
contentments as may equal hers?


Julia. The causes are as obscure unto me as unto you, I cannot he satisfied by
any thought, any conjecture on it; it is constancy enough in so great danger, to
see it, to attend it without grief; but surely it is too much to express it
further even unto joy.


Sabina. See how a gentle Genius has fittly sent her to us! Try to make her
discourse upon this point, she loves you too well to conceal any thing from
you: I leave you, Julia, entertain my Sister. I am ashamed to show so much of
melancholy, and my heart hurthened with a thousand fears, seeks solitude to
hide its sighs and tears.


SCENA. II.
Camilla, Julia. Camilla. Why flies she, and would have me entertain you?
thinks she that my grief's less then hers, and that as more insensible of such
misfortunes, I should mix less plaints with my sad discourse? My soul's
affrighted with the same alarmes. I shall lose in the one and the other army
as well as she; I shall behold my Lover, nay more, my only Joy die for his
Country, or ruin mine; and this dear object of my love become for my
afflicting punishment, or worthy of my tears, or of my hate. Alas!


Julia. Yet she is more to be lamented then you: one may change Lover, but not
Husband; leave Curiacius, and receive Valerius, so shall you fear no more for
the adverse party, so shall you be all ours, and your spirit released of it is
trouble, shall have nothing to lose more in the camp of the Enemy.


Camilla Give me advises that may be more lawful, and, without proposition of
crimes, wail my misfortunes; although I can scarce resist my evils, yet I would
rather suffer, then merit them.


Julia. How, Madame! do you call a fair and reasonable change a crime?


Camilla. What? think you that the breach of faith is pardonable?

Julia. Toward an enemy what should oblige you?

Camilla. Who can absolve us from a Solemn vow?

Julia. It Is to no purpose to disguise a thing that is so clear: I saw you
yesterday receive Valerius court-ship, and the favor which he received from
you, gives him encouragement to nourish a sweet hope.


Camilla. If yesterday I entertained him with a pleasing countenance, think
nothing on it but to his disadvantage; of my content another was the object. But
to remove your error, know the cause on it; I look on Curiacius with an amity
too pure to suffer my self longer to be thought perjured. About five or six
months after my Brother married his Sister ( Julia you know it) he obtained of
my Father that I should be his Wife. This day was prosperous and fatal to us
both at once, uniting our houses, it did disunite our Kings; our marriage and
the war were both concluded at the same instant, our hope as soon dead as born,
all promises lost as soon as made: Oh how extreme then were our miseries! how
many blasphemies did Curiacius Vomit forth against Heaven? how many Rivers
flowed from mine eyes? I need not tell it you, you saw our farwels; you have
since beheld the troubles of my soul, you know what prayers my flame has made
for peace, and what sad plaints at every encounter I have uttered, as fate
disposed it; sometime for my Country, and sometime for my Lover: my despair at
last constrained me to have recourse Unto the Oracles. Hearken unto the voice
that yesterday they gave unto me, and give me your opinion, whether I have
reason thereupon to reassure my dismayed spirit. That Greek so much renowned,
who for so many years foretold our destinies at the foot of Aventine, he I
mean, that inspired by Apollo never spoke false, does promise in these verses a
quick end Unto my travels.


The Oracle. Thy prayers are heard, Alba and Rome shall be to morrow in a fair
confaederacy, and thou with Curicius shall be joined never to part, so have the
Gods enjoined.

She continues. Upon this Oracle I ground a firm belief, and as the success
passed may hope, I gave my soul over to ravishments, which passed the
transports of the happiest Lovers: Judge you of their excess. I met Valerius,
and he could not, as he was wont, displease me, he spoke to me of Love without
my trouble; I perceived not that I discoursed with him, I could not show him
coldness, nor contempt; all that I saw seemed Curiacius to me, all that he said
unto me, spoke his fires, all what I said assured him of my love. A general
fight to day is doubted much, I heard the news on it yesterday, and was not
troubled at it, my Spirit did reject these fatal objects, charmed with the
sweet thoughts of marriage and peace: But this last night has dissipated those
so charming errors. A thousand fearful dreams, and bloody Images, or rather
heaps of slaughter and of horror snatched my joy from me, and filled me with
fear: I saw dead bodies, blood, and nothing else, a spirit appearing suddenly
took flight, they defaced one another, and each fantasme redoubled my fear by
its confusion.


Julia. A dream for the most part should be interpreted in a contrary sense.


Camilla. I should believe it so, since I desire it; but notwithstanding all my
prayers and wishes I see a day of battle, not of peace.


Julia. Thereby the war will end, and peace will follow.

Camilla. Last still the ill, if this must be the remedy! Whether Rome fall, or
Alba be o'rthrown, dear Lover, think no more to be my Husband: my heart (how
great soever the fire be that does consume it) will not have the conqueror,
nor Slave of Rome. But what new object here presents it self? Is it thee,
Curiacius?


SCENA III.
Curiatius, Camilla, Julia. Curiat. Camilla, doubt it not, behold a man who
neither is the conqueror, nor yet the slave of Rome: fear not to see my hands
blush with the shameful weight of Irons, or the blood of Romans; I believed
you loved glory and Rome enough for to despise my chain, and hate my Victory,
and so in this extremity I equally feared captivity and Victory.


Camilla. It is sufficient, Curatius, I do divine the rest, thou fly'st a
battle so fatal to thy wishes, and thy heart wholly mine, to the end thou
may not lose me, denies to lend thy arm unto thy Country: let who will herein
look on thy Renown, and blame thee to have too much loved me, Camilla must not
disesteeme thee for it; the more thy Love appears, the more she ought to cherish
thee: and if thou owe much unto the place that gave thee birth, the more thou
quit'st for me, the more thy Love appears, But have thou seen my Father? can he
suffer thee in his house thus? does he not prefer the State before his
private Family? regards he not Rome more then his daughter Lastly, is our
good fortune well assured? has he beheld thee as a Son in law, or as an Enemy?


Curiat. He looked upon me as son in law with tenderness and love, which
witnessed enough an entire Joy: but he beheld me not, by any treason unworthy
honor, enter in his house: I give not up the interest of my town, I love my
honor yet, though I adore Camilla; so long as the war has lasted, I have
approved my self as good a Citizen, as faithful lover. I would with my Love
reconcile Alba's quarrel, I sighed for you in combating for her; and if we must
yet come to strokes, I should, alas! fight for her, and sigh for you: in spite
of the desires of my charmed soul, if the war should continue, I should be in
the Army: it is peace that gives me a free access unto you, peace, unto which
our love owes this happiness.


Came. Peace! by what means may one believe this miracle?


Julia. Camilla, at the least believe the Oracle, and know we fully by what
blessed effects the happiness of a battle has produced this peace.


Curiat. Ye Gods, who even could have thought it! Already the two Armies
animated unto the combat, with an equal heat threatened each other with their
eyes, and fiercely advancing, looked for nothing but the signal to give the
charge, when our discreet Dictator putting himself some distance fore the
ranks, demanded of your Prince a minutes silence; it being granted him, What do
we, Romans, (said he) what devil provokes us to arms? let reason rule, and
clear your understandings. We are your neighbors, your fair daughters are our
wives, and ours are yours; Hymen has joined us by so many reciprocal strong
knots that there are few of our sons which are not your Nephews; and to speak
the truth, we are but one blood, and one people in two Towns; why should we
tear our selves by civil wars, where the death of the conquered weakneth the
conquerors, and the most beauteous triumph is watered with tears? Our common
enemies expect with joy, when one of us defeated, shall leave the other as a
prey unto them; they have too long enjoyed the benefit of our divisons: let us
for the future join all the forces that we have against them, and let us drown
these petty differences forever in Oblivion, which make so ill allies of such
good Warriors: but if the ambition to command each other makes your troops and
ours to march to day, if we would but appease her with less blood, she will
unite, far from dividing, us. Let us name Combatants for the common cause,
each people fix it self unto their own; and as the chance of Arms shall dispose
of them, the weakest party shall obey the strongest; but with this reservation,
that the conquered without indignity to such brave Warriors, shall not be
slaves, but subjects, free from tribute or shame, without other subjection then
to be bound to follow in all places the Colors of the Conqueror. Thus our two
States will make but one resplendent Empire. He ended here, every one figh'd
with joy, and looking each into the others ranks, knew there a friend, a cozen,
or a brother: they wondered how their hands, greedy of blood, flew rashly to so
many parricides, and showed a face at once covered with horror of battle, and
with ardour for this choice: At last the offer was accepted, and the desired
peace on those conditions was swore of both sides, three should fight for all:
but for to make the better choice, our Chiefs will take a little leisure. Your
election is in the Senate, our within a Tent.


Came. O Gods, how this discourse contents my mind!


Curiat. Within three hours or there abouts, by common accord, the fortune of
our warriors shall rule our fortune; in the mean time all are free, expecting
when they shall be named; Rome's in our Camp, and our Camp is in Rome; free
access being allowed of both sides, every one goes to find his ancient friend,
and to receive his Love; for my part, Madame, my passion made me seek your
noble Brothers, and my desires met with so good success, that the Author of
your days has promised to give me the unparalleled happiness of your fair
hand to morrow; you will not, I hope, become a Rebel to his power.


Came. The duty of a daughter is obedience.


Curiat. Come then, receive that sweet command which must heap up my happiness
to its full height.


Came. I follow you, but for to see my Brothers, and to know the end too of our
miseries.


Julia. Go, whilst that I at the foot of the Altars, freed so propitiously from
their feirce rods, give thanks for you to the immortal Gods


The end of the first Act.
ACTUS II. SCENA I.
Horatius, Curiatius. Curiatius THus Rome has fitly placed her esteem, she
should have chosen otherwise unworthily; this City proud in you and in your
brothers, has found three warriors, which she does prefer before all
others, and opposing to us no other arms but yours, braveth all ours with one
sole house: we will believe that, seeing all is committed to your hands, there
is no Roman besides Horace and his Sons: This choice can fill three Families
with Glory, and consecrate their names to future ages: Oh yes! the honor which
your does receive by this choice, can immortalize all three; and since with you
my fortune and may flame have made me place my Sister, choose my wife, that
which I ought to be, and what I am to you already, makes me take your part as
much as possibly I can: But sadly another interest does restrain my Joy, and
mingles bitterness amongst those sweets; the war has cast such a refulgent ray
upon your Valor, that I shake for Alba, and foresee its misfortune; since you
combat, her ruin is assured; in making you the choice, even destiny her self
has sworn it. I see herein too plain her fatal projects, and do already count
my self your subject.


Horat. So little reason have you to lament for Alba, that Rome rather should
be pitied, seeing those she rejects, and the three she names; alas! it is a
fatal blindness for her, in having so many brave Hero's to choose, and yet to
take the worst; a thousand of her fair Children, far more worthy of her then
we, could better have sustained her quarrel: But though this combat points me
out a grave, the Glory of this choice does swell me up with a just pride, my
spirit does receive a masculine assurance by it, I dare by virtue of it to hope
much from my small Valor, and what ere the projects be of envious fortune, I
do not account me it'h' number of your subjects: Rome has too much attributed
to me; but my ravished soul shall satisfy her expectation, or lose its life;
he that resolves to die, or overcome, is seldom overcome; this generous
despair does hardly perish: but come what will, Rome shall be free, not subject
until my last gasp assure my defeat.


Curiat. Alas! how much am ^ here to be pitied! that which my Country will, my
Amity forbids: Cruel extremities! to see Alba enslaved, or her Victory bought
at the dear rate of a life so precious, and the chief good whereto her wishes
tend, purchased at the price of your last sighs: What prayers shall I form?
what happiness expect? on every side I must shed tears; on every side my
desires are betrayed.


Horat. What! would you weep me dying for my Country? Such a death for a
generous heart has charms; the glory that attends it does allow no tears; and
I should bless my fortune, if the State and Rome could lose less by my death.


Curiat. How ever, Sir, permit your friends to fear it, they only in so fair a
death as this are to be weep'd, the glory ont's for you, the loss for them: it
makes you immortal, and renders them miserable; what is it one loses not in
losing of a friend so faithful! But I see Flavian approach, he brings me here
some news. Has Alba yet made choice of her three combatants?


SCENA II.
Horatius, Curiatius, Flavianus. Flavian. I come to tell you of it.


Curiat. Well, who are the three?


Flav. You, Sir, and your two brothers.


Curiat. Who?


Flav. You, I say, and your two brothers. But why this sad countenance and this
severe look? does the choice displease you?


Curiat. No, but it does surprise me, I thought my self unworthy of so great an
honor.


Flav. Shall I tell (Sir) the Dictator that sent me to you, with what little joy
you do receive it? This cold entertainment does make me wonder.


Curiat. Tell him, that Amity, Love, and Alliance cannot hinder the three
Curiatii to serve their Country against the three Horatii.


Flav. Against them! oh! it is too much for me to speak in few words.


Curiat. Carry him my answer, and leave us in repose.


-- Exit. Flavian. SCENA III.
Curiatius, Horatius. Curiat. How heaven* hell and earth conspire against us,
and make us war! Gods, devils, men, and fortune prepare a general assault
against us; in the condition that we are, I dare them to do their worst now,
what so ever they have of horrible and cruel, is much less then the honor which
they do unto us both.


Horat. Fortune, that opens us the lists of honor, offers a glorious matter to
our constancy, she draines her force to strengthen a misfortune. To measure her
self better with our Valor, as she esteems us not common souls, she does
exclude our fortunes from the common. To fight an enemy for the general safety,
and to expose ones self alone to strokes against a stranger, is but the effect
of a simple virtue, thousands have already performed it, thousands can perform
it still: to lay ones life down for his Country, is so fair a fate, so worthy
an exposure, that all should strive to purchase such a death: But to be willing
for to sacrifice unto the public that which we do love, to tie us resolutely
to the combat against our other self, to assault a party that takes the Brother
of a wife, and Lover of a dear Sister for its sole defender, and breaking all
these knotts, to arm for's Country against a blood which one would purchase
with his life, is such a virtue as belongs not but unto us: The glorious luster
of its great name makes but few jealous of it; very few men have so imprinted
it in the heart, as to dare to aspire unto so much renown.


Curiat. It Is true, our names henceforth shall never dye, the occasion is fair
it is fit we cherish it, we shall be held the mirrous of a virtue very rare. But
for all that, our constancy and courage savours a little of barbarity: few even
of the great hearts would be proud to go this way to immortality; at how high
price soever we do set such a smoke, such vanity; obscurity is better then so
much renown: for my part, I dare avouch it, and you might have seen it, that I
consulted not upon my duty; nor our long amity: Love, nor alliance could ever
suspend my spirit a moments space; and since by this choice Alba shows indeed
that she esteems me as much as Rome does you, I think to do as much for her as
you for Rome; I have as good a heart: but lastly, I Am a man. I see your honor
consists in shedding of my blood, that all mine does depend on peircing of your
body: ready to espouse the Sister, I must kill the Brother, and all for my
Countries sake; although without fear I fly to my duty, my heart is fiercely
angry, and I tremble for horror on it; I cannot choose but pity my self, and
cast an envious eye on those whose lives our war has ravished, yet without any
desire to retreat, or relinquish; this sad and Violent honor moves me, but
shakes me not; I love that which it gives me, and wail that which it takes
away from me: and if Rome does demand a higher virtue, I thank the Gods that
made me not a Roman, to conserve yet something of humane in me.


Horat. If you are not a Roman, make your self worthy to be so: if you equal
me, make it appear more plainly. Solid virtue, whereof I boast, admits no
weakness with its constancy, and it is ill to enter into the lists of honor,
and at first step to look behind us; our misfortune's great, it is arrived
unto the highest point, I look it boldly in the face, without trembleing to see
it. Against whom soever my Country does employ me, I accept this glory blindly,
but yet joyfully: that, to receive such fair commands, should smother in us
all other sentiments; who considers, besides to serve her, any other thing,
disposes himself poorly to his duty; this sacred right breaks all other
bonds; Rome has found out my arm, I Will not examine it; with as sincere and
full a joy as I Married the sister, I will fight the brother. And lastly, to
cut off this frivolous speech, Alba has named you, I know you no more.


Curiat. I know you yet, and that is it which kills me; but this sharp virtue
was not known unto me; as our misfortune now is, 't is arrived unto the highest
point, suffer me to admire it, and not imitate it.


Horat. No, no, embrace not virtue by constraint: and since you find more
pleasure in complaint, enjoy so sweet a good with all full liberty. Behold my
Sister comes to lament with you: I Will go to see yours, to resolve her soul
unto this thought, that she is still my wife, to love you still, though I dye
by your hands, and to take to her in her great'st misfortune the sentiments of
Roman.


SCENA IIII.
Horatius, Curiatius, Camilla Horat. Sister, have you heard what account they
make of Curiatius?


Came. Alas! my fortune has much changed her face.


Horat. Arm you with constancy, and show your self my Sister: if your Lover by
my death return a conqueror, receive him not as murderer of a Brother, but
as a man of honor, that does what he ought to do, that serves his Country
well, and shows to all by his high virtue that he is worthy of you; and so, as
if I lived, finish the marriage: But if this sword cut off his destiny, give to
my Victory such entertainment: do not reproach me with your Lovers death; your
tears flow from you, and your heart's oppressed, consummate with him all this
weakness, Sister, quarrel with Heaven and Earth, curse envious fortune. but
think no more of death after the combat. Sir, I will leave you but a moment
with her, since we must go together where bright honor does call us. --

Exit Horatius.
SCENA V
Camilla, Curiatius. Came. Will thou go, my dear Heart? art thou pleased with
this fatal honor so far, as to purchase it at the expense of all our
happiness?


Curiat. Alas! I see I must, do what I can, either of grief die, or Horatius
hand; I go to this illustrious employment as to my punishment, a thousand times
I curse the account they make of me, I hate that Valor which does make Alba
esteem me, my flame does pass from despair even to crime, it quarrels with
and does assault the Gods; I wail you, and my self, but I must go.


Came. No, no, I know thee better, thou desir'st that I should pray thee, and
that so my power excuse thee to thy Country. Thou art but too famous by thy
other brave exploits, Alba already has received by them all what thou ow'st
her, none then thee has better sustained this war, none with dead bodies has
more covered this ground, thy name cannot grow greater, there is nothing
wanting to it; suffer some other here to ennoble his.


Curiat. Should I premit, and see before mine eyes another head crowned with
immortal laurels, which glory does prepare me, and my Country reproach this to
my virtue, that it might have trimphed, if I had combated? and by my Love, my
Valor lulled asleep, crown so many exploits with such an infamy? No, Alba,
after the honor thou have given me, thou shall not fall, nor vanquish but by
me; thou have committed to my hands thy fate, I Will give to thee a good account
of it, and live without reproach, or dye with shame.


Came. I hope thou will not so betray my trust.


Curiat. Before I Am yours, I must be for my Country.


Came. But will thou for it so deprive thy self of brother in law, thy sister of
her husband, I of my brothers?


Curiat. Such is our misfortune: the choice of Alba and of Rome, takes off all
sweetness from the names (sometime so sweet) of Brother in law and Sister.


Came. Will thou also come to present me with his head, and ask my hand for
guerdon of thy Victory?


Curiat. In the condition wherein I am, I must no more think of it; without
hope, to love you, is all that which I can do. You weep, my dear Heart.


Came. I have cause to weep, my cruel Lover does ordain me death; and when our
Hymen lights his torch, alas! he with his hand does put it out, and opens a
tomb unto me; this unpitiful heart is obstinate to my destruction, and says
it loves me, when it murders me.


Curiat. What powerful discourse has a Mistress when she is blubbered with
tears? and how strong is a fair eye with such help? how tender is my heart
become at this so sad a sight? my constancy against it labors with some
regret. Assault not with your griefs my glory, and leave me alone to save my
virtue from your tears, I feel it tottering, and ill defends it self: the more
I am your Lover, the less am I Curiatius, already weak in combating against
Amity, should it o'rcome at once both love and pity? Begone, love me no more,
shed no more tears; where I oppose the offense to such strong Arms, I shall
defend me better against your anger; and to deserve it, I Will no more look on
you, revenge your self of an ingratfull person, and punish an inconstant. Show
you not your self as sensible of this injury? I have no more eyes for you. Yet
you have for me! must there be more yet? I renounce my faith unto you. Rigorous
virtue, whose Victime I am. What! can not thou resist, without the assistance
of a crime?


Cum. Commit no other crime, and I attest the Gods, that far from hating
thee, I Will love thee more: yes, I will cherish thee, false and ungrateful, and
cease to aspire unto the name of fratricide. Why am I Roman, or why Art not
thou so? I would prepare thee Laurel with my hand, I would encourage thee, and
not distract thee, and I would treat thee as I do my brother. Alas! I was to
day blind in my wishes, I did against thee when I did for him, He returns:
what misfortune! if the love of his wife works no more upon his soul, then
mine does upon thine!


SCENA VI.
Horatius, Curiatius, Sabina, Camilla. Curiat. Good Gods! Sobina follows him.
Is not Camilla strong enough to shake my heart, but you must join my Sister
too? And leaving her tears to conquer me, bring you her hither to seek the
same advantage?


Sab. No, no, Brother, oh no, I come not here but to embrace you, and to bid
you adieu; your blood's too good, fear not that there is any baseness in it,
nothing that may offend the constancy of these great hearts; if this
illustrious fate should shake either of you, I should not own him for brother,
or for husband: may I yet make a request unto you worthy of so brave a Husband,
and so brave a Brother? I would at once take off impiety, render unto the
honor that expects it, its purity, without mingling of crimes set its fair
luster on it: in a word, I feign would make you lawful enemies; I am the sole
bond of that sacred knot which joyneth you; when I shall be no more, you shall
be nothing unto one another; breaking this chain, you break off your
alliance; and since your honor does require effects of hatred, purchase by my
death the right and privilege to hate: Alba and Rome will have it so, it is fit
that you obey them; let one of you two kill me, and the other revenge me, then
your fight shall not be strange, or at least one of you shall justly fight for
to revenge his wife, or else his sister. But what! you would fully so fair
Glory, if any other quarrel should provoake you: your zeal unto your Country
does forbid you such cares, you should do very little for it, if less then
this; unto it you must sacrifice, and without hate, a Brother in law, no more
then defer that which you ought to do; begin, and practice by his wife to
shed his blood, begin to pierce his bosom by his sister; begin to make a
worthy sacrifice of your illustrious lives to your dear praties by the death
of Sabina; you are enemies, you unto Alba, your to Rome, and I to both of them:
what! think you to reserve me to see a Victory, where I shall behold the
laurles of a brother or a husband smoke with a blood that I so cherished? can
I between you two govern my heart then? fulfill the duty of sister and wife?
embrace the conqueror in weeping for the conquered? no, no, before Sabina
shall feel this stroke, the death which expect from one of you, shall readily
prevent it. If you deny your hands, my own shall execute it; on then, who holds
you? on, inhumane hearts! I shall have means enough to force you to it; you
shall not be busy at the at the fight, but in the midst this body shall
arrest your Swords, and spite of your refusals, force them to make way here
before they reach at you.


Horat. O my wife!


Curiat. O my sister!


Came. They begin to mollify.


Sab. You sigh, your Visages grow pale! are you those great hearts, those brave
Heroes, which Rome and Alba have taken for defenders?


Horat. Wife, what have I done to thee, wherein have I offended thee, that thou
seek'st out against me such a revenge? what have my honor done thee? and
wherefore come thou with all thy force tassault my virtue? satisfy thy self
at least to have astonished it, and leave me to finish this great business.
Thou would feign reduce me to strange point, if thou lov'dst thy husband,
thou would not seek to prevail; be gone then, and no longer leave the
Victory doubtful and in suspense, the dispute on it makes me ashamed already:
suffer me to end my days with honor.


Sabina. Well, proceed, fear me no more; he comes to thy assistance.


SCENA VII.
The old Horatius, Horatius, Curiatius. Sabina, Camilla. The old Horatius. How
comes this, Children? does your love lull you asleep, or do you hearken to its
charm? Lose you yet time with women? even ready to shed blood, look you on
effeminate tears? begone, and leave these blubbered fools to their
misfortunes; their complaints have too much art and tenderness for you; they
would participate their weakness to you, and there is no way to shun those
strokes but only to fly from them.


Sabina. Fear nothing from them, they are worthy of you, in spite of our
endeavors; I perceive, you may expect what ever you desire both from a Son and
Son in law; and if our weakness could have changed them, we leave you here to
encourage them; come, Sister, come, let us lose no more tears; against such
virtues they are but weak arms, it is but to despair that we must have
recourse, Go, Tigers, go to fight, and we will go to die.

-- Exeunt women.
SCENA VIII.
The old Horatius, Horatius, Curiatius. Horat. Father, I do beseech you,
entertain these passionate Women; above all things see they come not forth,
their troublesome affection would come with glory by their cries and tears to
interrupt our combat, and what they do to us, would with justice do; we may be,
perhaps, suspected of this evil artifice. The honor of so fair a choice would
be too dearly bought, if we should be suspected of any cowardice.


The old Horat. I will have care of them; begone, your Brothers do attend you:
think of nothing, but what is due unto your Country.


Curiat. What farewell shall I bid you, and what complements use to express my
self?


The old Horat. Oh! do not mollify my sentiments here: to encourage you my
voice wants language, my heart cannot form thoughts strong enough: At this
adieu I have my self tears in mine eyes. Do what you ought, and in your combat
have no other thought.


The end of the second Act.
ACTUS III. SCENA I.
Sabina. MY soul, we cannot stand indifferent, one side it is requisite I take;
I must be wife unto Horatius, or sister to Curiatius; cease we to divide our
fruitless cares, let us desire something, and fear a little less; but which to
take, alas! I know not, in a chance so contrary; it is a hard extremity to
choose a husband or a brother for an enemy; Nature or Love does speak for each
of them, and by the laws of duty I am tied unto them both: on their high
sentiments rather lets rule our own, be the wife of the one, and sister of the
other both together, let us look upon their honor as a good unparalleled,
let us imitate their constancy, and let us fear no more; the death which
threatens them is such a fair death, that we should not be afraid to hear the
news o'nt; let us not call then the destinies inhumane, let us think upon the
cause, and not upon the hands, let us behold the conquerours as if we had no
other thought but of the glory which all their house receives from their
Victory, without considering what blood is shed to raise their virtue to that
glorious hight, let us make our interests of their Family, in the one I am wife,
in the other daughter, and hold of both by such strong obligations that they
cannot triumph but by my arms. Fortune, whatever evils thy rigor sends me, I
have the means to derive joy from thence, and to see now the combat without
fear, the dead without despair, the conquerours without confusion. Flattering
illusion, sweet and gross error, vain endeavor of my sonl, impuissant light,
whose false sparks take a privilege to dazzle me! how little thou last's, and
how soon vainshest! much like unto those lightnings which in the thick shades
thrust forth a sudden day, and afterward renders the night more gloomy and
obscure; thou struck'st mine eyes but with a moments brightness to overwhelme
them with eternal night. Thou too much flattered'st my punishment, and Heaven
offended at it, sells me this moment of refreshment very dear, I feel my
sad heart pierced with all the strokes, that now deprive me of a brother or a
husband; when I think upon their death, what ever I propose, I think by what
arm, and not for what cause, nor can I ^ehold the conquererours in their
illustrious rank but to consider at what bloods expense; the house of the
vanquished party only touches my soul, in one I Am daughter, wife in the other,
and hold of both by such strong obligations, that they cannot triumph but by my
arms. This is that peace then I so much desired! Too favorable Gods, you
heard my prayers! what thunderbolts dart you, when you are wronged, when even
your favors are so full of cruelties? And in what manner punish you offense,
if thus you use the prayers of innocence?


SCENA II.
Sabina, Julia. Sab. Is it done, Julia? what news bring you me? Is it a bro^ers
or a husbands death? Or has the sad fate of their impious arms of all the
combatants made as many sacrifices, and envying me the horror which I had of
the conquerours, condemned me to tears for all o^ them together?


Julia. Know you not what has passed yet?


Sab. How should I understand it? know you not that Camllia and my self are
shut up in this house, as in a prison?


Julia, they fear our tears: we should without doubt have interposed our selves
between their arms, and by the just despaires of a chaste amity we should have
drawn some pity from both Camps.


Julia. There was no need of such a tender spectacle, their sight brought
obstacle enough unto their fight; as soon as they were ready to measure their
swords, both one, and the other Camp began to murmur, that persons so near
allied, should sacrifice each others life unto their Countries quarrel; one was
moved with pity, and another seized with horror, some wondered at the madness
of their zeal, others extolled their virtue to the Heavens, and some presumed
to name it sacrilegious and brutish; all these diverse sentiments had yet but
one voice, every one accused their Chiefs, all with a general consent abhorred
their choice, not able to endure so barbarous a combat, they cried out on it,
advaunced thereupon, and parted them.


Sab. Great Gods! what incense do I owe unto you for hearing my devotions?


Jul. Sabina, you are not yet where you imagine now; you may hope, you have less
to fear: but yet there does remain unto you cause enough wherewith to wail you.
Vain was the endeavor to free them from so sada fate, these generous, or
rather cruel combatants could not consent unto 't; the glory of this choice
seemed so precious to them, and so much charmed their ambitious souls, that
when they were deplored, they esteemed themselves happy, and took the pity
that was showed unto them for an affront: The trouble of both camps seemed unto
them to sully their renown, they rather would combat with both the armies, and
dye by the same hands that parted them, then quit the honors were conferred
upon them.


Sab. What? were those Iron hearts so obstinate?


Jul. They were so, but the armies mutany'd, and uttering their cries both at
one time, demanded other combatants, or battle. Scarce was the presence of
the Chiefs respected, their power was doubtful, their words not attended: the
King himself was much astonished at it. Since every one (said he) dislikes this
discord, let us consult the sacred Majesty of the great Gods, and see we if
this change be pleasing to them: where is that impious soul will dare oppose
their will, when in a sacrifice, they shall be pleased to manifest it to us? He
held his peace, and these words seemed charms, yea from six combatants
snatched away their arms; and this desire of honor which shut up their eyes,
though blind, respected yet the Gods: their boiling heat submitted to the
counsel of Tullus; and were it by an appeal, or by a ready scruple, in both
armies 'twas made a law, as if they both acknowledged him for King; the
victimes death will show the rest.


Sab. The Gods will not allow an impious combat, I hope well of it, since it is
deferred, and I begin to see what I desired.


SCENA III.
Sabina, Camilla. Julia. Sab. Sister, I Will tell you good news,


Came. I believe, I know it, if we may but name it such; I was in presence when
'twas told unto my Father, but I gather naught from thence that may assuage my
grief; this intermission of our misfortunes, will but make their strokes more
rude; it is but a longer time allowed to our inquietudes, and all the comfort
that one may hope from thence, is only this, to lament those we love a little
later.


Sab. The Gods have not in vain inspired this tumult.


Came. Let Us rather say, sister, that we consult them in vain; the same Gods
have inspired this choice into the breast of Tullus; and the public is not
always their voice; much less descend they into such low receptacles, but in
the breast of Kings, their living Images, whose absolute power is, and
authority, a secret ray of their divinity.


Jul. It is to form you ostacles without reason, to seek their voices
otherwise then in their oracles, and you cannot to your self figure all lost,
without belying that was rendered to you yesterday.


Came. An Orale can never be comprehended: for the more we think to understand
it, commonly the less we understand it, far from settling on such a sentence;
who sees nothing in it obscure, ought to believe that all is so.


Sab. Let us build more assurance upon that which makes for us, and entertain
the sweetness of a just hope; when Heaven is favorable half ways to open its
arms, who does not promise some good thence to himself, deserves it not; he
oftentimes hinders this favor from showing it self, and when it does
descend, his cold refussall sends it away.


Came. Heaven acts without us in these events, and orders them not on our
sentiments.


Jul. He makes you not afraid but for your good Adieu, I go to know what is
done at last; assuage your fears, hope at my return, to entertain you, Ladies,
with no other discourse but love, and that we shall employ the end of this day
to the sweet preparatives of a blessed marriage.


Sab. I hope it also.


Came. And I dare not to dream on it.


Jul. The effect will make it plain t'y', which knows best to judge thereof.


SCENA IIII.
Sabina, Camilla. Sab. In the midst of our sorrows, give me leave to blame you:
so much trouble in your soul I can no way approve of; if you were in my case,
Sister, what would you do then! if you had so much cause to fear as I, and were
to expect from their fatal arms such ils as mine, and such unparalle'd losses?


Came. Speak more indifferently of your sufferings and mine, every one sees
those of another not with the same eye that he sees his own; but to look well
on mine wherein heaven plungeth me, yours after them would seem ty' as a dream.
Horatius death is only to be feared by you, a brother's nothing to a husband;
the marriage that tyeth us unto another family, untyeth us from that wherein we
lived maids; these knots so different, are not to be compared; we must leave
Parents, Friends and all the world to follow a dear husband. But if, Sister,
so near unto a marriage, the Lover which a glad farther gives, is less unto us
then husband, and not less then brother, surely our sentiments between them do
remain suspended, our choice is impossible, and our desires confounded. Thus
you have in your complaints where to direct your wishes, and terminate your
fears: but if heaven should resolve to presecute us, for my part, I must fear
all things, and can hope for nothing.


Sab. When one must dye, and by the others hand, it is but an ill dispute this
which you make; let the knots be as different as they will, we must not leave
our parents in oblivion; although we leave them, Hymen does not raze out those
deep engraven characters; to love a husband, we are not obliged to hate our
brothers; nature always does conserve her first rights, when the death of
either one or other is proposed, we cannot choose, they are as well unto us, as
a husband, our other selves, and all evils are alike when that they are
extreme: but happily the Lover that does charm* you and for whom you burn, is
not so to you as you would have him, an evil humor, or a little zealousie, may
banish him your good opinion; and put him quite out of your fantasy; what they
do often, do the same by reason, and leave your blood out of comparison: TO
oppose voluntary bonds to those whom birth has rendered necessary, is a crime
indubitable: If heaven should resolve then to persecute us, I have the most
reason to fear all fortunes, and despair of all things; but for your part,
duty directs you in your complaints where to address your wishes, and
terminate your fears.


Came. Sister, I see you never loved you know not Love, nor felt his darts: one
may resist him in the birth, but when he is grown, and become Master of us, we
cannot banish him; especially when the consent of Father in engaging our faith
has made this tyrant lawful King. He enters with sweetness, but he reigns
by force; and when the soul has tasted once his sweet temptation, to love no
more is that it cannot do; since it cannot desire but what he will, his chains
are for us as strong as fair.


SCENA V.
The old Horatius, Sabina, Camilla. Old Horat. I come to bring unto you
sorrowful news; my daughters, but in vain I should conceal it you, which could
not but a little time be hidden; your Brothers are in fight, the Gods ordained
it.


Sab. I must confess this news does much astonish me I thought there was in the
Divinities much less injustice, and much more of goodness: comfort us not,
reason is troublesome when it dares to oppose such a misfortune; we have the
end of our griefs in our hands, who can resolve to dye, can brave disaster. We
easily could make, Sir, in your presence a feigned constancy of our despair;
but when one can without shame be without resolved courage, it is a cowardice to
counterfeit it: the use of such art we leave to men, and will not pass for that
but what we are: It is not our desire that such a stout spirit should abase it
self by our example to complain of fortune; receive these mortal tidings
without trembling, behold without mingling your own with them our tears flow
down our cheeks; lastly we crave (as all the favor we desire in such
calamities,) that you will keep your constancy, and suffer our sad sighs.


The old Horat. I am so far from blaming the tears which I see you shed, that
I can scarce defend me from their force, and should perhaps yield to such
strong assaults, if herein we had both like interest: not that your Alba by her
choice has made me to hate your brothers, all three are dear persons yet unto
me; but amity is not of the same rank, and has not the effects of love nor
blood. I do not feel for them the grief that does torment Sabina as a Sister,
and Camila as a Lover; I can behold them as our enemies, and give without
regret my prayers and wishes unto my Sons; they are (thanks to the Gods) worthy
their Country; no astonishment ever perished their glory, and I saw their honor
increase highly when their courages refused the pity of both camps. If they by
any weakness had desired it, if their high virtue had not presently refused it,
my hand should have revenged me upon them of the affront which their effeminate
consent had done me; but when in despite of them they would have other
combatants, I Will not deny't, I joined my prayers with yours; if pitiful Heaven
had hearkened to my voice, Alba should be reduced to choose anew, we should see
then the Horaces triumph without seeing their hands stained with the blood of
the bold Curiatii, and upon the event of a combat far more reasonable the
honor of the Roman name would now depend. The prudence of the Gods does
otherwise dispose thereof, on their eternal order my spirit does repose, it
arms it self on this occasion with generosity, and of the public good makes
its felicity. Endeavor both of you to do as much, to ease your griefs, and
think that you are Romans: you are become so, you ( Camllia) born such; so
glorious a title is a treasure; a day, a day will come that Rome shall make its
glorious name feared like the thunderbolts through the whole earth, and all the
universe shall shake under its laws, it will become the ambition of Kings; for
the Gods have promised this glory unto our Aeneas.


SCENA VI
The old Horatius, Sabina, Camilla, Julia. The old Horat. Come you to tell us,
Julia, the Victory?


Jul. But rather, Sir, the fatal sad effects of the fight Rome is subject unto
Alba, and your sons are defeated; two of the three are dead, her husband only
does remain.


Old. Horat. O effect of a sad fight truly fatal! Rome subject unto Alba, and
my Son to free her from it not employ himself unto the last gasp! No, this
cannot be: Julia, you are deceived, Rome's not subject, or my Son's slain.


Jul. A thousand from our Ramparts saw it as well as I: he made himself
adimir'd whilst that his Brothers stood; but when he saw himself alone against
three adversaries, ready to be encompassed by them; he saved himself by flight.


Old Horat. Would not our soldiers dispatch the traitor! would they give this
coward retraite into their ranks?


Jul. I had no heart to see more after this defeat.


Came. O my Brothers!

Old Horat. Soft, mourn them not all, two of them enjoy a fortune that does
make their father proud and jealous too; See that their tomb be covered with
the most noble flowers; the glory of their death has paid me for their loss:
this happiness has followed their unconquered courage, that they saw Rome free
as long as they had life, and would not have beheld her to obey but her own
Prince, nor to become the Province of an adjacent State. Lament the other,
lament the irreparable affront his shameful flight imprinteth on our brow,
lament the foul dishonor that he casts on all our race, and the eternal stain
he leaves unto the sometime glorious name of the Horatii.


Jul. What would you have him do, Sir, against three?


Old Horat What! I would have him dye: a brave despair would have assisted him
perhaps, had he deferred his defeat a minute longer; at least Rome would have
been a little later subjected; so would he have left my hair with honor gray,
and that were a reward worthy his life. He is accomptable unto his Country of
all his blood, every drope spared, perishes his glory; after this base bout
every instant of his life does publish, with his own, my shame. I Will break the
course of it, and my just anger, against an unworthy son using the rights of
father, shall make in his punishment appear the glorious disacknowledgment of
such an action.


Sab. Hearken somewhat less unto these generous heats, and render us not
altogether miserable.


Old Horat. Sabina, your heart may easily be comforted, hitherto our
misfortunes touch you little, you have no part yet in our miseries: Heaven has
saved you your husband and your brothers, if we are subject, it is unto your
Country; your brothers are the conquerous, although we are betrayed; and seeing
the high point whereto their glory mounts, you little look upon our shame; but
your too much affection for that so infamous husband, will persuade you to
grieve as well as we ere it be long; your tears in his behalf are but weak
guards: I swear by the great Gods, the supreme powers, that ere this day end,
these my proper hands shall wash off with his blood the stain from Rome.


Sab. Let Us follow him anger transporteth him. Gods! shall we see nothing but
such misfortnnes? must we fear greater still, and must o^r fates always
proceed from friends and parents hates?


The end of the third Act.
ACTUS IIII. SCENA I.
The old Horatius, Camilla. Old Horat. Never speak unto me in the favor of an
infamous person, let him fly me as the Brothers of his wife; to save a blood
that he esteems so precious, he has done yet nothing, if he keep not from my
sight.


Sabina may give order for it, or I attest the sovereign power of all the Gods.
--


Came. Oh, father, take a sweeter sentiment, you shall see Rome herself to use
him otherwise, and by what fate soe'r she be oppres'd, to excuse a virtue so
o'r-charg'd with number.


Old Horat. Romes Judgment herein makes but little for me,


Camilla, I Am a father, and I have my rights apart. I am not ignorant how the
true virtue acts: there is no triumph where number does oppress, her masculine
vigor always in the same point falls underneath the force, but yields not to
it. Peace, here comes


Valerius. What is his business with us?


SCANA II.
The old Horace, Valerius, Camilla. Valerius. Sent by the King to consolate a
father, and to express for him --


Old Horat. Take you no care on it, it is a comfort which I have no need of; I
rather would behold them dead, then covered with infamy, that come to take me
from an enemies hand; they died both for their Country like men of honor, it is
sufficient.


Val. But, Sir, the other is a rarer blessing, of all the three he ought to
hold with you the chiefest place.


Old Horat. Would he have made the name of the Horatii perish with himself!


Val. You only treat him ill after the deed that he has done.


Old Horat. His fault belongs to me only to punish.


Val. What fault can you find in his good conduct?


Old Horat. What brave virtue can you find in his flight?


Val. His flight is glorious on this ocasion.


Old Horat. You redouble, Sir, my shame and my confusion: sure the example is
rare, and worthy memory, to find in flight a way to glory.


Val. What confusion, and what shame is it to you to have brought forth a Son
that does conserve us all, that makes Rome triumph, and gains an Empire to
her?


Old Horat. What preservation, triumph, and what Empire, when Alba rangeth
underneath her laws our destiny!


Val. What speak you here of Alba, and of her Victory? you know not yet half
of the story.


Old Horat. What? is not the combat finished by his flight?


Val. Alba Though so at first, but she perceived soon, that he fled like a man,
that knew well how to manage Romes best advantage.


Old Horat. What! triumphs Rome then?

Val. Be pleased to understand; the valor of this son, whom wrongfully you do
condemn, resting alone against three, (but in this passage, all the three being
wounded, and he free) too weak for all, too strong for either of them, he
thought it fit a little to retire him; he fled to fight the better; this quick
policy fitly divides the brothers, each of them follows him with a pace more
or less eager, as he does find himself more or less hurt: their heat was equal
to pursue his flight, but their unequal blows did separate their pursuit: when
Horatius saw them thus scattered one from the other, he returned, and thought
them more then half conquered already: he did expect the first, and 'twas your
son in law, who all enraged that he should stay for him, in vain did make a
great heart to appear, assaulting him, the blood that he had lost weakened his
strength: Alba began to fear a change of fortune, she cried to the second that
he should aid his Brother; he made have, and spent himself in vain attempts for
her, but found his Brother dead when he came up.


Came. Alas!


Val. Quite out of breath, he took his brothers place, and soon redoubled
Horatius Victory; his courage without strength was a weak prop: desirous to
revenge his brothers death, he fell down by him. The air did resound with
cries, which all sent unto heaven upon it; Alba breathed sorrow, and the Romans
joy. As our brave Hero saw his enterprise near at an end, he would a little
vaunt as well as conquer: I am come (said he) from sacrificing two unto the
Ghosts of my dead brothers: Rome shall have the last of my three adversaries,
it is unto her interests that I offer him: This said, he presently flew at him;
between them the Victory remained not long time doubtful; the Alban pierced
with wounds, could hardly stand, and as a Victime brought before the Altar, he
seemed to present his yielding throat unto the deadly stroke; so he received
it. His death establishes the power of Rome.


Old Horat. O my son! O my joy! O honor of my days! O unexpected succor of a
tottering State! O virtue worthy Rome, and blood worthy Horatius! Thou support
of thy deer Country, glory of thy race! When can I somother in my close
imbracements the error wherewith I formed such false sent'ments? When my love
bath thy victorious front with tears of joy?


Val. Sir, presently you may Use your caresses, the King goes to sent him unto
you, and deferres until to morrow the pompous sacrifice which we owe to the
gods for such a benefit; only to day we pay them but with songs of Victory,
and ordinary vows. The King does lead him unto the Temple, whilst he sends
me to do this office to you both of joy and grief together: But this is not
yet enough for him, he will come here himself, perhaps to day; this noble
action so highly touches him, that he will thank you with his own mouth, for
giving your brave sons to the good of his State.


Old Horat. Such high acknowledgments have too much glory for me; I account my
self already too much paid by yours for the one service, and the others blood.


Val. The King can't' do an honor (Sir) by halfs; and his Crown snatched from
the enemies hands, makes him esteem the honor he intends you beneath the
Father's merit, and Son's. I Will go to let him know what noble sentiments Virtue
inspires into you, and what ardour you express for his service.

Exit Valerius.
Old Horat. I shall be very redeonble to you for that good office.


SCENA III.
The old Horatius, Camilla. Old Horat. Daughter, this is no fit time to shed
tears: it is not handsome when we see such honors: We mourn unjustly for
domestic losses, when public Victories proceed from thence: Rome triumphs
over Alba, and that is enough for us; all our ills at this rate ought to be
sweet unto us; in the death of a dear Lover, you lose but a man, whose loss is
easy to repair in Rome: after this victory, there is no Roman but will be
proud to give his hand to you. I must go to Sabina with this news; this stroke
(without doubt) will be grievous to her, her Brothers stain all by her Husbands
hand, will give her juster tears and plaints then you: But I hope easily to
dissipate the violence thereof, and that a little discretion assisting her
great courage, will make the generous love she owes unto the Conqueror, reign
on so noble heart: In the mean time, smother this unbecoming and poor low
passion. If he comes, receive him, and show no weakness; make your self appear
to be his Sister, and that in one womb Heaven formed you both of the same blood
and substance.


SCENA IV.
Camilla sola. Yes, I will make appear plainly unto him, that a true Love can
brave the Destinies, and cannot take Laws from those cruel Tyrants, whom an
injurious Star gives us for Parents. Thou blam'st my grief, thou dare to name
it base; so much the more I lov't (unpitifull Father) as the more it offends
thee: by a just endeavor I will make it equal to the rigours of my fortune.
Was there ever seen any yet, whose rude traverses took in so short time so many
several faces, that was so often sweet, so often cruel, and gave so many
various strokes before the mortal strok! Was ever seen a soul more seized with
joy and grief, with hope, and fear; subjected (as a slave) to more events, and
made the pitious pastime of more changes! An Oracle assures me, a Dream frights
me, Battle dismayes me, and Peace pleases me: my Marriage is prepared, and in
a moment my Lover's chosen forth to fight my Brother. The two Camps in a
mutiny, disavow'd such an unjust choice, they brake off the party; the Gods
renew it; Rome seems vanquished, and only of three Albans, Curiatius has not
at all in my blood stained his hands God! did I not then feel too little grief
for Rome's misfortune, and two Brothers death? Flattered I not myself too much,
when I thought I might love him yet without a crime, and nourish some hope? His
death scourges me enough for that, and the inhumane manner wherewith my
terrified heart received the news thereof: his Rival told it me, and in my
presence making the recital of so sad a success, upon his front he wore an
open joy; which grieved my heart, and made the public good less then my loss
So building in the air upon another misfortune, he triumphed over him like to
my Brother. But this is not all, it is nothing unto that which does remain; In
such a fatal stroke they ask my joy, I must applaud the Conqueror's exploits,
and kiss a hand that pierces my sad heart: in so great and so just a cause of
plaints it is a shame to weep, a crime to sigh. Their brutish virtue would,
that (in this case) I should esteem me happy; so with them, one must be
barbarous to be generous. But we'll degenerate (my Heart) from such a virtuous
Father; let us unworthy of such a generous Brother: It Is a glory to pass for
abject spirits, when bruitishnesse is held the highest Virtue. My just Griefs,
break forth: to what end should I keep you in? When one has lost all, what is
more to be feared? Have no respect for this inhumane Conqueror: Fiar from
avoiding of him, come athwart him, trouble his Victory, provoke his anger, and
take (if possible) pleasure to displease him. He comes, prepare we show
constantly what a kind Mistress owes unto the death of him she loves.


SCENA V.
Horatius, Camilla, Proculus, and two other Soldiers, carrying each of them a
sword of the Curiatii. Horat. Sister, behold the arm that has revenged our two
brave brother; that has broke the course of our contrary Destinies, that makes
us Masters of Alba; lastly, see the arm that makes today the fortune of two
States: Behold these marks of honor, these fair testimonies of glory, and
give what thou ought unto the happiness of my Victory.


Came. Receive then my tears; it is that which I do owe unto it.


Horat. Rome Will see none after such high exploits; and our two brothers slain
in the misfortune of arms, are paid enough with blood, there needs no tears to
mingle with it. When the loss is revenged, it is recovered.


Came. Since they are satisfied by the blood that shed, I Will cease to mourn more
for them, and forget their death, which your hand revenged. But who shall now
revenge my Lovers, to make me forget his loss too?


Horat. What say thou, unfortunate!


Came. O my dear Curiatus!


Horat. Infinite boldness of an unworthy Sister! Must the name of a public
enemy, whom I have conquered, be in thy mouth, and his love in thy heart? Thy
criminal heat aspireth to revenge, thy mouth demands it, and thy heart longs
for it; follow thy passion less, stint thy desires, make me not blush to
understand thy sighs; thy flames henceforth ought to be smothered, banish them
from thy soul, and think upon my trophies, let them ever be hereafter thy
only entertainment.


Came. Give me then a heart like thine, barbarian. If thou would have me to
speak my thoughts, restore unto me my Curiatius, or leave my flame to act; my
joy and griefs depend upon his fortune: I adored him living, and I mourn him
dead. Seek not thy sister where thou left'st her; thou shall see no more in me
but an offended Love, which like a fury fixed to thy steps, incessantly shall
haunt thee, and still reproach thee with his death. Inhumane, blood thirsty
Tiger, that forbid'st me tears, that would that in his death I should find
charms, and that extolling thy exploits to heaven, I should my self kill him a
second time! May such misfortunes wait upon thy life, that thou fall'st to the
point to bear me envy, and sullie soon by some unworthy act that glory dear
to thy brutalitie!


Horat. O heaven! who ever saw so high a madness? Believ'st thou then that I
should be insensible of such an outrage, and that I should suffer this foul
dishonor in my blood! Love, love that death which makes our happiness; but
prefer that which thy birth owes to the interests of Rome, before the memory
of a man.


Came. Rome, the only object of my sad resentment! Rome, unto whom thine arm
has sacrificed my Lover! Rome, that gave thee birth, and whom thou do adore!
Lastly, Rome that I hate because she honors thee! May all her neighbors
conspire together in a league against her, and sap her yet unsettled
foundations: and if this of all Italy be not sufficient, let the East join
with the West against her; let a thousand several Nations (from the ends of
the Universe) pass the seas and mountains to destroy her; let her self
orethrow her walls upon her self, and with her own hands tear her bowels; let
the anger of heaven (by my prayers kindled) make a deluge of fire to rain upon
her; may mine eyes see those brave thunderbolts to fall upon her, her houses
ashes, and her laurels dust; fee the last Roman breathing his last gasp, and I
the cause of this, to die with pleasure.


Horat. Putting his hand to his sword, and following his Sister, who slies him.
It is too much, my patience gives place to reason. Go thy ways to hell, and
join thy self there with thy Curiatius.


Came. Wounded behind the Stage. O Traitor!

Horat. Coming again upon the Stage* Such sudden punishment let every one
receive, that dares lament a Roman enemy.


SCENA VI.
Horatius, Proculus. Proc. What have you done?


Horat. I think, an act of justice, Such a fault such a punishment requires.


Proc. You should have used her with less rigor, though.


Horat. Tell me not that she is my blood, my sister; my father for his daughter
can no more acknowledge her: Who is so bold to curse his Country, does renounce
his family: Those names of love are then no more allowed him, he makes his
dearest friends his enemies; the blood it self arms them in hatred of his
crime, the speediest vengeance is the best for it. This impious wish, though
forcelesse, is monster that must be smothered in the birth.


SCENA VII.
Horatius, Sabina, Proculus. Sab. Horatius, why stays thy illustrious anger
here? come, see thy Sister in thy Fathers arms render her spirit: sacrifice
unto the Country of the virtuous Horatii the sad remains of Curiatius blood: So
prodigal of thy own, spare not theirs, join thy Wife to thy Sister, separate
not Sabina and Camilla; our crimes are alike, as are our miseries; I sigh as
well as she, and do deplore my Brothers; more guilty in this point
'gainst'gainst thy hard laws, in that she wept but one, and I weep three, and
that after her punishment my fault continues.


Horat. Dry thy tears, or hide them from my sight, Sabina, make thee worthy of
my chaste half, and endeavor not to oppress me with an unworthie pity; if the
power of a chaste flame leaves unto us both but one thought, and one soul, it
is thy part to raise thy sentiments to mine, not mine to descend to the shame
and poverty of thine; I love thee, and I know the grief that presses thee;
embrace my noble virtue to overcome thy weakness, share my glory in stead of
sullying it, put it on rather then take it from me: And thou of my honor so
mortal enemy, how much better should I have pleased thee, if fallen in infamy?
Be more a Wife then Sister, and conforming thy self to me, make thee of my
example a law immutable.


Sab. Seek more perfect souls to imitate thee. I impute not to thee my loss: I
have the same sentiments I ought to have of them, and have a quarrel to
fortune rather then unto thy duty. But withal, I renounce the Roman virtue, if
to possess it I must be inhumane, and cannot see in me the Conquerours Wife,
without discerning there the Sister of the Conquered. Let us participate in
public of the public Victories; let us at home weep our domestic evils, and
not regard the common happiness when we behold our private miseries. Why
(cruel) do thou covet to act otherwise? Entering, leave here thy Laurels at
the door, mingle thy tears with mine. What? does not this effeminate discourse
arm thy high virtue against my sorrowful days? Does not my crime (redoubled)
move thy choler? O how happy art thou, Camilla! She could soon displease thee,
and receive from thee what she did pretend: she could below recover all her
loss. Dear Husband, of the torment that does press me dear author, if thy
anger ceases, hearken to pity; exercise the one of the other to punish my
infirmity, or end my griefs. I ask death either for a favor, or for a
punishment (I care not whether.) Let her be an effect of Love, or Justice, it
matters not; all her darts shall seem sweet unto me, if I see them to come from
a Husbands hand.


Horat. What an injustice is it unto the Gods, to give up unto women so great
an Empire on the fairest souls, and to be pleased to see such feeble
Conquerours to reign to strongly o'r the noblest hearts? My Virtue, unto what
point do thou come to be reduced? Nothing can better warrant it then flght.
Adieu, follow me not, or hold thy sighs.

Exit Horatius.
Sab. alone. O Anger! Pity! deaf to my desires! You care not for my crime, and
my grief tires you; and I obtain from you nor punishment nor favor. Well, once
more by tears I Will try, and if that fail, then by myself I Will die.


The end of the Fourth Act.
ACTUS V. SCENA I.
The old Horatius, Horatius. Old Horat. LEt us withdraw our looks from that sad
object, to admire here the judgment of the God; When glory puffs us up, they
can confound our pride; (our sweetest pleasures come not to us without some
sorrow) oftentimes they mingle infirmities with our Virtues, and grant seldom
the entire honor of a glorious Actions to our ambition; I mourn not Camilla,
she was a criminal; I lament my self, and thee too more then she: I for
producing unto the light a heart so little Roman, thou for dishonouring by her
death thy hand. I find it not unjust, nor yet too quick; but (Son) thou might
have spared thy self the shame on it: her crime, though great, and worthy death,
were better unpunished, then punished by thy arm.


Horat. Dispose my fortune as you please; the laws command it so: I thought I
owed this stroke unto the place that gave me my first being. If my zeal to my
Country seems criminal unto you, if thereby I must receive an everlasting
stain, and by this action my hand become disgraced and profane, you can with
one sole word cut off my destiny. Receive your blood again, whose purity my
baseness has unto so little purpose defiled: My hand could not suffer crime
grow in our race; suffer you not a spot in your own house: It Is in those
actions (wherewith honor is wounded) that a father, such as you are, shows
himself interested. His love must not appear, where all excuse is null; himself
takes part when he dissembles them: and he makes small account of his own
glory, when he forbears to punish what he does not approve.


Old Horat. He is not always rigorous, but spares his children often for
himself; his old age does delight to lean upon them; and punishes them not, to
the end he may not punish himself. I look upon thee with another eye then thou
behold'st thy self. I know -- But the King comes, I see his Guards.


SCENA II.
Tullus, The old Horatius, Valerius, Horatius, The Company of the Guards. Old
Horat. Oh Sir, this is too great an honor for me, I should not see my King in
this poor place. Suffer me on my knees --


Tull. No, Father, rise; I do but what a good Prince ought to do: so rare a
service, and of such importance, requires the rar'st, and most illustrious
honor: you had for pawn thereof his word already, I could no longer have
deferred it. I know by his report (which I never doubted) how brave and like
your self you bear the death of your two sons, and that your soul already being
resolved, my consolation would be superfluous: but I come to know what strange
misfortune has followed the virtue of your victorious Son, and how it comes,
that his too much love for the public cause bath taken an only daughter from
his father by his own hands: I know what such a stroke can do upon the
strongest spirit, and doubt how you may bear this death.


Old Horat. Sir, with displeasure, but yet with patience,


Tull. It Is plain, this is the virtuous effect of your experience: Many have
taught by a long file of years, as well as you, that miseries succeed the
sweetest happiness; few know like you to apply this remedy, and all their
Virtue yields to their Interest. If my compassion can ease your sorrow, know
that it is extreme, as is your evil, and that Tullus laments you as much as he
does love you.


Val. Sir, since Heaven does put its justice in the hands of Kings, and the
force of the laws; and since the State asks rewards for virtues, and strict
punishments for crimes, of lawful Princes; suffer that a just occasion make
you to remember, that you lament too much what you should punish: Suffer --


Old Horat. What! that we send a Conqueror to punishment?


Tull. Allow him leave to finish, and I Will do justice; I am bound to render it
to all, at all hours, and in every place: it is by it that a King makes himself
a demi-God: and hence is it that I pity you, that after such a service, against
him they should demand me justice.


Val. Suffer then, O great King, and the justest of all Kings, that all good
men speak to you by my mouth: not that our hearts, as jealous of his honors,
urge us to this; if he receives much, his high deeds do deserve it; add unto
it, rather then lessen it; we are also ready to contribute unto it: but since
he has showed himself guilty of such a crime, let him triumph as Conqueror,
and perish as malefactor: stop his fury, and save from his hands, if you desire
to reign, the remnant of the Romans: hereupon depends the loss or safety of
the rest; seeing the blood shed by this fatal War, and so many fair knots of
marriage wherewith our happy destinies have so often united such near
neighbors, few of us have enjoyed such a happiness, as not I'have lost a
Cosen, or a brother in law, an uncle, or a son in law in Alba, whereby to have
occasion to shed tears for their own losses in the public joy: If it be an
offense to Rome, and that the fortune of his arms allows him to punish this
crime of our tears, what blood will this fierce Conqu'ror spare, that would not
pardon that of his Sister, nor excuse the grief which the death of a Lover does
infuse into a Mistress heart, when ready to be lighted by the fair nuptial
Torch, she sees her hope in the grave with him? Making Rome thus to triumph, he
enslaves it: by this means he has a right of life and death upon us, and our
offending days shall last no longer then it shall please his clemency to
suffer them. I could add, for the interests of Rome, that such a stroak's
unworthy of a man: I could demand, to be brought here before you that rare
exploit of a victorious arm; you should see then a fair blood (to accuse his
rage) retort into his cruel face: you should behold horrors which cannot be
conceived; her age and beauty (sure) would move you, but I hate those means
that show artifice. You have deferred the sacrifice till to morrow; Think you
that the just Gods (styled the revengers of Innocents) will receive incense
from a parricide hand? This sacriledg would draw their punishment upon you.
Look upon him but as an object of their hate, believe (with us) that the good
destiny of Rome in all these three fights did more then his arm, since these
same Gods (the Authors of his Victory) permitted that he suddenly should fully
the glory of it; and that such a courage, after so brave an Act, should in one
day be worthy of a Triumph, and of Death. It rests (Sir) that your Sentence
decide this: Rome never saw a parricide till now. Fear what may follow, and
Heaven's anger; save us from his unnatural hand, and fear the Gods.


Tull. Defend your self, Horatius.


Horat. To what purpose shall I defend me? Sir, you know the action, as being
told it now: what you think of it must be a law to me. One ill defends himself
against the opinion of a King: and the innocentest soul that ever was born is
guilty, if he judge him to be so: It is a crime to excuse himself unto him. Our
blood's his goods, he can dispose thereof; and we must think, that when he does
do so, he deprives not himself without just cause. Then (Sir) pronounce, I Am
ready to obey. Others love life, and I am bound to hate it. I reproach not
Valerius heat, which makes him, loving the Sister, to accuse the Brother: my
wishes at this time conspire with his: he asks my death, it is that which I
desire: We differ only in this point, that I seek to conserve my honor in it,
and he to perish it. Sir, seldom is a subject offered to show the virtue of a
great and noble heart complete: according to occasion, it acts or more or
less, and appears strong or weak unto the eyes of those that are her
witnesses: The people, that only looks upon the outside, judges its force by
its effects, and dares to think, by an ill maxim, that who does a miracle,
must do it still: After a complete action, high and illustrious, what glitters
less ill answers their expectation: they would have us to be all times
alike, and in all places: they examine not if one could better do then, nor
that, if they see not still a wonder, the occasion is less, and Virtue equal:
Their injustice destroys great names; the honor of the first attchievements
is forgotten by the second: and when renown is passed beyond the mean, if we'll
not fall thence, we must act no more. I will not boast the exploits (Sir) of my
arm, your Majesty has seen my three encounters; hardly again shall I meet any
such, nor ever the like occasion will be to show my courage, and crown the
success; so that to leave here an illustrious memory, death only now can keep
alive my glory, and I must have it too as soon as I have conquered; for I have
outlived my honor: Such one as I beholds his glory perished, when he falls
into any ignominy: and my hand would have freed me on it already, if my blood
durst come forth without your leave: as it belongs to you, you must dispose
on it; to shed it otherwise, is to rob you of it. Rome wants not store of
generous warriors; enough besides me will sustain your Laurels; henceforward
let your Majesty dispense with me herein. And if what I have done deserves a
recompense, permit, great King, that with this conquering arm I sacrifice me to
my Glory, not my Sisters cries.


SCENA III.
Tullus, Valerius, The old Horatius, Horatius, Sabina, Julia. Sab. Sir, hear
Sabina, and see in her soul the sorrows of a Sister and a Wife, who (wholly
desolate) at your sacred feet laments her Family, and fears her Husband. It is
not that I would by any artifice endeavor to take out of the hand of Justice a
guilty person; Whatsoever he has done for you, use him as such a one; and
punish (Sir) in me this noble Criminal: with my unfortunate blood wash off his
crime. You shall not change your Victime for all that, nor shall you herein
take an unjust pity, but sacrifice the dearest mosty of him. The knots of
marriage, and his extreme love makes him live more in me, then in himself; and
if you grant that I shall die to day, he will die more in me then in himself:
the death which I beg, and would fain obtain, will raise his punishment, and
finish mine. See the excess (Sir) of my sad afflictions, and the deplorable
condition whereto I am reduced: What honor is it to embrace a man whose sword
has cut the thread of of all my family? and what impiety to hate a Husband for
his service to you, his Country, and his Friends? What? shall I love an arm
stained with the blood of all my Brothers? Shall I not love an Husband that
does put a period to our common miseries? O (Sir) deliver me by an happy death
both from the crimes of loving, and not loving. I shall esteem that Sentence a
great favor: My hand can give me what I crave of you, but this death shall be
much more sweet unto me, if I can free my Husband from his shame, and by my
blood appease the anger of the Gods, in dying satisfy the Ghost of his
offended Sister, and conserve to Rome so good and glorious a Defender.


Old Horat. Sir, it concerns me then to give an answer unto Valerius; I see my
children conspire with him against me, and all three would ruin me: they arm
themselves unjustly against that little blood's left in my house. Thou that by
griefs (contrary to thy duty) would leave thy Husband to go to thy Brothers,
go rather to consult their generous Ghosts. It Is true, they are dead; but they
died for Alba, and hold them happy in it, since Heaven would have it, she should
be subject: if that any sentiment remains after life lost, this misfortune
seems less, and its strokes not so rigorous, since all the honor of it falls
on us. All three will disapprove thy grief, thy tears and sighs, they will
condemn the horror which thou have of a brave Husband. Be their Sister (
Sabia) and observe thy duty like them. Valerius in vain lifts up himself
against this dear Husband: a first motion was never held a crime; and praise is
due, in stead of punishment, when Virtue only produces this first motion. To
love our enemies even with idolatry, madly to curse the Country for their
death, to wish the State an everlasting ruin, is that which we name crime, and
that which he has punished; the only love of Rome provoked his arm: He should
be innocent, if he had loved her less. What have I said, Sir? he is so, and
this my paternall arm had punished him already, were he guilty; I would have
better used the full power I have upon him by the laws of birth. I love honor
too well, and am not of a quality to suffer in my blood affront or crime: of
this I do desire no other witness but Valerius: he saw what rigorous
entertainment I prepared to give my Son, when ignorant as yet of half the
combat, I believed that by his flight he had betrayed the State. What makes him
so officiously to trouble himself with the cares of my Family? What makes him
to desire (in spite of me) to vindicate my daughter? By what reason in her
just death takes he an interest a father does not meddle with? He fears, that
after this severity to his Sister, he will not spare others. Sir, we have no part
but in the shame of ours, and in what manner another may act, what concerns us
not makes us not blush. Valerius, thou may weep, and in Horatius sight; he
takes no interest but in the crimes of his race; who is not of his blood, can
do no injury unto the immortal Laurels that impale his brow. Ye Laurels,
sacred boughs, which envy would reduce to dust, you that conserve his head
from the confounding thunder, will you leave him unto the infamous Ax, that
makes offenders fall underneath the executioners hands? Romans, will you permit
that they should sacrifice a man, without whom Rome had not been Rome at this
time, and that any Roman should traduce the glory of a Conqueror, to whom all
owe so fair a character? Tell us, Valerius, tell, since he must perish, where
thou would choose fit a place for his punishment. Is it within these walls,
which many thousands of voices make resound yet with the noise of his exploits?
Is it without the walls, in the midst of those places which smoke yet with the
blood of the conquered Curiatii, between their three tombs, in that field of
honor, the witness of his valor and our happiness? Thou can not from his
Victory conceal his Punishment: within the walls, without them all speak his
glory; all oppose themselves to the endeavor of thy unjust love, which would
with such a glorious blood defile so fair a day. Alba cannot endure so sad a
spectacle, and Rome with her tears will put an obstacle to 't. But (Royal Sir)
you will prevent them, and by a just sentence you can embrace her interest much
better: What he has done for her, he can yet do; he can secure her still from
adverse fortune: despair not yet (Sir) of my feeble years. Rome now has seen
me father of four children, three in her quarrel are already dead, there is
but one left me; keep him for her, remove not from her walls so strong a prop;
and suffer me to address my self unto him, to make an end. Horatius, do not
think the stupid people should be absolute masters of a substantial honor;
their vain voice tumultnous enough makes often noise: but as a moment raises
it, a moment destroys it; and whatever they contribute to our renown,
i'th'twinkling of an eye it vanishes to smoke: It does belong to Kings, to
great ones, to accomplished spirits to see that Virtue in its least effects be
full; it is from them alone that we receive true glory; they alone assure the
memory of the true Heroes, live still in Horatius, and still after them. Thy
name shall remain great, illustrious, famous, though the occasion, less high
or resplendent, deceives the unjust expectation of th'ignorant vulgar. Hate
then life no more; at least live for me, and to serve thy King and Country
longer. Sir, I Have said too much; but the affair concerns you, and all Rome
speaks by my mouth.


Val. Sir, suffer me --


Tull. Valerius, it is enough, your sound discourse by theirs is not defaced: I
keep yet in my spirit the pressing'st reasons on it, and all your arguments are
present with me still: this heinous action (almost before our eyes) does injure
nature, and even wounds the Gods. A sudden motion of anger, that produces such
a crime, cannot excuse him lawfully; the Laws that are the least severe
condemn the act, and if we follow them, he is worthy death: If otherwise we will
look on the guilty, this crime, though great, heinous and inexcusable, proceeds
from the same sword and arm that makes me now Master of two States: Two
Scepters in my hand, and Alba subject unto Rome, speak highly in the favor of
his life. Had it not been for him, I should have yielded obedience, whereas now
I give forth laws; and should be subject, whereas now I am twice Sovereign.
There are in all the Provinces many good subjects, that by feeble prayers only
acquit themselves toward their Princes: all can love them, but all cannot
assure their States by some illustrious actions; and thou art and power to
establish Crowns are gifts which heaven gives but to some choice persons: such
servants are the wealth and strength of Kings, and also are to be above the
Laws; let them be silent then, let Rome dissemble what from her birth she sees
in Romulus; She can well suffer in her Liberator, what she has suffered in her
first Author. Live then Horatius, live magnanimous soldier, thy Virtue sets
thy glory 'bove thy crime, Its generous heat produced thy offense; the effect of
such a fair cause must be suffered. Live to do service to the State, but love
Valerius; let not any hate nor anger remain between you, and whether he
followed or love, or duty, without any sentiment resolve to see him. Hearken
less ( Sabina) unto the grief that presses you; remove from this great heart
those marks of imbecilitie: in drying of your tears, you will show your self true
Sister of those Brothers you lament. But we do owe to morrow to the Gods a
sacrifice, and should have heaven but little propitious to us, if our Priests
before the action, find not out the means to purge it. His father shall take
care on it, I believe, it will not be hard for him to appease Camilla's Ghost. I
do deplore her fortune, and to give to it what her amorous spirit may happily
desire, (since in one day an equal heat of one and the same zeal finished her
Lovers destiny and hers) it is our will that one day, as a witness of their
two deaths, may see in the earth's womb their bodies laid, and shut up in one
tomb.


The King rises and all follow him but Julia. Jul. Camilla, thus heaven well
advertised thee what tragical events were to succeed; but always it conceals
a part o'th'secret even from the most refined and clearest spirits. It seemed
to speak of thy approaching marriage, it seemed to promise all things to thy
prayers; and hiding so from us thy sudden death, it is voice too truly has
deceived our sense.

Thy prayers are heard, Alba and Rome shall be to morrow in a fair
Confaederacie; And thou with Curiatius shall be joined, never to part: So have
the Gods enjoined.


FINIS.

