The Great Necessity of Preparation for Death and Judgment.

A SERMON Preached in the Parochial Chapel OF MACCLESFIELD, In the County
Palatine of CHESTER, AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr. John Corker als Cor Cor of
HURDESFIELD, on the Eleventh Day of November 1693 and since Revised and
Enlarged at the Request of the Relations of the Deceased.

By Samuel Corker als Cor Cor, M. A. Rector of Alderley in the County
aforesaid; and sometime a Student in Trin. Coll. in Cambridge.

Behold the Bridegroom comes go ye out to meet him, Mat. 26.5. Be ye therefore
ready also, for the Son of Man comes, etc. Luke 12.40. Veniet, fratres,
veniet; sed vide quomodo te inveaiet. Aug. Ser. 140. de Tempore. DUBLIN:
Printed by Joseph Ray, 1695.

TO HIS TRULY HONORED AND MUCH VALUED COUSIN Edward Corker als Cor Cor, Esquire;
The Author wishes Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
THE death of Friends (who were loving and amiable in their Lives, and
Encouragers of Virtue) is very piercing and grievous; but most of all pensive
and afflictive, when they are taken away (as your dear Brother, and my truly
loving Kinsman was,) by a sudden surreption, without a foregoing Visitation and
Sickness: which severe and startling Providence made a very great breach in his
Family and Neighborhood, and a deep impression upon my Thoughts.

But the Great and Wise God, in whose Hands our Lives are, has a Sovereign
Right to dispose of, and put a period to them, when and in what manner his
Infinite Wisdom sees meet; without being accountable to his Creatures for his
Actions. Our Duty is humbly to submit to his Holy Will, and with good Old Eli
to say, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

When Your Affectionate Brother had paid that Debt which We yet owe to God and
Nature; His mournful Relict desired that I would perform the last Ministerial
Office for him at his Interment. I had not power to deny her Request, although at
the same time I was sensible he deserved a better Orator to commemorate his
Virtues.

The Discourse I then made, and here present to You Revised and Enlarged, is
plain, not clothed with pomp of Words, and tunable Expressions, which in
Sermons and Books of Divinity, are like Paint laid upon Pearls, which shine
best in their native luster. Flourishes of Wit and fine Phrases, may tickle
Men's Ears, and please their Fancies, but rarely convince them of the important
necessity of preparing for Death and Judgment: or prevail with them to live
holily, that they may die happily.

The Text it self is very momentous, and the subject matter of the Comment is
salubrious, and may claim attention and regard from all Orders and Degrees of
Men, who by the eternal and unchangeable Decree of God must once die and appear
in Judgment: But if it meet with unkind entertainment from some persons of
corrupt Principles and profligate Lives, who atheistically droll upon and
ridicule every thing that is serious; yet it may be beneficial to others, who
are really solicitous to know what they must do to obtain Salvation, and to
inherit Eternal Glory.

That the God of Mercy and Consolation would sanctify and sweeten to you this
sharp and afflictive Providence: that he would work in your Soul a cheerful
resignation to his Holy Will, and enrich you with all the Blessings of Heaven
and Earth, is the daily fervent Prayer of

Your most affectionate Relation and very humble Servant, Samuel Corker als Cor
Cor.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL, of Mr. John Corker of Hurdesfield, November
the 11th 1693.
Matthew 24.44. Therefore be ye also ready; for in such an Hour as you think
not, the Son of Man comes.


THese Words are part of a Sermon, Preached by our Blessed Lord and Savior, to
his Disciples; the Occasion was this; They were all met together at the Temple
of Jerusalem, admiring the Magnificence, Firmness, and Stateliness of it, and
highly commending the Beauty, and Order of the Fabric; which was Adorned Luke
21.5.
with goodly Stones, and sumptuous Mate rials, set off with all the Advantages
and Curiosity of Art, Pains and Industry; which Josephus calls, a Work of all
that we have ever seen, or heard; the most Admirable, both for the greatness of
the Pile, the sumptuousness of the Edifice, and the Riches of the inward
Furniture; in which respect, Tacitus calls it, a Temple of Immense Riches,
Immensae Opulentiae Templum.
suitable to the Majesty of God, who was therein to be Adored and Worshipped.

Our Lord, to take off his Disciples Eyes, from beholding those Gay and Stately
Things, with so pleasing Admiration; foretold the Destruction of it, and the
utter Ruin of the City; that it should come to pass, according to the
Predictions of the Prophets; Jer. 26.18.
Zion (for your sakes) shall be Plowed as a Field, and Jerusalem shall become
Heaps, and the Mountain of the House (on which the Temple, Micah 3.12.
one of the Wonders of the World did stand) as the high places of the Forest;
i. e. shall be demolished, and become so desolate, that Trees shall grow there
as in a Wilderness. See ye not all these things? Verily, I say unto you, there
shall not be left one Stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down; Lib.
7. de Belle Jud. cap. 10.
which was fulfilled, as Josephus Reports, by the Roman Army, who burnt all of
it, that was of combustible Nature, expressly contrary to the command of Titus
Vespasian, who would have saved it, but could not restrain the fury of his
Soldiers, though he charged Liberalis the Centurion of his Guard, to beat them
that would not Obey him, and to drive them away; and the Foundation which the
Fire consumed not, was Ralsed by Turnus Rufus, (...)
the General of the Roman Army there; who at his departure thence, drew a Plow
over it as God had said.

And after this, when Julian the Apostate, out of spite, and opposition to the
Christians, gave all manner of Encouragement to the Jews, to Rebuild their
Temple, Re-edifie their Altar, and Restore their Sacrifices, and the
Solemnities of their Worship; and appointed Alypius of Antioch to over-see, and
carry on the Work, with all possible Briskness, and Activity, hoping by that
means to evidence to the World, that our Savior was a false Prophet, and an
Impostor, in pronouncing the final and irrevocable Dissolution of that Church,
and State: Heaven was pleased on a sudden, to baffle the whole Undertaking, and
by many Illustrious, and Miraculous Instances of God's Displeasure; Viz.
Violent Hurricanes, dreadful Earthquakes, and Eruptions of Fire, which brake as
it were under the Foundation, and seized upon the Workmen, and Spectators,
burnt their Tools and Instruments, and made the place inaccessible, for any
such Attempts for the future: A more full Relation hereof is given by the
Learned Dr. Cave, from Socrates, Philostorgus, Rufinus, Am. Life of St. Cyril
of Jerusalem. Sect. 9th
Marcellinus, and others, where the Curious may meet with fuller satisfaction.

The Astonishment of this dreadful Relation, impressed upon the minds of the
Disciples, struck them with silence; till they came from Jerusalem, to the
Mount of Olives, which afforded a curious Prospect of the Holy City, about a
Acts 1.12.
Sabbath Days Journey distant from it; a Mountain famed in Sacred Scripture,
for the frequent Apparitions of Angels, and for being often honored with the
Presence of Christ; Luke 22.39.
for hither He was wont to retire; here He Prayed, and from the summit top
hereof He Ascended into Heaven; but at this time he sat down here, either to
rest himself, (for he was of like Infirmities with us) or else in imitation of
the Jewish Doctors, who, when they were about to Teach in the Temple, sat
down; testifying by that Gesture, their great Authority, and the calm composure
of their Minds.

Our Lord by this Posture, giving his Followers a fair opportunity, of making
their Address unto Him. St. Peter, James and John, came and asked him
privately, Mark 13.3.
When shall these things be? and what shall be the Sign of thy coming, and of
the end of the World? For it is probable, they did suppose, that the Dissolution
of the World should immediately follow the Ruin of the City and Temple, and
Destruction of the Jewish State; and therefore they desired some Prognostics,
by which they might discern its approaching Funeral. Master, what Sign shall
there be, Luke 21.7.
when these things shall come to pass.

Our Lord gave them no certain Sign, from whence they might positively conclude
the particular time; but he gave them many common Signs, which should portend
the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the end of the World; which when they, and
others in their several Generations should see them, they might from thence
conclude, that the time was at hand; and from which, we also may be assured,
that they are Forerunners of the near Approach, of the Great Day of Judgment;
for it is agreed by Divines, that the Ruin of Jerusalem, was a Type of the
Destruction of the World; as therefore before the particular Judgment, upon the
Jews, many Deceivers and Seducers did arise; such as Theudas who boasted
himself to be some body, some great Prophet: Lib. Antiq. 18. c. 1 and 6.
Judas also of Galilee, mentioned by Josephus, and Sadoc his Confederate, who
Labored to seduce the People; and a certain Egyptian Magician, who took upon
him to be a Prophet, and coming into the Country of Judea, gathered a company
of deceivable People to him, to the Number of Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 21.
Acts 8.9.
30000 and Simon the Sorcerer, whom the Ancients called, (...) --
(...), The Eldest Son of the Devil, who gave out, that he was some great one,
and pretended to be, that Divine Being, who made both the Angelical, and
Visible World; and persuaded all, from the least to the greatest, to believe,
that he was that Numen, or Divine Person, who was under one Name, or other,
Adored and Worshipped in every Nation, as the Supreme and Sovereign Deity; in
honor of whom, the Emperor Claudius Erected a Statue, with this Inscription
upon it; Simoni Deo Sancto, to Simon the Holy God.

Even so in the last Ages of the World, there shall come many Deceivers, Evil
Men, Lying Spirits, that would Vent their own Idle Fancies, and seduce others
from the Truth, to their corrupt way. The Truth of this needs no Proof in our
Days, for the time is come, when, many that live in the Bosom of the Church, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
will not (as the Apostle says) endure sound Doctrine, which tends to promote
Holiness, to recover the Soul from Sin, and teaches to Order the Life aright:
But after their own Lusts, heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears,
disposed to Novelty and Error; to be Tossed to and fro (like Ships without
Ballast) and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.
by the slight of Men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
Deceive. Heb. 13.9.
Nullum saeculum Religionis feracius, nec pietate Sterilius. No Age, ever made
a greater Profession, and less practice, of Christian Virtue. Never was there a
more splendid show of Religion, and less sincere Love, and serious Piety; for
if we may without breach of Charity, judge of the Tree by its Fruit, and of
Men's Religion, by their Conversation, and Actions; little remains with some,
but an outward Form; and with too many, nothing but the empty Name, and Title
of being Christians; for by their Immoral, and Licentious Lives, they may
rather pass for Turks, and Heathens, than for the Disciples of Christ; so that,
our Saviors Advice, is very seasonable; beware, look about you, (...).
take heed that ye be not deceived. Nay, rather look home, into your hearts,
lest the Old Man of Sin, the great Impostor deceive you; and the Son of Man
come at that time, when ye are least prepared for his coming.

In this Chapter, Our Blessed Savior Remarks several other searful Presages,
of the downfall of the Jewish State: Such as great Rumors, and Discourses of
Wars, which would create panick fears, civil broils, and commotions; Seditions
and Insurrections, both in Judea, and other Countries; for Nation shall rise
against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and there shall be great Famines
and Pestilences, and Dreadful Earthquakes, in diverse places, Persecutions of
the Saints, who should be delivered to the Synagogues, and into Prisons, Luke
21.12.
and be brought before Kings, and Rulers, for the Name of Christ, and be put to
Death. So Stephen was Stoned, Acts 7.29.
Peter and John were called before the Jewish Sanhedrim, where the Scribes and
Elders, Chapter 4.26.
Annas and Caiphas used to sit in Council. Paul was brought before Agrippa and
Festus. James was killed with the Sword, Chapter 16.23.
and afterward as the Doctrine of the Gospel spread it self, Chapter 12.2.
the Professors of it were Persecuted by the Heathen Powers, with the keenest
Malice, and put to most lingering and tormenting Deaths; and by reason of the
great sharpness of these Afflictions, many would stumble and turn Apostates, as
Phigellus, Demas, Hermogenes, Hymeneus, and Philetas did; for Iniquity would
abound, and the Love of many, both Parents and Children, Friends, and
Relations, Strangers, and others would grow cold, and the Gospel should be
Preached to all the World; these are percursory Tokens of this great
Destruction.

But those, which should immediately precede its coming, were the Abomination
of Desolation, set up in the Holy Place, the which would be attended with great
Tribulation: By which Expositors do understand the Roman Armies (made up of
Idolatrous Soldiers) besieging the City of Jerusalem, as once God in his
Righteous Judgment, suffered the Holy Place to be polluted, by the abominable
Armies of Antiochus, which made most horrid devastation: And the Sign of the
Son of Man in Heaven; what this (...) is, we cannot certainly tell, though there
are many conjectures about it: Some conceive it to be a Figure in Heaven of
Christ on the Cross, with his Wounds on his Hands and Feet, and the Angels
round about him, which should fall out at that time: Others take it to signify
some special Prodigy, which should attend that Destruction. The Jewish
Historian mentions several; De Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 12.
Viz. a Stupendous Comet in the Form of a fiery Sword; which for a year
together, did hang over the City of Jerusalem. Eus Ecc. His. l. 3. c. 8.
Meteors in the Air, like unto Iron Chariots, and an Army in Battle Array,
Marching along the Clouds, and begirting the City, a Light about the Altar, and
Temple, at the Ninth Hour of the Night; Shining as clearly as Day; a Voice in
the Inner Temple, which was heard by the Priests, as they were offering
Sacrifice, saying, Let us depart hence: And what was more dreadful than all
this, the Cry of one Jesus, the Son of Ananus, going about the City when it
Flourished in Peace and Riches; saying, A Voice from the East, a Voice from the
West, a Voice from the four Winds, a Voice against Jerusalem and the Temple, a
Voice against all People; Woe, woe, to the Temple, and People. But the general
Opinion of the Learned concerning this (...) is, That thereby is to be
understood, Signum Crucis, the Sign of the Cross. Such as Ecclesiastical Story
does Record, Constantine the Great saw in the Air, L. 3. c. 28.
when he was Marching his Army against Magnentius the great Enemy of the
Church. A Pillar of Light in the Heavens, Signum Crucis hic intelligamus, aut
Vexillum fidei Victoria triumphantis. Anselm.

Testatur Ecclesia Signum Crucis esse Signum filii hominis and Agni. Cajet.


appeared to him in the Form of a Cross, whereon was this Inscription, expressed
in Letters formed in the Configuration of Stars, In this overcome, the
semblance of which Figure, he afterward wore in his Shields, and Imperial
Banners, in all his Wars.

Some such Astonishing Signs as these, shall precede the Funeral of the World,
for those things were written for our Instruction, and they do lively represent
the Wars and Confusions, which are at this day abroad in the World, and which
seem to have a Commission to go through all Europe, and all Lands; for there
has of late been very dreadful Earthquakes, in diverse Places, which have
overturned many Famous Cities, and laid them in heaps of Confusion; and many
thousands of People, have gone down quick, into the Pit of Destruction. We our
selves have felt the Shocks, and Tremblings of the Land under us; as if God
designed thereby, to display his Wonderful Power, and to awaken us out of our
security, by shaking the Pillars of the Earth, upon which we tread, distant
Kingdoms, trembling at the same time, notwithstanding the Vast Ocean
interposed; which wonderful Signatures of Divine displeasure, should learn the
Inhabitants of the Earth Righteousness, Isaiah 26.9.
and make the most secure and profligate Sinners, to take notice of the
Brightness of his Glorious Power and Wisdom, to acknowledge his terrible
Majesty, to stand in awe of him, and to Sin no more, lest something worse
befall them.

But, where is the Ancient Zeal, and sounding of Bowels and Mercies, to
indigent and distressed Objects? The Christian Religion was immediately
designed, to mollify, and sweeten the Nature of Men, to change their
Boisterous and Pharisaical Spirit, into a calm and obliging Temper. It enjoins
them, to have fervent Charity, to love as Brethren, to be kindly affectionated,
one to another, and to prove themselves, to be the Disciples of Christ, by
loving one another, as he has commanded, and as the Primitive Christians did
in the first Ages of the Gospel; when (as Tertul. says) it became so signal,
that the Heathens observed it, with this special Remark; See how these
Christians love one another: And Julian (the professed Enemy of Christianity)
testified of the For so in derision he termed Christians.
Galileans, That by their Charity, they begot the greatest Admiration of their
Religion, in the minds of Men.

But this Generous, and Excellent Spirit of the Gospel, seems to be lost in our
days; as the Ovid Met. l. 1. Fab. 4.
Poet described the Iron Age Malice, Enmity and Ill Will, Strife and
Contention, Envy, Hatred and Uncharitableness, inveterate prejudices, and
animosities, intestine heats, and divisions, hot Persecutions, and oppressions,
and all manner of Injustice, Covetousness, and Impiety, succeed in the Room
thereof. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 John 5, 19.
There seems to be almost a general Corruption in the Lives, and manners of
Men. The whole World lies in Wickedness; and if this be a portentous Sign, we
have reason to fear that a Storm is coming, and that the end of the World is
near approaching.

But now admit, that there will be no other Antecedents thereof, no Stupendous
Comets in the Heavens, no fiery Meteors in the Air, no extraordinary Flashes of
Lightning, to give us warning of that dreadful hour; in which the Heavens shall
pass away with a great Noise, and the Elements melt with servent heat, and the
Earth with its, (...), the Works that are therein, shall be burnt up; and all
those delectable things, in which worldly Men place their Felicity, shall be
destroyed: Yet there shall be heard as was before, in the Temple and City, a
Voice, but much more Shrill, and Astonishing, in comparison of which, the
loudest clap of Thunder, which was ever heard from the fraction of a Cloud,
will be but as the sound of the Silver Trumpets under the Law; when the
Congregation of Israel Assembled; or as the blowing of the Rams Horns, when the
Walls of Jericho fell; for it shall be so loud and vociferous, as to make the
Dead in their Graves to hear, and come forth, to meet the Great Judge, 1 These.
4.16.
who will descend from Heaven with a shout, and with the Voice of the
Archangel, under whose Conduct shall come all the Angels of God, Mark 13.26.27.
with a great sound of a Trumpet, to gather the Elect from the four Winds, from
one End of Heaven to another.

But as concerning the period of time, when this coming of the Son of Man will
be in Power, and great Glory, God the Father has reserved it in his own Power,
and Pleasure, and not Revealed it, either to Men or Angels, that we might not
be overcurious, in enquiring after it. But this he has made known concerning
it; that it will be at a time, when we least expect it; for as the Universal
Deluge came upon all the Inhabitants of the Old World; when they were immersed
in their Carnal Delights and Security, and never thought of a change, and so
were surprised by it. So will the coming of our Lord be; he is his own Herald,
and in the Text, proclaims the certainty of his coming; but from the
uncertainty of the time when, presses his Disciples to rouse up themselves,
and to stand perpetually upon their Watch; looking for, and awaiting the coming
of the Lord, either by Death, or Judgment, for it is all one in effect, whether
he come to us, or we go to him, whether the World ends to us, or we to it;
for when we die, we then part with all our dear Delights, and sweet enjoyments
of this Life, and go to Judgment; for as Death leaves us, Judgment will find
us; as soon as ever the Soul is separated from the body, it is winged by the
holy Angels to the Tribunal of God, to receive its definitive Sentence, to Joy
or Misery, according to its Works done in the body in this Life: So that, we
had need to be ever waiting and prepared for that hour: Therefore be ye also
ready; for in such an hour as you think not, the Son of Man comes.

Which Words were spoken by our Lord, particularly to his Disciples, but are of
Universal concern to all Christians, and do as much belong to Us in our days,
as to Them in theirs; and therefore I shall look upon them with particular
Application to our selves: they do contain two General Parts.

I. Our Blessed Saviors seasonable and serious Advice, solemnly to prepare our
selves for Death and Judgment; Be ye also ready. II. A powerful and cogent
Motive enforcing this good Advice; For in such an hour as you think not, the
Son of Man comes.
I. The first thing to be considered, is our Saviors serious Advice, solemnly
to prepare our selves for Death, and Judgment; therefore be ye also ready, for
this Reason, because ye must die and come to Judgment, and the time when, is
unknown; be ye ready, the Original imports, set in the way; as all those are,
whom God has set in the Path of his Commandments. Psalm. 85.13.
Righteousness shall go before him (as his Harbinger) and shall set us in the
way of his Steps, i. e. in the path wherein he walks, and which he has
prescribed and appointed us to follow him in. The Vulgar Latin reads it
Parati, made fit. Now, for as much as this is a long and difficult work, and
requires many Acts, and Duties, to be performed by us, to dispose and qualify
us to meet our Lord with Joy, and Comfort, I will therefore show,

i. Wherein this Preparation does chiefly consist.

ii. Manifest the urgent necessity hereof, and the many Obligations which we
lie under, to be always prepared for Death, and Judgment.

i. My first work is to show, wherein this Preparation does chiefly consist;
this I shall do two ways, Generally, and Particularly.

1. Generally. This preparation does consist in the constant course of a
Religious, Holy, and Heavenly Conversation, and in the daily practice of
Universal Purity. (1.) For this end the great and wise Creator did make us
noble and reasonable Creatures, Neh. 5.9.
to walk in the fear of God, to approve our selves by a blameless and harmless
life; Phil. 2.15.
the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a perverse Nation, among whom
we (being enlightened by the Son of Righteousness) shine as lights in the World;
that others may see our good works, the beauty and splendour of our Gifts and
Graces, Mat. 5.16. Joh. 15.^8.
and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. For herein is he glorified, if we
bring forth much fruit of Righteousness, and true Holiness. Not that it is in
our power to add any thing to the essential glory of God: but only contribute
to the manifestation of his Glory and Majesty.

(2) This he does command and require from us as we are his Creatures. When God
had chosen the Seed of Abraham, and had separated them from all Nations, and
from all Impurities, and Idolatries, and set them apart for himself, a peculiar
People, an holy Nation, a chosen Race, a People purchased to himself by
Temptations, by Signs, and by Wonders, and by War, and by a mighty Hand, and by
a stretched out Arm, and by great Terrors; Deuteronomy. 4.34.
according to all that he did in Egypt, He charged them thus, Levit. 20.7, 8.
Sanctify your selves and be ye holy, for I am the Lord your God, and ye shall
keep my Statutes and do them.

We are the Seed of Faithful Abraham, Gods peculiar People, his proper portion
and possession, he has brought us into a state of Salvation, Tim. 1.9.
and has called us with an holy Calling, not according to our works, nor for
any merit of ours, but according to his own purpose, and grace, which was given
us in Christ Jesus, before the world began, and as he that has called us is
holy, so should we be holy in all manner of conversation; 1. Pet. 1.16.
for it is written, be ye holy, as I am holy. Now there is a two fold likeness
to God in holiness, viz. a conformity to his nature and will, in reference to
which, we are engaged to crucify the old man with his deeds, to mortify the
corruption of nature, with all those sinful affections and actions which flow
from it, and to put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness. 3 Cor. 5.17. 2 Pet. 1.4.
Which is called by St. Paul the new Creature, and by St. Peter, the divine
Nature, which consists not in any communication of the divine Essence to us,
but in our partaking of those divine Qualities, and dispositions of knowledge,
righteousness and holiness, which do express the perfections of God; and in our
analogical resemblance to him in his Attributes of Meekness, Humility,
Patience, Long suffering, Justice and Faithfulness, Mercy and Charity, Love and
Purity; and in our sincere endeavor to please him, to do his Will, and keep
his Commandments, which require us to do justly, to love mercy, Micah 6.8.
and to walk humbly with God. To love him with all our hearts, and soul and
strength, and might; to discharge all the Duties that we owe to his Divine
Majesty, and to be fervent in spirit in his service. To abstain from all
injurious practices against our Neighbors, to perform all kind and friendly
offices to all men, to bear good will to them, to rejoice at their happiness,
to pity their miseries, and commiserate them in adversity; to pay all due
respect to them suitable to their degree and quality; to show all meekness to
all men, and heartily and favorably to interpret their words and actions,
mildly to reprehend their faults, and sparingly relate their miscarriages,
forgiving, and forgetting their greater offenses, and conniving at their lesser
injuries, which make no great breach upon our interest or reputation; studying
by all fair means, as much as lies in us, if it be possible, to live peaceably
with all; tho we we may sometimes sail in our purposes, because some men are of
such a turbulent, fiery, and malicious spirit, and such professed enemies to
peace, and love, that it is scarce possible to obtain their good will, or to
maintain a friendly correspondence with them.

In regard to our own persons, the holy God commands us to depart from all
iniquity, to put away the evil of our doings, Isaiah 1.16, 17.
to cease to do evil, to learn to do well; to watch and be sober, to cast off
the works of darkness, and to walk as children of the light, Romans 13.13.
(...) honestly, and decently, as becomes those to whom the glorious light of
the Gospel has appeared; shunning all those vices of Gluttony and Drunkenness,
Whoredom and Uncleanness, all lustful and lascivious dalliances, Strife and
Envy, which are a stain and blemish to our Nature, and to our holy Profession,
and to live in the constant practice of universal Purity, Psalm. 37.24. 2 Timothy
2.19. Jam. 4.8.
which obliges us to depart from evil, to cleanse our hands, and purify our
hearts, i. e. to reform and amend our lives and actions, out thoughts and
affections, and through the assistance of Divine Grace, (which is never wanting
to those that endeavor to obey God, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and do his Will) to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit. (i. e.) from all bodily pollutions, such are sins of Intemperance,
Fornication, Uncleanness, etc. in respect of which, it becomes the duty of a
Christian to learn, and exercise that holy skill, 1 These. 4.4.
to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor; for such sins as these are
a real dishonor to the body, Romans 1.2. And since God has showed his Art in
the curious workmanship of it, Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tuerj jussit,
etc.

Materiam superabat opus -- Ovid. Met.


which was not at first made without a consultation of the whole Trinity, after
what eminent manner, and majestic form they should make it, the rare and
admirable structure whereof, Genesis 1.26.
being exquisitely composed of Bones, and Muscles, and Sinews, of Veins, and
Arteries, and variety of members, excellent both for beauty and use, filled
David's Royal Soul with such admiration of God's infinite Wisdom and Power,
that when he contemplated his own Body, he praised God, Psalm. 139.14.
and said, I am fearfully and wonderfully made, and curiously wrought, with
various embroidery: and since God (I say) has bestowed so much pains and cost
upon the workmanship of the Body, and that it is a part of Christ's purchase,
and together with the Soul, is become a member of his, and a Temple for the
Holy Spirit of Purity to reside and dwell in; it is principally incumbent upon
us, to keep it pure and clean, chaste and holy, and free from all carnal
pollutions,

We ought to have a greater regard to our noble Souls (which are of an heavenly
Original) to purify and preserve them from spiritual wickedness, from
extravagant passions, inordinate affections and desires, from Pride and
Covetousness, rash Anger and Contention, Envy, Hatred, Malice, and all
Uncharitableness; for these Sins and Vices defile our Souls, and make us both
afraid to dye, and unfit for judgment: Therefore the Apostle calls upon us to
perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, and assures us that this is the
revealed will of God, 1 These. 4.3.
even our sanctification, that we should be holy both in our hearts and lives,
inwardly in our thoughts and affections; outwardly in our words and actions,
both intensively and extensively holy,

3. For this end and purpose the Lord of Glory sent his beloved Son into the
World in great humility, to carry on this work of making us holy by his
exemplary and virtuous life, and by his patient and meritorious death,

First, By his virtuous and exemplary life, he has given us the most
illustrious pattern in his own person in all the parts of holiness, and set us
the fairest copy of the most sublime and perfect virtue. For which cause we
find him in Scripture dignified with eminent Titles, as of a Prince and
Captain, a Master and Guide of holy life and obedience, he voluntarily
undertook to subdue our Enemies, and has encouraged us with a most bountiful
promise of a glorious reward, a Crown of Righteousness, to follow his heroic
Conduct, in a holy warfare against Sin and Satan: to fight manfully under his
Banner against all the Enemies of our Souls; as Plutarch says, Caesar's
Soldiers did, when his presence and unparalleled Gallantry inspired them with
Courage and Valor extraordinary -- Fortis in armis, Caesareis Labienus erat.


Example has a great influence and efficacy; for as Pliny the younger has
observed, Melius hominis exemplis docentur, qua imprimis hoc boni habent, qua
approbant, quae praecipiunt, fieri posse.
Men are better instructed by Examples, which have in them chiefly this
advantage, that they do prove the things may be done which they enjoin. And as
Seneca tells Lucilius, Homines plus Oculis, quam auribus credunt, Epist, 6.
Men give greater credit to their Eyes than to their Ears; to what they see,
than to what they hear.

The more Eminent any persons are that give Examples, the more readily are they
imitated. Et in vulgus manunt exempl^ Regent^um.
Such as sit in the Gate; as all uppermost in the world have many followers
that conform to their manners, and practice. When the King of Nineveh put on
Sackcloath, Jonah 3.6.
his Courtiers and Citizens complied with the fashion. When Constantinus Mag.
embraced the Faith of Christ, Heathen Superstition began to creep into holes
and corners, and Christianity overspread the face of the Empire.

Now our dearest Lord, being the greatest, and wisest person that ever lived,
and his example the most perfect and transcendent that ever was, we should
endeavor (if we would live happily, and die comfortably, to conform our
practice to his; because he was the most exact mirror of true Goodness and
Virtue, of general Kindness and Charity, Patience and Contentedness, Meekness
and Humility; which he most lovingly inviteth us to imitate him in. Matthew.
11.29.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart? His Patience in bearing the
Affronts and Indignities of Sinners, his Contempt of all the Glories of this
World, his Self-denial and Submission to the will of God, his unwearied
diligence in his Service, his Peaceableness and Gentleness to all men, and
readiness to perform all kind Offices to men, especially to their Souls, was
written for our Admonition, to influence our practice, and lead us in the paths
of Righteousness, and to make us partakers of his Holiness.

2dly. Our Blessed Lord and Savior's patient, and meritorious Death, and
Sufferings, were primarily intended to work Holiness in us. The design of his
coming in the Flesh, was not only (as the Socinians say) to give us an example
of Christian Purity; but to lay down his life for us. We are assured of this
from his own sacred lips, Matthew. 20.28.
The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his
life a ransom for many; (...), 1 Timothy 2.6.
a redemption-price, so great and valuable, that there needs no further
satisfaction to be made for any. St, Paul says, that he gave himself a ransom
for all, (...), an emphatical word denoting the exchange of condition with
another, the laying down of ones life to save another. And so did our dearest
Lord and Savior, Tit. 2, 14. Romans 8.32.
he gave himself for us, and in our place and stead, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of^^ good
works. The price which he paid for our Redemption, was his own blood, not a few
drops, for then what he shed at his Circumcision, and bitter Agony, when he
sweat drops of blood, might have sufficed, but it was his hearts blood. Ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19
from your vain conversation, (and course of life, which is unprofitable for
your souls, and insufficient for Righteousness and Salvation,) but with the
precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot.
Precious in the Esteem of Angels and Men, but most of all precious in regard of
the Glory and Dignity, of the Qualifications and Endowments, of the Gifts and
Graces of the Person that shed it, Coloss. 2.3.
In whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, in whose mouth no
guile was ever found, who needed not to offer Sacrifices for his own Sins,
being a person so perfectly holy, harmless and undefiled: No! it was for us and
for our Salvation, that he died, Romans 4.25. He was delivered by the determinate
counsel and fore knowledge of God, for our offenses, Acts 2.23.
to make full satisfaction to his Father for them, and to reconcile us to God.
By his own free and spontaneous act, he laid down his life, Joh. 10.17. Gal.
1.4.
and gave himself for our Sins: Not only to take away the Guilt, with all the
causes and consequences thereof, Once in the end of the World has he appeared
to put away Sin, (...), Heb. 9.26. Romans 5.19.
to the abolition of Sin, by the Sacrifice of himself, by whose obedience many
are made righteous; but also to ease guilty souls of the pain and anguish of
Conscience, which does fill them with dreadful fears and terrors, and a certain
fearful looking for of wrath, Heb. 9.14.
and fiery indignation. The Blood of Christ does purge your Conscience from
dead works, and not only justify and absolve the true penitent Sinner; but also
meritoriously purify the Soul from inherent corruption, and sanctify it by
infusing holiness: So that body, soul and spirit becomes one frame of Holiness
to God, to serve him here in the Beauty of Holiness, and to enjoy communion
with him in his Ordinances; till he is pleased to fit him for the full fruition
of himself in the Holy of Holies in Heaven. This is the effect of Christ's
Blood which was shed, to put a silence to the clamours and accusations of
Conscience, and also to pacify the wrath of God for Sin. Jesus being the (...),
1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
Who delivers us from the wrath to come, and is now actually delivering us by
his prevailing Intercession, and the supplies of his Grace, enabling us to
subdue the power of Sin and temptation, and will most certainly complete and
perfect our deliverance at his second coming. So that now the penitent Believer
may safely make that bold challenge which the great St. Paul does; Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? Romans 8.33
It is God that justifies, and absolveth them, who is he that condemns? It
is Christ that died; and by his Death has made a sufficient atonement to God
for all our Sins, and washed them away in his Blood, which is a Fountain opened
for Sin, and for Uncleanness, (...), a Laver to wash away the pollution and
filth of all our Sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; he is a
propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, 1 John 2, 2.
but for the Sins of the whole World, Ephesians. 5.25, 27.
He delivered himself up for the Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it,
i. e. Purify all its members from the guilt, filth, and power of Sin; endue
them with a principle of Holiness, and consecrate them to God a glorious
Church, without having spot or wrinkle; free from the smallest remainder of sin
and misery. 1 John 3.8.
For this purpose the Son of God was manifest to destroy the works of the
Devil, the original word is (...), that he might dissolve those chains,
wherewith Satan holds all his Vassals in bondage.

4. So great was the care of our Lord to make men truly good and virtuous, that
when he left the World, he sent the Holy Ghost, the Promise of the Father, to
superintend the Affairs of the Church, Vicarius Christi in Ecclesia.
whom Tertul. calls Christ's Vicar; a Metaphor borrowed from certain
Church Officers, who are so denominated as our Civilians say, Quasi vice
fungentes Rectorum.
to attend the Offices of the Church in the Rectors absence. To oppose the
Torrent of Vice and Wickedness, to instruct people in the fundamental
Principles of Religion, to guide, direct, and encourage them in the paths of
Holiness, and Virtue; and by a continual residence upon his Cure, to be ever
ready to perform the Duties belonging thereunto. Even so the Holy Spirit was
sent to supply Christ's room in the Church: Joh. 16, 7.
If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I
will send him unto you. He was not to enter upon his Economy or Dispensation,
till after Christ's Ascension, and Glorification, as we learn from John 7.39.
The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Christ was not yet glorified.
Princes do liberally bestow their gifts and favors at the time of their
Inauguration; Ephesians. 4.9.
and the Prince of Peace, being ascended up on high, and triumphing gloriously
over all his Church's Enemies, poured down a plentiful effusion of gifts and
graces unto men. As St. Peter acquaints his Auditors; That Christ being by the
power of God exalted, Acts 2.33.
and having received of the Father, the promise of the Holy Ghost; he has shed
forth this, which ye now see, and hear. The design and end of his coming, is,
as our Savior says, Joh. 16.8.
To reprove the world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment. To convince us
of the evil and obliquity of our ways and doings; and reclaim us from Sin and
Error, to regenerate us unto God's Image, infusing holiness into our souls, and
giving us a right to eternal Salvation, Tit. 3.5.
by the washing of Regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, changing of
our corrupt Natures, creating good Dispositions, and pious Affections in us,
sanctifying us with Divine Graces, Dr. Bar. Creed.
and begetting virtuous inclinations in us; reverence toward God, charity to
Men, sobriety and purity as to our Selves, with the rest of those amiable and
heavenly virtues of the Soul, which is the work of Sanctification, leading and
governing us in our Actions and Conversations, that we may actually do and
perform those things which are acceptable in the sight of God.

These are the Offices of the Holy Spirit, who is therefore denominated Holy,
because he is the Author and efficient Cause of holiness in us? and has the
special Name of Spirit given him, both because of his Spiritual Essence, and in
regard of his Spiritual dispensations; and those Graces which he bestows upon
every faithful Soul, which are heavenly and spiritual: for the performance of
which, Mat. 28.20.
he is to abide with his Church for ever. Lo! I am with you always even to the
end of the world: to enlighten your Understandings, to sanctify your Wills and
Affections, to assist you in Devotion, to stir up in you good Desires, and to
lead you in the way of all truth and obedience to Gods holy Will and
Commandments.

(5) For this purpose the great Ordinance of the Gospel Ministry was
instituted, and persons in sacred Orders appointed to make men truly holy: to
dispose and fit them for Death and Judgment, Heaven and Happiness, to teach and
tread the way to Glory.

(1) (...) to teach the way to Heaven, rightly to cut out to every man his
portion, and to divide the Word of Truth. 2 Timothy 2.15.
The titles which are given them in Scripture, import the business they are to
perform and do: They are Ministers, Stewards, Ambassadors, Ministers of Christ,
1 Cor. 4.12. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. Acts 20 18. 1 Cor. 3.9.
and Stewards of the mysteries of God, to whom he has committed the Ministry
of Reconciliation, the word of Power. They are Overseers and Comptrollers of
his Family, Ambassadors for Christ, to pray, beseech, and court men in their
great Lord and Masters stead, to be reconciled to God; Laborers and
Co-operators with God in the work of Conversion and Edification. He, Joh.
20.21, 22. Romans 10.15.
the principal Agent. They, Officers under him, ordained and sent by him, and
furnished with Gifts and Abilities to negotiate his great Affairs. He made them
able Ministers, 2 Cor. 3.6.
fitted by a supervening act and influence of Grace, to discharge the trust
which he has reposed in them to the souls of men. He strictly charged them to
preach all the counsel of God: Acts 20.27.
whatsoever he requires of any one, in order to eternal blessedness, even the
whole doctrine of Christianity, which teaches us to deny all ungodliness, etc.
to reprove, rebuke, and exhort with all long suffering and patience, 2 Cor.
5.11.
and as knowing the terror of the Lord to persuade men, to believe the dreadful
comminations and threatenings of God, revealed in his Word, Romans 1.18.
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; and accordingly to frame
their lives innocently, and holy, that at the dreadful day of Judgment, which
the Prophet calls a day of wrath, Zeph. 1.15. He alludes to it in the ruin
which he foretold should fall upon the Jews by the Chaldeans.
a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasting and desolation, a day of
darkness and gloominess, a day of Clouds, and thick darkness; and the Apostle,
a day of terror; because there will be a very strict scrutiny, a narrow search
made into the thoughts, words, and actions of men, done in the flesh; nothing
but holiness will then stand in any stead: therefore the Ministers of the
Gospel are commanded to use the most prudent and effectual course, Acts 26.18.
to open men's eyes and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance
among them that are sanctified by faith; which grace does purify the heart
from sin and corruption, They must not connive at, or comply with, the lusts of
men, as Ahabs Priests did; but handle the Word of God sincerely, with zeal and
courage, not fearing the faces of men, in the work of the Lord; who has
charged them at their peril not to be dismayed at the presence and frowns of
great men, J^r. 1.17.
or presumptuous sinners: yet at the same time, when they do show their zeal,
against their sins; to manifest their reverend esteem, and love of their
persons; and tender affection to their souls, instructing those that oppose
themselves with all gentleness, and winning insinnuations, and restoring them
in the spirit of meekness; which is the most probable way to enamour them with
the love of Virtue, and to save their Souls.

(2) (...). To tread the way to heaven, and to walk uprightly, Call. 2.14.
according to the truth of the Gospel. So passionately desirous is God of men's
happiness, that he would have his Ministers to be Shining Lights, as John the
Baptist was; showing the power of Godliness in their lives, that by their good
Conversations, their People might be drawn to imitate them in the practice of
all Christian Graces. 1 Timothy 4.12.
St. Paul exhorts his Son Timothy to be an example of Believers in word, in
Conversation, in Charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. (...), of Believers,
not of moral honest men only; but of Gods Jedidians, Pro. 12.
the excellent of the earth, in whom he delights, of those firstborn Souls,
Mal. 3.17.
those bright and sparkling Jewels of whom the world is not worthy, those
darlings of heaven that are the Apple of Gods Eye, Heb. 11.38. Deuteronomy. 32.9.
those precious Sons of Sion, who are the lot of Gods inheritance, and the
glory of Christ. 1 Cor. 8.23.
To such noble and virtuous persons as these are the Ministers of the Gospel to
show themselves patterns, in Sacerdotal exemplariness, and in the habits and
exercise of grace, Prove. 4.18.
and in holiness of life, which is a shining light that has influence and
powerful operation upon others to excite them to bring glory to God. For this
reason they are styled, Presidents, Shepherds, Guides, because they are not
only to preach Angelical Sermons, but to live heavenly lives, to adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior, by the purity and luster of their Conversations:
For the greatest part of Mankind are like Sheep, Heb. 10.24. Prove. 27.17.
which go rather as they are led then as they are taught. A good Example is
greatly influential to Virtue, to provoke unto love and to good works, as a bad
one is an occasion of much harm; -- faciles imitandis Turpibus and pravis omnes
sumus.
we having a great proclivity to follow ill Examples. Those therefore that are
to teach others, that are to be the lights of the World, ought to take heed to
themselves, that their lives and actions may command a reverence from men, 1 Timothy 4.16.
and induce them to conform to their pattern and practice; a holy life being a
great advantage to Religion, and the best preparation for Death and Judgment.

2. Particularly; The readiness and preparation I am speaking of does consist
in the several acts and duties of the Christian Religion: which must be
performed by us with all diligence, zeal, and vigor, viz. in the speedy
settling our domestic concerns, and moderating our affections to this world, in
making our peace and reconciliation with God, and Men, in doing all the good we
can whilst we live, in keeping Conscience clear and free from offense; in
bearing with patience the troubles we meet with; in living under a constant
sense of Gods all-seeing Eye, and inspection over us, and possessing our selves
with frequent thoughts of Death and Judgment. So that duly to dispose our
selves for a blessed Eternity, does not consist in one transient act, but is to
commence as soon as we come to a consistency of reason, and understanding,
Eccles. 12.1. and must be carried on, through the several periods of our lives,
till God is pleased to dissolve the vital union between the Soul and Body, and
make a separation between them.

(1) The speedy settling of our domestic concerns, and disposing of our
temporal affairs, while we have opportunity to do it deliberately and
advisedly, with prudence and discretion, is one part of this preparation for
Death and Judgment. Death is a debt which we all owe to God and Nature, and
which we are sure to pay whenever it pleases the God of Nature to require it
from us: But since we know not the time when, nor the manner how, we shall die
and depart this life; Omnibus est eadem lathi via, non tamen unus est vitae
cunctis; exitiique modus.
it is not only wisdom, but our duty to dispatch this work; lest we should be
taken away (as experience shows us many are) by some sudden casualty or
unexpected surreption. But suppose we go off the Stage of this world,
deliberately and by slow degrees, some previous sickness or sensible decays of
Nature, forewarning us of our approaching dissolution; it is not fit then to
have the disposition of our secular affairs upon our hands, to disturb and
disquiet our Minds, and to rob us of our precious time, every minute of which
must be bestowed to the best advantage, and to the true interest of our Souls:
for what they are when they leave the body and enter into a state of separation
from it, that they shall be to all eternity; therefore it should be our
chiefest care to get them washed clean in the blood of the immaculate Lamb,
from all their impurities, that whatsoever defilements they have contracted
during their union with their Bodies, through the lusts of the flesh within, or
the wiles of Satan from without, these being purged away; they may appear
spotless before the great Tribunal, and stand with exceeding great joy before
the Impartial Judge. It is not fit when we come to die, to have the settlement
of our Estates then to take up our last moment, which ought to be employed in
renewing our repentance, and in making our peace with God, and solemnly
preparing for a comfortable passage into the eternal world.

There are very sew (if any) of us, whose outward circumstances are so mean and
low, but that we have some of the Gifts of Fortune to dispose of at our death;
Some Estate more or less to bequeath among our Friends and Relations when we
leave the World. Those of us that have the fairest Inheritances, the fullest
Baggs and Barns, can take nothing away with us when we die; but are at the
courtesy of our surviving Friends for a Shroud and a Coffin to intomb us in
the Earth: For as Job said, when the Chaldaean and Sabaean Robbers had taken
away all his goods, Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, Job 1.21.
and naked shall I return. So may we say with the Son of Syrac, As we came
forth of our Mothers womb, naked shall we return, to go as we came; and shall
take nothing of our labor, which we may carry away in our hands. Holy David
affirms the same of the rich man, tho the glory of his House is increased, when
he dies, Psalm 49.17.
he shall carry nothing away; his glory shall not descend after him; All his
Wealth, and Power, and Grandeur shall die with him, Nudos fudit in lucem --
Nudos recepit terra, Seneca Epist,
We must carry out no more than we brought in; So that it concerns us to make
our Wills with great Justice, and Piety; and to take care that they be penned
with clearness, and plain expressions, to prevent all Animosities, and
Encumbrances, Wranglings, and Suits of Law amongst our Children, and Legatees:
For we are obliged to provide for the Quiet, Peace and Prosperity of those that
are to succeed us in our Possessions, that it may go well with them, when we
are dead and gone.

Now, forasmuch as Solomon says, Eccl. 3.1.
To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under Heaven;
The most proper and convenient season for the dispatch of this weighty Affair,
is the day of Health, while we have our wits about us, while our understanding
is clear, and our memory perfect; and that we can duly consider which way God
may be best served by our Bequests, Virtue encouraged, and Justice may be done
to every man, and the Poor in some measure be provided for, according as God
has enabled us, ever remembering, that what we have, comes solely from his
bounty, who is the Sovereign Lord, and true Proprietor of all that we have. We,
but Stewards only, and the Poor his Proxies and Receivers; therefore we must
not forget them in our Wills: but remember that Precept of Solomon, With hold
not good from them to whom it is due, Prove. 3.27.
when it is in the power of thy hand to do it: because such actions are works
of Charity and Bounty to the Poor, and acts of Righteousness to God: and they
that give nothing at their departure hence, Luke 16.9.
betray their trust; for the good things of this life are committed to their
care and management, upon such conditions and reservations, that they should
use them comfortably while they live, and dispose of them wisely and charitably
when they die, lest they give a bad account of their Stewardship, and have
reason to expect a severe sentence from their Lord: Jam. 2.12. August.
For he shall have judgment without mercy, who showed no mercy. Desideravit
guttam, qui non dedit micam. This piece of Wisdom we may learn from the Example
of Abraham, who did dispose of his Estate among his Children, some time before
his death, reserving only the enjoyment of it to himself during his life. This
preparation for death in the day of Sickness and Visitation, is not to be then
neglected. It Is advised by Jesus the Son of Sirac, My Son, according to thy
ability do good to thy self, Ecclus. 14.11, 12, 13.
and give the Lord his due offering; remember that death will not be long in
coming, and that the Covenant of the Grave is not showed unto thee. Do good to
thy friend before thou dye: Put not off to thy Will and Testament, but
according to thy ability, stretch out thy hand, and give unto the Poor.

Thus in the day of health it is most convenient to dispatch this work; but in
the day of Visitation, and the approaches of Death, Ecclus. 33.23.
it is an indispensible duty, not to be neglected. At the time when thou shall
end thy days, and finish thy work, distribute thine Inheritance. Genesis 48.22.
chapter 49. 1 K. 2.1, 2, 3, 4
So did Jacob in that prophetical Testament of his. And David also, when his
days drew nigh that he should die, he disposed of his Kingdom to his Son
Solomon, and charged him, saying, I go the way of all the Earth, (i. e. I die)
be thou strong, and show thy self a man, (of Wisdom, Courage, and Constancy)
and keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his
Statutes, etc. that thou may prosper in all that thou do, and
whithersoever thou turnest thy self, that the Lord may confirm his word which
he spoke concerning me, saying. If thy Children take heed to their ways, to
walk before me in truth, with all their heart, and with all their soul: There
shall not fail thee a man on the Throne of Israel. Verse 13.
And when David had finished his charge, he slept with his Fathers, and was
buried in the City of David. And after him this was expressly commanded by God
himself, to the good King Hezekiah, as a preparation for death. In those days
was he sick unto death, 2 Kings 20.1.
and the Prophet Esaias said unto him, Thus says the Lord, Set thine house in
order, for thou shall die, and not live: i. e, Make thy Will, and settle the
Concerns both of thy Family, and thy Kingdom, to prevent all Contentions and
Quarrels after thy decease; for thy Disease is mortal in its kind, if God do
not by his power prevent it: therefore dispose of thy temporal Affairs; and as
for the spiritual Estate of thy Family, imitate the example of David, and
Abraham, advise, instruct, Genesis 18.19,
exhort and admonish them to keep the way of the Lord, and to do Justice and
Judgment. There are some Divines, who give this relation of our Lord and
Savior's last Will and Testament, that upon the Cross, a little before he gave
up the Ghost, he bequeathed his Soul into the hands of his Father; his holy
Mother, to his beloved Disciple St. John; his Body, to Joseph of Arimathea;
Paradise, to the penitent Thief that was to die with him; and to his
Crucifiers, his heartiest Prayers and Intercessions. Romans 15.4.
Now these things were written for our learning and instruction, to teach us to
imitate them, and to prevent the ill consequences of intestate Estates, to
settle our minds at ease, and free from disturbance, and to put our Souls into
a prepared frame and disposition for our departure. Thus, by discharging a good
Conscience, we may be ready to meet our Lord, and freely depart in peace.

(2.) This readiness does consist in moderating our love (...) affection to^
this World, and not overvaluing any earthly comfort. We serve a very liberal
and bountiful Master, 1 Timothy 6, 17.
Who gives us richly all things to enjoy, and with holds no good thing from
us, but that which would be a temptation and a snare unto us: only he has not
allowed us to set our affections upon this world, nor any of the enjoyments of
it; for this is not our place of rest and abode. Whilst we are at home in the
body, 2 Cor. 5.6.
we are absent from the Lord, may better be rendered, Whilst we converse or
sojourn in the body, So long as we tabernacle in the flesh, we are but like the
Israelites in the Wilderness, Strangers, and Sojourners, passing to the
Heavenly Canaan, detained from the blessed Vision and Fruition of God, Heb.
13.14.
and the possession of that happiness which makes Heaven. Here we have no
continuing City, no settled abiding place. This notion the wiser Heathens had
of this present World, who looked upon it as an Inn, not as their home. Nature
having designed it to us as a Diversory to lodge, Commorandi enim natura
diversorum nobis, non habitandi locum dedit.
but not to dwell in. For it is not a fit place for us, nor can our stay in it
be very desirable, because it is fleeting and vanishing, full of vanity and
vexation; all its splendour and glory depends merely upon our fancy. Our
Historians tell us, that the Peruvian Mines of Gold and Silver, their precious
Stones and Pearls, were of such low and mean esteem with those barbarous
Indians, that they preferred our trifling Bawbles before them; and made that
their valuable Treasure, which we make little or no account of.

In the Reign of the Great and Wise Solomon, Silver, (which is now the adored
Idol of the World, and for which men venture not only their dearest lives, but
even pawn their precious Souls to obtain) was not at all regarded; 2 Chronicles.
9.20.
it was not any thing accounted of, it was but as Stones in his days. This
glorious Prince surpassed all the Kings of the Earth in Riches, 1 Kings 4.22,
23, 26.
and Wisdom He had the greatest flow and confluence of this World. His
Provisions for one day were 30 measures of fine flower, 10 fat Oxen, and 20
Oxen out of the Pastures, besides Hearts and Roe Bucks, and Fallow Deer, and
fatted Fowl, he had 40000 Stalls of Horses for Chariots, and 1200 Horsemen for
the Guard, and preservation of his Person, for the defense of his people, and
for the grandeur of his Government; The yearly income of his Traffic
(be-besides that which Merchants imported, and the Kings of Arabia brought to
him) was six hundred and threescore and six Talents of Gold: 2 Chronicles. 9.13.
many of his Shields and Targets, and all his Drinking Vessels were of pure
Gold. He resolved to gratify himself with delicious Meats, and pleasant Wines;
and if it were possible for him to arrive at satisfaction in this mortal state,
he made magnificent Works for delight, Eccles. 2.3, 4, 5, 7, 8.
and erected stately Houses, and planted Vineyards, and made Gardens of
pleasure, and planted Orchards and Trees in them of all kind of Fruits for
profit, he gathered himself Gold and Silver, vast Riches, and the peculiar
Treasures of Kings, and of the Provinces, i. e. the most valuable Jewels and
Rarities both of other Princes, and of his own Dominions; he gat him Men
singers and Women-singers, the most sweet and melodious Voices, and all other
delightful things, as Musical Instruments of all sorts; he denied not himself
any thing that was pleasing to his Eyes, or grateful to his Senses, or that his
heart desired, neither was he hindered from the free and comfortable Enjoyment
of all his Labors, either by Wars abroad, or Tumults at home, or personal
Afflictions, or any outward Calamity, or imbittering Occurrents, and he had a
heart to use, and taste the sweetness of all his labors, which the eager
covetousness of wretched Misers, will not suffer them to do, who reap no more
benefit by their Riches, than to look upon them, and to say the property
thereof is Mine. So true is that of the Royal Preacher, He that loves Silver,
Eccl. 5.10, 11.
shall not be satisfied with Silver; nor he that loves abundance, with
increase: When Goods increase, they are increased that eat them, and what good
is there to the Owners thereof, saving the beholding them with their Eyes:
Which is a poor benefit indeed, unable to make the Worldling compensation for
his cares of getting, and fears of losing them, a Privilege which is common to
all others, who may every day see more goodly sights, the radiant luster of the
Sun, adorned with Light as with a beautiful Garment, and smiling upon the Earth
with a most pleasant and amiable Countenance, the sparkling Glories of the
heavenly Bodies, in their Constellations, the lovely and fragrant Flowers of
the Field, the Rarities and Treasures of Nature, and all the Pomp and Gallantry
of Princes and Nobles, all which are more pleasing sights to the Beholders. But
mark what Character he gives of all outward things, after that he had taken a
serious Review of all his Wealth and Labor, and found himself disappointed in
them, Eccles. 2.11.
I looked (says he) on all the labors that my hands had wrought, and on the
labor that I had labored to do, and behold all was vanity and vexation of
spirit; a disappointment of all my hopes and desires of satisfaction; This was
my portion of all my labor. Alas, all things here below are of too narrow an
extent, to satisfy the vast and capacious Desires of our Souls, which are
enlarged with enjoying; and therefore the inspired Pen men of the holy
Scripture have advised us, That we labor not to be rich, Prove. 23.4. Mat.
6.19. Colos. 3.2.
nor lay up for our selves Treasures upon Earth, but that we set our affections
upon things above; (...), Grace and Glory, and the Inheritance which is
incorruptible, and undefiled, and fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us;
and not on things on the Earth; the Pleasures, Honors and Profits of this
World, which we are prone to desire inordinately, and to pursue immoderately,
though we are charged to the contrary; Love not the World, 1 John 2.15.
neither the things that are in the World; if any Man love the World, the love
of the Father is not in him: Know ye not that the Friendship of the World is
enmity with God; James 4.4.
whosoever will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God; in open
hostility with him, and unfit to see his Face in Death or Judgment; therefore
our Savior warned his Disciples to take heed and beware of Covetousness, Lake
12.15. (...)
or an inordinate desire of earthly things; a Man's Life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses; he may live as easily and
comfortably without it; Nature is content with little, and Grace with less:
Abundance is not necessary to render our Lives happy; the Poor are as merry and
cheerful, as vigorous and healthy, as well satisfied and contented with a small
pittance, as the Wealthy and Opulent with their Superfluity, which serves only
to administer to Pride and Vanity, Prove. 23.11.
to make them wise in their own conceit, to puff them up with Haughtiness, and
Arrogance, Insolency and Imperiousness of Spirit, and to betray them to sin and
solly: They that will be rich, fall into temptations and a snare, and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, 1 Timothy 6.9,
which drown men in destruction and perdition; which take up their time, and
fill their heads with solicitous Cares and Fears, engross their Affections,
encumber their Lives with toilsome Labors about them, expose them to a great
many Sorrows, which pierce their Souls, and render Death and Judgment exceeding
formidable to them. Therefore since the love of this World is so dangerous a
thing, let us not with Martha be careful and troubled about many things, and
leave Mary's Vnum Necessarium wholly unregarded; but rather spend our Days and
Years in this mortal state, in adorning our Souls with Evangelical Graces and
Virtues, to fit us for Heaven; for if we had the Riches of both the Indies, we
can take nothing away with us, when we depart hence; Job 1.21.
Naked came we out of our Mothers Womb, and naked shall we return: We must
everlastingly part with all that we have when we dye, and leave it, as Solomon
says, to the Man that shall come after us; and who knows whether he shall be
a wise Man or a Fool, Ecoles. 2.18, 19.
yet shall he have rule over all our labor, and gather all that we have heaped
up; but works of Righteousness will accompany us into the other World; and now
is the time for us to be rich in good Works, to grow in Grace and Holiness; To
give all diligence to add to our Faith, Virtue; to Virtue, Knowledge; to
Knowledge, Temperance; to Temperance, Patience; to Patience, Godliness; and to
Godliness, Brotherly Kindness and Charity; for if these things be in us and
abound, and our Minds fit loose to the Affairs of this Life, we shall be ready
and willing to leave them, whenever our Lord shall please to call us hence.

(3.) This Readiness and Preparation for Death and Judgment, does confist in
making our Peace and Reconciliation with God and Men. (1.) With God, which is a
thing of infinite moment; for so long as we continue in enmity with him, and
maintain a Rebellion against his Crown and Dignity; he is engaged for the
Vindication of his own Sovereign Power and Justice, to be our Enemy, and to
execute his severe Judgments upon us; and we have no Security that he will not
do it speedily, without giving us farther time to consider our ways, and throw
down our Arms of Hostility against him: For the Psalmist assures us, Psalm.
7.11, 12, 13,
That God is angry with the wicked every day, (even while his Providence seems
to smile upon them, and they think themselves most secure and confident.) If he
turn not, he will whet his Sword, he has bent his Bow, and made it ready, he
has prepared for him the Instruments of Death.

God is loath, for the Glory of his Patience and Long suffering, forthwith to
proceed against us; For my Names sake, Isa. 48.9.
will I defer mine anger; and for my Praise, will I refrain; He forbears us
because he is slow to anger, he knows our frame (and propension to evil) and
remembers (the Weakness and Mortality of our Nature) that we are but Dust,
unable to bear the weight of his Indignation, and therefore he is pleased to
fore-warn us of our danger, by some signal Tokens thereof; as the whetting of
his Sword, and the bending of his Bow; thereby to awaken in us a serious
Consideration of his anger, and a great care to prevent it, and a very earnest
desire and endeavor to be at peace with him; the which we may obtain by
Repentance and Faith in Christ, and by fervent Prayers and Supplications for
the Remission of our Sins.

[1] By cordial and sincere Repentance; which is (a Divine Remedy) the means
which God has appointed us to use for the obtaining of his Favor; the
Doctrine of Repentance was never taught in the School of Nature, neither could
be learned from the Writings of the grave Heathens, though their wise
Philosophers in their Works have given us some impersect descriptions of it;
But as Tertul. de poenit. has observed, They were as far from understanding
the true Reason of Repentance, a ratione ejus tantum absuerunt quantum a
rationis autore.
as from understanding the God of Reason. They have given us many excellent
Rules for the practice of Moral Virtues, but were not able to instruct us in
the nature of that Peace and Rest which is Eternal; all that they aspired to,
was Peace and Serenity, Tranquillity and Composedness of Mind, which they called
Happiness; but was only a Moral Attainment; and they that lived most Regularly,
according to the Dictates (...)
of Right Reason, and Directions of Nature, found most Ease and Peace in their
own Bosoms. Certainly Socrates and Plato had not such disturbed and distracted
Minds as Cain and Judas; neither had Tully and Cato such black and guilty Souls
as Cethegus and Cataline; neither had Plutarch and Seneca those Gripes and
Twinges those Fears and Horrors which Nero and Caligula felt; they beheld a
Beauty and Comeliness in the face of Virtue; Turpitude and Deformity in Vice
and Wickedness, and discovered that sin was against their Reason and true
Interest. Nature taught them not to sin, a natura sequitur ut meliora
probantes, pejorum poeniteat.
to renounce and forsake Sin; but it never read them Lectures of Repentance:
God himself made known the first Discoveries of it to the World, and published
his gracious intentions to accept of a sincere Repentance, as the Sovereign
Means to reconcile us to Himself: He sent his dear and only Son to publish it
by his Doctrine, and confirm it by his Miracles, and to make way for it by his
Death and Sacrifice. So that if God had not been in serious earnest, to have
Sinners reconciled to him by Repentance; he would never have sent the Son of
his love to have obtained Peace for us by the Blood of his Cross. Tully and
Aristotle were wholly silent in their Writings how so great a Work might be
effected; but the Gospel has discovered the Counsels and Purposes of Grace and
Mercy, agreed upon by all the Persons in the Godhead at the Council Board of
Heaven, (if I may so say) for the Restoring of lost Man by a new and living
way, which Christ has consecrated for us, and opened unto us, that we might
have access to God.

The chief Articles and Conditions whereof, are Repentance and Conversion to
God, and Renovation of Mind, which are indispensibly necessary, to fit us for
the Appearance of Christ, and everlasting Happiness, which is to be obtained by
him; and he therefore began his Prophetical Office with a Sermon upon
Repentance, Mat. 4.17. Repent signifies not only sorrow for Sin, but a change
of Mind, Will and Affections, as may be seen at large in the Parable of the
Prodigal Son, Luke 15.
where it is fully described in all the material constitutive and principal
lines and parts of it, viz. Pensive Thoughtfulness and Consideration, a manly
and serious application of our Minds, to take an impartial Re-view of our
selves, in which God himself does place the first signs of our Recovery, Ezekiel.
18.14. and 28. Serious and deliberate Resolution to amend our ways and doings;
such as we find in the Penitent King of Israel, I thought on my ways, Psalm.
119.59, 69.
and turned my feet to thy Precepts; I made haste and delayed not to keep thy
righteous Judgments. It Is dangerous for us to trifle and delay in so momentous
and weighty a matter; therefore while God waits to be gracious, let us not
abuse his Goodness and Patience, but without delay resolve to mind and
prosecute the things which belong to our Peace, before they be hid from our
Eyes; and to the end that we may appease the just Displeasure of our Heavenly
Father, and be re-instated into his favor; it is requisite that we make an
ingenious Confession of all our former Transgressions, with shame and sorrow of
heart, and great Contrition, accompanied with actual Reformation and Amendment,
and a sincere desire and endeavor to be universally good and holy, to yield an
entire Obedience to all God's Commandments; If these Ingredients do constitute
our Repentance, God is faithful and just, 1. John 1.9.
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: He will
not exact the forfeiture of us, but freely and fully pardon us, and remember
our sins no more. When the wicked man turns away from all his sins, Ezekiel.
18.21.
and keeps my Statutes, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live, he shall not dye; all his transgressions that he has committed,
they shall not be mentioned unto him; in his righteousness that he has done,
he shall live.

We have Gods gracious Promise, Isa. 55 7.
That when any wicked man (whether he be Jew or Gentile) does forsake his ways
and thoughts; and returns unto the Lord, he will have mercy upon him, and
abundantly pardon him: For his Mercies are as the great Mountains, firm and
stable; he will not alter the Word that is gone out of his Mouth. Those that
repent (though their Sins are of a scarlet and a crimson dye, great and many) he
will certainly pardon, and receive into favor. Though it be a very difficult
thing for a Man to retrieve himself, that has been long accustomed to vicious
Habits, Jer. 12.23.
and has debauched his Reason, gratified his Lusts and Passions, debilitated
all the Powers of his Soul, and cauterized his Conscience through a long
continuance in sin; though it be (I say) a hard thing for such a one to cast off
the Yoke of Custom, and to reform himself; yet the thing is Job 14.7, 8, 9.
possible to be effected; nay, it is absolutely necessary: Mat. 18.3.
Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little Children,
ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; John 3.3.
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish; except ye be born again, ye
cannot see the Kingdom of God: All Births are painful, Chap. 16.21. Gal. 4.19.
both the Natural and Supernatural; but nothing is too hard for Omnipotency: He
can cause dry Bones to live; and if we set our selves in earnest to amend our
ways and doings, and to implore the help of his Grace, he will send his holy
Spirit to invigorate and assist us with Divine Aids, and infuse every Grace
into the Soul, which constitutes the Divine Nature: The Conversion of a Sinner
is a work purely (...). from above; 1. Pet. 1.23.
We are born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of that which is incoruptible,
and are sanctified and cleansed by the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5.
and renewing of the H. Ghost, and so made meet for our Lords Appearance.

[2.] By Faith in Christ. This Peace of Reconciliation with God, may be
obtained by a firm and steadfast belief, that our Lord Jesus Christ has
appeased his Fathers Anger, satisfied the Demands of his Justice, slain the
Enmity, established a steady Friendship between God and us; and purchased
eternal Life and Salvation for us. God the Father has promised him in the
Covenant of Redemption, Romans 3.25.
to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood; and it is by the Blood of his
Cross, that he made Peace, as the Apostle affirms, Coloss. 1.20. for without
shedding of Blood there could be no Expiation, or Remission of Sins: Therefore
he became obedient to the accursed Death of the Cross, that by the bloody
Sacrifice of himself, there once offered, Heb. 9.14.
he might perfect for ever them that are sanctified, and do all that was
necessary for their acceptance with God, and the forgiveness of their Sins.
But although he has done this for us, yet it is Faith on our part, which must
lay hold of the Value and Merit of his Sacrifice and Suffering, and apply the
Benefit which he has purchased for us. God, is the principal Efficient;
Christ, the Meritorius; and Faith, the Instrumental Cause of our Justification;
the Accomplishment whereof, is by Faith, and not by Works; By the Deeds of the
Law there shall be no Flesh justified, Romans 3.20
and acquitted from Condemnation in the Court of Heaven, and accounted
righteous, in the sight of God? for by the Law comes the knowledge of sin, and
a more exact and perfect Discovery of the nature and turpitude thereof, than
the Light of Nature could afford: But there is another way of becoming
righteous, which is of God's Ordination and Appointment, and which alone he
will accept; by Faith: Being justified by Faith, Romans 5.1.
we have Peace with God, with whom before we were at Enmity, as the Apostle
testifies: But now we are reconciled, Coloss. 1.21. Ephesians. 2.14. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19
by the Blood of his Gross, and the Merit of his Death; for he is our Peace,
and has reconciled us unto himself; by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the
Ministry of Reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the
World to himself; and by Faith in him, we become righteous in the sight of God;
Tit. 3.5. Jam. 2.22. Acts 15.9.
not by any works of righteousness which we have done, but by a lively
operative Faith, which is made perfect by Works, and purifieth the Heart, and
brings forth the good Fruits of Sanctification and new Obedience in Life and
Conversation.

This is that Divine Grace which renders God propitious to us, and our Persons
and Religious Services acceptable to him. Without which it is impossible to
please him. Heb. 11.6.
This is the Shield wherewith we shall be able to quench the fiery Darts of the
Wicked, Mat. 13.19.
i. e. the Devil, who is denominated (...), The Wicked One, because it is a
Name that fitly denotes his spiteful malicious nature, his desire to vex and
annoy us with his violent Temptations, wherewith he and his wicked Instruments
fiercely assault us; this is that part of our spiritual Armor by which we
become victorious, over the Fears and Terrors, the Hopes and Joys, the
Temptations and Desires of this World; which are the great Obstructions and
Hindrances of our Obedience: 1 John 5.4.
This is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith.

By the assistance of this heavenly Virtue, we are enabled to live above the
World, and despise the Pomps and Vanities of it; because it represents unto our
Minds Heb. 11.1.
invisible Glories and Felicities, all the Riches and Treasures of Heaven, and
the future Recompenses of Reward: For this cause we faint not, though our outward
man decay, 2 Cor. 4.16.18
our inward is renewed day by day; whilst we look not at the things that are
seen, but at the things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered
into the heart of Man to conceive: For the things which are seen, are temporal;
but the things which are not seen, are eternal.

This is that Fruit of the Spirit which gives us Union and Communion with
Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. John 3.15, 16.
and entitles us to Eternal Bliss, to live for ever with the Lord. Whosoever
believes on him, and commits the Care of his Soul unto him, relying on him
alone for Salvation; has such an Interest in him, that he is not afraid of
being condemned by the severe Judge at his Appearing: He that over-cometh, Rev.
21.7, 8.
shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, (to love and glorify him)
and he shall be my Son, to inherit all the Joys and Happiness of Heaven, and to
live with me for ever; but the fearful and the unbelieving shall have their
parts with the Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers and
all Liars, in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the
second Death.

[3.] By Prayer; this is the most effectual means which God has consecrated
for receiving the highest Blessings, for the obtaining of Peace with him, and
to complete our Reconciliation. Haec vis Deo grata est. Tert.
Salvation is not to be obtained without great vehemence in Devotion: This
violence which we offer to God in fervent Prayer is very grateful to him. Jam.
5.16.
The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man is very prevalent with God for
obtaining of what is desired. When God had determined to destroy Sodom and
Gomorrah, and the neighboring Cities, by raining down Fire and Brimstone from
Heaven upon them to consume them for their filthy lusts; Abraham by his
powerful intercessions had most certainly averted Gods indignation from those
wicked people, if there could have been found but Ten Righteous Persons among
them. Hereby Jacob in his conflict with the Angel of the Covenant, wrestled so
vigorously that he obtained the Victory, and had the name Israel given him:
Genesis 32.28.
For says the Text, as a Prince thou have power with God and with Men and have
prevailed. And Elias, an eminent Prophet, prayed earnestly that it might not
rain, and it rained not on the Land of the Ten Tribes of Israel for the space
of Three Years and six Months: and he prayed again, and the Heavens gave Rain,
and the Earth brought forth her Fruit.

Temporal Blessings, which appertain to this mortal life, God has promised
upon certain conditions, restrictions, and limitations, i. e. that if he in his
infinite Wisdom see them good and necessary, convenient and advantageous for
us. Spiritual Blessings which tend to make us happy in the future World he has
promised absolutely: and in particular, Peace of reconciliation with God, and
eternal Salvation, he is ready to grant to every humble supplicant; Psalm. 69.32.
their Soul shall live that seek the Lord. They shall have inward life, joy,
and consolation here, and everlasting Life and Glory hereafter; Romans 10.13.
for whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved: but for these
Belssings he will be sought unto both publicly and privately.

(1) Publicly, in the Church, which is the House of Prayer wherein the
Primitive Christians met together in multitudes, like a great Army to besiege
Heaven, and take it by storm; Coimus in Coetum and Congregationem ut ad Deum
qu^si manufacta praecationibus ambiamus. Tert.
for the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
storm; i. e. by ardent Prayers and fervent Devotions: they did send up their
joint Petitions with such holy fervors, that St. Jerome faith their Amen was
like a clap of Thunder. Certainly their Zeal is a shame and reproach to our
coldness and indifferency to public Prayers, which has been the general
practice of Men of all Ages and Religion^, who have thought it their duty to
beleaguer the Universal Parent and Sovereign of the World; and to pay him their
thankful acknowledgments. And therefore such as deny or neglect so faced and
solemn a part of Divine Worship, and so excellent a means of Holiness, may
justly be suspected of Atheism and Impiety.

Be entreated therefore (dear Christians) as you value the Church, of which you
are Members; as you desire the favor of God and the light of his countenance
which is better than life; to attend frequently the public Assemblies, and to
perform your parts in the Churches Prayers with devotion and fervency; Psalm.
87.2.
for God loves the gates of Sion, more than all the private habitations and
dwellings of Jacob: it is the place which he has peculiarly chosen to exhibit
himself in, to all that call upon him there for the remission of their sins:
48.3.
God is known in her palaces for a sure refuge: there is the most proper and
decent place for us Christians publicly to meet in, to beseech the Father of
Mercies to be at peace with us. But lest we should play the Pharisee, and court
the observation of the World with a formal and pompous show of Religion, our
dearest Lord has directed us also,

(2) To the more frequent exercise of Religious Adoration in private with our
Families; and yet more secretly in our Closet retirements; where we may with
greater freedom acknowledge our Guilts, with all the aggravations and
circumstances of our Sins to our gracious Father, in order to obtain pardon and
reconciliation with him: to lay open our particular wants and necessities, and
pour out the desires of our Souls in all the threnes and sad accents of godly
sorrow; in all the penitential tears of Contrition, and meltings of Repentance;
in all the endearments of Love, and ardors of Affection. And to avoid
Hypocrisy, Mat. 6.6.
our Savior has directed us, when we pray to enter into our Closets, and
having shut the door, to pray to our Father which is in secret, and he will
reward us openly. There we may think that we hear him kindly saying unto us, as
the Bridegroom does to his Spouse the Church: Cant. 2.14.
O my Dove thou art in the clefts of the Rocks, in the secret places of the
stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely. Absent not your selves (dear Souls) from
my presence by reason of your deformities, be not ashamed to appear before me,
but come with broken and contrite hearts, with an humble boldness and
confidence into my presence, and make your supplications unto me; for your
prayers and praises, your persons and Services are acceptable to me, and
amiable in my sight. For I the Lord am gracious and merciful, long-suffering
and abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin;
of all kinds and degrees whatsoever, the sin against the H. Ghost excepted. So
great is Gods mercy and clemency to relenting sinners, that he pardons not only
single acts, but confirmed habits of sin; and those also of several kinds and
natures. So that if we would seriously reflect upon the transcendent excellency
of his kind and merciful nature, and the tender love he bears to the Souls
which he has created, this will quicken us to make our humble supplications to
him, to be at peace with us; especially since he himself has declared, Esaias
45.16.
that none shall seek his face in vain: And that both our Savior, and his
Apostles, have encouraged us with assured promises, Mat. 7.7.
that whatsoever we ask the Father in his name, he will give it us. Ask and it
shall be given, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.
Jam. 4.8. 1 John 5.14.
Draw night to God (in humble adoration) and he will draw nigh to you, in the
manifestation of his grace and favor. This is the confidence that we have in
him, that if we ask any thing according to his will he hears us: for he is
more ready to give than we to ask. The Lord is very pitiful; (...). Jam. 5.11.
Psalm. 86.5.
full of bowels and of tender mercies. He is good, and ready to for give, and
plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon him. Having therefore these
promises we are encouraged to pray incessantly; Phil. 4.6; 7.
and in every thing by Prayer and Supplication to make known our requests unto
God: for by so doing we may obtain peace of reconciliation with him; even that
peace which passes all understanding, and which shall keep our hearts and
minds through Jesus Christ, and preserve in our bosoms such a calmness and
tranquillity of Soul, and peace of Conscience, and fervor of affection, as will
make us fit to die, and ready to receive with joy and gladness the Son of Man,
when he comes to judge the world in righteousness.

But if we refuse to seek the Lord while he may be sound, and let slip the
present season of Grace, the acceptable time, and the day of Salvation, in
which he will be entreated, and will not mind the things which belong to our
peace in the day of our visitation: If we pass our allotted time, and the
terrors of Death surprise us, he may then give us hearts that cannot repent and
seek him; and Conscience will then upbraid us with our neglects, and fill us
with bitter anguish, when we shall call to mind how many holy opportunities of
public and private Devotion we have neglected; how many hours we have
prodigally spent upon vain emploiments, sinful pleasures, and carnal delights;
which God intended we should have bestowed in prayer and communion with him.
Let us therefore often think of the day of Death, when our Body shall return to
the Earth from whence it originally came, and the Spirit to God who gave it.
Let us awaken our selves to a lively sense of our approaching change, that we
may see the necessity of preparing for it, and lay up betimes a stock of Grace
against that day comes. Let us not put off Devotion as a work proper for a
Deathbed; for if we die not suddenly, God only knows, whether we may die
sensibly: For our Understandings may be disturbed; our Reason fail us; an
Apoplexy may seize and stupifie and benum our Spirits in such a degree, that we
may only perceive with our animal Faculties. Some painful or acute Disease may
sensibly afflict us, and cause a great disorder in our Souls, and distract our
Thoughts from minding our spiritual Estate. Our hearts which have been all
along subtle and dilatory, may deceive us at the last hour. God may substract
his aids and assistance from us, and prove inexorable, or deliver us over to a
reprobate mind: So that our safest and wisest course is, to lay up a good
treasure for our selves while there is time in our hands, against our final
change comes. A life of strict Virtue and Devotion will not then fail us: but
we may look back upon it with comfort and satisfaction. It must needs save us
many sorrowful sighs and tears, and pensive thoughts of heart. But our
Conscience will never upbraid us with any bitter reflections for having done
our duty; neither will it be any regret or trouble to us to remember that we
did serve our Creator in the days of our youth; but now we shall certainly reap
the benefits of an early piety. Let us therefore now acquaint our selves with
God that we may be at peace, and be ready to receive him at his coming. Having
thus made our peace with God, it is incumbent upon us in the second place

(2) To make our peace with Men, to reconcile our selves to our Brethren whom
we have wronged and injured in any kind whatsoever: this is necessary to be
done in order to the fitting every one of us for Death and Judgment; for when
we come to die, we would willingly with good old Simeon depart in peace without
any sparks of anger or malice; wrath or displeasure abiding upon our minds
unexstinguished; or any unjust gain to cleave or stick close to us: for in the
day of Judgment God will require a strict account of our obedience to his
Commandments, and there is not any duty of Christianity, which he has
inculcated with greater plainness, then this of peace one with another: for it
is one of the greatest earthly blessings, and does most lively represent the
peaceful state of Heaven; where the blessed Angels and Souls of just men made
perfect, live in perfect peace and amity. Now that we may be here in a great
measure fitted for that blessed Society; Ephesians. 4.31.
we are commanded to put off all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor,
with all malice; and to put on kindness, Colos. 3.8, 12, 14.
humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering, and clemency toward each other,
and above all to put on charity; i. e. mutual christian love, Joh. 13.35.
which is the proper livery of Christ's Disciples. By this shall all men know
that ye are my Disciples if ye love one another.

We are likewise prohibited all seuds and quarrels, and are charged not to
revenge our selves, but to give place unto wrath: Romans 12.19. 17. 1 These.
4.11.5.13. 1 Pet. 3.11. Heb. 12.4.
not to retaliate injuries, to recompense no man evil for evil; but to study to
be quiet, to be at peace among our selves, to seek peace and ensue it; yea, to
be at some pains to obtain it, when it seems to fly from us; to follow peace
with all men. Follow, in the original, is an emphatical word, which imports an
eager, unwearied pursuit of peace and comfortable association with all persons,
in all things good and lawful; as far as it is possible for us: Romans 14.19.
And in order to the obtaining thereof, to follow the things which make for
peace: to endeavor all things that will promote it, by performing all kind
Offices, and doing good to all men; showing them all due respects, and affable
deportment, courteous salutations, easy access, cherful countenance, soft
words, and friendly discourse; heartily interpreting their words and actions,
mildly reproving their faults, patiently bearing their hasty passions, burying
their affronts and injuries in oblivion; the which in the opinion of Solomon,
the wisest of men, is an effectual means to obtain peace, and preserve an
inviolable amity and friendship among men; Pr^. 17.9.
he that covers a transgression seeks love. These, and such like things,
are the things which make for peace, which we must pursue with zeal and vigor;
Romans 12.18.
that if it be possible we may live peaceably with all men; that nothing may be
wanting in our endeavors to obtain the friendship and good will of men. And to
fit us for the presence and society of the Prince of Peace, it is necessary
that we make restitution to all persons whom we have wronged by fraud or
circumvention; injustice or violence; oppression or deceit. That we submit our
selves to all persons whom we have justly offended, acknowledge our faults,
crave their pardon, and readily forgive those that have offended us; unless we
do so, we are not fit to die and appear in judgment.

[i] It is indispensibly necessary that we make restitution as far as we are
able to all persons whom we have wronged by oppression and violence, deceit or
fraud. Now by Restitution I mean with Theologists, an act of commutative
justice, whereby the injury done is repaired, and the person wronged is put in
possession of his goods, injuriously taken away from him; or whereby due
compensation is made, or equivalent satisfaction given to him, from whom any
thing is unjustly taken or detained, or who is unjustly damnified by another.
Bp. Andrews on the 8th Commandment.

There are indeed some cases wherein it is impossible to perform this incumbent
duty: For corrupted honor cannot be repaired; nor abused chastity be restored.
He that in proud wrath, anger and malice, has taken away the precious life of
another, cannot possibly restore it to him again, but must heartily beg pardon
of God (whose sole Prerogative it is to dispose of every man's life at his
pleasure) as David did in the case of Vriah, whom he had contrived and caused
to be slain by the Sword of the Children of Ammon: Psalm. 51.14.
Deliver me from Bloodguiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation, and my
tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. And forasmuch as no reparation
can be made to the deceased Persons Mournful Friends, the Offender must humbly
beg Pardon of them also; and make due Satisfaction to the Creditors, and
Children, and Relations of the Person slain, so far as it appears that they are
damnified in their Temporal Estate, by the immature Death of their dear Friend,
who was cut off out of the Land of the Living, without time to repent, and
opportunity of making his peace with God.

In like manner he that has taken away the good Name of another by Slander or
Detraction; and has blasted his Reputation by opprobrious Defamations, cannot
prevent the Mischief that may ensue thereupon; all that he can do is to confess
his fault to the Person injured, and endeavor to stop the spreading of the
infamous Report, by timely unsaying what he has spoken in passion or
prejudice, against the Rule of Charity, which obliges to give every man his
due, Honor to whom Honor. In these and such like Cases, Restitution has no
place.

But in Oppression, Bribery, and unjust detention of what is another, to which
we have no legal right or title, where the practice of this Virtue is
absolutely necessary; St. Augustine sets down this for a Canon, Non remittitur
peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum, the Sin of unjust getting is never
pardoned, unless restitution be made of what is unjustly gotten, if the
Offender be able. Therefore it is necessary to do it, in point of Duty and
Obedience to God who has commanded it, and as a means of Pardon and Salvation;
our Repentance cannot be sincere without it, as the Prophet Ezekiel assures us:
Ezekiel. 18.21. and 33.15.
If the wicked man turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep my
statutes, and do that which is lawful and right; if he restore the pledge, give
again that he has robbed, walk in the Statutes of Life, without committing
iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall not dye: If he do not this, the
Commination threatened, shall not be reversed, He shall surely dye. Evident then
it is, that a well grounded peace cannot be obtained with the person injured
without restitution; nor with Almighty God, whose Laws (which oblige men to
love, fidelity and justice) are transgressed in every sin we commit against our
Neighbor; and particularly in the case before us; Levit. 6.2, 3, 4, 5.
If a Soul sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord, and lie unto his
neighbor in that which was delivered him to keep, (by denying a thing
deposited in trust with him) or in fellowship, (or commerce in trading) or in
any thing taken away by violence, Isai. 61.8.
force, and rapine, (God hating Robbery) or has deceived his Neighbor
secretly, (of which kind of injustice Zacheus the Publican cleared himself, by
offering a Four fold Restitution of what he had gotten of any man wrongfully:)
Luke 19.
or have found that which was lost, and swears falsely; then it shall be
because he has sinned, and is guilty, he shall restore that which he took
violently away, or the thing which he has deceitfully gotten; De male
quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres.
or that which was delivered him to keep; or the lost thing which is found; he
shall restore it in the principal, (for Restitution to Man must accompany
Repentance toward God,) and shall add the Fifth part more thereto, and give it
unto him to whom it appertains, and he shall bring his Trespass Offering unto
the Lord, and the Priest shall make an atonement for him before the Lord; and
it shall be forgiven him in any thing that he has done in trespassing therein.

Which Law was again inculcated with additional directions to whom compensation
is to be made, either in kind or in equivalency, in Numbers 5.6, 7, 8. and
largely commented upon by the learned Ainsworth out of Maimonides his Treaty of
Robbery.

Now if God did so strictly insist upon the performance of this duty from the
Jews, and encouraged them to it with promises of pardon and remission; of
temporal prosperity and eternal glory; and expressly told them that he would not
accept their Oblations, if they did not confess their sins with grief and
remorse; and make full satisfaction according as the Law directed: then we may
rationally infer, that he will not accept of our Repentance without the like
practice: if we would be at peace with him, we must offer unto him the best and
most acceptable sacrifice; Psalm. 51.18.19.
which is a broken spirit and a contrite heart. Therefore our Savior (who came
not to destroy the Law and the Prophets, nor to abrogate the observation of
them in his Kingdom, but to fulfill, supply and perfect them) has made this an
Evangelical Duty. Mat. 5.23, 24.
If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother
has ought against thee, (any matter of complaint, for any wrong or injury done
by thee to him) leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way; first be
reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

St. Paul charge us, 1 These. 4.6. Romans 13.7, 8.
not to go beyond or defraud our Brother in any matter, and to owe no man any
thing but love; for he that loves another has fulfilled the Law; this is the
Golden Rule, to do as we would be done by: Wherefore it concerns us to have
special regard to the discharge of this duty of Restitution as far as we are
able; and if we want ability to do it, as the sacred Word and Law of God
commands, we are to manifest our Repentance and remorse of Conscience; to
testify the sincerity thereof with compunction and tears; and solemnly promise
that if ever God make us able we will actually do it. And in this case we need
not doubt but that God will accept of a willing mind; 2 Cor. 8.12.
and every merciful and good man whom we have injured, will pity, pardon and
forgive us, and restore us to his favor.

[2.] For the composing of our mind in order to our waiting for the coming of
our Lord by Death or Judgment, it is also necessary, that as we submit our
selves with all humility to all persons whom we have justly offended,
acknowledge our faults and crave their pardon, so also cordially forgive those
that have wronged us.

Though we find it a work of great difficulty to bring down our big Spirits, and
to bow our stubborn Wills to make an humble and ingenuous acknowledgment of our
faults, and ask the forgiveness of those whom we have justly displeased;
because as Salvian says, Totum durum est, quicquid imperatur invitis.
every thing is hard to an unwilling mind; yet it is absolutely necessary, for
without emptying our hearts of all rancour, malice, ill will and desire of
revenge, we cannot obtain peace with men; nor remission of our sins, and
reconciliation with God: He has declared that no religious duty which we
perform will be pleasing and acceptable to him so long as we are not in charity
with our Neighbor, as appears from the forequoted Scripture; If thou bring thy
gift to the Altar, Mat. 5.23.
etc. go first and be reconciled to thy Brother, (...), do thy endeavor at
least to appease his anger and make him friends with thee, then come and offer
thy gift. If he receive thy submission thou have gained thy Brother; if he
continue the Enmity the fault is his, and he shall answer it to Almighty God,
whose Law he violates in denying his pardon to the Penitent. If thy Brother
trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him; if he
trespass against thee seven times a day, and seven times (i. e. as often in a
day) turn again unto thee, Luke 17.3.4.
saying, I repent; thou shall forgive him; and lay aside all thoughts and
desire of Revenge: This is a Doctrine directly contrary to the principle of the
Stoics, (a Sect of Philosophers who pretended to be most sublime and refined
in their Morals) which was this, That a wise man ought not to pardon another
man's faults, nor to commiserate his sufferings, for this is to invite injuries
by a stupid patience. Magni animi injurias despicere. Lib. 2. de Ira.
But the wise Seneca was of another mind, who says, That it is the character
of a great Soul to despise injuries, and that nothing is more glorious then to
change enmity into amity.

The World may think a man stupid and without sense of honor, that passes by
wrongs. But Cato a wise Heathen is commended by Seneca for not resenting an
affront or blow given him by a rude fellow in the Bath, to whom he said, when
he came to make satisfaction, Chap. 32.
I remember not that thou did strike me; as thinking it a wiser part not to
acknowledge the wrong then to repay it. And a wiser man than he, affirms that
the slower a person is to anger, and the readier to forgive, the more
understanding he has, and is more worthy of praise and honor. Prove. 19.11.
The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass over
a transgression.

When the Prince of Peace came into the world to set up his his Kingdom and
introduce his holy Religion, he enacted Laws of Peace and Love; of gentleness
and forbearance, of forgiveness, as most agreeable to his own nature and the
design of his coming. He charged his Disciples to love their Enemies, 1 Pet.
3.9. 1 Thessalonians. 5.15.
to be kindly affectionate one toward another; to render to no Man evil for
evil, but ever to follow that which is good. To bear no grudge or ill will, to
harbor no thoughts of Revenge, for that is God's Prerogative. Dearly beloved,
avenge not your selves, Romans 12.19.
but rather give place unto Wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will
repay says the Lord. It so properly belongs to Him, that none but His
Ministers who are commissioned by Him, may execute it. He severely threatened
the Edomites and Philistines for their revengeful usage of the Jews, Ezekiel.
25.14. 15, 16, 17.
I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my People Israel, and they
shall do in Edom according to my anger and fury, and they shall know my
Vengeance, says the Lord; behold I will stretch out my hand upon them, and
will execute great Vengeance upon them in furious Rebukes; (or fierceness of
wrath and without pity,) and they shall know that I am the Lord, when I lay my
Vengeance upon them.

But though God is sometimes forced to vindicate his own Honor in Acts of
vindictive Justice: yet in regard of his ordinary proceedings with Men; he is
frequently styled the God of Love and Peace, of Patience and Consolation, the
Father of pities, rich in Mercy, full of bowels; ready to turn from his anger,
easy to be entreated, and willing to forgive those who are guilty of the
greatest trespasses against him: This is his glory and delight, because he is
merciful and gracious, Exodus 34.6, 7.
long suffering and abundant in goodness, keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. Now this kind and indulgent
disposition of Mind, which is the perfection of the divine Nature, John 4.11.
Ephesians. 4.31, 32.
the holy Apostles recommend to our imitation and practice; beloved if God so
loved us we ought also to love one another, let all bitterness, and wrath, and
anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away with all Malice; and be kind
one to another, be tender hearted forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake, has forgiven you:

It is mighty kindness in our heavenly Father to offer us easy terms of
Peace, and to beseech us to be reconciled to God; 2 Cor. 5.20.
the consideration hereof should melt us into love and tenderness toward our
offended Brother, for the wrongs and injuries which he has forgiven us are
infinitely greater, and of a more provoking nature, then those which he
requires us to forgive our Brethren; our offenses against him are like Beams;
theirs against us, but as Motes; ours for Number and Magnitude are Ten thousand
Talents; theirs for paucity and meanness, but a hundred pence, and since he
has so frankly forgiven us, Reason and Ingenuity should engage us to be very
easy to forgive those that have offended us freely and fully, unfeignedly and
cordially from our very Hearts.

This the great King in the Parable insisteth much upon to his ungrateful
Servant: Mat. 18.22.
I forgave thee all that Debt thou owedst me, because thou desiredst me;
should not thou also have had compassion on thy Fellow Servant, even as I
had pity on thee?

Our Savior gave us his admirable Pattern of Charity and Forgiveness, he
showed greater love to us, whilst we were professed Enemies to him; then ever
any of us have done to our Neighbor: and when he was upon the Cross in the
height of his bitter Passion, in the agony of Death: he Prayed for his mortal
and most malicious Enemies; and earnestly interceded with his Father for his
Crucifiers: Luke 23.34.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Now so worthy a Precedent
should Rouse our industry and influence our Practice; and we are the greatest
Monsters of ingratitude in the World, if we are not provoked by an Example so
illustrious in it self, and so advantageous to us, to go and do likewise.

The benefits which accrue unto us thereby are very considerable; the
inconveniences which attend the neglect of so doing are very dangerous and
hurtful.

(1) The benefits which we gain by forgiving injuries are very considerable,
such are freedom from all those unreasonable Passions of envy, hatred, malice
and desire of Revenge, which are continually fretting and vexatious to our
Spirits, and eat out the peace and comfort of our Lives, whenever we do
cordially forgive a Trespass, we find a great Calm on a sudden in our Bosoms;
our Souls are at ease, and our Thoughts are no longer disturbed with meditating
of Revenge; the offense is to us, as if it had never been committed: Envyings,
Strife and Contentions cease, together with the sources of them; anger, malice,
pride, emulation; in the room whereof springs up charity, kindness, gentleness,
meekness, humility, long sufferings, patience, and other God like Virtues,
which are the Riches and Beauty; the Glory and Ornament of a Christian; and
render him lovely and amiable in the Eyes of his Enemies; and Venerable in the
esteem of all good Men; and all his Duties, and Services pleasing and
acceptable to God, and greatly contribute to the obtaining remission of his
sins with God, as our Savior himself certifies us; Mat. 6.14.
If ye forgive Men their Trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you; not that our forgiving our Brethren without the concurrence of other
divine Graces and holy Duties, is alone sufficient to entitle us to the
remission of our Sins; but to show us that without this forgiving of our
Brethren, Almighty God will not forgive us; as also to represent the excellency
and necessity of this Duty, which is very grateful to him, and of great Power
in order to the commending us to his Grace, and favorable acceptance, and a
principal part of that Obedience which we owe to him, Psalm. 32.1, 2.
and which he will reward with eternal Blessedness: Blessed is he whose
Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is covered, blessed is the Man unto whom
the Lord imputes not Iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is no guile.

(2) The inconveniences which do attend the neglect of this Duty are very
dangerous and hurtful, the implacable and irreconcilable Person increases his
own sorrows; vexes and cruciateth his own Soul, makes his anguish more sharp
and piercing: To use the words of a great and good Man; Arch Bp. Tillotson's
Sermon on Mat 5.44.
The very design of Revenge is troublesome, and puts the Spirits into an
unnatural fermentation and tumult; the Man that meditates it, is always
restless, his very Soul is stung, swells and boiles, is in pain and anguish,
has no ease, no enjoyment of it self so long as this passion reigns: It
entails enmity and mischief upon him that is guilty of it, from his
Adversaries; who will not fail to add weight unto his shoulders, and multiply
fresh injuries and affronts upon him, which will gall his very Soul, and make
his Life painful and uneasy to him, and which is most of all afflictive and
deplorable, he puts a bar to the remission of his own sins. If ye forgive not
Men their Trespasses, Mat. 6.15.
neither will your Father forgive your Trespasses, one Man bears hatred to
another, and does he seek pardon of the Lord? Ecclus. 28.3, 4.
he shows no mercy to a Man which is like himself: and does he ask forgiveness
of the Lord? God will surely keep his sins in remembrance, Mat. 7.2.
and repay him in his own kind and measure, he that is pitiful and merciful to
his offending Brother, shall find mercy from God; he that will not forgive,
shall not be forgiven; but shall be judged with impartial justice according to
the severity of the Law, without the least mixture of Mercy; he shall have
Judgment without mercy, J^m. 2.13.
that has showed no mercy. God will deal with him according to the demerit of
his sins, and appoint him his portion with the reprobate Angels, whose example
he imitated in implacable malice and revenge, this will be the dreadful
sentence of malediction; Mat. 25.41.
depart from me thou cursed Sinner into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil
and his Angels: miserable companions for distressed Souls, but their
condemnation is just and agreeable to their own requests, for as often as they
said the Lords Prayer, they in effect prayed for their own Damnation; and
besought God to forgive them their Debts, as they forgave their Debtors, i. e.
that he would not forgive them, because they will not forgive their offending
Brethren.

Upon the whole then it does appear, that as abiding anger, malice, and
uncharitableness, renders us unfit to die and to appear in Judgment; so
forgiveness and mercy, dispose and prepare us for the coming of our Lord; let
us therefore take the Wise-Mans advice; Ecclus 28.6, 7.
Remember our End and let enmity cease; remember Corruption and Death, and
abide in the Commandments, and bear no malice to our Neighbor: though our Blood
flows now warmly in our veins, and our spirits are brisk, and we enjoy a
perfect state of Health, and therefore delay and put off many things that are
necessary to fit us for our final change; yet it will not be long but we must
put off this tabernacle and put on corruption: when Death approaches us, we
shall then with Balaam desire to die the death of the Righteous, and that our
latter End may be like his, peaceable and happy; that we may see the Felicity
of Gods chosen, and the glory of his Saints in Heaven; the which we shall never
attain unto, unless we quit our selves of all uncharitableness, and root out
the malignant distemper of mind, and all those bad dispositions, those keen and
tumultuous passions which hitherto have rufled us, and disturbed the
tranquillity and repose of our Souls; therefore the great Men of the World (who
have been prone to remember affronts and injuries with the highest resentments)
when they come to Die, look upon Forgiveness and Charity as necessary
preparations for their change; do give their general Amnesty to all that have
offended them, either out of Fear or Obedience to him who is the fountain of
Love and Goodness; who passes by innumerable indignities, and pours down
showers of bounty and mercy upon them that provoke him to wrath and indignation
against them every day.

A chief part of our readiness and preparation to meet our Lord, consists in
doing all the good we can while we live with unwearied diligence and
expedition; For there is no work, Eccles. 9.10.
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave: Now is the season for us
to lay up for our selves Treasures in Heaven; for if once Death put a period to
our Lives, the time of our preparation for Eternity is at an end: our Souls
will be for ever what they are when they leave the Body; so that it ought to be
our chiefest care to improve the present seasons of Grace; and to secure to our
selves a right and title to that exceeding great and eternal weight of Glory,
which is reserved in Heaven, for all those that are rich in works of Piety,
Justice, and Charity.

This is one main end of our being sent into the World, to do good to all Men
in general, because they are partakers of the same common nature with us;
allied to us by cognation of Blood; sprout from the same common stock, are like
us in the contexture and frame of our Bodies; and inspired with immortal Souls,
which are endowed with reason and understanding as well as ours, they lively
represent us in all the natural Characters and Features of Body and Soul, and
are discriminated from us only in some small circumstantial matters; they are
liable to the same Fortunes and distinguishing Titles of Honor and Dignity,
purchased with the same precious Blood, comprehended in the same Covenant of
Life and Peace, partakers of the same common Salvation, and Heirs of the same
Promises and Heavenly Inheritance. In particular, we are to do good to the
Household of Faith, i. e. to the Catholic Church of Christ extended from one
end of the Earth to the other, which he has redeemed with his Blood;
beseeching Almighty God to inspire her with a Spirit of Truth, Unity and
Concord, to preserve her from all false Doctrines, Heresy, and Schism. More
especially yet shall we pray (after the Examples of those Holy Men Jeremiah and
Daniel,) for Sion the City of our Solemnities, for the Church of which we are
Members; that peace may be within her walls, Ps. 122.6.
and prosperity within her palaces: That God, by whose name we are called would
not leave us, but be a wall of fire round about us; an impregnable and
invincible defense in this time of our necessity, by his Power and Providence;
and the Glory in the midst of us; by his gracious Presence and Holy Ordinances
in their power and purity; in the glorious appearance of Holiness, Peace, and
Blessedness: That he would strengthen the Bars of Sions Gates, and bless all
her Children within her.

That he would maintain his truth, and preserve the beauty of our Religious
Government, and abate our heats and animosities, that we may not by our peevish
differencies and unnecessary divisions open a gap for the common Enemy to
invade us; but may agree in this great and good work, to defend and promote the
honor and interest of our Reformed Religion, against those that are deeply
engaged to destroy it; and pray earnestly that all who profess it may live in
Unity and Godly Love one with another; and wherein we differ, to do it with
more moderation, peace and charity: this is to do good to the public. And in
this time of difficulty, we that are conjoined together in the same sacred and
secular interest, ought to unite in mutual intercessions: to lift holy hands in
prayer, and to cry mightily unto God, Is. 62.6, 7.
who would have his People not to hold their peace for Jerusalem 's sake, nor
give him rest till he has made her a praise in the earth; this the Apostle
advises and directs us to do; Gal. 6.10.
as we have opportunity let us do good unto all men, especially unto them who
are of the household of faith.

We are to be as serviceable as we can to the Church and to the State, to every
particular man that is a proper object of beneficence; but especially to the
poor Members of Christ, whom we are to prefer above others; for the good we do
unto them our Lord will accept as done unto himself: Mark 9.41.
Whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones a cup of cold water
only, in the name of a Disciple, he shall in no wise lose his reward. Though they
are little in the esteem of the World, and mean in their own Eyes, Genesis 32.10.
as Abraham and Jacob were, dust and ashes, less than the least of Gods
mercies, yet they are very dear to Christ, more precious than fine Gold, Job
23.10. His Jewels, Mal. 3.17. made up of the precious graces of the Spirit, all
glorious within, being beautified with divine virtues; Faith, Ps. 16.3.
Love, Meekness, Humility, etc. The excellent ones; the delight and joy of his
heart, whom he values as his chiefest treasure, and charge his Angels to
minister unto, and take care of, and therefore they should be the objects of
our tenderest regard; for he will reward us. Heb. 6.10.
He is not unrighteous to forget our work, and labor of love, which we have
showed toward his name; in that we ministered to the Saints and do minister. To
this end and purpose God has entrusted us with several advantages and gifts of
Nature and Fortune, with more or less of Riches, Power, Wisdom, Strength,
Authority, Reputation, and Esteem with great Men, Interest in the World, Skill
in Arts and Sciences, etc. that we may employ them all for the use and benefit
of others: And we live in effect to no purpose if we do not exercise our
Talents this way, and become very serviceable ad beneficial to mankind.

God has laid the practice of doing good so near the heart of Piety he has
enforced it with so many affectionate and persuasive Arguments and gracious
Promises, and terrible Threatenings, that we may safely conclude from thence,
that a principal part of our preparation for Heaven lies in doing good to the
Souls and Bodies of Men; instructing their Ignorance, removing their
Prejudices, satisfying their Doubts, relieving their Fears, supplying their
Wants and Necessities; feeding the Hungry, clothing the Naked, being
hospitable to Strangers, and fruitful in all good works. This was our blessed
Saviors constant Employment, his meat and his drink, and his daily business;
He went about, doing good; Acts 10.38.
He laid hold on all opportunities, and diligently sought out distressed
Objects to exercise his large charity upon. He has made it an essential part
of his Religion, and has given us many Precepts, Mat. 6.20. Luke 12.33. Chap.
6.30.
quickening us to the doing of much good. Lay up for your selves treasures in
Heaven; give Alms; provide your selves Bags which wax not old; a treasure in
the Heavens that fades not. Give to every man that asks of thee. Chapter 16.9.
Make to your selves frieeds of the Mammon of unrighteousness. And by his
Apostles he has commanded us to distribute to the necessity of the Saints,
Cor. 9.6, 7, 8.
to do it. cheerfully and bountifully; because God more regards the affection
of the Giver, then the quantity of the Gift; and in the next Life he will
proportionate his rewards according to the good Works, which we do in this
Life; therefore the Apostle earnestly presses us,; Col. 3.12. Ephesians. 4.32.
To abound in every good Work, to show mercy with cheerfulness, to put on
Bowels of mercy, to be kind and tender hearted one toward another, 1 Timothy 6, 7.
to be rich in good Works: rich in Faith, in Knowledge, in Works of Liberality,
Mercy and Charity; these are Solomon's durable Riches which will follow us when
we die, into the Eternal World; wealth will not do this, 2 Timothy 6, 7. it will
attend us no further than the Grave; and if we dispense it not well and wisely,
but hoard it up as the unprofitable Servant did his Talent in a Napkin, the
rust and canker thereof will be a Witness against us, and convince us of our
unmercifulness in doing no good with it; it will kindle the wrath of God
against us, and gall our Consciences with a vexatious remembrance of our Sin
and Folly.

But good Works will certainly follow us into the future Life; blessed are the
Dead which die in the Lord, Rev. 14.13.
so says the Spirit; for they rest from their Labors and their Works follow
them; to Witness for them before the great Judge of the quick and dead, and (I
had almost said) to appease his Wrath, Jam. 2 13. Dr. Ham. in locum. Mat 5.7.
and to prevent their Condemnation; for St. James says, mercy rejoices
against Judgment. (...), triumphs over it, for the merciful shall obtain
mercy, our Savior does not say, that they shall Merit mercy at the hand of
God, but obtain mercy; the reason is plain, for when we have done all we are
unprofitable Servants, and have not at all benefitted the infinitely Glorious
and Blessed God by our services, but only done that which was our Duty, and
therefore must expect to receive our reward from Gods free mercy and not of
merit, Non properito accipis Vitam aeternam, sed tantum pro gratia August.
St. James is very express, Chap. 1.14. That we must be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing, as to all the integral parts of Christianity, to render us
truly acceptable to God, yet this we may firmly rely upon, that no one single
Virtue can better qualify us for mercy, or more effectually prevail with God
to show us mercy, then this of mercifulness, Phil. 8.14.
which is an Odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing
to God: the consideration whereof should induce us upon all occasions and
opportunities to do good; to be rich, copious in good Works; ready to
distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for our selves, (not for
our heirs and executors) a good foundation against the time to come, that we
may lay hold on eternal Life. A Life, Bp. Reynolds.
which may be held when the last general conflagration shall have melted all
the Treasures of the World, our good works will abide that Trial, the
Inheritance unto which they follow us is incorruptible, undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in the Heavens for us. But we must qualify our
selves for it upon Earth, by making it the whole business and trade of our
Lives to do good: which is to act according to the frame of our Natures, and to
comply with the best of those inclinations which God has planted in us; and to
do a most delightful and pleasant Work, (even in the Opinion of Epicurus
himself, the great Patron of pleasure) which is accompanied with satisfaction
in the present performance of it, and in the after reflection does yield a huge
refreshment to our Minds, and a spring of peace and joy to our Souls, which far
exceeds all sensual and bodily delights, and will most of all be sweet and
comfortable to us when the pains of Death are upon us, and our Souls are ready
to take their flight into the eternal World; therefore if we would have our
Passage easy at our Death, we must treasure up now a stock of Comfort against
the evil day; good Works will certainly support us in the Agony of Death, and
stand by us in the day of Judgment, and plead for us before the Righteous
judge, and obtain for us a glorious Reward; a Kingdom, not purchased by our
Works; Mat. 25.34, 35, etc.
but prepared for us from the foundation of the World, and freely bestowed upon
us for our obedience to his Holy Laws in being kind and merciful to his
suffering Servants.

(5) The preparation which our Lord requires to fit us for his coming, consists
in keeping Conscience clear and free from offense, either by abstaining from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, or by a sincere endeavor (if the mind and
Conscience be defiled) to get the guilt of sin done away by Godly sorrow, which
works Repentance unto Salvation: for so St. Paul directs us, (alluding to the
purifying under the Law by the sprinkling of Blood.) Heb. 10.22. 1 Timothy 1.19.
To get our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and to hold Faith and a
good Conscience. To this he assiduously applied himself with all his might;
Acts 24.16.
Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God and Man. He made it his constant study, and the daily business of
his life continually to live inoffensively, and to do his duty concscienciously
both to God and Men. He felt the sweetness and comfort of it in his Soul, when
he was by the malice of the Jews imprisoned at Jerusalem and brought before the
Sanhedrim, where he makes this solemn profession; Men and Brethren, Acts 23.1.
I have lived in all good Conscience before God: Though Tertullus impleaded him
with all the insinuative Arts of Learning and Eloquence; he is able to make his
own defense, sully to answer the charge laid against him, and his home and
powerful reasonings of Temperance, Righteousness and Judgment to come, made his
Judge to quake and tremble.

See here the great advantage a good man has of his Adversaries, and what
invisible supports a good Conscience affords in the day of danger and
adversity: Hor. Car. L. 3. Od. 3.
Neither the tumults of the People, nor the face and indignation of Tyrants can
abate his courage; Inocency and Virtue animate him with boldness and confidence
against all their accusations and terrors, and lay the firmest foundation of a
durable contentment and satisfaction: therefore Seneca represents the mind of a
wise man by the state of the superior Regions, which were free from storms and
tempests, always serene and temperate. A good man is never without joy, Ep. 59.
his contentment grows not, but from the Conscience of Virtue.

This made Paul and Silas when they were cast into Prison and thrust into the
inner Dungeon, Sanctorum sors est, and non meleste ferenda.
and their Feet mast fast in the Stocks, sing divine Hymns and Songs of praise
to God. This was holy Job's comfort under all those piercing afflictions which
besell him: the loss of all his Substance, and Children, and desertion of his
nearest Friends and Relations. In these sad and miserable circumstances, when
there was none to pity and comfort him, the conscience of his own innocence and
integrity supported his Spirit: Job. 27.5, 6.
I will never remove my integrity from me, my righteousness will I hold fast
and will not let it go, mine Heart, (i. e. my Conscience) shall not reproach me
so long as I live.

This supported and comforted the Primitive Believers in all their Tribulations
and Persecutions, which were too great for human patience to bear: Our
rejoicing is this, 2 Cor. 1.12.
the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in
the world.

A good Conscience is a continual Feast, a Jubilee, Pro. 15.15.
in that dark dismal time, when Death is breaking that Vital Union, and making
a separation between Soul and Body, and the man is walking through the valley
of the shadow of Death; Ps. 23.4.
which is very full of terrors and dangers: this will relieve his fears, fill
him with unspeakable Joys, and enable him to grapple with the King of Terrors
with courage and constancy of mind: and to say with the blessed Apostle, 2 Timothy
4.6, 7, 8
The time of my departure is at hand, I have fought the good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith; upheld and maintained it, in and by
my Ministry; and lived in the exercise of the grace of Faith. Henceforth there
is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge
shall give me (of his free grace) at that day. My Soul shall enjoy it at my
dissolution, my whole man at the general resurrection: Such a comfortable
departure as this, free from the stings and accusations of Conscience, is worth
the most solicitous care and earnest endeavor of a Christians whole life; for
when he comes to die, Conscience will administer unspeakable Consolations to
him, make him lift up his head with joy, and with a cheerful countenance to
stand before the Son of Man, and to say with Hezekiah, Remember now, o Lord,
Isa. 33.3.
I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight.

But on the contrary, the case of a wicked man will be very deplorable, when he
falls into any calamity or affliction, Job. 15.24.
pain or Sickness, when the days of darkness are at hand: Conscience is then
most active, upbraiding him with the greatness, multitude and aggravations of
his sin; Guilt lies throbbing on his Soul: Trouble and anguish make him afraid,
they shall prevail against him, as a King ready to the Battle. Who goes forth
to fight, with all the strength and power of his Kingdom, attended with his
Guards and Battalions of disciplined Soldiers, and with all his Engines and
Military preparations for slaughter and destruction; which strikes a dread and
terror into his Enemies; which fills them with fears and anxious thoughts what
the event and issue may be. Such are the troubles and agitations of Conscience
in wicked men, and that not only of the weaker fort, but of such also as are
clothed with Purple, and invested with Imperial Power. The mighty Monarchs of
the world, such as Nero, Tyberius, Caligula, etc. who are above the reach of
human Justice, these are not exempted from the disquiets and stings of
Conscience; the Gripes and Convulsions of Self-conviction, and the
apprehensions and fears of a Caelestial Tribunal, which they shall not escape,
though they have derided and laughed at it in the day of health: But the dread
and horror thereof increases upon them, as they draw near to the end of their
days; and this will be the case of every one of us, if we do not now get our
Consciences purged from dead works, and the guilt of all our sins cancelled by
a cordial sorrow for, and moral revocation of it: Therefore it very nearly
concerns us to make a strict and severe inspection into our Consciences, to
state our Account right between God and our Souls: For if any sin remain
uncrossed, it concerns us as much as our everlasting happiness is worth, to set
about it with all possible speed and diligence, to give no rest to our Eyes,
nor slumber to our Eye lids, till we have by an actual repentance, and
revocation of all that we have done amiss, totally discharged them, and gotten
all our sins blotted out, that they may not be found upon record against us;
When the times of refreshing come from the presence of the Lord: Jer. 17.1.
For Conscience registers all that we do, be it good or evil. And when the Son
of Man shall come in the glory of his Father, and the Book of Conscience shall
be opened, and according to what is found written therein, we shall be judged,
sentenced, and rewarded; for Conscience will be with us in Death and Judgment,
either to comfort, justify, and acquit us; or to terrify, accuse, and condemn
us.

(6) That we may be ready for the coming of our Lord, it is necessity that we
bear with patience and constancy, the various troubles and trials which we may
meet with in this Life; for as Job says, Affliction comes not forth of the
dust, Chap. 5.6.
neither does trouble spring out of the ground, but Man is born unto trouble as
the sparks fly upward. Crosses and Troubles befall us not by chance or
accident, but are foreordained by the Wisdom, and dispensed by the providence
of God, or by his allowance; Can a bird fall in a snare upon the Earth, where
no Gin is for him? Amos 3.5. John 16.33.
nor industriously prepared and laid to take him; in the World we shall have
tribulation, reproach and injuries from Men, the loss of Goods and good Name;
disappointments in Children, Friends and Relations,; provocations to anger and
revenge; sickness and distempers in our Bodies; troubles within, disquietudes
anxieties of mind, which are little Deaths; not only prologues, but
preparatives to Death: Acts 14.22.
We must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God; even as the
Israelites went through many hardships in their peregrination through the
Wilderness to the Land of Canaan; so must we in our Pilgrimage through this
World, to the Inheritance which is above, reserved in Heaven for us. Therefore
patience is absolutely necessary for us, to enable us to bear our burdens, to
persevere in our Duty, and to wait for our promised reward. We have need of
patience, that after we have done the will of God, Heb. 10.36.
we may receive the promises: Now many of the promises are of a long date and
distance from us, the reward is given to those that hold out unto the end,
wherefore the Apostle advises us; To strengthen our selves with all patience
and long suffering with joyfulness; Coloss. 1.11.
Heb. 12.1, 2.3.
and to run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus
the author and finisher of our Faith: who for that joyful and glorious state,
which was faithfully promised by his Father, to be the reward of his
Sufferings; endured the Cross with all the concomitants of it, despifing the
shame and disgrace poured on him by his Enemies, and is set down as a glorious
and triumphing conqueror over Sin and Satan, Death and Hell, at the Right Hand
of the Throne of God; the extraordinary example of so innocent and eminent a
Person, ought to be regarded by us, and engage us to comply with duties of this
Nature: His whole Life was one continual exercise of meekness and patience, and
that we might not be discouraged from doing our duty, and faint in our mind;
the Apostle directs us, to consider him that endured the contradiction of
sinners; i.e. of the Instruments and Abettors of his miseries, who reviled his
person, slandered his Doctrine, and blasphemed his Miracles; yet he did
obediently submit himself to the will of God, patiently endured what was his
Fathers good pleasure to impose upon him; and did mildly bear the injuries and
reproaches of his Enemies, without any inward fretting or vexing his Spirit,
without any immoderate anger, hatred or revenge toward them. And all this to
leave us an Example that we should follow his steps, as in all other Graces; so
especially in this of patience, which is the best remedy to ease us under our
burdens, and to deliver us from them; for they cannot be very injurious to us,
if we calmly and mildly bear them. Horace.
Levius fit patientia quicquid corrigere est nefas.

This carried the noble Army of Martyrs through their bitter sufferings,
without discovering the least sign of impatience, and enabled them to bear the
calamities and miseries of this Life, while they waited for the rewards and
felicities of another World; for if God in his Providence is pleased to order
us our Portion of troubles here, his design herein is to exercise our Graces,
to wean us from the World, to prepare us for Death, Luke 21.19. Romans 12.12. 2 Timothy 2.3. Chap. 4.5.
and fit us for Heaven; therefore, we should possess our Souls in patience; be
patient in Tribulation, endure Afflictions as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ,
and endure unto the end: for he that bears troubles patiently, is well prepared
to die peaceably; and to meet his Sovereign Lord and Judge comfortably. I
conclude this point with St. Peter's Counsel; Beloved, think it not strange
concerning the fiery Trial, 1 Pet. 4.12.13.
(which is sent by God for the trial and exercise of your Grace,) but rejoice
in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings; and made conformable to
him your head, that when his Glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with
exceeding joy.

(7) A brisk and lively apprehension of God's all seeing Eye upon, and
inspection over us in all our ways, will conduce much to the fitting us for our
great change. It was Seneca's Advice to Lucilius, whatsoever he was doing, to
imagine that Cato, or Scipio, or Loelius, or some of the Roman worthies did
behold him, and then he would do nothing dishonouraable; Epist.
Do all things said he, as if another looked on, it is undoubtedly very
profitable to have a Guard over a Man's self: and to conceive that some virtuous
and excellent person, whom we have an high esteem and reverence for, is a
spectator of our actions, and has an insight into our very Thoughts, such an
apprehension as this, would be a great awe upon us to speak and act wisely and
worthily.

Moses his person and presence was very awful to the Egyptians. Ahab stood in
fear of Elias. Joash was good as long as Jehojada lived. John the Baptist's
piety, sanctity and graces, commanded regard and reverence from Herod: Mark
6.20.
He feared John, as knowing that he was a good man, and a holy, and observed
him: i. e. behaved himself reverently in his presence, and studied to please
him in his demeanor and respectful carriage: was careful to avoid all occasions
of his discontent, and was very much delighted with his preaching: Heard him
gladly and did many things in obedience and conformity to his Doctrine; both in
his private conversation, abstaining from several sins and impieties; and in
his administration of public Government, enacting several good Laws for the
regular ordering of his Kingdom, and the reforming of abuses, and for
correcting and restraining of several Vices and Immoralities. And St. John the
Apostle, by his gravity, presence, and ghostly advice and counsel, wrought so
effectually upon a common Thief and Cutthroat, that he laid down his weapons
of hostility, trembled and wept bitterly, Eusebius. Eccl. Hist.
and in the words of my Author, was rebaptized in his own tears, and becomes a
Convert, a public Minister of the Church of God, and an Instrument of much
good.

Now if the presence of a virtuous person whom we venerate has so great an
influence upon men's practice, certainly the belief of Gods observing Eye upon
us will be of greater force to make us stand in awe and sin not: Now that he is
thus present with us, we are Infidels if we believe it not, because it is
confirmed to us by plentiful testimonies: The Scripture assures us, That his
Eyes are upon all our ways, Ps. 4.4.
they are not hid from his face, neither is our iniquity hid from his eyes:
That no man can hide himself in secret places that he shall not see him. Some
indeed have flattered themselves with the hopes of secrecy and impunity. As
particularly the Adulterer; Jer. 16.17. Chap. 23.24
Who says in his heart no eye sees me? Ecclus. 6.23.
I am compassed about with darkness, the walls cover me, 18.19.
and no body sees me, what need I to fear? the most high will not remember my
sin, such a man only fears the eyes of men. Job 24.15.
The eye of the Adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, no eye shall see
me: No common eye of men shall take notice of me, being under a cover of
darkness: No eye of the Magistrate who is a Minister of Justice to punish evil
doers; No, not the eye of God himself shall see me: But He knows not that the
Eyes of the Lord are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, beholding all
the ways of men, and considering the most secret parts. Pro. 5.21. Job 31.4.
All the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondreth all his
goings: he sees all our ways, and counts all our steps: the very secrets of
our heart are not hid from him; much less our secret actions; every thing that
we do, be it never so retiredly, Heb. 4.13.
is naked and open to his eyes, which pierce to the very marrow of our bones,
and penetrate to the bottom of our intrails, and clearly and fully discern our
secret atheism and unbelief, our hypocrisy and dissimulation, our affections,
inclinations, and the bent of our Natures: The beauty and comeliness, the
defects and blemishes of a naked body are not more plain and visible to an
accurate observer, neither were the interior parts of Beasts offered in
Sacrifice, when they are excoriated, imbowelled and divided per spinam Dorsi,
more obvious to the heathen Magicians, whose duty it was to observe the color,
shape, defects, and other circumstances, whereby they might know how to order
their Divinations; then our ways and goings are to Gods pure and piercing eyes,
who beholds our closest artifices and subtilest disguises, as clearly as he
sees our open and scandalous offenses: For the darkness hides not from him,
Ps. 139.12.
the night shines as the day, the darkness and the light are both alike to
him. Job, 34.21, 22
His eyes are upon the ways of man; fixedly and intentively; and he sees
(critically and curiously) all his goings; there is no darkness nor shadow of
death where the workers of Iniquity may hide themselves.

Seneca told Lucilius, Epist. 41. Jer. 17.10. Ps. 7.9.94.12.
God is near unto us, he is with us, an observer of our good and evil actions,
the searcher of our hearts, who knows the secret motions, counsels, and
affections of our Souls, and keeps acquaintance with our thoughts, and is
familiar with all our purposes and designs. Now if we do believe this great
truth, it must doubtless be of unspeakable use to us for the regular and
orderly government of our lives; and make us as circumspect and cautious of our
thoughts, words, and works, as if we visibly saw him standing before our eyes,
writing down every action of our life in order to call us to account for it.
This consideration had so great an influence upon holy David's practice, that he
assigns it as the motive of his obedience; I have remembered thy name and have
kept thy Law, Psalm. 119.55. and 168. etc.
I have kept thy Precepts and thy Testimonies, for all my ways are before thee;
this is a powerful Amulet against sin and a great preservative of virtue, a
means to make us sincerely upright in all our ways, and to tremble to commit
any sin or wickedness in the sight of our all-seeing Judge, before whose
presence we shall not be afraid to appear hereafter; if we set him before our
Eyes here, as an observer and witness of our actions, Psalm. 16.8.
for thereby our hearts will be overawed with a sense of his omnipresence, so
that we shall walk very cautiously and circumspectly before him, having respect
to all his Commandments, and with a concern to please him in all things; by
this means death and judgment will not be formidable to us.

(8) That we may be ready for a comfortable passage into the eternal World, it
is necessary that we possess our Souls with frequent Thoughts of Death and
Mortallity. This is the earnest and pathetical charge of the merciful and
compassionate God, who is very heartily concerned for the everlasting happiness
of Men, by his eminent Servant Moses, (whom he was pleased to make choice of to
be the Commander and Governor of a numerous People) he bespeaks them in a most
affectionate and obliging manner, to remember the days of old, what great
things he had done for them; in chosing them for his People, and delivering
them from the hand of Pharaoh King of Egypt, by a mighty hand and an out
stretched arm, in preserving them at the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness, in
subduing the Nations about them; and in giving them possession of the Land of
Promise, flowing with Milk and Honey: he entreats them to consider the
transitoriness of their condition, and to withdraw their affections from
Farthly Glories. O that they were wise to consider their latter end, Deuteronomy.
32.29.
to study and apply their minds to that holy wisdom which would fit them for
Life eternal.

We are now Gods peculiar People, he is as solicitous for our happiness and
salvation as once he was for the Israelites, and with the same tender affection
does he importune us to consider our end, and to what Eternity we are going,
whether to bliss or misery; we are but Sojourners and Pilgrims here, having
Heb. 13, 14.
no continuing City, no certain abiding place; our condition here is fleeting
and vanishing, Jam. 4.14.
we know not whether we shall continue here till to morrow; for what is our
Life? it is even a Vapor, exhaled from the Earth by the influence of the
heavenly Bodies, Psalm. 90.9. Psalm. 73.20.
that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, like a Tale that is
told, which is at an end, e're we consider it; or as a Dream, when one awaketh
suddenly, which disappears: being then that we are such weak creatures, Psalm.
39.4.
we should pray with David, Lord make me to know my end and the number of my
days, that I may know how frail I am, and how near to death; so teach us to
number our days that we (passing by the cares the glories and pleasures of this
World) may apply our hearts with all diligence unto true wisdom, 90.12.
which is to be wise unto Salvation. For the attainment whereof, and for the
more effectual impressing upon our minds, deep and serious thoughts of our
mortal state; it is expedient that we visit sick and dying persons as often as
opportunity invites us: not only to condole with them, and to afford them our
pity and compassion in their affliction, Job. 6.14. Chap. 19.21. Heb. 13.2, 3.
which is some alleviation of their misery; to administer seasonable comforts
to them, to give them ghostly advice and counsel, to bear with patience the
chastisements of the Lord, and humbly to resign themselves to his wise
disposal: but also to stir up in our selves many Pious and Devout
Considerations of our approaching Change.

In the presence of dying Persons, there is represented both to our eye and
mind many objects, that will naturally suggest to us holy Meditations, serious
and awful Thoughts of Death and Eternity. There we may see the person visited
struggling with strong pains of bitter Agonies; and Death sit in his ghastly
countenance, we may hear the rueful Groans of his expiring nature, and observe
him exercised with Soul-conflicts, with great terrors of mind, and with
powerful convictions of sin, and dreadful apprehensions of the wrath of God,
unfit perhaps to die, and yet past all hopes of continuing long in this
transitory life.

There we may see the mournful looks of the spectators, and hear the bitter
lamentations and cries of Wife and Children, and observe the trickling tears of
dear Relations. For if Alexander the Great wept when he heard of the death of
Darius; and Caesar at the relation of Pompey's; and Titus Vespasian at the
miserable destruction of the Jews; how shall they refrain from tears at the
sight of a dying Friend struggling with the pains of Death, and perhaps doubting
of his salvation? Such a spectacle as this will administer to us such thoughts
as these. This person is now about putting off his Earthly Tabernacle, his Soul
is entering into the Confines of Eternity, and his Body ere long will be a prey
to Death, and be laid down in the cold and silent Grave, where the Worms shall
be its companions till it has put on rottenness and corruption. The Angels
will convey the immaterial Soul to the Bar of Judgment to receive sentence to
its eternal state. This is a visible instruction to me really to converse with
sickness and weakness; and to think that it will not be long but I shall feel
and endure mortal pains and the miseries of a Death bed; I shall breath short,
feel cold sweats and dying pangs: My Body which I am now so indulgent and
tender of shall be wrapped in a Shroud, be nailed up in a Coffin, Luke 7.12.
and carried forth as the Widow of Nain's Son was, upon the shoulders of men,
to be intombed in the Grave the House of all living; and my immortal Soul shall
expire, and go to God who gave it, to be rewarded and sentenced according to
the things done in the body.

Such serious thoughts as these will be a sovereign Antidote against all Sin
and Wickedness; and dispose and prepare us before hand, that when the critical
moment comes we may not run the great hazard of miscarrying for ever: For in
the day of Death we play the last Game for everlasting Felicity or endless
Misery, so that we had need to do it wisely and warily, because an
uncorruptible Crown of Life and Glory depends upon it; the winning whereof will
make us unspeakably happy, and the losing of it eternally miserable, beyond all
humane apprehension. Thus have I showed at large, both generally and
particularly, wherein this preparation does consist, because the burden of the
Text lies upon it.

(II) I proceed now to the second thing in order of method, which is to
manifest the urgent necessity of this readiness, and the great obligations
which lie upon us to be always prepared for death, and the Son of Man's coming:
The omniscient God, (who certainly knows what is best for our present good, and
future happiness) has very warmly pressed it home upon our hearts, by many
Precepts and Commands: the work it self is difficult, the time allotted us to
do it in is very precious; life it self is very short and uncertain, and Death
inevitable, and if we be not prepared for our change by inherent holiness and
sanctification, we shall fall short of happiness. So that upon these accounts
it is absolutely necessary that we be always in readiness.

(1) The omniscient God (who certainly knows what is best for our present good
and future happiness) has very warmly and earnestly pressed it home upon our
hearts by many precepts, which he has inculcated in the Scriptures; that we
(knowing our Duty) may yield a cheerful and and filial obedience. Throughout
this whole Chapter of the Text, we are taught that the coming of our Lord will
be very sudden, like Lightning which in the twinkling of an eye, Verse 27.
darts through the Air, and surprises the Inhabitants of the Earth before they
are aware of it, or can avoid it; that it will be at a time when the spirit of
security has seized the hearts of Men, and they are given up to sensuality and
debauchery, wholly unconcerned at all Gods invitations and warnings; and
unmindful of the great things which belongs to their everlasting Peace.

This was the case of the old World, and of Sodom and Gomorrah, Verse 37, 38.
Luke 17.28, 29, 30.
in the day of Noah and Lot; They did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold,
they planted, they builded; they went on securely in their luxurious courses,
and lived in a careless regard of their Duty, till the day that Lot went out of
Sodom; when God rained down fire and brimstone from Heaven upon them, and
destroyed them all; even so shall it be, in the day when the Son of Man is
revealed. Now the time of his coming being concealed from us, lays the greatest
obligation upon us to be Vigilant, watch therefore, says, Verse 42. Mark
30.33, etc.
our Savior, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is, for the Son of
Man is as a Man taking a far journey, who left his House, and gave authority to
his Servants, and to every Man his work, and commanded the Porter to watch;
watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the master of the House comes, at
even, or at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in the morning; lest coming
suddenly he find you sleeping, and what I say unto you I say unto all, watch.
The design of which precept is to engage all of us to abstain from all sin, and
to be diligent and industrious in doing of our duty, that at what time soever
our Lord comes, we may be ready: Luke 21.34, 35, 36.
Take heed to your selves lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
Surfeiting, and Drunkenness, and the cares of this Life, and so that day come
upon you unawares; the day of particular or general Judgment: For as a snare it
shall come upon all that dwell on the face of the Earth; watch ye therefore and
pray always that ye may be able to stand before the Son of Man; to stand with
cheerfulness and confidence, without fear of condemnation in the last Judgment,
for the ungodly shall not stand in judgment, Psalm. 1.5.
nor be able to lift up their heads before the presence of the severe Judge;
because they have not been diligent to be found of him in peace, without spot
or blemish. The design of our Lord in the Parable of the Ten Virgins is to
press upon all Christians the urgent necessity of a constant preparation for
his coming; and not to content themselves with having Lamps, and making a bare
profession of Religion, but to keep Oil in their vessels with their Lamps; i.
e. truth of grace, fruits of the spirit, and works of mercy: To have their
Lamps trimmed, their Loins girded about, and their lights burning, as those
that look for their Lord. Herein lay the Wisdom of the prudent Virgins, they
provided Oil in store to replenish their Lamps; a good stock of faith, and
love, and other divine graces to feed and maintain their profession, and they
trimmed their Lamps, and took care to prepare themselves for the Bridegrooms
coming, by which means they being found ready; were at his coming admitted by
him into the place of Nuptial entertainments.

But the indiscretion of the improvident and formal Professors, lay in pleasing
themselves with an (...), a false Unction, they traded for the goodly Pearl,
the rich Treasure hid in a Field, but they did it so unseasonably and coldly,
that they were not sensible of their mistake, till it was too late to retrieve
and amend it. The Bridegroom came when they were not in a readiness to receive
him, and so the door was shut against them, and though they cried with earnest
entreaties and ingeminations, Lord, Lord, open to us, yet there was no
admission for them, they were for ever excluded. Which dismal Fate of theirs,
teaches us this useful instruction, To improve the present seasons of Grace,
and to work while it is to day; For when the Night comes no Man can work; John
9 4.
as the Tree falls so it lies; if it fall toward the South, or toward the
North, in the place where the Tree falls, there it shall lie; which Scripture
is thus interpreted by a learned Author. Olympiodor in Eccles.
In whatsoever place therefore, whether of light or darkness, whether in the
work of wickedness, or virtue, a Man is taken at his death; in that degree and
rank, does he remain either in light with the just, and Christ the King of all;
or in darkness with the wicked, and Prince of the World. There is no rectifying
the errors of this Life, in the next, the day of Grace ends with this Life;
here all the Evidences, and Graces of a Christian are to be acquired; in the
future state he shall receive his reward according to the things done in the
Body, Vid. Victoris Erabdum.
whether they be good or bad: After we are gone from hence, There remains no
place for repentance, no effect or benefit of satisfaction, here Life is either
lost, or obtained; and at the moment of death, thou have a passage hence to
immortality: So that whatever is done by us to obtain the favor of God and a
blessed immortality, must be done in this World. The time of this Life, Dr.
Sherlock. upon Death.
is all the preparation time that ever will be afforded to us to work out our
Salvation: There is no middle state or place (as they of the Roman communion,
do fondly fancy) to do it in: we consist but of two parts, Body and Soul; and
Solomon has assured us that when we die, Eccles. 12.7.
the body returns to the Earth from whence it originally came, Fundamentum ex
pulvere, et in pulvere finis ejus, and the Soul to God that gave it. The holy
Angels conveyed Lazarus his Soul at his death into Abraham's bosom; immediately
upon its separation from the Body, so says the Spirit, from henceforth, from
the instant of their dying, the dead are blessed; and rest from their labors,
from all the labors of their Christian calling, their Race is at an end, their
course is finished, and the crown is to be received: All the Divine graces and
Religious dispositions of mind, which are requisite to fit the Soul for Heaven,
and make it happy when it leaves the Body, must be obtained and exercised in
the Body; So that to day, whilst it is called to day, we must seriously mind
and prosecute the things which belong to our peace; and give obedience to the
Commands of God, which are reasonable and easy; advantageous to our interest,
and do claim a Priority in our affections and endeavors, for so we are
directed to remember now our Creator, and to seek the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness in the first place; for by so doing we not only secure to our
selves the temporal Emoluments of this Life, so far as the wisdom of God sees
them good for us, but dispose and prepare our selves for eternal Glory; and our
obedience shall not miss of a suitable reward.

ii. The solemn work of preparation for Death and Judgment is difficult, it is
not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
but he that does the will of his Father which is in Heaven; that sincerely
endeavors to fulfill the whole will of God by faith and holiness. The truth and
power of piety lies not in a mouthful of good words; be ye warmed, be ye
filled, be ye clothed; nor in a mere outside Form of worship, but in practice;
it is not enough for us to live inofsensively and harmlesly, to abstain from
that which is evil, but we must actually do good, and abound in fruits of
righteousness. It Is a great work to die well, and unless we do lay up an ample
stock of spiritual preparations, we shall never be able to go safely through
the dark passage of death to Eternity. Assure your selves, dear Souls, that a
few penitent resolutions, forced promises, deathbed sorrows, mournful tears,
melancholy looks, formal prayers, and crying God's mercy, and asking him
forgiveness, will not serve the turn and prove effectual; no we must put forth
the most painful efforts of our Souls, in mortifying our earthly Members, in
conquering vicious habits, in regulating disordered appetites, in governing
according to the Laws of reason and religion all the faculties of our Souls, in
eradicating strong prejudices from our Understanings, in bending our obstinate
and rebellious Will, in regulating unruly Affections, in taming wild
extravagant Passions, in guarding our Hearts from vain Thoughts and inordinate
Desires, in subduing powerful Lusts which war against the Soul; in resisting
temptations, and repelling the fiery darts of the professed Enemy of our
Salvation, in fighting manfully under Christ's Banner against Sin, the World,
the Devil, and the rebellious Flesh, in curbing its impetuous and eager
desires, in bridling our Tongues from idle, obscene, and unsavory talk, in
directing our steps in the straight path of holiness; in sustaining Crosses,
Afflictions and Troubles with a generous patience and unshaken constancy; doing
our duty faithfully to God, conscientiously waiting upon him in his Ordinances,
studying to know his Pleasure, to do his Will, to obey his Commands, to promote
his Interest and advance his Glory in the World. We shall have need of sincere
Repentance, Faith unfeigned, unshaken Patience, universal Charity, seraphyck
Love, invincible Constancy, an humble submission to the Will of God to bring
down the Joys of Heaven into our Souls, perseverance unto the end, and a well
grounded hope of partaking with the Saints in joys unspeakable and full of
glory; unless our Souls be habited and attired with these goodly virtues we
shall be very unfit to die and to appear in Judgment. Now to obtain these
heavenly Graces is the work which we are to apply our selves unto with
diligence and vigor: For every Virtue has its peculiar difficulty: 2 These.
1.11. 1 These. 1.3.
Faith is called the work of Faith. It Is a difficult thing to believe the
Existence of things; which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither is the
heart of man able to conceive the immortality of the Soul, and the existence of
it in an immaterial world. It Is hard to believe firmly all the promises and
threatenings of the Word; to rely upon Christ alone for Salvation; perfectly to
submit our Understandings, and to resign our Wills to his holy will. Repentance
is a work not easily wrought upon the Soul; though it be highly reasonable that
when we have done contrary to our duty, we should be cordially sorry for it;
resolve to do so no more, and labor to undo what we have done amiss by godly
sorrow and compunction of heart; humble confession to God, and restitution to
Men: yet experience shows that it is very hard to do this. Began the Ethiopian
change his skin, or the Leopard his spots: Jer. 13.23.
then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil, Hence it is called
renovation, a new creation, regeneration, a new birth, in which there is pain
and difficulty. Charity is a laborious exercise of many good works; it consists
in the performance of several kind Offices: The Christian must exert that
labor of love mentioned by the Apostle, 1 These. 1.3. Temperance is a virtue
not easily attained; it requires presence of mind, and great wisdom, to
regulate unruly Appetites, and to govern unnatural Lusts, which are fired by a
small spark of temptations; and to withstand the allurements of pleasure, to
refuse the courtships and solicitations of jolly Companions, to shun the snares
of their wild examples, and to bear with evenness and equanimity of mind the
scoffs and sarcasms of those patrons and encouragers of Vice and Vanity, who
can have no kindness for those that will not run with them the same risk of
madness and extravagance.

The like might be showed concerning meekness, humility, self-denial and
resignation to the Divine Will; patience, contentedness, and all other Divine
Graces which are from above, from the Father of Lights, who is the giver of
Grace and Glory, and has placed them out of our reach, that we might take
pains to acquire them by fervent Prayer and Devotion, and exert great diligence
in the practice of them. For since it is appointed for Men to die but once, we
should do all we can to prepare our selves to die happily; and as St. John
says, in the Lord, that we may live for ever with the Lord.

iii. The time allowed us to prepare for Eternity is precious, for it is very
short, if we measure time according to the largest extention of it; for all
that space of this present life which is allowed us to do the works of our
Callings in is exceeding short; but if we take it for the opportunity of time,
or the proper season for the making our Calling and Election sure, and securing
our everlasting state, it is much shorter. Of all the outward blessings and
comforts which God is pleased to bestow upon us in this life, he is not so
frugal and provident in any of them as he is in the distribution of our time.
He confers upon us the comfortable accommodation of this world in great
abundance: but Time he proportions to us in a continual succession of days, and
hours, and minutes, so that we never enjoy two of them together, but as one
passes away he gives us another: and yet how profuse and lavish are we in the
expense of them. A considerable part of our time we have wasted in childish
vanities, and when we came to maturity of years, and consistency of reason, we
spent no small part of it in gratifying inordinate appetites, and in sensual
pleasures. So that before we seriously consider the end for which we were
created, the major part of our time is elapsed beyond revocation; and we crowd
up this solemn work of preparation for Eternity into a narrow compass. It
concerns us therefore to redouble our diligence, to redeem the time, and to
increase in all Graces, adding to our faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge,
etc. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. To reach forth (with the blessed St: Paul) unto those
things that are before; Phil. 3.13, 14
to stretch as hard as we can after that measure of holiness which we have not
yet attained; to press toward the mark, that we may win the prize of eternal
Glory: and the rather should we exert the greatest vigor, because we have but
little time to do the work of him that sent us, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.
in. The time is short; furled like Sails when the Mariner has finished his
Voyage and is come into the Haven; so that we should be careful to improve it
to our best advantage, which is a special point of wisdom: commendable avarice,
as Seneca says, Nulla nisi temporis honesta est avaritia. We are allowed to
covet earnestly the best things, amongst which this precious jewel of time may
be reckoned; and therefore not to be wasted in fruitless pastimes, and carnal
contentments; in earthly pleasures and overmuch secular negotiations of this
life; much less in wicked projects or sinful practices, but in adorning our
Souls with such virtuous dispositions as will fit us for the presence of God,
and the society of the Saints in the future state of Glory: When we come to
die, one of those days or hours which we have vainly wasted will be of more
value to us then all this world.

It is scarce possible for us in the day of health and prosperity to conceive
how valuable Time will then appear to us. We shall sadly repent that we have
spent any part of it in worldliness, ambition, idleness, sensual gratifications
or sinful lusts. We shall heartily wish that we had improved every minute of it
in the spiritual and everlasting concernments of our Souls; and to be sure (if
we have any presence of Mind, and the use of our Reason) we shall then employ
every minute of it (which is free from disturbances and interruptions) in
finishing our last preparatory work on Earth, in order to our appearing before
our great Judge: It will be our wisdom to do that now with all our might which
we shall then be so intent upon, because a few sands more will bring us to that
state in which we shall remain for ever, and leave us in Eternity.

iv. The urgent necessity of such a solemn preparation as I have described,
will farther appear if we consider that life it self (which is the most
valuable treasure, the richest Jewel in this World) is very short and
uncertain, and Death inevitable.

1. Life is very short: The most fading and vanishing things in Nature are made
use of by the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures to set forth the brevity of the
life of man: It Is represented by a Dream, which for a little while affects the
Fancy; Job. 20.8.
but when the man awakes (if not before) it vanishes away: By a Flower of the
Field, or the Grass of the Earth, Ps. 73.20.90.6.103.15.
which in the Morning is green and flourishing, but in the Evening is cut down,
dried up, and withered. As for man his days are as grass, as a flower of the
field so he flourishes; Job. 14.2.
he comes up like a flower, and is cut down, he flees as a shadow and
continues not: His life slips away suddenly, like a Tale that is told; his
beauty, strength, and all his excellencies consume away like a Moth, Chapter
13.28.7.6.9.25, 26.
which by eating and fretting a Garment spoils the glory of it. Sometimes the
life of man is compared to a Weavers Shuttle, which is an Instrument of a very
swift motion, and passes the Loomb or Web speedily. Sometimes it is compared
to a swift Post, which rides upon fleet Horses, and hasten his speed by land.
To swift Ships of Ebeh, a River in the East where Job lived; which by the force
and strength of its Current, added swiftness to the Vessels which sailed fast
upon it. And forasmuch as an Eagle (of all the Fowls of the Air) is the
swiftest and strongest of wing, Isaiah 40.31
they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, which soar aloft in the Air, so
high, that the eye of man cannot see them; yet themselves are so quick-sighted,
that they can discern their prey at that vast distance, and sowce down upon it
like a Thunderbolt, hunger adding swiftness to their wings: therefore Job makes
use of that Emblem to set forth the shortness of the life of man,

Among the Evangelical Writers, we find St. Paul comparing it to a Race. And to
the end we may perform our Christian Course well, he advises us to imitate the
Roman and Grecian Racers, who when they were to run for the Prize, put off
their cumbersom clothes, that they might run with briskness and agility, so as
to obtain the reward, which was a leafy Crown, made up of Bay's or Laurel, etc.
A fading, corruptible, and perishing one: but we Christians run for an
incorruptible Crown, 1 Pet. 1.4.
an immortal Inheritance, that sadeth not away, laid up in store for us.
Wherefore we are the more obliged to lay aside every weight, Heb. 12.1.
and the Sin which does so easily beset us, and run with patience the Race that
is set before us; for it is but short, and will soon be over. Behold, says
David, Thou have made my days as an hand breadth, which is one of the least
measures, whether we take it in the largest dimension and expansion of the
hand, or in the more restrained limitation; the breadth only of the hand: in
both which respects it is very short; an inch long, says In Carmine Lyrico,
Plutarch and Seneca.
Alcaeus, much shorter yet in the grave Moralists Opinions, who style it but a
Point. Punctum est quod vivimus, and adhuc puncto minus. But St. James, who
spoke by a more excellent spirit, Chapter 4.14. Job 14.1.
represents it more diminutively, in that he calls it a mere Appearance. What
is your life? it is even a Vapor that appears for a little while, and then
vanishes away, Man that is born of a woman is of few days. Few in comparison
of the Antidiluvian Patriarchs from Adam to Noah, who lived near a thousand
years; fewer yet in regard of the years of Abraham, whose life was prolonged
but to one hundred threescore and fifteen years, Genesis 25.7, 8.
and yet Moses says of him, that he died in a good old Age, an old man, and
full of years. In Moses's time it was limited to threescore years and ten, Ps.
90. A Psalm of M^ses, etc.
and if by reason of strength men come to fourscore years (which is a singular
and extraordinary favor) yet is their strength then but labor and sorrow; and
through weakness and infirmities of Age, they are a burden to themselves,
unable to bear the aches and pains, and indispositions and diseases incident to
their sickly natures, and unfit to perform the acts and offices of Religion and
Repentance toward God, and in a little time they are cut off, and gone to
their long homes, where they can never have any more opportunities of
Repentance: In a moment (which is the shortest parcel of time that we can
imagine) they go down to the Grave, and on a sudden vanish away. Lo! this is
the length of the short life of man; and since we must shortly put off this
Tabernacle of Flesh and Bones, it concerns us as much as our Souls are worth,
to prepare them with grace and holiness, that they may be fit for the
appearance of Christ, and be precious and lovely in his eyes; and that we may
not be terrified and affrighted at his coming, as those Kings of the Earth, and
great Men, and rich Men, and chief Captains, and mighty Men, whom St. John
speaks of in the Revelation: Chapter 6.15, 16, 17.
Who shall then hide themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains;
and say to the Mountains and Rocks fall on us, and hide us from the face of him
that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day
of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?

2. It is very uncertain; Man knows not his time, as the Fishes that are
taken in an evil Net; and as the Birds that are caught in the snare, so are the
sons of men snared in an evil time, Eccles. 12.9.12.
when it falls suddenly upon them. Death often comes when persons are most
secure and careless, and least expect it. Dives (the representative of the
Voluptuous World) promised himself long life, secular prosperity, and the
fullest satisfactions that the creature could afford. To that end he resolved
to make the largest preparations for many years Festival living: He said to
himself, This will I do, I will pull down my Barns, Luke 12.18, 19.
and build greater, and there will I bestow all my Fruits, and my Goods; and I
will say to my Soul; Soul, thou have much Goods laid up for many years, take
thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But alas! all his projects failed him,
and his designs were disappointed; for he never saw the light of another day.
God said unto him, thou fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee:
Then whose shall all those things be which thou have provided? And for ought
the wisest of us know, this may be our own case; while we are seeking after the
fullness of earthly contentments and delights, our Souls may be separated from
the embraces of their Bodies, and all our hopes perish. Do not our lives depend
upon many uncertainties, diseases, and fatal accidents? See we not, Epist. 120.
says Seneca to Lucilius, How many incommodities do torment us; sometimes we
complain of our heads, then of our breast and throat; sometimes we are pained
in our Nerves, and vexed in our feet; to day the Flux, to morrow a Rheum
disturbs us; sometimes too much blood, sometimes too little; every way we are
troubled. Nihil satis est morituris, nihil morientibus; There is nothing that
contenteth us that are to die, nay that die every day: for we daily approach
our last hour, and there is not a day or hour that drives us not into the
Grave, where we must rest.

It is observed by Gallen and Hippocrates that Man is more liable to diseases
and distempers, and his life is more endangered by them then any other
Creature; Romans 5.12.
the reason may be, because he has sinned more then they; for by sin, Death
(with all its antecedents, fore runners and harbingers) entered into the world,
and so passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. There is not the least
disease incident to our frail nature, but has been armed with power sufficient
to conquer and overcome. Some die by Fevers, as Vespasian, Antonius, Julius the
2d. and Boniface the 9th; Platina and Ri^aut in vit.
others by Apoplexies, as Valentinian the Emperor, Pope Paul the 2d. occasioned
by his intemperate eating of Melons. Sometimes by Gouts, as Septimius Severus,
Julius the 3d. Sozimus the Syrian, and Sixtus the 4th; others by the Stone and
Cholick, as Gregory the 11th. and Pius the 5th; Some by Plurisies, as Gelasius
the 2d. etc. others by violent pain and anguish, as Crassus the Orator, etc;
some have ended their days in transports of Joy, as Philippides the Comedian,
when his Lauriat Poems were preferred; and Diaggoras of Rhodes, Bp. Taylor's
great Ex. part 3. disc. 20.
and Chilon the Philosopher, embracing their Sons crowned with Olympic
Laurels; others have expired in excess of sorrow.

Many have lost their lives by overmuch fullness, repletion and ingurgitation of
meats and drinks; but more have perished by pinching Famine. O the havoc and
desolation which it made at the Sieges of Jerusalem and Samaria, 2 Kings 5.25.
Joseph de bello Jud. l. 7. c. 7, 8.
when the poor miserable Jews did for very penury eat their Girdles, Shoes, and
the Skins that covered their Shields, and an Asses Head, which has but little
meat upon it, and that also, both unwholesome and unclean by Law, was sold for
80 pieces of Silver, which amount to about 5 l. of our Money; a vast price for
so small a pittance, Mill modis lethi miseros (...) una fatigat.
and the 4th part of a Kab, or quart of Pease, for 5 pieces of Silver.

Death is every day making its approaches near to us with speedy and
undiscerned steps, it follows us, and will arrest us e're we be aware of it;
but when, or how, we know not, every breath we draw may be our last, and the
next step we take, may be into the Grave. Who sees not then the absolute
necessity of being always ready for his departure hence? No man dies so
cheerfully as he that has prepared and composed himself for it by a foregoing
preparation. Death will not wait for us one moment, and therefore it is
extremely dangerous to flatter our selves with hopes and expectations of long
life, and that we shall repent hereafter; for we have not one day, or hour, or
minute at our disposal. Qui poenitenti veniam spospondit, peccanti crastinum
diem non promisit. Death spares none, neither for age nor manners. We see the
Rose-buds are gathered as well as the ripe Roses. Many young persons are
snatched away in the flower of their time and strength. Job 10.22. chapter 3.19.
The Grave is without order, there are small and great in it. Goliath not too
bigg, David's Child not too little to fill a Tomb.

So that upon this account we ought to live in a constant expectation of Death,
and the coming of our Lord, and to dispose of every day in such sort, as if it
did lead to the consummation of our lives, Luke 12.
Blessed are those Servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

(3.) As Life is very short and uncertain, so Death is inevitable, and
therefore the preparation for it is indispensibly necessary: the very Heathens
wondered not to see Bodies composed of earthly materials dissolve into dust and
ashes. What man is he that lives and shall not see death? Ps 89, 48,
There is an Erotesis in the words, a Figure peculiar to the Idioms of the
Hebr. and Greek Tongues; we frequently meet with it in the Scriptures, as in
Isaiah 58.3. Who can declare his Generation? i. e, None can, Heb. 1.13.
because he is eternal. Again, To which of the Angels said he at any time, thou
art my Son, etc. i. e. He never said so to any of them. So in these words of
the Psalmist, the interrogation bears the force of a positive affirmation;
There is no man living shall escape death, Job 3.13, 14, 15.
for it is the end of all men: Of Kings and Counselors of the Earth, of
Princes and great Warriors, of Oppressors and Prisoners, of Captives and mean
Persons, of Masters and Servants, of Small and Great, all go to the place of
Silence, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary be at rest. 17 v.
Your Fathers (that have been in all Ages before you) where are they? Zech. 1.5.
and the Prophets (that Preached to you, and warned you of your danger) do they
live for ever? These are all laid down in the dust, and we must all follow in
our order; i. e. Heb. 9.27.
It is appointed unto men once to dye; none shall escape the irreversible
decree, save those that shall be found alive at the coming of Christ. 1 Cor.
15.51, 52.
Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trump; for the
Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall
be changed: which change shall be either by their dying for a short time, and
then reviving again, as the Sleep there mentioned seems to imply; or else by
the mighty power of God, their natural and corruptible bodies shall be changed
into spiritual and incorruptible bodies, which change shall be equivalent to
death; but all other persons shall see death, and undergo the common fate of
all mankind. Neither Achitophel's Policy, nor David's Piety, nor Solomon's
Wisdom, nor John Baptist's Zeal for God, nor Tertullus his Silver Tongue, nor
Aristotle's Philosophy, nor Demosthenes his Oratory, nor Bathsheba's Beauty,
nor Sampson's Strength, nor Orpheus his Harp could charm Death, nor prevent its
all-subduing Conquests. Death knocks at the Palaces of Princes as well as poor
men's Cottages. What is become of all the Egyptian, the Persian, the Grecian,
and the Roman Monarchs, the Renowned Cesars, Julius and Augustus, celebrated in
History for War and Peace? Where are the Egyptian Ptolomies, the Syrian
Antiochus's, the Theban Labacides's, the famous Constantines, the pious
Theodosiis's, and all those Religious and Valiant Kings that have filled the
British Throne, and awfully swayed the Scepter of this Kingdom in their
several Ages, from William the Conquetor, to William our glorious Deliverer?
all that remains of them is an imperfect Historical account of all their
Virtues and Heroic Acts recorded in our English Annals.

What is become of those wise and experienced Generals, Joshua, Othniel, Ehud,
Barak, Gideon, etc. Achilles, Hannibal, etc. whose noble Exploits we read of in
the Book of Judges, in Josephus's History, and in Plutarch's Lives? they have
all been conquered by the King of Terrors.

Where are now the Seven Angels of the Asiatick Churches, the Bishops of
Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, etc. where Christianity was once
in its zenith, and flourished most gloriously? What is become of those
extraordinary Lights of the African Churches, Panaenus, Clemens Alex: Origin,
etc. incomparably furnished with divine and human learning? as also the rest of
the Fathers of the Greek and Latin Churches, Irenaeus, Tertul. Chrysostom. August.
Jerome. and multitudes more who enlightened the World with the knowledge of
divine things, and shined as lights in their lives and conversations? These are
all extinct in the Dust and mouldred to Atoms: as are also those Triple Mitred
Popes, that from the time of Gregorius Magnus (the last of the good, and first
of the bad) to this day, have filled the Roman Chair, and affected the Title of
Ecumenical Bishops, and claimed an exorbitant Power and Supremacy over the
Church of Christ, and made Europe to tremble with their dreadful Fulminations:
But they have all found that there is a Hell for the Unrighteous, and a Heaven
for the Just, but no Purgatory, save that of the Blood of Christ which purges
from all sin. These are manifest proofs that Death is not to be avoided. It Is
our wisdom then to prepare for it; for by that means, tho it be formidable to
Nature, yet the sting thereof is taken away, and we may be rather said to fall
asleep then to die; to sleep in Jesus, and go to a blessed and glorious
immortality.

v. Holiness, which is the best preparation for Death and Judgment, the noblest
qualification for Happiness, is absolutely necessary; for none but holy Souls
shall stand with comfort before the Judgment Seat of Christ: only they that
have walked uprightly, and wrought righteousness, shall stand in God's
presence. Ps. 15.1, 2.24.3, 4, 5.
Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, who shall stand in his holy place?
he that has clean hands, and a pure heart; (whose life and actions are holy
and unblamable,) who has not lift up his eyes to vanity, nor sworn
deceitfully; he shall receive the blessing from the Lord, Grace and Glory; and
all other good things which are promised to them that walk uprightly; and
Righteousness, together with the blessed fruits and rewards of it, and those
benefits which flow from it, from the God of his salvation. Mat. 5.8.
Our Savior pronounces Holy Men blessed; Blessed are the pure in heart; who
are they? who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? The
very best of Christians are not able to say sincerely and truly, that they are
free from all guilt and pollution of sin in heart and life. Such only then come
under this denomination, who being purified from all filthiness in the precious
Blood of Christ, are of a sincere and upright heart and conversation: though
they be not legally pure and free from all sin, yet the bent of their heart is
after holiness; or to speak in the words of a Reverend Divine upon this
Beatitude, Mr. Norris.
They are such as relate not only to the external conduct of their lives, but
also the inward frame and habitude of their mind, and conform not only their
actions but their wills and desires, thoughts and affections to the rule of the
divine Law, and to the dictates of the internal light of God in the Soul. Such
as sanctify the Lord in their hearts, and compose the inward recesses of their
Souls into an awe and reverence of the Divine Presence, set a law to their
intellectual powers, and suffer not the least thought or passion to violate the
order either of Reason or Grace.

Such holy Souls as these shall have the happiness to see God in the Beatifical
Vision of him in Glory. They have an imperfect view of him in his Creatures,
and in his Ordinances. They now see (as St. 1 Cor. 13.12.
Paul says) through a Glass darkly, but hereafter they shall see him face to
face; and be abundantly satisfied with his presence and glory to all eternity;
and their joy shall no man take from them, Joh. 16.22. neither shall any be
sharers with them in it but such only as are qualified for heaven by universal
holiness; Rev. 21.27.
for there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles it: no close
Hypocrite, no scandalous Sinner, no unclean person that has not by a holy life
separated himself from all sin and wickedness, and dedicated himself to God,
shall enter into that holy place: 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
Know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolators, nor Adulterers, nor effeminate
persons, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Extortioners, Gal. 5.19.
nor any other sinners that are guilty of the works of the flesh, shall without
sincere repentance enter into the Kingdom of God; of which I tell you before,
(before the day of Death and Judgment come, when you will experimentally find
what is here said to be true,) Ephesians 5.5. Col. 3.6.
That no such workers of Iniquity shall have any inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ and of God. But suppose they should be admitted into that blessed place,
they would there find nothing that would be grateful to them: For the joys of
Heaven are all pure and spiritual, and upon that account cannot possibly afford
any satisfaction to their carnal minds. The immaterial felicities of the upper
world agree not at all to their sensual desires, neither would they find any
complacency in those pure and refined delights, because there is no
suitableness in them to their constitutions and inclinations, which are wholly
bent to the gross and transient satisfactions of this world, which perish in
the using, like crackling of Thorns under a Pot, that make a blaze for a little
while and then suddenly vanish away. All the Beatitudes of Heaven, both in
their nature and degree, are congruous only to the dispositions of the Saints,
and suitable to their natures, to the divine principle of purity communicated
to them by God; they are not at all agreeable to the minds of wicked men: and
it is as unreasonable to think that such men can enter into heaven without
virtuous habits and holy dispositions, and divine graces, as to think that a
Lamp can burn without Oil to maintain the flame. Heaven is the habitation of
the Holy God, of spotless Angels, and glorified Souls; it is the Region of the
purest Virtue, and the most perfect Holiness. If ever therefore we desire to
enter into it, and to enjoy God in that blifsful place, we must make it our
chiefest business to purify our selves even as he is pure; for there is no
enjoying him, but by becoming like him; Heb. 12.14.
without holiness no man shall see the Lord. We can have no union to, no
communion with, or enjoyment of God, either in Grace or Glory, without
Holiness; that we may therefore be ready to meet our Lord, we must follow, i.
e. vigorously pursue Righteousness, 2 Timothy 2.22. 1 These. 5.15.
Faith, Charity, Peace, and that which is good: for so an entrance shall be
administered unto us abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Having thus showed wherein this preparation and readiness
for Death and Judgment does consist, and also manifested the indispensible
necessity of it, I proceed to consider

2. The cogent Motive or Argument which our Lord propounds to quicken our zeal
and diligence in making our selves ready to meet him, in these words; For in
such an hour as you think not the Son of Man comes: wherein we may observe
three things to hasten and invigorate our preparations.

(1) The designation of the person to whom the administration of the last
Judgment is committed, the Son of Man. (2) The certainty of his coming, he
comes. (3) The assignation of the time when he will come; in such an hour as
you think not. These three things being duly considered will make us very
zealous in our preparations for the coming of Christ.

i. The designation of the Person, to whom the administration of the last
Judgment is committed, is a very proper motive to quicken us in this important
work; The Son of Man; who is no other then the Lord of Glory, who in obedience
to his Fathers will, and an ardent desire of our happiness, was pleased to take
upon him our nature, and to be born of a pure Virgin ( Joseph being his reputed
Father) in whose Womb, and of whose substance he was conceived by the Holy
Ghost; and by a real and proper parturition was born into the world, in the
fullness of time, Gal. 4.4.
and at the very season which God had appointed for the redemption of Men, in
respect whereof he styles himself The Son of Man.

The original power of Judgment does certainly belong to God, who has an
absolute sovereignty over his Creatures; he as grand Lord of all the world has
entrusted us with various gifts and talents; an improvement whereof he will
require from us, and exact an account of our obedience. But such is the
brightness and glory of his Majesty, Exodus 33.20.
that we poor mortals are unable to behold him. If he should display the Beams
of his glory to us we should certainly be astonished and overwhelmed with his
dreadful presence. It has therefore pleased him to constitute the Son of Man
to execute that last and grand trust of his Mediatory Office, because he is
capable, by reason of his human nature which he assumed from his Mother, of
being visible to an eye of flesh; The father judges no man, Joh. 5.22, 27.
but has committed all judgment unto the Son, and has given him authority to
execute judgment, because he is the Son of Man. This Doctrine of his second
coming, our Savior before his ascension into Heaven, gave in strict charge to
his Apostles principally and publicly to preach unto the People; Acts 10.42.
That it was he which was ordained of God to be judge of the quick and dead.

To him the Father delegated his power, and commissioned him to be his Agent in
performing this great work. chapter 17.31.
He has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world with
righteousness, by a man, Dan. 7.13, 14.
(that peculiar man mentioned in Daniel's Vision) whom he has ordained and
confirmed under the broad Seal of Heaven, John 6.27. to judge the world. The
Lord himself shall descend from heaven, the Mediator between God and Man shall
come in his own person, and not by a representative; every eye shall see him:
tho to agrandize his Advent, all the holy Angels shall attend him, 2 These. 1.7,
8.
He shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, to
take vengeance of them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus. Now if the Judge be appointed, and that the Son of Man is the person
to whom the office of executing judgment is consigned; that the Divine Goodness
has committed it into his hands, who has taken upon him our nature, has born
our griefs, has felt our infirmities, and undergon those chastisements by
which our peace of reconciliation with God, our salvation and happiness were
purchased and effected. The consideration hereof should deeply engage us to
make our selves ready to meet our Sovereign Lord: For what can we wish more in
our own favor than this? that he shall be our Judge, who has been touched with
a fellow feeling of our miseries, and can have compassion of our infirmities.
For his coming we should be always ready, because none but such as are in a
prepared state shall partake of the joys which God has laid up for those that
love him.

ii. It is certain that the Son of Man will come; he is about it, upon the
point of coming. As for those persons that have the impudence and impiety to
redicule and deride this fundamental Article of our Christian Faith; they are
generally such as deny the Being and Providence of God, the immortality of the
Soul, and future rewards and punishments. Men of Atheistical principles and
dissolute lives, whose interest it is that this Doctrine should not be true,
because it lays a great restraint upon their Lusts; and fills them with fears
and terrors, and dreadful expectation of fiery wrath and indignation, which
shall be their portion, if in the end they should prove mistaken; but their
judgment is not to be relied upon against the consentient belief of men of all
Ages and Nations to the contrary; for not only the Greeks and Romans, (persons
among whom Arts and Sciences, Learning and Policy have been improved to a
considerable degree) but also the rude and barbarous people, among whom little
of Policy, or Religion, or good Manners are to be met with, have been of this
persuasion, That the Soul is immortal and destined to a future life, in joy or
misery, according to its demerits in this life, and that there shall pass
future scrutinies after death upon the actions of this life. That there are
places of rest and pleasure provided for good men. Some Paradysical Gardens,
and Elizian Fields, where they shall partake of purer joys, and sweeter
delights, then the finest sensitive pleasures.

On the other hand, that black and dismal Regions are assigned for wicked men,
ubi fera regnat Erinnys, where they shall be tormented by infernal Furies,
frightful Officers, and grim Judges, and dreadful punishments, such as Ixion
and Titius suffered, who are said to have a Vulture perpetually gnawing his
Vitals. But suppose that this sort of men were wiser then all the world
besides, yet it is a great piece of rudeness and incivility to maintain a
Position contrary to the sentiments of all mankind: and their deriding the
Doctrine of Christ's Advent, and scurrilously sporting with that which we
account an essential principle of the Christian Religion, is a clear agument of
the truth and verity of it, and of the near approach of his coming. So St.
Peter affirms, that there shall come in the last days, (a little before the Son
of Man appears) Scoffers walking after their own lusts, and saying, 2 Pet.
3.3, 4.
where is the promise of his coming; for since the Fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the Creation. They observed no discernible
change or alteration, saving that men die, and others succeed in their room,
and so for ought they know, may continue for ever. In the following verses, v.
8.9.
he reflects their Argument, and shows that a thousand years (which by a
Synecdoche, may be put for the longest revolution of time), is with an infinite
and eternal God, but as one day: who, tho he protracts his promise, has not
changed his purpose, but will fulfill it; and his forbearing to do it, is out
of abundance of patience and long-suffering to Sinners, as also for the tender
love he bears to his Spouse the Church, which is a Body made up of collective
parts, and by degrees; in fluxu and corpore temporum, as Tertul. says, in
every Age and Generation there being more or less to be gathered into Christ's
Sheepfold, which shall obtain Salvation; and tho there are strifes and
contentions, divisions and schisms within the Church's Bosom, which break her
peace and unity, by a voluntary recession of some of her members from her
Communion, upon the account of stricter Purity, Vid. The Bishop of Worcester's
unreasonableness of Separation.
which was the Plea of Parmenian and Petilian in the last Conference at
Carthage, of Felicissimus and his Brethren for their separation from St.
Cyprian, and of the Meletians, Luciferians, and Donatists in general; Tho there
be heretical Opinions and erroneous Doctrines, which externally oppose the
sound fundamental Principles of Christian Religion, and undermine the Faith of
Christ in some one or more essential Branches of it; yet these things must be,
1 Cor. 11.19
that they which are approved may be made manifest: and that others who are now
in being, or yet unborn, may in succession of time be added to the Church, and
by Faith and Repentance obtain Salvation; for this reason, that the seed of
Christians, that the numbers of Believers may be completed, the conflagration
of the world is protracted, and the great Judge delays his coming; but for
this, he will most certainly perform his word. We have the highest testimony
that can be given to confirm us in the belief of this Article of our Faith,
viz. of good men, who spoke by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, of blessed
and glorious Angels, of God, and Christ himself, who at his Ascension into
Heaven, gave his disconsolate Apostles an assured promise that he would come
again.

We have the testimony of good men, who spoke as they were inspired. God was
pleased in former times to reveal his mind unto his Prophets by sundry degrees
and parcels, and in diverse forms and manners of Revelation. To the Prophet
Daniel he communicated this great truth in a vision by night, to whom this
great Assize was represented after the manner of the great Synedrion or
Consistory of Israel; V. Mr. Mede's Answer to Dr. Meddus.
Wherein the Pater Judicii had his Assessors (as afterward Constantine the
Great had in the Synod of Nice) sitting semicircle wise before him, from his
right hand to his left. Dan. 7.10, 13, 14.
He beheld till the Thrones were pitched down, for the Senators to sit upon,
and the Ancient of Days (Pater Consistorii, who is the King and Judge of all;
so called, because of his eternal Deity, which is without beginning of time, or
end of days) did sit, whose Garment was white as Snow, and the hair of his Head
like pure Wool, his Throne was like the fiery Flames; a fiery stream issued,
and came forth from before him (Words denoting his Majesty and Righteousness in
Judgment, and his Justice in giving Sentence) thousand thousands ministered unto
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; and the Books, viz.
of Conscience, and of God's eternal Decree were opened, and behold, one like
the Son of man came with the Clouds of Heaven, etc. a very lively description
of Christ's Advent; for it well agrees with what the Apostles and Evangelists
have said of it in the New Testament.

To this may be added Job's evidence concerning it; he was a good man, and had
his hopes fixed above the felicity of this world; his Faith mounted aloft in
the serious meditation of a Redeemer, and in the premeditation of his coming to
Judgment. Job 19.25, 26.
I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the Earth. It was an Article of this holy Patriarch's Faith, that at the end of
the World, the day of the general Resurrection and Judgment, Jesus Christ
should appear in person on Earth, and raise up his people, and vindicate them
from all the injuries and reproaches which are now cast upon them, and bring
them to glory; and that the Judge should be visible, he affirms in the
following words, In my flesh shall I see God: In this numerical body, which is
now full of sores and ulcers; in this putrid, rotten flesh, which is now in a
great measure wasted and consumed, and shall certainly become a prey to worms,
and put on rottenness and corruption; in this same body (which shall be raised
from the Grave by the mighty power of God, and be reunited to my soul), with
these same eyes which I now have, shall I see my Redeemer, whom I shall see for
my self, and not by a deputy or proxy, but in my own person, for my own comfort
and benefit, and to my own infinite happiness and satisfaction. Mine eyes shall
behold him, and not another. With these organs of light shall I see the Judge
in his own proper person, and not in any representative of him.

This was an early Doctrine in the Church of God, and ought for the great
antiquity thereof to be believed and reverenced; for it is as old as Enoch, the
seventh Patriarch in a descent of the Churches line from Adam; a very good man,
who was the great Instance of Piety and Virtue in a corrupt Age: and for his
extraordinary obedience, received an unusual reward, viz. a bodily change, from
a mortal and corruptible, to an immortal and incorruptible state, without any
separation of his soul from his body; Being translated, Heb. 11.5.
that he should not see death. This righteous person has given in his suffrage
to this Doctrine, saying. Behold, Jude, v. 14.15.
the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all.
But, forasmuch as guilty Criminals endeavor to banish the thoughts of the
Judges coming out of their minds, this great Article of the Christian Religion,
had need of all the strength of evidence that can be given it. Therefore we
have in the second place,

(2.) The infallible testimony of pure and spotless Angels, that are confirmed
in holiness and goodness. Two of those blessed Spirits, who descended from
Heaven to attend upon our Savior's glorious and triumphant Ascension into
Heaven, told his Disciples (who waited on their Lord to the top of Mount
Olivet, and there saw him taken up, and received out of their sight by a Cloud)
that his going away from them was not a final departure, but only for a time,
and with a full purpose of returning again. While they steadfastly looked toward
Heaven, (earnestly observing him) as he went up, Acts 1.10, 11
behold two men stood by him in white Apparel, i. e. Two Angels appeared to
them in the shape of men in a shining glorious Attire, according as Matt. 28.3.
Angels are wont to do, to signify that they retain their native purity, and to
represent the joyfulness of the message they are usually sent upon. Indeed, Joy
had never so great reason to break forth reduntantly, as at our Lord's
Ascension into Heaven. These Angelical Messengers rouzed the Disciples out of
the extatical Trance they were in, at that glorious sight, and said unto them;
This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like
manner, as ye have seen him go into Heaven: He shall certainly come to judge
the World, in as glorious a manner as he left it. When he departed from the
World, he was received up into Heaven by Angels; and when he shall come again,
he shall be attended with his Satellites and Officers of State and Royalty,
myriads, and legions of Angels. Then a Cloud more than ordinarily bright and
resplendent carried him out of his Apostles sight; at his second coming the
innumerable Inhabitants of the whole World, all that ever descended out of the
loins of Adam, shall see him coming in the Clouds with great power and glory.
Mark 13.26. 1 These. 4.16.
He shall certainly and infallibly descend from Heaven, and the bodies of all
the righteous and good men that ever lived, shall rise first; and then all that
are alive on Earth, and remain, shall be caught up together with them (either
by some immediate and attractive power of Christ, or by the Arms of Angels)
into the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air, where this great Assize shall be
held, as being most convenient both for the capacity of the place, and the more
eminent visibility of the Judge and Assessors; whom all the wicked shall behold
with terror and astonishment, Jude, v. 15.
and then and there be so fully convinced of all their ungodly deeds, which
they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which they have
spoken, That they shall accuse themselves as Apollodore did in a dream,
fancying himself to be in a Cauldron of boiling Lead: I am the cause of this
Vengeance: our destruction is from our selves, we are the Authors of this
misery; For we hated instruction, and our hearts despised reproof, and obeyed
not the voice of our Teachers, nor inclined our ears to them that instructed
us. We regarded not the seasonable and tender admonitions of our Parents,
Friends and Ministers, who warned us to flee from the wrath to come. These
hardened, reprobate Sinners, shall now tremble to see and hear the severity and
righteousness of the judicial proceedings, and more especially at their own
final doom and sentence to everlasting Burnings; whilst the Righteous are
adjudged to life eternal, to enjoy the sweet and comfortable presence of Christ
for evermore. This is the testimony of Angelical Witnesses: Now if we receive
the witness of Angels,

(3.) The witness of God the Father, and the assured promise of God the Son is
greater, and we have both these to confirm this Truth.

(1.) The witness of God the Father, who has assured us that he will bring
every work into judgment, Eccles. 12.14.
with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. He will
execute Justice and Mercy, in retributing men according to their deeds: But he
will transact this great work by the Son, Romans 2.16. to whom he has committed
his power, John 5.22. And he is the faithful God, who has never yet failed in
the performance of one tittle of his word or promise to his people; and he will
not be deficient in this. He has appointed the day of Judgment, and has
ordained the person of the Judge; he has given assurance, public and evident
demonstration unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. Acts
17.31.
His Resurrection is a sound Argument of God's setting his Seal to his
Commission; of his Constituting and Confirming him Ecumenical Judge of all the
World. To it, our Lord, when he was upon Earth, appealed, as the great proof
that he shall come again to execute that judicial Office, and by it, that is,
the resurrection from the dead, he is declared to be the Omnipotent Son of God,
to whom all Power was given by the Father.

(2.) The assured promise of God the Son. In the last Sermon which our Savior
Preached to his beloved Disciples, he told them that the time of his departure
was at hand, and gave them his last advice, and dying charge: A new Commandment
give I unto you, that ye love one another. They were very much troubled to hear
of parting with their dearest Lord, who had resolved all their doubts,
satisfied their scruples, instructed their ignorance, and upon all occasions
most sweetly communicated to them his heavenly doctrine, and holy comforts. It
was very afflictive to them to understand from his own mouth, that he was about
to leave them; whereupon he advises them not to be discouraged at it: John
14.1.
Let not your hearts be troubled, nor be afraid. He was but returning home, and
going to his Father's House: the end of his going was to prepare mansions of
Glory for them, and for all his faithful Servants; and he promises to come
again, and make them partakers of his Glory. V. 3.
If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto
my self, that where I am, there ye may be also. Heb. 11.11.
Faithful is he that has promised, who also will do it: He will not fail the
performing of his promise, nor his peoples expectations. He that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry.

Now the certainty and full assurance of his coming being thus established by
the plain evidence of God, Angels and Men; should breed in us a most attentive
and accurate regard to every thing that we say or do; should make us very
serious in our thoughts, words and works; should mightily restrain us from
vice, and quicken us to virtue; and beget in us a care and conscience in all
our actions, because we must undergo a severe trial; upon the issue whereof
depends our everlasting woe, or endless felicity. We shall be guilty of the
greatest unfaithfulness, of the basest treachery to our precious souls, if we
do not provide for that great account, and prepare for the coming of our Lord,
and patiently expect his appearance.

iii. I proceed in the last place to consider the uncertainty of the time when
our Lord will come: In such an hour as ye think not. The Wisdom of God has
thought fit to keep secret the particular time of the Judges coming, that we
might not spend our thoughts upon it, nor out of curiosity enquire into it. He
has not revealed it to the holy Angels, and therefore it cannot be expected
that he should communicate it to any of the Sons of men, because it is not at
all necessary that they should know it, but believe it, and walk by Faith and
Works, and labor in the Vineyard till the Son of man comes: Of that day and
hour knows no man; (...) 13.32, ^^, etc.
no, not the Angels which are in Heaven; neither the Son (as man only) but the
Father. Take ye heed, watch and pray; for ye know not when the time is, etc.
Verses 35, 36. When ever he comes, Rev. 3.3.
it will be by way of surprise to many. So he told the Church of Sardis; If
thou will not watch, I will come on thee as a Thief, and thou shall not know
when I will come upon thee. The Thief comes when the Master of the House least
expects him, in the dead and solitary time of the night, when all the
Inhabitants are asleep: Such will be the coming of the Son of Man; who (a
little before my Text) represents it by the coming of the great Deluge in the
days of Noah; or, as the Fire and Brimstone came upon the Cities of Sodom and
Gemorrah; as Thro's and Pangs come upon a Woman with Child. As a Snare shall it
come upon all that dwell upon the face of the Earth. Now when a Fowler lays a
Snare to take a Bird, he gives no warning, but surprizeth it suddenly: even so
will the Judge of all the world come upon the generality of men, when they
promise themselves peace and security, and walk at ease, and think of nothing
but plenty and pleasure; of laying House to House, and Field to Field; of
Mansions and Manors; of reigning as Kings on the Earth, and of Lording it over
their fellow servants. Behold, the Judge stands at the door ready to surprise
them when they are most secure. And this may be our case, if we keep not up our
watch.

If therefore the Kingdom of Heaven be worth securing, and the salvation of
your souls be dear and precious to you, it is both your wisdom and your
interest, speedily, and without delays, to set upon this necessary and glorious
work: For it is no easy matter to obtain Heaven and Happiness, neither is it
the work of a few spare minutes to shake off evil habits, and to attire the
Soul with divine Graces and Virtues, that it may appear without spot or wrinkle
in the Bridegrooms presence. Be not deceived, it is not a few penitential tears
in the time of Sickness, and last Visitation, that can purge the soul from the
pollution of Sin, which it has been contracting many years; or change its
temper, and in a moment put it into a readiness for a future state. It is not
safe for us to run so great a hazard; we are not sure that we shall dye
deliberately, and by slow degrees. But suppose that a fore going Sickness
should by little and little weaken the powers of Nature, the Devil will then be
very busy in tempting us, and the Flesh unable to bear the burden of Sickness,
and sink under the groans of expiring Nature. If we have then our great work to
do, our Oil to get, and our Lamps to trim when the Bridegroom comes, the door
will be shut upon us, and we shall bewail to all eternity the folly of slipping
a season which can never be regained.

Let me therefore bespeak you (dear Christians) in words of love and
tenderness; and beseech you by all the obligations that your holy profession
lays upon you, by all the kindness which you bear to your immortal souls, and
the desire which you have to be eternally happy; seriously to prepare to meet
your Lord. Go hence from the House of God, with fixed resolutions, from this
time forth, to depart from all iniquity, and to live righteously, soberly, and
godly in this present World, looking for the glorious appearance of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the mighty working,
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. To whom, with the Father,
and Holy Spirit, three Persons, but one Eternal God, be Glory, Honor and
Power, now and for ever.

The CHARACTER.
I Have now performed my duty to the Living, by showing them both generally,
and particularly, that a good life is the best preparation for Eternity; and
that the way to dye happily, is to live holily. It remains, that I do now, in
some measure discharge my respects to the Dead, whose memory will be precious
among all good Christians, for his many personal Excellencies, and usefulness
in his Generation.

It Is a sad and mournful occasion that we are met upon, to Solemnize the
Funeral Rites and Obsequies of so dear a Friend and Relation: But this is our
comfort, that his whole life was an excellent Comment upon this Text; for tho
his Visitation was short (as for the most part is usual in such Apoplectical
Distempers as carried him off) and his Death sudden and surprising to us, from
whom he was snatched away in a little time: yet it could not be so to him, who
by the infirmities of a crazy body, and by many sensible decays of Nature, was
put in mind of his approaching change; and no doubt but his preparations for
Eternity were answerable to his frequent and almost daily warnings: For as in
his youthful days he was (by the mercy of God, a well disposed Nature, and a
virtuous Education) preserved from all gross Sins and Vices; so in his riper
years he lived a life of strict Virtue.

I am no great Favourer of Funeral Elogies, because they look like mercenary
Flattery, if there be not some extraordinary merit to lay a just foundation for
them: but the Righteous ought to be had in perpetual remembrance, and the
memorial of the Just shall be praised. It Is justice to give every man his due
praise, and to commend those whose virtuous lives are bright and illustrious to
others; and it is kindness to the living to hold before their eyes a shining
light, a glorious pattern of Virtue to guide and direct them to walk in the
paths of Holiness and Peace, and to beget in them the like Goodness and
Charity. Thus our deceased Friend in his life and practice did shine as a
burning Lamp, and adorned his holy Profession by a good Conversation.

His divine Soul was inflamed with a fervent love and zeal for God, and
possessed with a holy fear and awe of his glorious Majesty, whom he served with
Reverence and filial Obedience. His Piety did consist more in the vital and
substantial parts of Religion, than in Circumstantials. He had a sincere love
for the Preaching of the Word, which he waited upon with diligence; to the end,
that he might learn his duty, and grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus
Christ; whom to know, and in whom to believe, is life eternal. His attendance
upon the Word was with constancy, if his infirm body would give him leave; and
he heard it with reverence, as the word of Life and Salvation. Great was his
regard for the Lord's Day, not only to keep it holy himself, but to see that
his whole Family did strictly observe and sanctify it; not only by resting from
their worldly labors, and putting on finer Clothes, etc. but by performing
religious Exercises, and improving the present Vacation from the works of their
Callings, unto a more diligent attendance on God in the public and private
Duties of Religion, and in the spiritual concernments of their Souls.

The Government of his Family was very decent and regular, his House was an
Oratory of Devotion, wherein Morning and Evening Sacrifice was daily offered to
God, and some portion of Holy Scripture was read with seriousness and devotion,
with love and delight; and Prayer was the beginning and ending of every day:
And this I assure you is the duty of all Masters of Families, which they ought
to see performed in their Families; for the care and charge of Souls is
committed to them. There they are Kings to rule, Prophets to teach, and Priests
to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices for themselves, and for those under their
roof. They, their Children and Servants ought to serve the Lord, and their
neglect thereof is one chief cause of all that Atheism and Irreligion which too
much abounds in the Age we live in.

To this may I add his secret Devotion in private, which was most constantly
and diligently performed by him, The spirit of Religion eminently dwelt in this
good man: His Devotions were fervent and serious; his affections and desires
were in a great measure crucified to the world, and all the delights and
pleasures of it. He was clothed with Humility as with a Garment, and
beautified with the goodly ornament of a calm, meek and quiet Spirit, which in
the sight of God is of great price. His Mind was exquisitely tender and
compassionate: His kindness and charity truly admirable; for he loved, relieved
and assisted all necessitous Objects according to his ability. In company he
was pleasant, cheerful and facetiously witty. His behavior was modest and
affable, kind and courteous to all sorts of people: By the evenness of his
temper, and sweet disposition, and friendly deportment, he gained the love and
respect of good men. His Servants speak him to be a kind respective Master, and
we all know that he was a true Friend, a good Neighbor, a very useful and
serviceable person in his Generation; a Patron to several Fatherless Children
and Orphans, a true lover of his King and Country; sober and temperate in every
thing; in his Diet, in his Apparel, in his Words and Behavior; prudent in the
management of his own and others Affairs wherein he was much employed; a good
Housekeeper according to his degree and ability, and a great support to many
indigent and needy persons. In a word, his many virtuous Qualities, and
praiseworthy Deeds, deserve to be commemorated and recommended to your
practice: But he is gone to his unchangeable state. God grant that we who
survive may all of us tread in the steps of his exemplary Piety and Virtue, of
his unwearied diligence and patient continuance in well doing. May the Echo of
his Praises tend to the setting forth of God's Glory; to whom be ascribed by us
and the whole company of his Saints, as is most due, eternal praises, Amen,
Amen.

FINIS.

