A COPY OF THE PROPOSITIONS SENT From the Army to the Parliament by Lieut.
General Cromwell, for the removal of several grievances particularly
expressed therein. With the Names of those Lords and Commoners, authorized by
both Houses of Parliament, for relief of all those soldiers, or any other
persons who have done service for the Parliament, and to free them from all
troubles, suites, and vexations for the same.

LONDON: Printed for G. R. May 24.

The Copy of a Letter from an Officer in the Army, to a Person of honor.
Right Honorable.
I Have here enclosed, the Copy of the Propositions of the Army for the
removeall of the agreements sent by Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell, delivered to him,
Field Marshall General Skippon, Com. Ireton, and Col. Fleetwood, as the sense
of the whole Army: But the main thing which the Officers and Soldiers do
expect is the passing of the Act of Indemnity, I doubt not but these desires
will be looked upon as humble representations of their grievances, And I hope
their will be such a right understanding, that this Army will disband in love,
and they lay down their Arms in peace, and all things settled to Gods glory,
and the peace and tranquillity of the Church and Kingdom And so prays

Your Honorable servant, G. SMITH.
Walden the 21. of May, 1647.
May 21. 1647.
The Lords and Commons in Parliament do ordain and declare, That no person, or
persons whatsoever, who have since the beginning of this present Parliament.
Acted, or done any Act, or thing whatsoever by Authority of Parliament, or for
the service or benefit thereof, by Sea or by Land, ought not to be sued,
indicted, prosecuted or molested for the same: And that every such person or
persons whatsoever, are and shall be hereby fully acquitted and discharged, etc.

Earl of Northumberland. Earl of Kent. Earl of Rutland. Earl of Pembroke.
Earl of Lincoln. Earl of Nottingham. Earl of Suffolk, Earl of Salsbury.
Earl of Warwick. Earl of Denbigh. Earl of Middlesex. Earl of Manchester.
Earl of Mulgrave, Earl of Stamford. Viscount Hereford. Viscount Say. Lord
De-la-ware. Lord Berkly. Lord Wharton. Lord Willoghby. Lord North. Lord
Hunsdone. Lord Gray of warke. Lord Roberts. Lord Howard. Lord Bruce.
Commons.
Mr. Hollis. Col. Birch. Mr. Swinson. Mr. Maynard. Mr. Boys. Mr. Recorder. Mr.
Soliciter. Col. Purefoy. Col Harvey. Sir Phil. Staphleton. Col. Morley. Will.
Allenton. Livet. Genesis Massey. Mr. Whitlock. Sir Gilbert Garard. Sir William
Waller. Mr. Edwards. Mr. Challener. Livet. Gen: Crumwell. Mr. Tate. Sir William
Massan. Sir Sam. Luke. Mr. Lisle F. M. Genesis Skippon. Mr. Fr. Allen. Col.
Walton. Mr. Rigby. Sir John Maynard. Mr. Seldom. Mr. Got. Sir Will. Breurton,
Mr. Grimston. Mr. Darley. Mr. Dove, Sir Fr. Bampfield. Lord Monson. Sir Mich.
Livesey. Sir Thomas Widdrington. Sir Ar. Hazilrigge. Mr. Bainton. Mr. Nicholes.
Mr. Weaver. Mr. Not: Fines. Col. Rainsbourough. Major. Harison. Mr. Wall. Long.
Mr. Hollows. Mr. Mich. Corbet. Col. Thomson. Mr. Drake. Sir Thomas Middleton.
Mr. William Perpoint.
A Copy of the Propositions sent from the Army to the Parliament, by Lieutenant
General Cromwell for the removal of several grievances particularly
expressed therein.
FIrst, that whereas it pleases the honorable houses of Parl. upon mis
information falsely suggested unto them, to declare and immediately publish in
print to to the Kingdom, that the Petition of the Army, being but only an
intention, did tend to put the Army into a distemper and mutiny, to obstruct
the relief of Ireland, and to put conditions upon the Parl. and declaring the
Petitioners, if they shall proceed therein, no less then enemies to the State,
and disturbers to the Public Peace, which said heavy charge remaining upon
record, as a Memorandum of infamy upon us to posterity; we cannot choose but be
deeply sensible thereof, and with amazement, wonder how so humble and innocent
adresse, intented to the General, could beget so strange an interpretation,

2. That whereas those persons that have attempted to beget and attempt and
foment divisions between the Parl. and their Army, by their surrepticious
obtaining and misrepresenting our Petitions, and by producing other scandalous
Letters from unknown hands by them produced, the Authors whereof are concealed,
and not brought forth to make a judicial proof of those things laid to our
charge, which we cannot but look upon as a just cause of grief, that the
suggesters of such untruths seem to be encouraged, and we who are innocent
remain unjustified.

That diverse Officers of the Army of public and known integrity, have bin
(upon what grounds we know not) sent for to the Parl. as delinquents; Some
whereof do at this present attend there, and cannot procure a trial, having
nothing considerable laid to their charge, etc.

4. That whereas we understand that the Parl. has voted a sudden disbanding of
the Army, not having made sufficient provision for the auditing of our
arreares, and stating of our accounts, our own reason, and experience of
others, makes us sensible, how difficult, chargeable, and uncertain the
obtaining thereof will be after our disbanding, and therefore justly make us
sensible thereof.

Fifthly, That no provision has bin made for the payment of our dearly earned
wages by the expense of our blood, and often hazard of our lives, saving a vote
of six weeks upon disbanding, which is so mean a requital of our faithful
service, the Kingdom being now settled in peace, that it will inevitably expose
us (especially the private soldiers to great extremities) being hardly
sufficient to maintain many of them in their journies to their own homes.

6. That nothing as yet has been perfected for our future security for things
done as Soldiers, in relation to the war which the exigency thereof has
compelled thereunto, etc.

7. That we stand in fear (especially the private Soldiers) of being impressed
or forced to serve as soldiers out of the Kingdom, many of them having spent
their times freely in the public service of the Kingeome, forsaking their
trades, their only livelihood, to which many desire to return again for their
better future livelihood.

8. That whereas diverse of us (especially the private soldiers) who were
Apprentices in London, and other parts of the Kingdom, have voluntarily engaged
themselves in the service being encouraged thereunto by the Parl. Declaration,
showing that the time that they should so spend in the prosecution thereof,
should be so effectual in order to their freedom, as if they had remained
with their several respective Masters, notwithstanding which many have refused
to give some of us freedoms, who may justly claim it by the Parliaments
Declaration for that purpose.

9. That many soldiers who have lost their lives, widows who have lost their
husbands, and children their parents in this service, and thereby reduced to
great extremities, even to beggary for want of provision for their subsistence,
are not sufficiently provided for a future livelihood.

10. That whereas diverse persons has both privately and publicly labored by
aspersions and false calumnies to make us odious to the Kingdom, having
published many scandalous books, such as Mr. Edwards Gangrena, and diverse
others of that nature, the several particulars whereof we protest against as
most false, and are confident that it proceeded not from any probable ground,
which may argue such an intention in us, but fingly from the malice of our
enemies.

11. That notwithstanding the great care of the Committee and Treasures of the
Army, and the cheerful readiness of most Counties for the paying of
Assesments, as those where we now quarter do affirm, nevertheless the private
soldiers are necessitated to take free quarter for the present, which is very
irksome unto us to be so burdensome to our friends.

Having thus according to your commands, as fully as we are able accounted unto
you, what was the true genuine sense of the Army, and not their imaginary
conceits, but their grievances, that inevitably fall upon us, unless the
Parliament take course to prevent them: if the time allowed us by you would
admit, we could more fully demonstrate. We assume the boldness to entreat you
to be deeply sensible of, and represent to the Parliament these particulars, in
such an humble way, and to right us if we shall be misrepresented to the
Parliament by any, and so far as you can cover our weaknesses, that have or
may slip from us, and prevent any scandals, that the malice of any men do seek
herein to asperse us, when we shall be inquired into.

To the right Honorable Philip Skippon, Field-Marshall General, Lieutenant
General Cromwell, Commissary Gen: Ireton, and Colonel Fleetwood.
FINIS.

