CERTAIN ELEGANT POEMS, WRITTEN By Dr. CORBET, BISHOP OF NORWICH.

London, Printed by R. Cotes for Andrew Crook at the Green Dragon in Paul's
Churchyard, 1647.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lady Teynbam: Her humble Servant N. N. wishes
eternal Beauty, both in this world, and the world to come.
Madam,

I Have read that a poor and mean Lamp of a great Philosopher, has been sold
at a great price; And I have seen a Medail, which in the intrinseck value was
worth little, sold at a great rate, because it had the Name and Image of some
great Person stamped upon it. I therefore that I may gain an extrinseque value
to this Book, have presumed to dedicate it unto you, Madam, in hope that your
Nobleness and gentleness is as great as your Beauty, which delights and
causes admiration in the eyes of all, but those of the envious: And that you
will in the permission of your Name to be set before this Book, imitate the
custom of Kings, who set their Names on coins of Copper, as well as on those
of Gold; and as the King that coins, sets what value he pleases on his
Money; so when your name is set to his Work, I will give it what price (...)
please, and every wise person will ^uy it.

POEMS.
Iter Boreale.
Four Clerks of Oxford, Doctors two, and two,
That would be Doctors, having less to do
With Austin, then with Galen, in Vacation
Changed studies, and turned books to recreation
And on the tenth of August Northward bent,
A journey not so soon conceived as spent.
The first half day they rode, they light upon
A Noble Clergy host, Kitt Middleton;
Who numbering out good dishes with good tales,
The major part o'th cheer weighed down the scales,
And though the countenance make the feast, say books;
We nere found better welcome with worse looks;
Here we paid thanks, and parted, and at night
Had entertainment all in one man's right,
At Flower, a Village, where our Tenant she
Sharp as a winter morning, fierce, yet free,
With a lean visage like a Carved face
On a Court-cupboard, offered up the Place;
She pleased us well, but yet her husband better,
A hearty fellow and a good bone-setter;
Now whither it were providence or luck,
Whether the keepers or the stealers bucke,
There we had ven'son such as Virgill slew,
When he would feast AEneas and his crew;
Here we consumed a day, and the next morn,
To Daintry with a Land-winde we were borne,
It was the Marker, and the Lecture day,
For Lecturers sell Sermons, as the Lay
Do sheep and Oxen, have their seasons just,
For both their Markets, there we drank down dust.
In The interim comes a most officious drudge,
His face and gown draw'd out with the same budge,
His pendant pouch which was both large and wide,
Looked like a Letters Patent by his side:
He was as awful as he had been sent
From Moses with the eleventh Commandment;
And one of us he sought, a man of Flower
He must bid stand, and challenge for an hour:
The Doctors both were quitted of their scare,
The one was hoarse, the other was not there,
Therefore him of the two he seized best,
Able to answer him of all the rest,
Because he needs but ruminate that ore,
Which he had chewed the Sabbath day before;
For though we were resolved to do him right,
For Master Bayleys sake, and Master Wright,
Yet he dissembled that the Mace did err,
For he nor Deacon was, nor Minister;
No quoth the Sergeant, sure then by relation,
You have a license Sir, or Toleration;
And if you have no orders it is the better,
So you have Dods precepts, or Cleavers letter;
Thus looking on his Mace and urging still,
'Twas Master Wrights, and Master Bayleys will,
That he should mount, at last he condescended
To stop the gap, and so the Treaty ended;
The Sermon pleased, and when we were to dine,
We all had Preachers wages, thanks, and wipe.
Our next days stage was Littleworth a Town
Not willing to be noted, or set down,
By any Traveller, for when we had been
Through at both ends, we could not find an Inn,
Yet for the Church sake turn and light we must,
Hoping to find one dram of Wickless dust,
But we found none, for underneath the Pole,
No more rests of his body, then his Soul;
Abused Martyr, how have thou been torn,
By two wild factions! first the Papists burn
Thy bones for hate, the Puritanes in zeal
Do sell thy Marble, and thy Brass they steal.
A Parson met us there who had great store
Of Livings, some say, but of Manners more;
In whose straight cheerful age a man might see
Well governed fortune, bounty, wise and free;
He was our guide to Lester, save one mile,
There was his dwelling where we stayed a while
And drank stale Beer, I think was never new,
Which the dunne wench that brought it us did brew;
And now we are at Lester, where we shall
Leapeo're six steeples and an Hospital
Twice told, those Lande-markes I refer
To Cambdens eye, Englands Chronogropher;
Let me observe the Alms men's Herauldry,
Who being asked what Henry that should be
That was their founder Duke of Lancaster,
Answered, 'T was John of Gaunt, I assure you Sir;
And so consured all their walls that said;
Henry of Ric^mond this foundation laid.
The next thing to be noted was our Cheer,
Enlarged with seven and six pence, bread and beer.
But O you wretched Tapsters as you are,
Who reckon by your number, not your sare;
And set false figures for all Companies,
Abusing innocent Meals, with oaths and lies;
Forbear your Cousnage to Divines that come,
Lest they be thought to drink all that you sum.
Spare not the laity in your reckoning thus,
But sure your thest to us is scandalous.
Away my Muse from this base Subject, know
Thy Pegasus nere struck his soote so low:
Is not the usurping Richard buried here,
That King of hate, and therefore slave of fear;
Dragged from the satall lield Bosworth, where he
Lost life, and what he lived for, Cruelty?
Search, find his name, but there is none; O Kings
Remember whence your Power, and vastness springs:
If not as Richard now, so may you be,
Who has no Tomb, but Scorn and Memory.
And though from his own store Wolsey might have
A Palace, or a College for his grave;
Yet here he lies in^rr'd, as if that all
Of him to be remembered were his fall:
Nothing but earth to earth, nor pompous weight
Upon him but a pebble, or a quayte.
If thou art thus neglected, what shall we
Hope after death that are but shreds of thee?
Hold! William calls to horse, William is he,
Who though he never saw threescore and three,
Ore-reckon'd us in age, as he before
In drink, and will bate nothing of fourscore;
And he commands, as if the warrant came,
From the great Earl himself, to Notinghame:
There we cross Trent, and on the other side
Prayed for Saint Andrew, as up hill we ride.
Where we observed the cunning men like Moles
Dwelt not in houses, but were ^arth'd in holes.
So did they not build upwards, but dig thorough,
As Hetmits Caves, or Coneys do their Borough.
Great underminers sure as any where,
It Is thought the powder Traytots practiced there.
Would you not think that men stood on their heads,
When Gardens cover houses there, like leads,
And on the Chimnies top, the maid may know,
Whether her potrage boil, or not, below;
There cast in herbs, or Salt, or bread, her meat,
Contented rather with the smoke, then heat.
This was the rockie Parish, higher stood
Churches and houses, buildings, stone and wood,
Crosses not yet demolished, and our Lady,
With her arms on; embracing her whole Baby:
Where let us note, though these be Northern parts,
The Cross finds in them more then Southern hearts.
The Castle's next; but what shall we report,
Of that which now is ruin, was a fort?
The Gates, two Statues keep, which Giants are,
To whom, it seems, committed is the care
Of the whole downfall, if it be your fault,
If you are guilty, may King David's vault
Or Mortimers dark Cell contain you both,
A just reward for so profane a sloth;
And if hereafter tidings shall be brought
Of any place, or office to be bought,
And your left lead, or unwedg'd timber yet
Shall pass by your consent to purchase it,
May your deformed Bulkes endure the edge
Of axos, feel the beerle and the wedge,
May all the ballads be called in and dye,
That sing the wars of Colebrand, and Sir Guy;
O ye that do Guild Hall and Holmby keep
So carefully when both the Founders sleep,
You are good Giants, and partake no shame,
With these two worthless trunks of Notingham:
Look to your several charges, we must go,
Though grieved at heart to leave a Castle so.
The Bull-head is the word, and we must eat,
No sorrow can descend so low as meat:
So to the Inn we came, where our best che^re,
Was that his Grace of York had lodged there.
He was objected to us when we call,
Or dislike ought, my Lords Grace answers all;
He was contented with this bed, this diet,
This keeps our discontented stomachs quier.
The Inn keeper was old, fourscore almost,
Indeed an Emblem, rather then an Host:
In whom we read how God and Time decree,
To honor thrifty Hostlers, such as he:
For in the stable first he did begin,
Now see he is so^e Lord of the whole Inn.
Mark the increase of straw, and hay, and how
By thrift a bottle may become a Mow,
Mark him all ye that have the golden Itch,
All whom God has condemned to be rich;
Farewell glad father of thy daughter Mayresse,
Thou Hostler Phoenix, thy example rare is.
We are for Newarke after this sad talk,
And thither it is no journey but a walk,
Nature is want on there, and the high way
Seemed to be private though it open lay;
As if some swelling Lawyer for his health,
Or srantique Usurer to ^ame his wealth,
Had chosen out two miles by Trent, to try
Two great effects of Art and Industry:
The ground we tread is meadow fertile land,
New trimmed, and leveld by the Mowers hand,
Above ^t grew a rock, rude, steep and high,
Which claims a kind of Reverence from the Eye:
Betwixt them both there flides a lively stream,
Not lo^d, but swift: M^ande was a Theme
Crooked and rough, but had those Poets seen
Streight-even Trent, it had immortal been;
This side the open plain admits the Sun,
To half the River which did open ru^ne;
The other half ra^ne clouds, where the curld wood
With his exalted head threatened the flood:
Here I could wish us never passing by,
And never past; Now Newarke is too nigh;
And as a Christmasse seem a day but short,
Deluding times with revels, and good sport,
So did this beaurious mixture us beguile,
And the whole twelve being travailed seemed one mile.
Now as the way was sweet, so was the End,
Our Passage easy, and our prize a Friend;
Whom there we did enjoy, and for whose sake
As for a kind of purer coin men make
Us lib'rall welcome, with such Harmony
As the whole Town had been his Family
Mine host of the next Inn did not repine
That we perfer'd the Heart and passed his sign:
And where we lay the host and hostess saine
Would show our loves were aimed at, nor their gain.
The very beggars were so ingenuous,
They rather pray sor him, then beg of us;
And so the Doctors friends be pleased to stay,
The P^ritans will let the Organs play.
Would they pull down the Gallery builded new,
With the Church wardens seat and Burleigh pew?
Newarke for light, and beauty might compare
With any Church, but what Cathedrals are:
To this belongs a Vi^ar, who succeeded
The friend I mentioned, such a one there needed,
A man whose life and tongue is eloquent,
Able to char^ those n^inous head^ of Trent,
And urge the Canon home when they conspire
Against the Cross and B^ls with sword and fire:
There stood a Castle too, they show us here
The place where the King slept, the window where
He talked with such a Lord, how long he stayed
In his discourse, and all but what he said.
From whence without a perspective we see
Bever and Lincoln, where we feign would be,
But that our purse, and horses too were bound
Within the compass of a n^rrower ground.
Our purpose is all homeward, and 'twas time
At parting to have wi^, as well as wine.
Full th^ee a clock and twenty miles to ride,
Will ask a speedy horse, and a sure Guide:
We wanted both, and Lowborough may glory,
Error has made it famous in our story.
'Twas night, and the swift horses of the Sun
Two hours b^ore our Jades their race had run;
Nor pilor, Moon, nor any such kind star,
As guided those Wise men that came from far,
To holy Bethlem; such lights had they binne
They would have soon conveyed us to an Inn:
But all were wandering stars, and we as they
Were taught no course but to ride on and stray:
When Oh the fate of darkness, who has tried it,
Here our whole Fleet it scattered, and divided!
And now we labor more to mere, then erst
We did to lodge; the last cries down the first;
Our voices are all spent, and they that follow
Can now no longer tracke us by the hollow;
They curse the foremost, we the hindmost, both
Accusing with like patience, haste, and sloth.
At last upon a little Town we fall,
Where some for drink, some for a candle call:
Unhappy we! such straglers as we are,
Admire a Candle oft^er then a star;
We care not for those glorious lights aloof,
Give us a ^allow Candle, a dry roof.
And now we have a guide, we will cease to chase,
Now we have time to pray the rest be safe,
Our guide before cries Come, and we the whiles
Ride blindfold, and take bridges to be styles,
Till at the last we overcome the dark,
And spite of night and error hit the mark:
Some half hour after enters the whole rail,
As if they were committed to the Jayle;
The Constable that took 'em thus divided,
Made 'em seem apprehended and not guided,
Where when we had our fortunes both detes^ed,
Compassion made us friends, and so we rested;
It Was quickly morning, though by our short stay,
We could not find that we had less to pay;
All Travelers these heavy judgments hear,
A handsome hostess makes a reckoning dear;
Her smiles, her words, your purses must requ^ 'em,
And every welcome from her adds an Item.
Glad to be gone from hence, at any rate,
For Bosworth we are horsed: behold the sat
Of mortal men, foul error is a mother,
And pregnant once does soon beget another:
We who last night did learn to lose our way,
Are perfect since, and further out next day,
And in a Forest having travaild sore,
Like wandering Bevi(...) he found the Boar,
Or as some Love-sicke Lady of^ has done,
Before she was rescued by the knight o^th Sun,
So are we lost, and meet no comfort then
But Carts and horses, wiser then the men:
Which is the way? They neither speak, nor point,
Their tongues and fingers, both are out of joint,
Such monsters by Cole Herton banks there sit,
After their Resurrection from the pit.
Whiles in this Mill we labor and turn round,
As in a Conjurers circle, William found
A means for our delivery, Turn your clokes
Quoth he, for Pucke is busy in these Oaks;
If ever ye at Bosworth will be found,
Then turn your Cloakes, for this is Fairie ground.
But e're this witchcraft was performed, we meet
A very man, who had not cloven feere,
Though William still of little says does doubt,
It Is Robin or some Spirit walks about,
Strike him, quoth he, and it will turn to air,
Cross your selves thrice, and strike him: Strike that dare
Thought I, for sure this massy Forester,
In blows will prove the better Conjurer;
But 'twas a gentle keeper, one that knew
Humanity and manners where they grew,
And rode along with us, till he could say,
Lo yonder Bosworth stands, and this your way.
And now when we had sweat, 'twixt Sun and Sun;
And eight miles long, to thirty broad had run,
We learned the just proportion from hence,
Of the Diameter, and Circumference.
That night made yet amends, our meat, our sheeres,
Were far above the promise of those streets,
Those houses that were til'd with straw and moss,
Promised but weak repair for that days loss
Of patience, yet this outside lets us know,
The worthy'st things make not the greatest show.
The shot was easy, and what concerns us more,
The way was so, mine host did ride before,
Mine host was full of Ale, and History,
And on the morrow when he brought us high
Where the two Roses joined, you would suppose,
Chaueer nere writ the Romant of the Rose,
Hear him: see ye yond' woods? there Richard lay
With his whole Army: look the other way,
And lo where Richmond in a bed of gross,
Encamped himself over night with all his sorce.
Upon this Hill they met; why, he could tell
The Inch where Richmond stood, where Richard sell;
Besides what of his knowledge he could say,
He had Authenrique notice from the Play;
Which I might guess by's mustrimg up the Ghosts,
And policies not incident to hosts:
But chiefly by that one perspicuous thing,
Where he mistook a Player for a King,
For when he would have said, King Richard died,
And called a Horse, a Horse, he Burbage cried.
How e're his talk, his company pleased well,
His Mare went truer then his Chronicle;
And even for Conscience sake uns purr'd, unbeaten,
Brought us six miles and turned tail to New-Eaton;
From thence to Coventrey, where we scarce dine,
Only our stomachs warmed with zeal and wine,
And thence as if we were predestined sorch,
Like Lot from Sodom, fly to Killingworth.
The keeper of the Castle was from home,
So that half mile was lost; yet when we come
An host receives us there, we never deny him,
My Lord of Losters man, the Parson by him;
Who had no other proose to testify,
He served the Lord, but age and bawdery.
Away for shame, why should three miles divide
Warwick, and us? they that have horses ride,
A short mile from the Town, an humble shrine,
At foore of a high rock consists in sign
Of Guy and his devotions, who there stands,
Ugly and huge, more then a man on's hands,
His Helmet steel, his Gorget Mayle, his Shield
Brass, made the Chapel fearful as a field.
And let this answer all the Popes complaints:
We set up Giants, though we pull down Saints.
Beyond this in the rode way as we went,
A pillar stands where this Colossus leant,
Where he would love, and sigh, and for hearts case
Often times write verses, some say such as these.
Here will I languish in this silly bower,
While my sweere heart triumphs in yonder Tower.
No other hindrance now, but we may pass,
Clear to our Inn; Oh there an hostess was,
To whom the Castle and the dunne Cow are
Sights after dinner, she is morning wa^e,
Her whole behavior borrowed was and mixed,
^se fool, half puppet, and her pace betwixt
Measure and Jigge, her courtsy was an honor,
Her gare as if her neighbors had out gone her;
She was barred up in Whale bones that did leese
None of the whales length, for they reached her knees;
Off with her head, and then she has a middle,
As her Wast stands, just like the new found fiddle,
The favorite Theorbo, truth to tell ye,
Whose neck and throat are deeper then the belly:
Have you seen Monkeys chained about the loins,
Or pottle pots, with rings? just so she joins
Her self together; a dressing she does love,
In a small print below, and text above.
What though her name be King, yet it is no treason,
Nor breach of Statute to enquire the reason
Of her branched russe, a Cubit every poake
I seem to wend her, but she struck the stroke
At our departure, and our worships there
Paid for our titles dear, as any where.
Though Beadles and Professors both have done,
Yet every Inn claims augmentation:
Please you walk out and see the Castle, come,
The owner says, it is a Scholars home,
A place of strength, and health, in the same Fort
You would conceive a Castle and a Court,
The Orchards, Gardens, Rivers and the Ay e
May with the Trenches, Rampires, Walls compare,
It seems no art, no force can intercept it,
As if a Lover built, a Soldier kept it;
Up to the Tower, though it be steep and high,
We do not clime, but walk; and though the eye
Seem to be weary, yet our feet are still
In the same posture, cousn'd up the Hill,
And thus the workemans art deceives our sense,
Making those rounds of pleasure and defense.
As we descend the Lord of all this frame,
The Honorable Chancellor to us came,
Above the hill there blew a gentle breath,
But now we feel a sweeter gale beneath,
The phrase and welcome of this Knight did make
The place more elegant: each word he spoke
Was wine and music, which he did expose
To us if all our art could censure those:
With him there was a Prelate, by his place
Arch deacon to the Bishop, by his face
A greater man, for that did counterfeit
Lord Abbot of some Covent standing yet,
A corpulent relic, marry and'tis sin,
Some Puritan gets not that face called in;
A^ongst lean brethren it may scandal bring,
That look for parity in every thing;
For us let him enjoy all that God sends,
Plenty of flesh, of livings and of friends,
Imagine us here ambling down the street,
Circling in Flower, and making both ends mere,
Where we sare well four days, and did complain
Like harvest folks of weather and of rain,
And on the feast of B^olmew we try,
What Revels that Saint keeps at Ba^bury;
I^h name of God Amen first to begin,
The altar was converted to an Inn,
We lodged in the Chapel by the sign,
But in a banck'rupt Taveme by the wine,
Besides our horses usage makes us think,
'Twas still a Church, for they in Coffins drink,
As if'twere congruous that the ancient stlye
Close by those Altars in whose faith they dye;
Now you believe the Church has great variety
Of Monuments when Innes have such society,
But nothing less, there is no inscription there,
But the Churchwardens of the last year,
In stead of Saints in windows, and in walls,
Here buckets hang, and there a Cobweb falls:
Would you not think they love antiquity,
Who rush their quire for perpetuity,
Whilst all the other pavements and the floor
Are supplicant to the surveyors power
Of the high ways, that he would gravelled keep
Them, or in winter sure they will be deep;
If not for Gods sake, for Master Wheatley's sake,
Level the Walks; suppose these pit-sals make
Him spraine a Lecture, or misplace a joint
In his long prayer, or in his seventeenth point,
Think you the Dawes and S^ares can set him right?
Surely this sin upon your heads will light;
And say, Beloved, what unchristian charm
Is this, you have not left a leg or arm
Of an Apostle? Think you it those were whole,
They would arise at last t'assume a soul?
If not, it is plain all the Idolatry
Lies in your solly, not the imag'ry.
It Is well, the pinnacles are fallen in twain,
For now the devil should he tempt again,
Has no advantage of a place so high:
Fools! he can dash you from your Gallery,
Where all your medley meets, and do compare
Not what you learn, but who was longest there;
The Puritan, the Anabaptist, Brownist,
Like a grand Sallad, Tinkers, what a Town is it?
The Crosses also like old stumps of Trees,
Or stools for horsemen that have seeble knees,
Carry no heads above Ground: those which tell,
That Christ has n^re descended into Hell,
But to the Grave, his picture buried have
In a far deeper dungeon then a Grave,
That is descended to endure what pains
The Devil can think, or such disciples brains.
No more my grief, in such profane abuses
Good whips make better verses then the Muses:
Away, and look nor back, away, while yet
The Church is standing, while the benefit
Osseeing it remains so long you shall
Have that rackt down and called Apocryphal,
And in some Barn hear cited many an Author,
Ka^ Stubs Anne Ascue, or the Ladies daughter,
Which shall be urged for Fathers: stop disdain,
When Oxford once appears Saran refrain.
Neighbors, how has our anger^lius out-gone us,
Is not Saint Gileses this, and that Saint John's?
We are returned, but just just so much ore
As Rauleigh from his voyage, and no more.
R. C.
WHen too much zeal does fire devotion,
Love is not love, but superstition:
Even so in civil duties when we come
Too often, we are not kind, but troublesome,
Yet as the first is not Idolatry,
So is the last, but grieved industry,
And such was mine whose strife to honor you
By overplus, has robbed you of your due.
On Bishop Ravis.
WNen I pass Paul's, and travai^ in the walk,
Where all our British sinners swear and talk,
Old hairy Ruffins, Bankrupts, South sayers,
And youth whose cousenage is as old as theirs;
And there behold the body of my Lord,
Trod under foot by vice which he abhord.
It wounded me the Land lord of all times
Should let long lives and leases to their crimes;
But to his saving honor scarce afford
But so much Sun as to the Prophets Gourd,
Yet since swift flights and envy has best end,
Like breath of Angels with a blessing send,
And vanishes withal, while fouler deeds
Expect a tedious harvest of bad seeds;
I blame not fame and nature if they gave
Where they could add no more, the last a grave;
And justly do thy grieved friends forbear
Bubble and Alablaster boys to rear
Ore thy religious dust, but bid men know
Thy life, which such illusions cannot show;
For thou have dyed amongst those happy ones,
Who trust not in their superstitions,
Their hired Epitaphs, and perjured stone,
Which often belies the soul when she is gone,
But durst commit thy body as it lies,
To tongues of living men, not unborne eyes;
What profits thee a sheet of lead, what good?
If on thy course a marble Quarry stood?
Let those that fear their rising purchase vaults,
And send their statues (...) faults
As if like birds that pick at painted grapes,
Their Judge knew not their persons from their shapes,
Whilst thou assured by thy easy dust
Shall spring at first, they would not, yet they must:
Not need the Chancellor boast, whose Pyramid
Above the Host and altar reared is;
For though thy body fill a narrow room,
Thou shall not change deed^ with him for his Tomb.
R. Corbet.

On Doctor Corbets Father.
VIncent Corbet farther known
By Pointers name then by his own,
Here lies engaged till the day
Of raising bones and quickening clay:
No wonder reader that he has
Two Sir-names in one Epitaph,
For this one does comprehend
All that both families could lend;
And if to know more art then any
Could multiply one into many,
Here a Colony lies then
Both of qualities and men.
Years he lived were near fou^score;
But count his virtues, he lived more;
And number him by doing good,
He lived the age before, the flood.
Should we undertake his story,
Truth would seem feigned, and fainednesse glory:
Besides the Tablet were too small,
Adding the pillars and the wall;
Yet of this volume much, if found,
Writ in many a fertile ground,
Where the Printer thee affords
Earth for Paper, Trees for Words
He was natures Factor here,
And leiger ^gu for every shiere;
To supply the ingenious wants
Of some Spring fruits, and fortaine plants.
Simple he was, and withal,
His purs^ not base, nor prodigal,
Poorer in substance, then in friends,
Future and public were his end^
His conscience like his diet, such
As neither took nor left too much,
So the made laws needless grown
To him, he needed but his own:
Did he his neighbor bid like those
That feast them only to enclose,
Or with their Roastmeat rack their ^^^^^,
And cosen them with their (...) consents?
No the free meeting of his board
Did but one liberal sense afford;
No Close or Aker understood,
But only love and neighborhood
His Alms were such as Paul defines,
Nor causes to be said, but ^^^^^^
Which Alms by faith, hope, love, laid down,
I aid up what now he wea^, a Crown.
Besides his fame, his goods, his life,
He left a grieved son and wife;
Strange sorrow scarce to be b^leev'd,
When as a son and heir is grieved.
R. Corbet.

On the death of Master Rice Manciple of Christ-Church.
WHo can doubt (Rice) to what eternal place
Thy soul is fled, that did but know thy face?
Whose body was so light it might have gone
To heaven without a resurrection;
Indeed tho^ were all Type, thy limbs were signs,
Thy Arteries but Mathematick lines;
As i^ two souls had made the compound good,
Which both should live by faith, and none by blood.
R. C.

To his son Vincent Corbet.
WHat I shall leave thee none can tell,
But all shall say I wish thee well;
I wish thee (Vin) before all wealth,
Both bodily and ghostly health;
Nor too much wealth, nor wit come to thee,
So much of either may undo thee.
I wish thee learning, not for show,
Enough for to instruct, and know;
Not such as Gentlemen require
To prate at Table, or at Fire.
I wish thee all thy mothers graces,
Thy fathers fortunes, and his places.
I wish thee friends, and one'at Count
Not to build on, but support,
To keep thee, not in doing many
Oppressions, but from suffering any.
I wish thee p^ace in all thy way^,
Nor Lazy nor contentious day^s;
And when thy soul and body part,
As innocent as now thou a^.
R. C.

An Elegy on the late Lord William Howard, Baron of Effingham, dead the 10. of
December, 1615.
I Did not know thee, Lord, nor do I strive
To win access, or grace, with Lords alive:
The dead I serve, from whence nor faction can
Move me, nor favor; nor a greater man.
To whom no vice commends me, nor bribe sent,
Fr^ whom no Penance warnes, nor portion spent,
To these I dedicate as much of me
As I can spare from my own husbandry:
And till Ghosts walk, as they were wont to do,
I trade for some, and do these errants too.
But first I do enquire, and am assured,
What trials in their Journeys they endured,
What certainties of Honor and of worth,
Their most uncertain Life times have brought forth;
And who so did least hurt of this small store,
He is my patron, died he rich or poor.
First I will know of Fame (after his peace,
When Flattery and Envy both do cease)
Who rul^d his actions: Reason, or my Lord?
Did the whole man rely upon a word,
A badge of Title, or above all chance
Seemed he as Ancient as his Cognizance?
What did he? Acts of mercy and refrain
Oppre^ions in himself, and in his Train?
Was his essential table full as free
As boasts and invitations use to be?
Where if his Russet-friend did chance to dine,
Whether his Satten-man would fill him wine?
Did he think perjury as loved a sin,
Himself for sworn, as is his slave had been?
Did he seek regular pleasures? was he known
Just Husband of one Wife, and she his own?
Did he give freely without p^use, or doubt,
And read petitions, ere they were worn out?
Or should his well-deserving Client ask,
Would he bestow a Tilting, or a Mask
To keep need virtuous? And that done not fear
What Lady damned him for his absence there?
Did he attend the Court for no man's fall?
Wore he the ruin of no Hospital?
And when he did his rich apparel don,
Put he no Widow, nor an Orphan on?
Did he love simple virtue for the thing?
The King for no respect but for the King?
But above all, did his Religion wait
Upon Gods Throne, or on the Chair of state?
He that is guilty of no Quaere here,
Our-lasts his Epitaph, our-lives his Heir.
But there is none such, none so little bad,
Who but this negative goodness ever had:
Of such a Lord we may expect the birth,
He Is rather in the womb than on the earth.
And 'twere a Crime in such a public fate.
For one to live well and degenerate:
And therefore I am angry, when a name
Comes to upbraid the World like E^ingham.
Nor was it modest in thee to de part
To thy eternal home, where now thou art,
Ere thy reproach was ready: or to dye,
Ere custom had prepared thy calumny.
Eight days have past since thou have paid thy debt
To sin, and not a libell stirring yet,
Courtiers that scoff by Patent, silent sit.
And have no use of Slander or of wit;
But (which is monstrous) though against the tide,
The Watermen have neither rayld nor lide.
Of good and bad there is no distinction known,
For in thy praise the good and bad are one.
It seems we all are coverous of Fame,
And hearing what a purchase of good name
Thou lately made, are careful to increase
Our title by the holding of some lease
From thee our Landlord, and for that the whole c^ue
Speak now like Tenants ready to renew:
It were too sad to tell thy pedeg^ee,
Death has disordered all, misplacing thee,
Whilst now thy Herald in his line of heirs
Blots out thy name, and fills the space with tears.
And thus has conquering death, or nature rather,
Made thee prepostrous ancient to thy Father,
Who grieves thou art s^, and like a glorious light
Shines ore thy H^arse.
He therefore that would write
And blaze thee thoroughly, may at once say all,
Here lies the Anchor of our Admiral.
Let others write for glory or reward,
Truth is well paid, when the is sung and heard.
R. Corbet.

An Epitaph on Doctor Done, Deane of Paul's.
HE that would write an Epitaph for thee
And do it well, must ^st begin to be
Such as thou were; for none can truly know
Thy worth, thy life, but he that has lived so.
He must have wit to spare, and to hu^le down
Enough to keep the Gallams of the Town,
He must have learning plenty, both the Laws,
Civil and Common, to judge any cause;
Divinity great store, above the rest,
Not of the last Edition, but the best.
He must have language ^ravaile, all the Arts.
Judgment to use, or else he wants thy parts;
He must have friends the highest, able to do,
Such as Mecan^s and Augustus too.
He must have such a sickness, such a death,
Or else his vain descriptions come beneath.
Who then shall write an Epitaph for thee
He must be dead first, let't alone for me.
R. Corbet.

Upon Mistress Mallet.
HAve I renounced my faith? or basely sold
Salvation, or my loyalty for gold?
Have I some for in practice undertook
By poison, shot, sharp knife, or sharper look
To kill my King? have I be^ay'd the State
To fire or fury, or some newer fate?
Which learned murderers, those grand destinies,
The Jesuits have nursed if of all these
I guilty am, proceed, I am content
That Mallet take me for my punishment:
For never sin was of so high a rate
But one nights hell with thee could expiate:
Although the law with Garne^ and the rest
Deal far more mildly, hanging's but a jest
To this immortal torture; had she been
In Martyrs torrid days engendered, when
Cruelty was wit^y, and invention free
Did live by blood and thrive by cruelty,
She would have been more horrid engines sa^
Then sire or famine, tacke or halters are.
Whether her wit, form, talk, smile, tire I name,
Each is a stock of tyranny and shame.
But for her breath, spectators, come nor nigh,
That lays about, God bless the company.
The man in a Bears skin baited to death
Would abuse the dogs much rather then her breath.
One kiss of hers, and eighteen words alone
Puts down the Spanish inquisition.
Thrice happy we (quoth I) thinking thereon,
That see no days of persecution,
For were it free to kill, this grilly else
Would Martyrs make in compass of her self.
And were she not prevented by our prayer
By this time she corrupted had the air.
And am I innocent? and is it true
That thing which Poet Pliny never knew.
Nor Assri^k, Nile, not ever Hackluits eyes
Descri'd in all his East, West voiages?
That thing which Poets were afraid to saine
For fear her shadow should infect their brain,
This spouse of Antichrist, and hers alone
Shee'^ ^rest so like the whore of Babylon,
Should dote on me? as if there should contrive
The devil and she to damn a man alive.
Why does not Welcome rather purchase her,
And beat about this rare familiar?
Six market days, a Wake, and a Fair to it
Would beat his charges, and the ale to boore.
No Tigerlike, she seeds upon a man,
Worse then a Tygresse or a Leopard can,
Let me go pray and think upon some spell,
At once to bid the Devil and her farewell.
R. Corbet.

On great Tom of Christ-Church.
BE dumb ye infant Chime^, thumpe nor your mettle,
That never out-ting a Tinker and his Kenle,
Cease all your petty La^s, for to day
Is young Toms resurrection from the clay:
And know when Tom rings out his knells,
The best of you will be but dinner bells:
Old Tom's grown young again, the fiery cave
Is now his Cradle that was erst his grave;
He grew up quickly from his mother earth,
For all you see was but an hours birth,
Look on him well, my life I dare engage
You never saw prettier Baby of his age.
Some take his measure by the rule, some by
The Jacobs Staff take his profundirie,
And some his altitude but some do swear
Young Tom's not like the old, but Tom never fear
The critic Geometricians line.
If thou as loud as e're thou did ring'st nine;
Tom did no sooner peep from under ground,
But straight Saint Mary's Tenor lost his sound;
O how this May poles heart did swell
With full maine sides of joy, when that cracked bell
^hoakt with annoy, and's admiration,
^ung like a quart pot to the Congregation;
Tom went his progress lately and look^ over
What he never saw in many years before,
But when he saw the old foundation,
With like hope of preparation,
He burst with griese, and left he should not have
Due pomp, he is his own Bell man to the grave:
And that there might of him be full some mention,
He carried to his grave a new invention,
They drew his Brown bread face on pretty gins.
And make him stalk upon two Rowling-pins,
But Sander Hill swore twice or thrice by heaven,
He never set such a loaf into the Oven;
And Tom did Sanders vex his Cyclops maker
As much as he did Sander Hill the Bak^r;
Therefore loud thumping Tom be thi^ thy pride,
When thou this motto shall have on thy side.
Great world! one Alexander conquered thee,
And two as mighty men scarce conquered me.
Brave constant spirit, none could make thee turn,
Though hanged, drawn, quartered, till they did thee burn;
Yet not for this, norten times more be sorry,
Since thou was marryr'd for the Churches glory,
But for thy meritorious suffering
Thou shortly shall to heaven in a string;
And though we griev^d to see thee thumpt and banged,
We Will all be glad great Tom to see thoe haug'd.
On John Dawson Butler of Christ Church. Doctor Corbet.
DAwson the Butler's dead, although I think
Poets were never infused with single drink,
I Will spend a farthing Muse, a warry verse
Will serve the turue to cast upon his hearse.
If any cannot weep among us her^t,
Take off his cup, and so sque^ze out ^reare.
Weep O ye barrells, let your drippings fall
In trickling streams, make wast more prodigal,
Then when our bear was good, that John may float
To S^yx in hear, and list up Charons boat,
With wholesome waves: and as the Conduits ran
With Claret, at the Coronation,
So let your Channels flow with single tiffe,
For John I hope is crowned; take off your whisfe,
Ye men of Rosematy, and drink up all,
Remembering it is a Bu^s sunerall
Had he been master of good double bear,
My life for his, John Dawson had been here.
Doctor Corbet against the Anniversarist.
EVen so dead Hector thrice was triumphed on
The walls of Troy, thrice slain when fates had done,
So did the barba^us Greeks before their host
Toiment his ashes, and profane his Ghost,
At Henry's vault his peace and sacred hearse
Are torn and battered by thy anniverse;
Wast not enough nature and strength were foes,
But thou must yearly murder him in prose?
Or could thou hope thy raving phrase could make
A louder echo then the Almanacke?
Trust me, November does more ghastly look
In Dades and Hoprens penny, then thy book.
A sadder record their sixth figure bears,
Then thy false printed and ambitious rea^s,
For were it not for Christians which is n^gh.
When fruit, spice, eaten, and digested Pie
Call for more paper, no man could make she:
How to employ thy writings to his thri^t
Wherefore for bear for pity, or for shame,
And bid some richer pen redeem his name
From rottenness, leave thou him captive, since
So vile a Price never ransomed such a Prince.
A Letter sent from Doctor Corbet to Master Ailebury, December. 9. 1618.
MY Brother and much more, had thou been mine,
Had thou in one rich present of a line
Enclosed Sir Francis, for in all this store,
No gift can cost thee less, or bind me more,
Had thou (dear churl) imparted his return,
I should not with a tardy welcome burn;
But had let loose my joy at him long since,
Which now will seem but studied negligence;
But I forgive thee, two things kept thee from it,
First such a friend to gaze on, next a Comet,
Which Comet we discern, though not so true
As you at Sion, as long taild as you,
We know already how will stand the case,
With Barnavell of universal grace,
Though Spain deserve the whole Star, is the fall
Be true of Lerma Duke, and Cardinal,
Marry in France, we fear no blood, but wine,
Less danger's in her sword, then in her vine:
And thus we leave the blazers coming over
For our portents are wise and end at Dov^;
And though we use no forward censuring,
Not send our learned Proctors to the King,
Yet every morning when the star does rise,
There is no black for three hours in our eyes;
But like a Puritan dreamer toward this light
All eyes turn upward, all are zeal and white:
More it is doubtful that this prodigy
Will turn ten Schools to one Astronomy;
And the Analysis we justly fear,
Since every Art does, seek for resene there,
Physicians, Lawyers, Glovers on the stall,
The Shopkeepers speak Mathematics all,
And though men read no Gospels in these signs,
Yet all professions are become Divines,
All weapons from the Bodk in to the Pike,
The Masons Rule, and Tailors Yard alike,
Take altitudes, and the early sidling knaves,
On Fluirs and Hoboyes, made them Jacobs slaves,
Lastly of fingers, glasses we contrive,
And every first is made a Prospective;
Burton to Gunter Cants, and Burton hears
From Gunter, and the Exchange both tongue and ear,
By carriage: thus does mired Guy complain,
His Wagon in their letters beats Charles Waine,
Charles Waine, ^o which they say the tail will reach
And at this distance they both hear, and teach.
Now for the peace of God and men, advise
(Thou that have wherewith all to make us wise)
Thine own rich studies, and deep Harriors mine,
In which there is no dross, but all refine,
O tell us what to trust to, lest we wax
All stiff and stupid with his paralex;
Say, shall the old Philosophy be true?
Or does he ride above the Moon think you?
Is he a Meteor forced by the Sun?
Or a first body from creation?
Has the same star been object of the wonder
Of our forefathers? shall the same come under
The sentence of our Nephews? write and send
Or else this star a quarrel does pretend.
Doctor Corbet to the Lord Mordant.
MY Lord, I do confess at the first news
Of your return from home, I did refuse
To visit you, for fear the Northern wind
Had pierced into your manners, and your mind,
For fear you might want memory to forget
Some arts of which might haunt you yet,
But when I knew you were, and when I heard
You were at Woodstocke seen well sun'd and ayr'd,
That your contagion in you now was spent,
And you were just Lord Mordant as you went,
I then resolved to come, and did not doubt
To be in season, though the Bucke was out.
Windsor the place, the day was Holy-rood,
Saint George my muse, for be it understood,
For all Saint George more early in the year
Broke fast, and eat a bit, yet he dined here,
And though in April in red ink he shine,
Know It 'twas September made him red with wine.
To this good sport rode I, as being allowed
To see the King, and cry him in the crowd,
And at all solemn meetings have the grace
To thrust, and to be trod on by my place.
Where when I come I see the Church beset
With tumults, as had all the bre^n met
To hear some silenced teacher in that quarter,
In veigh against the Order of the Garter;
And justly might the weak be grieved and wrung,
Because the Garter prays in a strange tongue,
And does retain traditions yet of France,
In an old [Honi soit qui maly pense]
Whence learn (those Knights that order that have ra^)
That all besides the buckle is profane;
But there was no such doctrine now at stake,
No starved physician from the pulpit spoke,
And yet the Church was full, all sorts of men,
Religions, sexes, ages were there then,
Whilst he that keeps the Quire, togother locks
Papists and Puritanes, the Pope and Kn^.
Which made some wise men fear that love our nation,
This mixture would be get a toleration;
Or that Religion should united be,
When they said Service, these the Letany.
But no such have, this days devotion lies
Not in the hearts of men, but in their eyes;
They that do see Saint George, hear him aright,
For he loves not to parley, but to fight.
Amongst this audience (my Lord) stood I
Well edified as any that stood by;
And knew how many legs a Knight lets fall,
Betwixt the King, the offering, and his stall:
Ask me but of their robes, I shall relate
The color and the fashion; and the state:
I saw too the procession without door,
What the poo^e Knights and what the Prebends wore:
All this my neighbors that were by me took,
Who dived but in the garment, and the look,
But I saw more, and though I have their fate
In place and favor, yet I want their pate:
Me thought I then did these first ages know,
Which brought forth Knights so armed, and looking so,
Who would maintain their oath and bind their word
With these two seals, an Altar and a Sword.
Then saw I George new Sainted, when such Priests
Wore him not only on, but in their breasts.
Often did I wish that day, with open vow,
O that my Country were in danger no^:
And 'twas no treason, who could fear to die
When he was sure his rescue was so nigh?
And here I might a just digression make,
Whilst of some particular Knights I spoke,
To whom I owe my thanks, but 'twere not best
By praising two or three t'accuse the rest,
Nor can I sing that order or those men,
That are above the mystery of my pen;
And private fingers may not touch those things
Whose authors Princes are, whose partners Kings
Wherefore imburnt I will refrain that fire,
Lest hearing such a Theme I should aspire^
T'include my King and Prince, and so rehearse
Names fitter for my Prayer then my Verse;
He that will speak of Princes let him use
More grace then wit, know God's above his Muse.
No more of counsel hark the Trumpets sound,
And the grave Organs with the Antheme drowned,
The Church had said Amen to all their rites,
And now the Trojan horse lets loose her Knights,
The triumph moves: O what could added be
Save your success to that solemnity;
Which I expect and doubt not but to see it,
When the Kings favor and your worth shall meet,
I think the robes will now be come you so,
Saint George himself would not his own Knights know,
From the Lord Mordant: Pardon me that preach
A doctrine only that King James can teach;
To whom I leave you who alone has right
To make Knights Lords; and you a Lord a Knight.
Imagine now the Scene lies in the hall,
(For at high noone we are ^sants all)
The Church is empty as the bellies were,
Of the spectators that had languish there;
And now the favorites of the Clearke of the check,
Who often had yawnd and stretched our many a neck
Twixt morn and evening, the dull seeders on
Fresh patience, and rays^s of the Sun,
They who lived in the Hall five hours at least,
As if 'twere an arraignment, not a feast,
And look so like the hangings they stand near,
None could discern which the true pictures were;
These now shall be refresht, whiles the bold ^rum
Strikes up his srolick through the Hall they come.
Here might I end, my Lord, and here subscribe
Your honors to his power: but O what bribe,
What fear, or mulct can make my muse refrain
When she is ing'd of nature or disdain?
Not all the guard shall hold me, I must write
Though they both swear, and lie, how they would fight
If I proceed: my though their Captain say
Hold him, or else you shall not ca^e to day;
These goodly yeomen must not seape my pen,
'Twas dinner time, and I must speak of men;
So to the Hall made I, with little care
To praise the dishes, or to taste the fare;
Much less t'endanger the least Tart, or Pie
By any water there stolen, and set by,
But to compute the value of the meare,
Which was for glory, not for hunger eat;
Nor did I fear, stand back: who passed before
The presence or the privy Chamber door,
But woe is me, the Guard, those men of war
But two weapons use, Beese, and the Bar
Began to gripe me, knowing not in truth
That I had sung John Dory in my youth,
Or that I knew the day when I could chaunt,
Chivie, and Arthur, or the Siege of Gaunt;
And though these be the virtue which must try,
Who is most worthy of their courtesy,
They profited me nothing, for no notes
Will move them now, they are dense in their new coats;
Wherefore on run I, afresh they sall, and show
Themselves more active then before, as though
They had some wager laid, and did contend
Who should abuse me furthest at arms end;
One I remember with a grizled beard,
And better grown then any of the heard,
One were he well examined, and made look
His name in his own parish, and Church Book,
Could hardly prove his Christendom, and yet
It seems he had two names, for there were set
On a white Calves doublet which he wore,
Two Capital Letters of a name, before;
Letters belike which he had spu'd, and spilt,
When the great Bumbard leak^, or was at tilt:
This Iron side takes hold, and suddenly
Hurles me, by judgment of the standers by
Some twelve foot by the square, takes me again
Out throws it half a bar, and thus we twain
At this hot exercise an hour had spent.
He the fierce agent, I the instrument,
My man began to rage, but I ery'd peace,
When he is dry or hungry he will cease,
Peace for the Lords sake Nicholas, lest they take us
And use us worse then Hercules did Ca^s.
And now I breath my Lord, now have I time
To tell the cause and to consess^ the crime;
I was in black, a Scholar straight they guessed,
Indeed I colored for it at the least,
I spoke them saire, desired to see the hall,
And gave them reasons for it, this was all;
By which I learn it is a maine offense,
So near the Cleark ^oth Check to utter sense.
Talk of your emblems masters, and relate
How AEsop has it, and how Al^iate,
The Cock, the pearl, the dunghill and the gem,
This passes all that talk of sense to them.
Much more good service was committed yet,
Which I in such a tumu^t must forget,
But shall I smother that prodigious fit,
Which past in clear invention, and pure wit^
As thus: a nimble knave, though somewhat far,
Strikes at my head, and fairly steals my hat;
Another breaks a jest, (well Windsor, well,
What will ensue there is none can tell.
When they spend wit, serve God) yet 'twas not much,
Although the Clamor and the applause were such,
As when Sir Archey, or Garret does provoke them,
And with wide laughter, and a cheat loase choke them.
What was the jest do you ask? I dare repeat it,
And put it home before you shall entreat it,
He called me Bloxsord man, confess I must
'Twas bitter; and it grieved me in a thrust
That most ungrateful word Bloxford to hear
From him whose breath yet stunke of Oxford Bear;
But let it pass, for I have now passed through
Their halberds, (and worse weapons) their teeth too,
And of a worthy officer was invited
To dine; who all their rudeness has required,
Where we had mirth and meat, and a large board
Furnished with all the kitchen could afford,
But to conclude, to wipe off from before ye
All this which is no better then a story;
Had this affiont been done me by command
Of noble Fenton, had their captives hand
Directed them to this, I should believe
I had no cause to jest, but much to grieve;
Or had discerning Pembrooke seen this done
And thought it well bestowed, I would have run
Where no good man had dwelt, no learnd should fly,
Where no disease would keep me company,
Where it should be preserment to endure
To teach a School or else to serve a cure.
But as it stands, the persons and the cause
Considered well my manners and their Laws,
It Is no affliction to me, for even thus
Saint Paul has sought with beasts at Eph^sus,
And I at Windsor; let this comfort then
Rest with all able and deserving men;
He that will please the guard and not provoke
Court wits, must sell his learning, buy a cloak;
For at all seasts, and maskes the doom has been,
A man thrust sorth, and a gay cloak let in.
To the Duke of Buckingham.
I Have read of Islands floating and removed
In Ovids time, but never saw it proved,
Till now; that fable by the Prince and you,
(By your transporting England) is made true.
We are not whore we were, the Dog Star reigns
No cooler in our climate, then in Spaines;
The selfsame breath, same age, same heat, same burning
Is here, and there, 'twill be till your returning;
Come ere the Cards be altered, else perhaps
Your stay may make an error in our mappes,
Lest England will be sound when you shall pass,
A thousand times more Southward then it was;
O that you were (my Lord) O that you were
Now in Blackfriars, or had a disguised ear,
Or you were Smith again two hours to be
In Paul's next Sunday, at sull Sea at three;
There you should hear the Legends of each day,
The perils of your Inn, and of your way
Your enterprises, accidents until
You should arrive at Court and reach Madrill.
There should you hear how the States grandees ^out you,
With their twice diligence about you,
How one environed Prince walks with a guard,
Of Spanish spies, and his own servants barred;
How not a Chaplain of his own may stay
When he would hear a Sermon preached, or pray.
You would be hungry having dined to hear
The price of victual, and the scarcity there,
As if the Prince had ventured there his life
To make a samine, not to setch a wise.
Your Eggs (which must be addle too) are dear
As English Capons, Capons as sheep here.
No grass for horse or cattle, for they say
It is not cut and made, grass there grows hay,
Then it is so seething hor, they swear
You never heard of raw Oyster there;
Your cold meat comes in reeking, there your wint
Is all burnt Sack, the fire was in the vine;
Item the Pullers are distinguished there
Into sour quarters, as we branch the year,
And are a week a wasting; Monday noone
A wing, at supper something with a spoone;
Tuesday a leg, and so forth, Sunday more,
The Liver and the gizzards betwixt four;
As for the mutton, in the best house holder,
It Is selony to cheapen a whole shoulder:
Lord how our stomachs come to us again,
When we conceive what snatching is in Spain?
I whilst I write and do your news repeat,
Am forc'r to call for breakefast in and eat;
And do you wonder at this dearth the while
The flood that makes it runs in the middle I Will,
Poets of Paul's, these of Duke Hum^ mess,
That feed on naught but graves and emptiness.
But hark you noble Sir, in one cross week,
My Lord has lost 4000. l. at Gleeke,
And since they do allow you little meat,
They are content your losses should be great;
False on my Deanery, ^alser then your sare is
Or then the difference with the Grand d'Olivaries,
Which was reported strongly for one tide,
But after six hours flowing eb'd and died.
If God would not this great design should be,
Perfect and round without some knavery,
Nor that our Prince should end this enterprise,
But for so many tales, so many lies.
(...) for a good intent the heavens may please,
^ens tongues should become rougher then the ^as,
and that the expense of paper should be such,
first written, then translated out of Dutch,
^urrants, diaries, packets, news, more news
Which innocent whiteness constan^ly abuse
(...) first the Belgic pismire must be seen,
Before the Spanish Lady be our Queen,
With that success and such an end at last,
All Is welcome, pleasant, grateful that is past,
And such an end I pray that you may see
A type of that which mother Zebedee
Wished for her Sons in heaven, the Prince and you
At either hand of James, you need not sue,
Him on the right, you on the lest, the King
Safe in the midst you both invironing,
Then shall I tell my Lord his words and band
Are forfeit till I kiss the Prince his hand,
Then shall I tell the Duke our royal friend,
How all your other honors, this has earned,
This you have w^ought for, this you hammerd out,
Like a strong Smith, good workman, and a stout;
In this I have a part, in this I see
Some new addition smiling upon me;
Who in an humble manner crave my share
In all your greatness whatso'ere they are.
R. Corbet.

Upon the death of the Lady Haddington dying of the Small Pox.
Dear loss! to tell the world I griey'd, were true,
But that were to bewail my self, not you.
That were to cry out help for my affairs,
For which nor public thoughts nor private cares;
For when thy sat I publish among men
I should have power to write with the States pen.
I should by naming thee force public tears,
And bid their eyes pay ransom for their ears.
First, thy whole life was a short feast of wit,
And death the attendant which did wait on it;
To both mankind does owe devotion ample,
To that their first, to this their last example.
And though 'twere fame enough with thee, where same
And vertue^ nothing but an ample name,
That thou were highly borne, which no man doubts,
And so might swathe base deeds in noble clouts,
Yet thou thy self in titles did nor shroud,
And being noble wast not soul, nor proud;
And when thy fruit was ripe, when all the suite
Of all the longing Courtiers for thy fruit,
How wisely did thou choose sour blessed eyes,
The Kings and thine had taught thee to be wise.
Did not the best of men the Virgin give
Into his hands by whom himself did live,
Nor did they two years after talk of force,
Or Lady-like, make suite for a divorse;
Who when their own vile lust is fully spent
Cry out my Lord, my Lord is impotent;
Nor have thou in his Nuptial arms injoyd
Barren embraces, but sweet girld and boyd;
Twice pretty ones, twice worthy were their youth
Migh^t thou but bring them up that broughtst them for
She would have taught them by a thousand strains
Her blood runs in their manners, not their veins,
That glory is a lie, slate a grave sport,
And country sickness above breath at Court,
Oh what a want of her loss gallants have,
Since she has changed her window for a grave;
From whence she wont to datt her wit so fast,
And stick them in their Coaches as they past,
Who now shall make well colored vice look pale
And a ^rld m^eor with her eyes exhale
And talk him into nothing, who shall dare
Tell barren brain they live in fertile air?
Who now shall keep old Countesses in awe,
And by ^att similies repentance draw
From those whom P^achers had given or^ some such
Whom S^mons could not reach her arrows touch,
Hereafter fools shall prosper with applause,
And wise men smild, and no man ask the cause,
He of so^ score, three night caps, and two hands;
Shall marry her of twenty and get lieir^s,
Which shall be thought his own, and none shall say,
But it is a wondrous blessing; and he may.
^or whichis more then pity, many a knight
Who can do more then quarrel, less then fight;
Shall choose his weapons, ground, draw seconds thither;
Put up his sword, and not be laughed at neither;
O thou deformed unwoman-like disgrace,
Thou plowst up flesh and blood, and there fo^st peace
And leaves such print on beauty if thou come,
As cloured shoes do on (...) ^oore of loome,
Thou that of faces huny ^bes lost ^ke,
And of two breast (...) forsake
Thy deadly trade, thou art now rich give ore,
Or if thou needst wilt magnify thy power,
Go where thou art invoked every hour;
Amongst the gamesters where they call thee thick
At the last maine, of the last pockie nick,
Get thee a lodging where thy clients dice,
There thou shall practice on more then one vice,
There Is where withal to entertain the pox,
Ther'es more then reason cousening for the Box,
Thou who have such superfluous store of gain,
Why stickst thou on whose ruin is thy shame?
O thou have murdered where thou should have kissed,
And where thy ^hast was needful there thou mist;
Thou should have chosen out some homely face,
Where thy ill favored kindness might add grace,
That men might say, How bea^ous once was she,
Or what a piece ere she was sea^ by thee!
Thou should have wrought upon some Ladies mould
That nere did love her Lord, nor never could,
Until she were deformed, this cruelty
Were then within the rule of charity:
But upon one whose beauty was above
All sort of beauty, whose love was more then love;
On her to fix thy ugly counterfeit,
Was to erect a Pyramid of Jea^,
And put out fire to dig a curse from hell,
And place it where a blessed soul should dwell;
A soul which in the body would not stay,
When 'twas no more a body nor good clay,
But a high ulcer O thou heavenly race,
Thou soul which (...) ^tion of thy case,
Thy house, thy prison Soul, (...), fair
Rest where no health, no cold no^ compounds are,
Rest in that Country, and enjoy that case
Which thy frail flesh divides and thy disease.
R. Corbet.

A proper new Ballad, entitled The Fairies farewell, or God a mercy Will, to be
sung or whistled, to the tune of the Meadow Brow by the learned, by the
unlearned to the tune of Fortune.
FArewell rewards and Fairies
Good housewives now may say,
For now soul sluts in Dairies
Do fare as well as they;
And though they sweep their hearths no less
Then maids were wont to do,
Yet who of late for cleanliness,
Finds Six pence in her shoe?
Lament, lament old Abbeys
The Fairies lost command,
They did but change Priests babies,
But some have changed your land
And all your children stolen from thence
Are now grown puritanes,
Who live as changelings ever since
For love of your demaines.
At morning and at evening both,
You merry were and glad;
So little care of sleep and sloth,
These pretty Ladies had,
When Tom came home from labor,
-- Or Cisse to milking Rose;
Then merrily went their Tabor
And nimbly went their Toes.
Witness those rings and round lays
Of theirs which yet remain,
Were sooted in Queen Mary's days
On many a grassy plain.
But since of late Elizabeth
And later James came in,
They never daunc'd on any heath
As when the time had been.
By which we nore the Fairies
Were of the old profession,
Their Songs were Ave Mary's,
Their daunces were procession;
But now alas they all are dead
Or gone beyond the Seas,
Or further from Religion fled
Or else they take their case.
A tell-tale in their company
They never could endtire,
And who so kept not secretly
Their mirth was punished sure,
It was a just and Christian deed
To pinch such black and blew,
O how the Commonwealth does need
Such Justices as you!
Now they have left our Quarters,
A Register they have,
Who can preserve their Charters;
A Man both wise and grave.
A hundred of their merry pranks
By one that I could name,
Are kept in store; con twenty thank,
To William for the same.
To William Churne of Staffordshire,
Give laud and praises due;
Who every meal can mend your cheer,
With Tales both old and true.
To William all give audience,
And pray you for his Noddle;
For all the Fairies evidence,
Were lost if it were addle.
To the Ghost of Rob. Wisdom.
THou once a Body, now but air,
Arch-botcher of a Psalm or Prayer;
From Carfaux come:
And pa^h us up a zealous Lay,
With an old Aver and for aye,
Or all and some.
Or such a Spirit lend me,
As may a Hymn down send me,
To purge my brain.
So Robert look behind thee,
Lest Turk or Pope do find thee;
And go to bed again.
An Epitaph on Tho. Jonce.
HEre for the nonce
Came Thomas Jonce,
In St. Jileses Church to lie.
None Welsh before,
None Welshman more,
Till Shon Clerk dye.
I Will role the Bell,
I Will ring his Knell;
He dyed well,
He Is saved from Hell:
And so farewell
Tom Jonce.
On the Earl of Dorsets Death.
LEt no profane ignoble soot tread here,
This hallowed piece of Earth, Dorset lies there:
A small poor Relic of a Noble spirit,
Free as the Alre, and ample as his Merit:
A soul refined, no proud forgetting Lord,
But mindful of mean names, and of his word:
Who loved men for his Honor, not his ends,
And had the noblest way of getting friends
By loving first, and yet who knew the Court,
But understood it better by report
Then practice: He nothing took from thence
But the Kings favor for his recompense.
Who for Religion, or his Countries good,
Neither his Honor valued, nor his blood.
Rich in the worlds opinion, and men's praise,
And full in all we could desire, but days.
He that is warned of this, and shall for bear
To vent a sigh for him, or shed a tear,
May he live long scorned, and unpitied fall,
And want a Mourner at his Funeral.
R. Corbet.

On Henry Bolings.
IF gentleness could tame the Fates, or wi^
Deliver man, Bolings had not dyed yet:
But one which over us in judgment sits,
Does say our sins are stronger then our wi^.
R. Corbet.

The Authors Answer.
SO to de^d Hector boys may do disgrace,
That durst not look upon his living face.
So worst of men behind their betters back
May stretch men's names and credit on the rack.
Good friend, our general tie to him that is gone,
Should love the man that yearly does him moan:
The Authors zeal and place he now does hold,
His love and duty makes him be thus bold
To offer this poor mite, his Anniverse
Unto his good great Masters scared Hearse:
The which he does with privilege of name,
Whilst others 'midst their Ale in Corners blame.
A pennyworth in Print they never made,
Yet think themselves as good as Pond or Dade,
One Anniverse; when thou have done thus twice,
Thy words among the best will be of Price.
Dr. Price.

A Reply.
NOr is it grieved (grave Youth) the memory
Of such a Story, such a Book as he,
That such a Copy through the world were read,
Henry yet lives, though he be buried
I could be wished that every day could bear
Him our good witness that he still were here;
That sorrow r^l'd the year; and by that sun
(Such Man) could tell you how the day had run.
O'twere an honest cause for him, could say,
I have been busy, and wept out the day
Remembering him; an Epitaph would last,
Were such a Trophee, such a Banner placed
Upon his Hearse as this, Here a man lies
Was slain by Henry's date, not Destinies.
But for a Cobbler to throw up his Cap,
And cry, The Prince, the Prince: O dire mishap!
Or a (...)-Bridegroom after grace
To throw his Spouse in the fire, or scratch her face:
To the tune of the Lamentation, and delay
His Friday Capon till the Sabbath Day:
Or an old Popish Lady half vowed dead,
To fast away the day with Ginger-bread:
For him to write such Annalls: All these things
Do open laughter, and shut up griefs springs.
Wherefore Vertumm^, if you Print the next,
Bring better votes, or choose a meaner Text.
R. Corbet.

FINIS.

