Gods Providence, A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at
their late solemn Fast, December. 28. Anno 1642, in S. Margaret's Church at
Westminster.

By ED. CORBETT, fellow of MERTON College in Oxford.

Published by Order of the said House.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Badger, for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Pa(...)
Churchyard, at the sign of the King's head, 1642.

To the Honorable House of COMMONS, now assembled In PARLIAMENT.
THe same reason which first moved me to undertake this work, makes me now such
as it is to publish it, Obedience to this Honorable House: which did then
answer those discouraging arguments of my great imperfections, the want of my
study, my little acquaintance in practical Divinity, And does still excuse me
in any thing else but Sin. For I have taught my eyes to read much Divinity in
Man's command, I can deny my self to serve my Superiors; Indeed the voice of
God makes me deaf to Humane Institutions: And when Heaven speaks, I do not
understand the language of the World: Disobedience in such a case is Devotion,
and the greatest Rebel, the best Christian. If no other motive could subdue my
thoughts to this belief, S. Paul is plain and positive in my Text, showing the
vanity and deceiptfulnesse of all the Creature's excellency: the power,
weakness; the riches, poverty; the wisdom, folly: That God alone is power, and
riches, and wisdom, and all things. And surely this argument deserves the
severest study, the most holy Meditations of every child of Adam, and therefore
cannot be unwelcome to a great Council of wise Senators, who have received a
large measure, a full cup of Divine Providence, and inspight of Rome continue
succesfull. In which discourse I proceed as much as my memory would give leave
by example, and matter of fact, which brings the Conclusion to our bosoms, and
is more working than speculation. The unskilfulnes of the pen I hope will not
take off from the power of the subject, the rude clothing cannot more offend
the eye than the precious body may affect the heart. In which assurance I
remain

Your unworthy servant EDW. CORBEETT.

Gods Providence. A Sermon preached at the late Fast, before the Honorable
House of Commons.
1. Cor. 1.27. -- God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound
the wise. --


HAD we no other light but that of Nature, and no other writings but the book
of the world we might read a God and see his Providence: But to find a Savior,
to know a Gospel, to understand the mysteries of Salvation, Math. 16.17. and
Ioh: 3.4. 1. Cor. 2.10. Joh 5.39. Math. 11.25
is above the Art of humane learning, the spirit of God must be our Tutor
therein, and the Holy Scriptures only can teach and give us such a lesson: For
God has hid those secrets from the Scribes and great Philosophers of the
earth, he has cast away the understanding of the Prudent as the Apostle
speaks. 1. Cor. 1.19.
And has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise.

My text is of that Nature as will not easily admit a Division. I shall
therefore insist upon three Propositions, which I conceive do naturally arise,
and which I hope will give the full sense and scope of the words.

First (...) has chosen: Imports Gods eternal choice, the Council of his
will, his Providence by which he rules and governs all things, and therefore
thence I shall take this for my 1. Proposition.

PROP. 1. Gods will has an effectual Influence upon all the Creatures.

Secondly, (...) the foolishness of the world: that which in the Judgment of
worldly men is vain and foolish by Gods power is of great value and virtue:
whence I raise this 2. Proposition.

PROP. 2. Foolish things in the Judgment of the world, are in great esteem
with our wise God.

Thirdly, (...) to confound or make ashamed: That which is weak, and foolish
and nothing regarded by carnal Eyes, confounds many times the greatest power
and wisdom; and by the hand of Providence brings ruin and shame upon that
which wordly-men most glory and confide in: whence I shall infer my 3.
Proposition.

PROP. 3. God can effect great and glorious designs by weak and improbable
means.

Every proposition would afford abundant matter for a distinct Sermon. I can
therefore only point at some general heads, and as it were give you a little
map of this great Country, taking my propositions in that order which I have
mentioned.

1.Gods will has an effectual Influence upon all the Creatures.
The Nature and Condition of Gods will, with those distinctions and
difficulties disputed amongst the schoolmen, and betwixt the Arminians and
Contra-Arminians, are either too high for humane understanding to reach, or
else are piously resolved by learned pens already. D. Twisse D. Amesius.
Cameron P^du Moulin etc. Psa. 115.10. Ephesians. 1.11. Tract. de ^vers. Arist.
dogmatum. L. 4 de Gene. c. 12. and in En^^. c. 96. Quisquis diffitetur insanit.
Romans 9.21. Jer. 18.4.
I shall only touch upon the power and providence thereof, so far as may
conduce to the quieting of our thoughts in these distracted times, and to give
us patience and comfort in the midst of all afflictions. And to this purpose
David assures us, that our God is in heaven, he does whatsoever he will, and S.
Paul that God works all things according to the counsel of his own will: And
Justin Martyr, with Saint Aug. that Gods will is the cause of all things. What
confusion cannot he order? what wisdom cannot he frustrate? what weakness
cannot he enable? Nothing so high that is above his command, nothing so low
that is beneath his Providence. If the Potter have power of the same lump to
make one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor, and to preserve or break
in pieces what he has made, when as the vessel depends upon the earth of
which it consists, of the water by which it was tempered, of the wheel which
fashioned it, and of the fire which baked and hardened all: How much more shall
the God Almighty who gives to every creature matter and form, virtue and
activity and beauty, exercise his will upon them? How much more shall he build
up and pull down, save and destroy, and dispose them as seems good unto him?
Neabuchodonezor (one of the greatest and proudest Kings that ever was) will
confess as much. Dan. 4.32. according to his will he works in the Army of
heaven, and in the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand or say
unto him what do thou? the Armies of heaven do acknowledge God in all their
ways, Legions of Angels who excel in strength, who are as full of power as
of glory, and know no Law but their makers pleasure: The inhabitants of the
earth, Men and Devils, whatsoever the Sun has looked upon, or the creation
has raised from nothing, have this necessity upon them, to obey the Almighties
will, Mi^o and ineffabili modo non fieri propter ejus voluntatem, quod contra
ejus voluntatem fit. In. 2. q. 2.
and while they rush against his Counsel, to fulfill it, which may appear
more distinctly by considering three particulars.

1. Every Creature depends on God.
Every creature is the effect of God secundum esse, essentially depends upon
him, or as Scotus speaks is dependence it self: of necessity then they stand in
need of Gods perpetual help, the hand which made must support, and the power
which raised from nothing must still preserve from nothing. Which Christ
confirms John. 5.17. My Father works hitherto and I work; and Saint Paul
H^b. 1.3. He bears up all things with his mighty word: Greg. l 2. ^or c. 12
H^e^o. cont. p^lag^a. O^^g. l. 2. (...)
He bears up all things with his mighty word: He bears up all things, 1.
Sustinendo as a pillar and sure foundation upon which they stand. 2. Influendo
as a fountain from which they derive all their virtue and operations. 3.
Constringendo as a sovereign bond by which the parts of all things hold
together and are preserved as water in a vessel from dissolution and running
into nothing, and he bears up all things without any labor or difficulty
(...) only by his pleasure, his will by the same word, Psalm 33 6
and breath, by which they were first made. The creature cannot stand one
moment without Gods actual supportance; All things would run into confusion
without his powerful influence who created all things. For the frame of the
world, is not like a House which will stand it self after the Carpenter has
raised it, but receives continual subsistence from the Author, must be
preserved in being and working or else will suddenly break and fall in pieces:
It depends upon the Almighty as the figure of a Seal imprinted upon the
water, Contaren. de ^erf l. 2 c. 5 Aquinas. Con Gen l. 3. c. 24. Thom. p. 1. q
104 Sua. in Met. Vasquez in 1. p. d. 72. Scotus in 2. d. 1. q 5. Hurtad^ etc.
Hieron. in Ep. ad Ctesiphon^e^ and in l. 1. Contra Pe^agianos. act. 17.25.
which being withdrawn, the Impression is instantly defaced, or as the light in
the air which upon the Suns removal is presently extinct. Upon which grounds
the schoolmen affirm that preservation is a continued creation, that every
thing is as it were newly borne, newly produced; And although in themselves
permanent yet in respect of God are quasi in fieri: they are as it were under
the hammer, they are in a perpetual forge and dependence.

And as our Nature, so are our actions; we cannot utter one word, think one
thought, turn our Eye, or move a finger, without the concurrence of his power
who gives life and breath, and all things; much less can we of our selves
perform any thing which is good, direct a wish, or tread one step toward
heaven. As the Axe is in the hand of him that heweth, without whose elevation
it neither cuts nor sinks into the timber, so are we all in the hand of that
Master builder of Heaven and earth, we are dead and useless tools without his
Influence, (...). 2.13.
who gives as well the will as the work, Act. 17.28. Math. 14.29. Dan. 3.27
Exodus 1^.21 Numb. 20.8. Ios. 10.13. In 1. ad Heb. Hom 2. ad Heb.
and in whom we live and move and have our being. Heavy bodies cannot sink in
the water, nor the fire burn that which is most combustible, if the God of
Israel speak the word; the Watery Ocean becomes a dry pavement and the hard rock
a springing well at the pleasure of the Almighty: the Sun of Heaven refreshed
as a Giant to run his course, must stand still until the God of heaven concur
to the motion, the consideration whereof made Saint Ambrose break out into this
language, Non minus est conservare mundum quam creare, it is as great a work to
preserve the world as to create it: and Saint Chrysostom. (...) it is a greater
work: As it is more labor and strength to support a burden long in the air,
then at first to raise it from the earth, which may teach us:

To deny our selves, to yield up and resign our souls unto Gods disposing
Providence, Us. 2. Sam. 15.26.
Every one professing with David here am I, let the Lord deal with me as
seems good unto him. For Dependency is very humble and respective, it studies
contentment and care to Comply, it commands the soul a holy silence, and in
all afflictions keeps under the least rising of our hearts against the
Almighty: It makes us kiss the rod, Damnati gratias agant, accusatio votu^,
and poena felic^tas^ Job. ^.10.
and with the Christians in Tertullian, thank our Executioners. For shall we
receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? Is it his
great mercy that we do not f^ll into nothing, or which is worse into eternal
flames? and shall the calamities of this world which cross perchance our
hopes, and so prevent our pride, or draw from us some gilded earth, which
happily would have made us more wicked, or at most destroy these Houses of clay
which of themselves will fall in sunder? shall (I say) a temporal bodily
chastisement, Heb. 12.6.
the scourges of a loving father drive us to impatiency, or distrust, Job 3.
or make us curse the day of our Nativity? A Soldier is tried in a conflict,
and a Mariner shows his skill in a tempest. And shall a Christian faint or fear
in the Seas of Adversity, in the battles of affliction? we see, the candle
shines brightest when the air is dark and the fire burns hottest when the
weather is cold. Nature teaching these inanimate creatures to rejoice as it
were in danger, and to triumph over oppression: It is empty chaff which is
tossed up and down with the wind, not sound corn, and they are rotten trees
which a storm overthrowes. Let us consider that smooth and golden steps, lead
for the most part unto lust and carnal security, they make us insensible of
Gods mercyes, and less regardfull of his Judgments, and more conceited of our
own greatness: Ier. 12, 1.2. Consuevisse Deos, quos pro scelere ulcisci
velint, his secundiores res and diuturniorem sanitatem conceder. Caes. l. 1. de
bell. Gall. Job 21.7. Math. 26.39.42.
let us consider that the ways of the wicked prosper, they gallop over the
green plains of pleasure and plenty, their Houses are peaceable, and the rod
of God is not upon them. And shall we envy the condition of wicked men? shall we
complain because our Kingdom is not of this world? shall we be angry with our
blessings? Indeed when we consider the grievance it self we may look after a
change of our Condition, for we carry about us flesh and blood and who can say
his heart is clear? But yet we must remember the Author of our afflictions the
hand which strikes, and the providence which directs them: we may with our
Savior desire the Cup to pass from us, but we must with our Savior also
desire not our own wills, Isa. 45.9.
but Gods be done: Murmuring may enrage our Crosses and make them more heavy,
but cannot remove them, it may increase our guilt, and bring upon us new
Judgments, it cannot take them off, like a bird that is entangled in the lime
twigs, the more she struggles, the more she doubles her danger.

2.God is All-knowing and Omnipresent with the Creatures.
What power of Man or Angel can cloud the Eyes of the Almighty? what
darkness hides from his face with whom the night shines as the day; Psalm.
139.12. Sen. Ep. 41. Hill. l 8. de pri.
the darkness and light are both a like. A heathen will tell thee God is near
thee, he is with thee, he is within thee; a father will tell thee, God is never
from thee, the Shoolmen will tell thee, God is more present with thee then thou
art with thy self, and give good reasons for what they say: And above all Saint
Paul will tell thee Heb. 4.13. All things are naked and open unto the Eyes of
him, with whom we have to do: Nothing can escape his knowledge, Chrysostom. in
locum.
we are as it were divided and bowelled, without our clothes, without our skin,
in the sight of God. But when we are locked in our chambers, the windows shut,
the curtain drawn over our heads, when we are compassed about with stone
walls, who then shall see us? Nemo te videt (says Saint Bernard) non tamen
nullus: No man indeed can see thee, but he sees thee before whose tribunal
thou must one day stand and give an account for every idle word. Thy good
Angels see thee, and greeve at thy sin, the Devil sees thee, and rejoices
at thy folly. The stones in the wall see thee, and are ready when God pleases
to fall upon thee and to grind thee to powder. But Gods power does not rest
here, his all seeing Eye is not terminated in words and actions. He searches
the raines, Ps. 7 2. Ier. 11.20. Psalm. 94.11.
he reads clearly the book of our soul, he hears our thoughts. this House of
our body, walls of flesh cannot exclude the rays of that Omnipotent Majesty,
David in the 94. Psa. 81. will call them fools, who think otherwise; and he
will give a reason for it in the 92. v. He that planted the ear shall not he
hear? or he that formed the eye shall not he see? he that made the heart,
shall not he know the ways and works thereof? But Gods Eyes are purer yet, and
I have not expressed the least part of their brightness: God understands our
thoughts a far off Psalm. 139.2. from all eternity, says Lyranus upon that
place, as soon as he had existence himself, and he was never without
existence, he did know all the purposes, the secret motions, the deepest root
and ground of all our cogitations. But alas who can measure that which is
infinite? Our great God knows more yet, and which may make us adore and
admire and tremble, beholds us in our proper and corrupt condition, he discerns
much filth and great stains in the fairest soul, he sees our carnal
thoughts, our worldly thoughts, our presumptuous thoughts, our suspicious
thoughts, our partial thoughts, our curious thoughts, our vain thoughts, Genesis
6.5. Isa. 64.6.
he sees our wisest thoughts are foolishness, and our best thoughts have
enough to condemn us. But O worm that I am, ashes, and nothing, and worse
then nothing; why do I endeavor to fathom the depth of Gods knowledge, to
describe that light which looks further and further and has no end of
looking further. Whatsoever God sees (and he sees whatsoever has been, and
whatsoever is, whatsoever will be or may be, he sees whatsoever is to be seen
and whatsoever is not to be seen) he rules and governs and commands, Pro.
16.4. Psa. 34.10. 1. Tim. 2.4.
he directs to his own glory and man's salvation. Philosophy will teach us that
Angels can discover bad thoughts, by wicked actions, and judge of the soul by
the temper of the body: But to see us from everlasting, and to see us in our.
native fowlenesse and deformity, to know our thoughts before they were and so
long before they were to dispose of them to his own ends, this is that altitudo
of which Saint Paul speaks, into which the further we descend, the lower we may
sink, and the more we know, the more we are ignorant.

O thou Christian then whosoever thou art, having fought a good fight, made
conscience of thy ways, and kept thy self straight in the midst of a crooked
generation, do not hang down thy head or remit one jot of thy zeal in
goodness for the reproaches of Men, or the unjust censures of all the world,
rather revive and quicken thy industry in every good cause, inflame thy holy
life, and in despite of all the sharp arrows of calumniation, run joyfully in
the race of Gods service, raise thy languishing thoughts with David in the
consideration of thy own sincerity and innocence and single heart, comfort thy
self with the example of Christ, Heb. 12 2: Job. 16.19.
who despised the shame for the joy which was set before him, and satisfy thy
soul with Jobs resolution, behold now my witness is in Heaven, and my record
is on high. When thou art going to any lewd Act, profane company, vain
pleasure, remember the God of Israel looks upon thee: If profit unhappily move
thee to injustice, oppression or any other service of the Devil, if rotten
lusts, unconstant honor, base ends, lay siege unto thy soul and endanger thy
spiritual safety call to mind the presence of the Almighty. This one weapon
of Divine Armory is powerful enough to confound a whole world of temptations
and to conquer Hell it self. For will any man cut a purse before the Judges
face, and when he is sitting upon the Bench? will any man commit adultery in
the open streets? Nothing hinders vice so much as nakedness: and if Seneca speak
true, the greatest part of sins are committed for want of witnesses. How tender
were the primitive Christians herein? Who would not tell a lie to save their
lives as Justin Martyr relates. Ap 2. pro Chr. p. 57. De mend. ad. Cons. l. 1.
c 6. Job 13.7.9. Prove. 16.4. Exodus 32.32 Non nisi cu^ m^ntitur perseverat.
Tertul. Papists defen. aequivocation. Psalm. 14 1. Ideo dixit in cord suo quia
hoc nemo audet d^cere etjamsi audet cogitare; August. V. 18. C. 1. V. 21.
Saint Augustine proceeds further and will not admit a lie for the salvation of
a man's soul. But Job has a strain above all and will not have a lie told for
the glory of God: that glory which is the greatest Good, which is the end of
all things, which Moses preferred before his own everlasting happiness. O
merciful Father how are we degenerated from those pious resolutions! what
Spirit hardens our hearts? and devoures the conscience of these later
generations which make lying a Profession, and are constant in nothing else?
which maintain the lawfulness thereof, and confirm on truths with Oaths and
Imprecations. In David's time the fool said in his heart there is no God, he
durst not speak it with his tongue: But our Atheism is raised to that height
and boldness that we dare profess it in our words and Actions, we dare brag
of our uncleannes in contempt as it were of heaven and in scorn of the
Almighty. Add to this the filthiness of sin which our Savior tells us Math.
15. defiles the Man, (...) makes him Common which, by an Hebraisme, is profane,
unclean, beastly. Agreeable to which is that of Saint James lay aside all
filthiness and superfluity of naughtines, filthiness in the abstract, (...)
naughtines which is an excrement a nastie thing as odious and detestable in the
nostrills of the Almighty, as our very excrements are to us. Upon which ground
Devout Anselme professed that he would rather be in Hell and free from sin,
In vita Anse^mi:
then polluted with the filthiness thereof possess the Kingdom of Heaven. Now
if every sin be of this blotting beastly condition, if the Almighty beholds
them in their vilest shape, in their greatest deformity, what shall we think
of those crying sins, of unfaithfulness, Modo veritatis antiti^^ta and ve^^
Religionis corona jam sentina and confluges omnium haeresium. Nuntius
Popheticus p. 34.
blasphemy, whoredom, murder, how do they difile us? what beasts and black
Devils do they make us? what shall we think of this great and famous City
lately the Governernesse of Truth, and Crown of true Religion, but now the sink
and stinking dirt of all Heresies? My Author is in print and passes without
contradiction, and in a language which foreign Nations may understand: And
this he further speaks as near as I can translate him. I dare be bold to say
that more sects are risen in London in a year and half past then in the whole
Christian world since the Apostles times in 1600 years: Irenaus reckons up
about 20 diverse sects of Heretics, Tertullian 27. Theodoret 76. Epiphan. 80.
August. 88. Damas. 100. Philast. 128. All which being dead and buried many
centuries of years since, are raised at this time and recalled from Hell by
Handicrafts men, and the baser sort of people not without the great evil of
the Londoners; Neither is there yet an end of multiplying Religions. I must
confess I stand amazed at the relation. And know not whether I should be angry
with the book, or sorry for the Author, wish to the one less bitterness, or
to the other more charity.

3.God governs all things to their ends.
Nehem. 9.6
Gods Providence is as general as his Creation, governing all things by the
same infinite power by which they were made. This glorious fabric of the world
would soon lose its beauty and the great family and rich furniture thereof
fall into confusion, if the hand of Providence did not guide their motions and
by a sweet command conduct them to their ends. Job. 38.11.
The waters would overflow the earth, the fire would ascend above its proper
sphere, Lions and beasts of strength and Cruelty would quickly devour the
generations of Men: Nay the creatures have destruction enough within
themselves, and for want of enemies abroad would become their own Executioners.
Theodor. in his Sermons of Prove. Chrysostom. in his Sermons of Prove. L^ssius in
his base of Provid. etc De usu partium c. 7.
Divines and naturalists have spoken so much of the parts of man, the use and
order of the actions and fabric of rational creatures, of the virtue of
plants and stones, that wonder is fitter herein then words, and, he does best
relate that story who most admires it; I shall therefore only tell you, Galen
by the light of Nature did extol the wisdom of Godin the making of a Gnat, in
the very thigh of a Gnat that which we do so little regard, which we do so much
scorn, which many of us never took notice of, the thigh one of the least and
low'st parts of a gnat, a poor, imperfect creature, yet confesses the hand of
God and magnifieth that Name which Christians many times blaspheme; the basest
worm which creeps in the dust has matter enough to silence the wisest Man,
and by how much the lesser any creature is, by so much it raises the greater
wonder. As a small watch requires a curious hand, and pictures of the least
volume show most of all the limners skill. Let us consider the whole species of
mankind, every child of Adam from the Creation to the last Judgment, and when
we have considered let us be astonished, and cry out with Saint Paul, How
unsearchable are his Judgments who gives to so many millions of millions a
distinct Face? Romans 11.53.
by which the Husband knows his wife, the Father his Child, the Creditor his
Debtor, the Magistrate the Delinquent, the Subject his Prince, by which we know
our Friends from our Enemies: and without which Treason, Incest, Parricide,
Every wickedness would fill the world, and confusion overwhelm all Government,
there is not a Lilly grows in the Field, Math. 6.2^ 29. and 1^.29.30. vid.
aug. l. 5 de Civ. Deie. 11. and l. 10. c. 14. Pro. 16.33. Lam. 3.37. Deu. 19.4.
not a drop sinks from the clouds, not a hair falls from our Head or a
sparrow lights on the ground without the Eye of Providence; grass has measure
and the sands of the Sea are numbered, the whole disposing of a Lot is of the
Lord. He guides the stroke of every sword in a battle, and not a bullet flies
to any other place then he has appointed.

Those things which be most free and absolute, the hearts and wills of Men
follow the Influence of Divine Providence, they do whatsoever likes them, But
yet they can do no more and in no other manner then God has Decreed, He
guides them to his own Ends yet guides according to that Nature he has put
into them, they voluntarily perform, what certainly shall come to pass. He
causes good actions, he permits bad actions, he rules and orders all.
Absolon shall refuse the good Counsel of Achitophell if God have so
determined, 2. Sam. 17. 1. Sam. 2.25. Prove. ^.1.
and Elie's Sons shall not obey the voice of their Father if the Lord resolve
to slay them. The Heart of the King is in the hand of God as the Rivers of
water, the Kings heart, who has all things at command, and is of all men most
free, and whose wrath is as the roaring of a Lion, Prove. 19.^^
his heart, his will, his favors, his frown, his power, his purposes, are
called by Gods Providence as the waters are carried in their channels at the
pleasure of those who have skill to derive them. Posidonius in the life of
Saint Augustine gives us two memorable examples to this purpose The good Father
being to visit and instruct the people of a certain place, C. 12.
and having a guide to direct the way and conduct him thither, did
notwithstanding mistake the Common and usual road and ignorantly fall into a
by-path and so escaped the bloody hands of some Donatists who knowing of his
journey lay in ambush to take away his life: C. 15.
At another time this Holy Bishop preaching to the Congregation, and forgetting
the Argument, which first he proposed, fell upon the Errors of the Manichees,
which he never intended, and by that means converted one Firmus his auditor
who afterward fell down at Saint Augustines feet, Vid. de Alipio l. 6.
confess. August. c. 7. and de Iul. Caes. apud Suet. in Cas. c. ^1
weeping and confessing that he had lived a Manichee many years, and now, by
Gods mercy and his last Sermon was reduced to the Catholic belief. We all
know that Augustus made the general tax to enrich his own coffers, but God
used it as a means to fulfill the Prophecy of Christ's birth at Bethlahem. Nay
God is the cause why things are not, why a wise Council of State-Physitians
cannot cure the wounds of a bleeding Kingdom, why a peace desired betwixt two
contrary Armies finds no success, why the Enemies which were round about the
People of Israel could not desire their Land, the men being absent thrice every
year, Exodus 34.24.
and none but women to oppose them. It is God who hinders and gives way to
every work, nothing is independent on him who depends on nothing.

Indeed Ticho-Brach, and Kepler two famous Mathematicians, seem to Cross this
doctrine, attributing much to the Influences of the Stars, and to that great
conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter. From whose pens some in these times give
out many ominous conjectures: and in truth few can be ignorant that the
heavenly bodies have great power over inferior Creatures and are the partial
causes of many alterations here below; but such cross accidents do frequently
happen in the Matter on which they work, especially in the body and actions of
men which are swayd by reason and education and Religion. And God does so
control and check them at his pleasure, that our sins are more to be feared
then the Stars, Jer. 10.2.
and nothing certain can be concluded from their aspects, but that they work
together for the best to them that love the Lord. Rom 8.28. Joel. 2.31. Mat.
24.29
They make somewhat to foretell Man's inclination* and are signs of spiritual
events, but they bring no fatal necessity with them, and things contingent are
as far above their power, as they are below the Almightie's. If we can believe
that the 1000. years mentioned in the Rev. for the binding up of Satan, is
yet to come as diverse do strongly persuade us, C. 18.
M. Meade in his clavis Apo. Alst. in his diatr. Caro^us Gallus in his clavis
Proph.
we need not cast the great fury and confusion of all the world, upon the
stars, we need not wonder at those Civil dissentions by which we devour our
selves, and when no other enemy could do us any harm, we labor our own
destruction. For the old Serpent is such an enemy to goodness and is now so
madly furious because his time is short, that he brings forth all his wicked
instruments which are in the 4. quarters of the world to compass the Tents of
Saints about and the beloved City, to strik Religion at the heart, and to
banish, if it were possible, the Church of Christ from off the earth; and yet
thanks be to our gracious God his power is limited both in regard of time and
measure and manner, he can go but to the end of his chain, witness Jobs
afflictions; He may express his malice, he cannot effect his will: For
wickedness it self is under subjection, and all the strength the Devil has
rests in God; I am confident that these rageing waters which do so overflow the
banks of Christendom are trialls of the Godly, punishments of sin, and
instruments of Divine Providence. I do not more believe that the sun is in the
Heaven, or that I am speaking to this Congregation then I do believe that all
the calamities which are fallen upon this Land, shall turn to the benefit of
Gods people, See the Inter. on the Reve. Napier. Fon. Br^gh. Con^a. Man. Math.
24.14. Vide Heurrius de leg. Eva^g. ad Jndo.
that Antichrist shall concur to his own subversion, and the very enemies of
Truth shall advance it, then that scarlet whore, who has so long made the
Nations drunk with her fornications shall fall, and it is most probable that
her ruin is near at hand: when a more full and entire calling of the Gentiles
then hitherto has been, shall be accomplished, and their reasons are
prevailing with me, who yet expect such a calling: when the Jewish Nation shall
be fully reduced to Christian Religion and it is a granted truth amongst the
best Divines that such a conversion is yet to come, See Wee^^ Treatise of the
Jew. p. 355.
then shall the Church of Christ break through the clouds of affliction,
prevail over Antichrist and all the instruments of hell, and flourish more in
doctrine and manners, Mich. 4.3. Esa. 54.11. L. de mundo c. 6.
in peace and power and glory then ever it has done since men first inhabited
the earth. What Aristotle therefore relates of Phydias the famous Carver, I
shall apply to Divine Providence, for as he being to make the Image of Minerva,
did with such curious Art work his own face upon the statue, that whosoever
should scrape out the face, must of necessity deforme the whole Image: so the
great Architect of Heaven and earth, has in such a wonderful manner engraven
as it were his own glorious face, his power, his wisdom, his goodness, upon
the whole fabric of the world, and upon every part thereof, that this Divine
face of God cannot be separated from any Creature without the Creatures ruin
and annihilation. I will conclude this point, and my first Proposition with
David's Confession. Psalm. 40. v. 5. O Lord my God thou have made thy wonderful
works so many that none can count in order thy thoughts toward us, I would
declare and speak of them, but they are more then I am able to express.

PROP. 2. Foolish things in the Judgment of the world are in great esteem
with our wise God.
How much the heathens of old did contemn the Jews for Circumcision that seal
of the covenant in the flesh, Poets and profane writers do sufficiently
manifest. And although the Socinians of later times do not plainly deride
Baptism the Sacrament of Christianity and new birth, yet they place it amongst
unnecessary ceremonies, Vide Catech. Ra. ^ cov.
and account it rather a matter of form and custom then of use and power.
What wicked titles does Muncer that great Anabaptist give to Matrimony the holy
Ordinance of God, Sleyd. Com: Rulling. l. 1.
and, which is honorable in all, calling it fornicem and Sathanae lupanar, the
stew, and whore-house of the Devil, from whose opinion Coster the Jesuit does
not much dissent professing, that a Clergie-man who keeps concubines and
commits sacrilege, offends less then he who is married to a wife: Enchyr. c.
17.
And do not many amongst us think coursly of the blessed Eucharist, 1. Cor.
11.29.
not discerning the Lords body as the Apostles speaks, who profane those sacred
mysteries with carnal thoughts, and unprepared hearts, and rather feed their
bodies then their faith? The Holy Scripture, which is the word of Grace, the
word of life, Act. 14.3. Ph. 2.16. Romans 1.16. Burtor. in Syn. Jud. and Weens
treatise of the Jew. p. 349. Dignitati comparar^. Aug. Con. l 3. c. 5. Act
26.24 Act 17.32. 2. Cor. 5.18 Romans 10.14 2 Cor. 10.4 Heb. 4.12.
the power of God unto salvation, by the Jews is less valued then the Talmud,
and in the esteem of Papists, is an imperfect leaden rule, a dead and dangerous
letter, a nose of wax. That God should be incarnate, and suffer is madness in
the judgment of Festus: A Virgin to bear a son, or a resurrection from the
dead is abundant Matter of laughing at Athens.

What better entertainment has the preaching of the Gospel? which is the
ministry of reconciliation, and the ordinary means of eternal happiness,
opening the ears, enlighting the eyes, softning the heart, and sanctifying the
whole man. How is it accounted by too many, ludibrium and probrosum artificium,
as Gerson speaks, a vain work, a dishonorable profession? how do we loath
this heavenly Manna? What a foolish unnecessary business do we make it,
preferring our ease, our profit, our private reading before the bread of life
and the public worship and service of the Almighty. Such is the condition of
the flesh, and corrupt reason and wordly wisdom that they cannot relish
matters of greatest weight of highest excellency, they cannot discern the
doctrine of faith, the mysteries of salvation, some reasons may be these.

REAS. 1. God sees not as Man sees.
The Lord beholds the heart, 1. Chro. 28.9. Ier. 17.10. 1. Sam. 16.7
he regards sincerity and faithfulness, he loves a willing mind, a cordial
wish, when all things else are wanting: But men have base and bastard
principles by which they judge and by which they are led, they look upon the
Garment and outward appearances, either blessing themselves in their policy
with Achitophel, or in their power with Nebuchadnezzar, or in their full barnes
with the Rich-man in the Gospel* soul take thy ease thou have goods laid up
for many years, when alas the whole world, is nothing to the happiness of the
soul and Gold can no more fill the spirit of man then grace can fill his
purse. Eliab looked more like a King then David in the eyes of Samuel, yet
David was elected and Eliab refused. 1. Sam. 16. v. 6.7. And that which is
highly esteemed amongst men is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16.15 How
does the face and outward splendour of the Romish Church prevai^e with carnal
minds? How many owe their Religion more to education then to the Scripture^,
and are rather born in good opinions then choose them? veritas and veritas was
never out of the mouth of the Manichees, when they spak those things which were
most false* and their many and great books were full of the Name of Truth when
their hearts were empty of the Nature. Aug. l. 3. Conf. c. 6.
Look upon those vast and Giantlike Volumes of Baronius, Vasquez, Suarez, and
many others of that Ignatian Order: how are they composed with Judgment,
strengthened with reason, confirmed with antiquity? what tongue do they not
speak, what art do they not know, what sanctity do they not profess? And if
you desire to understand what Policy they use to establish the Kingdom of
darkness, to endeere their name and credit to the world, I refer you to three
books, the one entitled Arcana Jesu^tarum, the other, Mysteria Jesuitarum, the
third Historia Jesuitarum. Proceed a little fu^ther and take notice of those
lesser, but no less pernicious works of Socinus, Volkelius, and some other
petty primer tracts of their adherents: their rational discours^s would
invite and feast any man who is not nourished with Grace and disciplined by
Scripture, their smooth and insinuating language would deceive if it were
possible the very Elect: So that if we should judge our cause and Religion by
the face and eye of man, if Bulk or Policy or external glory were the only
arguments of Truth, and characters of the Gospel, our state were desperate,
and as the Apostle speaks in another case, we were of all men most miserable.

Saint Chrysostom in his third Hom. on the 1 to the Cor. comparing Paul and
Plato together prefers the Heathen before the Apostle in point of reason and in
the knowledge of Nature, Hom. 3. in 1. ad Cor. (...).
notwithstanding gives the victory to Saint Paul and lays the Philosopher in
the dust. And I believe if we examine the whole Catalogue of Martyrs, and take
an exact view of those good souls who did put on the whole armor of God, and
have wrestled with the rulers of darkness, Nostri (ut de viris taceam) pueri
and mulierculae tortores suos taciti vincunt and expromere illis gemitum nec
igni^ potest, Lae. l. 5 c. 13. Socrates l: 1. ca. 5. hist. Ecc. 1. Cor. 1.26.
and spiritual wickedness we shall find the unlearned but religious tradsemen
professing Christ, and entertaining death when the Scribe and disputer have
renounced their faith, and forsook their colors, we shall find the wisdom of
the wise destroyed and silly women and children putting their hands into those
flames which the Doctors refused. An Ignorant laick at the Council of Nice
confounded and nonplust many Scholars. And how many of Christ's Apostles were
fishermen, learned only in goodness, and better read in sincerity then
books? what can be more plain then that of Saint Paul, not many wise men after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. And Saint Chrysostom
will give us the reason, because the great, and studied Scholar blessing
himself for the most part in the proud swellings of his deep learning, stands
upon his own strength and excellency, and will do nothing without a reason:
when the illitterate Countryman, the poor snake abhors himself, is
contemptible in his own eyes, and with all humility and fear casts himself
down at the Almighties feet. Romans 8. v. 6.7.
Saint Paul goes further, and tells us that the wisdom of the flesh is death,
is emnitie against God, neither is or can be subject to the Law of God. Romans 8.
v. 6: 7.
Romans 8. All which is to be understood of wisdom and knowledge so long as they
continue carnal, carried away with pride, and self-sufficiencie; For we must
know that many of Gods dearest children have been and still are as able
scholars, as glorious lights, and as eminent in every outward excellency as
any in the world; who ever more eloquent then Esaias? more profound then Saint
Paul? more renowned for all learning then Moses and Solomon? wisdom and
knowledge, are happy instruments of salvation when they are guided by truth and
steered by Religion, they are great virtues in themselves, and if there were no
other world but this, I would account my study, my heaven, and my books
everlasting life, but when the text tells me (...) not many wise: when
Philosophy teaches corruption Optimi est pessima, when experience shows no
wickedness to the wickedness of a Scholar, I must conclude that Piety is the
greatest Policy, and the best Christian, the wisest Man.

REAS. 2. Foolish things are made wise by Gods effectual calling.
When God calls any Man effectually, he puts his fear into his heart as Jerem.
speaks; And Solomon assures us that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom: Ier. 32. v. 39.40. Prove. 1.7
when we delight in the commandments of God, and devote our selves to the
obedience thereof, when we are eminent in good works, and abundant in service,
and embrace Religion with any danger, with any difficulty, then are we wiser
then our adversaries, Psa. 119. v. 98 99 100
our teachers, our Elders, as David speaks, wiser then the great Achitophels
the Pharisees of the world, who being puffed up with the pride of their strong
brain, and blinded with an opinion of their profound knowledge will deride
Christ himself when he tells them that it is impossible to serve God and
Mammon. Luke 16. v. 13.14. Psa. 119. v. 98.99.100
For wisdom is the fruit of Devotion, and because David was holier therefore
he was wiser then his Enemies: Piety raises the soul of man, and purges it
from those lusts which do besot our knowledge, it inspires the understanding
with a high and heavenly light by which we discern the subtilitie of the Devil,
the corruption of our own hearts, the mystery of salvation; it breaths into our
Actions sincerity, and watchfulness, and the life of wisdom. Though we
understand the depths, and secrets of State, excel in Judgment, sharpness
of wit, faithfulness of memory and in variety of experience and
observations; though we be living libraries, and have not Religion, we are
blind and stupid, and fools in any true knowledge, the flower and spirit of
all our wisdom is but learned folly, and beautiful simplicity. For tell me,
O thou mighty Man of knowledge, who do trample upon the Counsels of others
with contempt, and art the Oracle of God in the esteem of Men. 2. Sam. 16.23.
Can thy Policy resist the Devil? or find out the wiles and devises of the
old Serpent, who is well read in all the Arts and advantages of the earth, and
is as full of knowledge as of malice? Can thy worldly wisdom preserve thy life
one moment longer then God has decreed? Job ^.^.
can it conduct thee the way to Heaven? or preserve thy soul from Hell? that
precious soul, which Saint Basil calls the delight of the Almighty, and Saint
August. the miracle of miracles, that Divine, spiritual, eternal soul, I
tremble to speak it, our souls are eternal: when we have continued as many
years, as there are drops in the Sea, we have not continued one moment in
comparaison of Eternity; were all the world a Mountain of sand, and every
thousand years one of those sands removed that Mountain would have an end,
but Eternity would be no lesser; After all the ages which Men or Angels can
number or conceive, Eternity does but begin, it does always begin, and is
nothing but beginning. And now let the eye of reason judge betwixt a Child of
God, and a man of the world, betwixt the providence of heaven, and the wisdom
of the flesh: what learning is it, to know all the secrets of Nature, and to be
a very fool in the mysteries of Grace? What Policy is it to have a clear
sight into all the Kingdoms of the earth, and to be stark blind in the
Kingdom of Heaven? what profit is it to gain the whole world and to lose our
eternal souls? Mat. 16.26
All the admirable knowledge and virtues of the Heathen are but glorious
abominations in the judgment of Saint Aug. and Nicodemus one of the best of
the Pharisees, Splendiae peccata.
a Ruler of the Jews and a professed Doctor in the Law is stupid and childish in
the principles of Christianity; Job. 3.4.
if our Savior talk to him of being borne again, he presently thinks of
entering into his Mothers womb, the natural Man, the Man endowed with all the
excellencies of which the soul is naturally capeable, 1. Cor 2.14.
perceives not the things of the spirit of God, has neither wisdom to make a
right choice of the best end, nor understanding to find out the true means;
Nay he esteems them foolishness, and so changes the greatest blessing into a
fearful curse. Saint Paul will give us the reason of all because they are
spiritually discerned, they require single eyes and soft hearts, and humble
thoughts, they require a sanctifying spirit. The wisdom of Heaven, proceeds
only from the God of Heaven, and therefore,

1. Do not contemn thy weak brother.
God can raise his thoughts, or direct his folly to a happy end, he can make
him an Instrument of glory, Psa: 19.6. and 119.130
who is now a subject of weakness, and can strike a straight stroke with a
crooked stick. Titus 3.3.
Let us remember that we our selves in times past were unwise, disobedient,
deceived, serving lusts, and diverse pleasures, that we continue clay of the
same lump, branches of the same root, and the same Grace which supports one,
may raise another: For who made us to differ? or what have we that we have not
received? 1. Cor. 4. Psalm. 44.14
Although the Jews be now a byword amongst the heathen, and have lien long
under Captivity: Although they are broken off from the stock, Romans 11.22 Lev.
26.43
yet God is able to graff them in again and to let the day of his glory shine
forth upon them. Nay God will remember his covenant with Abraham and Jacob, his
calling is without change, No sin can frustrate his Election. Those who are
Enemies to the Commonwealth of Israel, and are darkness it self, may be
enlightened by the sun of righteounesse: God may have Children amongst Turks
and Pagans, the wilderness may nourish sheep, Luke 23.43. Act. 9.
and the hard Iron afford sovereign spirits: The thief upon the Cross became a
Saint, and persecuting Saul was changed into Paul an Apostle. Other men's
imperfections therefore may be our instructions, they may be arguments of great
devotion, they must not be objects of any derision: the least sin deserves
contempt, but the greatest sinner charity: let us hate the vice but help the
man, pity him, pray for him, let us ex^end our breasts of compassion,
wheresoever is hope of Conversion. But above all let us not despise our zealous
brother, who out of a pious apprehension of the joys of Heaven and of the
torments of Hell, of the love of Christ, and wickedness of sin, makes a
conscience of the least transgression, startles at all appearance of evil, is
strict and tender, and fearful in all his conversation, who looks upon the
world with contempt, Calv. in Ep. ded. in 1. ad Cor.
and for the Gospel sake will kiss the rod, and welcome death. Calvin
dedicates his Commentary on the 1. to the Cor to one Caracciolus a Marquess of
Italy, of great honor and Estate, blessed with a noble and chaste wife, and
with many sweet Children, and full of peace and earthly happiness;
notwithstanding parted with his Country, bid farewell to his pleasant and
rich possessions, forsook his wife and children, and friends, and all for the
love of Christ and liberty of his conscience; following the Counsel of Saint
Hieron, Epist. 1 ad. Heliod.
to his beloved Heliodor, if thy little Grandchild hang about thy neck, if thy
mother with her hair untied and her garments rent, show thee those breasts
which gave thee suck, if thy father cast himself down upon the threshold to
keep thee in, tread upon thy father and with dry Eyes fly unto thy Savior.
It is Religion in this case to be cruel, and the greatest pity to be
pitiless. Ignatius Antiochen.
Ignatius the Martyr was of the same mind, I would to God (says he) I might
enjoy those beasts which are prepared to eat me up, I will make much of them,
and use them with all kindness, that they may devour me presently: Let the
faggot, the gallows, the fury of wild beasts, the rack, the tearing and
unjointing of all the body, let the torments of the Devil come upon me, so
that I may gain Christ Jesus: it is better to dye for Christ, then to be
Emperor of the whole world. Call not then devotion weakness, or zeal folly,
rank not them in the Calendar of fools who prefer Salvation before the world,
and by a bold assertion of the Truth, fight for Martyrdom. God is never more
honored then when the Kingdom of Heaven suffers such violence: The Church
never showed more wisdom than when her zeal flamed highest. It was an ancient
Complaint of Justin Martyr in the behalf of the primitive Christians, that
they were condemned and put to death, Apol. 2. pro Christ p. 54 55. See Tertul.
adver. Gen^es c. 2.
(...) upon an ill report, and (...) for the Name of Christian, and (...) for
the profession of goodness: And in this kingdom there was a time when virtue
and piety were accounted crimes, and the Name of Puritan a greater accusation
than drunkenness or whoredom: Luther that glorious light of the Gospel, was
called the Trumpet of rebellion. Adamus in vita. 1. King. 18.17. 1. Cor. 4.13.
The Prophet Eliah the Troubler of Israel, and Saint Paul was made the filth of
the world and the offscouring of all things.

Take heed therefore of rash and ungodly censures in matter of Religion, which
requires our prayers, and patience, and charity, abhorres reproaches: See
Tertul. Apol. contra Gent. c. 39.
Thou may abuse a Court with the Name of faction; and under the calumny of
Brownist condemn a Saint: Salvation ought to be the business of our whole
life: We cannot be more studious to preserve our souls then the Devil is to
destroy them, we cannot be too careful about that work, in which our greatest
care is not enough.

2. Do not undervalue Gods Ordinances.
Divine Institution adds a price, and holy regard to every work: The time, the
place, the matter, the manner, every circumstance receives weight from Gods
command, and he who is not careful to observe the least, does not obey God
when he performs the greatest: Salv. l. 3.
If Naaman will be cleansed, he must wash seven times in the water of Jordan, 2.
Kings 5:
six times washing will not remove the Leprosy: whosoever will be cured must
enter, First into the Poole after the Angel has troubled the water; he that
comes after shall have no benefit; Gods order must be observed, his number
regard'd contempt in any circumstance ruins all the work; It is no just excuse
to prefer some before others when all ought to be done, it is not the Duty of
a Servant to choose his work, and rather to dispute his Masters will, then obey
it. Let the Ordinances of Heaven be never so mean, so poor in regard of their
outward condition; They are worthy of precious account, of honorable esteem,
of careful observance, in respect of their Author, and those sacred ends for
which they were enjoined: Common bread becomes the food of life in the
Sacrament of the Lords supper, 1. Cor. 11.
and water, a vulgar and corruptible Element, Seals in Baptism the remission
of sins: Act. 2.
The very same words of Man which pass as wind and only beat the Air,
coming with Gods Authority and blessing shall melt a heart of Flint, Isa.
55.11. Heb. 4.12.
shall prosper in the work for which they were sent, are sharper then any two
edged sword, are lively and mighty in operation If the liquor be cordial,
what matter if the vessel be earthen? If the Tabernacle be all gold within,
what though the covering be of badgers skin? A Scholar will not judge a book
by the bulk and outside, but by the contents. A Soldier will not choose a
sword by the luster of the hilt, but by the goodness of the blade. The Author
legitimates the work, the will and end is All in every action. Crassus whipped
his Mason, A Gell. l. 1. c. 13 Florus l. 1. c. 14.
because he sent him a fitter Mast for his service, but not the same he
required: and Manlius beheaded his son because contrary to command he gave
battle to the enemy and obtained the victory. And will God endure disobedience
at the hands of sinful Men? Is he less jealous of his honor then the
Creature? shall he command, and threaten, and beseech? Shall he bring salvation
to our doors, to our bosoms and shall we despise it? Take heed, curses attend
contempt, Deu. 38.
Famine follows abuse of fullness, and unthankfulness in Peace and knowledge,
brings war and ignorance. Math. 4.^2
Our Savior only called John and James, and they without tarrying left their
ship and their Father, and followed him: Parents, and Fortunes, and Lives give
place to Gods command, we must disprove nothing which he approves, nor like any
thing which he dislikes. For we are not our own, and therefore we must not set
up our own wills, nor judge by our own reason, nor work for our own ends: but
we must sacrifice our selves to God, our wills to his will, our reason to his
knowledge, our whole endeavors to his Glory. It is enough for us that he would
have it so: His will is wisdom, and Justice, and power, and reason, and all
things.

3. God can effect glorious designs by weak and improbable means.
What cannot the God of Heaven compass to set forth his own glory and to
advance his servants good? Exodus 8.
Flies and Frogs and Lice the very corruption and dung of the earth are too
strong for Pharaoh a potent Prince: these vile and loathsome Creatures shall
conquer a Nation of armed Men. When all Egypt and any ground upon which an
Egyptian breathed did swarm with Flies, v. 26.
the Land of Goshen, a little spot of earth and in the midst of the Country
was not molested with any: Not with Flies which of all Creatures are most
passeable and least to be resisted: Walls and Rivers, and Armies cannot oppose
their motion, deny them entrance: And yet these active irrational Creatures
did not touch upon Goshen when they were round about it, they did know the
people of God, and distinguish betwixt his Friends and Enemies. Read the 2.
Cap. of Joel, Joel 2.
how a great and mighty people were prepared for battle, before whom the Land
was as a garden of Eden, and behind whom a desolate wilderness. V. 3. They
shall come as the noise of a flame of fire, and devour men like stubble; V. 5.
they shall march like strong men, and go forward in their way without
resistance; V. 7. they shall fall upon the sword and not be wounded. V. 8. The
earth shall tremble before them, and the Heavens shake. V. 10. And yet this
powerful terrible Army, in the 25. V. consists only of Grasshoppers, See Junius
in locum.
and Caterpillars, vile despised worms, which are strong to execute the word
of God. V. 11. and are invincible Soldiers when the Lord of Hosts is General.
What more contrary to good than evil? or what more opposes happiness than
sin? Genesis 50.20.
Yet the evil of Joseph's brethren, God disposed to good, and the greatest
sin that ever was, the Crucifying the Lord of life by the Divine Counsel
produced the greatest blessing. Nay, the bitter waters shall be made sweet by
salt, and the sacrifice shall burn when water is powered upon it: 2. King.
2.29. 1. King. 18.34.35.
our very afflictions as over mastered and ruled by God have this injunction
upon them to further our salvation: Our wounds are remedies, and those who
contradict the precepts of the Almighty obey his Providence. Reasons may be
these.

1. No means are Helps to God.
The Lord of Hosts can conquer without an Army ( Zach. 4.6. Neither by power
nor might, but by his spirit he can subdue every Mountain of opposition) and
bring about whatsoever he has determined. Indeed in the ordinary course of
Providence, second causes do concur, and in their sphere derive to every
effect a proper virtue: Yet here also the God of Providence has the governing
power; he is the Author of all the good which is produced, and may be said to
work himself though with other means: For all the world of Creatures are but
Instruments at the most such as contribute no assistance to the Almighty God;
they depend upon him for their Being, they work by his continual influence,
and receive their ends from his eternal Order. The same reasons which moved
God, to make the Creatures, move him still to use them, not necessity or want
of power, but love and goodness. Did he cast out Devils with his finger, Luke
1. and can he not beat down Men with his hand? Did he make the world when
there was no help, and can he not rule the world without any help? Is his arm
shortened who is omnipotent? or his Providence decayed who is wisdom it self? The
shadow of Peter shall heal multitudes of all diseases, Act. 5. Act. 5 15.
Ezech. 9.4.
And the letter Thau upon the foreheads of his people shall preserve them;
Ezech. 9. God is not like the Children of Men, who can do nothing without their
Tools; he can work above means, and he can work against means: sometimes he
disableth the greatest means, and sometimes he uses no means at all.

2. God can help the means.
He that can work without means, can improve and advance the weakest means,
can raise and quicken every temper, and dispose little occasions to great
purposes. Luther an obscure Friar, did shake the whole Kingdom of Hell and
Antichrist, by whom God gave Truth a resurrection, and a conquest over heresy.
The whole world against Athanasius, and Athanasius against it; Hook. Ecc. pol
l. 5 sec. 42.
half a hundred of years spent in doubtful trial, which of the two in the
end would prevail, the side which had all, or that part which had no Friend
but God and Death. And to come a little nearer home, and it would be strange
ingratitude in this place, to forget that general deliverance which this whole
land obtained by the doubtful language of a few careless syllables: See the
story, The danger is past as soon as the letter is burnt.
And which is more to be admired, when the vault was ready, the powder laid,
the train made, the match prepared, the Executioners of all bloody in
resolution and in the rage of their Fury. Then the hand of God made a scrip of
Paper to frustrate all the work, and to vanquish Rome and Hell it self: Isa.
38. 2 King. 20.7. Ficus suapte natura possunt pus evocare and educere, Cells l.
5. cap. 12. Eccl. 10.10 Iosep. Anti. l. 15. c. 14. Rev. 11.16 So some good
Divines interpret. 2 King 5. John 9. Judge 7.
we all know that Ezechias being sick unto death, was cured with a bunch of
Figgs, which having a peculiar Nature to dry Ulcers, in time would have
Matured the Boil; but the sudden cure was the hand of God; if the Iron be
blunt, God puts more strength unto it: If our gracious Creator will favor the
building of the Temple, no rain shall fall for ten years space, in the
daytime to hinder the workmen. The woman in the Revel. the Spouse of Christ
shall be helped by the Earth, the dullest of Elements, the basest of the
people^ Naaman shall be healed by the common waters of Jordan, the blinde-man
cured by clay and spittle, Physic fitter in common reason to have destroyed
the Eyes, than to have restored the sight. When God speaks terror, 300. Men
shall vanquish a mighty Host, and empty pitchers shall affright an Army as
much as roaring Cannons: Nay a blast, a rumor, a Fancy, shall overthrow the
greatest power on earth; The Moabites had a Fancy that they saw the blood of
their Enemies, when they saw nothing but the sun shining in the water: And yet
this Fancy was their overthrow, 2 King 3.22
2. King. 3.22 So easy it is for God to raise strength out of weakness, to
pull down the pride of flesh and blood, and to make a shadow, a trifle the
Instrument of great Deliverance. And therefore,

1. Trust not in Means.
The way to have any thing taken from us, and not blessed, is to trust in it, and
depend too much upon it: The Prophet Ierem. is positive herein, er. 27.5.
cursed be the Man who trusts in Man, and who makes flesh his Arm. The reason
follows, and which draws his heart from God: For when we make flesh our
arm, account it our support and strength, and rely upon it for deliverance.
Our hearts are withdrawn and departed from the living God, we Deifie the
Creature and as much as in us lies we unGod that Creator. The Lord himself in
effect, speaks as much in his discourse with Gedeon, Judge. 7. The people which
are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands lest
Israel make their vaunt against me, and say my hand has saved me. Isa. 47.10
Self-sufficiency and Creature-confidence is of a vaunting and rebellious
Spirit. It sets up it self, and De-thrones the Almighty. Woe to them, says
Isay. in the 31. C. that go down into Egypt for help, and trust in charets
because they are many, and in horses because they are strong: And if you would
know what this woe is, the Prophet will acquaint you in the 3. V. When the Lord
shall stretch out his hand, the helper shall fall, and he that is helped shall
fall, and they shall all together fail. Curses and woes follow them which rest
in, and lean to earthly things, and the fruit of carnal confidence is
destruction. Out of God there is nothing but the Creature, which is changeable,
empty, and insufficient, which borrowes all the worth it has, and by very
trusting in it, proves uncomfortable. How many Parents lose their children, by
setting their hearts too much upon them? who miscarry oftener than Men of the
greatest parts? Let us not therefore cry up the hands of Zerubbabel, nor the
greatness of an Army, nor the wisdom of a Parliament, but let us exalt the
power of the Almighty, adore his Providence, trust in his goodness; let every
Christian endeavor to join his soul close unto God, and as it were to square
it fit for him, to bring his trust only to the God of trust, and to set him in
his own place, the highest in the heart. For the conjunction of the soul with
God is the life thereof, and while we be careful to preserve that union, the
Gates of Hell cannot prevail against us, we stand impregnable. But if the
Devil come once betwixt God and our souls, and it is his greatest study so to
Do. If the love of the creature and confidence therein make the least
separation and unloose our hearts from their chiefest good, then our rock and
sure footing is gone: we lie open to that roaring Lion and to those waters of
iniquity, which will quickly sink us in perdition: Despair, Idolatry,
Atheism, and the whole body of sin have free passage into our souls: We
cannot step from God, but Satan steps to us; Every degree of departing from
God is distrust and unbelief, and what will not an unbelieving heart commit?

2. Serve Gods Providence in the use of means.
So far as God affords us helps and means, we must not be wanting in our
Duty to actuat their power, and to employ them to the best advantage; we must
go along with Providence, and serve occasion and opportunities, and be exactly
careful of all means, Josu. 1.
although we must not trust in any. God promised Josuah, not to leave him nor
forsake him, yet he bids him be strong and of a good courage: the Israelites
must fight it out, when God had given the Enemy into their hands. Indeed
sometimes he will have us only spectators of his Actions, he will tell
Jehosaphat and the people of Judah, 2. Chro. 20.17:
they shall not need to fight in the battle; stand still, move not, and behold
the salvation of the Lord toward you: when he is pleased to show a strange
deliverance, and to get honor in the confusion of his Enemies, as he did on
Pharaoh in the red Sea; Exodus 14.
then there shall be no concurse of second causes, he will fight himself, and
do his own work with his own hands; but most commonly he requires the service
of the Creatures, which he does not want, and sets down a course of means
which he will not alter; and then it concerns us to answer Providence with
industry, to put forth our strength, and to use such means as God vouchsafes.
If we have the honor to be Gods Instruments, we must do the office of
Instruments and be active: we must cast our care on God for the issue, but we
must sweat our selves in the prosecution. Hell it self shall never prevail
against the flock of Christ, Luke 13.^4 Phil. 2.12.
yet they must strive to enter in at the narrow Gate, they must work out their
own salvation with fear and trembling. Election to the end, includes the
means, and whosoever will be happy in another world, must first be good in
this. Presumption is as dangerous as distrust, and he may justly lose the
fruit of a happy end, who neglects the use of lawful means.

3. Confide in God in the want of means.
It was a pious speech of Luther in an Epistle to Melancton, God is able to
preserve his own cause from falling, or to raise it when it is fallen, God is
never more near his people, than when deliverance seems furthest off, they
can be in no condition where he is at a stand and cannot help them. This war
which, we think, will devour us all, may be an Instrument of preservation as
the whale which swallowed up Jonas, Jon. 1.1^
was a means to bring him to the shore. The depths of Mercy are beyond the
depths of misery, and God has his own ways of helping his Children, when all
things else deny them help. The violence of the wind turned back the Darts of
Bugenius his Army into their own faces for the victory of Theodosius. Syms.
Hist. c. 14. p. 67 etc. 16. p. 183 2. Chr. 20.22. Isa. 28.^9.
A number of little fishes will come to feed the Rochellers in a hard siege.
Moab and Ammon, the Enemies of Judah, shall destroy one another. So mighty is
God in power, and excellent in working. Say that our sins are many and our
transgressions great, yet Gods mercys are more, and his glory will be greater
in pardoning. No faults, can damme up the endless goodness of the Almighty, we
cannot offend so much as he can pardon. Say that our enemies are many, and
mighty, and cruel, yet Ahab with a few young Men, 1. King. 20
vanquished Benhadad's great Army, and 32 Kings with him. The Devil is
stronger by Man's wickedness than by his own power. Say what we can, and say
the worst we can, that England is sore wounded, and poor Ireland is giving up
the Ghost. Yet remember that Repentance preserved Ninive which in 40 days was
to be destroyed, Jon. 3. Dan. 6.
that Faith delivered Daniel out of the Lions mouth. That he, who will raise
our bodies, can mend our worst condition. Was Abraham deceived, who trusted in
God for a Son against the course of Nature? Or David, who being compassed
about with the waters of affliction hoped for better times? Dan. 3.17.
Or the 3 Children who believed that God would deliver them out of the fiery
furnace? Psa. 7.1.
O Lord my God in thee have I put my trust, save me from all that persecute me
and deliver me. And deliver us all he will, if we all pray unto him; for
faithful prayer is Omnipotent. And pray unto him we shall, Alsted^
if we all trust in him, for trust is the root and life of succesfull prayer:
Let us all therefore Pray, and Trust, and Trust, and Pray, that our heavenly
father would work a good understanding betwixt King Charles and his great
Counsel, that he would look with the Eye of compassion upon dying Ireland,
that his merciful hand would make up the breaches of distracted England, that
his goodness would take away the cause of all calamities, our many, and great,
and crying sins. And after our prayers let us trust again, that seeing it is
all one with the Lord, to save with many or with few, to help with means or
without means: He will in due time produce a sweet correspondence betwixt the
King and people; he will deliver bleeding Ireland, out of the hands of bloody
Rebels. He will restore distressed England to a happy condition, he will
pardon our iniquities, and remember them no more. Let us pray therefore, and
trust continually, and let us never cease to trust and pray.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii 28. December. 16^2.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons, that Master Corbett shall have
thanks returned him from this House for the great pains he took in the Sermon
he preached this day at S. Margaretts in the City of Westminster, at the
entreaty of this House. And that he be desired to print his Sermon: And it is
ordered that no man shall presume to print it but he, whom the said Master
Corbett shall authorize under his handwriting. And it is further ordered that
Sir John Corbett, a Member of this House, shall return the thanks to Master
Corbett.

H. ELSYNGE Cler. Parl. D. Comm.
I appoint Rob. Bostock Stationer to print this Sermon.

ED. CORBET.



ERRATA.
Page 9. l. 20. r. destroys. l. 11. r. untruths. l. 35. r. thus. p. 10. that
Gallen. p. 11. l. 1. r. every grass. l. 36. r. ruled. p. 13 l 31. r When that
scarlet. p. 13. in the margentr. Visa est in^igna quam Tullianae dignitati
compararem. p. 16. r. Gold.


