A TRVE RELATION OF The Miseralble Estate THAT Ireland now stands in.

MANIFESTED By a Letter sent from the Lord Dungarvan Son to the Earl of Cork:
TO Sir Arthur Magennis, a worthy Knight in ENGLAND.

Wherein is showed the great distress of the Protestants there inhabiting:

Likewise the preparation for Ireland, by assent of both Houses of Parliament.

With the great comfort that they daily receive by means of the valor of Sir
SIMON HARCOVRT.

With a list of the Ships, men, money and Ammunition sent for the present
relief of the poor distressed Protestants of IRELAND.

LONDON Printed by John Hammond. February 9. 1642.

THE TRVE Copy of a Letter sent from the Lord of DVNGARVAN, son to the Earl
of Cork, to Sir Arthur Magennis, a worthy Knight in ENGLAND.
SIR,
I Would have made you acquainted with the troubles which daily increase more
and more to our great sorrow: the distressed estate of our County of Cork is
grievous to express; but opportunity has not so well fitted, as to give you a
more timely relation thereof. The rebels have so far encroached into the body
of our County, that they are become Masters of the most part thereof, diverse
Lords being newly revolted to them. Amongst the rest, the Lord ANTRIM, within
the Province of Munster, about a fortnight agone, is revolted, with many
soldiers that were under his command, and have committed great slaughters on
the Protestants, with extreme cruelty, and inhumane massacres, yet have they
been valiantly resisted by Sir Simon Harcourt, and his Forces: who has proved
himself a stout soldier, and faithful subject to the King of England; and
has taken from the Rebels diverse Forts and Castles, and keeps the same well
manned with good Garrisons.

Our Army set forwards toward the Rebels, to give them an encounter on
Wednesday last was a seven-night; but they hearing thereof, withdrew themselves
to the confines of our County, where they have mustred their Army, and raised
it there to twenty thousand; which being perceived, we desired to join with
Sir Simon Harcourt and the Scots in those parts, which they accepted: and
marching toward the Rebels, they took the Field, where was a battle fought
between us; where (God be praised) we lost but one hundred men, whereof our
greatest loss was the Lord Fawklands brother: and the adverse party lost above
three thousand five hundred, as we conceived: upon which they drew back to
their Trenches, the skirmish holding some eight hours, our force being not so
strong as we wished we were enforced to retire to strengthen our army, in which
time the Rebels replenished, and augmented theirs, but we failed in our
expectation, for many of onr soldiers sides with the Rebels revolted from our
command by which means we were so weakened that we could not again take the
field without apparent danger of the loss of our whole army; the Rebels being
six to one, upon which we were enforced to retire to a town near adjacent in
which was a good castle, fortifying the same as well as we could for our
security, there intending to stay till we have aid from England or Scotland
which we daily write for, and without which not only this County, but even the
whole kingdom of Ireland is without all hope utterly lost: many Bishops are
also revolted, Aid is daily sent from forram parts so that they are increased
to that strength that they are able to bring 50000 fighting men in the field:
They have put hard for Cork and have entrenched themselves near Dublin, diverse
great personages in that City have also revolted, they have set forth
proclamations declaring, they take arms for their King and are the Queens army,
for a toleration of their Religion, and for the defense of the laws of that
land, so far, as they serve their desires and wills, I therefore conceive
that perpetual war is to be expected in Ireland, till they are fully
vanquished, and subdued, and not then free from Mutinies and Insurrections,
Except all Papists be banished that Land, and the Kingdom, inhabited with
nations in subjection to the King of England, as are Protestants.

We expected aid from England, both of Men, Ammunition, and money, before this
time; but the distractions and divisions in that Kingdom, we conceive has
hindered their proceedings in their intentions therein; Here are 3000. Scots
arived, of which we are right glad, and we expect assistance from Denmark,
which when we have, and also from England, I make no doubt, but by the blessing
of God, Ireland will again be reduced to their due subjection to the Crown of
England, which is all the news opportunity will give me leave to write at this
time.

DVNGARVAN.
January 30. 1641.
The strength and preparation for Ireland, by the assent of both Honses of
Parliament.
THE Parliament being touched with their wonted lenity, and commiseration of
the afflicted, and premeditating the distressed estate of our poor Brethren in
Ireland, by their receiving daily intelligence of the bloody Massacrees, and
inhumane butcheries daily committed by the Rebels, seriously considering, that
without some speedy aid and relief, that whole Kingdom would be in danger of
loosing, the Rebels therein, having already dirogated, nay almost usurped his
Majesty's Prerogative, slain, and put to the sword his Majesty's most true and
loyal Subjects of the Protestant Religion, confiscated their estates, and what
not, that might avail to the ruinating of a State, They have provided in their
defense, and the repulsings of the rebellious enemy, 36. Ships laden with
men, ammunition and victuals, who are now ready for Transportation at
Westchester, 18 of the said Ships being his Majesty's, to guard the narrow
seas, so that by these, and such like preparation, it is expected our friends
shall be strengthened, and our foes defeated in their pernicious designs.

FINIS.

