A Copy of An ADDRESS To the KING By the Bishop of OXON, To be Subscribed by
the Clergy of his Diocese; with the Reasons for the Subscription to the
Address: And the Reasons against it
To the Kings most Excelent Majesty.
WHEREAS, in Your Majesty's Royal Declaration lately Published, You have been
Graciously pleased to Declare, That Your Majesty will Protect and Maintain the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all other Subjects of the Church of
England in the free Exercise of their Religion, as by Law Established, and the
full and quiet Enjoyment of all their Possessions, without Molestation or
Disturbance whatsoever; we cannot but think ourselves obliged in Duty and
Gratitude, to return Your Majesty Our most Hearty Thanks for those Gracious
Expressions of your Kindness, and for all Your former Assurances of Your Royal
Favor to the Church of England; And to express our Loyalty as becomes the True
Sons of the Church of England, and Your Majesty's obedient Subjects and
Servants.

The Reasons for the Subscription to the Address are but two.
I. FIrst, That it may continue the Kings Favor, whereas the Omission may
irritate the Treasury to call upon the Fifth Bond for first Fruits at full
worth.

II. Secondly, That it will testify Our unit with, and Submission to the
Bishop requiring their Address, and perhaps expecting it upon Our Canonical
Obedience; there being nothing in the Address Praeter licitum and Honestum.

The Reasons against it are many. To Instance in Four
I. AS to Our Possessions, it is but Thanks for His Majesty's, continuing Our
Legal Rights, which either Equally concerns all States of Men in the Kingdom,
and ought properly to be considered in Parliament; or else it supposes Our
Possessions less Legal and more Arbitrary than other Subjects.

II. As to the free exercise of our Religion, It unnecessarily Herds us among
the Various Sects under the Toleration, who for that Favor in Suspending the
Laws have led the way to such Addresses, Depending for Protection upon no Legal
Establishment, but entirely upon Sovereign Pleasure and ^ndulgence, which at
pleasure is Revocable.

III. This Address when Subscribed, is either designed in the Name of the
Church of England, and then ought to have had its Birth at Lambeth, or a
Synodal Convocation; or else in the Name of this Diocese only, which will
disjoint us both among Ourselves, who differ about it, and the Body of the
National Clergy, who as we are Assured, dislike it in the present
Circumstances; so that the inevitable Consequences of this Address (set on foot
by two or three Bishops, independent upon their Metropolitan, and without the
Previous Concurrence of the rest of their Order) must be a fatal Division among
the Clergy, and either beget a new Schism, or widen the old ones, which are
already Deplorable which above all things is likely to hasten our ruin and
promote the Intreaging projects of our Adversaries.

IV. It forfeits the present Reputation we have with the Nobility, Gentry, and
Commonality of our Communion, and may tempt them not only to disgust us for our
rash Compliance with suspected Artifices (which may the up hereafter against Us
to Our own and the Churches Prejudice) But also to waver in the stedfastuess of
their Profession, when they see us owning the Exercise of Our Established own
Religion to be Precarious.

Wherefore may it not be expedient humbly to remonstrate Ourselves in this
Affair to Our Diocesan, and humbly desire beseech him not to (without
Consulting Us) Our Act in a thing of so Public and National a Concernment, in
which We conceive Ourselves obliged to proceed upon mature Deliberation and
United Measures, which under God and the King are likely to be our greatest
Safeguard.

As to the continuance of the Kings Favor.
IF the known Loyal Principles and practices of the Church of England,
pencliarly evident to this Prince in the Bill of Exclusion and Monmouth will
not Secure it, this Address, (Which only Copies out Fanatical Thanksgiving)
will not. Yet it might be thought Expedient for the Church of England to
Address for the Contents of that Declaration, which promises to Engage the Two
Houses of Parliament, in Concurrence to so Excellent a Work; as if the favor
of Continuing the Laws, (which perhaps cannot be Repealed) were as great as the
abrogateing the Laws for the Dissenters Sakes, which is the reason of the
Thanks in the Presbyterian, and Independent Addresses.

As to the Bishop.
THis Address is no Instance of Canonical Obedience that we know of, neither is
Our Unity with him such, as to Oblige Us to disjoint from Our Metropolitan and
National Clergy; neither seems Our Bishop to have had any Paternal Regard of
Us, unless it be in Treating of Us like Children of a very weak and passive
Minority, when he requires Our Subscription to a Formed Address, wherein He
has neither Consulted Us, nor given us leave to Word Ourselves, or speak Our
own Sense.

And till Bishops at their Confirmation declare what Faith they are of, as they
did in the Primitive Church. (for which there are the same Reasons now) Our
Unity with him must either be with Communication as to the whole Church, or we
may follow him We know not whether.

FINIS.
Printed in the Year 1687.


