HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A COPY OF THE FOUR REASONS TO diswade the King from his journey into Scotland
for fourteen days longer.
Delivered by Mr. Hollis to the Lords at a Conference, 7. August 1641.
M. Hollis went up to the Lords with this Conference from the House of Commons.
I Am commanded to put you in mind what has passed upon this occasion before,
concerning the Kings journey to Scotland, that both Houses did Petition his
Majesty not to begin his journey till the tenth of August, and to acquaint the
Scots Commissioners therewith, who afterward desired this House to express
their resolutions in the affirmative, upon which the House of Commons passed a
resolution, that then if his Majesty pleased to go, they would submit unto it.

I am commanded to declare unto your Lordships that the House of Commons is
desirous to submit unto his Majesty's good pleasure in all things: but such is
the present condition of this business, as it now stands; that they are
enforced to present some further considerations to your Lordships.

First, That when they gave this assent, they were in hope both Armies would
have been disbanded by that time; but though there has been all possible
means used to that end, yet it could not be effected: so the same
inconvenience does still continue.

Secondly, The treaty cannot in so short a time be finished, being returned
from Scotland but three days since: but since it is ready to be finished, and
moneys are provided, the Armies will be disbanded by that time we desire his
Majesty to take his journey.

Thirdly, The distempers and jealousies of the Kingdom are such that they
cannot be composed by passing some Act, unless his Majesty stay the desired
time.

Fourthly, No course is yet taken for the government of the Kingdom in his
Majesty's absence, there being so many weighty things to be taken into
consideration.

Upon these reasons the House of Commons have thought fit to move your
Lordships to join with us in a Petition to his Majesty to stay his journey for
14. days longer, and we make no doubt but our brethren in Scotland will
consider the straight we are in, and for our safety condescend to our desires.
And if his Majesty yield thereunto, then we shall desire your Lordships to
join with us by some express messenger to the Parliament in Scotland for the
Kings stay for that time, which we hope will give them satisfaction.

Printed in the year, 1641.


