AN ENQUIRY INTO THE OATH Required OF Non-Conformists By an ACT Made at OXFORD.

Wherein the True Meaning of IT, and the Warrantableness of Taking it, is
Considered.

By JOHN CORBETT, late Minister at Chichester.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers Chapel, 1682.

An ENQUIRY into the OATH Required of NON-CONFORMISTS By an ACT made at OXFORD.
The OATH.
I A. B. do Swear, that it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take
Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Traitorous Position of taking
Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are
Commissionated by him, in pursuance of such Commissions; and that I will not at
any time endeavor any Alteration of Government either in Church or State.

THE Interpretation of the Oath here given, is not peremptorily determined, but
probably concluded and humbly proposed, by the Inquirer, to men of sober and
Impartial Judgment, in order to the clearing of his own Judgment, and the
settling of his own Conscience about this important Matter.

In Considering the Warrantableness of taking this Oath, these two main things
do necessarily come under consideration;

I. Whether the words do signify a just and good meaning according to a
Rational Interpretation?

II. Whether such just and good meaning was the very meaning of the Lawmakers
in the Enacting of this form of Words.

The First Inquiry is, whether the Words do signify a just and good meaning
according to a Rational interpretation. Now in the way of Rational
Interpretation, these things are to Observed;

1. We must proceed no otherwise than the Words will bear in their ordinary
signification. For Words as taken in their common use are the first and most
noted means of signifying the Mind of those that use them. Therefore to force
upon them a sense in it self Rational enough, which is Alien from their
ordinary signification, is indeed Irrational.

2. A Meaning, which the Words taken by themselves may bear, may not be rigidly
insisted on against the intent of the Law. For the Words of a Law are many
times more rigorous than the intent; nevertheless, they are but subservient to
it, and may not be urged to the perverting of it.

3. It is Rational to Interpret a Law, if the Words will bear it, in a sense
agreeable to right Reason and Equity. For by the Reverence that is due to
Governors, we are forbidden to put upon their Acts a sense repugnant to Reason
and Equity, unless that repugnancy be apparent.

4. It is Rational to consider this Law not by it self alone, but as it is a
Law of this Realm, and in Conjunctionwith the other Laws there; of and
consequently to interpret it, far as the Words will bear, in a sense
consistent with the constitution of the Realm, and with the other Laws, and
with the ordinary legal Practice. For the Lawmakers must not be supposed to
enact things inconsistent, unless the inconsistency be manifest.

In this way of proceeding I come to consider the just and good meaning which
the words of the enjoined do admit.

The First Part of the OATH.
I do Swear that it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms
against the King.

IN this part these or the like words [ I do hold or I do believe] are
necessarily and evidently to be understood. For the thing that the Law seeks or
aims at, is not the truth of the Proposition, which is presupposed, but the
discovery of the swearers Judgment concerning it. This may further appear from
some other Act, where the said Words are expressed in the like imposition. [ I
Swear that I hold it unlawful to take Arms against the King.]

As for these words [ upon any pretense whatsoever] they signify no less than
upon any cause, or in any case whatsoever; so that this Tenet (as I apprehend)
is sworn to without any restriction or limitation. But then it must be
considered, that these Words [ to take Arms against the King] must be taken in
their due and legal sense; and so taken, they import the resisting of the
Sovereign Authority, or the power ordained of God, which is not Lawful upon any
pretense whatsoever. I know it is objected that some of the most eminent
Assertors of the power of Princes, as Grotius, `Barclay, etc. have Restrictions
and Cases of Exception in this Point. But I conceive that the objected Cases of
Exception delivered by them, are not properly Restrictions laid upon the Tenet,
but Explanations of its meaning, that their Readers may not mistake some for
delinquents against it, who indeed are not such according to their Judgment.

The design of this part of the Oath, is to Renounce all Rebellion, and all
resistance contrary to due Subjection, as not to be justified upon any Cause,
or in any Case, that may come to pass. And its due legal meaning is Rationally
conceived to be, That it is not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever for any of
the King's Majesty's Subjects to take Arms against his Person, or Authority, or
any of his Rights and Dignities.

The Second Part of the OATH.
And that I do abhor that Traitorous Position of taking Arms by his Authority
against his Person, or against those that are Commissionated by him, in
pursuance of such Commissions.

THE Position of taking Arms by the Kings Authority against his Person is
justly to be disclaimed. Though the King's Person and his Authority be
distinct, yet they are not separate. The King's Authority is inherent in his
Person, and in no other. Though it be exercised by an other during his Natural
incapacity, as in his infancy, yet his Person alone is the proper Seat and
Subject of it, and that other exercises it only in his Name, and as his
Vicegerent. Indeed sometimes an inferior Authority, as that of a Judge, or
Justice of Peace, or Constable is called the King's Authority; but in proper
signification it is no more than the Authority of the said Officers derived
from the King as the Fountain thereof. Now it is most absurdly spoken or
imagined that the King's Authority, which is inherent in his Person only, can
be exerted in taking Arms against his Person. Likewise it is as absurdly spoken
or imagined, that an Authority inherent in an other, but derived from the King
and dependent on him, should be so exerted.

The following Words [ or against those that are Commissionated by him] are
most Rationally understood of those, that are Legally Commissionated by him.
Likewise by pursuance of such Commissions is meant Legal Pursuance. It cannot
reasonably be supposed, that a Law, on the behalf of Persons Commissionated,
does intend any other than such as are Commissionated not against, but
according to, Law. A Commission against Law is no Commission. Wherefore
Commissionated in this place is of the same import with authorized.

The Third Part of the OATH.
That I will not at any time endeavor any Alteration of Government either in
Church or State.

I Confess that these Words [ I will not at any time endeavor any Alteration]
taken by themselves, may be interpreted so unlimitedly as to import the
abjuring of all kind of endeavor of any Alteration whatsoever, whether great
or small, for the better or the worse, necessary or unnecessary. Nevertheless
being considered as the words of a Law in Conjunction with other Laws, they may
be well limited to a more temperate and equitable meaning. We cannot reasonably
imagine that the intendment of this Oath extends so far as the abjuring of all
lawful endeavor in our place and calling of any alteration whatsoever in any
point of Government, though never so small, never so necessary, never so
advantageous for the public good in this or after times. The informing and
petitioning of Parliament Men, and legally acting in them in order to the
alteration of particular Laws is warranted by the Fundamental Constitution of
this Realm. Wherefore it is Rationally conceived, that the true intent of this
part is to engage against disturbing the Public Peace and Government now
Established, by Rebellion, Sedition or any other unlawful practice; and that
the endeavor here abjured is only such as is forbidden or not Warrantable by
Law. For a Law ought to be interpreted, as far as is possible, so as to be
consistent with Equity and Justice; and it ought not to be so interpreted, as
to damn the ordinary Course of Law, and the necessary allowed practice, such as
is the Alteration of Laws both in Civil and Ecclesiastical matters from time to
time, as need requires.

The Restrictive Interpretation here given, is no forcing of the intendment of
the Oath in this part into a narrower Compass, than the form of Expression can
well bear. Indefinite Words are to be limited according to the Nature and
Reason of the thing about which they are used. So is the indefinite expression
of endeavor to be here limited that the Oath may bear a just and equal sense
in Conformity to other Laws, and to the ordinary Legal Practice.

Besides, seeing the Words [ any Alteration of Government] are an unlimited
form of Expression, and put no difference between the most alterable, and the
most unalterable Points, certainly it is most Rational to conceive that the
Word endeavor is to be taken in a restrained sense. For it is not to be
thought that the Law should intend the perpetual securing of the least and most
alterable points of Government, as much as the greatest and most unalterable.
Yet it could intend no less, if the abjuring of all kind of endeavor of any
Alteration were intended. Moreover though the Law does not explicitly, yet it
does implicitly distinguish in the present case, and restrain it to Rebellious,
Seditious, Schismatical, or other unlawful endeavor. For it is the declared
end of the Law to obviate the designs of such [as take opportunity to instill
Poisonous Principles of Schism and Rebellion into the hearts of his Majesty's
Subjects] as the Words thereof are.

The second thing to be considered is, whether the just and good meaning before
set forth was the very meaning of the Lawmakers in the enacting of this form
of words.

A Law being the Will of the Lawgiver must be taken in that meaning, which is
therein immediately signified by him to be his Will. And that meaning being not
his secret or private but his declared and public will, must some way or other
be so evident and open* as that the Subjects may be sufficiently informed
thereof, if they be not culpably negligent. That the meaning of the Lawgiver
be made thus open and evident is a condition necessary to be constituting of
the Subjects Duty. Now to discern what it is, they are to use their Judgments
of Discretion, that their submission to it may be according to right Reason and
Good Conscience. In the present Case the declared and public will and meaning
of the King and his two Houses of Parliament is to be considered and discerned.

Sometimes the meaning of the Lawgiver may be so clearly expressed in the Law
it self, that he, who has the understanding of a man, cannot or need not
mistake it, and then there needs no farther inquiry about it. Sometimes being
not so clearly expressed in the Law it self, it may be more fully done by some
other declarative act, or open express signification of the Lawgiver, and then
also their needs no further inquiry. But in case the said meaning be not so
clearly signified by the Law it self, nor by some Authoritative Declaration,
nor by other open express signification, then of necessity recourse must be had
to a Rational interpretation: And according to Reason, that sense, which the
words do conveniently import, which is agreeable to the Law of God, and which
the Constitution of the Realm, and other Laws thereof, and the ordinary legal
practice do require, is to be taken for the declared and public Will and
meaning of the Lawgiver; Especially if it answer the design of that very
particular Law.

The meaning of the Oath now considered is not so clearly expressed in the
Words taken by themselves, as to prevent all mistaking or doubting thereof in
all, that are men of Understanding, and make use of it. The Words may bear a
far more extensive sense, than what may be judged to be the true intent and
meaning of the Lawmakers. The sense of many Laws, which are unquestionably
Just and Good, do lie in a Narrower Compass than the full extent of the Words
taken by themselves, as is manifest in these Divine Laws. Swear not at all.
Call no man Father on the Earth.

The Lawmakers have not by any Authoritative Declaration, or open act
signified that their meaning in this Oath is as extensive as any sense, which
the Words taken by themselves will bear, or that it is not to be limited to an
equitable intendment in a Consistency with the other Laws, and that legal
practice, which they themselves own and maintain. Therefore that equal sense
which the Words do fairly bear, and which bears Conformity to the Law of God,
and which the other Laws, and the Constitution of the Realm, and the ordinary
legal practice do require, and which suits with the design of this very Law, is
in Reason to be taken for their declared and public Will and meaning in this
Oath.

Here let us look back upon the Interpretation before given. Is there any just
Reason to conceive that the Lawmakers or the Major part of them did in the
first part of the Oath intend by taking Arms against the King, any other than
what is such by the Law of this Kingdom? Or that in the second Part, they
intended by those that are Commissionated by him any others than those that are
Commissionated by him according to Law? Or that in the third Part, they
intended the abjuring of all kind of endeavor, and not that only which the Law
forbids, or is not warranted by Law? And more especially concerning the third
Part, which has been most called into question, can it Rationally be supposed
that the generality or Majority of them intended to bind men by Oath from
lawfully endeavoring in their places such Changes about particular Laws or
Canons, as they themselves ordinarily make in their Places by Voting in
Parliament, and some of them being Clergymen by Voting in Convocation? Or can
it Rationally be supposed that they intended to bind only one sort of men,
called Non-conformists, from lawful endeavors of the public good, while
others were left free.

If it be Objected that Lawmakers may in some particular Law have a meaning
repugnant to Equity, and to the Ordinary Course of Law and legal Practice, my
answer is, that the Reverence and Charity, which is due to our Superiors
forbids us to conceive that they have such a meaning, unless we be compelled to
it by convincing Reason. Now we are not compelled to conceive thus by the Words
of the Oath, for they carry it fairly for a very good meaning; nor by the Scope
of the Law (which is expressly declared to prevent the distilling of the
Principles of Schism and Rebellion into the hearts of his Majesty's Subjects);
nor yet by any public or open Act of the Lawmakers. Have the Majority of them
as so many single Persons severally declared such a meaning, as is suggested in
the Objection? Or can it reasonably be imagined that they would ever so
declare? Or is there any other Evidence or convincing Reason to be produced for
it?

The Will of the Lawgiver, which the Subjects are bound to take notice of, is
that which is so public and open, that they may be informed of it, if they be
not culpably negligent. But if any shall imagine him to have a private Will or
Aim in the contrivance of a Law different from his public and open Will and
meaning, the Subjects are not concerned therein, because it is not the Law or
Will of the Lawgiver as such. For a Law is the Will of the Governor, not as
merely existent, but as declared, Wherefore touching this Oath, that which the
Subjects are concerned in, is to know what is the apparent or sufficiently
declared meaning of the Lawmakers therein, and that the same is Just and Good.

Being it is further noted, that it is no more than the meaning of the
Lawmakers expressed in the Words of the Oath, touching two general Positions,
and a general promise, that is sworn unto in the taking thereof. In the first
part of this Oath the Person, upon whom it is imposed, is called to swear this
general, Tenet according to the true intent of the Words, That it is not lawful
upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King; but not that this
or that case is a taking Arms against the King, which is not signified by this
Oath, but by the Law and State of this Kingdom. In the second Part he is called
to abjure the general Position of taking Arms by the King's Authority against
his Person or those that are commissionated by him according to his Laws. But
who are Commissionated according to Law, and who are not, is not signified by
this Oath, but by the Law of this Kingdom. Likewise in the third Part he is
called to make this General promise upon Oath, that he will not at any time
endeavor any Alteration of Government either in Church or State by any
unlawful means. But what means are unlawful, and what are not, is not signified
by this Oath, but by the Law and Constitution of this Kingdom. And it behooves
him in all particular Cases, that may come under the said Generals, to judge
and act as the said Law and Constitution does determine.

I have used the best of my Understanding in this Inquiry; and I should not
thus labor in it, were it not my own concernment. What I can discern thereof I
have impartially set down: yet if any thing here written should be found
Erroneous, I disclaim and revoke it. The issue of the whole disquisition is to
propose it to the Consideration of Sober, Judicious and Unprejudiced Persons,
whether the full meaning of the prescribed Oath be not expressed in this more
explicate from here following.

I Do Swear, that I do believe that it is not Lawful upon any pretense
whatsoever, for any of the King's Majesty's Subjects to take Arms against his
Person or Authority, or any of his Rights and Dignities; And that I do abhor
the Traitorous Position of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or
against those that are Legally Commissionated by him, in the Legal pursuance of
such Commissions; And that I will not at any time endeavor any Alteration of
Government either in Church or State, by Rebellion, Sedition, or any other
means forbidden or not Warranted by Law.

It is the Duty of a Subject to give due security for his Loyalty to the King
and his Government; And it is the Property of one that fears God, to fear an
Oath.

I think I have set forth the true intent and meaning of the Oath, and I do not
see how it can be reasonably taken otherwise. Nevertheless in the matter here
discussed, I am unavoidably timorous, and therefore have published this Inquiry
to the intent, that if I be in the right, I may be confirmed in it by the
sufficient Testimony of others; but in Case I have misunderstood it, that I may
be better informed, and set Right. My design is to expedite my self and others
concerned in the taking of this Oath from groundless scrupulosity; yet I would
not encourage my self or others to take it in a wrong meaning. If I take it, it
must be in the sense before given, which I think is a full renouncing of those
Principles of Schism and Rebellion, against which this Law designs to secure
the Government.

FINIS.
Several Tracts not yet Printed, prepared for the Press, and left under Mr.
John Corbett's own handwriting, intended shortly to be Published, are as
follows;
1. MAtrimonial Purity.

2. An Humble endeavor of some plain and brief Explication of the Decrees and
Operations of God about the free Actions of Men. More especially of the
Operations of Divine Grace.

3. A Discourse of the Church and of the Ministry thereof.

4. A Tract of Certainty and Infallibility.

5. Of Divine Worship, in three Parts; 1. Of the Nature, Kinds, Parts and
Adjuncts of Divine Worship. 2. Of Idolatry. 3. Of Superstition less than
Idolatry.

6. The true State of the Ancient Episcopacy.

7. The present Ecclesiastical Government, compared with the Ancient Episcopacy.

8. A Consideration of the present State of Conformity in the Church of England.

9. An Account of his, and other's Judgment and Practice, and their Vindication
against Mis-representations made of them, and Hearty desire of Unity in the
Church, and of Peace and Concord among all true Protestants for the
strengthening of their Common Interest in this time of Danger. With his
Judgment as to Communion with Parish Churches in the Worship of God.

10. His Humble Representation of his Case touching the Exercise of his
Ministry.

11. Discourses between Dr. Gunning, late Bishop of Chichester, and himself;
wherein are several Humble Defenses made both as to his Principles and Practice.


