HERACLIUS, EMPEROR Of the EAST. A Tragedy.

Written in FRENCH by Monsieur de Corneille.

ENGLISHED by LODOWICK CARLELL, Esquire

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Mitre between the Middle Temple Gate
and Temple Bar in Fleetstreet. 1664.

March 9. 1664. Imprimatur ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

The Author's ADVERTISEMENT.
ANother Translation formerly designed (after this seemed to be accepted of)
was perfected and acted, this, not returned to me until that very day. Such a
rejection makes it more contemptible to some, than perhaps it deserves: Parents
are apt to dote on their own brats, especially those of their old age.
Impartial men are the best remedies against this mischief: friends, and
prejudiced persons, will still have something of the bias, therefore from those
who know least of me, I am likeliest to take a true measure of my self, one
cause why this is now in print.

Though my humble respects to her Royal Highness prompted me to undertake a
Translation in verse, because she loves plays of that kind, and is as eminent
in knowledge as dignity, yet I presume not to beg her protection, only as it
took birth at Sommerset House, I hope she will not despise it from the report
of others.

For my most gracious Mistress whom I have so long served, and in former Plays
not displeased, I dare not address this, because my first essay of this nature.

For her Son; that Sun of Majesty, I am too much dazzled at this distance to
attempt nearer, since only Eagle-Muses can approach his brightness; yet I durst
in all humility present the Original and my design in translating it to his
Princely consideration. For the subject of it is the restoration of a gallant
Prince to his just inheritance, many years after the unjust and horrid murder
of a Saint-like Father, and this by the courage and prudence of one, who seemed
in the vulgar eye to go another way. Yet I know those who looked upon all his
actings when most violent, to be like that of a Geer-falcon, who though she
seems not to eye the Hern, but works a contrary way, it is but to gain the wind,
by which advantage she makes her self the master of her design. All this, if I
mistake not, is a just parallel.

Though what is already said may seem too long, I cannot conclude without some
remark upon Leontina's action, which some censure unnatural, so unwarrantable:
But if we are bound to sacrifice our own lives, to preserve that of our Prince,
we may expose our Child's for the preservation of his Heir, the continuance of
a just and Royal line being not one of the least blessings to a Nation: if any
yet doubt I refer them to the Casuists, as I do what I have writ to the censure
of all that love serious Plays, to whom I dedicate this.

Those who translate, hope but a Laborers praise;
Who well invent, contrive; deserve the Bays.

THE PROLOGUE Intended for the PLAY.
WE nothing change that does the Plot concern,
Though in the Verse some change you may discern;
All tongues have proper idioms of their own,
Their Elegance in ours is hardly shown;
This, but a Copy, and all such go less,
Great Beauties may be altered by the dress.
You see how careful an excuse we make,
That one so mean, CORNEILLE does undertake;
But sure no envy to his share can fall,
Who once kept shop, translates, so keeps a stall:
Those who have need we should interpret this,
Their Clap bears the same value with their Hiss.
Of one of these you are too lavish grown;
A Song, a Dance; nay, if an Ape were shown,
You Would cast your Caps, but lest you them should loose
Some in good husbandry, their hands mis-use.
This bold digression thrust in by the way,
Too often the By exceeds the Main; the Play.
What Is French you like, if vain* exceed their height,
What Is Solid, Worthy, too few imitate:
But we have those, when they things serious write,
May give Them Patterns, You, more just delight.
The Actors Names.
PHOCAS Emperor of the East, by usurpation upon Mauritius. HERACLIVS Son to the
deceased Emperor Mauritius, but taken for Martian the Son of Phocas; in love
with Eudoxia. MARTIAN Son to Phocas, but taken for Leontius, Leontina's Son; in
love with Pulcheria. PVLCHERIA Daughter to the Emperor Mauritius; in love with
Martian. LEONTINA A Lady, sometime Governess of the two Princes, Heraclius and
Martian. EVDOXIA Her Daughter, in love with Heraclius. CRISPVS Phocas his
Son-in-Law. EXVPERIVS A Nobleman of Constantinople. AMYNTAS His Friend.
Courtiers, Guards and other Attendants, Men and Women.
The Scene, CONSTANTINOPLE.

HERACLIUS, A Tragedy.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Phocas, Crispus, Guards, and Attendants. Phocas. THe luster that from
Crowns does strike our sight,
Crispus, is but a false, though glittering light:
Those to whom Heaven commits the Scepters care,
Know not the weight, till they the Scepter bear;
A thousand sweets there seem unto it bound,
But the hid bitterness is only found:
He that possesses it, yet fears the loss,
So to enjoy, turns that into a cross.
But above all to me, whose birth's obscure,
Who by Revolt became an Emperor:
As I, by guilt, the height of power did gain*
By bloody crimes I did the same maintain:
All that were good, or great, to death I sent,
Virtue on Vice still looks with discontent;
I counted all my foes who gained esteem,
Whom I made slaves, their virtue might redeem.
I left none living of the Royal line,
But one, not spared by pity, but design,
By her to make my Son the Crown possess,
And keep him great, should Fortune make me less.

CRISPVS. Blind Malice now seeks to Revive a Boy,
Which in the Fathers sight you did destroy:
But it is a Fable to the wiser sort.

PHOCAS. Pretenders to a Crown make fatal sport.
Though they believe not, yet they make a show,
And discontent makes Rumor stronger grow:
But what is the name with which they would fright us?

CRISPVS. Who gives new life, calls him Heraclius.


PHOCAS. Of no deep reach sure the Inventors were,
What is impossible, we need not fear;
His death was so remarkable to all,
That it bred horror, some on me did fall;
For blood and Milk there issued from his side,
And the same day my Martians Mother died.
These things forgot, because so long since done,
Gives a new life to the dead Emp'rors Son;
But little do I value their design,
Since yet alive is faithful Leontine,
Who was his Governess, and did declare
Where he was hid, from love to me, or fear.

CRISPVS. Then Sir you trusted to her care your Son,
Which some did censure as not wisely done.

PHOCAS. She brought Heraclius forth, by me he died,
Joined in his blood she is to my interest tied;
Her Son I have made great, bred with my own,
His worth, their Friendship to the world is known,
And proved to us most happy the last war;
For when my Martian was engaged too far,
Leontius bravely charged, relieved my Son,
And joined together soon the battle won.

CRISPVS. Your Son's so prodigal of his own life,
Twere well he had some Issue by a Wife;
And none I think could so secure your state,
As fair Pulcheria. Pho. True, but my hard fate
Denies that happiness, my great design.
That marriage would divided factions join,
And fix the Empire in our Royal line.

CRISPVS. You dally with her; let her know she must:
The Empires happiness makes all force, just.

PHOCAS. She scorns the Empire, and the Emp'ror too.


CRISPVS. And will do still, whilst you appear to sue.
Though never so great your power makes her your slave.
Pho. She must be free; Crisp. How Sir?

PHOCAS. To wed my Son, or else to wed a grave.


ACT I. SCEN. II.
Enter Phocas, Crispus, Pulcheria, her Women, Guards and Attendants. MAdam, at
last, it is time that you should yield
To what, your greatness will more firmly build;
A Caesar got betwixt you and my Son,
Would add more blessing than a Kingdom won:
I ask no great acknowledgment in this,
For my past care; but offer you all bliss:
The Crown, my Son, I cannot give you more;
The gift were less, could I the dead restore.
Accept 'em then, do not my patience tire,
Let not scorn force me hate, what I admire:
With, or against your will, it must be done;
For, know already your last Glass does run.
Think well, he sues that does a Scepter sway,
Whom though you will not love, you must obey.
PVLC. I hitherto have showed you some respect,
Now find in you and me no small defect.
Mine, that I paid you what you not deserved;
Yours, now to boast that you my life preserved;
Yet threaten still to take that life away,
Unless I do your unjust will obey.

PHO. Is it unjust to offer you my Son,
Whose merit all hearts, but your own has won?

PVLC. It were unjust his merits to deny;
Yet since your Son, I Will rather choose to die,
Than by my marriage to secure your State:
That Is justly mine, unless a more kind Fate
Would make your death the first step to my Throne;
Till purged with blood, I scarce dare claim my own,

PHO. I have constrained my self, and given you way,
To hear what Pride and Malice make you say,
And it is just, that you should not refuse
To hear that love, that would you disabuse.
The Empire is not tied unto your race,
Mauritius reigned; the Army gave his place,
And by that Title I the Empire sway;
The sword made his, the Sword now makes my way.
Who has, or ever durst, dispute my power,
That twenty years have reigned an Emperor?
I have but little need of your support:
It Is love I offer; you should thank me for it.
I was not Author of your Fathers fate,
But grieved his loss; forced to obey the State.

PVLC. It Is fit this offered love then to requite,
I disabuse thee, Phocas, know me right;
I am descended of the Imperial line,
In four descents from famous Constantine;
Thou a poor Captain of the Mysian band,
Who first that bloody Treason took'st in hand,
Dare to my face pretend a right to Reign,
Having thy Master, the just Emperor slain?
And all this ill, for good unto the State;
What Is thy Reward? the peoples deadly hate:
Which is the cause that I am courted now;
Yet threatened to be broke, unless I bow.
Thus Tyrants, when they fear, are ever kind,
The danger past, for love, we hatred find.
But know, Pulcheria's not degenerate,
For doubtful love to change her ancient hate.

PHO. Well, Say I should the Empire back restore,
Placing you there, whom justly all adore,
That I repent these things you say I Have done;
Could you yet have a quarrel to my Son?
He in his Cradle then with milk was fed,
And did not suck the blood your Father bled.
He laid no plots to hasten on his fate;
Now full of Virtue, why feels he your hate?

PVLC. Go Tyrant, the art not fit to speak his praise,
What Is spoke by thee does yet suspicion raise,
Seeming to do him right, thou do him wrong,
Thy heart's so false, there is none will trust thy tongue.
I know him better, and his worth is such,
That all that can be said, is not too much.

PHO. Why then refused, since you his worth allow?


PVLC. Only because he takes his birth from you:
For, should I grant to marry with your Son,
I justify the murders you have done,
Settles the Empire in a Traitors line,
Lose my just vengeance, perfect your design.

PHO. Designs to make you great deserve your love.


PVLC. Not if that greatness his protection prove,
That killed my Father, Brothers, all my Kin;
And that black Roll too, I my self am in:
I Am kept alive, but it is to serve your ends;
For Tyrants only to themselves are Friends.

PHO. I not deny all this that you have said,
For you shall bleed, if I be not obeyed:
Wisely prevent it, marry with my Son,
Be safe in him; for, man and wife are one:
Think well what blessings may attend your throne,
Sure Heaven it self inspires this union.

PVLC. Your Son yet with this Crown, I could deny,
Though I did love him above Monarchy:
But it is not yours to hold, much less to give,
If I were dead, a brother yet might live:
Divide your presents then, and let me choose;
Single I like, but joined I both refuse.

PHO: What, shall I to a Woman's hand commit
My Scepter, when thy Fathers proved unfit?

PVLC. Traitor, that Father yet might leave a Son,
Shall bravely take what thou most basely won.

PHO. It Is that vain hope then makes you now so bold;
Sure you have feigned what is by others told.
But see the weakness of their foolish lie,
To make him live, must make your title die.

PVLC. Since you upbraid me with this new Report,
Which I believe not; yet must thank 'em for it,
I Will add unto it all that is in my power,
And whosoever, wish him an Emperor.
He must be worthy that assumes our Name,
And do such Actions as may raise his Fame;
Thou have no title, his must be as good,
And will be better, if he shed thy blood.
Thou a false Traitor did usurp the throne;
He comes perhaps to yield to each their own:
Prevent him then, resign the Crown to me;
By one just Act wipe off thy Tyranny.

PHO. Yes, I shall soon do justice in thy death,
That dare abuse the Mercy gives thee breath:
All my kind offers thou have still refused,
My patience mocked, and dignity abused.

PVLC: Thy dignity! an idol of thy own creation,
That from no good man yet found veneration.

PHO: Well, please thy self, with what thy fancy gives,
That there is a brother, or some other lives,
To take my life, to right pretended wrong:
But know, your fate depends upon your tongue;
Which though thus bold, must say, I Will be his Wife,
Or, the denial ends your scornful life.
Smile you? Now by my Crown i will have it done,
And you this day shall marry with my Son.

PVLC: I may live long, yet you not perjured be;
You swear by nothing, that, belongs to me.

PHO: By my right hand, that does to me belong.


PVL: Thou have no right; since all thou have is wrong.


PHO: I Am sure the art proud, and by this pride I swear:

PVL: Your pride makes mine, and so no death I fear.
But can thou dread an Oath? it cannot be!
Thy whole life's one continued perjury.

PHO: to himself Her Genius masters mine; I must submit
To her great spirit, heightened by her wit.
Madam, let us end this Combat of the tongue,
Women at their own weapons are too strong:
But urge me not, lest I make use of swords,
And they can cut as deep as bitter words.

ACT I. SCEN. III.
Phocas, Heraclius taken for Martian, Martian taken for Leontius, Crispus,
Pulcheria, her women, Guards, and Attendants. MArtian, thou know with what
Paternal cares
I Have bred this Serpent, who ungrateful dares
Spit her bold venom in her Sovereign's face,
My Person, and my Government disgrace,
Lay plots, partake with Traitors to my Crown,
And cares not who she raise to pull me down;
Her death is just, so to prevent all harms,
She has no Sanctuary but thy Arms.
HERAC. taken for Martian. And why should I an Enemy protect?
No Sir, I so your dignity respect,
That I must tell you, you do show mistrust
In your own Right, declare her Title just,
By pressing this; What need I marry her,
Since I Am your son? that title I prefer.
He wears a Crown with slavery all his life,
Who has no better title than a Wife:
Mine is a double right, as may be said,
That now descends, of which you conquest made.

PVLC: They speak the Father, not the Son, these words;
Was ever conquest made with civil swords?
Abhorred Rebellion all good men do call
A Traitors rise by a just Princes fall.

PHO: I am thy Prince, and justly thou shall die:

PVL: Such justice well becomes thy tyranny.
The have kept me like a Lamb, suffered to feed,
The Wolf wants meat, and innocence must bleed.
Nor speak I this that I repine at death,
I scorn a life depends upon thy breath.

HERAC. taken fer Martian. She must not die, be careful of your self,
Lest when you shipwreck her you meet a shelf;
The winds blow high, take heed Sir, how you steer,
The storm that rose far off, increases here;
The Peoples discontents would grow more bold,
Desperate, if once to them her death were told;
On her great merit they have fixed their eyes,
And in her safety, Sir, our safety lies.

PHO: Why then are you so careless of her love?


HERAC: taken for Martian. I want that worth that her great heart should move.


PHO: Who has it then, or who durst so aspire?


HERAC: taken for Martian. It is not such if done by my desire.
True friendship, Sir, is such a powerful charm,
That e'n to marry her shall do no harm.

PHO: When dead Mauritius does such vigor give
To this supposed Son, now said to live,
Do thou not think a real Son-in-law
Would claim the Crown, and keep us still in awe?
But thou will say, it is trusted to a friend,
Crowns once in question, there is no tie can bind.

HERAC: taken for Martian. When married meanly, that will bate her pride;

PHO: She rather seeks how to be Deifi'd,
Scorns an Alliance, would her fortune prove,
And her dead kindred only seems to love.
We Will send her to them out of love, not hate;
Who not supports, may yet disturb our state.
Pulcheria, though your pride would never yet
Grant any thing to me that I thought fit,
But call me Tyrant, yet so kind I Will prove,
To send you quickly to your friends above.

Exit Phoc. Crisp. etc. ACT I. SCEN. IV.
Heraclius taken for Martian, Martian taken for Leontius, Pulcheria, her Women.
HERAC: taken for Martian. IN vain he promises himself that I
With his injustice should so far comply,
To force affection; justly you may choose,
And should you grant, I justly might refuse.
We never must our houses join in one;
Nor are we fitted for this union.
You in Leontius happier will be,
And in his Sister's my felicity:
We all are happy in our equal love,
And Leontina does our choice approve,
Whose Virtue and whose wisdom is so great,
That nothing can so just designs defeat.

PVLC: Sir, you at first Leontius gave to me,
And as your gift increased his dignity:
Which in the world's opinion was before,
So great, that only you could make it more.
But it is improper now to think of love
To any other than to those above.

After a pause. HERAC: taken for Martian. I am resolved; it never shall be done:
Who dares, since in your Glass my life does run?
Which I Will declare, and let the Tyrant storm,
If he raise forces, I can sooner arm,
And check his rage, who innocence defends
Must not mistrust either his Cause, or Friends.

PVL: You justly now, Sir, do excite a fear,
Which I had not, though I knew death was near;
But now, that I do find that danger's yours,
I feel a coldness strike my vital powers:
Kind Heaven, your Messenger is timely sent;
My single death may many now prevent. she swoons.

MARTIAN taken for Leontius. I never thought that any thing but love
Could in a woman's breast such passion move.
Sir, she recovers: seem to change your mind.

HERAC: taken for Martian. I will, and yet do what I have designed.
Pulcheria, be not grieved, and I will do
Only what your desire shall guide me to.

MARTIAN taken for Leontius. Rather be ruled by me, whose life was spent
To serve you both, though now, your punishment:
First you must seek, Sir, to secure her life,
Which cannot be preserved unless your wife.
If you your selves, and me will this way bless,
I shall be happy in your happiness;
The Princes good, to subjects, still should be
The highest pitch of their felicity.

HERAC: taken for Martian. Ah my Leontius, you too high aspire,
For my sake to extinguish that bright fire,
Which we ^ave kindled; glorious whilst it burns,
But if extinguished, you to ashes turns.
I know you cannot live without her love:
What is divine proceeds from those above,
Part of their Essence: friendships here on earth
Are more our choice, and suit our humane birth.
I know you better, than your self, you know,
And I my life unto your friendship owe:
I doubly tied, by love and friendship too,
Will court this new Pretender to serve you.

Exit. ACT I. SCEN. V.
Martian taken for Leontius, Pulcheria, her Women. PVLC: THou soul of Goodness,
and of Greatness both!
How I do love the Son, the Father loath?
Thus they divide betwixt them love and hate:
For what I owe to thee, he did create.

MARTIAN taken for Leontius. All that proceeds from him is greater made;
This glorious Sun yields me a happy shade:
My heart long scorcht by your bright beauties beams,
He gained me from you sweet refreshing streams;
Since thus by both your favors then I live,
My life's a debt i will pay, and nothing give;
But you being still the Tyrant's Ostage here,
Whatever we can act, begets my fear,
Unless we shall attempt to escape his hand,
Forcing his Guard with those that I command:
Or else design in some disguise to fly,

PVLC: All flight does either guilt, or fear imply.
We Are in a storm, tossed by our hope and fear;
Let honor hold the helm, and our Barque steer:
To make me die must prove the Tyrants shame,
While bravely suffering does increase my fame.

MARTIAN taken for Leontius. But, Madam, we must suffer, if you do;
If we lose you, we lose our honor too:
We must not live, yet suffer you to die,
One stroke frees you, and ends his Tyranny. His hand to his sword.

PVL: By that one stroke your life too must have end.
Who then survives Pulcheria to defend?
And yet some hand the danger does invite;
When all is danger, we should danger slight.
But let us first with trusty friends survey
The safest means, and the securest way.

MARTIAN taken for Leontius. While Virtue thus and Honor we pursue,
Death has his Conquest, and just Laurels too. Exeunt.

ACT II.
SCEN. I.
Enter Leontina, Eudoxia. LEONT: I Feared his passion sad effects would move.


EVD: His Birth concealed from me, had showed small love.


LEONTINA. As great imprudence showed he to reveal:
How hardly women secrets can conceal?
You could not choose but whisper what you knew
To some false friend perhaps that envies you;
By which grown public that Heraclius lives,
Such and alarm to the Tyrant gives,
It troubles not so much as it does arm,
By that foreknowledge to prevent his harm;
What Is unexpected easily may annoy,
Where strength's awake we hardly can destroy;
His former guilt he quickly will increase,
And sacrifice Heraclius to his peace.
The secret kept, he loved him as his Son,
His life, your love, my care, you have undone.

EVD. Madam, it is fit that I your passion bear,
But reason heard, it quickly will appear
That I am free from this so great offense;

LEON. How is this secret known then, or from whence?
Is it from me? or is it from the Prince?

EVD. From neither: for if you examine well,
They only say he lives, but do not tell
How, you usurping Phocas did deceive,
Heraclius sparing, one of yours did leave
To feel the Tyrants rage: an act so high:
Though your Son's dead, our fame can never die.
Nor was your wisdom than your courage less,
When being made the Prince's Governess,
Mauritius's Son you did to Phocas give,
While the true Martian as your Son did live,
Leontius called by my dead Brother's name,
Who in this sacrifice does share your fame.
Yet none pretend to say 'twas carried so,
As had I blazed the secret, all must know.

LEON. It Is true, it is only said Heraclius lives,

EVD. Which without circumstance no indice gives;
The rest is so ignor'd, some simply good
Expect he should by miracle not blood,
Resume a Throne usurped upon his Sire,
But see he comes, and let your fears expire.

ACT II. SCE. II.
Heraclius, Leontina, Eudoxia. HERACLIVS. MAdam, you will be forced now to
reveal
My birth, which you to serve me did conceal,
Pulcheria presently must be my Wife,
Incest's too great a price to pay for life,
If you do not, I must declare my self,
On either side, there is a dangerous shelf,
That threatens shipwreck, if you now can steer,
Avoid those dangers that so great appear.

LEON. As yet there is none that are assured you live.


HERACL. It Is said I do, that does suspicion give:
Forces are raised, Phocas means I shall go
My self against my self: Leon. The fancied Fo?
No where that I can hear of does appear.

HERAC: Even shadows will create a Tyrants fear:
Fear makes him doubtful, doubt does danger breed,
For some, to cure those doubts and fears, may bleed.
I fear not for my self, he is to me
So kind, that kindness is an injury,
Breeds strife within me how to take his life
That offers such a Throne, and such a Wife.

LEON: It Is to secure himself; Tyrants can love
No thing on Earth, since not the Powers above:
And yet they think they do Children and Friends;
When it is indeed themselves and their own ends:
They only can be said truly to love;
When that affection others good does move.
Thus love descends to us, which we return,
When in true zeal, to serve those powers, we burn.

HERAC: A greater witness none did ever give.
You gave your Son to death, that I might live.
Let me no longer justice then defer:
You brought your Son, but he the Murderer.
I Am weary longer to be thought the Son
Of him that has so many mischiefs done.
To crown his ills, he will take Pulcheria's life,
Or my own sister I must take to wife.

LEON: Though you her death, or worse, do incest fear,
Leave all to me, your person only spare;
For on your life depends the life of all:
The giddy people rise, and soon do fall,
Though I rejoice, their love seems now so great,
The least disaster qualifies their heat.
Be yet the Son of Phocas for a while,
Ere long you shall be heard in your own style,
Mauritius' Son, and then with great applause,
This Tyrant shall be sentenced by your Laws.

HERAC: I doubt the occasion never will be so good,
There Is one pretends both to my Name and blood;
He may possess the peoples hearts, and I,
Although you would join, shall not disprove his lie;
Impostors often have got too near a Throne,
Who Tyrants dispossess are loved unknown:
Upon what right soever one pretends,
Hate to Usurpers yields Usurpers Friends:
And I, though the just Prince, may punished be
As Son to Phocas for his villainy:
Which, witness Heaven, were such a curse to bear,
May well excuse my passion, and my fear.

EVD: She that preserved you with her dear Sons blood,
Cannot be grown less careful of your good;
Your honor too, I value at that rate,
That, to preserve it I would tempt my fate.

LEON: Your life and greatness have long been my care,
The fruit, the honor, none with me shall share.
Phocas ere long shall by my means be slain;
And Prince Heraclius in full glory reign:
If not, the bold attempt, shall fully prove
Duty more strong, than Nature, or self-love:
Our highest aim, is glory, here below;
Who has it here, may greater glory know.

EVD: If love have value for a Lovers tears,
Preserve your Person, to secure my fears;
The Tyrants death, though just, will for some time,
Acted by you, appear a horrid crime:
The People, though well pleased, to see him fall,
Yet you a bloody Paricide may call:
And say you only do assume a Name,
To get the Throne, and yet prevent the shame
Of gaining it; truth often is denied,
Till it by time and circumstance be tried.
Let not the least suspicion, Sir, appear,
To cloud your glory, that shines now so clear:
I know desire to right your Fathers wrongs --

HERAC: I know, your will has power, above all tongues,
Since you engage I will no more contest:
Who yields to love and gratitude, is blessed.
To Leontina. The secret's yours, and I should be ingrate,
Without your leave to claim my Father's state.
No, 'twere in vain, whatever I undertake;
Even truth it self you can imposture make.
I may say more, the Empire's yours, not mine;
Which from you I Will receive, and here resign:
Her title, at least as mine, must prove as good,
Since it was purchased with her Brothers blood. Exit.

ACT II. SCEN. III.
Leontina, Eudoxia. LEON: MY Plot now ripe, I must no more conceal
My deep design, but all to thee reveal;
For, you may help to perfect my intent:
Phocas by Martian must to death be sent.
It Was for that cause I gave him a reprieve,
And that Act done, he should no longer live,
But for Pulcheria's sake, whom he does love;
A Mistress with a Throne must strongly move.

EVD: To kill his Father, Madam, 's an offense,
With which nor Love, or Empire can dispense.

LEON: His killed the common Father of us all;
It Is just that he by his own Son should fall.

EVD. It Is just to him, but unjust to his Son.


LEON: He shall not know he is such till it be done,
But pass still for Leontius, son to me,
And so by both their deaths Heraclius free.

EVD. I know the guilty Father merits death,
But that so brave a Son should stop his breath,
To me looks horrid, though he know it not,
His so great fame will have a lasting blot.

LEON. It is not fit a bloody Tyrants son
Should wear that Glory he as mine has won.
Enter Page. Exuperius comes to kiss your hand.

LEON: Exuperius! I am at a stand.
That name surprises me; what makes he here?
How this new Visitant revives my fear?
He hates the Tyrant for his Fathers blood.
Of tattling still I tell you comes no good.

ACT II. SCENE IV.
Exuperius, Leontina, Eudoxia. EXVP. MAdam, Heraclius is discovered.
Leontina to Eudoxia. Now?

Eud: If I --
Leontina to Eudoxia. Peace. But since when, or where, or how? to Exup:

EXVP: By me just now.


Leont: And he is doomed to die?


EXVP. The Tyrant yet knows not the Mystery?


LEONT. Mystery?


Exup: Madam, he comes, you need not fear.


LEONT: None but my Son Leontius does appear.


ACT II. SCEN. V.
Martian taken for Leontius, Exuperius, Leontina, Eudoxia. EXVP: MAdam, you
need no more put on disguise;
We by a Paper now, are all made wise.
MARTIAN taken for Leontius. Madam, you know, and best can understand,
If this be feigned, or Mauritius hand,
Whether it disabuse, or more delude;
Pray clear what yet has great incertitude:
I cannot be your Son, and yet his too;
If any know the Caracter, you do.

Gives her a Paper. She reads. LEONTINA has deceived PHOCAS; and by delivering
one of her Sons to death, preserved mine, to inherit the Empire: You that
remain faithful Subjects, honor and assist so great Virtue; HERACLIVS lives
under the Name of LEONTIVS. LEON: He tells you true, Sir, you were in my hands,
When Phocas entered with his Rebel bands;
Seized on the Emperor; let him only live
To see his children die, more grief to give.
I past all hope, you longer to conceal,
To save your life, I did my self reveal:
Offered my Son to Phocas in your stead,
Gave you the name of him that now is dead,
For whom these tears; he was your sacrifice,
And from his death your life and greatness rise.
Nature though then struck dead, by duties force,
Does now revive and cause this briny source.
Weeps a while. Phocas thus ravished with deluding joy,
Heaps favor on me, and on you a Boy;
favors so great, some said my Son and I
Did seem with him to share his Tyranny.
This, Sir, I thought not fit for to declare,
Till you had got so great a name in war,
That all might judge, your birth must needs be great,
Since so much merit claimed the highest seat:
And this great news, that makes the Tyrant fear,
Must prove a truth when you your self appear;
MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. But, Madam, that you have concealed all
this,
Though it seem well, I feel what is amiss.

LEON. I did not know all that the Emp'ror knew;
Things done long since, men may suspect not true;
My testimony rests on your strong arm,
Else what designed against him, may prove our harm.

EXVP. The Emp'ror forced to see his own Child die,
To Leontina. Became a witness of your Policy,
And did design to hinder your intent,
But the Executioner did that prevent:
After, a little pleased to think his Son
Might right the wrongs to him and his then done;
He told it Felix, and this Paper gave,
Who gave it me, that put him in his grave,
Called it a Legacy, that might dethrone
The Tyrant under whom the world did groan.
Armed with this secret, I desired to know,
Who would with me the danger undergo?
The People now are up, our friends assemble,
The Tyrant, from his fears and guilt, does tremble:
Show but your self; do but our forces lead:
As he my Fathers, I Will take off his head.
I secretly gave out, that you yet live,
But where, or how, did no suspicion give.
All that are honest, love Mauritius' Name;
Those that are not, yet having missed their aim,
Seek, in their discontent, to bring you in:
What they called just before, they now call sin.
MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. Surpised with a discourse so new and
strange,
Wonder not, that you see my passions change;
I know how great a debt to you I owe,
That to Mauritius' Heir such love did show,
I owed you, as your Son, my life before,
And if not yours, my obligation's more:
But how can I my gratitude declare,
When this strange story breeds a Civil-war?
You know I love; your story makes my flame,
Which was my glory, now appear my shame;
Incest! to love a sister; what is a Throne,
When she that can command all hearts, is gone?
My love thus murmurs; and my heart must break:
(Pardon distraction) how or what to speak:
to Exuperius. Duty and Honor, yet does me command,
To give a Chief' to your illustrious Band.
Justice requires that one thing must be done,
Though Phocas perish, yet preserve his Son:
He has no guilt, but that he is of his blood;
The Fathers ill cannot outweigh his good.

EXVP. To your commands we shall obedience pay.
Have, Sir, to those that with impatience stay.

Exit EXVP. ACT II. SCEN. VI.
Martian taking himself for Heraclius, Leontina, Eudoxia. MARTIAN taking
himself for Heraclius. MAdam, though you have made a strange discourse,
That both my faith and reason seems to force;
Yet since it is you, my faculties submit,
To credit any thing that you think fit.
Though others this reserve might jealous make,
You did of Martian's love advantage take,
To raise your dear Eudoxia to the Throne,
And that the cause this secret's so late known.
Or that you thought it was enough for me,
That I from you derive my Pedigree:
But 'twere in me a crime this to believe;
Yet have you done what I may ever grieve.
Why did you by all ways my passion move?
Is Incest such a happiness in love?
I had been happy, if I then had di'd,
Since now to love Pulcheria is denied:
When I Leontius was, you fanned a fire,
Which, if I be Heraclius, must expire.
I know your Virtue, what could you then mean,
To make me act a Part in such a Scene?

LEON. I let you love her, that a noble flame
Might raise your soul, to gain an equal fame.

MARTIAN taking himself for H^^^clius. Both in the mean time infamous had (...)

LEON. It Was in my power still to prevent your (...)
I knew the Tyrant, and his great design:
Pulcheria was to marry in his Line,
Thus you neglected might offended be,
And add that wrong to former tyranny,
Which might excite you to a just return:
Strike now, lest you a Sisters death do mourn,
Pulcheria perishes, unless he fall
A timely Victim to preserve us all.

MART: taking himself for Heracl. Were it not best, since she cannot be mine,
I won her, to accomplish his design?
When in Leontius she a Brother sees,
Martian, by easy ways and soft degrees,
Will reach her heart; nor can I to my mind,
A nobler Husband for my sister find.

LEON. What do I hear? or what do you propose?


MART. taking himself for Herac. Her life and mine I foolishly expose,
That Match I most desire for to prevent;
How rashly too Heraclius name is lent
To a small Party, an ill managed Plot?
'Twould prove unto my Name a fatal blot,
To gain the Crown by an Assassinate,
And all my honor to it immolate:
No, rather let my glory plead for me,
The cause so just, what doubt of Victory?
My Father's, Brother's, Friends revenge I shall;
Whose ends are great, can never basely fall.
But with Pulcheria, since so near allied,
I must consult, her will shall be my guide;
With your Eudoxia, you --

LEON: Yet, Sir, hear me.


MART. taking himself for Herac. I have much need in such difficulty,
Of prudent counsel; yet in your design
So many other interests may combine:
I must advise elsewhere; not that I do
Your zeal or faith mistrust, the world in you
Must ever both applaud; but I resign
My conduct now to one that is wholly mine.

Exit. ACT II. SCE. VII.
Leontina, Pulcheria. LEON: I Am confounded; all things cross my mind:
I thought all done, not half is done I find;
And when my hazards just rewards expect,
I find all humane Counsels have defect.
The Paper yet which Martian does abuse,
Works in my favor all that I would choose;
It strongly against the Father arms the Son,
But e're the blow can fall, the passion's don;
Instinct of Nature in a secret way,
Though he knows nothing does his fury stay.
The Note surprises, not deludes him quite;
And dazzled, not misled by this new light:
He hinders that himself he would promote,
And flying incest, does for incest vote.

EVD: Madam, at least you now may plainly see,
That your great secret was not told by me.
But what is the reason, Mother, that you thus
Take name and title from Heraclius?
That Note which you affirmed a truth to be
Is a sure step to Martian's dignity.
Think you if thus he do assume the Crown,
At your request that he will lay it down?
Twere vain for you to say, the Paper's feigned,
None quit such Powers, unless they be constrained;
Folly to hope such virtue from your words,
Phocas once slain; he will command all Swords.

LEONT: Love makes you curious, you too much would know,
Let it suffice, I know which way to go.
Only I must again see Exupere,
For in him rests the only cause I fear.

ACT III.
SCEN. I.
Martian taking himself for Heraclius, Pulcheria, her Women. MARTIAN taking
himself for Heraclius. DEar Mistress ( Sister, yet I cannot name,
Since that destroys my too beloved flame.)
When from my lowness I beheld those eyes,
I taxed my pride to look at Deities;
I feared to meet a fate which might declare
A punishment for those that over-dare;
Yet in those troubled thoughts there something still
(Though reason did forbid) compelled my will:
A sweet impulsion victory or death,
What Is life, if not to draw a Lovers breath?
Though not highborn I might high things attempt,
And your brave soul great Actions might resent;
Our zeal to serve, moves those that are above,
And none so great but have a sense of love.

PVLC: How often did I too at my birth repine?
Since Princes Daughters must their will resign
To reason of State; and yet the Empress too
Breathed into me the love I felt for you:
She waved the Usurpers motion with disdain,
Opposed that match he presses still in vain;
And poisoned for it, her dear expiring breath
Gave me this caution just before her death:
The Tyrant, Child, designs you for his Son,
But fly that Match, or else you are undone;
Of LEONTINE rather a Husband take;
She does preserve a Treasure that will make
PVLCHERIA happy; and so died: But I
(These words still living in my memory)
Saw Leontina changed from bad to good,
Fancied her guiltless of my Brothers blood:
And Husband, Treasure, Happiness so joined,
Me thoughts they all in you alone combined.
Thus was my haughty birth by duty crossed,
The vain imagined distance 'twixt us lost;
Such bravery too did in your Person shine,
As equalliz'd Leontius birth to mine:
These flatteries daily did approve my choice,
I thought it Love, but it was Natures voice.
That love, which to extinguish, if you know,
Teach me your skill, my sad heart yet says no.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. Ah! my dear Sister, since my birth's now
known,
I so must call you, that less interest own.
Friendship to love does easily incline,
How hardly love for friendship we resign?
It tears our souls, nay, passes humane skill
To dispossess that Monarch of our will.
Whose conquest justly made by hopes and fears,
When he resigns must cost deep sighs, salt tears.
Oh it is not possible: a constant heart,
Will with its life than love more freely part:
Nature thou striv'st in vain, even virtues power,
Cannot make void, long love in one short hour.
What a sad kindness I to nature owe?
How cruel they to me her kindness show?
I Am torn from what I am, from what I would,
Estranged your person by a share in blood,
Oh my too pleasing error! cruel light!
Knowing too much now has undone me quite.

PVLC: I in my heart too much have felt loves force,
Not to feel bitterness in such divorce,
Hatred has more of sweetness in my mind,
Than love; if love to you must be less kind.
Yet since my love to you was a chaste fire,
Virtue that kindled it, bids it expire:
My fate I shall believe most happy still,
If you the Throne attain, the Tyrant kill.
And ere you do that Conquest undertake,
Subdue your passions, for fair virtues sake:
In that we both may meet, your glorie's mine;
We to our vengeance, must our love resign.

MART. taking himself for Heracl: You who were always great, always so bred
Should to the conquest of your self be led
Is not so strange, great hearts have great designs,
When lower souls at hard things still repines.
Pardon that in Heraclius yet may be
As poor Leontius left; and you shall see
What ever this dares say, the other do,
It shall become revenge, his birth, and you;
To the Conspirators I Will add new fire,
Honor's, and your fame nobler thoughts inspire:
May I of one request the freedom use?

PVLC: I neither can dislike it, nor refuse.


MARTIAN taken himself for Heracl. The Tyrant now in you will miss his ends,
The Crown no longer on your match depends;
Since then you cannot me a Husband make,
Martian accept, and love him for my sake.

PVL: Since not your wife, I justly might deny
With any other man that knot to tie,
Yet some perhaps might call this to my shame,
A guilty warmth of a remaining flame.
Therefore to cure all doubts, I this demand;
That as my Emp'ror, you the match command:
His worth is great, his person I can love,
But first his Father, must the victim prove;
To purge his blood: this done, I Will him accept,
But whilst he lives the marriage I reject.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. Rather your marriage you should now
declare,
When Phocas dies, they Martians life will spare,
Your interest will protect him from all harm,
And in that hope, my self, and friends I Will arm.

PVL: Shall I, my self, then Phocas daughter make,
I then, his interest, do undertake;
How, shall I pray, that your designs may speed,
And wish to see my Husbands Father bleed?
It were a kind of parricide in me,
Marriage deferred, from all this sets me free:
I justly hate the Father, though the Son,
By your command, has fair acceptance won.
Think then what it is that you persuade me to,
A match, that poor Pulcheria would undo;
For should not now your enterprise succeed,
In me they have title to the Crown indeed:
It Is Phocas blood that must prepare my way,
Without that cleansing there is no wedding day.

ACT III. SCEN. II.
Phocas, Mart. taking himself for Herac. Crispus, Exuperius, Amyntas,
Pulcheria, her Women Guards and Attendants. PVLCH. SEE Brother where he comes!
what shall we do?


MARTIAN taking himself for Heracl. I am betrayed, here is Exuperius too.


PHO: What discourse have you now with the Princess?
Of The marriage I intend?

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. It Is that I press.


PHO: Does she incline? prevail you for my Son?


MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. I have her promise, Sir, it shall be
done.


PHO: It Is not a little won on her hard heart;
But when?

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. That secret she does not impart.


PHO: Tell me then one that is of greater worth,
It Is said that you can bring Heraclius forth,
If you love Martian, let me know him too.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. You know him but too well: and him I do,

pointing at Exuperius. EXVPERIVS I serve my Prince, who duty does deserve.


MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. And well thou do thy promises
preserve.


PHO: I have a note here that does give some hint,
But it is obscure, there is much of riddle in it;
And for the meaning I am come to you,
Leontius.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. Call me Heraclius too;
Leontius is no more, nor do I need
To hear my sentence, I Am prepared to bleed.

PHO. And well thou may expect it, whose attempt,
From treason, and fowl murther's not exempt.

MART. taking himself for Heracl. 'Twas what I ought; to serve, and let thee
reign,
Both to my name, and birth had bin a stain;
My Fathers blood, cries loud to me for thine,
Which I Would not spare should thou the Crown resign:
Death I expect, nay, rather death desire,
Since of our courage, it is the greatest trier:
That death I feared not, I have shown for thee,
That thy Son lives, the thanks belong to me.

PHO: This allegation is but weakly made,
Leontius saved my Son, that debt's well paid;
Heraclius then, methinks should find some shame,
To beg more payment in another name.
But grant you saved my Son, you would kill me,
Though called a Tyrant, yet I just will be:
I owe thee for his life, thou me for mine,
Leons shall escape, but justice forfeits thine.
Against a Princes life, there is nothing weighs,
Treason deserves death, noble Acts just praise.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. Which you but pay unto my borrowed name;
But know your Tyranny shall build my fame;
I as Heraclius by my death will show
What to my honor, and my birth I owe,
Make that so glorious that my subjects shall
Grieve for my loss, rejoice to see thee fall.

PHOCAS. Well, we shall see your courage, the next room
May cool your heat, there you shall know your doom.

MART: taking himself for Heracl: Madam, farewell; but know, my latest breath
Shall be to those that can prevent your death.

Exit with Crispus and Guards. ACT III. SCEN. III.
Phocas, Pulcheria, Exuperius, Amyntas, Guards and Attendants. PHOCAS. NOr
can thou hope, fond fool, to alter me,
Having thy Brother, there is no fear of thee.
No more constrain my self, for thy love plead,
One stroke abates thy pride, takes off his head:
Do not restrain thy self, come, vent thy Gall,
No words to ease thy heart, then tears must fall.

PVLC: I grieve, I weep, I well might so have done,
Had he appeared less than our Father's Son;
I am so pleased with all that he did do,
That though his Sister I Am his Lover too.

PHOCAS. Dissemble not, freely express your heart,
From me you scarce can hide it by this Art:
Will you, to save so dear a Brothers life,
Lay by your hate, and be my Martians Wife?

PVL: Think thou thy policies can ever gain
Me to consent to what I so disdain?
My blood, to save his life i will sacrifice;
But so to give my hand, my honor dies.

PHO: Well, then he dies; thy cruelty's the cause,
Whose pride contemns both Love and Natures Laws.

PVL: Thou that my cruelty do thus upbraid,
For thy own cruelty may be afraid.
Though human vengeance scarce can reach thy head,
There Is thunder yet above to strike thee dead:
Nor do thou know, some Brother yet of mine
To punish thee, the Grave may now resign,
Or he might escape thy hands by some device
More subjects there might be both stout and wise:
And thou shall never know that he does live,
Till by thy death he thee assurance give.
If no such be, I make my self a prize,
And all my youth and greatness sacrifice;
For, whosoere can take away thy life,
The worlds Plague, deserves the greatest Wife.

PHO: Strange Spirit!


PVLC. Go kill Heraclius, or think that I
Do hope to save him, by this policy;
Be not deceived importune me no more,
Since I can say but what was said before;
If you grant this, I will safe counsel give,
If you would reign, we both must die, or live.

Exit Pulcheria. ACT III. SCEN. IV.
Phocas, Exuperius, Amyntas, Guards and Attendants. PHO. WIth what delight such
menaces I hear?
Small danger in vain words there does appear;
But I have power to make my threatenings good,
Punish her scorns in her dear brothers blood.
You my true friends that thus have eased my pain,
I feared your hate, but now your love's made plain.
Rest not till you make perfect your design,
For, to your judgments I my will resign.
Shall we in secret give Heraclius death,
Or on a public seaffold stop his breath.

EXVP: What is the fittest is the best for you;
In public, Traitors still should have their due:
A private death would politic appear
Not just; and we more Hydra's heads might fear:
The Mutineers may say, he is not dead,
And raise some other Traitor in his stead.

PHO. Then in the Palace-yard it is best he die,
Our Guards about us for security.

EXVP: Not in your own Court, Sir, Should it be done,
But in the face of all, before the Sun,
Where justice used to be, and so declare
That public Acts should not be mixed with fear.

PHO: Then at the time that he gives up his breath,
We Will show his Note, the just cause of his death.

EXVP. That, Sir, avails not; after twenty years
Mauritius' hand unknown to all appears:
But if the storm now you will lay indeed,
When publicly this Pageant-Prince shall bleed,
Make him acknowledge who he is, and cry
It is HERACLIVS, People, you see die.

PHO: I am resolved it shall be as you say;
And Leontina shall the same debt pay:
I Have made her great; her plots I now mistrust,
Who make their Prince fear, make their own death just.
But Mutineers may force 'em from our hands.

EXVP. What are those People to your well-arm'd bands?
None, Sir, will dare the least resistance show,
Who Is in disgrace, there is but few friends will know:
A little pity as he goes along:
Often curiosity does make a throng,
Rare sights the people love, but none will be
So mad to stir, if so he dies by me:
Yet what you do should soon be put in act:
Let them not meet to talk about his fact:
Seize all convenient places through the Town,
And place such Guards as you know are your own;
For us we are engaged to see him die,
Lest if he live, we lose our lives thereby;
Since it is our duty brings him to the block,
Our courage shall sustain the fiercest shock.

PHO: It is enough I on your zeal rely,
And this may help to quell all mutiny:
I go to perfect this so great affair,
And leave your friends assembling to your care:
The work once done, look you for such reward,
As so great Faith and courage has deserved.

Exit Phocas and Attendants. ACT III. SCE. V.
Exuperius, Amyntas. EXVP. WE are in favor, friend, and all command.


AMINT. Why so great joy? I scarce can understand;
Falsehood and Treason are not things to boast:
What is our greatness, when our honor's lost?

EXVP. True, to the Generous it is not great.
Why we engaged, I need not now repeat;
We shall find ways yet to recover all,
And raise our honor, by this present fall:
Come, let us go, this pain we must endure,
If honor bleeds, blood may our honor cure.

Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCEN. I.
Enter Heraclius, Eudoxia. HERAC: WIth reason you her dangers apprehend,
Now she appears but a mistaken Friend;
If she fly not, no hope but she must die,
Twill justice seem in him, not cruelty.
Eudoxia, not for her I grieve, but thee,
She justly is betrayed that betrayed me.

EVD. Can you believe her hate to you was such,
When her Sons life for yours was not too much?

HERACLIVS. To her imposture I must give that name;
She stayed those actings that might raise my fame,
And by her cunning, and a false report
My Name and Right to Martian does transport:
Approves that Letter in my Fathers Name,
Entitles him to the Empire which I claim;
In this there was no love, no policy,
Since he must reign, or else must die for me.

EVD. Had she decry'd that Letter as a lie,
Your secret then had been revealed thereby;
She doubted, Sir, as by the issue now,
Her just suspicion you may well allow:
Armed then with something yet to make you reign
More than is known, or that Note could contain;
Had she not turned the blow on Martian's head,
You, that mistake her service, had been dead.

HERAC: No matter which, I Martian too much owe,
If one must die, to suffer him to go:
Though none discover me, my self I must
To my brave friend and honor, be so just.
This only difference, Martian can I see
Betrayed, I wretch'd die; glorious for thee.

EVD. Ah! Sir, will you so rash an action do?
Betray your self, and give me my death too?
What have? the Tyrant yet does nothing know;
Will you the object of his fury show?

HERACL. Your love, to what is my duty, makes you blind;
Who does not love my honor, is unkind.
He by my Name is sure to suffer death,
And shall I by his Name preserve my breath?
If by the error he might live and reign,
It might be born, he by my loss might gain:
Twere a low baseness, longer to conceal
Such a mistake as honor bids reveal.

EVD: Oh Sir! it is not that which I desire,
Your honor's mine, mean thoughts would quench my fire.
Arm, arm your self, Sir, to preserve his life,
Make Phocas die, his death will end all strife:
Rekindle what my Mother quenched before.
And from my love and courage make it more:
Take to the Empire now a Soldiers way,
If you meet Death, tell him I for him stay.

HERAC: The Occasion's lost, Martian now goes for me,
And by his pris'n our friends dispersed be:
Since all do take him for Heraclius,
They Will think it a foul Parricide in us;
Some few that love my person well, may rise,
But spite of them and us still Martian dies.
And when his death gives Phocas victory,
What force can I expect should join with me?
Then speak no more, your love must not retard,
His life, my honor are of more regard.
Whether I reign, or whether I must die,
I Will trust my virtue for a Victory.

ACT IV. SCENE II.
Phocas, Heraclius taken for Martian, Eudoxia, Exuperius, Guards and
Attendants. PHOC. showing Eudoxia to his Guards. TO prison with her, till her
Mother appear.


HERAC: Has she a share?


PHO. That will be found, never fear;
It Is fit that we do seiz her, she may peach,
And help to draw the Mother within reach.

EVDOXIA to Phocas going off. Believe not any thing that he shall tell.


PHOCAS to Eudoxia. Follow your counsel? yes, 'twere very well.
Exit Eud. with a Guard. To Heraclius. Her tears thy pity no way do deserve:
Would thou thy greatest Enemies preserve?
No, no, I Am sure when all their guilt is known,
Thou neither wilt their love nor persons own.
Bring in the Prisoner; tortures we not need, To his Guard
To find the crime for which he now must bleed,
It is his boast; his pride your self shall see, to Heras.
Who scorns our mercy would not pitied be.
But what is that which I must not believe?
My apprehension begs thee to relieve
The doubt I labor in of what she meant,
When faith unto thy words she would prevent.
Have thou some new, some greater crime disclosed?

HERAC: taken for Martian. More than by any else can be deposed;
points at Exup. More than Mauritius saw, more than he knows.

PHO. Perfidious wretch! this day to death she goes.
Speak:

HERAC: taken for Martian. It Is a secret of no common weight;
Before the Prisoner, I will all relate.

PHO: He Is here, but speak not for him, I command.


ACT IV. SCEN. III.
Phocas, Heraclius taken for Martian, Martian taking himself for Heraclius,
Exuperius, and Guards. HERAC: taken for Martian. THat, Sir, were vain for me to
take in hand.
I rather beg that justice may be done:
Condemn Heraclius, so preserve your Son.
Shall it be granted?

PHO: It Is what I desire.
Thy safety does indeed his death require.

MART. taking himself for Herac. Without regret, I saw approaching Fate,
But you to sentence me with so much hate:
I never knew you till my death I see.

HERAC: taken for Martian: I never less than now was known to thee.
Hear me, blind Father, and more blinded Prince,
My honor must your ignorance convince.
Thy Friends thy enemies, Phocas, sever thus,
He is thy Son, and I Heraclius.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. My Lord, what say ye?


HERAC. I must not conceal
What honor, to preserve thee, hids reveal;
Phocas by Leontina twice deceived,
And she so cunningly her web has weaved,
By change of names she causes their mistakes,
And a false Martian of Heraclius makes.

PHO. Mauritius Note the Contradiction gives;
Under LEONTIVS Name HERACLIVS lives.

HERAC: I grant the Note true then, now it is not so;
I did, Sir, by Leontius name then go;
But though the Emperor what he saw did leave,
He could not, what is done since he ceased to breath.
Within short time began your Persian war,
Lasted three years, you still from home so far,
And all that while (your Wife too being dead)
Leontine, as she pleased our childhood bred,
To trace me out a way unto the Throne,
Made me your Son, took Martian for her own;
And the resemblance Infants then may have,
Favored her so, you took the Child she gave.
This known, Compassion made me longer stay,
And not attempt my right a bloody way:
But seeing by this error he must die,
That saved my life; it now were base if I
Should not assume my name, his only guilt;
My life and honor in his blood are spilt.
I beg not, Sir, that you make less your hate,
Behold, an enemy expects his fate:
I ask but what you promised should be done,
Condemn Heraclius, Preserve your Son.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. To Phocas. Admire, thou Father art of
such a Son,
Admire the reputation he has won;
He this invents from Generositie,
Would die himself, in hopes to set me free.
To Heraclius. It Is true, too much, for what by me was done,
I saved your life, by which I honor won,
Yet lost not mine, but you to save my breath,
Do throw your self into the arms of death,
And if acknowledgments you owe to me,
Then let me Son unto the Emp'ror be:
Rob not my name which I count glorious,
Fearing to be ingrate, be not injurious.

PHO. How many troubles breeds this strange dispute,
Neither themselves, nor others they confute.
Which to believe now? which is in a lie? To Exup.

EXVPERIVS It Is so perplexed, that only time must try.


PHOCAS. The Note, if true, the rest like truth does show.


EXVP. Who knows whether that rest be true or no.


PHOCAS. Leontine twice may have deceived me.


EXVP: Changed them, or changed them not, either might be,
I am more, Sir, than you circled with doubt,
And cannot find which way I shall get out.

HERAC. It Is not to day that I learned who I am,
My actions witness, I have known my Name
These four years, and have used my best address,
To gain Eudoxia, shunning the Princess,
Which but I knew, that I was not your Son,
You may imagine I would not have done.
This caution Leontina did impart.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. What, Leontina?


HERAC. Even she.


MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. Strange Art!
Martian loves Eudoxia, she does abuse,
Him by pretended horror to refuse
The Match you aim at, that your Daughter may
Have to the Throne by that refusal way;
This error does assure her of his Vows,
Ambition all deceitful ways allows
Nor had the truth to me been ever known,
Unless the Emp'rors Letter you had shown. To Exup.

PHO: She does abuse him too as well as me.


EXVP. Which she abuses, yet I cannot see.


PHO. Do thou not see the Daughter's in the plot?


EXVP: Twere better Sir, for her that she were not.


PHO: Are all things ready for their punishment?


EXVP. Which is the guilty? which the innocent?


HERAC: Can you make doubt, after what I have said?


MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. Will you by what is false be longer led?


HERAC. Frind, give me back my Name, the favour's small,
Since I would have it but to die withal.
With it I could to you my title give,
But that the owner must no longer live.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. And why would you my Tyrant's Victim be,
When your death lays a greater stain on me?
I did, who e're I am, his death design*
And different fate our names the plot assign.
What in Heraclius is a brave attempt,
From Parricide in Martian's not exempt.
Since I may guilty, or illustrious die,
Blast not your friend with so much infamy,
To right the world on Phocas I aspire,
And you my Fathers death make me conspire.

HERAC. My Name is only faulty, leave dispute;
Quit that, to thee no guilt they can impute;
It Is that conspires wirhout the help of friends,
Heraclius dying, all the danger ends.
Be but his Son, and live.

MART: taking himself for Heracl. Had I been such,
That Traitor in one word had said too much. of Exup. to Phocas.
When to kill you he had persuaded me,
From that Act Natures force had set me free.

HERAC. Know then my heart's desire did thine fore-run,
By her kept back: thy life had else been done. To Pho.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. For Leontina could not then abide,
That Martian should become a Parricide.

HERAC: Consider cooly what she moved you to;
To love Pulcheria, and kill Phocas too:
Each Act, each Name in you would horrid prove,
This a Parricide, that incestuous love.
Could she then scruple at a crime of mine,
That either way in you did one design?
I was the object of her love and care,
Which by her words most plainly does appear.
Why should you hazard? wherefore undertake,
Since MARTIAN's danger shall you Emp'ror make.
These were her Reasons, all she did or said,
Was to preserve me for the Daughters bed,
Yet stayed to see how your attempts would fall;
If fit, she then me Emperor would call.

PHO: How shall I know, which of these two is mine?
I only find, my ruin both design:
My fate is sad, who now can counsel give?
I have my Enemy, ye^ let him live;
Out of my hands I know he cannot make;
I see him, yet I know not which to take:
Nature does tremble, and astonished grow,
Uncertain which way to direct my blow;
The Assassine seen, yet in my heart is hid,
Nature, when I should kill him, does forbid.
Martian -- Both turn from him.
Martian, none to that name will answer give,
Will neither own me? one from me did live;
What is it Nature then? what can this mean?
Am I the only Actor in this Scene?
Can I a Father be, without a Son?
What, to be thus forsaken, have I done?
Nature forsake me too, or tell me how
This Labyrinth of doubt, I may get through;
Or do not speak at all, or let me know
Which I must cherish, or which count my foe:
But thou most cruel, whosoere thou art
That wilfully to both procures this smart;
Is my crown then thy death? more shame to thee;
The dead more than the living happy be.
Two Sons Mauritius gains him to succeed,
Rather than mine will me he will choose to bleed;
I justly then thy honors envy must,
Both scorn my glory to embrace thy dust.

ACT IV. SCEN. IV.
Phocas, Heraelius, Martian taking himself for Heraclius, Exuperius, Crispus,
Leontina, Guards and Attendants. CRISPVS. OUr search is not in vain, she is
found at last.


PHO. Success was always better far than have.


HERAC. Madam, confess, for I have told him all.


LEON: All what?


PHO: As if you knew not what we call
You hither for: Tell me, which is my Son?

LEON: What makes you doubt? well, what is it I have done?


HERAC. His Son now lays a title to my Name;
A Note by you attested makes his claim.

PHO: Stay not for torture, think not to deny:
You changed my Son, and gave yours up to die?

LEON: I gave my Son to die, and it is my glory;
Would thou believe, should I tell all the story?
If to deceive thee it was then my will,
How can thou know, I will not do so still?

PHO: However, show us, where the Reason lay,
Why from the one, until this very day,
You kept the secret; and yet four years since
You had imparted all unto the Prince?

LEON: Yet one's thy Son, the other Emperor:
Strike, if thy hate can overcome thy fear.
Thou tremblest by thy love, thy fear, thy rage,
And which to satisfy dare not engage.
Strike, strike, since one is but thy Son;
It Is like a wager, may be lost or won.
It Is fit all Tyrants should be in thy case,
To fear an Enemy in their own Race.
Thy Son thou in thy Enemy shall love:
Half Tyrant and half Father only prove;
And all that time in vain thy study spend,
To punish thee, is one part of my end. Phocas chafes.
Since from me only knowledge can be had,
Thou will not kill me till I make thee mad;
Then thou may do it, not before i am sure,
Thy doubts and fears there is none but I, can cure.

PHOCAS. Thou forcest me to that which I am loath:
They both shall die, since I Am denied by both.

LEONT: Those Mutiniers that now give thee Alarms,
Would reach thy head, should thou cut off thy Arms.

PHO: I justly punish both, though neither know,
One's sure Heraclius, the other would be so.

LEONT. I should be pleased, 'twere a most happy hour,
To see thee cut those props support thy power:
Proceed, and make thy resolution good,
Strike; let instinct inform which is thy blood.

PHO. What strange acknowledgments are these from thee,
Since thou have shared even my Authority? Pho. flatters
Committed to thy care my only Son,
Yet give him back, and all my anger's done.

LEON: Should I do so, yet neither thee would own,
They death prefer before a Tyrant's Throne.
Admire the virtue, which this trouble breeds,
So brave Plants raised from such accursed seeds,
No Age could ever boast, of greater worth:
These Acts my better Precepts have brought forth;
If they by thy Example had been taught,
Their honors had been sold, their safety bought;
Heaven has afforded them a better fate,
Than to have had thy vice to imitate.
Thus I Have returned more than thou did for me,
Purging their blood from thy impuritie.

EXVP. Impostors impudent, and proud still be,
Lies are the weapons gain them victory:
I have another way to make her know
What she to Truth and Majesty does owe;
Spite of the obscurity of her delusion,
I shall make clear^, what is now confusion.
Since, Sir I have begun, I will conclude,
Or, if I fail, forfeit my dearest blood;
If to my custody you will her commit,
I Will spread such nets, shall catch her female wit:
There Is none so fortified of all her kind,
But have some fit place to be undermined.

PHO. O my best friend take all the ways you please,
Even to torment her, so you give me ease.
But yet I think, it is flattery must gain,
She is ambitious, give her hopes to reign.
But what need I my thoughts to you reveal,
All things are less, nothing above your zeal:
The service you have done, can only be
Out-gone, by what you now design for me.
This while I mean to take 'em both apart,
And try the utmost of persuasive art;
Nature in private may more aptly move,
And Mine be softened by a Father's love.
Bring 'em away

Exeunt Phocas, etc. ACT IV. SCEN. V.
Exuperius, Leontina. EXVP. NOne can hear, and I must
Unto your faith commit the greatest trust:
And that you may the better credit give,
Know it is resolved, that Phocas shall not live:

LEON: Yes to reward that base officious zeal,
That sells thy Father, does thy Prince reveal.

EXVP. You by appearance judge, and so mistake.


LEON. They do indeed, who you for honest take.


EXVP. That which to you does falsehood seem as yet.


LEON. Is but a knack of State, a trick of wit:

EXVP. How can you judge, since yet you do not know,
What our designs are, which way we will go?
But I will tell you how our plot is laid,
And that we should fall off, be not afraid.
Our injuries are, Rapes, Oppressions, Blood,
Our Prince to be restored the chiefest good.
We that were once disfavoured, and disgraced
Removed from Court, are thus in credit placed,
And that which to you treachery does seem,
Is a sure way our honor to redeem.

LEON: Others may credit give to what you have said,
I have no faith for you, at least it is dead.

EXVP. You have much reason, from that, faith may grow.


LEONT: Not from such seeds as you did lately sow.


EXVP. You know how strong and watchful are his Guard,
All entrance to his hated person barred,
Till now that I have such opinion won,
I am confided in beyond his Son;
'Twas my pretended zeal the counsel gave,
That Prince Heraclius public death might have,
The streets, gates, forts, his guards must all make good,
Then, with my friends, I Have power to shed his blood:
Which shall be done, when once you make us know,
Which is the Prince to whom we duty owe.
We from the Tyrrnt take both life and Crown,
To make our act just, a just power must own.

LEON. How dull and weak art thou, that could believe,
Since me thou can not, thou should him deceive?
He finds thy plot, if true, and does design
Thy ruin, but this way he shall not mine.

EXVP. Madam, I Have told you truth, and will say more --

LEON. Not to the purpose that you spoke before?


EXVP: Well, I am satisfied, be faithless still;
I will take care, that you shall do no ill.
I Will keep my secret, and you may keep yours,
Those must obey, that are in others powers:
To prison, Madam; you ere long shall know,
To the same end men several ways may go. Exeunt.

ACT V.
SCE. I.
HERACLIVS. WHat strange confusion's this that I do find?
He whom I hate, would kill, appears so kind,
That I still fear what ever is designed.
Perhaps Leontina does me abuse;
Then wrought by her my right I may refuse,
Mauritius' interest honor bids me choose.
If Phocas Son, I then must share his guilt,
By a just Prince much blood is seldom spilt;
My hopes are on my first opinion built.
Look down, great Soul, from thy celestial home,
And to thy staggered sons assistance come;
Arm him with scorn against a Tyrant's doom.

ACT V. SCEN. II.
Heraclius, Pulcheria. HERAC. OH Heavens! What good Angel brings you to me?


PVLC. Phocas, who of your birth resolved would be,
And hopes by me he may the secret know;
He Is cunning, and the likeliest ways does go.

HERAC: If I were sure, how could I then deny,
What my soul loves in all to satisfy?

PVLC: If I did know it, he should never do;
I Would die my self, if so I could save you.

HERAC: Do not, Pulcheria, do not weep for me:
How gladly would I die so to save thee?
But it is in vain to hope that I should die,
I cannot move his hate, though all means try:
I am not so much as a Prisoner made,
The least affront to do me he is afraid,
Which gives some fears, makes me suspect my fate,
That I am Son to him whom all men hate.

PVLC. Your fears and doubts beget much fear in me,
Can thou, Oh Love, then my dishonor be?
A Son of Phocas in my Love claim part,
Yet he alive? I Will first tear out my heart.

HERAC: Worth of it self, where e're it be does live,
And though our Parents some addition give;
It were unjust true merit to deny,
Since Birth is not our choice, but Destiny.

PVLC. In one of you two I a Brother find,
Nay, to that interest you do both pretend;
Your state's so doubtful, you may well believe,
That as I both do love, for both I grieve;
Yet am not without hope; as I came here
Great Troops were seen the Palace to draw near,
And Exuperius against them drew his force:
Our fortunes may be better, cannot worse.

ACT V. SCEN. III.
Phocas, Heraclius, Martian taking himself for Heraclius, Pulcheria, her Women,
Guards and Attendants. BUt here is Phocas!

PHO. What good news? will he yield?


PVL: My Forces are too weak, I quit the Field,
All the advantage that I yet have won,
I have two Brothers, you still want a Son.

PHO: Thus you are rich, although I yet am poor.


PVLC. I only know, Sir, what you knew before;
They, for my sake, do thus their births obscure,
Or else that they their safeties may procure,
Preserve them both, and that ends all the strife.

PHO: In favor of my blood, I yours will save;
But first the knowledge of my Son I crave,
On that condition my consent is won,
To give him life that back restores my Son.
Ingrate, I this once more do thee conjure, To Herac.
Thou thy own safety and thy friends procure:
Why should not Nature be as strong in thee,
As her impulses show themselves in me?
Consider with what care I thee have bred;
Consider these floods from my aged head;
Consider those deep sighs I fetch for thee:
If this move not, yet let that amity
That thou art bound to have for thy brave friend,
That saved thy life, how dare thou cause his end?

HERAC: I give you back your Son, his birth and all.


PHO. How can that be since thou for death do call?


HERAC. I die to give you him, and his life save.


PHO. We both in thee die, buried in thy grave.
Well since I see I nothing can obtain,
At least grant this something to ease my pain,
Adopt me for thy Father, so my Son,
And with thy dear friend reign, my raign's near done.

HERAC. Oh that is too much, and will my glory stain,
Why, real love for what I did but faign?
Yours is so too: for what you offer me,
Would not make more, but less my dignity;
I to my self a monster should appear,
Son to a just Prince, yet a Tyrants heir.

PHO: Go cease to hope that death thou do deserve,
Since thou refusest what might both preserve;
All I required was but to take his name,
Thy cruelty, not mine, must bear the blame.
Thou art my Son, and nature bids me spare,
But of his death thou shall the torment share.
Strike Soldiers, now I Will see his heart blood spilt,
He dead, choose then for Father whom thou will.

HERAC: Hold villain, hold. --

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. Ah Prince, what would you do?


HERAC. Preserve the Son; nay so the Father too.


MART. taking himself for Heracl: Preserve that Son which he in you would have,
And hinder not one that does court his grave;
Heraclius needs must happily expire,
Since to your hands he yields up his Empire:
May the Gods long and happy make your reign.

PHO Strike, strike Octavian all discourse is vain.


HERAC. Hold Traitor, Sir, I am --

PHO. Confess at last.


HERACLIVS. Into what mist of errror am I cast?


PHO. Get out at leisure; strike, and end the strife.


HERAC. I am -- What I should be to save his life.
From me to him, Sir, there is so much due,
That I will pay the debt he ows to you,
So readily, so fully and sincere,
As if indeed you my true Father were.
But then you shall engage your life to me,
That from all injury you keep him free,
For if he die, be sure that I die too,
Or your life pays the forfeit made by you.

PHO. Fear nothing, my supporters both I Will make,
Then nothing can my peace or Empire shake,
I know that both have so much love for other,
That I shall have two Sons, you each a Brother;
My joys are now so great I scarce can see
By what addition they can greater be,
You are my Son, obedience have professed,
Show it this once, I am for ever blessed,
Admired Pulcheria you must grant to be
The happy cement of our amity.

HERAC. She Is my Sister, Sir,

PHO. You no more my Son,
And all I Have labored for, again undone.

PVL. What if he were? Tyrant art thou so vain,
To think his grant could alter my disdain?
Could I love any thing should but seem thine?
And from thy blood less than my own decline:
Cease then to hope the least pretense in me,
Whilst death has power from that to set me free.

ACT V. SCEN. IV.
Phocas, Heraclius, Martian taking himself for Heraclius, Pulcheria, her Women,
Crispus, Guards and Attendants. CRISPVS. TO Exuperius, Sir, the debt you owe,
He and his friends have born the business so,
That he the Mutineers has overcome,
And Prisoners brings their chiefs to hear your doom.

PHO: Command that in the Court for me he stay,
Where them their due, my thanks to him i will pay.
Ungrateful will thou be, my Son, or no?
The Mutineers over come, I need not show
Or fear or love, more than I have indeed;
Use well the time while I make others bleed:
And thou Pulcheria, if thou would not see
Both their bloods shed to end the Tragedy,
Find, or make choice of one of them for mine,
And with the usual forms your right hands join:
At my return I swear this shall be done;
Who scorns my blood and Throne, is not my Son.

PVLC: Threat not, they dead, I gladly death embrace.


PHO: I know thou would, but i will not grant that grace,
That were a mercy: I must punish thee,
Which as the highest, thou shall marry me.

PVLC: Ha! What Plague?


PHO. If it be great, from me it is justly due,
But I shall make it yet more strange and new,
I Will bath this in their bloods when so, take thine,
One way or other compass my design.
She will not kill her self, whilst yet they live To himself.
They error me, and I Will them terror give.

Exit Pho. Crisp. etc. ACT V. SCENE V.
Heraclius, Martian taking himself for Heraclius, Pulcheria. PVLCHERIA. O The
sly Wolf, his fear made him seem mild,
The danger past, how bloody and how wild;
Threatening our hearts in pieces he will tear,
If only mine, it were not worth my fear,
But when you both must die, whose worth is such,
The world never knew, nor shall again so much:
Since we to death must all together go,
Which is indeed my Brother let me know,
That aptly I may pay the debt I owe.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. Rather resolve, your danger drawing near,
(He may come back, and act what you so fear)
The marriage with the Son then celebrate;
To shun the Father you so justly hate.

PVL. Who is it will show me, if I could consent,
And so assure me, incest to prevent?

MART. taking himself for Herac. I see too much of fear for us and you:
Yet a faign'd marriage you may yield unto,
Deceive the Tyrant, virtue not destroy,
All live, and yet not Hymen's rights enjoy.

PVL, So to dissemble would look poor and low:

HERAC: A Tyrant to outreach makes it not so.
'Twould place in trust a Brother which he gives,
We having power, he at our mercy lives,
And so we may, when ever we think good,
Sue a divorce, and seal it with his blood.

PVL. Well to preserve your lives, avoid my shame,
I am content: whose wife must I seem? name;
Which of you is it offers me his hand?
It Is not a real, since no legal band.

HERAC. You Sir, who did at first the motion make;

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. You Prince, who for his Son Phocas will
take;

HERAC: You who these four years have her lover him:

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. You who have greater worth her heart to
win:

PVL. Ah Princes!
By this so brave retreat your worth is shown,
But I mistrusted still; judged by my own,
For great hearts, which the Heavens for Empire make,
Even at the shadow of a crime must shake.
Let us leave all to Heaven and nothing do,
But what bright honor fairly guides us to.

HERACL. Was ever fate more cruel than is mine?
The doubtful truth, which with my blood I sign;
Leaves me unworthy still of that great Name,
I suffer for, in death I lose my aim,
Saving not him, for whom I choose to die.

MART. taking himself for Herac. That nothing is to my strange destiny;
Who in the compass of one day appear
Leontius, Martian, and Heraclius here,
A Tribun's, Tyrant's, a just Emp'ror's Son,
And die I know not who, e're it be done.

PVLC. How small your griefs are yet compared to mine?
Though I confess you justly may repine;
For death which may ease you I must not try,
They that give life, that help to me deny;
We are born Servants, and our Lord's design,
We must not question, but our wills resign.
It is determined by great Nature's Laws,
That all effects depend upon their cause.

ACT V. SCEN. VI.
Heraclius, Martian taking himself for Heraclius, Pulcheria, Amyntas. HERAC.
WHat does this Traytor's coming mean? speak slave.


AMIN: I am not so, since I no Master have;
The name of Traitor I can less endure,
Washed in the Tyrants blood, I now am pure.

HERAC. Ha! What says he?


AMIN. That I am free from stain:
By Exupere and me Phocas is slain.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. He that betrayed me?


AMIN. You mistaken were,
We Traitors seemed to find our Emperor.

PVL. Were not both sent the Mutineers to quell?


AMIN. Yes but each others minds we knew so well,
That when time fitted we did soon agree,
To punish Phocas for his Tyranny.
For he secured by our deceit from fear,
Quickly his wonted fierceness did appear;
For pride and cruelty do greater grow,
When one believes he has subdued a foe:
The seeming Prisoners kneeling on the ground,
Implored his mercy, but this threatening found;
You are all Traitors to whom death as due,
It Is just, cries Exupere, most just to you.
He strikes, we second him; the Tyrant dies:
Long live HERACLIVS, Exuperius cries.
The standers by struck with amazement were,
To see one stroke destroy their hope and fear:
Thus for self ends who called this Tyrant good,
Soon read his ills once written in his blood.

The last Scene.
Heraclius, Martian taking himself for Heraclius, Pulcheria, her Women,
Leontina, Eudoxia, Exuperius, Amyntas, Guards and Attendants. HERACLIVS. SAy
Madam, is it true? is there a change?
Amyntas tells us news, though good, yet strange.

LEON: Sir the success, though great, you may believe,
Nor is there any blood, shed, we should grieve.

HERAC. False to be generous, I thee embrace,
To Exuperius. If I have power expect the highest grace.

EXVP. I must beg pardon from one of you two,
If I have injured him, I have served you.

MARTIAN taking himself for Heraclius. Either of both may easily forgive
His death, who was resolved we should not live.
Yet at the mention something touches me.

HERAC. It may the great effects of nature be;
If so you have no great cause to complain,
If I the Empire, you my sister gain;
Nor can my dear Pulcheria now refuse,
The Father dead, how can you better choose?
To Leons. Madam, it is you alone can end the strife,
Either the Empire's mine, or she is my wife.

LEON. And can I then alone the difference end?


HERAC. Who else? on your knowledge all things depend.


LEON. You may suspect me, yet of artifice,
Believe not me then, but the Emper(...).
To Pulch: Madam you know her hand, it is you that must
To both pretenders show what they must trust;
This at her death she did deliver me.

PVL. Which thus I kiss upon my bended knee,
Pulcheria reads After so many miseries endured,
Just Powers have me this happiness procured,
Before my eyes by faithful Leontine,
My Son is once more changed; the great design
Not known so Phocas, he believes him his,
And so the Empire mine can hardly miss;
Those of our friends that yet have faith for us;
Must Martian love, he is my Heraclius.
Constantine. To Herac. You are my Brother then

HERAC. I wished to be
It Is mutual loves yields all felicity.

LEON: You know enough, and need no incest fear,
Nor could that have fallen out, such was my care;
But pardon, Sir, that blood I would have spilt, To Mart.
As being yours, though none, it looks like guilt.

MARTIAN. Against the common joy i will not oppose,
What Nature makes me feel I will keep close;
Though he from any did not merit love,
A Parent's death some inward grief must move.

HERAC. That you your grief the better may decline,
Leontius be again, Martian resign:
Under that name great glories you have won;
You have no vice to suit a Tyrants Son.
You, my Eudoxia, take my heart and throne.
For in exchange I know you give me one.

EVD: This your deliverance a joy affords,
Too high, to be expressed, in my low words.

HERAC: O be not sad since your PVLCHERIA may To Mart.
Think strange, she yours, to see a gloomy day.

MARTIAN. A mixture of such joies as yet cause grief,
Only from time and her should find relief.

HERAC. to Leontina and Exuperius. You my Preservers made my troubles blessed,
Your love and courage bravely did contest;
The Victory I reap, your Harvest too;
Honors are still mine, whilst conferred on you:
But first to the just Powers our thanks we will pay,
That none but Traitors blood sprinkled our way.

Long live Heraclius. EPILOGUE spoken by LEONTINA
MY part was bold, and high, throughout the Play,
In all of consequence I bore the sway;
I with my tongue the Tyrant often shook,
Now I do so, fearing your angry look:
Pass by our faults in acting, his low style,
And seal our pardons, though but with a smile.
Books lately printed for John Starkey at the Miter nere Temple Bar in
Fleet Street.
ANdronicus Comnenius a Tragedy written by John Wilson Author of the Cheats. 4.
Aminta the famous Italian Pastoral, written by Torquato Tasso, and englished by
J: D. The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral Comedy, written by the honorable
Walter Mountague Esquire The Works of the famous Francis Rabelais, Dr. in Physic,
a Book highly esteemed in France for it is excellent drollery, translated into
English by Sir Tho. Vrchard Knight. The History of Gavelkind, with the
Etymology thereof, containing also an assertion that our English Laws are for
the most part those that were used by the ancient Britains, notwithstanding the
several Conquests. To which is added a short History of William Conqueror in
Latin, written in the time of Henry the first. The Abridgment of all the
Public Acts of Parliament in force and use from the 4th of Jan. 164 1/2. to
the 16th of March 166 1/4. by William Hughs Esquire.
In the Press.
Philosophical Conferences of the Virtuosi of France, upon the most curious
questions concerning man, Philosophy, the liberal Arts and Sciences, and all
other natural knowledge, translated into English by G. H. folio.
FINIS.

