A DISCOURSE Written to a LEARNED FRIAR, BY M. DES FOVRNEILLIS; SHOWING, That
the SYSTEME of M. DES CARTS, and particularly his Opinion concerning BRUTES,
does contain nothing dangerous; and that all he has written of both, seems to
have been taken out of the First Chapter of GENESIS.

To which is annexed the SYSTEME GENERAL Of the same CARTESIAN PHILOSOPHY.

By Francis Bail, Dr. of Physic at Tholose.

Englished out of French.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little
Britain, 1670.

A DISCOURSE
Written to a Learned Friar, showing that the Systeme of M. Des Carts, and
particularly his Opinion concerning Brutes, does contain nothing dangerous; and
that all he has written of both, seems to have been taken out of the First
Chapter of GENESIS.
My Reverend Father,
I Know very well, that Moses has not written his Genesis with a design to
explain to men the Secrets of Nature; but I do also know, that being inspired
by God, as he was, he could say nothing about the production of the World,
which is not true. And therefore I esteem, that to find the Principles of
Natural Philosophy infallible, they are not to be sought but in that History
which He has given us of the Creation of the World; or at least, that we ought
to esteem false whatever is said of Nature, when it cannot be reconciled with
all the Circumstances of this History.

Do not wonder therefore that I so often refer you to Genesis, and that I lay
so much weight upon the Principles of Monsieur Des Carts. Most of his Tenets
are so conform to what Moses has said, that it seems, he became a Philosopher
only by the Reading of this Prophet. But that you may the more easily apprehend
how great an agreement there is between that Sacred Writing and his Philosophy,
I intend to expound unto you the first Chapter of Genesis literally; and you will
see, that in doing so, I shall discourse to you almost the same things which I
told you last, when I explained to you the Principles of M. Des Carts.

The only difference you will find is, that M. Des Carts writes things more
particularly, and with a design to make them known what they are in themselves;
whereas Moses writes like an Historian, who discourses of Nature only so far
as was needful to make us admire the power of the Author thereof. Thus the one
speaks only of the principal things, and the other dives more into
particulars; and yet all these particulars are clearly nothing else but a more
ample explication, and a Sequel of those main things which Moses has recited
in so concise, so bold, and so true a manner.

I told you the other day, that M. Des Carts in the beginning of his
Principles uses much reasoning to show, That there is a God: That all what is,
is only by him: That he begun this great piece of Workmanship, which we call
the World, by creating Bodies: That from that time he moved them, and that he
still continues to move them. I also told you, that among so many differences,
which the Figures may make between Bodies, M. Des Carts takes notice of three
principal ones; that he shows, there is a very great Number, of such as are
round like little Balls; others, subtle enough to fill the spaces left by these
Balls between themselves; and others again, whose irregular Figures do so
entangle them one with another, that they may compose the greater Masses.

I added, that examining the several changes, which the Matter or the Aggregate
of all these Bodies may have suffered successively, M. Des Carts shows, that
there may have been formed many Masses of different bignesses, of a figure
approaching to that of the Earth; above which he shows, that there was to
remain a number of particles, some like those which compose the Water, and
others like those which compose the Fire: That this Aggregate of Earth, Water,
and Air, was to be mixed, and surrounded with an almost infinite number of
those little Bodies made in the form of Globules, and with these other subtiler
ones that were to fill up their Intervalls. And that, lastly, M. Des Carts
repeats often, that God entertains in a continual motion this subtle matter,
which else could not be moved.

Now all this, if you mark it, is nothing else, than to describe
Philosophically and exactly (for the making out of the least circumstances of
it) the same wonders which Moses has described Historically in these few
Lines; God created in the beginning Heaven and Earth. Now the Earth was void,
and brought forth nothing, because it was covered with deep waters; Darkness
was upon the face of this Abyss, and the Lord moved a subtle matter upon the
Waters.

He that shall well examine what the Prophet has said, will find that it is the
same thing which the Philosopher has endeavored to explain.

The FIRST DAY.
IF we shall follow the one in the progress of his Reasonings, and the other in
the progress of his History; we may judge, that it is of Moses, that Des Carts
has learned, that the Light was made before the Sun; at least it will appear,
that this place of Genesis, which for so many ages has perplexed men's spirits,
is found happily cleared, according to the Letter, by the Principles of M. Des
Carts.

Moses having showed that the Earth was infertile because of the Waters
encompassing it, and the Celestial matter useless, because the motions of it
were not regulated; he goes on to show, that God, who does nothing in vain,
began, for the ordering of all these things, with the Creation of Light: He
expresses himself magnificently, as he is wont to do; and makes the Almighty
speak on this occasion in such a manner, which is capable all alone to
persuade, that it is the Lord himself that made him speak thus.

Behold his Expressions; And God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light.
He adds, That God saw, his work was good; that he divided the Light from the
Darkness; and that he gave the name of Day to the Light, and the name of Night
to Darkness

There is no man of good sense, who sees not, that Moses, having declared, that
in the beginning God created Heaven and Earth, and that certain Bodies, subtle
enough to be called Spirits, were carried to and fro, does signify, that all
the Bodies were already created; and that God did maintain from that time in
the whole mass of matter as much motion, as he conserves in it now; and that
what he has made in all the following six days, was only to put those Bodies
in order, and to regulate all their motions.

So that, if speaking like an Historian, Moses has marked out the first day of
this admirable Contrivance by the formation of Light, this signifies only to
us, that God disposed the Bodies, as they ought to be, to produce this
wonderful effect; which was sufficient for an Historian; but the Philosopher
was to make it out, how these Bodies were to be disposed for that purpose.

Wherefore choosing from among all the Figures those, which might be most proper
for the little Bodies which cause Light, and seeing that those, which he had
described as Globules, being moved in a certain manner, would be satisfactory
to all that is known of the Rays which are made by the Light; M. Des Carts
has supposed, that there were formed diverse Vortexes or Whirl-pools of these
little round Bodies, and that many of them turning round about one and the same
Center, a part of the matter, which fills up their Intervalls, was gathered
toward the Center, whence it did propel the Globules which surrounded it; so
that this pressure of the Globules made Light in all those places, where was
found a sufficient conflux and heap of subtle matter.

But he adds, that as in this beginning there was not yet a great plenty of
these more subtle parts in the Centers of the Whirlpools, the action, which
pressed the Globules, did not reach far; so that the places, which its effect
could not reach to, remained in darkness, whilst the other were already
enlightened: which agrees admirably with the effect, which Moses ascribes to
the first Word of the Lord, which did separate the Light from the Darkness,
from the time it began to form it: From thence also we may say, according to
Genesis, that the Night was where the Darkness had remained; and the Day, where
the Light had begun.

You will observe, that by the Word Light, we are here to understand nothing
else but that, which is the cause, that the Bodies, called Luminous, excite in
us the sentiment,, which makes us perceive them, and not the sentiment it self.

Men do often confound these two things, and it is certainly from thence that
all the doubts proceed that are met with on this Subject. But me thinks, that
in what Moses has written of Light, it is evident, that he would only speak of
what is found on the part of the Bodies, and not of the Effect which it
produces in such Subjects as are capable to have the sense of it; since it is
certain, according to Moses, that when that, which is called Light, was
created, there was yet none of the other Creatures which are esteemed capable
to perceive it.

I desire you to observe by the by another thing, which is; That this
sentiment, which we have from Luminous Bodies, is in such a manner on the part
of our Soul, and has such a necessary respect to the motion of certain parts
of our Brain, that very often, without the excitation of the nerves of our Eyes
by any Luminous body, we have the sense of Light. Thus in Dreams, the
fortuitous course of the Spirits moving those parts of our Brain, the agitation
whereof is designed to excite in us that sentiment, makes us clearly see
Objects that are not present: And by the same reason those, who marching in a
very obscure place hurt their head against the Wall, are subject to see a
thousand Fires; whence we are to conclude, that those motions of the Brain
which have nothing that resembles the thoughts which arise in the Soul on
their occasion, may be excited by other Bodies than those we call Luminous. But
it was very proper, not to give this name but to Bodies, whose figure and
motion were so proportionate to the fineness and tenderness of our Eyes, that
their nerves might be moved by them without pain, and without danger to the
other parts of our Body. Wherein, me thinks, M. Des Carts has succeeded
admirably well; it being not possible to assign to Luminous Bodies a fitter
Figure than that which he has given them, nor a motion more convenient, than
that which he has ascribed to them.

The SECOND DAY.
MOses relating what passed the Second Day, for the formation of the Firmament,
expresses himself in these terms; God said, let the Firmament be in the midst
of the Waters, and let it separate the one from the other. He adds, that the
Firmament was presently made, and the Waters were separated from the Waters, so
that there were some of them above and some under the Firmament, which he
called Heaven.

To understand how the Waters were separated one from the other by the
formation of the Firmament, according to the sentiment of M. Des Carts, we
shall need only to relate what he teaches of the Waters and of the Firmament.

Those who have read what he has written thereof, do know, that after he had
considered all the effects of Water, he conceived that the particles, which
compose it, must be smooth, long and pliant; and that by this supposition alone
he has rendered a reason of all what is observed in Water, whether it be
running, or whether it enlarge it self in a Vessel, or whether we see it in
drops, or in the form of a Scum, or whether it rise in Vapors, or whether,
remaining without motion, it appear in Ice or Snow.

We know also, that he supposes, that there has been a great number of these
particles very smooth and very pliant, mingled with other bodies, a great part
of which had figures so embarassing, that their Aggregate could form no other
but hard Masses.

Lastly, We know, that he supposes these last particles have been the matter
of many Masses almost like the Earth; and forasmuch as these Masses could not
be very solid and very hard, but by an extreme pressing of the Branchy
particles which compose them, it is evident, that the particles of water which
were mixed therewith, were driven out of it, and that so the surfaces of those
great Masses were to be altogether covered with it.

This being supposed, it is now to be observed, that, according to M. Des
Carts, the formation of the Firmament is nothing else but a perfect
disposition and ranging of all the Whirlpools, of which I have already spoken
in the Subject of Light: Their number is so great, and the space they fill so
vast, that the word Firmament, according to the truest interpretation,
signifies a vast extension. There is nothing that deserves more this name,
than their Aggregate. But as we ought to mark the time of the formation of
every thing, only from the moment which gives it its perfection; M. Des Carts
having supposed, that the Aggregate of all the whirlpools was not yet well
ordered, when the Light began, nor their motion very free, does mark the time
of the formation of the Firmament, then only, when they were so well adjusted,
that the Ecliptic of the one answering to the Poles of the other, they began
to move among themselves with a motion altogether free, and so proportioned,
that not any one received a Let from all those, which encompassed it.

It Is at this instant, that, according to Des Cartes's Hypothesis, the Masses,
which were in the same Vortex, where the Earth was, began to be separated from
it by the matter of that Vortex, which insinuated it self betwixt them, and
which kept them more or less distant from the Center, according to the
difference of their grossness or solidity. Now, as we have noted, that they
were all covered with their Waters, and that the matter of the Vortexes (which,
according to this Doctrine, is the matter of the Firmament) separated them from
the Earth, it was true to say, following the same Doctrine as well as that of
Genesis, that the Waters were severed from the Waters, by the formation of the
Firmament.

Thus M. Des Carts, who seems always to follow Moses, disposes the Waters so,
that they are some above, and some under the Firmament. For we know, that what
the Prophet calls in this place Under, is the Earth we inhabit; and all that is
severed from it by the Celestial matter, may be said, in respect of us, to be
above the Firmament.

I do not explain this more at large, nor do I examine, how well these
different Conservatories of Waters, which M. Des Carts places in several
parts of Heaven, do represent those Cataracts, whence the Lord drew forth, at
the time of his wrath, what served to overwhelm the Earth.

Neither do I make reflection upon the Changes, which have happened to the
Earth by this super-abundance of Waters. This is perhaps the cause of the
Clouds, Rains, and the first apparition of that admirable Phenomenon, which
the Lord made use of to secure Noah against the apprehensions of a new Deluge,
when he promised him to shut up for ever those Cataracts, which he had opened
for his vengeance; but this would carry us too far.

The THIRD DAY.
THe Third Day Moses observes, that, the Waters covering the Globe of the
Earth, it was convenient to gather them together into certain places, to the
end that the other parts thereof remaining discovered, the Earth might produce
Herbs, Plants and Trees of all kinds. He says, that the same word, which had
operated the wonders of the precedent days, wrought that also. To which he
adds, that what appeared dry, was called Earth, and the collection of the
Waters, Sea.

Now it is evident, that if the Earth had remained perfectly round, the waters
could not have been gathered into places, to leave others dry. We must
therefore believe, that the same day, which saw the separation of the Waters
from the Earth, saw also the formation of the Hills, and that certain parts of
the Earth being raised above others, left Valleys betwixt them for Beds to the
waters, and Cavities under their Elevations, to receive a quantity of water,
approaching to that which should appear no more. It Is thus, that M. Des Carts
explicateth the matter. He declares also, how the Earth was enabled to produce
herbs, plants and trees, and how the different Juices, which run within the
bosom of the Earth insinuate themselves into several Seeds, whose pores are
adapted to their figure.

I desire you in this place to observe, that Moses says not, that God made any
Soul for Plants; he only says, that the Earth, rendered fertile by the word of
the Lord, did produce them. But those Philosophers who have always had
recourse to Souls, when they would explicate the effects of certain Organical
Bodies, of which they could not discover the Springs, have given one to every
Plant. They have believed, that it was impossible, to give an account of
Vegetation without it. But M. Des Carts, without adding any thing to the
Scripture, where Moses speaks of Plants, of their Seeds, of their increase
and fruit without speaking of any Soul, has believed, there needed none to be
supposed to give a reason of their Nutrition; and he has so clearly showed,
that Vegetation is performed by the local motion of the parts which come in
afresh, and by the fitness of their figure to the pores of that plant, which
they are proper to increase, that I think I may assure, that there is none, how
little soever accustomed to Ratiocination, but will acknowledge, after he has
examined what he says on this Subject, that there remains not the least
probability to maintain, that Plants have Souls.

Yet you know, that there are yet some who will defend, that there are
Vegetative Souls. But what, I pray, can authorize them? Not Reason surely. That
tells us all, that things ought not to be multiplied without necessity; and
since we do manifestly see, that Figure and Motion may be the entire cause of
Vegetation, we ought not to no purpose have recourse to Souls. Nor can it be
the Authority either of Man, or of the H. Scripture; for that of Man cannot be
considerable against the evidence of natural Notions, and against the
Experiments by which this Error is convinced. As to that of Sacred Writ, it is
manifest, that that is not on their side, and nothing appears there that may
come near to what they would attribute to Plants, viz. a Vegetative Soul.

The FOURTH DAY.
THe Fourth Word did form two great Luminaries in the Firmament, to divide
perfectly the Day from the Night, and to mark the difference of Days, Seasons
and Years. The same Word formed also the Stars, according to the History of
Moses.

M. Des Carts explaining this as a Naturalist, says, that the several
Vortexes, which had been formed of all the Celestial matter, having been
adapted to one another, as was most convenient for the continuation of their
motions, there flowed so much of the most subtle matter toward the Center of
each of them, by the pressure of the Globules, which tended to recede from it,
that at length each of the Whirlpools came to have in his middle so great a
quantity of this matter, that it was able to propel the globules to the
extremities' of the Whirlpool, and by this action to form such Rays, as those
are, whose force makes us see the shining Sun.

He adds, that this subtle matter, gathered at the Center of each Vortex, may
have force enough to thrust the Globules of the Neighboring Vortexes, and to
make there its action sensible. So that, according to this Author, the shining
collection of subtle matter, which was made in the Center of this Vortex
wherein was the Earth, was, in respect of it, the greatest Luminary, that is,
the Sun: Those that were made in the other Vortexes, were Stars; and that of
all the great Masses, which was found nearest, and most disposed to propel
toward it the Light of the Sun, was the lesser Luminary, that is, the Moon. I
shall say no more of it; and it is so well known, that the difference of Days,
Nights and Seasons comes from the different situation, wherein the Earth, the
Sun and other Stars are found, that I should be tedious to repeat here what M.
Des Carts has written on this Subject.

The FIFTH and SIXTH DAY.
THe Fifth Day God said; Let the Waters produce the Moving Creature that has a
living Soul, and Fowl that fly above the Earth. And the Sixth Day he said, Let
the Earth bring forth the Living Creature after its kind, Cattle, and creeping
things, and Beasts of the Earth. I do not add the rest; for it is enough to
say, that God would have it so, to let men know, that it was so.

This Place teaching us, that if it may be said, that Fish and the other Brute
Animals have Souls, these Souls are produced by the Waters and the Earth; M.
Des Carts had reason to believe, that what is here called Soul, is nothing
else but little Bodies so adjusted to the Organs of Fishes and other Brutes,
that they make them live, move and grow.

He has admirably explained upon this Subject the Circulation of the Blood;
the manner how it is heated in the Heart; how it runs into the Arteries, whose
different pores let out the particles, which their figure makes fit for the
nourishment of the Members; and how the finest parts of all extricate
themselves from the rest, to go to the Brain, whence they are distributed into
Muscles, where they serve for the motion of the whole Body.

He does give such an accurate account of all these things only by the figure
and the motion of the little Bodies, and the disposition of the Organs, that
there can remain no doubt of them. And that it may not seem a wonder, what he
says of the heat of the Blood, which he makes the chief Spring of all those
Functions, commonly called Vital and Animal, he proves, that they must
necessarily be performed by Bodies, without the need of any Soul; adding to his
Reasons the example of certain Liquors, which are cold to the touch when they
are asunder, but grow presently hot, even to a degree of ebullition, when they
are blended together. As this effervescence happens to Liquors, which are not
so much as suspected to have Souls, M. Des Carts has, me thinks, advanced
nothing but what is rational, when he says, That the heat of the Blood, joined
to the disposition and the dependence of the Organs, is able without a Soul to
cause the nutrition and motion of Brutes.

Me thinks also, that he had reason, since, what the Vulgar Translation calls a
Living Soul, was produced by the Waters and the Earth, to believe, that this
kind of Souls were only Bodies. And indeed there are so many places, whereby we
may know, that this was the meaning of Moses, that it is a wonder to me to find
men still doubting thereof.

I should tire you to recite them all to you; let me only desire you to reflect
a little on Lev. 17. 11. where you will plainly find what it is that enlivens
Flesh and Beasts; The Soul of all Flesh is in the Blood. The same says M. Des
Carts. But Deuteronomy. 12. 23. Moses expresses himself yet more clearly, to make us
understand, that Beasts have no other Souls than the Blood: Only be sure that
thou eat not the Blood: for the Blood is the Soul. And that it might be yet
more understood, he adds; And therefore thou may not eat the Soul, but shall
pour it upon the Earth as water. Is there not then all the reason in the world,
that those Souls, which the earth produces, which may be eaten, and poured out
upon the earth as water, should be counted among Bodies?

I grant indeed, that the blood, when it is heated, is exhaled in very subtle
parts, and that these fine parts are those, which do nourish and move. But how
subtle soever they be, they are Bodies, and they have nothing more of spiritual
in them, than flame, composed of parts yet more subtle, which yet never any man
was so unadvised as to call spiritual.

I wonder for my part, that those who have given Souls to all that is
nourished, have given none to a Flame, which converts into it all the bodies it
lays hold on. And (what is more) I wonder, how men could come to attribute to
Souls the cause of Nutrition and Motion, whereas we see nothing but Body that
is capable to be moved, and that Nutrition is nothing else but an addition of
Bodies to Bodies. But without insisting so much upon Ratiocination, is it not
visible, that Moses (who certainly ought to be believed) acknowledges no other
thing for the cause of the motion and nutrition of Beasts, but the blood? I
think not, that any man, who considers it, will contend about it any longer.

But that you may the better know the force of all these passages, which
hitherto I have only taken according to the Vulgar Translation, and which,
according to this version, leave no difficulty, although the word Soul have
been there employed; I shall now make use of a means, which will prevail upon
your spirit, and better persuade you than any other.

You know more than one Language; and among others you know the Hebrew, which I
understand not. I shall tell you then, that a while ago, reflecting on that
place of Scripture, where is described the work of the Fifth, and that of the
Sixth Day, there appeared to me so great a difference betwixt the manner, in
which the formation of Brutes, and that of Man was made, that I believed, what
word soever was used in the Vulgar, there must be used very differing
Expressions in the Hebrew.

I saw, that the Vulgar said, that the Beasts have a Living Soul, and that the
same Translation used the same word to signify the Life of Man: But I found
withal, that besides that living Soul, which the Vulgar gives to Man, as it
does to Brutes, it is added, that Man was made to the Image of his Maker, whom I
knew to be a pure Spirit. Whence I concluded, that since this Resemblance could
not be drawn from the Body, the Creator having none, it must needs be taken
from something of a superior order, and, in a word, from the Spirit. To this I
added, what the Vulgar expresses, speaking of Man in the Second Chap. of Genesis
Where I saw, that the Lord, who had made him a living Creature, as the Beasts,
had breathed into him something which Beasts had not, and which, me thought,
should be in him the Principle of a Life altogether different from theirs, and
the cause of that advantageous resemblance, which he was to have with his Maker.

All these things did already sway much with me for the advantage of Man; but
believing that I might yet better discover the sense of those places, by
getting the Interpretation of the Hebrew, I consulted Monsieur de Compiegne,
who is known to be the ablest we have in this Language. I prayed him to give me
the Version of the first and second Chapter of Genesis; and in this Version I
found the full proof of what I always thought, and of what M. Des Carts had
written on this Subject. For I saw, that in the place, which speaks of the
Production of Fishes and other Brutes, where the Vulgar says, Let the Waters
and the Earth bring forth Living Souls, my Interpreter said, Let the Earth and
the Water produce Living Individuals: which carries with it a very good sense,
and expresses the thing in a far more conceivable manner: For, it is very
intelligible, that the Earth and Waters have produced living Individuals, that
is, that they have been so fitted and disposed by the Almighty hand of the
Lord, as to form Organical Bodies, which being fit for Nutrition and Motion (in
which consists all the Life of Bodies) were to be called Living; but forasmuch
as they could not be divided without being quite destroyed, were to be called
Individuals.

Secondly, I see in the place which speaks of the formation of Man, that not
only he was formed out of the Earth by the hands of the Lord, and that thereby
he was become a Living Individual, as Beasts are; but above that, I see, that
besides this Individual or Body Organick, which makes him feed and move like
Beasts, he has received another thing, which my Interpreter calls Men's, and
which I call Spirit, or Thought.

So that, as there is nothing spoken of a Soul for Plants in the Vulgar (as I
have already observed) so there is neither in the Hebrew for Brutes. Neither is
it said, that Brutes have Sense, (which I also desire you to note) but this
only is said, that they have Life and Motion. And because this Life and this
Motion do depend upon the disposition and correspondence of many Organs, the
Division of which would hinder the effect; Moses, to signify this Aggregate by
one word, uses that of (...), which signifies Individual.

But that, which we ought to consider above all, is, what the same sacred
Writer so well declares; That Man has a Body organized as Brutes have, and
that this Body lives by the same Principles which give life to Brutes; that
having said, that the Individuum of every Beast was produced by the Waters and
the Earth, he says, that that of Man was also produced of the Earth. And to
make us understand, that this dust of the earth, which before was divisible
without danger, was so disposed that it became an Individual, as every one of
the other living bodies; he expresses himself by the same word he used
speaking of Beasts; and at the same time adds, that the Lord inspired into this
living Individual, of which he would make a man, that which he expresses by
the word (...), that is, a Spirit, or Thought.

This seems to me so strong, that I think there can remain no more scruple
about this point, viz. what we are to believe henceforth of Brutes and of Man.
Moses has given us clearly to understand, that Brutes live and move, because
the Blood and the contrivance of their Organs makes of each of them an
Individual Body, which remains fit for those two effects, as long as that
contrivance lasts: And why should we attribute any other thing to them but this
individual body, by which an account can be given of their Life and Motion?

But then, Moses says not, that they have Sense. Why should we devise, that
they have any? Or, at least, what danger is there to assert, that they have
none?

Lastly, this Man, inspired by God, teaches us, that the Brutes have nothing
but what a Body may have, and that we have a body as they. But he adds, that we
have besides a Spirit; or, if you will, a Soul, which we know is alone capable
of having sense, of judging, of willing, and of all the other ways of
thinking. Why then should we not assert, that the brute Animals have nothing
but Body, and that they have no sentiment? And why should we not affirm, that
besides a body, like unto that which they have, (which makes us not resemble
our Maker) we have a Soul, which gives us that admirable advantage to resemble
him as much as a Creature is capable to do?

If after all this you shall still tell me, that the opinion of M. Des Carts
is dangerous, in that it makes Brutes live and move without a soul; I shall
answer you, that then the History of Moses is dangerous, forasmuch as it
teaches us the same thing.

But if, after you have seen, how well Moses does separate that in Man, which
makes him live and move, from that which makes him think, you shall examine,
how the Creed of S. Athanasius, which we read every day as the Symbol of our
Faith, defines Man, you will see, that he says, that the Flesh, and the Rational
Soul make all what he is: To which he adds, that, as these two substances, how
different soever they be, constitute but one man; so God and Man make but one
and the same Christ. But as in our Lord Jesus Christ it is not allowed,
whatever the Union of his two Natures be, to confound them so, as to attribute
to the one what comes from the other; so there is always great danger to
confound in Man the two Substances which do compose him, and the Functions
which depend from each of them.

Those that give to the Body sentiment or other perceptions, which cannot
belong but to the Soul, are subject to believe, that Man, as a Beast, has
nothing but Body. On the other hand, those who think, that the Soul is that
which causes Nutrition and Motion in Man, are liable to believe, that the
Beasts, which feed and move, have a Soul as Man has; and when there is no
other difference betwixt Souls than that of more or less, there is an Axiom,
which saying, That more or less changes not the Essence, makes, that Men will
soon accustom themselves to believe, that if all perishes in Beasts by death,
there remains also nothing in Man, when he has lost his Life.

As for me, I doubt not at all, but what has been said of Vegetative and
Sensitive Souls, which are attributed to Plants and to Beasts, has made
impious men believe, that those which are given to men, may be of the same
nature.

If my Discourse were not too prolix already, I could explain to you the most
wonderful operations of Brutes by the sole Construction of their Organs, as all
the operations of a Watch are made out to you by the contrivance of its parts;
and show you, that there is no difference betwixt Artificial and Natural
Engines, but in this, that the Author of Nature is a far more excellent Artist
than Men are, and that he has known to apply such parts to one another, as are
much subtiler and much nimbler than those are of which we commonly compose our
Machines. I could alse demonstrate to you, that there is nothing known to us in
Brutes, even in the Ape it self, which may not be explicated from Bodies; and
that in Man there are Thoughts, which all the diversities imaginable in Figures
and Motions cannot give an account of. But I should exceed the Bounds I have
prescribed to my self, and it suffices me to have showed you, that M. Des
Carts has always followed Moses, to make you aver, that his Philosophy
contains nothing dangerous.

Mean time I shall acknowledge, that the formation of the World according to M.
Des Carts, seems to have something different from that of Moses. But when you
shall have considered the Design of the Prophet, and also that of the
Philosopher, you will confess that this difference ought not to make us say,
that they have receded from one another.

Moses has delivered the thing as 'twas done. He says, that God created the
Earth, the Waters, the Celestial Parts, then the Light, and the rest; so that,
when the Sun was created, the Earth was already enriched with Fruits, and
adorned with Flowers. Whereas M. Des Carts makes the Sun the Cause, not only
of the Fruits, and Flowers, but also of the gathering together of many inward
parts of the Earth. The same also makes the Earth to have been formed a long
time after the Sun, although the Scripture notes, that it was created before.

But here we are to take notice of 2 things: The one is, that M. Des Carts
has said himself, that his Hypothesis was false in this, that he supposes
that the formation of each Being is made successivly; assuring, that this way
not being so proper for God, we are to believe, that his Omnipotency has put
every thing in the most perfect condition it could be in, from the first moment
of its production.

The other is, that M. Des Carts was, like a Philosopher, to explicate only
the reason, why things are conserved as they are, and the different effects we
now admire in Nature. Now, as it is certain, that things are naturally conserved
by the same means which has produced them; so it was necessary for to find,
whether the Laws, which he supposes Nature follows to conserve her self, are
true, that he should examine, whether the same Laws could have disposed it as
now it is: And finding, that according to the History of Moses it self,
although the Sun was formed after the Earth, it is yet by the Sun, that God
conserveth the Earth as now it is, the heat thereof being cause of all the
Productions and Changes therein; M. Des Carts was to show, that this same Sun
could have put it into that state we now find it in, if the great Creator had
not put it there in an instant by his Omnipotent power.

It Is true indeed, that the manner, in which M. Des Carts describes, that the
Sun has disposed the Earth, is successive, which he acknowledges (as I have
already noted) to be not so suitable to God in producing things: But however, as
that which God does in conserving the World, is successive, and must be so,
that every thing may have a certain duration; it was proper for our Philosopher
to examine, whether the Principles which he laid down to give an account of the
duration of all Natural Beings, could have produced them by succession of time;
which he has done with an exactness, which seems to me incomparable. And so M.
Des Carts has therein done nothing, contrary to the Design of Moses.

Moses knew, that it is by the Sun that God conserveth the Earth and the Natural
Beings, those at least which are nearest unto us; but lest it should be
thought, that that Luminary was the cause of all, he would have us know, that
Light, which depends most of all from the Sun, was made before the Sun. And
this was necessary to give notice of to those who were to know these Wonders,
that God has wrought them all by his sole will; and if he conserveth them now
with a kind of mutual Dependency, yet they do not owe their Being nor their
Conservation to one another, but to God alone.

M. Des Carts on his part, being to explain that correspondence, which God
has put between the things of Nature, and being to give an account by the Sun
of all that is done in that part of the World which is most known to men, could
not better declare to us, how well the Sun is fitted and disposed by the First
Power to maintain the natural state of all we see, than by showing, that,
following this same disposition, the Sun could have in progress of time put our
World into the condition it is in, if it had not been more proper to form all
the Creatures in an Order altogether contrary to that, which was required by
the dependence that now is between them, and to produce each Being in a way,
which might show, that as the Author of the World had need of nothing to make
all things, so he needed no time to bring forth any of the things we admire.

Lastly, If you consider, that that Wisdom, which put the first Man into his
most perfect state from the first moment of his Production, did subject his
Conservation to the same Laws, from which he has made to depend the formation
of those that are born of him, and that, for the right knowledge of the Nature
of Man, it would be much more proper to examine the different Changes, which
happen in the Seed from the time of Conception, unto the Birth of those that
are generated, than to examine the miraculous formation of him, whom
Omnipotency finished in beginning him; you will doubtless find, that for the
well knowing, whether what is taught of the Laws, which conserve the order of
Nature, be true, there is no better way, than to consider, whether those Laws
could have produced the same.

I will not examine here, whether what is commonly believed of the stability of
the Earth, is better explicated by the Hypothesis of M. Des Carts, than by
those which have preceded him.

Neither shall I examine, whether it be more true than others; himself has
said (as I have already noted) that it may be false. And certainly among an
Infinity of ways, which God may use to make one and the same thing, it is
difficult to assure, which that is he has taken actually. But me thinks, that
Men have reason to be content, when they have found one of them, which can give
an account of all the Phenomenon, and is not contrary to what the H. Scripture
and the Church propose to us. M. Des Carts has been so shy to advance any
thing not conform to what they declare to us, that he has expressly submitted
to the one, what he seems to have wholly taken out of the other.

Thus whosoever shall read his Writings with the same Spirit, wherein he wrote
them, will not be in any danger of being deceived, and will be always ready to
acknowledge his Errors, as soon as those that are to direct his Belief shall
make him understand them. As for me, I am persuaded, that if we should condemn
what M. Des Carts has written touching the manner in which the several
Aspects of the Sun and the Earth are made, and that upon judging, it would not
be a sufficient stability for the Earth, to remain always at rest in the midst
of all the Celestial matter, which is found between the Body of the Moon and
it, we should come to determine, that the Circle which M. Des Carts makes all
that matter run through in 1. year about the Sun, is contrary to what we ought
to believe of the rest of the Earth; his greatest Followers, imitating his
submission, would submit themselves first of all. For in short, as they know by
evident Demonstrations, not only that it is God that is the Cause of the motion
in the least portion of the Matter, but also that it is his Omnipotent hand
which directs orders it throughout; it would be much more easy for them than
others, to conceieve, that the same Hand can direct the Motions of the Sun, and
of all the Celestial Matter about the Earth, so as it should not receive the
least shaking from it.

For the rest, I think I cannot repeat too often, that M. Des Carts has not
pretended, that his Hypothesis was true in all, and has even acknowledged,
that it was not so in certain things. But once more, I esteem, he had reason to
think, that it was allowable for Men to make suppositions, and that they were
all receivable, so they did satisfy all the Appearances, and were not contrary
to Religion.

You Will find in some of his Letters, that he took much pains, when he was about
to advance certain Propositions, to know, whether they had been condemned. It
is by the Motives of this discreet apprehension, that he dedicated his
Meditations to the Doctors of the Sorbon. And in short, it appears in his whole
Conduct, that he would not for all the knowledge and Honor of the World, run
the hazard of an Anathema. I must tell you also, that I think I know some of
the best Wits, which are much addicted to his Tenets; and I know not one of
them, that would not abandon them, if they had been condemned. I doubt, whether
the same would be done by those that follow Aristotle, if his Opinions should
be condemned anew: I say anew, because you know, that they have been so by the
Laws, and even by a Council: And yet, although nothing have been changed since
in the Canons about it, many think they may follow him notwithstanding. My
chief Design is not to blame Aristotle; I intend only to justify M. Des
Carts, and I think I have done it sufficiently, I am,

Reverend Father, Your Humble and Obedient Servant, Des FOVRNEILLIS.
At Paris, Nov. 6. 1669.
THE GENERAL SYSTEME OF THE CARTESIAN PHILOSOPHY:

By Francois Bail, Dr. of Physic at Tholose.

Englished out of French.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little
Britain, 1670.

A TABLE of the HEAD'S of this SYSTEME.
I. OF Metaphysics. II. Of Logic. III. Of Physiology, in general. IV. Of the
Productions in the Bowels of the Earth. V. Of Meteors. VI. Of Sensible
Qualities. VII. Of Plants. VIII. Of Animals. IX. Of Man. X. Of the Passions.
XI. Of Morals, and the Sovereign Good of Nature.
THE GENERAL SYSTEME OF THE CARTESIAN PHILOSOPHY.
Of METAPHYSICS.
HE that will have a Metaphysical certainty of the Existence of things, may
with reason, and even ought to call in question all which the Senses represent
to us, because they do ordinarily deceive us: But whilst he doubts of the
existence of the Objects of the Senses, he cannot possibly doubt that he or
that part of himself, we call Soul, which doubts and thinks, exists.

And because Thinking alone makes the Soul know its existence, she is
convinced, that she is a Substance, whose Essence or Nature is to Think, and
nothing else; and consequently that she thinks always. Whence it also follows,
that the Soul is more assured of her Existence, than of that of any other
thing, and that she knows her self better than any other thing, since she
cannot discover any propriety of it, but she must discover in her self a new
one, that is, the faculty or propriety to know it.

If the Soul makes reflection upon the Idaea's or Conceptions she has, she
will find one of them, which represents to her a Being infinitely perfect,
which is God. And observing that this Idaea contains by representation an
Infinity of Perfections, she will be constrained to acknowledge, that this
Idaea could not be in her, if this infinitely perfect Being, which she
represents, had not lodged it there, and consequently, that this Being, which
is God, exists.

And because this very same Idaea contains the external Existence of this
infinitely perfect Being, which she represents, the Soul is obliged, by a new
conviction to avow, that Existence belongs to the Essence of God, and by
consequence, that he exists necessarily.

Lastly, Forasmuch as the Soul knows, that there is not any necessity for her
to exist to day because she did exist yesterday, she is thence convinced, that
she needs to be conserved: and because Conservation is nothing but a continual
Production, she must needs confess, that God, to whom alone belongs this
Production, exists, and that it is in vain here to have recourse to a progress
in infinitum, because the matter in question is the present Conservation, the
first cause of which must exist.

The Idaea we have of God, whereby we apprehend him to be a Being soveraignly
perfect, although it be not complete, because it comprehends not explicitly all
that is intelligible of him, yet it is very clear, and very distinct, because
it clearly shows us his whole Nature; just as we say, that a man knows the
whole Nature of a Triangle, when he knows a Superficies bounded by three Lines;
although he do not know many of its Proprieties, which perhaps will never be
all known to the best Geometers.

Being most assured, that there is a God, and his Nature being such, that he
cannot deceive us, we are certain, that we shall never err in things we know
clearly and distinctly. Wherefore having clear and distinct Idaea's of the
Corporeal Nature, or of Substance in general, and also in particular of some
Bodies which present themselves daily to our mind by the Senses; and knowing
besides, that we are not the Causes of those Idaea's, since we often have them
against our will; we must necessarily conclude, that they are excited in us by
sensible Beings that are without us and actually exist in the World; and that
these Beings are really distinct from the Soul, because that her Nature is
altogether different from theirs; whence it follows that she is Immortal.

And because the Idea's, which we have of things corporeal, are often
different, we have cause to believe, that the Beings which produce them, are
different also. And because these Idaea's are sometimes renewed, after they
have ceased to be for some time, and that we have no reason to believe, that a
thing which is once, should be anihilated, we are obliged to hold that there
are Beings, which last even when they are not felt; and this is the only means
we have to assure our selves of the existence of the Number and Duration of
Sensible Beings.

We are not only assured of the Existence of Bodies, but also, that there is
one, which is more properly ours than all others, because it accompanies us
every where, and the Motions made therein excite some Thoughts in our Soul, and
the Thoughts of our Soul produce reciprocally some Motions in the Body. Which
convinces us of the Union there is between the Soul and the Body, which
consists not only in their mutual presence, but in a true mode, which in its
nature is such, that we cannot comprehend it by our Understanding, nor by our
Imagination; but we infer it only by the Experiments of the Senses.

Our Errors proceed from the ill use of our Freedom, in that our Will being in
some manner of a vaster extent than our Understanding, we do not contain that
within the Bounds of this, but we either judge of things we do not clearly
conceive, or we judge of them otherwise than we conceive them. For it belongs
to the Understanding alone, to conceive or to represent Objects simply, whereas
the Judgment and all other determination is an Act of the Will.

The chief perfection of Man consists in the good use of his Freedom, and in
never judging otherwise of things than he conceives them; which is so proper to
every one, that even those who have their Understanding less enlightened, may
altogether possess this perfection, forasmuch as it is always in their power to
suspend their Judgment, that is, to keep themselves from asserting or from
denying a thing, of which they have not clear and distinct Idaea's: which is to
be understood of those only that belong to the Instruction of the Mind; for
very often we ought not to look for evidence in things which concern the
Conduct of our Life, and less in those which pertain to Religion, because
knowing evidently, that God cannot deceive us, and that there are infinite
things in him, which are above the reach of our Spirit, his Authority ought to
produce in us a certainty, which surpasses that of the greatest Evidence.

We may distinguish three degrees in each sense. In the first, we are to
consider nothing but the Motion, which the external Objects do immediately
cause in the corporeal Organ; and it is this alone, we have common with Brutes.
The second contains all that results immediately in our Mind, because it is
united to the Corporeal Organ, moved and disposed by those Objects: Such are
the Sentiments of Heat, of Titillation, etc. And this is all we ought to refer
to Sense, if we will exactly distinguish it from the Understanding. The third
comprehends all the Judgments, which we have been accustomed to make from our
Infancy concerning things that are about us, upon the occasion of the
Impressions, that are made in the Organs of our Senses; and it is in these
Judgments, that our principal Errors do consist; so that when we say that the
certainty of our Understanding is greater than that of our Senses, we mean
nothing else, than that the judgments we form in a riper age, by reason of some
new Observations we have made, are more certain than those, we have formed from
our Infancy, without having reflected on them.

Of LOGIC.
IT cannot be said, that the Precepts which are commonly taught in Schools, are
to be altogether rejected or despised, since they are established upon very
good Reasons; nor that a great number of Questions, which are treated therein,
and which at first sight appear odd enough, are of no use. For although it be
not valuable, to know the truths which they explain, yet the difficulty there
is in examining them exercises the Mind, and renders it more able to penetrate
and to clear up the Difficulties which are met with in weighty matters;
provided, Men use this Caution, that by too much applying the Mind to those
things which subsist no otherwise than in an Idaea, they be not taken for real
Beings, and such as do exist without the Understanding.

Thus Geometricians make themselves capable, promptly to explicate the most
difficult Problemes in those matters which are of use in the life of Man, by
exercising themselves in the most knotty and the most abstract Questions of
Algebra, and by making Magical Squares and other things, which are of no use in
themselves.

But, to speak precisely, no man of good sense, that acts heartily, and labors
only to find out Truth, either alone or jointly with others, without any design
of deceiving them, and without any ground of fearing to be deceived himself by
any Sophism, needs any other Precepts of Logic, but these four ensuing.

The first is, never to receive any thing for true, which is not evidently
known to be such, that is, never to take in more into our Judgments, than what
presents it self so clearly and so distinctly, that we cannot at all doubt
thereof.

The second, to divide each of the difficulties, which we discuss into as many
small parts as is possible, and necessary for examining them the better.

The third, orderly to conduct our Thoughts, by beginning with the most simple
and the most easily knowable Objects, and so by degrees to ascend to the
knowledge of the more compounded.

The fourth, to make throughout such complete Enumerations, and such universal
Reviews, that we be assured, we omit nothing.

Of NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.
Of the Systeme of the World, and the Causes of the Disposition and Order of
the most considerable parts thereof.
THE extension into length, breadth and thickness, is that, we call Body or
First Matter; and whosoever shall attentively consider the Idaea he has of
this Matter, will be convinced, that a Vacuum is impossible; that Rarefaction
is made only by the acquisition of some new Matter, and Condensation by the
loss of some other; that the interior place of a Body is not different from
that Body; that the World is indefinite; that it is repugnant, there be more
Worlds than one, although there may be many Bodies that may be inhabited as our
Earth is; that the Matter of the Heavens and that of things Sublunary are of
the same kind; Lastly, that a Cubique Foot of Lead holds not more Matter than a
Cubique Foot of Cork.

Divisibility, Figure, and Impenetrability are the Essential Proprieties of
Matter. Motion, Light, Colors, etc. are its common Accidents. That which
Philophers call the Quantity of a Body, is not the extension of that Body
precisely, but its Extension as such, that is, forasmuch as it may be measured
by such and such a number of Feet, Fathoms, or the like measure.

Divisibility is the most fertile of all the proprieties of Matter; it is from
thence, that the several Magnitudes and Figures of her parts are derived; and
from the different disposition of these do proceed all the different Beings,
which make up the World. The Matter cannot be actually divided but by Local
Motion; and this, being taken formally, is nothing else but the successive
application of a Body, in all it has outwardly, to the several parts of the
Bodies which touch it immediately. Motion, which is called Efficient, consists
in the force or power of moving, which God from the beginning has put into the
parts of the Matter, and which he still conserveth therein in the same
quantity; for which cause he is called the First Mover. The parts of the
Matter, according as they differ in Magnitude and Figure, are called the Second
Causes of this same Motion, forasmuch as they communicate it mutually to one
another, or retain it, according as they have the power of it; and that is done
following these Rules.

1. All Body which is moved and meets with another quiescent Body in its way,
if it propels it, communicates to the same of its own motion in proportion to
its Bulk. 2. When the Motion of a Body is made in a curve Line, each of its
parts in particular tends always to continue its Motion in a straight Line, and
effectually continues it, if it can separate it self srom the rest. 3. All
Body which is moved, and communicates nothing of its Motion to another Body,
which it meets, must reflect, that is, loose its determination, without loosing
any thing of its Motion; whence it follows, THAT that Body must not rest, as
they speak, in the point of Reflection; and that the direct Motion and the
Motion reflected are not contrary, but only their Determinations are so. 4.
When an hard Body falls perpendicularly upon another hard Body which it moves
not, the Reflection must be made in the same Line, in which the Incidence is
made. And when an hard Body falls obliquely upon another hard Body, which it
moves not, the Reflection must be made at equal Angles. 5. When a Body passes
obliquely out of one Medium into another which it penetrateth more easily, it
must be diverted by approaching to the Perpendicular: On the contrary, it must
be farther removed from the same, when it penetrateth the second Medium more
difficultly.
There is no Motion differing from the Local, not even that which is called the
Motion of Generation; whence it follows, that it is useless to admit Substantial
Forms in Beings merely Material.

Being assured, that God has put into the Matter, of which the World is
composed, a certain quantity of Local Motion, and that he always conserveth
the same; we are also assured, that, although God had not produced the World
all at once, it would have come to pass by the Rules of Motion, we have laid
down, that in the indefinite Extension of the Matter there would have been
formed a great number of Vortexe, or Whirl-pools, which would have continued to
move of themselves without the succors of any Intelligence, and kept always
the same Situation in respect to one another.

It is likewise evident, that many parts of the Matter which composeth each
Vortex, of what Figure soever you suppose them, must, in hitting one against
the other, have broken their Angles, until they were made near round, and so
formed the Matter, which we call the Second Element.

The Matter, that is come away from about the parts made round, must
necessarily have acquired a Motion much swifter than that of the said round
ones. Whereunto if you add, that those parts being extremely small, their
smalness must make, that they can change their Figure every Moment, to adapt
themselves to the Figure of the places where they are to pass; you have that,
we call the First Element.

The third and last Element is nothing else but the Surplus of the parts of the
Matter, that are insensible, but yet grosser than those of the first and second
Element, and which having kept the entangling Figures they had in the
beginning, have been proper, more easily to be joined many together, and to
compose great Bodies, as the Planets, than to be made round.

It Is superfluous to admit other Elements than these three, because there are
no other Bodies in the whole Universe, that are simple, that is, the Forms of
which do not contain any Qualities, that are contrary.

From thence, that all the Matter of each Vortex turns round, and striveth to
recede from the Center, it must come to pass that the Matter of the second
Element does recede farther from it, than that of the first; which consequently
must take up the space which is at the Center of every Vortex: Whence striving
still to recede, it thrusts from all sides the second Element; and adds to its
force the impression, which is requisite to move the Optique Nerve, the Motion
of which passing afterward into the Brain, gives the Soul occasion to produce
the Sentiment of Light.

As to the Great Bodies that were formed of the third Element, and are called
Planets, they were to follow the Circular Motion of the first and second, and
to range themselves in each Vortex the nearer to, or the farther from the
Center, the more or less solidity they had; and because the more solid are
actually gone farther from it, they also take up, in making a Revolution, so
much the longer time, the greater their distance is from the Center.

But although the Planets do without resistance follow the course of the Matter
of the Heavens which carries them about Circularly, yet we must not therefore
say, that they move altogether as swift; whence it comes to pass that the
Matter of the Heavens not being able to continue its course in the degree which
its swiftness requires, by reason of the Encounter of these great Bodies, it
is forced to turn about them, and to make a particular Vortex, which makes
them wheel about their Center the same way wherein it turns it self.

And because all things continue in the state wherein they are, and by the same
means, they were put into it; it follows, that the Vortex or Systeme, wherein
we are, still maintains and keeps it self by the Rules above declared.

The Sun takes up the Center of our Vortex, as every Star possesses that of
some other. He turns continually about the Axe of the Ecliptic: And because he
is made up of the most subtle Matter, it may be said, that he is made up only
of that of the first Element; the Heavens, of the second; and the Earth with
the Planets, of that of the third: Whence it follows, that there can be no
composed Bodies, but on the surface of these last.

After the Sun follows Mercury, which is distant from the Sun 200 Diameters of
the Earth, and makes his Revolution in about 8 Months. The Earth is distant
above 600 such Diameters, and makes her conversion about the Sun in one year,
and about her own Center in 24 hours. Mars is remote from the Sun about 900
Diameters, and makes his Revolution in 12 years. Saturn is about 6000
Diameters off from the Sun, and finisheth his period in 30 years.

The Earth carries about in her Vortex the Moon, which makes a Revolution in
27 days and some hours. All the Matter, which extends it self from the Earth
unto the Moon, is called the Elementary Matter; and because this Matter
contains many parts, which are moved much swifter than others, it is consequent
that all are unequally determined to recede from the Center of the Motion; and
that those, which move swiftest, receding from it with more force than the
rest, are able to beat them downwards; which makes some appear lighter, and
others heavier.

It cannot be doubted, but that the Systeme, in which we are, is such as has
bin declared, since of so many, which Philosophers have fancied, there is none
but this, which agrees perfectly with that, delivered by Moses. Besides that
therein we find, in a very natural and very simple motion, not only the Causes
of the general Phenomenon, as are the Direction, Station and Retrogradation of
the Planets, of the Motion of the Spots of the Sun; of the Motion of the
Planets about their Center, of the Vicissitudes of Days and Nights; and of the
Diversity of the Seasons, but also of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, of all
the Proprieties observed in the Magnet, and in short, of all the Appearances in
the particular Bodies.

Of all the Systemes there is none, that deserves so much to be rejected, as
that of Ptolomy. For, besides that from the Aggregate of all the parts thereof,
there results a Whole that is monstrous, it is not able to give an account, why
Venus appears sometimes increasing, and sometimes full; why Mars, Jupiter and
Saturn, are always in the lower part of their Epicycle at the time when they
are retrograde; why the Moon respects us always from the same side; why Saturn
appears to us under different Shapes, now round, then oval; nor give a reason
of many Appearances more.

Of the PRODUCTIONS, made in the Bowels of the Earth.
THE Diversity of the Pores of the Earth is the Cause, that the Matter of the
first Element, passing through them, takes the Form of so many several Juices,
Salts, and Oils, of which are afterward formed all the Metals and Minerals,
which are found in the Bowels of the same.

The Magnet has the propriety to draw Iron, or Iron to draw the Magnet, only
from this Cause, that the Pores of them are so disposed, that the striate or
channell'd Matter, (as the Philosopher calls it) which comes from the Poles of
the Elementary Mass, and continues its way through the Pores, which are parallel
to the Axe of the Earth, pasing more easily through the pores of the Loadstone
and of Iron, than through those of all the other Bodies, drives away by this
means all the Air met with between both: And because this Air finds no place to
pass into (because all is full) but into that, which the one or the other of
these two Bodies quitteth, there is a necessity, that the Iron should be thrust
toward the Loadstone, or the Loadstone toward the Iron.

The Sea furnishes Water to all Fountains; those that are on the tops of
Mountains, are formed of Waters, that are reduced into Vapors by the heat,
which is found in the Entrails of the Earth.

The subterraneous Fires differ nothing at all from those that are kindled in
our Chimneys. They come from this, that where there are Mines of Sulphur or
Bitumen, there are raised Exhalations, which lighting upon subterraneous
Cavities, fasten to the Roofs, as Soot does to the inside of our Chimneys, and
there make a kind of Crust, which has a great disposition to take Fire; and
which takes flame actually, either by the attrition of its parts, which their
weight loosens from one another, or by the fall of some great Stone, which
tumbling down from the top of the Vault, sets it on fire, as the Pestle does
Gunpowder, when being very dry, it is too violently stamped.

Of METEORS.
Winds do principally come from nothing but the dilatation of Vapors. And
this dilatation depends from the presence of the Sun, or from the heat he has
left in the Earth, or in the Waters. When the Sun rises, we feel an Easterly
wind; when he sets, a Westerly; about Noon, a Northerly; and about Midnight,
a Southerly. Men seldom fail to find these four sorts of Wind every day upon
the great Seas; but they are not in the same order observed upon Land, by
reason of the Mountains, and of the variety of Climates, which hinder it.

Mists and Clouds are nothing else but the same Vapors, that made the Winds,
which having lost their agitation, stop in great number in certain places, and
thereby hinder the action of the Rays of Light.

Rain is nothing else, but the same Vapors, that made the Clouds, which are
converted into many little drops of Water by the action of the Air, which a
wind has carried upwards after it had been considerably heated near the Earth.

The parts of the Clouds, which meet only with cold Air to pass through, after
that they are loosned, do come unto us in the same state, and by this means do
make that Substance, we call Snow.

Hail is nothing else but some portions of a Cloud, which having been melted in
part, do meet with a cold Air, that congealeth them afresh.

Thunder depends from this, that in the Air there are diverse Stories of Clouds,
of which the higher fall upon the lower; the Air, driven out from between them,
being determined to produce a sound for the same reason, that another Air
produces one in Musical Organs.

Lightning proceeds ordinarily from this, that the Exhalations, which are
between two Clouds, whereof the one falls upon the other, are so pressed, that
there is some part of those Exhalations, which swims but in the sole Matter of
the first Element, and consequently takes the form of Fire.

A Thunderbolt is nothing else but a portion of these kindled Exhalations,
which moves down to the Earth, where it must needs strike high Bodies, rather
than lower ones; and produce so many different and wondrous Effects, as we see,
according to the Nature of the Exhalations, of which this Thunderbolt is
formed.

A Rainbow is nothing else but many drops of Rain, which receiving the Rays
of the Sun, break them many different ways, and which, after they have thus
broken them, return them to our Eyes with the modifications requisite to excite
in us all the sentiments of the Colors, we perceive in this Meteor.

Of SENSIBLE QUALITIES.
HArd Bodies are those, all whose parts are at rest one by another.

Liquid Bodies are such as have all their parts moving separately; whence it
comes, that these latter have the propriety of dissolving the former. And if a
Liquid is unable to dissolve an Hard Body, or if it have the force to dissolve
one rather than another, that proceeds from hence, that its parts are more or
less gross or agitated, and from this that the configuration of the Pores of
the Bodies, which are to be dissolved, is different.

All the diversities of Liquors consist in the different sizes and shapes of
their parts. Those that have irregular and entangling figures, do compose
Liquors that are called Fat; and those, whose figures are very well polished
and very smooth, make those, we call Lean. All Liquors are kept in motion by
the matter of the first and second Element, which slides into their Pores, and
moves always of it self, ever since it was first put in motion in the
beginning of the World.

The constrained Figure, given to the Pores of Hard Bodies when we bend them,
is the dispositive Cause of the force they have of redressing themselves, and
the Matter of the second Element, passing through these Pores, is the Efficient
Cause of the same. The Suppleness of hard Bodies consists in the texture and
connection of their parts. Their Fragility in that their parts do but
immediately touch, without being otherwise locked in with one another.

The Heat of hot Bodies consists in the agitation of all their insensible parts
about their own Center; whence it follows, that the greater this agitation is,
the stronger is the heat, and consequently there can be nothing hotter than a
Flame, there being nothing more agitated, as Experience confirms it. All the
diversities of Flames proceed from this, that the parts which compose them are
more or less gross, and consequently more or less capable to agitate the
Bodies, which are the Subject of their Action. The propriety of Heat is always
to dissipate, and never to congregate but by accident. Forasmuch as it consists
in Motion, it must rarifie certain Bodies, and condense others at the same
time, according as the parts of those Bodies are equal or unequal, and diversely
ranged and disposed.

Cold consists in whatsoever can make an hot Body lose that kind of Motion
wherein Heat consists; and because one Body cannot take from another Body the
Motion it has, without losing the same it self, it follows from thence, that
whatever Body refrigerates another, must grow hot it self.

Odors in scenting Objects are nothing else than the insensible parts of the
same, which being severed from one another swim up and down in the Air, and
being taken in together with the inspired Air, excite a Motion in the
extremities of the Olfactory Nerves; which they do so many several ways, as we
find several kinds of Smells.

Tastes in savoury Bodies consist only in the parts of the same, forasmuch as
they are subtle enough, and sufficiently agitated to penetrate the Pores of the
Tongue, and to move the Nerves serving for the Organ of Taste. All the diversity
of Tastes depends upon the size, shape, and motion of the Savoury Bodies.

Sound is double, the one from the Body resonant, which is called the primitive
cause of Sound; and the other from the Medium, which ordinarily is the Air. The
Sound of this latter consists only in a simple tremulous Motion of the Air,
which strikes our Ear, and exciteth the Organ of Hearing. The Sound from the
resonant Body consists in general in the force it has to excite that trembling
in the Air; but in particular, this force depends upon many Modes of Being,
which are very different, as appears in Bells and strings of Instruments. A
sharp sound comes from thence, that the trepidations of the Air do closely
follow one upon another. The grave, that those Motions of the Air are less
frequent. The Consonancies and Dissonancies depend upon this, that the
impressions, which several resonant Bodies make in the Air at the same time, do
meet, or not meet at all.

Light in luminous Bodies consists in an actual Motion of all their parts; and
in transparent Bodies, it depends upon this, that the Matter of the second
Element which is in their Pores, and which reaches to our Eyes, is thrust
forward by the parts of the luminous Body; whence it follows, 1. That it is not
so much a Motion, as an inclination to Motion. 2. That it passes in an instant
to all sorts of distances. 3. That it is nothing material in the Medium,
through which it passes, and that it does but mark, in what manner the
Luminous Body acts against that, which it enlightens. 4. That many Lights do
not confound one another. 5. That Light must refract and reflect, and, in
short, have all those proprieties, that are observed in it.

Colors in general are nothing else, but Light it self modified by the Surface
of the Bodies, we call colored. The White Color particularly consists in
this, that the Superficies of the white Body is asperated by innumerable small
Surfaces of an almost specular nature, which are so placed, that some looking
this way, and some that way, they yet reflect the Rays of Light falling on
them, not toward one another, but outward to our Eyes.

The Black consists in this, that the Surface of the Black Body is asperous
after such a manner, that it altogether deads the Rays of Light which fall upon
it, and keeps them from reflecting back again to the Spectators eyes. All other
Colors consist in this, that the Superficies of the Bodies thus colored are
in such a manner unequal, that the little Globes of the second Element, which
enter into the composition of the Rays, encountering them, do reflect, losing a
part of their direct Motion, and acquiring in stead of it somewhat of a
Circular Motion. And it is also in the several proportions, to be met with
between these two Motions, that all the several Colors do consist: And because
these Proportions may be changed a thousand different ways, it is no wonder we
see so many different Colors.

The Humors which compose our Eyes, are contrived by Nature to determine the
Rays, that come from one and the same point of the Object, to reunite in one
and the same point of the Retina; whence it is, that it may be said, that there
is formed a true Image of the Object on the bottom of the Eye. Yet this Image
does not consist in a resemblance to the Object, but only in this, that it is
capable to give to the Soul an occasion to perceive all the several Qualities
of the Objects, which it relates to; which it does by the simple Motions
wherein it consists.

Although one only Object imprints two Images at once in the two Eyes, yet we
do not therefore see double, because the Eyes are not the immediate Organs of
Sight, but the Brain alone, in which the two Impressions made in the Eyes do
reunite by the intervention of the Sympaticall strings of the Optic Nerves,
before the Soul perceives it.

Of PLANTS.
THE form of Plants consists in the particular texture of their Fibers, and in
the size, shape, and disposition of the parts which compose them: Whence do
result in Plants such Channels and Tubes, as are fit to receive those Juices,
which are proper for them, and no other; and the Matter of the first and second
Element is determined to make those Juices to run, to be variously agitated and
fermented, to concoct and prepare them, that they may serve, according to their
several parts, for Matter to nourish the Wood, Pith, and Bark, and to produce
Leaves, Flowers, and Fruits.

The Vicissitude of Day and Night, of Winds warm and cold, dry and moist,
contributeth much to cause the Juice, which from the Root of the Plant has
passed into the Bark, to be attenuated, to run with more force, to jelly and
fix, and to run afresh: As the vicissitude of the Seasons of the Year makes,
that this Juice runs more plenteously sometimes to the Body and Branches, and
sometimes toward the Roots.

When this Juice is too copious, it relaxeth the texture of the Fibers of
Plants, and suffocates their natural Heat, which depends upon the quantity of
the first Element, agitating that Juice, whose force cease, as soon as the
Interstices of the Fibers do considerably change their natural state.

If this Juice be in too small a quantity, the Plant is dried up little by
little; but if it be too copious, or if the shapes of its parts are very
different from those of the Pores of the Plant, it spoils and destroys the
woof of the fibers in the Bark of the Roots, or makes it degenerate into
another Plant, especially in its first rise, by changing this same texture, and
thereby making it fit to receive the Juice, by which that Plant is nourished,
into which it is made to degenerate. Whence it is, that certain Seeds are
infallibly corrupted, when they are cast into certain Earths; and that others
degenerate in them; as Wheat sometimes produces Tares, or Barley, or Oats.

It is not at all necessary, that there should be a Soul in Plants, to cause
the Juice, which serves them for nourishment, to be distributed into all the
parts to increase them, and to form Flowers and Fruits; no more than there
needs a Soul, to make Liquors rise to a considerable height in filtration, or
in a little Tube of Glass, against their own weight, and variously to fix
themselves according to the diversity of their parts, and of the Channels
through which they run. Plants have their life potentially, or in the first
act, as the Schools speak, by the sole contrivance and structure of their
parts; but they live actually when the Juice runs through their Pores, etc.

Of ANIMALS.
THE Form of Animals, as that of Plants, consists in the Magnitude, Figure and
Structure of the parts, of which they are composed; with this difference, that
the nature of Animals is of a more complicated and more excellent contrivance,
by reason of the manifold and more particular functions they have need of for
their conservation. For, they not being fixed to the Earth, as Plants are, to
draw thence their nourishment, it was requisite, that they should be able to
move to and fro, for finding their necessary food, and that they should be
composed so artificially, that the little particles, which exhale out of
Bodies, or the Light which results thence, striking certain Organs, might be
able to determine them to pursue after that, which should be convenient for
them, and to flee from, or to repel that, which should be noxious to them.

Forasmuch as most of the Motions, that are observed in Animals, are
accompanied in us with some knowledge, it has been believed, that there was in
Animals a principle of knowledge, which is called the Sensitive Soul, that
produced them; without considering, that the same Motions are very often made
in us without our Soul's contributing any thing to them, seeing she does not
think on them, and that at times they are made against her will. And those can
hardly disabuse themselves, who do not know, that God has put motion into
Matter in general, that he has contrived the Bodies of Animals after a certain
way, and that he has established certain Rules of Motion. But those, that have
this knowledge, observing that they see nothing but Motion in brute Animals,
they find the true cause of it in the general state of the world, and the
determination in the particular structure of the the Body of Brutes, and they
know by the Laws of the Mechanics the necessity there is, it should be done in
such a manner.

What concerns the Nutrition of Animals; the Food, they have swallowed, is
digested and changed into Chyle in the Stomach by a gentle fermentation, which
is wrought by the mixture made of the Aliments, and Spittle, and the acid
Juice, which is distill d into the Stomach, and of the remainder of the
precedent Food. There is also made in the small Intestines another
fermentation, by the means of the Gall, and the Pancreatique Juice, which
makes the Chyle more fluid, and causes the good to be more easily separable
from what is useless and gross.

The Chyle is changed into Blood in the Heart by a special fermentation, which
is there made by the means of a Fire that shines not, and of the fermented
Blood, which remains in the Heart; to which the mixture of the Lympha
contributeth not a little, which comes from above, and that of the Gall, which
comes from beneath, together with the Blood, which is conveyed by the Vena Cava
into the right Ventricle of the Heart. The Ears of the Heart, (two Muscles of
an admirable structure, which shows their use) do propel the Blood in the
Ventricles of the Heart, when this relaxeth or subsideth; and the Heart,
closing it self after the Blood is ratified and fermented, thrusts it toward
all the parts of the Body by the Arteries (which then make the motion called
the Pulse) for Nutrition. But what sticks not to the parts, is carried from the
Lungs to the Heart by the Venal Artery, and from the rest of the Body by the
Vena Cava.

The most spirituous part of the Blood is carried to the Brain, where the
Spirits are separated from it to serve for the functions, called Animal; whence
flowing into the Nerves that pass to the Organs of Sense, and filling them,
they keep their fibers tense whilst the Animal is awake. Hence it is, that the
impressions of the Objects can be transmitted into the Brain, and there change
the disposition of the extremities of the Nerves, that are distributed in
certain Muscles, and determine the Spirits to flow there, to make them swell,
and to move the Members, to which these Muscles are fixed.

And because there may be an infinite variety in the Impressions, made by the
Objects upon the Senses, there may also be an innumerable variety in the
determinations of the Spirits to flow into the Muscles, and by consequence an
infinite variety in the Motions of Animals; and that the more, because there is
a greater variety of parts, and more contrivance and Art in the structure.

During Sleep, the Nerves of the Organs of the Senses not being full, nor their
fibers tense, the impressions of the Objects, unless they be very violent, are
not transmitted to the Brain, to determine there any Motion.

There are five outward Senses, and they all receive the impression of the
Objects by mediate or immediate contact. The grossest Sense is called the
Touch, to which all the Membranous and Nervous parts serve for Organ.

The Taste has it Seat in that woof of Nervous Filaments which is spread over
the Tongue and Palate; but chiefly upon the end of the Tongue.

The Smell has its Residence in that fine Membrane which is extended in the
cavity of the Nostrils.

The Hearing has for its Organ small Nerves, which end in the extremities of
that Membrane, we call the Tympanum or Drum.

The Sight has for its Organ the Retina, more particularly, the other parts of
the Eye making the Rays of Light or Colors which come from diverse points of
the Objects, to affect diverse points of the Retina.

There are three inward particular Senses; that of Thirst, which has its Seat
in the Throat; that of Hunger, in the Stomach; that of the Passions, in the
Heart.

The Sense, called the Common Sense, has its Seat in the Brain; and because
the Animal Motion, and the Functions of all the Senses depend upon the Spirits
that come from the Blood, it is therefore that the Scripture says, that the
Soul of the Beasts is in the Blood.

Of MAN.
MAn is made up not only of a Body, which, as that of Animals, has a peculiar
structure of Organs, wherein consists, in some sense, the Form of this Body;
but also of a Soul, which is the true and essential Form of Man, or of the
Humane Body as such, after the manner that Aristotle takes this Word Form in
his First Book of Generation, Chap. 10.

By reason of the Union, which is between the Soul and the Body, the
Impressions, which the Objects make upon the Senses, are cause that there do
result in the Soul certain Sensations. And not only the Soul perceives many
Motions that are made in the Body, but she also is able to produce or to hinder
them. It Is true that this is only done by variously determining the Motion of
the Animal Spirits by her Thoughts.

Man has as many Exterior and Interior Senses as Animals, but with this
difference, that in these, all the Action of the Senses consists in the Motion
of the Corporeal Organ, whereas in Man the motion of the Organ is accompanied
with a Thought or Perception of the Soul, which is called the Sentiment of
Sound, of Light, of Color, etc.

Of the PASSIONS.
MAn has also his Passions, which are perceptions of the Sentiments or
Commotions of the Soul, which are referred particularly to her, and which are
caused, entertained, and fortified by some Motion of the Spirits.

Admiration is a sudden surprisal of the Soul, which makes that she is
carried, with attention to consider the Objects, that seem rare and
extraordinary to her.

Love is a perception or motion of the Soul, caused by the motion of the
Spirits, inciting her to join her self by the Will to the Objects, which appear
agreeable to her.

Hatred is a motion caused by the Spirits, which inciteth the Soul to a
separation from the Objects, which present themselves as disagreeable or
hurtful to her.

Desire is an agitation of the Soul caused by the Spirits, which disposes her
to will future things which she represents to her self as suitable and
beneficial.

Joy is an agreeable commotion of the Soul, caused by the enjoyment she finds
in a good, which the Impressions of the Brain represent to her as hers.

Sadness is an unpleasing Languor, caused by the Incommodities which the Soul
receives of the Evil of Defect, which the Impressions of the Brain represent
to her as concerning her self.

These six Passions are primitive, and all the Genus's, whose Species all the
others are.

According to the Institution of Nature, all the Passions refer to the Body,
and are not given to the Soul, but forasmuch as she is joined to (...). So that
their natural use consists only in this, that they fortisie and make lasting in
the Soul those Thoughts, which it is good she should conserve, and by which she
is incited to consent and to contribute to the Actions that may serve to keep
the Body, or to render it in some manner more perfect: As also all the Evil,
which they can occasion, consists in that they strengthen and entertain
thoughts more than needs; or else, that they keep others, which it is not good
to indulge to.

Of MORALITY.
Of the Sovereign Natural Good.
IF we consider Goodness with relation to our selves, the Sovereign Good of the
Soul of every one in particular, consists in a firm and constant will to do
well, and in the contentment produced thereby. And it is herein, that all
Virtues do consist.

Justice, for example, is nothing but a constant Will to give to every one what
we judge to belong to him.

Boldness, nothing but a constant Will to execute things dangerous, when we
believe them to be the best.

Humility, nothing but a constant Will, never to prefer ourselves before
others, and to think, that others have their Free Will as well as we, and can
use it as well as we, etc. Now it is this alone, which deserves Praise and
Honor; it is from hence alone, that the greatest and most solid Contentment of
Life results, and consequently wherein the Sovereign Good consists.

There are two sorts of Indifference, which appertain to humane Liberty: One is
from the Object's part, and this is not Essential; on the contrary we are never
more free, than when we are less indifferent. The other consists in the real
and positive faculty, we have to determine our selves to the one or the other of
two Contraries; and this is always found in the Will, and agrees perfectly
well with all the impressions, that are caused in her from God's part, although
we do not conceive, how this agreement is made.

The Angels, and the Saints in Heaven, do love God freely; but their Liberty
consists not, as Ours does, in a positive faculty to determine themselves to the
one or the other of two Contraries; but only in this, that seeing God
Soveraignly Good, they love him in such a manner, that they feel not any
exterior force, constraining them thereto.

FINIS.

