A Copy of the COVENANT, Both as it was first formed at EDENBVRGH By the
General Assembly and Convention of Estates of SCOTLAND, With the concurrence
and advice of the Commissioners sent thitherout of ENGLAND, And as it was after
reformed by the LORDS and COMMONS of PARLIAMENT at WESTMINSTER.

Together with His Majesty's Proclamation prohibiting the taking of it.

Printed, Anno 1644.

A Solemn League and Covenant for Reformation and Defense of Religion, the
Honor and happiness of the King, and the Peace and Safety of the three
Kingdoms of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND.
As it was agreed upon by the Lords and Commons of Parliament at Westminister,
September, 1643.
[The several additions to the Scottish form are here printed in a different
letter.]

[The omissions and other alterations are noted in the margent.]

We Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of
the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts Scot. of.
in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by the Providence of God
living under one King, Sc. and of one true Protestant reformed Religion.
and being of one Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God,
[and the advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,] the
Honor and happiness of the King's Majesty and His Posterity, and the true
public Liberty, Safety, and Peace of the Kingdoms, [wherein every ones
private condition is included,] and calling to mind the treacherous and bloody
Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts and Practices of the Enemies of God, against the
true Religion and Professors thereof in all places, especially Sc. in this
Island.
in these three Kingdoms, ever since the Reformation of Religion; and how much
their rage, power and presumption are of late, and at this time increased and
exercised; whereof the deplorable State of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland,
the distressed estate of the Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous
estate of the Church [and Kingdome] of Scotland, are present and public
testimonies; We have now at last, (after other means of Supplication,
Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for the preservation of our selves
and our Religion from utter ruin and destruction, according to the commendable
practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and the Example of God's people in
other Nations, after mature deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into
a mutual solemn League and Covenant, wherein We [all] subscribe, and [each
one of us for himselfe] with our hands lifted up to the most High God, do
swear,

I. That We shall Sc. all and each of us, solemnly.
sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of God, endeavor, in our
several places and callings, the preservation of the Sc. true Protestant
Reformed.
Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline,
and Government Sc. according to the Word of God.
[against our common Enemies,] the Reformation of Religion in the [ Sc. Church.
Kingdomes] of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, Sc. according to the same holy Word.
according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed Churches:
and Sc. as may
shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in Sc. both Nations
the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion,
Confession of Faith, Form of Church Government, directory for Worship and
Catechizing; That We and our Posterity after us may, as Brethren, live in Faith
and Love, [and the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.]

II. That We shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, [that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deanes, Deanes and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy] Superstition, Heresy, [Schisme] Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest We
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III. We shall, with the same sincerity, reality, and constancy, in our
several Vocations, endeavor, with our estates and lives, [mutually] to
preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of
the Kingdoms Sc. respectively.
, and to preserve and defend the King's Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms;
that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our loyalty, and that
We have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just Power and
Greatness.

IV. We shall also with all faithfulness, endeavor the discovery of all such
as have been or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, Sc. to
hinder.
by hindering the Reformation of Religion, Sc. or to divide.
dividing the King from his People, or one of the Kingdoms from another, [or
making any Faction, or Parties amongst the People, contrary to this League and
Covenant] that they may be brought to public trial, and receive condign
punishment, as the degree of their offenses shall require Sc. and.
or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms respectively, or
others having power from them [for that effect] shall judge convenient.

V. Sc. That we shall, all and each of us, according to our places and
interest, inviolably observe the Articles of the late Treaty of Peace betwixt
the two Nations; and shall, by all good means, endeavor that Justice be done
without partiality, in manner aforesaid, upon the Opposers of it; to the end
that this blessed Peace, may be perpetual to all posterity.
And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied
in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of God granted
unto us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both Parliaments, We
shall each one of us, according to our place and interest endeavor that they
may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterity; And that
justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in manner expressed in
the precedent Article.

VI. We shall also, Sc. to the utmost of our abilities.
according to our Places and Callings, in this common cause of Religion,
Liberties, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that enter
into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof, and
shall not suffer our selves, directly or indirectly, by whatsoever combination,
persuasion, or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this blessed Union and
Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to give our
selves to a detestable Indifferency or Neutrality in this cause, [which so much
concerns the glory] of God, [the] good of the Kingdoms, and Honor of the
King; but shall all the days of our lives zealously and constantly continue
therein, against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power,
against all lets and impediments whatsoever: and what We are not able Sc.
presently.
our selves, to suppress or overcome, We shall reveal and make known, that it
may be timely prevented or removed. All which We shall do as in the sight of
God.

And because Sc. both Nations.
these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against God, and
his Son Jesus Christ, as is [too] manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof, We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of
Sc. both Nations.
these Kingdoms, especially, that We have not, as We ought, valued the
inestimable benefit of the Gospel, that We have not labored for the purity and
power thereof, and that We have not endeavored to receive Christ in our
hearts, [nor to walk worthy of Him in our lives,] which are the causes of
other [Sinnes and] transgressions so much abounding amongst us; and our true
and unfeigned purpose, desire, and endeavor, for our selves, and all others
under our power and charge, both in public and in private, in all duties We
owe to God and man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in
the example of a real Reformation; that the Lord may turn away his wrath and
heavy indignation, and establish Sc. both Nations.
these Churches and Kingdoms in Truth and Peace. And this Covenant We make in
the Presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all hearts, with a true intention
to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great Day, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed: most humbly beseeching the Lord to strengthen us
by his holy Spirit to this end, and to bless our desires and proceedings with
such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his People, and
encouragement to other Christian Churches, groaning under, or in danger of the
yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same, or like Association and
Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the Peace and Traquillity of Christian Sc. States
Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

BY THE KING.
His Majesty's Proclamation forbidding the tendering or taking of a late
Covenant, called, A solemn League and Covenant for Reformation, etc.
WHereas there is a Printed Paper, entitled, A solemn League and Covenant for
Reformation, and Defense of Religion, the Honor and Happiness of the King,
and the Peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, pretended to be Ordered by the Commons in Parliament on the twenty
first day of September last, to be Printed and Published; Which Covenant though
it seems to make specious expressions of Piety and Religion, is in Truth
nothing else but a Traitorous and Seditious Combination against Us, and against
the establshed Religion and Laws of this Kingdom, in pursuance of a
Traitorous Design, and endeavor to bring in Foreign Force to invade this
Kingdom; We do therefore straightly charge and command all our loving
Subjects, of what degree or quality soever, upon their Allegiance, that they
presume not to take the said Seditious and Traitorous Covenant. And We do
likewise hereby forbid and inhibit all Our Subjects to impose, administer, or
tender the said Covenant, as they and every of them will answer the contrary at
their utmost and extremest Perils.

Given at our Court at Oxford, this ninth day of October, in the Nineteenth
Year of our Reign.
God save the King.

