ROME In Her FRUITS. Being a Sermon Preached on the fifth of November, 1662.

By RICHARD CARPENTER, Near to the Standard in Cheapside. In the which Sermon
the Author sets up his Standard in opposition to the Fruits and practices of
Rome: And likewise answers in brief a late Pamphlet, entitled, Reasons why
Roman Catholics should not be persecuted.

Job 5. 12. He disappointeth the Devices of the Crafty, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise.

Verse 13, He takes the wise in their own Craftiness, and the Counsel of the
frowa^d is carried headlong.

S. Greg. Naz. in Jambicis: (...): There is a sort of Men that speak Gold, but
their Works and Fruits are not like-metal'd with their words.

Greg. Magnus, ep. 101. Aethiops in balneum niger intrat, niger egreditur: The
Abyssine or Ethiopian goes into the Ba^h black, and black returns out of it.
Petrus Chrysologus, Sermon. 42. Misericordiam qui non praestat alteri, tollit
sibi: He that performs not a work of Mercy to another, takes away God's mercy
from himself. LONDON, Printed by T. Ratcliffe for H. R. at the sign of the
Three-Pigeons in St. Pauls-Church-Yard. 1663.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aed. Sabaud. Mart. 19. 1662. Geo. Stradling, S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat.
D. Gilb. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domestic.

To the Honorable House of Commons assembled in Parliament.
MAY it please you who are legally placed in this high Orb of Honor, and have
most happily driven away and scattered (...) according to Aquila, agreeably to
the Septuagint (...) compliably with Philo the Jew, the Fly-swarms of Sects and
Heresies, which Exodus 8. 21
offended, diverted, and exasperated all sincerely and modestly walking in
straight-pa^hs, to give leave, because even in natural Things, the higher the
Sun mounts, the less shadows it casts; and in Artificials, the Pyramid
ascending higher and higher, is lesser still and lesser, that I poor man amidst
the Acclamations of all Lips. lib. 2. manuductionis ad Philosophiam Stoicam.
Psalm 133. 1
(though Lipsius is pleased to teach, Vir perfect bonus non est nisi in
Descriptione, There is no man perfectly good, otherwise than in Description)
good Protest^nts, may give God praise for your most happy success, and
joyfully sing with the Royal Prophet; Behold, how good and how pleasant it is,
for Brethren to dwell together in Unity! For pleasant, St. Hierom allow^
decorum, comely, and the Hebrew word is nahhim, fair; Unity and order being
fair and comely. The Sept. for in Unity, place (...), into one and the same
Thing, signifying such as attend to the same divine Worship; these being one
Body and one Soul, than which there cannot be a greater and more near
conjunction. This Compliance with his Majesty's and your Commands will make of
every pious occurrence, in Synesi^s his Language, Sy^es. lib. de providentia.
(...), matter of Virtue. In Arabi^ the Happy, all plants and Herbs are end^wed
with a sweet odor, exp^red from the felicity of the Soil; and all regulated
Works are further blanch't and candied by our obedience to our Superiou^s,
wherein we give again, and resemble the passive Obediential power in creatu^es
with respect unto God. To say a good Christian; and the same disobedien^, is
(...), a most incongruous and false manner of speaking. It is my part and
Office to proclaim aloud, (and Seneca wisely says of Fools, Se^c. in ep. ad D.
Paulum.
Deus quandoque exore fatuorum effatur, The most wise God speaks sometimes by
the mouths of Fools.) that this your Ecclesiastical Uniformity will indeed
render you formidable yea terrible to the Church of Rome. And therefore our
sulphurous and jealous-headed people here, have not the least glimpse of cause
to fear Popery, Things running upon this by as: David paints them, There were
they in great fear, Psalm 53. 5
where no fear was; no cause of fear: The Vulgar Latin asserts, Illic
trepidaverunt timore, There they moved mo^u Trepidationis, with the motion of
trembling: In the plaining of which Verse, Hesychius calls such (...) persons
fearing vain noyses and Specter: Aristotle is Hesych. in Sept.
an offerer here, averring, some to be so fearfully fearful, that they fear
(...), the poor slies that fly buzzing Aris^ot. in Polit. lib 7. cap. 1. Soph.
in Electra.
about them: And Sophocles applies himself, (...), All things make a great
noise in the ears of a timotous man. Go then, most noble Souls, and aeternitati
pingite, bind the old Protestan^ to you with an eternity of obligation. For the
Papist, nobly and courageously persist to set him more and more aside with the
rest or rather, as he is most dangerous, more than all the rest. Where the Pope
obtains the least freedom, he is always crowding for all: And I am sure and
secure, that generally Monks, Jesuits, and Priests were his Majesty's perverse
Enemies, until they saw the Day down toward him: I most heartily forgive those
Iliads of evils (Wrongs and Lies) wherewith they most horribly afflicted me,
even when they were most gently treated here! Sunt Homicidae interfect res
f^atrum, and sunt Homicidae de ratractores Clemens Roman. ep. 1. ad S. Jacob.
eo^um, There are Homicides who murder their Brethren, and there are homicides
who detract from them: But I shall defend my Country, from their secret
encroachings, and Insolences; which I best know. The Jesu^ts have thundered in
their Serm^ns against you, yea, brought you upon the Stage after a most
disgraceful and ridiculous manner, in St. Omers, France, Spain, Italy. Indulge
to us, we most humbly beseech you, freedom in as great a latitude for the
surpessing of Popish Hypocrisy, as their Pope* according to his Politics,
gives it to them for the debasing of Christian Honesty. Heroic Hearts, In
God's Name proceed, and prosper.

Your most obliged l'en-man, RICHARD CARPENTER.

ROME In Her Fruits.
Matthew. 7. 16. Ye shall know them by their Fruits.
WHo can unriddle it? Why are we now met? What has congealed us this day into
a Congregation? But why do I now start this unelemented Question? Do not I well
know this to be a Redletter Day, even the anniversary Day designed for a solemn
Day of Thanksgiving, in relation to our wonderful Deliverance from the
Gunpowder-Treason? Why now am I sent back to School again. The
Gunpowder-Treason is but a word, and such a single Cypher-word as signifies
nothing. There was never any such Thing as the Gunpowder-Treason, in Act or
Intendment: so the learned and pragmatical Papists have said every where, long
ago at Rome, at Paris lately, now at London. Yet I humbly confess, I am not so
learned to think so. O Rome, shall yonder old and fatal Assertion gain ground
upon thee forever; Rome cannot stand unless under-shouldered with lies? I, but
in the mean time, howsoever you demean your self in Earth-bounded and Sublunary
matters; do not, I pray your Holiness, intrude upon Heaven, do not defile
upwards. God's holy Truth, authorized by the Spirit of Truth, calls not for
assistance to the Devil's pedling-School of Lying. Now, O thou imperious Wh^re,
blush a little if thou can. Here let my Soul dilate her self: Shall I be
damned to an Eternity of Torments by a most good and most just God, because I
cannot believe eternal, invincible, and unmatchable Liars, most maliciously and
knowingly sinning against the same God as he is the God of Truth? Beloved
Countrymen, let me prophecy in a word or two: After a few years I mean, when
our old Men here are silenced, and laid to sleep in the Grave, the Truth of the
Gunpowder-Treason, which as yet many thousands now living amongst us know from
the Collections and Evidence of Sense, shall be declared against ex sacra
Cathedra, out of the sacred Chair at Rome, and holily si^ned Annulo Piscatoris,
with that holy Signet of his Holiness. Tell me now, Romanists, How shall we
afterward believe you in other things? We are instructed from your Civilians,
Mendax semel, mendax sempet praesumitur. He that does gloriose mentiri, he that
is once a notorious, magnificent, and glorious Liar, is presumed to be a Liar
always. This will make us tremble at the Canonization of Saints, who are not
Canonized until the Age be dead wherein they lived. Melchior Canus, thou
learned Rabbin amongst the Papists, come forth, stand in the midst of this
Congregation, and speak to the matter: Dolenter dico potius Melch. Can. in
Locis Theol. lib. 11. c. 6.
quam Contumeliose, multo a Laertia, and Ethnicis Historicis, Philosophorum
vitas severius scriptas, quam a Christianis Vitas Sanctorum: Gr^evingly I speak
it rather than contumeliously, The lives of the old Philosophers are more
strictly and severely written by Laertius, and other heathenish Historians,
than the lives of our Saints by Christians. Romanists, There we have you.
Quoniam incidit in foveam, obruatur: Because he is fallen into a ditch of his
own digging, throw dirt upon him, bury im.

Now the Curtain is drawn, and we plainly see who they are that forsake, in the
pursuit of their evil Ends by indirect Means, Viam Regiam, the Princely way of
Psalm 40. 4.
Truth, and turn aside to lies. When water leaves its Channel, and turns aside
there to abide, it quickly stinks. The Vulgar Latin gives in the place of lies,
insanias God. Vulg.
falsas, false madnesses: The Septuagint led the way, who render it (...),
lying madnesses. St. Hierome Sept.
diggs to the Root in the Hebrew, and calls it Pompam Mendacij, the Pontifical
Pomp, or profession of a Lie: a S. Hier.
Church-Lye going in holy State.

Give me leave to draw forth before you, as upon a Table, a Triangle of
Questions, which all cast an eye upon holy Scripture. First: who is Pater
Mendaciorum, the Father of Lies, so declared by the true God, and the same the
God of Truth? Ye all know him, and it would be superfluous to name him. Now
learn to know his Children: Ye shall truly know them by their Lies. Secondly:
who shall be excluded from the communion of Saints in Heaven, as the last and
worst of all the Rout? The beloved Disciple as truly answers, whosoover loves
and makes a lie: customarily Revel. 22. 25
makes it, because he loves it. Thirdly, Why were not Pictures and Images
entered of old into the Jewish Commonwealth? Philo Jud. lib. de Gigant.
Philo the Jew hands the Reason to us: Picturam atque Statuariam a sua Repub.
rejecit Moses, quod veritatem mendaciis vitient, illudentes per oculos
animabus facilibus: The Arts of Picture and Statuary, Moses, inspired by God,
rejected from his Commonwealth, because they vitiate, that is, deflowr Truth
with lies, deluding easy Souls by the eyes. Moses, God's Vicegerent, was
greatly afraid even of dumb lies, that have mouths and speak not; of lies in
their very first ineaments of color, and Figure.

Concerning the seventy Cells built in observance to the commands of Pt^loncy,
whereas St. Justine gives to every Elder a Cell, St. Epiphanius one to every
two, St. Hierom, to promote his Latin Edition, joines them altogether, and
professes, Nescio quis primus Author septuaginta S. Hierom. Praefat. in
Pentateuchum.
Cellulas Alexandriae mendacio suo extruxerit: I know not who as the first
Author built seventy Cells at Alexandria with a Lie. But I know the persons
that have built seventy times-seven Babel-Towers in the Minds of Men with their
Lies. I most humbly call God to witness: I have been these forty years
acquainted with Popish-Priests, of the which notwithstanding I never knew one
(no verily not a little one) whom either in his words or practices I could
reasonably difference from a theatrical Mountebank, or a nimble-finger'd Jugler.

Hitherto we have preambled. Now we state our Text: Ye shall know them by their
fruits. It seems to be resisted (ex obliquo, obliquely) by the first words of
the Chapter: Judge not, that ye be not judged. Howsoever, Know we may, when
Things are evidently demonstrated by their effects or Fruits. Scientia, says
Aristotle, est ejus, cujus est Demonstratio: we know a Thing when it is evident
to us by Demonstration. Know we may: we may not judge. Knowledge draws life
from evidence, D. Tho. p 1. q. 1. art. 6. ad 3.
Aquinas speaks, cum judicium ad sapientiam pertineat, Whenas Judgment
pertains to Wisdom. Does it so? Then as we know, we may judge also, if we
judge according to the Dictates of Wisdom. To Christ the Son of God, to whom
Wisdom is signally attributed, Judgment is likewise assigned. There are
therefore two sorts of Judgment, Judicium rectum, Judicium temerarium, Right
(otherwise called wise) Judgment, and rash Judgment. Judge not, that is, not
rashly. Rash Judgment is, cum Judicium fit ex incertis, and incognitis, when
judgment is given concerning Things uncertain, and unknown. Right Judgment
is, cum Judicium fit ex notis, and evidentibus, when judgment is given
concerning Things known, and evident. Knowledge and Right judgment will stand
and stable together. Yea, the one necessarily supposes the other, and this
other infers that one again. Right judgment supposes Knowledge, and, Knowledge
infers Right Judgment. (...), Searcher and Knower of the Heart is one of God's
proper Titles: He only knows the Heart in the Heart: but we know and judge
other men's Hearts when out of the abundance of the Heart the mouth speak^th.
Excellently Euaristus writing to the Evar. ep. 2: ad Epist. Aegypti.
Bishops of Egypt, and alleged by Gratianus: Deus omnipotens, ut nos a
praecipitatae sententiae prolatione compe^ceret, cum omnia nuda and aperta sint
oculis ejus, mala Sodomae noluit audica judicare, priusquam manifest
agnosceret quae dicebantur: The omnipotent Ged that he might retract us from
the precipice of rash Judgment, although all things are naked and open to his
eyes, yet would not judge the sins of Sodom upon hearsay: he would manifestly
see the truth of the matter in the Theater of practice, and express a
conclusion from the secret Inwards of Experience. Not that God acquires
Knowledge expe^imentally, or otherwise; Experience being a knowledge gathered
from par^iculars: but, for our learning. Unde ipse ait, says my Author,
Descendam, and C. The Lord said, because the Cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was
great, ver. 21. I will go down now and see whether they have done altogether
acco^ding to the cry of it, which is come unto Genesis 18. 20*
me, and of not, I will know. God seems not to know what he knows, that we may
know what we know not: Knowing and seeing, he went down to see and know; that
we may proceed from Evidence to Judgment

Our Knowledge and Judgment are grounded in this particular (and the like may
be said hereafter concerning the Judgment and Knowledge of our Children, and
of their children, and their childrens children to the end of the World) upon
such Evidence as holy Scripture is abundantly satisfied with, yea such as,
according to the level of Right Reason proportioned to the Word of God, falls
open (...), into a Quad^ate, the Figure of New Jerusalem, in quadro sita,
fou^-squar'd. Which Knowledge and Judgment if we or our children to the last
man, should in a black day wave or lay aside, God our most gracious Father,
Benefactor, and true Protector, would be most unworthily defrauded of his
Worship and Glory, most due to him, as performable by public Acknowledgement
Psalm 44. 1
and Thanksgiving. We have heard with our ears, O God, our Fathers have told
us, what work thou did in their days, in the times of old, ver. 2. How thou
did drive out the Heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them, how thou did
afflict the people, and cast them out. Let us continue the Song, that God may
continue his Deliverances: How thou did deliver our most wise and most
learned James King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, and all his
Nobles, and People, from the most horrible and most derestable Usurpation of
the Papists attempted by a most hellish Powder Plot, and how the Traitors were
caught by the very covert mention of their own Snare, and how thou did
afflict them with death, and cast them out; yea how thou did continue the
Government upon his Shoulder: which we most heartily and most humbly desire
thee, notwithstanding all Popish and Popish-fashion'd Machinations, to continue
likewise upon his posterity for ever. Amen.

Know then we may, yea by fruits when they are evident (as we see they are in
our case), and from Knowledge we may pass to Judgment. Now let us enquire
further concerning these fruits: lest the Papists should imitate that impure
person, who called his Whores by the name of the Muses, or be like the popish
Painter, who preferred the picture of his Iewd Mistress, under the name of the
blessed Virgin, that it might be worshipped.

First: These fruits have no correspondence or analogy with Christ, the
Bridegroom of the Church, and of Souls, as he is described in his person, by
his Eyes; in his ordinary practice, by his pasture or feeding; in his Office of
Mediatorship, by his Name; in his extraordinary fruits, by his Obedience unto
death; His eyes Cant. 5. 12
are as the eyes of Doves by the Rivers of waters. The Dove abiding with
pleasure by the waters, discovers the Birds of prey in the Air by their shadows
in the waters, and then presently wings it in the Air for her security (there is
all she does); shadowing innocent Christians, that in the Sallies of
persecution should fly Cant. 6. 3
from City to City. He seedeth among the lillies. The lillies are not
blood-colour'd, but white, pure, and lifted up by a long stalk from the
pollutions of the Ground or Earth which opened her mouth to receive the blood
of Cain's brother Abel. His Names were Jesus, the Savior, and the Lamb of God;
in opposition to the Destroyer and his Office: Our Lambs are innocent, but the
Lamb of God was innocent, as God, superlatively innocent. As to the
transcendent fruits of his Obedience: Phil. 2. 8
he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross. St. Gregory speaks appliably: S. Greg. lib. 35. Moralium in Job, cap.
12.
Obedientia victimis praeponitur; quia per victimas aliena caro, per
obedientiam vero voluntas propria mactatur: Obedience is preferred before
Sacrifice; because in Sacrifice other Things, in obedience our own wills and
selves are kill^d; that is, mortified, and offered to God. He humbled himself,
his whole self, and became obedient unto death. Death, says Franzius, like the
Lion, tears all. Franz. in Leone.


Secondly, These bloody fruits have no consanguinity with the Spouse of Christ,
which is the Church, and the Righteous Soul. The Church may be considered in
her Name, deciphering her gracious Nature; in her different States, calm, and
troubled; and in her perpetual practice. Open to me, says Christ to his
Church, my Cant. 5. 2
sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled. She is Christ's Sister, like him in
Nature, and in deportment; his Love, his beloved Sister, because like him, and
likeness causes liking; his Dove, because harmless as the Dove, and like him
in his dear Innocence; his Undefiled, because his Dove, the Dove not being
defiled with blood. The Council of Aix declared: Meminisse oportet, Council.
Aquisgranense, Can. 134.
quia Columba est in divinis Scripturis Ecclesia appellata, quae non unguibus
lacerat, sed alis pie percutit: It behooves us all to remember, that the Church
is styled in holy Scripture, an innocent Dove for her Gentleness, which tears
not with Talents, but piously strikes with her wings. In Statu Pacato; in her
State of peace and prosperity, the Church is, as St. Cyprian pencils her, in
operibus S. Cyp. ep. 4.
Fratrum Candida, white in the works of the Brethren: these are the lilies
among which, Christ feeds: In Statu perturbato, in her state of Adversity and
persecution, She is, as the same Father adds in the same place, in Martyrum
cruore purpurea, purple in the blood of her Martyrs: these are her Rod-Roses,
and her truly-Christian S Cypr. ibidem. Cant. 5. 10
Cardinals: she is, as her Beloved, white and ruddy. It is again appositely
observed by St. Cyprian: Ut appareret, Innocents esse qui propter Christum
necantur, Infantia innocens ob nomen ejus occisa est: That it might appear,
those who dye for Christ should be harmless, S. Cypr. ep. 24.
his very first Martyrs were innocent children baptized, Baptismo sanguinis,
with the baptism of their own blood: and these were Primitiae Martyrum, the
first fruits of the first Martyrs; and they were early fruits. For those whom
the Casuists call Adultos, grown persons, Five conditions must concur to the
determining of a Martyr, whereof a chief-one is: That he who is martyred, must
not resist his perfecutors in Act or Desirt: And therefore, even Christian
Soldiers fighting in Gods cause, are not Martyrs, though killed, because they
do not imitate the Prince of Martyrs, who suffered Death without resistance.
The practice of the most pure and primitive Church, is also recounted and
justified by this our primitive Doctor St. Cyprian: Nos laesos divina ultio
defendet. Inde est, quod nemo nostrum se adversus inju^tam violentiam, quamvis
nimius, and copiosus sit noster populus, ulciscatur: St. Cyprian here, lays
Bellarmine with all his long Train of Scarlet, flat on S. Cypr. ad Demetriad.
his back. God will revenge our wrongs: and therefore, not one of us does lift
up his hand against unjust violence, although our people be numerous, and our
strength great.

Thirdly, These Angelical Missioners, as they pharisaically style themselves,
are not in these their fruits, like the Angels, First: Because all the
apparitions of An^els appearing like men in the Old Testament, leaned forwards
with a special reference of similitude toward Christ. The Angelical Doctor
fastens it: Omnes D. Tho p. 1. q. 51. art. 2. ad 1.
enim Apparitiones veteris Testamenti ad i^lam apparitionem ordina^ae sucrunt,
q^a filius Dei apparuit in carne: For all the Apparitions of the old Testament
were directed and ordered toward that pr^ncipal, and most excellent
Apparition, wherein the Son of God appeared in the Flesh. There their fruits
bear no date of e(...)ction to Christ, or of semblance with him. Secondly,
Because the Angels never assame Bodies of Fire. (If a Spirit attempts to make a
compact, he is a Devil; if he takes a Body of fire, he is a Devil: they are two
most distinctive Marks of a Diabolical Apparition) The same Angel of Aquine
suppe^itates the Reason, quia comburerent ea D. Tho. p. 1. q. 51. art. 2. arg.
3. S. Cyr. Alex. in cap. 1. Zachar.
quae contingerent; they would then set on fire all they should touch, as these
saltpeter fruits do. Thirdly, Because Angels in holy Scripture are always
represented to us, as St. Cyril of Alexandria takes notice, (...), stantes,
standing, to divulge and evidence their promptness, readiness, and erected
mind in their bringing all to the commands of God to execution: These Gunpowder
and sulphurous fruits act for Hell and the Devil. Fourthly, Because Angeli
illum gradum tenent in substantiis spiritualibus, quem corpora coelestia in
substantiis D. Tho. p. 1. q. 58. art. 3. in Corp.
corporeis: The Angels hold that degree in spiritual substances, which the
heavenly Bodies have and hold in the substances that are corporeal. The
heavenly Bodies are sublime, placed above the Moon, and incorrupt: Our corrupt
and evil Angels dig their way to Hell under Ground.

Now whereas they are not like in these their fruits to Christ, nor to his
Church, nor lastly to the good Angels; to whom at length (I pray) are they
like? To the King of the strange Locusts in the Revelation. And they had a King
over them, which is the Revel. 9. 11
angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but
in the Greek tongue has his name Apollyon. The Greek (...), is latin'd by the
Vulgar, exterminans, exterminating: Erasmus allows for it Edit. Vulg. Eras.
perdens, destroying: According to the letter in the Hebrew word Abaddon, the
Result is Perditio, Destruction, Perdition, Destruction: the meaning is, a
Destroyer so greatly destroying, that he seems to be Destruction it self. And
the Greek has expressly (...), the Dest^oyer, (...), eminently destroying: that
is, his Eminence (which Title Pope Urban the eight conferred upon his
Cardinals, who before were but Illustrious) that is, I say, his Eminence the
Angel of the bottomless Pit, whose whole and proper work is to destroy. They
do the works of their Father the Devil: His children they are, and him only
they are like.

And because we have retraited them back to their first Parentage, and
originally derived them from the Devil, let us make further inquisition into
these their devilish fruits, and better know them by these. First, They would
have destroyed the most knowing, and most peaceable and Solomon-spirited King
upon Earth, together with all the Royal Family, Root and Branch, by a sudden
hellish Blow given from the sad inventions of an idle, yet over-busie Friar;
and all this, without the least preadvertisement of danger. Go, Turn over all
the Annals of Indian Man-eaters, Turks, Barbarians, Jews; the like was never
storied of before: and yet, this was the plot of our understanding occidental
and Sunset Christians, presumptuously calling themselves Catholics.
Afterward indeed, horrid mischiefs* have succeeded, but such as these had long
taught by their foregoing Examples. By the way: They bespatter me, as if when I
flew beyond the Seas; threatened and persecuted by that blazing Meteor of a
Supreme power, or Ghost of Pope Hildebrand, Cromwell, I complied with them to
secure my own Ends. Truly, whatsoever of Juggle they found in me, their former
Jugglings with me taught me: I had been their Prentise. And I now best discover
their monstrous Devices, because I know their Trade, know it speculatively, not
practically. I return. This Powder-Blow would not have only destroyed the
strong foundations of the Parliament House and the Cities of Westminster and
London, but also the whole foundation of three Kingdoms. For Kings are
Scripture-call'd the strong foundations of the Earth. Answerably, Micah 6. 2
a King is named in the Greek Language, (...), quod sit (...), populi Basis,
because he is the basis and foundation of the people. And the Hebrew word Adon,
from whence comes Adonai, signifying Dominus, Lord, is borrowed from Eden, a
basis or foundation. And if the foundation be subverted, all is Ruinated.
Father Tompson the Jesuit, our Ghostly Father at Rome, when he often told us
Scholars there, that his shirt had been many times wet in his digging under
the Parliament House upon this horrible account, intimated, that their
intention was to bring up the foundation and all with a Powder. Kings agreeably
to an old Style, write, Nos, We? because they represent their whole people, and
because the well-being of their whole people resides and lives in them. If the
Basilical Vein be cut, the whole Body of the people mortally bleeds. Principes
and Praelati, it is the Doctrine of Aquinas, honorantur, etiamsi sint mali, in
quantum gerunt personam Dei and Communitatis, cui praeficiuntur: Princes and
Prelates are honored D. Tho. 2. 2 dae. q. 63. art. 3. in Corp.
although they be evil, because they bear the person of God, and of the
Community, over whom they are set. No Earthly power nor Action can divest a
King of this Honor, that he visibly bears the person of the invisible God as
God is the supreme Lord. A Bishop directly, and immediately represents God in
his Goodness, Holiness, Gentleness, Piety: a King in his Greatness, Majesty
and Supremacy of executive power: the one as a King, the other as a Bishop.

Secondly, They would have destroyed all the flourishing Nobility of this
Nation, many hundreds of the chief Gentry, many thousands of neighboring
people, whereof a main part were aged persons, women and innocent children; yea
and children in the Womb, not baptized, and therefore according to them not
capable of Glory; and a great part laden with sin unrepented of. It seldom
happens, even in the most bloody Wars, as Vegetius notes, that old Men, old
Women, young Maids, and little Veget. de Remilitari, lib. 3.
children are not spared. And could ye not be contented, (O ye cruel-ones after
the manner of Italy, cruel beyond the Grave and beyond Temporalities) to kill
Bodies, but Souls must be killed too? O be merciful now, if ye have relenting
Hearts, if ye have any reflection upon Antioch or Jerusalem, to these poor
people on the brink and edge of horrible Danger. He that has a bountiful
Prove. 22. 9 Vulgatus Interpres.
Eye, shall be blessed. The vulgar Latin advances, Qui pronus est ad
Misericordiam, benedic^tur: He that is prone to mercy, shall be blessed. The
Hebrew deals forth primarily, Qui bonus est oculo, He that is good of Eye.
Text. Hebr.
And the Chaldee follows in the foot-step, Qui bonum oculum habet, He that has
a good Eye. Then we have a Chald. Paraph.
merciful eye, when we look mercifully upon those who are in misery, or in the
confines of it. Zanchius is our Orator: Inde dicta est Misericordia, quod
Cordi nobis Zanch. de natura Dei, lib. 4. cap. 4. quaest. 1.
sit aliena Miseria: Thence mercy was by the Latins called Misericordia;
because by mercy, we lay close to our Hearts another Misery. But who do I
require a merciful eye, or the eyes of Doves in Wolfes, Tigers, Rocks; worse:
Men in whom the Nature of Man is joined with the Nature of Devils, as some
report of Antichrist?

Thirdly: (I speak now of a Thing, which, I believe none of our Preachers ever
thought of until now:) They would have destroyed their own God, many times
over: that is, burned his real Body, as they speak, in many places at once.

In this most abominable Plot, there was neither good order not measure, and
yet the match was measured, ordered and appointed to deliver his mournful and
matchless arrant to the powder about the hour of ten or eleven in the morning:
because it was supposed, that then the Parliament House would be full and
complete. These are the hours, wherein commonly their Priests run over their
Masses, as the blind Be^ga^ his prayers in the Spanish pamphlet: whereof some,
but few were ingulfed in, or knew the plot. This was perfectly known to the
plotters: as likewise, that hundreds of Priests were then scattered in and
about Westminster. For they seat themselves here ordinarily, in great nu^b^^;
near to Courts, Parliament-Houses, Innes of Court, School; and Universities,
as watching for their Game. Therefore they had an intentional, wilful, and
explicit Design to blow up their own God with their King. Here a most
excellent Spirit of Elixir exerts it self: He tha^ Reb^ls against his King,
Rebels against his God: He that would destroy his King, would if he could,
destroy his God stan^ing in his way: so near, so twisted and united are the
interests and affairs of God and a King; by reason that a King is in his Office
so like to God, and so nearly subordinate to him. But hear me, ye that work in
the Cellar there, I beseech you: Remember the Text, Hoc est corpus meum, This
is my Body: Hic est sanguis meus, This is my Blood: And forget not your own
Glosses: After the pronuntiation of the last syllable by the Priest in the
words, This is my Body; there follows nothing but the Body of Christ ex vi
verborum, by force of the words, but per Concomitantiam, by concomitance, there
follows the Blood of Christ, the Soul of Christ, also the Son of God the second
person in the Trinity, yea the whole Divinity: likewise after the last syllable
in the pronunciation of the words, This is my Blood, there follows nothing but
the blood of Christ* by the force of the words, but by concomit^nce, there
follows the Body of Christ, the Soul of Christ; also the son of God the second
person in the Trinity, yea the whole Divinity. Ye would have put fire to and
blown up the Body of Christ, the Blood of Christ, and if it had fallen within
your Sphere, the soul of Christ, also the son of God, the second person in the
Trinity, yea the whole Divini^y; and this, twice wheresoever the blow should
have found the Priest after the consecr^tion* and of^ner after the division of
the Host. Was ever any Apparition from Hell, so frightfull and so full fraught
with horror, as the mere ayrie Relation of this most damnable Fire-work? Do we
dream, or are we awake? Can this be true Veritate Rei, in the truth of the
Thing, or Fact? In like manner, Beloved, They would have destroyed their King
ex vi verborum, by the force of their immediate Purposes, Decrees, Designs;
but they would have d^stroyed their God, if they could, per Concomitantiam, by
concomitance: the Rights of God and of the King, being involved most rightly
together. God is God per essentiam, by essence, and the King is God per
similitudinem, by Similitude and Representation: I have said, Isalm 82. 6
Ye are Gods. There are Kings, and there are Viceroyes: There is a God, and
there are Vice-Gods, visibly acting in the place of God toward their people.
Summon your Attention, mark again; The Jesuits Riveted their
Lay-Fellow-Plo^ters into this Luciferian Design by the receiving of the
Sacrament: Thus began the first Act of the plot in the abuse of the Sacrament;
and the destruction and most horrible abuse of the Sacrament, for the Godhead
of which they so earnestly stickle, should have ended the last act of it. The
Godhead of the Sacrament is much defended, but little regarded in case of
Exigent. Insert here, I pray: Henry the seventh Emperor was poisoned by a
Benedictine Monk, who impoison'd an Host, and gave it to him in the receiving
of the Sacrament: an^ Pope Victor the third died at the Altar, having there
drunk of a poisoned Chalice. Rather than Jesuits or Monks will miss of their
ends, Popes, Kings, Emperors, God and all shall go. But, ye learned Masters of
the dark Vault, hark ye once more. Have not ye taught me, that the Syriack
Interpreter, Grandchild to Syrus Interp.
to the Apostles, in the 14th. Chapter of St. Mark, in lieu of the original
Words ingrafts words deserving a Ve^sio ^^thiopica.
fair Asterisk; Hoc est ipsum corpus meum, This is my Body it self? And that in
the six and twenti^th Chapter of St. Matthew. the Ethiopick likewise imbodies:
Haec ipsa caro mea, This is my flesh it self; and Hic ipse sanguis meus, This
is my Blood it self? Yea, that in the old Mass of St. Isidore, when the Priest
recited, Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis hodie, Give us this day our daily
Bread, the Quire answered, Qui tu es Christ, which daily Bread in the first
place, thou O Christ art; as being Missa Sti Isidori.
the first and most noble in Genere panis, in the Breadkind? And moreover, that
hence the rabid and furious Objection of the old Heathens against the
Christians, took life, intimated by St. Cyril, (...), Mysterium S. Cyril ep. ad
Eutropium.
nostrum pronuncias: You call our Mystery the eating of man's flesh, Will ye
blow up now the Body of Christ it self, the Blood of Christ it self, our daily
Bread, which is Christ; the Mystery or Sacrament which St. Chrysostom calls
(...), the Trophy of divine Love? And when I have objected on the behalf of S.
Chryosost. homil. 1. in Psalm. Miserere mei Deus.
the Protestants, disputandi gratia, in a School-Dispute, against your
Doctrine, from Logic, Accidentis ^sse est inesse; Or, Inhaerentia est de
Essen^ia Accidentis, An Accident cannot be without a Subject; Have ye not
answered: In naturals it is true, false and spurious in supernaturals? If we
should require in matters of Faith, that the Object should come in Right and
courting Lines to the Sense, and be coincident in every point with it; we
should obstinately follow the Guidance of that Knowledge in the grand Affai^ of
Reli^ion and of the soul, which is common to us with Beasts, whose Heads are
bowed toward the Ground, and that are utterly nescient of him, who dwells
above the Clouds and the Star-ey'd Firmament. Our senses are the Powers and
Faculties of the Beast in us. Have ye not proceeded against me, explanandi
causa, to explain your Assertion? Shall you and I put limits to an infinite
Power, able, as Learning of old gr^nted, to do more than humane understanding
can understand? The Apostle signs it in the third Chapter to the Ephesians,
Deus facere potest supra quam petimus, aut intelligimus: God can do above what
we ask or understand. Have ye not urged beyond all this? If Heathenish Art and
Science must be solemnly and with sound of Trumpet, received in r^vealed
Truths, they will dispirit Scripture; and innocent Divinity will be deplumed of
her chief and Cardinal Articles. It is a Logic Maxim, accepted into the
Mathematics: Quae sunt eadem uni tertio, sunt idem inter se. The Things that
are the same with a third Thing, are the same Thing if examined in themselves
and as they face one the other. This eliminates the Mystery of the most
blessed Trinity; wherein the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are the same
essentially, but not p^rsonally. Philosophy Rules it: Ex nihilo nihil fit: Of
Nothing comes Nothing. This throws to the Dunghill the Creation of the World.
And Aristo^le confuted, as he thought, Bereschith Elohim bara, the beginning o^
Genesis, In the Beginning God created, with this his Nothing-Rule; when by
Chance he saw the Pentateuch. Philo^ophy holds forward; Omnis substantia maxim
Rationalis, per^se subsistit: Every Substance, the R^tional especially,
subsists of it self. There the mysterious Incarnation of Christ, and the
Hypostatical V^ion are disowned, discounted, exauctorated, and contemned: the
humane Nature in Christ, subsisting by the subsistence of the divine Word, to
preserve Union in the person of Christ God and Man. Logic administers as
principle-strong: A Privanone ad Habitum non fit Regressus: There is ^o
Regresse from the Privati^n to the Habit: And the Physicians and Chemists own
it as an Apherisme. Here all the Miracles of Christ, and of his Apostles and
Saints, are anathematized and set going. Philosophy vomits up, Eadem numero non
redeunt, sed specie: The same numerical Things return not: Here the
Resurrection is discountenanced and dismissed. You set a Logical or
Philosophical Rule, quickened by the Light of Nature, to strugle and combat
with a revealed Mystery clear to divine Light. O the divine Apostle in his
first Epistle to the Corinthians, and the first Chapt. Nonne stultam fecit Deus
sapientiam hujus Mundi? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?
Infinite power does every Thing equally, and with like facility; except that
which is offered to the power, as St. Ambrose unsheaths it, be Naturae ejus
contrarium, contrary to the S. Am^r. Annot. in cap. 23. Numeror.
Nature of God, or to some natural Attribute: As, Factum infectum facere, to
make that a done Thing was not done, is contrary to his Truth; to sin is
contrary to his Holiness. Hither I have phras'd it as one of yours. Now I come
to my self again. Should this Sacrament, containing according to you the Holy
of Holies, and to which all Arts and Sciences must yield and submit themselves,
have been blown up in a moment, ye that would have done this, what will ye not
do? Optatus Milevitanus Records, that the Donatists threw this holy Sacrament
to Opt. M^levit. lib. 2. contra Donatistas.
the Dogs, and that the Dogs immediately destroyed their own M^sters who threw
it to them; and that the Teeth which tore the one, tore the other also. What
shall I say? Where shall I begin? How shall I end? O most execrable,
un^athom'd, bottomless --! O that a Seraphim from Heaven, would furnish me
with adequ^te and fit Words. I must desist: I cannot speak large enough to this
immense and unspeakable mischief.

Certain Inferences pertain to this place; but because I have encountered a
Sheet of Reasons why Roman Catholics should not be persecuted; and my
Inferences stand in diametrical Opposition to those Reasons, I shall lead up my
Inferences, and set them in Battal^a against those Reasons. The Author
Commences with an Int^oduction, and therein, with an old Rule founded in Nature
and exalted by Grace. Do ye unto others as ye would that others should do unto
you. This Rule is immovable, where the Actions from both sides run in a Right
Line of Morality. Moralitas Actus est ejus Conformitas ad legem, The mortality
of an Act is its S. Jo. Damasc. lib. 2. de orthod fide, c. 29.
conformity to the Law of God. Let the Author peruse Saint Damascen. In a good
Judge personating his King on the Bench, there are two Wills, an antecedens
Will, and a consequent Will: By his antecedent Will he wills well to a Prisoner
at the Bar, even as well as to himself, considering him, in his antecedent
considerati^n of him, as a Man, and in his pure self: but when in the
consequent consideration of him, he considers him with these Adjuncts, that the
same Man hic and nunc is a Thief and homicide, and endangers the public peace
and safety, secundum allegata and probata, according to the Things alleged and
proved against him, his first and antecede^t consideration of him vanishes, and
the Will belonging to it becomes a velleity and inefficacious, and by his
consequent and judiciary Will he wills him to the Gallows. It would be
ridiculous in such a Prisoner, to Retort upon the Judge before his
Condemnation, Do as you would be done by; when as even the Judge himself, if
reduced to the Prisoner's Condition, would naturally desire his own
preservation, and plead not guilty. The same wills are in God, who according to
his antecedent consideration of Mankind, will have all men to to be saved; many
1 Timothy 2. 4
whereof notwithstanding, according to his consequent consideration of them, he
reprobates by an act of his consequent and judiciary Will. Our Lawmakers, and
our Judges in the Execution of our Laws that are penal, act according to the
fruits of men thoroughly known. And it is rottenly inferred concerning the Rule
of Prudence, which teaches when you are encumbred with more inconveniences, to
bear with the lesser. The Rottenness here will easily appear to those who
shall be pleased to reflect upon past Things: As, That an Armado was procured
from foreign parts by the solicitation of English Priests, to dest^oy their
own Country. I have read a Latin Book at Rome, written by Father Parsons a
Jesuit, wherein it was acknowledged, and justified: and I have heard it
confessed, that many English Priests came with the Armado to direct and assist
the Spaniards: Also, That the prime Inventers and plotters of the
Gunpowder-Treason were Priests: Verily, dreadful evils have been performed
afterward, (I tremble in the remembrance of them:) But the Malefactors acted
them as the Disciples of the Monks and Jesuits, and as followers of their
Doctrines and Examples. When our Lawmakers and Judges consider Priests in
their holy Names of Jesuits, Monks, Friars, they wish that such if they will be
Jesuits, Monks, Friars, would, as Jesuits ought to do, imitate Jesus; as Monks,
live solitarily and separately from the pomp of the world, wherein, says St.
Athanasius, such are as Fishes out of their Element; S. Athanas. in vita Sti.
Ant.
and like Friars (that is, Brethren) abound in brotherly love: they wish to
them, even as they wish to themselves in their own condition: But when they
consider them in their wicked and Retrograde Fruits, they wisely Retard and
suppress them by coercive and agreeable Statutes. Salvianus Salvian: lib. 4.
de Gubern. Dei.
brings Honey to this Hiv^: Atrocius sub sancti Nominis professione peccamus:
We sin more grievously, when our sin breaks out from under a glorious Name,
and profession: Which two contrary conditions, occasion, that wise men consider
such Persons two contrary ways.

By his first Reason he claims the privilege, that Christ's Church gave to the
Jewish, to be buried with Honor; and that, as the Heathens were, they should
be drawn to Truth by persuasion, and not by force. The first Branch of this
first Reason discovers the Author to be either a Jesuit, Monk, Friar, or
Priest: Because the bottom or pedestal of this Branch is deep-fetch't out of
Thomas Aquinas: whose words are: Sicuti homines mortuos servati aliquandiu ante
D. Tho. p. 2. dae, q. 103. art. 4. Conclus.
sepulturam contingit: ita legalia (quae ut viva post Christi passionem servari
sine peccato mortali non poterant) recte ut mortua, a passione Christi ad
Evangelii divulgationem servata, ut cum honor mortua matter Synagoga
sepeliretur: As it happens that the Bodies of dead men are sometimes kept
before their burial, so the Legals (which after the passion of Christ could not
be kept, as alive without a mortal sin) as dead, from the passion of Christ to
the promulgation of the Gospel were rightly kept, that the mother Synagogue
being dead, might be buried with honor. She was truly noble and honorable
being alive, and therefore being dead was honorably and nobly buried. But when
under pretense of an honorable Burial, a restless people deadly prejudicial
to the Kingdom wherein they live, shall endeavor to outlive and build up
themselves upon the Ruins of those among whom they live, it alters the case
substantially by a circumstance. If ye be not suppressed, as now ye are, by the
Laws, but may elbow it at your pleasure (I see it clearly behind the Curtain),
more than a hundred thousand Subjects shall be drawn every year from their
Allegiance to his Majesty. St. Hie^om's complaint would then S. Hierom, lib.
a^versus Lucif^^anos: Tom. 2.
quickly be applied hither with a little Change: Ingemuit totus orbis, and
Arrianum se esse miratus est: The whole world groaned, and wondered that it
found it self Arrian upon a sudden. Pope Gregory the 13th. that established
missions into all parts, gave ominiously for his Arms a flying Dragon vomiting
poison. I know what sublime Advertisements the predicant Jesuits give in their
Sermons: such indeed as little suit with dead or dying people: For example: The
Heavens are always in motion: the Sun takes no rest: Fire is always in action:
The Sea never sleeps: The soul is always busy in the exercise of her Faculties,
active Virtues and Spirits: The Heart always panting: the eyes are always
active when they are open: Life keeps the pulse in continual beating; and the
breath always a passenger coming or going. These are numb^ed amongst the
choysest of God's creatu es; and therefore bear more likeness of him in
themselves, than meaner things. These ever work, and shall his Holiness, and we
be idle? For the second Branch: The Church of England rightly and righteously
draws you to Allegiance by Force: Your different Judgment in matters of
Religion is only chastised in a geatle manner with a pecuni^ry mulct: Yea the
Priests themselves are not otherwise punished, but as unquiet and known
Seducers of the people from their Allegiance. And whereas St. Peter, after your
style, the first Pope, set these two so nearly together, Fear God, honor 1
Pet. 2. 17
the King; the Church of England solidly concludes, That ye cannot fear nor
serve God, except ye honor the the King: and that ye cannot serve the Sup^eam,
except ye honor his Substitute.

His second Reason pretends, That the Roman Church must not be persecuted by
the old Protestant, as confessing her to be a true Church, and professing her
self to be sp^ung from her loins: he must not defy his Mother for a Whore.
If the old Protestant thoroughly considers your Whorish falsehood and
prostitution in the practice and exercise of Religion, truly, That she
confesses you to be a true Church, is more her Goodness than your Desert. And
the Church of England does not spring from the loins of the Church of Rome as
the Church of Rome is a Whore, but as by the great providence of God there has
been preserved a continual succession of Priesthood in her. As the Church of
England came of her, so she came from her, and communicates not with her in her
Whorish considerations. When those occur, she looks beyond them, and honorably
derives her self from the most chaste and primitive Church. And therefore, the
Church of England may desie the Church of Rome for a Whore, without biushing.
For brevity-sake, I shall name here but one Whorish practice. The practice of
ignorant people praying in an unknown Tongue, is Whorish. First, what prayer
is, St. John Damascen, the Greek Lombard, has O^acled, and the Schools have
devoutly received, who teach: (...). S. J. Damasc. lib. 1. de ^ide orthod, cap.
14.
Prayer is the ascension of the Mind to God. Prayer being in its Essence, the
ascension of the Mind, the Mind ascerds in the prayer as such. Secondly,
Because our Oblation of prayer to God our Maker, should evenly concord with our
making and Talents, Man worshipping God, quatenus Homo est animal Rationale, as
Man is a Reasonable creature. We therefore being originally enstamped
reasonable and understanding creatures, agreeably to our Origin pray with
understanding. For which cause where the psalmist exh^rteth, ps^l^ite
Sapien^er, Sing ye wisely; the Hebrew Psalm 47. 7
Bible setleth, maskil, in intelligentia, in understanding; and the Sept.
prefer (...), intelligenter, understandingly; and the English follows in the
path, sing ye praises with understanding. For the same cause the Apostle
rigorously exacts of us rationabile obsequium, Reasonable service. Romans 12. 1
Thirdly, Because prayer unites the Soul with God, and is therefore baptized in
the Hebrew Language. Tephilah, with a Ray reflected from the Childaean Taphal,
which signifies copulare, to u^ite or join: and like is best united with like,
as Mind with Mind, understanding with understanding, and as our Wills are most
perfected when united with the Will of God: God is Men's Aeterna, the Eternal
Mind. Yea a loving, faithful, and zealous prayer unites the Soul with God in
the nearest conformity to the Beatifical Vision: wherein according to the
Thomists, Scotists, Bonav^ntu^ists, the Mind or Understanding takes up and
possesses the Founda^ion, and fundamentally essen^iats Blessedness. Fourthly:
Voluntas non agit ex Inco^nito, the Will does does not ordinarily work or act,
authorized, summoned, or ente^tained by an unknown Thing: and Intellectus
praefert Volunta^ilucernam, the understanding carries a Lamp or Lantho^n before
the Will: and the Will is preportionably enfl^m^d as the Understanding gives
evidence Fifthly, Because in a Regulated prayer the Soul is hol^causted; all
being offered to God: and if all, chiefly our chief and first Facul^y, our
understanding: of the which, Aquinas; Cum D. Tho. p. 1. q. 12. art. 1. in
Conclus.
ultima hominis Beatitudo in altissima ejus operatione consistat: Whereas the
last blessedness of Man consists in his highest operation. Sixthly and lastly:
Because where the prayer is not understood, the Words, as compared to the
understanding of him that prays, fall off into vain, and the Sense with them,
and both are fruitless; and to offer such vain Ciphers unto God, or such a
shell fruitless of the proper Kernel, is a part of niggardize, heterogeneous
even from the first adventures of Worship, in the ancient and typical
Sacrifices: wherein God required the finest flower, the First Fruits, the
fattest Beasts, the choicest Birds. In Consideration of this Whorish practice,
and many others, Rome I defy thee for a Whore.

His third Reason contends for Liberty, in regard the Protestant acknowledges,
that the Roman professes all fundamental Truth, and as so doing, is capable of
eternal felicity, which is our last End, and wherein all saved persons shall
enjoy everlasting Friendship. The quarrel of the Protestants against you, upon
which persecution is grounded, is created and heighthen'd from your Doctrines
leading to Treason, and from the long experience which they have had of your
turbulent and indefatigable Spirits. When a Thing done was enspirited and
enthusiasm'd by Doctrine, it is honestly imputed to the Teachers and Authors of
the Doctrine. True Christians are principled in a particular abomination of
Murder, because their most beloved Lord was murdered; and they are themselves
ready, not to murder others, but to be murdered as their dear Lord was: and
consider men, though Heathens, not only as men, but as the Images of God whom
they adore. Therefore they justly suppress as far as they can, the children of
cursed Cain. How can a person be tolerated in a well-tempered Nation, who takes
it upon a religious account, that post latam Bullam Excommunication is a Domino
Papa, after the Bull of Excommunication is published by his Lord the Pope, he
may kill the person excommunicated whosoever he be; that in the case of unjust
Scandal, he may kill the Accusers, the Witnesses, yea the Judge himself; that
if he has defiled his Body with a Woman, and she give signs of a willingness
to divulge it, he may kill her; that if any one shall threaten to reveal the
secret sins of a Community, he may be killed: (this part of Escobar the English
Monks now in London, practiced against me in the Bastille at Paris; they
endeavored to kill me, both by poison and otherwise; and fathered the Reasons
upon a Cause, the contrary of which was most true; let them now stand forth and
clear themselves:) that he may, though the professed Servant of a buffeted
Lord, to prevent a blow or buffet, or the Lie being given him, kill a man; that
a Woman may procure abortion. The popish Casuists, Escobar, L^ssius, Zanchez,
Diana, Reginaldus, Hurtado de Mendora, Bauny, are heavy-laden with such fruits.
Are not the maintainers of these Doctrines, kill, kill, and nothing but kill,
unsufferable Coac. Constantiense Sess. 13. sub Martino 5.
amongst pious Christians? What the Council of Constance defined in defiance
and hatred of Wicklef, is evident; and in what circumstances the Jesuits of
Paris being terrified by the Parisian Parliament, renounced Mariana, I am
assured. No Jesuit sets forth a Book, but first approved by three Jesuits whom
his Provincial names: neither can they act any matter of great consequence, as
the Gunpowder-Treason was, without the knowledge of the Pope, to whom they are
obliged by a particular Vow of Obedience. In the last place, let me tell you,
you are highly beholding to the Protestants, that they give no definitive
Sentence against you in the business of your Salvation: You are not affected
with like Civility toward them, when you damn them for Heretics, and
frequently cite against them, first, St. Cyprian, pronouncing, Habere jam non
S. Cypr. lib. de Simplicitate Praelatorum. Council. Lateranense sab Innocentio
3. cap. 1.
potest Dominum Patrem, qui Ecclesiam non habet Matrem, He cannot have God for
his Father, who has not the Church for his Mother; and afterward the Council
of Lateran, Una est Fidelium Universalis Ecclesia, extra quam nemo salvatur,
There is one universal Church of the Faithful, out of which no person is saved:
and you understand by the Church, yea by the universal Church, the Church of
Rome: and when you argue against them as follows; Shall we give away
Salvation (a most holy Thing) to persons destitute of habitual Grace? Or, is
habitual Grace given out of the true Church of God, united in one Lord, one
Faith, except in the virtue of the Church, as in the baptizing of Infants or
others amongst Heretics or Infidels? Then to be of the Church or not of the
Church, is of the same composure, fabric, mineral, and metal: (...), Uno
Absurdo dato vel concesso, --, If we grant or sign a pass to one Absurdity;
Scholars know the Catastrophy, and what follows by necessary Concatenation.
This Answer evacuats also his fourth and fifth Reasons.

In his sixth Reason he runs wide of his matter, and there is a palpable (...),
Transition to a different kind of Things from the Thing in question. That the
Duke of Saxony with his Lutherans, and the Emperor, Head of the Papists in
Germany, better agree, than either of them with Calvinists, is not our
Business, because they are branched into several Governments, whereas the
Protestants and Papists are here incorporated under one Prince. And his
Instance in Hugonotes, is also absurd and absonous; the Hugonotes of France
being Calvinists, and the Agreement being there sinewed, because the Kings of
France have experienced the Hugonotes to be better Subjects than their own
Popish-ones, Marshal Turin, General of the French King's Horse, is a most
Honorable Example. When we break our limits that should bound our Discourse,
it signifies we have almost done all within our Bounds that Genesis 3. 1.
we can do. When the Text, says, Now the Serpent was more subtle: Aquila
descends to the Root, and affords, (...), more pragmatical, more over-acting;
and Plato's A(...)la: Plato in Menexeno. 2 Cor. 11. 3.
word (...), is used by the Apostle, and signifies Craft that treads all ways,
and tryes all works to do mischief. Note with me, that here in the beginning of
Genesis, the first Book of holy Scripture, the Serpent into which the Devil
ent^ed, has his Name a Serpendo, from creeping; he was but a Creeper when he
first began to plot against us; rhis being the first mention of the Devil in
Scripture: Now the Serpent is in the length of Time grown into a Dragon, and he
grew apace after the Monks and Jesuits came into the World; such we find him in
the last Book of Scripture the Revelation, Michael and his Angels fought
against the Dragon. Rev^^. 12. ^
The Tail of which Dragon, is now in England, in C^rculum retorta, where it
lies in a circle round about us. St. Epiphanius teaches, That the Devil is
called in Scripture, by S. E^^ph. (...) in E(...)
the Name of a Serpent; because the Serpent is omnium Animantium (...), the
most winding and turning of all living creatures; and that he winds himself
into circles and knots, and has nothing of right and straight, or of innocent
candor. He is called by Theodoret, (...), altogether wicked. Theodoret. lib.
1. Hist. cap. 2.
Your out-walkings, windings, and insinuations, are now, the Devil being grown
to a Dragon, most dangerous. I could speak to the seventh Reason, but it
concerns Raggione di Stato, Reasons of State, which are above me.

His eighth Reason presses a Belief upon us; That the Roman Catholic is an
enemy to Innovation, and propitious to Monarchy, and that his Faith leads him
to a strict obedience. These things are gloriously said; but as St. Justine
writes S. Just. (...). se^ Cohort. ad Graecos and Gentiles.
to the Grecians, (...), Christian Religion is practical, and consists in
works, not in words. I am half-perswaded, that here the Author of the Reasons
mocks and scoffs at the Romanist^. Aquinas his Doctrine (restored by
Bellarmine) in his Question, Utrum Imago Christi sit adoranda adoratione
Latriae? where he resolves, That the Image of Christ or a Crucifix may be
adored with the adoration of (...), being a worship due to God alone; is it not
an Innovation? (...), him only shall thou serve with the service of (...). (I
charge you only with your most gross Innovations.) D. Tho. p. 3. q. 25. a^t. 3.
If ye be enemies to Innovation, why is not this Doctrine thrown out and
condemned? Is it not an Innovation, of which Nicolaus Lyra mournfully
complains, Aliquando Matthew. 4 10
in Ecclesia fit maxima deceptio populi in Miraculis factis a Sacerdotibus, vel
eis adhaerentibus proptet lucrum: Sometimes the people are very greatly deluded
in the Church, Nic. Lyr. Comment in cap. 14. Dan. secundum Edit. Vulgat.
by forged Miracles: the Priests or their Adherents forging them for gain? Is
it not an other Innovation, of which irrefragable Alexander Hales treats in
sad terms: In Sacramento Alex. Halens. part 4. quaest. 53. Memb 4. Art. 3.
Solut. 2.
apparet Caro, interdum humana procuratione, interdum operatione Diabolica:
Flesh appears in the Sacrament sometimes by humane procuration, and sometimes
by Diabolical ^perati^? I could name a thousand of these. When you urge, That
you are pr^pi^ious to Monarchy, the word pr^pitious is ill-plac'd.
Propitiousnesse is of a Superior to an In^eriour, as Oration est Inferio is,
Prayer is of an Inferi^ur to a Superior; Deus, esto propitius, cries the
Publican, God be proptious to me a sinner. Mona^chs and Monarchy are very much
engaged to you that you are propitious to them. In good sooth, you honor
Monarchy in order to your Pope and his Supporters, as appears by these your
Arguments; St. Thomas his Ground is irresistible: Deus omnibus providet
secundum quod competit eorum naturae: God provides for all things agreeably to
their natures: D. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. art. 9. in Corp.
The Church m^litant is partly visible, and invisible partly; Visible in
respect of our persons and Bodies, and in regard of our Souls invisible: Why
then as she has a Head invisible, ought she not to have likewise a visible
Head homogeneous with her visible condition? And whereas according to
Heaven-born Divinity, Praedestinatio est pars nobilissisima divinae
providentiae. Predestinat^on is the most noble p^rt of divine providence,
excellently dealing and disposing concerning the last and ul^imate end of God's
people; If Monarchy be the Government of Heaven, and also the secur^st and most
peace-preserving Form upon Earth, why should it be disanull'd in, and abrogated
from the Church, which is the most noble and most excellent Convocation,
conjunction, and society of people upon Earth, and the society without the
Steerige of which we cannot arrive at our last End? The Ground-Axioms are also
most noble: The one is mansion'd within the Territories of Philosophy, Quod
inest nobiliori, nobilius est, That which is in the more noble, is the more
noble: this being verified also in Aristocracy and Democracy aequo librili,
aequa simbellae state a perpensis, weighed justly together: The other shines
tanquam densior pars sui Orbis, like a Star, in St. Justin, (...) S. Just.
Cohort. ad Graecos.
(...), Monarchy, as such, is discord-free. Here ends your Discourse. But how
long have you honored Monarchy in order to your own Princes? Shall we date the
time from the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, or from the Spanish
Fleet inclusive, or from the Gunpowder-Treason? That many of you have been
actually and externally loyal to his Majesty in his Troubles, I joyfully
confess: but whether this was done in Sensu Composito, because your Interest
was objectively connexed with his Majesty's Right, or in Sensu diviso, for
pure love of God and the King, examine your Hearts and Consciences: This
objective precision, this divine Alchymie is not the work of every Day; I was
in the company of four English Monks here, on that mournful Day wherein the
best of all Christian Kings then living, was most barbarously murdered; and
they all spoke of him underfoot and contemptibly. St. Austin has taught me: S.
Aug. Homil. 38.
Qui amicum propter commodum quodlibe^ amat, non amicum convincitur am^re, sed
commodum: He that loves his friend for the profit he reaps by him, is
convinced, not to love his friend but the profit. For the last Clause,
concerning your Faith, look back upon what is already cleared.

His ninth Reason presents an Answer to the Objection, That the Roman Catholic
holds positions inconsistent with good Government, either in Church or State.
But the Author so behaves himself in his Answer, that if I durst loosen my Soul
a little, I would contemn him, yea desist from anatomizing further into his
Reasons. He answers as no Man of his Fox-fur, but himself, would answer: And
therefore this Answer, may happily gain some favor for him, yet cannot prevail
for others. He defears all the Councils, which, if general, are universally
judged by popish Recusants infallible. Although this one Priest may be White,
all the rest all black. Whosoever he be, he is as St. Bernard S. Bern. ep. 249.
ad Bernardum Priorem. Sept. in cap. 13. Is.
shapes him, quaedam Chimaera sui saeculi, a certain Chimaera of his Age, or a
kind of (...) in the Septuagint* half Romes and half Englands; and puts me in
mind of the Archbishop Petrus Tenorius, who after a long Disputation, equally
bandied concerning the Salvation of Solomon, pictured him half in Heaven and
half in Hell. His tenth Reason sinks with his ninth, as depending upon it.

His eleventh Reason disburses, That persecution forces Roman Catholics to
put themselves in danger to be made disloyal and practice disloyalty; first, by
carrying news to Ambassadors he^e, and secondly, by sending their Children
beyond the Seas, there to be taught by the Enemies of England. He that puts
himself in the near danger of a Sin, sins. But a man cannot be forced to sin.
All sin is voluntarily committed; and voluntas non cogitur, the will is not
forced. Thomas Aquinas sets up his Flag for us: Homicida est per se and D. Tho.
p. 2. d^^, q 73. art. 8. ad 3.
sufficiens causa Corporalis mortis: Spiritua is autem mo^tis nullus potest
esse alteri Causa per se sufficiens: quia nullus Spiritualiter moritur, nisi
propria voluntare peccando: An Homicide or Murderer is the proper and
sufficient cause of the corpor^l death of him whom he kills: but no man can be
to another a proper and sufficient (so Cajetan senses the words) cause of
spiritual death: because no m^n dies spiritually, but by sinning with his own
proper will. Such News-Carriers and Homebred Intelligencers I have known many.
He was a Priest and a Friar, that had long played the Intelligencer on both
sides, and at length solaced himself in his mirth at Brussels, with this
remarkable encouragement, The Pope and Cromwell shall pay for all. And
concerning the Children of Papists, except they may, not be taught only, but
also priested here; Father Robert Anderton the Monk, station'd in Lincolns-Inne
Fields, will carry them abroad; and therefore, the State of England has reason
to fear, that whereas you have a potent party abroad, and in this regard are
more dreadful and dangerous than others, many of your party being our Enemies
by your instigation, you will, if not suppressed and overlook't by all who do
(...), return to your old Trade of delving and digging your own Graves. The
voice of thy Thunder in the Heaven, or in the Sphere; Psalm 77. 18
the original Word with like affection importing a Sphere, a Wheel, and every
thing the motion of which is circular: which moved the vulgar Latin to run
parallel with our Edit. Vulg.
sense, Vox Tonitrui tui in rota, The voice of thy Thunder (or of Men's
Thunder-plots which God permits as far as he pleases) is heard in the motion of
the wheel: And the same Prophet prays against plotters, O my God, make them
like a wheel, which continually returns to the same place where Psalm 83. 13
Psalm 12. 8
it was. For, The wicked walk on every side, The Vulgar has, In circuitu impii
ambulant, The wicked walk in a circuit or Circle. Circulus in Mathematicis
perfectissimus, imperfectissimus in Moralibus: A Circle is most perfect in the
Mathematics, in Morals most imperfect. The marrow-Truth is, The Councils named
in your ninth Reason, and your Casuists, urge you to disl^yaltie, namely the
Council of Florence defining for the Popes Universality of Jurisdiction, and
the Lateran Council for his power in Temporalities indirect^y called indirect,
directly to depose Princes by their own Subjects.

His twelf Reason is drawn ab improbabili, from an improbable Thing? it seeming
altogether improbable, That liberty granted to Papists should destroy the
settled Religion of England, because Protestants have the use of Scripture in
their own Tongue, and amongst the Papists here even the service is private, and
the want of Preachers very great. Intruth, your lazy Monks are great enemies to
Preaching: But, howsoever ye scar^ it, ye pervert people without end, and
without number: Every one of your Emissaries is a kind of Ulysses, praised by
Homer with this Elogy, (...) Hom. in 'O(...).
(...), he knew the Cities, and manners of many people. If your Hopes be not
erected to the perverting of this Nation, and if ye do not serve Baalzebub,
that is, (...), the God of corrupting Flies, why is it written over the Porch
of the English College at St. Omers in Golden Letters, Jesu converte Angliam,,
Fiat, Fiat, Jesus convert England, Amen, Amen? And why do ye now boast every
day of twenty strange Things which I have received from person's of Trust, and
have in deposito, but will not name for fear of poisoning the people as ye do?
Yet thus much: The Head of us, though he be most honorably grateful to you for
your service upon what Ground soever it was performed, yet is not of your
Feather. I go not in chase of preferment: St. Hierome thus puts the last stamp
upon the S. Hier. ep. ad Paulin.
soft Heart of Paulinus, to whom he writes, Facile contemnit omnia qui se
semper cogicat esse moriturum, He does easily contemn, and with a violent hand
throw under him all things, who thinks he stands always with one foot in his
Grave: I speak with a deliberate meditation upon the hour of my death and the
day of Judgment; when he was in Germany, Brussels, France, my most innocent
Necessities carried me to all these places, in all which I saw the most noble
Things done by him in the profession and Exaltation of Protestant Religion that
any Princely Soul could act; and particularly in France I saw a young person,
and the same highborn freed by his most zealous Commands from eminent and
iminent danger of Popery, and all this, in his lowest ebbs: and when Popish
Princes highly courted him in order to his Restitution. Those people have
hearts steeped in the Gaul of bitterness, yea in the poison of Dragons, that
will not believe the right Sterige of men's hearts, until the men be opened,
and they see their entrals. Away, away, scatter no more suspicions and false
Rumors. I should gladly meet with a Papist that can speak Truth of High, or
Low. It is truth, which Tertullian speaks of Tert. in Apologet. cap. 7.
lying Fame: Quae nec tunc quidem cum aliquid very affert, sine mendacii vitio
est, detrahens, adjiciens, demutans de veritate: which neither then truly when
it proposes a true Thing, is without the scar of a Lie; drawing from, putting
to, and changing the truth. And be a little more humble, and peaceable in your
Carriages: the very hopes of a Toleration had so transported you, that a
Minister could scarcely pass in the streets by your Shops, but reproached and
abused by you: Yea, I was present the other day, when a Jesuit having crept
into a House, and standing by a fire, Ansatus with his arms hook't up to his
sides, professed against the Master of it being a Minister, that he had more to
do in his house than he. Whither will these people drag us, if they be
suffered? It is my Road, when an insolent Sect is most high and proud, to catch
at the very Head of it: I wrote against Presbyterians, and Anabaptists, when
they took their turns at the Helm, and for the divine Right of Episcopacy, when
humane Helps were depressed. I have a Sigh coming, and a Groan after it, that
Vshers a word or two: O that unwise ewe, which gave suck to the forsaken whelps
of a wolf; that afterward destroyed her and her young, and all the flock!

His last Reason, he says, is rather a Request than a new Reason. And my Answer
shall be like i^: Our Church Governors are desired to consider whether a
Toleration of Papists would not increase their Power: And I likewise m^st
humbly desire them to consider, whether it would no bring their Power to the
Grave, and there leave it. Secondly: They are entreated to consider, whether
their first Consecrators, were themselves truly consecrated, that they may be
reverenced by Papists, according to their Character, and obeyed accordingly:
and I most humbly desire them to consider, That this is a Desire in the Air,
where Aristophanes his Birds built a City; Aristoph. in Av^b.
for, the Papists believe it not. Thirdly: Protestants are beseeched to lo^k
upon them as their Fellow Soldiers in defense of their Kings: and I most
humbly desire all men to consider, that it was both our Duties, and requisite
that both we and they should know and keep the Conditions of a just War:
whereof the first is, Auctoritas legitima, a lawful Authority: which is, the
Authority of a Prince, or of a supreme Power: Because Princes and supreme
Powers have no common Tribunal, at which they may a^cuse other supreme Powers
and Princes: Secondly, causa justa, a just Cause: which is, The repulsing of
notorious and great Injuries: the repulsing of which, is a more eligible Good,
than the Good lost by the evil of War, that the Prince may defend the people
subjected to him, now greatly damnified by the Enemy. Thirdly: Intentio bona, a
good Intention, the End of War being, ut in pace vivamus, that we may live in
peace. Fourthly: Modus debitus, a due manner: Christoph. Marcellus Orat. habita
in Council. Lateran. sub Julio 2. Sess. 4.
which enjoynes the taking off all possible care, that the Innocent be not
endamaged. In this their Desire, it is questioned whether any Roman Catholic
has been false to his Majesty: and I humbly desire the Protestants to
consider, that much may be said in this business above what has already
passed in the stream. I have heard extraordinary Things from a great Statesman
of France, and an other of Italy in the Bastille. And had not the two Filli
olei, according to the Hebrew and the Vulgar Latin, Sons Zach. 4. 14.
of Oil, as they may be called out of the Prophet Zachary, the one by Land, and
the other by Sea, done their Duties, stange and prodigious Things had followed.
We are, the God of patience and consolation be blessed, set in joint, and I
will not blab abroad my Secret. Answerably to Aquila Aquil. Theodot. Sept. Sir.
Arab. Antiochen. Arab. Alexandr.
and Theodotion, they are Filii Splendoris, or Claritatis, Sons of splendor or
Clarity: The Septuagint, Syriack, and Arabic of Antioch deal out, Filii
pinguedinis, Sons of fatness: The Arabic of Alexandria, filii Misericordiae,
Sons of Mercy, Oil being a Symbol of Mercy. God Reward them in his infinite
Mercy: who rewards every one according to his works and fruits: and God
preserve his Majesty, and grant that as he is set above us, so he may walk with
God, and before us by a most perfect Example.

Amen.
Laus Deo Liberatori: Praise be unto God our Deliverer.
FINIS.

