A COPY OF THE ARTICLES For the surrender of the City of Worcester, With all
the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition therein to Major Genesis RAINSBOROW.

With a Copy of a Letter sent from the Governor to him, and the manner of the
mutining in the Town, which occasioned the same.

And how Sir William Russell is to be delivered to the mercy of the Parliament,
and the Enemy to deliver all their Arms after they have marched a mile out of
Worcester.

These are perused by the Original Papers and published according to Order of
Parliament.

London, Printed for F. Coals. 1646.

MAjor General Rainsborow being come before Worcester, and made his approaches
very nigh, that so terrified them within, that in a kind of mutinous way, they
pressed the Governor to surrender, whereupon he sent this ensuing letter to
Major General Reinsborow.

For Major General Rainsborow, Commander in chief of the Forces before this
City of WORCESTER.
SIR,
THis City was first summoned by your General, upon promise of honorable
terms, and has been since invited to a Treaty, by Colonel Whalley. In order
to which, (upon assurance of the rendition of Oxford, and credence of His
Majesty's Printed Letters, we of this City offered Propositions, with this
reservation: That if any demand on our parts might seem too high, or any
denial on yours, to trench too much upon our Honors, neither side should so
insist upon their own sense, as not to submit to better reason, which was
mutually assented unto. On this foot we left them, being assured, upon the word
and honor of your Commissioners, we should receive an account of them within
few days; If that resolution be altered, we shall desire to have a clear and
perfect Answer: that the world may be the Judge between us upon whose score,
the effusion of so much innocent blood shall rest; since in conformity to His
Majesty's Command, we do not decline the rendering of this City, upon
honorable and equal conditions.

So I remain, Sir, Your humble servant. Henry Washington.
Worcest. 16. July, 1646. Postscript.
SIR,
LEast the Treaty begun by Colonel Whalley, might have been misrepresented by
him, I shall desire you to grant a pass for Master Goodwin, to come to you,
who can particularly inform you, of the progress of the whole Treaty; which
gives me opportunity of sending this pass for Captain Blisset.



MAjor General Rainsborow receiving this Letter from Colonel Washington, he
yielded to a parley, which was carried on with very much gallantry, and wisdom;
and the result thereof, produced an agreement for the surrender of the City of
Worcester, with the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition therein according to these
ensuing Articles.

Articles of agreement for the Surrender of the City of Worcester, and the
Forts belonging thereunto, concluded July 19. 1646 Between Col. Tho. Rainsborow
on the behalf of his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax General of he forces raised
by the Parliament, and Col. Henry VVashington Governor of Worcester.
1. THat the City of Worcester with all Forts, Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition,
stores and Provision of War thereunto belonging shall be delivered without
wilful spoil and imbeazlement unto his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or to
such as he shall appoint to receive them upon the 22 of this instant July at
ten of the Clock, in the morning, in such manner and with such exceptions as
are contained in the ensuing Articles.

2. That one the 23 of July the Governor and all Officers and Soldiers of the
Garrison, with all other persons therein that will shall march out of Worcester
with their Horses, Arms, and Baggage belonging to them to any place within one
mile of Worcester, which the Governor shall choose, where all their Horses and
Arms except what allowed in the ensuing Articles shall be delivered up to such
as his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint. All the Soldiers shall be
disbanded, and all such both Officers and Soldiers and others as shall engage
themselves by promise never to bear Arms any more against the Parliament of
England, nor do any thing wilfully to the prejudice of their affairs shall
have the benefit of these ensuing Articles.

3. That all such as shall desire to go to their own ho^es, or private
friends, shall have the Generals passes and protection for their peaceable
repair to and abode at their several places they shall desire to go unto,
The Governor to pass with all Horses, Arms and baggage properly belonging to
him, and each Colonel to pass with three Horses, and each Lieutenant Colonel
and Sergeant Major with two Horses, each Captain Lieutenant, and Cor^^^t with
out Horse, and every person not under the degree of an Esquire with three
Horses and all of them with their Arms and goods properly belonging to them to
be carried on their Horses, and all Soldiers with their Swords and such
baggage as properly belong to them, which they carry about them.

4. That all persons which are to have the benefit of the preceding Articles
shall if they desire it, have passes to go beyond Seas, provided they depart
this Kingdom within two Months after the surrender of the Town.

5. That the City and garrison of Worcester, and all the Inhabitants thereof
shall be preserved from all plunder and violence of the Soldier.

6. That Sir William Russell now residing in Worcester be excepted from any
benefit of these Articles.

Hen. Washington.
Signed and Sealed July 19.
FINIS.

