A Copy of Verses Presented TO His Royal Higness, AT THE Lord Biship of
SALISBVRY's; ON Monday the 15th. of this Instant September, 1684.
To the Illustrious and High Born Prince, James, Duke of York, and George
Prince of Denmark.
WElcome great Princes to our Tradesmen all,
Welcome to Loyalty whether great or small;
To witness which, we'll let you know
Our Lives etc. for Loyalty shall go:
Blessed be God; the Nation's now in peace again,
And Fanatics once more turn Loyal men.
Now may our King, and Princes a Progress go,
God still defend them, and Confound their Foe.
Heavens bless the King and Royal Family to;
And prosper all what e're they have to do;
And suffer not the Unhallowed Heart and Hand,
Any more to prosper; which durst command
The Sons of Belial further for to Plot,
Or Sallamanca like, Swear they know not what;
To take the lives of Loyal men away,
By seeing from St. Omers hither in a Day:
Denying honesty, proud with Malice grow,
Regard not Others but to the Devil go,
Thinking it is no sin to spill the guiltless Blood
Tho never so Loyal and in their places good.
Faith and Allegiance they did not Spare,
Nor Conscience make to pull him from his Chair
Thus did the Villains think for to be great
Making Religion the ground of all their Cheat
They thought quite to blot out Prince James's Name,
Who was a Hero to all where e're he came.
But Justice soon found them out, and at last
Destroyed their Hellish Counsels with a Blast:
And the Damned Rebels brought to shame,
Who might have lived in Honor and in Fame,
Blessed be God some are already dead,
Tho others from Justice they are Fled:
Who dare not blame hard Fate or Destiny,
But wilful rebellion Rewarded with Misery.
Thus have Loyalty and Justice all their Plots out-don,
Over turned their Counsels, and made the Traitors Run.
Rotten members must be lopt of for fear
Of doing further harm, whilst they are here.
Gentle forbearance making Traitors to offend,
And does but Strength to all Phanaticks lend:
Which makes them still expect their acts of Grace,
To thrust their Sovereign out of his place.
Go Traitorous Martirs go, go and tell
Your horrid plots unto the damned in hell:
There Address, Associate, and for liberty call
To your old Achitophell, Beelzebub, Lucifer and all
The Damned Crew --
Confounded be all such that seek their Princes Woe,
Lord cut thm off, or work their Ovethrow.
LONDON, Printed by G. Croom, for the Author. 1684.


