An Historical RELATION OF THE Military Government of GLOUCESTER: From the
beginning of the Civil War Between KING and PARLIAMENT To the removal of
Colonel MASSY from that Government to the Command of the Western Forces.

By John Corbet Preacher of Gods Word.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by M. B. for Robert Bostock at the Kings Head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1645.



To the Right Worshipful, the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, with the
Burgesses of the City of GLOUCESTER.
Gentlemen,
SIlent and calm times, and an equal stream of secular Affairs are more
acceptable to men of the present age, because they are times of enjoyment;
whereas the greater Changes and Confusions of the world do more delight
Posterity, or such as survive the trouble of those Changes. For it is a pleasure
to behold at such a distance the Risings and Falls of Nations and their
Governments, as to see the raging Sea from the secure Land. And it does not
seldom come to pass that an universal Concussion, and the shaking of the
pillars of the earth, does cast it into better frame and settle it on a firm
Basis: So that the men of the former Age do labor, and those of the later
enter into their labors. Even so, it is the Calamity of these Days to be
engaged in such a War and the woeful attendants thereof; yet their felicity
to be engaged for the highest interests in this life, which will exalt them,
whatsoever the success be; and if prosperous, will make the faithful in the
land a perpetual Excellency, and the joy of many Generations. The Action of
these times transcends the Barons Wars, and those tedious discords between
the Houses of York and Lancaster, in as much as it is undertaken upon higher
Principles, and carried on to a nobler end, and effects more universal. And in
this you have acted not the least part for a particular Government to your own
safety and honor, and by a general acknowledgement not a little to the
preservation of the whole Kingdom. Wherefore out of abundant respect to my
dear native place, having collected some Memorials of its fidelity and
Industry, I humbly present them to your view, who were witnesses of, and bore a
part in those performances. I remember my own thoughts when we were in the
height of Danger, and ready to fall into the depth of Misery, That I did seem
to refresh my self in the conceit of the future joyous remembrance thereof,
when we should out live those extremities. And you also must needs be
abundantly satisfied in reminding those manifold hazards and exegencies which
you by patience and perseverance have in good measure overcome. For which cause
this Historical Relation, though it tenders it self to the review of all
serious men, yet unto yours chiefly, that your joy might be yet more full.
Neither ought we to be so injurious to Divine Providence, as to bury or keep
secret the influence and working thereof upon the endeavors of a willing
people. Hitherto you have run well, nothing remains but perseverance, that
the concluding part may be blessed and honorable. Let your City ever flourish
and prosper under the protection of the Highest.

Gentlemen, Your humbly devoted servant, JOHN CORBET.

LEges Historiae civilis aperte satis innuit Franciscus Verulamius notando
plurima quae eam circumstant vitia. Dum plerique narrationes quasdam inopes and
plebeias conscribant; alii particulares relationes, and Commentariolos opera
Festinata, and textu inaequali consariant; alii capita tantum Rerum gestarum
percurrant; alii contra minima quaeque and ad summas actionum nihil facientia
persequantur: Nonnulli, nimia erga ingenia propria indulgentia plurima audacter
confingant: Ast alii non tam ingeniorum suorum, quam Affectuum imaginem rebus
imprimant and addant, partium suarum memores, rerum parum fideles Testes;
Quidam politica in quibus sibi complacent, ubique inculcent, and diverticula ad
ostentationem quaerendo narrationem rerum nimis leviter interru^pant: alii in
orationum and conoionum aut etiam Actorum ipsorum prolixitate parum cum judicio
nimii sunt.

Haec omnia caute vitantur in Historia legitima and numeris suis absoluta.

De Augment: Scient. l. 2. c. 5. Errata.
PAge 4. l. 37. r. tracke. p. 6. l. 27. r. in themselves. p. 8. l. 4. r.
tender. p. 50. l. 17. del. and the river chained. p. 81. l. 6. r Subtle. p.
ib. l. 10. r. imaginary. p. 82. l. 32. r. quartered. p. 85. l. 11. r. Winnie^
hill. p. 86. l. 22. r. Ledbury. p. 119. l. 23. r. yielded to the drawing. p.
220. l. 13. r. role. p. 121. l. 21. r. Lidney. p. 123. l. 9. r Gloucester.
Other faults less material, let the courteous Reader be pleased to correct.

AN Historical Relation Of The Military Government of GLOUCESTER.
AMidst the variety of action in the present Age, the course of this Military
Government was conceived not unworthy to be known unto more than them that
acted, or beheld at a nearer distance; only the care of a true and meet
Representation held his thoughts, who has now brought it to the public light,
and hazarded the censure of these knowing times. If I have fallen below the
Story, I shall neither beg acceptance nor crave pardon for a deliberateerrour;
nevertheless to give an account of the design is no more then that due which
all may expect and challenge: only the Princes of Learnings Empire are
authentic in the very name, and require an uncontrolled pass without a
Preface to ^ther them: but whosoever owes respect and d^^^ to the world, his
observance will plead for the necessity of a (...) introduction.

The Relation therefore brings to remembrance the affairs of a particular
Command, which as yet has not been the meanest part of the present warfare,
the event whereof all Christendom may expect with admiration and horror; it is
one branch of the History of these times, which happily may be viewed in
several parcells better then in one entire body: for such a Chronicle, if it
shall duly express the rise and progress of things, must needs be perplexed
with multiplicity of interwoven Discourses, when three Kingdoms are engaged,
and no part in either of them stand free as Spectators only of the common
calamity; that the work must either swell into a bulk misshapen and
burdensome, or lie too narrow to comprize the several parts in their just and
perfect measures; but many single Narrations do more exactly delineate, give
the truest colors, and put upon things the most unsuspected visage. General
Histories do seldom approach the fountain of action, and their gloss though
beautiful, yet more dull cannot hold forth that native grace and luster.
Whereas there appear in particular branches those lively sparklings and more
secret motions of life and heat, which strike upon that fancy and intellect
that can behold and reach them; besides, they that gather up so many divided
Plots (as are now acted) into one model, are wont to endeavor after a
smoother path, a greater harmony, and more exact symmetry of parts; whereas the
face of things is conscious of more disproportion, sometimes a confusion of
business, and the several scenes may easily swerve from the original plot;
but the divided parts drawn in several are not so constrained and rackt, but
come naked and more simple, and show that the reason of the same Counsels is
one in the Senate or Conclave; another in the field, discovers the failing or
the crosse-working of contrivances, how in the midst of action the maine
Land-markes are waved, and many grand projects never reach their period. Out of
all which the comparing faculty of a judicious observer may collect the
mis-guidance or defects of Policy; and see how the pearcing subtilties of wit
are broken and shattered by the course of things more knotty, rude, and and
violent; and this is the life of History, that ought to declare the delinquency
of State as well as its accomplishment and perfection.

If the materials of the Work be questioned whether fit to be drawn up into
one regular and compacted whole, and to make a standing monument, we also know
that nothing in this kind is to be thrust upon the world, since History does
intend to gratify the future times with the remembrance of those things only
which prudent men desire, and claim from such as pretend an interest and
portion in the treasures of knowledge; it bears therefore before it nothing
more then the thing it self gives forth, and which may find acceptance with
severer wits; for not only the remarkable changes of the Universe, the grand
periods of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, the chief and turning points of
State-affaires, but particular Plat-formes, lives, examples, and emergent
occasions also, are to be observed and laid up for posterity. More yet, those
particularities, and minute passages are they that come home to men's business,
approach their experience, and guide their course; but things more grand and
lofty seem to be turned upon the wheels of Providence; too high for the
imitation of men. The work of a politic or martial man is to fix his
design, and then to expect the accomplishment, not by one sudden or great
achievement, but by a series of many particles, and through an infinite
variety of emergent occasions, and at last the maine turning point falls in by
the overruling power of the Universal cause; such are properly the works of
men into which they ought to enquire and search. Besides, the chief skill is
not the general knowledge of the maine undertaking, but a certain dexterity
in meeting every point, in working through many mazes and windings, since
sundry passages of small purport intervene to disturb or promove it.
Experience tells, that many Universal Scholars are the most uncouth persons
to Civil employment, which so happens, because they study Books more then the
course of business, in which they gaze upon high objects, and bind themselves
to the riged observance of received Canons; that if they venture amongst men,
upon a slight accident unexpected, they stick in the mire or run a wrong
course. We dislike not the taking up of well tried Principles, only by
examples of all sorts must we learn to except and distinguish, and by
consequence to use or abate the rigor of Political Maxims: neither does it
seldom come to pass that inferior things overruled, and a circumstance may
be predominant. From such a low bottom and mean beginning are great things
raised, and as their verticle point come in an instant, so may they be turned
upon a weak and slender hinge; yet we mean not those circumstances that are
the inseparable attendants of every natural action, but only such as are
worthy, and have a moral influence; all which shun their understandings who
respect only great, and excelse objects, which peradventure may flourish with
ostentation and pomp, but if applied unto the life of man bring forth an
effect like the birth of the Mountains. And here we tender a naked Comentary
and true rehearsal of those things as deserve not wholly to be forgotten; if
it be not full of rare changes which may grace the composure, and affect the
Reader; yet does it give the full draught of a Martial command, and a true
Copy of the things it intends to express: it has this advantage it common
with others of the like nature, that it can come forth to the censure of the
present Age without the guilt and shame of mistakes or flatteries. Authors more
Universal could never gain to be styled the Writers of unquestionable
verities, for they see at a greater distance, and by a more obscure and duskey
light: certainly a nearer approach, and some kind of interest is required of
him that desires to show not only some tarcke and footsteps, but the express
image of things, for whatsoever passes from hand to hand though upon the most
undubitable Authority, proves at the best but the image of a Picture: for the
best wit that takes things though upon the surest trust, must needs fall short
of the Copy by which he writes, if not in beauty, yet in the truth and life
thereof. The only danger in such as are intressed is, least they be partial
to their own side, or make the Discourse more lofty then the Stage can reach;
which mischief the deliberate thoughts of a serious man can prevent, and tell
him that the unvayling of the defects, and misfortunes of his own party does
evince the sincerity of the Relation, and graceth it with more variety, then
what the continual stream of the hight of gallantry and success can yield;
and which is most of all, does demonstrate that at some times the design was
laid upon the principles of reason, and prosecuted with industry, whereas
continual victory is attributed to a certain hidden felicity, and the bounty
of providence. Affection therefore receives a check from that man who is more
true to his own faction and ends, then to transgress against the honor of
that work he takes in hand.

As for this Military Government, the power hereof has rested in one Command,
and therefore does more easily close into a single frame, yet not in a smooth
and equal strain, but distinguished by many rises and falls: it is a branch
almost divided from the maine stock, and has been put to live and act of it
self: nevertheless a branch still, and enlivened by the Authority of the
Kingdoms sovereign power, from which it receives an influence both of support
and guidance: but its distance from the fountain of power had derived upon the
Trustee a more free command, and made way for the perfect work of a soldier
both counsel and action, which is the surest way to make such commands both
active and prosperous.

The seat hereof lies in the heart of the enemies Country, like a forlorn
hope, and is maintained not so much for its own sake, or that so much ground
might lie under a Parliament Power, but to divide the Kings Association, to
stop his Recrutes, to scarter his Forces, and continually to distract the
designs of that Army. Experience is witness of how great concernment it has
been to the safety of the Commonwealth, not one place in the Kingdom of
England has so much exhausted the enemies Army, nor has the like advantage to
ruin it: It can pain them at the heart, it is a fire kindled in their bowels,
that might eat out their strength, had it been the felicity of the State to
have sent hither a part of those great supplies, which have been elsewhere
expended, and done little toward the conclusion of the great work.

If this Collection shall present any thing that comes home to a civil life,
or the employment of a Soldier, if it shall bring to mind acceptable
services, and cause the people to remember the day of small things, with the
power of active and faithful endeavors, that observe and follow the Divine
Providence, I shall not fail of my end: and I know that this my adventure is
no more then what the action does deserve, and the world may challenge.

THe engagement of the City of Gloucester in this common Cause of Religion and
Liberty, first began when the Houses of Parliament declared to the Kingdom
their resolution of a defensive War: neither were its principal and active men
drawn in by inferior and accidental motives, but quickened by the same
Principles in the maine, that did enliven and actuate the Supreme Court,
expressing themselves the very motions of a Parliamentary spirit by an absolute
and greeda compliance with every act that breathed toward the perfect health
of the State, the several Remonstrances of both Houses were received with all
due respect, whereas no Declaration sent from the other Party, found the
courtesy of a formal entertainment. It has been the honor of that Civil
Government, never to be guilty of the least act of disservice against that
Cause which their hearts wish might prevail and prosper. Therefore when the
fire kindled and fomented by Jesuited Papists and their adherents, was blown
up into a flame, and the heads of two Parties appeared within this Realm, the
City of Gloucester determined not to stand Neutrall in action, but to adhere
unto one party, with which they resolved to stand or fall, necessity requiring
no less, which affection improves into virtue. The acknowledgement of its own
advantage in situation and strength importuned a more timely Declaration,
least by it self neglected, it should be seized by the Enemy, whose eae was
upon it, and so cast into perpetual bondage. Also the greatest part of the
Country consented and resolved to maintain their Birthrights in the defense
of the Privileges and Power of Parliament, against all invasions of usurpation
and tyranny.

During the Kings preparaetions in the North, they attempted (according to the
slendernes of al beginnings) to put themselves into a posture of defense, and
exspected the instructions of Parliament. And whereas the Ordinance of Militia
was the first pretended ground of difference between his Majesty and the
Houses, (they desiring such Officers in whom the State might confide, and the
King refusing to deprive them that by himself were entrusted) when the rent
was once made, a greater necessity impleaded the execution of that Ordinance:
Whereupon the Lord Say was by Order of Parliament appointed Lord Lieutenant: A
Commission was likewise granted unto diverse Gentlemen for Deputy Lieutenants,
many whereof drew back and shunned the employment, that the power for the most
part rested in the Members of the House of Commons for this County, by whose
countenance many Companies of Volunteers were raised, then called the Militia
Bands, and led by such Captains as the Embryo of the War could afford. But
the first undertaking was more jocund then the progress; as often times it comes
to pass, that a Military pomp and appearance of bravery does affect and raise
up many feeble spirits, who quickly lie flat when they begin to feel the
stubbornness and cruelty of War.

The Commission of Array did not adventure to render it self to the people; it
was about to be offered to their liking at Cirencester, by the Lord Chando's
and some other disaffected Gentlemen, but was stifled in the birth, and crushed
by the rude hand of the multitude before it saw the light; the chief Abetter
thereof was like to suffer violence by the meanest of the people, whose fury
constrained him to promise, and give under his hand, that he would never more
deal in the business. But when they saw that this Lord had escaped their
hands by a secret conveyance, they were the more enraged, and waxed cruel
against his Accoutrements and Furniture, and whatsoevtr of his was left behind,
delighting in a contumelious revenge and rustic triumph. Such were the effects
of that fury that took hold on the ignoble multitude, in whom not always the
deep sense of their own interests does provoke this ecstasy of passion, but
peradventure a slighter accident and unexpected turning of the fancy sets them
in a hurry, when their insolency becomes intolerable, and they glory to vent
their humors, by reason of an usual restraint and subjection. Nevertheless
they have produced good effects, and often times a more undescerned guidance of
superior Agents turns them to the terror of the Enemy, and an unexplecable
selfe-ingagement upon the common people, which prudent men promote and
maintain, yet no farther then themselves can overruled and moderate. Hereupon
the full stream of the Country runs for the Ordinance of the Militia, and
against the Kings Declarations and Commission of Array. But since we are now
upon the beginning of action, it will not be from the matter to declare the
grounds of that affection which the Country did express, and were common unto
them with many parts of the Kingdom, that were devoted to the same Cause, but
might appear in a greater degree, and have a clearer evidence in the present
example. Most men therefore did undoubtedly foresee greater hopes of liberty
from the Parliament then the Kings Party; in so much that there appeared in all
the States adhearents an inbred propensity to freedom, but a desire of vast
Dominion, Dignity, revenge, or rapine in them that took to the contrary
Faction; by which this Country did seem well disposed to comply with the
Parliaments grand Design: for there was no excessive number of powerful
Gentry, who for the most part care not to render themselves the slaves of
Princes, that they also might rule over their Neighbors as Vassalls: But the
Inhabitants consisted chiefly of Yeomen, Farmers, petty Freeholders, and such
as use Manufactures that enrich the Country, and pass through the hands of a
multitude, a generation of men truly laborious, jealous of their Properties,
whose principal aim is Liberty and Plenty, and whilst in an equal rank with
their Neighbors they desire only not to be oppressed, and account themselves
extremely bound to the world, if they may keep their own; such therefore
continually thwart the intentions of tyranny unto which they only are
molded, who detesting a close, hardy, and industrious way of living do eat
their bread in the sweat of other men, and neglecting a secure estate, rejoice
rather in the height of fortune though inconstant and dangerous. Such is the
predominant humor of Gentlemen in a corrupted age. Besides, the Countryman
had of his own, and did not live by the breath of his great Land lord; neither
were the poor and needy at the will of the Gentry, but observed those men by
whom those Manufactures were maintained that kept them alive. By which means
it came to pass that neither they of the middle rank, nor the needy were de
voted to the examples of the Gentlemen who turned back, betrayed their trust
(and are always more apt to be corrupted, or mistaken in judging of the common
interest) but had learned to reverence their Liberties, and to acknowledge
their native happiness.

But some higher cause had a greater influence on the endeavors of many for a
well-bounded Freedom, and regular Privileges; a knowledge of things
pertaining to Divine Worship, according to the maine Principles of the
Christian profession. Which Religion is not according to the will of man but
grounded upon an unchangeable and eternal Truth, and does indispensably bind
every soul to one Law perpetual and constant. This therefore does strongly
implead the necessity of external privileges in her Professors, and though it
does not destroy the Kingdoms of the World, nor usurp a greater liberty then
humane Laws will easily grant, yet it will not give away its native right; and
it has moreover in its nature an irreconcilable emnity against Arbitrary
Government, and will work its self out of bondage when the felicity of the
times shall give power and a lawful call. And in this kind of knowledge this
City and County was more happy then many other parts of the Kingdom by means
of a practical Ministry, which has not only its powerful working in Divine
things, but does also enable vulgar capacities more fitly to apply themselves
to such things as cenverne the life of a moral man; and although each Person
thus informed reaches not the depth of the reason, yet he can comprehend the
truth thereof, and jealousy makes him the more quick-sighted. Thus have we
found that the common people addicted to the Kings service have come out of
blind Wales, and other dark corners of the Land; but the more knowing are apt
to contradict and question, and will not easily be brought to the bent. For
this cause the ambition of the times has endeavored the undermining of true
Religion, to promote a blind and irrational worship, that might bring forth an
ignorant and slavish generation of men, which kind of bondage the meanest
person that performs a reasonable service cannot but resent and fear.

Yet something there was that might debase and infeeble their spirits (the
plague and mischief of the whole Realm) a gross ignorance, and supine
neglect of Military Discipline, there being no ground for the study and
exercise of Arms that might keep the body of the State in health and vigor.
Nor is it unlikely that extreme vassalage was the end of that long sluggish
Peace, when the Nation could not have been more happy, then in some just and
honorable war with foreign parts, though now none more miserable by reason
of these civil broils, that tear the bowels and eat up the strength of the
Kingdom. It Is no shame in the progress of time to look back upon the
beginnings of action. The Trained Bands accounted the maine support of the
Realm, and Bulworks against unexpected invasions, were effeminate in courage
and incapable of Discipline, because their whole course of life was alienated
from warlike employment, in so much that young and active spirits were more
perfect by the experience of two days service. Wherefore these men might
easily repine at oppression, and have a will to preserve themselves; yet a
small body of desperate Cavalliers might over run and ruin them at their
pleasure. Some professed Soldiers were sent down from the Parliament to
settle these and the Militia bands, who had this only according to the Rules
of war, to be gathered under several Captains, and many of them into the
form of a Regiment, which disposition might fit them for a sudden service,
and the very posture confer something of a warlike spirit.

Within the City of Gloucester one Company of Volunteers was added to the
Trained Band, and some Pieces of Ordinance obtained from London and Bristoll,
which were then received with universal amazement by an Inland people, though
not long after they grew familiar with their terrible executions: mean while
the City was open on three parts at least, and had no considerable defense,
only capable thereof by advantage of situation: The Citizens did mainely show
their care and affection in fortifying the Town, a work both expensive and
tedious; being of great compass, and raised from the ground: During these
things the Enemy came not near our dwellings, we heard of them a far off,
but little thought that the cloud of blood should be blown from the North and
settle over us, upon whom it afterward brake into so many showers; that this
place should become the seat of War, and the Stage of action; that then
lying open to a free commerce with the World, it should be shut up sometimes in
strict custody, but still under a larger confinement, and beleagured at a
distance in the midst of the Kings head Garrisons.

At that time the rumors of War and first acts of Hostility quickly filled
the ears and tongues of people, Alarms were then taken at a greater distance,
and the first was given from the neighbor City of Worcester, by five hundred
of the Kings Horse, which entered the Town, and at that season were not the
least part of his Majesty's forces: His whole strength could not amount to the
number of a just Army, according to the slender proportion of those times,
neither could they march like a set and perfect body, but flasht through the
Land as the Lightning that strikes from one quarter of the Heaven to the other.
The noise of a nearer Enemy raised the Volunteers of the Country, who marched
under the conduct of some Gentlemen toward Worcester, expecting to meet
Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes with a strength of Horse, but Colonel Fiennes had
faced the Town and drawn off before the advance of our Foot, and they also
retreated having done nothing, but so meanly prepared for the service, that
they were much bound to the Enemy that they fell not out of the City and cut
them in pieces. The same Volunteers came on the second time, and were to join
once more with Colonel Fiennes, who returned with a greater strength of Horse
and Dragoones under the Command of Colonel Sands, and now also prevented our
Foot; they attempted the onset, and approached the Town with much speed and
confidence on the Welsh side of Seaverne, supposing the Earl of Essex at hand
to assault the other side; but were merely deluded by a false Message from the
Enemy with a signal accordingly given, at which instant of time Prince Rupert
arrived at Worcester. By means of this deceit the Horse rush upon an
Ambuscado, when through the straightness of the passage first over a Bridge,
then through a narrow Lane, neither the Rear could be brought up, nor the Van
make a Retreat. 'Twas an hot skirmish, and performed with sufficient gallantry
on our part by them that came up, where persons of value were slain and taken,
the rest wholly routed and fled in confusion far beyond the reach of a
persuite. This Victory was of great consequence to the Enemy, because the Omen
and first fruits of the war. Upon this the Kings forces hearing of the
approach of the Parliament Army immediately quitted the Town: so they shifted
from place to place since their inconsiderable number would scarce allow them
to erect any Garrison; yet they increased by their motion and quick dispatch,
gathered the strength of the Countries as they passed along, and withal
overcame the contempt of their small numbers, and by frequent execution gained
the repute of a Party not easily to be vanquished. This they acted while the
Parliament Army lay still, or marched according to the slow paces of a greater
Body. The day after the Skirmish the Earl of Essex entered Worcester with his
whole Power, and there continued a months space, sent forth several Parties,
as the Lord Stanford to Hereford to prevent the Forces of South Wales, whilst
the King lay about Shrewsbury, and raised himself to such an Army as was able
to deal with and endanger that maine power raised by the Parliament.

After the famous Battle at Edgehill, the first large field of blood in
these Civil Wars, though the Kings Army was there much broken, yet his
strength increased, and multitudes began to look toward him, as one at
leastwise possible not to be overcome, and in this strange confluence of men
His Army seemed like that fabulous generation that sprung out of the teeth of
the Cadmean Serpent buried in the earth. The neglected Enemy becomes
formidable, and the Parliament Forces may desire their first advantage, but
have sufficiently learned that to give the first blow is not against the Law of
a defensive war; the hopes of a subitaneous service are lost and the Kingdom
is made sensible, that their peace and liberty will cost much blood. Both the
Armies begin to take up their winter quarters in the most defensible places,
and for the most part are settled according to the affections and engagements of
the people; Colonel Thomas Essex marched into Gloucester with the Command of
two Regiments of Foot as Governor of the Town, but as yet the Deputy
Lieutenants had the sole Command of the County. Four weeks had not passed in
this Government but Colonel Essex was commanded to Bristoll, to secure and
settle that City of so great concernment, both by Sea and Land, and at that
time much distracted between the well-affected and malignant parties. So it
was, that the Kings Cause and Party were favored by two extremes in that
City; the one the wealthy and powerful men, the other of the basest and lowest
sort, but disgusted by the middle rank, the true and best Citizens. Thus the
present state of things had taught men to distinguish between the true Commons
of the Realm and the dreggs of the people; the one the most vehement assertors
of Public Liberty, but the other the first rise of Tyrannical Government,
and the footstool upon which Princes tread when they ascend the height of
Monarchy. In that City many of the rich men were disaffected to reformed
Religion, and some more powerful were conscious of delinquency; others
upbrayded themselves with their own public disgrace, and therefore did much
distaste the ways of the Parliament, and the needy multitude besides their
natural hatred of good Order were at the devotion of the rich men. These
therefore began to raise Commotions, and hearing of the advance of the Forces
from Gloucester, flocked together after a tumultuary manner, shut up the Gates,
but chiefly guarded that Port where they expected an entrance would be made,
and planted many Ordnance against the approach of our men, with a full
resolution to fire upon them. They were expected in the Evening, but Colonel
Essex had intelligence of these preparations, and from a Party within was
directed that night to march to another Gate (then neglected by the multitude)
that should be set open; this was performed accordingly, and betimes in the
morning he entered the City with his two Regiments, besides great numbers out of
this County, and in an instant surprised the mutineers, and quashed the
business without drawing of blood.

The City of Gloucester was again left naked till the Earl of Stamford
marched hither with his Regiment of Foot, and two Troops of Horse from
Hereford, the Earl himself was commanded into the West upon his first
arrival, but his Regiment designed for this City under the command of
Lieutenant Colonel Massy, first as Deputy Governor under the Lord Stamford,
afterward with the power in himself which for the space of two years and
six months continued an uninterupted and happy Government. The providence of
God and the felicity of the place so overruling, that that Country which
should endure the brunt, fustaine so many violent shocks, and bear up under
the Kings whole Army should be defended by a Commander, whose experience,
fidelity, and valor with indefatigable care and industry might answer the
expectation of so great a trust, assisted with that Regiment, whose very name
proved a terror to the Enemy, and long enjoyed the honor of the most ancient
Regiment in the Parliament Army, though broken, torn, and worn out with
extraordinary duty and service. And because the mere pomp of Military
preparations, and the hopes of a sudden Victory being now past, the war has
put on a blacker visage, and the sad effects thereof come home to these parts;
it is meet to express what was the state of the Country at that time. The
inhabitants of this County had openly engaged themselves in the State service,
nor as yet had they any thought of repenting, though cast into the midst of an
enraged Enemy. Oxford is the Kings head Garrison, Herefordshire possessed by
his Forces upon the first removal of the Earl of Stamford into Gloucester;
Worcester has already entertained a strength, Wales rise on the Kings behalf
by the power of the Lord Herbert: the Earl of Essex with his Army is drawn
toward London, the Parliament Forces in the West have their hands full; and
there remain in these parts of the Kingdom only two broken Regiments at
Bristoll, which was much distracted by intestine divisions, and one Regiment at
Gloucester; so that the most slender Guard was left upon these parts, where the
Enemy resolved their chief game for the winter action. And if this Country
must be preserved, it must be done by the Volunteers, which were yet as a Cake
not turned, a kind of Soldiers not wholly drawn off from the Plow or
domesticke employments, having neither resolution nor support suitable to the
service: But the greatest defect was the want of able and experienced Officers;
neither had they any Commander in chief upon whom the hearts of the people
might fasten.

Amidst these things the strength of the County was drawn to Cirencester a
fronteer Town toward the Kings head quarters, then made a Garrison to prevent
the incursions of the Enemy, as well to preserve the Country from ruin as to
advance the Public Service; Colonel Fettiplace had the Command of this
Garrison, under whom some Train Bands and Volunteers were drawn into a
Regiment, and two Companies of the Lord Stamfords Regiment were added to
encourage the business: a few Horse and Dragoones were raised at the free
charge of the Country, and the rest of the Militia were to assist upon all
appearance of danger: all things were trans-acted in a more voluntary, but
less regular way. The business chiefly rested on Sir Robert Coske, Sir John
Seamore, Master Natbaniel Stephens, Master Edward Stephens, Master Thomas
Hodges, with the rest of the Deputy Lieutenants; and setting aside these men
with some gleanings of the Gentry, the Yeomen, Farmers, Cloathiers, and the
whole middle rank of the people were the only active men. The Gentlemen in
general denied their concurrence, discerting their Country either by open
enmity or detestable neutrality; and from the Major part no better fruit was
to be looked for in a degenerate Age, when in many of them there appeared an
hatred of the Commons, and a strong disposition to the ends of Tyranny. Others
there were not wholly averse from the good of the Commonwealth, whose enmity
was grounded in Religion, which obtained the most eminent place in the
Parliaments Cause. The superstitious adoring of their old way imbittered their
spirits against reformed Religion, which to them seemed a peevish affectation
of novelty, besides, the hatred and fear of Ecclesiastical Discipline. But
the greatest number neither driven by ambition, nor the spirit of blind zeal,
only resolving to be true to themselves, deserted the State with some
inclinations to the contrary Faction, reflecting on their estates environed
with the Kings Country, near the heart of his strength and far from
Parliamentary supplies; besides, the violence and quick dispatch of the Kings
Army, with the slow performances of our Country Agents after the space of an
ordinary legal course in those extremities, did much deter them; the Country
complained of their principal men for the neglect of Taxes, and the Gentlemen
might happily see the grudgings of the Country in the payment of those Taxes
(for the common people are always covetous though well-affected) and forbear
to urge whatsoever might distaste the people, or cross the Parliaments
accustomed moderation. Which slow deliberations did lessen the esteem of the
service in the hearts of many.

The secession of the dis-afiected Gentlemen did cast an aspe^sion that could
not stick, that the business was dese^ted by knowing men, and prosecuted by a
rash and confused multitude. Whereas by no one thing could it more evidently
appear to be the Cause of the Commonwealth then by the acknowledgement of the
whole Body of the Commons, which is more honest and wise in things of public
concernement; for though they be very weak one by one, yet brought together
they balance each other, and when no man has power to impropriate much, each
man expects only a proportionable share in the Public interest. Neither is
their judgment and foresight to be undervalued who are apt to discern any
thing that concerns themselves, and being united are not like to fail, for
they have the best experience and are nearly affected with the woe or weal of
the State, and so may sometimes judge better then those that guide it, as he
that uses the house can better judge thereof then the Builder, and the Pilate
of the Stern then the Carpenter. And although they have not the first and most
excellent part of knowledge to find out, and by themselves to understand the
rules of Government, yet have they the second part, which is also excellent to
judge aright of things proposed, and if not made fit for the yoke by dependence
on the Gentry, can discover the fraud that lies under the fairest pretext; but
the Gentlemen by depriving the meaner people of their due protection, blemished
the reputation of their Families, and crossed the end of their honors and
possessions, which in a well ordered State are given for a shelter to the under
shrubs that some generous spirit nearer the Commons might keep off the
invasion of Princes, and whose power was most desired in such an exegence, to
gather up the scatterings of the people and keep them united, who for want of
this concurrence were of less strength and vigor.

Such was the face of this Country now ready to receive the first shocke of the
Enemies fury. About the first of January, 1642. the maine strength of the Kings
Army came before Cirencester prepared and resolved to storm it, yet they only
faced the Town, and after two days were strangely taken off, either disabled
by the extreme cold on the Hills, or some sudden misfortune, or daunted by
the show of unanimity and resolution in the people, or else clouded in their
thoughts by the secret Will of God in the nick of action, that they made not
the least attempt, but threatened an afterclap. A few days after our forces had
their design upon Sudely Castle, at that time kept by Captain Bridges in the
behalf of the Lord Chandos. Leiutenant Colonel Massy was entrusted with the
manage of this action, who drew from Gloucester a Party of three hundred
Musketteers, with two Sakres assisted with fourscore Horse, and four
Companies of Dragoones from Cirencester by order of a Counsel of War held
there, and consent of the Deputy Lieutenants; there were in the Castle near
threescore Soldiers, with Provision and Ammunition sufficient: Our men drew up
before it in the Evening, made several shots, and the Canon did some
Execution; the same night summons was given, the enemy refused to render upon
quarter, but craved time till the next day, which in part was granted; Guards
were set upon them all night, the next morning our men were drawn out to make
an assault, Beds and Wooll-packs were fetched out of the Neighborhood, which
they tumbled before, and saved themselves from shot: the Horse and Dragoones
came up before the foot approached the wall, and possessed themselves of a Garden
under the Castle, and got Hay and Straw which they fired, that the smoke
driven by the wind smothered the house, in the shadow of which the Ordnance
were brought up undiscovered, and planted against the weakest part of the
Castle, which when the enemy perceived they sounded a parley, and immediately
rendered upon agreement; the conditions were that all might have liberty of
person, and pass to their own houses leaving their Arms behind, and taking
an Oath never to serve against the Parliament: they compounded also for the
goods in the house, for which they were to pay five hundred pounds within six
days, or to leave them a free prize to the Soldiers.

Within two days after Prince Rupert faced Sudely with about four thousand
Horse and Foot pretending an attempt to regaine it, but in the mean time
marched his Artilery toward Cirencester. Lieutenant Colonel Massy made
provision to maintain the Castle by taking in water, and store of Hay and
Corn, and having left there Lieutenant Colonel Forbes with a sufficient
Guard, himself retreated to Gloucester; the Prince with his Forces kept the
Hills, and after three days fell before Cirencester a straggling and open
Town, neither well fortified nor capable of defense. The champaine Country
round about was most advantageous to the Horse, in which the Enemies strength
did chiefly consist, and which was then wholly wanting to that Garrison, for
their Horse and Dragoones were sent to the taking of Sudely: most of their
Officers were drawn out upon that service except the Captains of the
Volunteers, and Lieutenant Colonel Karre was the only experienced Soldier
left there: their Canoneers were wanting, the common Soldiers quite off the
hinges either cowardly or mutinous. The storm rose when least feared by the
miserable people, who had not ended the joy of their late deliverance from as
great a power but strangely diverted; and though they were still in the same
danger upon the reverse of the Army, yet were they not capable of the least
distrust, till the storm hovered again, either supposing themselves
invincible, or by defiance to have bafled a wary Enemy, that falls back and
waits his time to return with greater fury. On the second of February the
Town was assaulted and taken; the first and maine assault was made on a house
a flight shot from the Town, which was defended by a hundred Musketeers for an
hours space against two Regiments of Foot, and a Regiment of Horse which were
led on by the Prince, till at length having drawn up their Musketeers, and by
Grenades fired the Barnes and Ricks and smoothered the Guard, the Enemies
Horse drove their Foot before them, entered the streets by maine force, and
possessed themselves of the Garrison within two hours, yet it cost them the
lives of many, amongst whom the Welch-men were reported to suffer the greatest
slaughter, who in that Army were a continual sacrifice to the Sword. Each
Guard made resistance according to the Officers valor and experience; the
Soldiers of the Earl of Stamfords Regiment had acted the best part but that
they were most put to the sword when the Town was entered, except those that by
flight had their lives given them for a prey. Some few besides defended their
Guards a while, but the passages were many and open, and the enemy soon came
upon their backs; as for the Countrymen their hour was not yet come, neither
had they quitted such employment as did infeeble their spirits, nor entered the
School of War to study indignation, revenge and blood, that alone can overcome
the terror of an Army.

It so fell out that in the midst of the service they were at their wits end,
and stood like men amazed, fear bereft them of understanding and memory, begat
confusion in the mind within, and the thronging throughts did oppress and
stop the course of action that they were busied in everything but could bring
forth nothing; few of ours were slain in the fight, but many murdered after
the taking of the Town, eleaven hundred taken prisoners and at least two
thousand Arms lost, which the Country had there laid up as in a secure
Magazine; the miserable Captives were entertained with all despite and
contumely, according to the Enemies accustomed cruelty in the beginning of the
war; Commanders and Gentlemen had no better quarter then the common
Soldiers, but were all thrust into the Church to be reserved for a triumph,
and trampled upon in a base and impotent revenge: whether the first fury of a
civil war, and the jarres of Brethren prove most outrageous, or the cause of
Religion had blouded their minds. Not a man could be released, though the price
of his redemption were paid, till he had first attended the triumph at Oxford;
that an unfortunate King might view the aspect of such innocent Subjects, that
should presume to claim those rights wherein they were borne when reason might
easily evince that no slight matter could engage such a people in a open war
as were ever willing to deceive themselves into a Supererrogation of Loyalty.

The whole Country was quickly full of this disaster, and in vain did think
to recover what was lost by weakness of spirit or error in the chief manage
of the business; thousands of men armed and unarmed flocked together, and
resolved to undertake the Enemy under the conduct of a grave and well-minded
Patriot; but the desired Leader was conscious of the peoples madness, and knew
well that they made a loud cry a far off, but if once brought up to the face
of the Army they would never abide the fury of the first onset. Wherefore he
refused to engage himself and them upon a certain destruction; nevertheless
the people bitterly railed against him, and cursed him as a Traitor to his
Country; neither could the experience of these times dispossess them of that
absurd conceit.

The very next day after the loss of Cirencester the City of Gloucester was
demanded by Prince Rupert, the Summons found the people extremely dashed at
the strange turning of things, and so much amazed that they could not credit
the report of this blow, though confirmed by sundry eyewitnesses; the hearts
of many sunk very low and began to lie flat, Zeal and Religion upheld some,
all had a kind of will; but the strong sidelity and resolution of the Soldier
at that time, and in all extreme hazards upheld the Garrison. The Prince
therefore received a short answer from Lieuten ant Colonel Massy and the
principal Officers, that they were resolved with their lives and fortunes to
defend the City for the use of the King and Parliament, and in no wise would
surrender at the demand of a foreign Prince. Another answer was returned from
the Mayor of the City (for the Martial Command was not fully settled) that he
was resolved according to his Oath and Allegiance to keep the City in his
Majesty's behoose, and would not deliver the same according to this summons.
Whereupon a second summons was sent from the Prince, which could not alter the
case in their judgment who held the Town, and seeming withal to persuade and
solicit them out of their Hold, did easily beget an opinion of the Enemies
weakness and their own considerable strength, since neither Religion nor
modesty could withold from blood that enraged Party, but only the conscience
of a self insufficiency; the Soldier therefore began to acknowledge the
remainder of power which did not appear contemptible with the Kings Army.

Hitherto the City has been lodged in the midst of many out Garrisons as the
heart in the body, but now it has enough to do in its own safety, and the
remote parts must be pared off that a liberal nourishment might preserve and
foster that place which was the seat and fountain of life unto these parts of
the Kingdom. Sudeley Castle was deserted, the Garrison of Tewksbury (which was
defended only with such slender Forces as Gloucester could spare out of its
penury before the Enemy fell on the County) was already surprised with fear;
both places could not be maintained when so great a power did urge, and hear
down on every side. Those of Tewksbury sent an express to the City to inform
them of the State of their Town, and to request more aid; likewise they
dispatched Messengers to the Villages round about, to acquaint them with the
state of things, and to try whether the Inhabitants would come in person or
send in their Arms, but there came neither the one nor the other, and itwas
resolved by the Counsel of War at Gloucester that the Forces, Ordnance and
Ammunition with all well-affected persons should forthwith repair thither. In
the heat of this debate there came an invitation from Worcester by a Letter
from Sir William Russell, with intimation of conditions of Peace; all which
disposed that Town to compliance with the Enemy. Hereupon a Common Counsel
being held, and the Officers present 'twas determined that the Gloucester order
was to be obeyed. The Town thus deserted was willing to provide for its own
safety, and chused rather to obtain some reasonable terms of Peace then
suffer it self to be quite ruined; wherefore they drew up some Propositions to
be sent to Sir William Russell, yet before the dispatch they sent to Gloucester
a second Message by the Minister of the Town, and an Officer of the Garrison
with Sir William Russells Letter and their Answer. These promised an early
return, but failing some hours of the time appointed, in the mean while the
Propositions were sent to Worcester. This Message brought a countermand, when
there sprung an Alarm that Cirencester was regained, and the spoil and
prisoners recovered back, for this cause the Soldiers were detained a while,
but when the report was found untrue, of themselves they began to quit the
Town. In the Evening the Messenger returned from Worcester with the
Propositions granted; the subjection seemed unfortunate and dishonorable in
them whose affections were engaged to this Cause, neither did there appear a
means to prevent it for the transmigration of the whole Town was impossible,
nor as yet did the condition of the war require any such thing from one
particular place; for the Parliaments adherents, as also the Malignant Faction
did never at once forsake their habitations to be gathered into one body for a
sudden conclusion, but were brought peecemeale unto action, and many lie under
covert in the Enemies Country reserving themselves for future service. Thus the
people entertained gladly those conditions, which though performed in part yet
were a sufficient bondage, did impoverish their spirits, cool their zeal of
Religion, and lessen the former inclination to liberty; after which by frequent
changes under many Lords they became so feeble that they never durst confide in
themselves to vindicate the Town into its former happiness, but a long time
remained averse to the fairest opportunities, yea necessities of engagement and
desired an everlasting neutrality. The deserting of this Town increased the
forces of Gloucester by two hundred Foot and Dragoones, and took off the fear
of a greater mischief; for though the quitting of the place caused us to
resent our great distress, yet the taking thereof would have confounded our
thoughts, and hazarded the maine chance where the whole strength did not lie at
stake.

The enemy breathed out threatenings, many false friends sought cunningly to
make us afraid, the Countrymen in general were taken off, who in their
jocund beginnings still concluded on the Victory, but never prepared for a
blow, that the whole business was dashed at one clap, and especially when
Cirencester was taken, in which they did repose so much trust. The issue
discovered the weakness of the former proceedings in committing the whole
fortune of the Country, and the lives of so many men to such a poor defense,
and hazarding the maine rest where the strength of the game could not be
managed. Besides, the Enemy had this great advantage in over-powring the minds
of men; who, since their cause could not lay claim to justice, nor themselves
procure love, sought to prevail by terror and by their late cruelties became
dreadful: so that such spirits as wanted greatness of mind or strong
fidelity to persevere, did greedily comply with that Party, supposing
themselves secure from this side, at least in respect of a deep personal
suffering, which supposals were grounded upon the Parliaments lenity, and unto
which peradventure they were bound, that they might gain affections in a
voluntary war. The more zealous and active had no head under whom they might
unite and grow strong; the power of the Deputy Lieutenants was quite fallen, a
kind of command suitable only to the infancy of Military affairs, and the
whole business was devolved on the Soldier, whom the people then beheld as
the professed servants of fortune, and trusted not till after manifold
experience; so they sunk under the burden, and gave up themselves to spoil
and rapine. The clouds gathered round the City, the Enemy lay strong at
Cirencester and Tewksbury, our men were confined to the Town walls; the works
not half finished, the Soldier within mutinous and desperate: no moneys came
from the State, and but small supplies out of the Country, that the vilest
mutineers were to be dealt with by entreaty, their insolences to be suffered
with patience, who took so great advantage by our extremity that their humors
had a full vent, and ran forth into incorrigible wickedness: the City was
constrained to free quarter and great disbursements by way of lone, and the
Governor to use his skill in keeping together the male-contented Soldiers.

The Army raised in Wales by the power of the Earl of Worcester, and his Son
the Lord Herbert begins to appear, is designed for Gloucester, and comes on at
Coford in the Forest of Deane three miles from Monmouth, where Colonel
Berrowes Regiment had made a kind of loose Garrison for the defense of the
Forest in an open Town, and with slender preparations. Here the Welsh fell
on, but their Officers with strange fury drove our party before them, which was
borne down by their multitudes yet with a greater loss on their part; diverse
Officers were slain, and with the rest their Commander in chief Sir Richard
Lawdy, Major general of South Wales; of ours few slain, but Lieutenant
Colonel Winter, and some inferior Officers, with about forty private
Soldiers taken Prisoners. All the strength of these parts are now driven into
the Walls of Gloucester, only Barkly Castle is held still for an intercourse
between us and Bristoll. This City was accounted one of the chief Holds of the
Kingdom, and far from the wellspring of succor, yet was there no care of a
competent Brigade or Magazine, a common defect, by which the State has
received much detriment; that through the penury of men, Arms, and Ammunition,
remote Garrisons are left in despair, or the intention of the maine Army must
be diverted for their relief. Our succors were yet to be raised, or selected
out of several commands and come on slowly; the people were held up by false
reports, and to stave off the Enemy the Governor was to put the best face on a
bad matter.

Mean while a great power of the Welsh Army advance toward Gloucester and
settled at Hignham house within two miles of the City and began to entrench. The
Governor placed a Guard at the Bishops house to keep them at a distance. Sir
Jerome Brett their Major General had the confidence to demand the Town, but
the summons was received with scorn from a Welsh Brigade, and became
ridiculous when Prince Rupert had been twice refused, besides an inveterate
hatred derived by fabulous tradition had passed between the Welch-men and the
Citizens of Gloucester. Such slight and irrational passages prevail much with
the common people in whom opinion bears rule. Those Forces were said to expect
Prince Ruperts approach on the other side, else it cannot be imagined to what
end they lay five weeks in a stinking nest. They were basely basled, never
attempted our out-Guard, never undertook the least Party that issued forth.
Meanewhile the Prince was conceived to wait upon other designs. The Bristoll
Plot offered it self, upon which his person did attend before the Gates of
that City. Thence he was drawn off to stop Sir William Wallers advance for our
relief, who deceived the Prince by strong reports and night marches, and
happily drilled along his small Army to the place of action. The Governor
could attempt nothing but only make good the Guard at the Bishops house, and
flourish with some slender Sallyes; he had not an hundred Horse, and the
Enemies foot were double the number of those in the Garrison; at length an
addition of two hundred Horse and Dragoones from Bristoll under the command of
Captain John Fiennes gave some life to the business: hereupon several Parties
at sundry times were drawn out, which never failed to beat the Enemy into their
works, kill and take prisoners, although treble the number of our strongest
Party. So that the name of our Blew Regiment became a terror to those
miserable Welch-men, who were partly constrained to take up Arms, partly
allured with the hope of plunder. Certainly they were deceived out of their
own Country not to fight but to take Gloucester; by which means they could
act an impotent villainy and cruelty, but nothing of a Soldiers gallantry.

Immediately after the taking of Malmesbury Sir William Waller bent his course
toward Gloucester, and laid his design for the surprise of the Welsh Army; he
gave notice of his advance unto Lieutenant Colonel Massy, with directions
instantly to draw forth both Horse and Foot before Hignham, and to keep them
in continual action, that they might not understand his approach. He gave
order likewise that those Flat-bottomes which were brought from London upon
Carriages for service upon the River Seaverne, should be sent down to Frampton
passage, six miles below Gloucester, where both Horse and Foot were arrived by
noone, passed over the River before night, and unawares of the Enemy got
between them and home, took them in a snare and intercepted their flight. The
Governor performed according to the intention of the Plot, drew forth all the
Horse and a Party of five hundred Foot, brought up the Ordnance near the
house, and kept them in the heat of play till the Evening; at night he set
Guards round the house, with that straitenesse and confidence that the Enemy
durst not stir, nor a Spy steal out, although they lay fifteen hundred
strong. At Sun rising they had a fresh Alarm by our Ordnance, and were held
to it by our Musket shot. This morning their Horse issued out, attempting to
force their way through the Horse Guard, which they did, and put some of our
Horse rashly charging and upon disadvantage, to a disorderly retreat, but
coming up to a Foot Guard received a repulse: and to the relief of that Guard
which was thought too weak, a Party was drawn from the Artillery, and that
again by this means much neglected, in so much that the same instant the
enemy fell out upon our Ordnance then like to be deserted, but were beaten
back by the gallantry of some few that kept their ground. In this point of
action Sir William Waller came up and shot his warning-peece on the other side,
which dashed the Enemy, and so revived our men that they ran up with fury,
stormed a redoubt, and took in it two Captains and above thirty private
Soldiers, which service had a maine influence upon the surrender of the house;
Sir William placed his Army to the best advantage for show, and displaid the
Colors of two Foot Regiments reduced to a hundred and fifty men, drew near
the house and made some few shot with his Canon; After his approach not a man
of the Enemy was slain or hurt, yet the common Soldier would do any thing
but fight, when they were well fortified, and had a sufficient Magazine; they
sounded a Parley and sent forth some Officers to treat, which had this result;
that they should render the house and themselves as prisoners, and the Officers
should receive respect and quarter according to their quality. Upon the return
of these terms some advised to break through, which the common Soldiers
utterly refused and neglected the advantage of a dark and rainy night. The
persons that treated dealt the second time in a kind of begging way, but at
last accepted the former conditions, and gave up the Welsh Army into the hands
of men quite spent with continual marches and watching. Diverse persons of
quality were here taken, the most powerful Gentry of Herefordshire, some of
those that in scorn were styled the Nine Worthies, who in the first opening of
the great breach affronted the Parliament with a scandalous remonstrance; the
next day being the twenty fifth of March, near fifteen hundred were led
Captive into Gloucester, as great a number as Sir William Wallers Army with the
Garrison Forces could rise unto: Thus the first fruits of Wales were blasted,
the strength of the nearer parts almost vanquished, and the effects of this
Victory had been more lasting had it been used to the best advantage. The Kings
Party had a notable faculty in the improvement of Victories by strict
imprisonment, and inhauncing the rate of their Captives; their usual
fierceness did extract great Ransomes or unequal exchanges, and disposed them
to detain their Captives in extreme misery, and to neglect their own friends
in the like thralldome, of which those that were taken at Cirencester gave a
full testimony: But the Parliament Garrisons knew not how to keep a
correspondence in this case, but groaned under the burden of miserable
prisoners, were prone to exchange, or set free upon easy terms. And by this
means most of the common soldiers then taken within ten days were sent
back into their own Country, with an Oath never to serve against the
Parliament; others that tendered themselves were entertained in the service, who
for the most part proved Runnegadoes; the Commanders and Gentlemen came off,
some with a Ransom, and Oath which they quickly violated, and the residue were
wholly lost at the surrender of Bristoll.

The whole success of the former action happily complied with the maine Plot,
and extremely dashed the Kings affairs in these parts. The general fame did
increase and heighten the repute of Sir William Waller, and the enemy possessed
there with began to draw back on all sides; Sir Matthew Carew forthwith quitted
the Town of Tewksbury, which within twelve hours was repossest by our Forces,
Captain John Fienes was commanded thither with a slender strength of Horse and
Dragoones, with whom the well-affected of the Town that abode in Gloucester
began to return. The undertaking was hasty and confused, without the
observance of the Enemies motion or distance, or any rational assurance of
defending the place. Our Party had no sooner saluted the Town but received an
Alarm that the former Forces were returned with a greater power. 'Twas a
gallant Brigade of Horse commanded by the Lord Grandeston, which immediately
came from Cheltenham, whereof our men had not the least intelligence; it seemed
by the event that the Enemy expected none from Gloucester; however there was
quick dispatch on both sides, yet Captain Fienes with his whole Party had bin
surprised had not those Horse been kept off at a miles distance by a ridiculous
accident. It so fell out that they met a man coming alone from the Town, whom
they fell to question whether any Forces were there, of what strength, and by
whom commanded; the man intending nothing less then the escape of our Party,
but supposing them a part of the Parliament Forces, and willing to curry favor
begins to talk of a maine strength and vast numbers, with so many Guns and all
kind of preparations, and withal defies the Cavalliers with much affected
indignation; which words so far prevailed that they presently held a Counsel
of War, and once were about to fall back. This delay gave an hours respit to
those within to prepare for a flight, who had no sooner recovered the end of
the Town, but the Enemy had entered, amazed to see themselves so miserably
deluded.

When Sir William Waller had refreshed his men some few days about the first
of April 1643. he advanced toward Monmouthshire, at the solicitation of
diverse Gentlemen of that Country, with a promise of concurrence in reducing
those parts to the obedience of King and Parliament. When he came near the
Town of Monmouth where the Lord Herbert had began to place a Garrison, the
Soldiers did not abide his coming, but all shifted for themselves by flight;
Sir William entered the naked and open Town, where he stayed a while and sent
many Parties abroad the Country for supplies of money; thence marched to Vske,
where he set free some prisoners kept there; but the reducing of the Country
came to nothing, for the Gentlemen did not perform, and he found there what
usually comes to pass in such cases, that men desirous of alterations invite
upon ample promises, but never make good, and feldome appearein the business
till the Soldier has done the work to their hands, or they have gotten some
strong Hold to secure their engagements. So that the well-affected would not
declare themselves, because a running Army could be no lasting support, and
they had no strong Hold, nor the stream of the people, which were at the
devotion of the Earl of Worcester, almost an universal Landlord in that
County.

Whilst these things are acted Prince Maurice enters Tewksbury with a power of
Horse and Foot added to those former under the command of the Lord Grandeston,
resolving to make after Sir William Waller, and to intercept his return out of
Wales, for he was gotten into such a nooke of the Land in the Enemies Country,
that the Prince might easily drive him to a Nonultra. Wherefore a bridge of
Boats was made over Seaverne at Tewksbury, that they might pass to and fro
nearer the retreat of our Army. Here the Prince marched over with a body of two
thousand Horse and Foot, confident of this design, and therefore too remiss
and slow in his advance. Sir William was nimble in the retreat, caused his Foot
and Artillery to pass over Seaverne at Chepstow, and himself with his Horse
and Dragoones passed through the lower part of the Forest of Deane near the
River side, and before the Enemy had notice of his march sent forth two Parties
to fall upon two of their maine quarters, which was performed whilst the maine
body slipped between both, and a Party was left to face them and make good the
retreat, which came off something disorderly, and with the loss of a few
private Soldiers. 'Twas an exquisite conveyance, and unexpected felicity that
brought them out of the snare through those intricate ways. This Alarm
quickly reached Gloucester, and Lieutenant Colonel Massy drew out three
hundred foot and two troops of horse to fetch off our men, but if he found them
dis-ingaged, for a further design. This Party met them within two miles of the
Town, where the Governor made known to Sir William Waller his purpose to set
upon Tewksbury, and taking the opportunity of the Princes absence, and the
Enemies jollity at our supposed total defeat, instantly advanced upon them,
and by break of day brought up his men before the Town, one part whereof fell
in to the Ham, seized upon the Guard left with the bridge of Boats and cut off
that bridge, the Horse with the rest of the Foot came up Gloucester way, the
Forlorn. Hope surprised and slew the Sentinel, climbed over the works, and
cut down the drawbridge; whereupon both Horse and Foot-rushed in, and the
party on the other side of Avon ready to enter: there were left in the Town
near three hundred men commanded by Sir Matthew Carew, whom the triumph of
yesterdaies conceived Victory laid asleep, and the sudden Alarm roused up,
first into a shuffling fighting posture, and after half an hour to a nimble
escape. Sir Matthew Carew fled, and many escaped the hands of our men, who
wanted numbers to surround the Town, but most of the common Soldiers, and
some valuable Officers were taken. Oxford was as miserably gulled in these
passages, and in a few hours extremely affected with contrary reports; for
the jocund news of the vanquishing of Sir Will. Waller arrived early in the
morning, but before noone an express came of the loss of Tewksbury, which was
cast upon the heat of the first report like cold water into a boiling pot.

The same day a Party of Prince Maurice his Horse appeared from the top of a
Hill near Tweksbury, and intimated the approach of his whole Army; whereupon
Sir William Waller marched thither that Evening, and resolved to break down
or make good the bridge at Upton upon Seaverne, besides which there was no
pass nearer then Worcester; but the Scouts gave notice that the Prince had
recovered the bridge and set a guard upon it. The next morning Sir William
advanced toward the Prince, and found him in Ripple Field with his Army drawn
up, and divided into three bodies, besides the hedges lined with Musketeers.
Here our Forces faced the Enemy in a large field, and could hardly reach the
third part of the Princes strength, brought up their Gunnes, having neither
shot prepared nor Cannoneers that understood the business, nor the assistance
of Foot, save only a part of the Governors own company, besides the wind and
Sun were against them, and no retreat if need were, but through a narrow Lane
of two miles long; and whereas they might stand upon the top of a rising ground
to deceive the Enemy with the semblance of a greater power behind, they
descended a little on the side of the Hill, and discovered their weakness to a
full view. In this posture some persuaded to fight, and began to make some shot
with the Ordnance which gave no show of the least execution; But some other
Officers examined the Cannoneere, and finding neither fit Bullet nor any
convenient shot, but all things at random, earnestly dissuaded either to make
the onset, or expect the enemy in that place; and advising likewise the trial,
discovered their Ambuscadoes within the hedges. Hereupon Sir William Waller
fell back, and entered the narrow Lane commanding a Party of Dragoones to face
the Princes Army, and the Musketeeres to stand at the corner of the lane within
the hedges to make good the retreat. The enemy fell on, not a man of those
Dragoons would stand to receive the charge, but hurried away, broke over the
hedge, fell among and disordered our own Musketeers, the Enemy clapped in after
them, cut down four or five of the Foot, and took as many Prisoners;
Lieutenant Colonel Massy kept close to his Foot, and instantly dispatched to
Tewksbury for a supply, and Sir Arthur Hazelrigg prevailed with his own Troop
to charge, and in his own person performed gallantly; the Foot with those
Horse put the Enemy to a stand, and in part took off the foulness of the
retreat through that strait passage. When they came to the next open place our
men had the advantage of a ditch to stay the persuit, and in the heat of the
chase one Foot Soldier at the command of the Governor turned upon the Enemy a
gate then cast of the hinges; which barred their entrance and enabled our men
to draw up for a charge; here for a while they stood in a maze, but on a
sudden faced about, ran flock-meale, the Enemy upon their backs, and the close
of this action was like to be miserable, but at the entrance a strait passage
near the Myth Hill, a supply of Foot from the Town opportunely met them,
gauled the Enemy and put them to a stand once more, whilst the Governor
charged the leader of the forlorn hope hand to hand, and was rescued by the
gallantry of some Officers, when of ours only a small Party of Horse remained
in the field, the rest being got off in great confusion. Yet the escape might
equal a Victory, and the saving of the Forces pass for clear gain. Prince
Maurice did not attempt the regaining of Tweksbury, the Government whereof was
entrusted to Sir Robert Cook, who had newly raised a Regiment of Foot by
Commission from sir William Waller.

At that season the main strength of the Kings Army was drawn from these parts
when Redding was beleaguerd by the Earl of Essex, by which means the
Parliament forces had a large and free game in this Country; went on with a
full stream of success, driven with a gentle gale of providence, and a kind
of unimitable happiness, in unbloody victories. The fortune of the former did
overruled the event of the succeeding action, and the name and presence of Sir
William Waller did include more then a thousand men. Neither was he wanting to
himself, but made the best use of his present fame, and kept it up by constant
active endeavors, lest a little intermission might permit the enemy to
recollect himself, or the real weakness of this Army be discerned. It was
therefore suddenly resolved for Hereford, whither he advanced with a thousand
Horse and Dragoons, assisted by the Governor, with the greatest part of the
Lord Stamfords Regiment: there were also the beginnings of Colonel Thomas
Stephens his Regiment. The maine body of Horse and Foot were drawn up before
Bisters gate on the North side of the Town, stood aloof off and shot at random;
till the Lieutenant Colonel commanded Captain Gray with a party of musketeers
over the River, toward Wie Bridge, whose march was secured by a rising bank
under the walls. These were ordered to make show of an assault, and if need
were to fall back unto the water side, where seconds were placed for their
relief. The enemies horse sallied out upon them, whom that party having
gallantly kept off, and forced back into the City, withdrew thence and gained
a Church within Pistol shot of St Owens gate, whence our Musketeers played on
the walls, and exceedingly terrified those within. But the main rest of the
business was the name of a conquering army, which Sir William Waller improved
to the best advantage by all expedition and industry: And to help forward,
Massy drew up two Sakers in a strait line against Wigmarsh gate, not without
extreme hazard by shot from the walls; himself gave fire, and the first Canon
shot entered the gate, took an Officers head from his shoulders, and slew some
few besides, More shots were made, each of which scoured the streets, and so
daunted the enemy, that they presently sounded a parley, which was entertained
by Sir William Waller, and hostages given on both sides; the Parley lasted
almost the whole day, whilst most of the common soldiers ran over Wie bridge
into Wales, only the Commanders and Gentlemen remained and were reported to be
held in by the Townsmen, to sweeten the surrender, and obtain better quarter.
Next morning they rendered: the chief prisoners here taken were the Lord
Scudamore, Colonel Coningsby Sir William Crofts, etc. few horse and private
soldiers, but store of Arms and Ammunition. The Town compounded, was secured
from plunder, and after fourteen days deserted. Sir William Waller obtained
many fair victories, but had no power to make them good because his field was
too large for that strength; and the State made an inconsiderable number of men
the only stay of the remote parts. These could overrun the enemies Country,
but get no ground, master no strong hold, nor reduce a people naturally
malignant, that were dashed at present, but did flourish again in the reverse
of the Kings Army. The next attempt was made upon Worcester, whither all the
horse and the greatest part of the blue Regiment were drawn. They at Oxford
were said to have yielded that Town for lost, and to give out that Sir William
was gone to take possession of his purchase. For at that time Treason was the
pretended cause of every loss on both sides, especially if weak and unworthy.
Both horse and foot came up before the City, where they lay a day and a night,
effected nothing, and were drawn off at the noise of the Lord Capels advance;
at which instant Sir William Waller was taken off these parts, and ordered to
march into the West, with all speed to prevent the joining of Sir Ralph Hoptons
forces with the rest of the Kings Army. Sir Robert Cooks Regiment was called
off from Tewksbury for the Western expedition, and that Town once more slighted.

Hitherto Lieutenant Colonel Massy governed the City of Gloucester by
deputation from the Earl of Stanford, whose return was not expected;
wherefore the thoughts of the Citizens began to enquire after a Governor. They
thought well of a man near home, and cast their eye upon a known Patriot.
Nevertheless more intelligent men upon the serious review of the Cities
continual hazard, found that the necessity of this place did require a tried
Soldier, and that such a one might possibly be found faithful; but a timorous
or unskilful man must needs ruin all. Wherefore they reflected on Massy,
whose good services gave them also a competent assurance of his fidelity; that
by the happy choice of the Citizens and the Lord Generals Commission, he was
appointed Governor. To enable the City to defend it self, a foot Regiment was
raised by Commission from Sir William Waller out of the Townsmen, for the major
part both Officers and Soldiers, under the Command of Colonel Henry Stephens.
The first intention of this Regiment was to defend the City only within the
walls, according to the infancy of war; but the hard service of this place
did suddenly require and exact the full duty of Soldiers. At this instant the
City was well becalmed, only there happened one passage of inferior nature, but
full of the fortune of war. The Governor with a party of an hundred and
twenty Horse and Dragoons, advanced toward Stow in the would, to beat up the
enemies quarters; By break of day he fell into Slaughter, took a Lieutenant,
twelve Troopers, horse and arms, and thence marched to Odington a mile beyond
Stow, where he surprised a Captain of a Troop with forty men and horse, and so
made homewards, neglecting the residue of the enemy, who drew out of their
quarters with all speed. The remainder of their Regiment fell upon the reere of
our men, near unto Slaughter with some slight execution, but were beaten back.
The Governor being confident he was able to fight with them upon any ground,
made no haste to march off, till the enemy had received a supply of Horse from
Sudely Castle, and again charged him at Andovers foord, whom our men received
gallantly, and repulsed without any loss. The Captain that led the Van was
slain by the Governors hand, and the rest wheeled about; whereupon the
Governor dismounted the Dragoons, and divided his men into three bodies, the
horse to the right and left wing, in this posture resolving to march up to the
enemy (who would gladly rid their hands of the business) but having advanced a
little distance, and looking back to bring on his men, saw the greater part in
a strange hurry, occasioned by the faceing about of some cowardly spirits, and
himself with those dismounted men desperately engaged; for a while he shuffled
amongst the enemies Troops, till observing himself eyed by some, he sprang
forth, fired in their faces, and came last off the field upon the maine road.
He offended here, by affecting too much gallantry, and was deceived in his new
raised men, who were not hardened by the sight of an enemy. Besides, no ordinary
care was had of securing the prisoners, who were all recovered back. Four of
ours were slain, many wounded; Colonel Stephens, a Lieutenant, with five and
twenty private soldiers taken prisoners. The springing hopes of Colonel
Stephens failed unfortunately, when his eager mind, engaged him in the action
without order, and against the will of the Commander in chief; he had no
command in the action, but hasted after as greedy of the service; he was led
captive to Oxford, and a while after breathed his last in that poisonous air,
where many Gentlemen were observed in those days to expire.

Amidst these things Sir John Winter, a zealous Papist, began to declare
himself. A subtle wit, that pretended innocence till his hour was come, and
had almost persuaded the world that he durst deny himself, and commit an
unpardonable sin against the Catholic Cause. His house in the Forest of
Deane was at first neglected, when it was in the power of this Garrison to
ruin his design. But under hand he prepared for defense, suddenly clapped in
his own Confidents, and with a little labor made it inaccessible, but with
apparent great loss, and maintained his den as the plague of the Forest, and
a goad in the sides of this Garrison. These things were acted about the time of
that blow almost fatal to the Parliaments cause, in the vanquishing of Sir
William Wallers Army at the Devices; which defeat cast these parts of the
Kingdom into a miserable plight, when the State had placed the whole game in
the success of this Army, never providing a reserve. The King became master of
the field, the Parliament left without an Army that could check the enemy, who
came up to our gates, and by threats would seem to shake the walls of the
City. Many began to prepare for flight, whose presence no real necessity, but
the peoples opinion did require. They at Bristoll disclosed their fears, and
gave no good presages. And when that City was yielded, Gloucester did stand
alone without help and hope. The Lord Generals Army pined away: Sir William
Waller at London for a recruit: The Earl of Stamford shut up within the walls
of Exeter: The Kings Country reached from the utmost Cornwall to the borders
of Scotland, and he was able to divide his Army, one part for Exeter, and the
other for Gloucester.

That sudden surrender of Bristoll, which was almost beyond our fears, brought
forth a dark gloomy day to the City of Gloucester. The minds of people were
filled with amazement, and the failing of such a promising Government made most
men infidels, or at least to question all things. But here was the greatest
mischief of all: Many were not wanting to debate upon the maine cause of the
Kingdom; malignant spirits took the advantage of our misery, and unstable
minds, who beholding only the surface of things, and led by the common voice
of their equals, were flushed in prosperous times, now became crest-fallen, and
questioned the passages of State, conceiving each miscarriage a fundamental
error, and accounting their present sufferings not for Religion and Liberty,
but some scruples of State policy. The state of things required strong
resolution; the usual posture could not pretend to the safety of the place.
The soldiers therefore acted with minds more sturdy and vigorous as desperate
concerning the enemy, but not in despair of their own party. The Commanders
reserved no place of retreat, and if causlesse jealousies over-clouded any,
they put themselves upon a free Declaration. The old and careful soldiers who
were unlucky in the censures of the people, upon the first arrival of the sad
news from Bristoll, vented themselves in sharp and cutted speeches, which
bursting from the fullness of the thoughts, did imprint and pierce, were
received for good prognostics, and repaired likewise that credit, which the
presumption of a conceived opinion bore down, and an ordinary good behavior
could hardly raise up, but happily regained by one violent and severer passage.
The Officers were to give in a full resolve, that no place be left for an after
dispute; wherefore they vowed never to see within the gates the face of a
conquering enemy. But chiefly the hearts of the people were to be held up,
wherefore the Governor appeared in public, rode from place to place with a
cheerful aspect, and bearing before him no change in the sudden alteration of
fortune. To them that enquired into his very thoughts, he gave assurance of
safety, concealing the danger, or lessening its esteem. Fear did not beget
confusion, but things were transacted in a calm and constant order. The
presages of misery were exquisitely shunned, and the least show of distraction
and weakness forbidden. Money, Plate, valuable goods, or any kind of riches
were not suffered to pass the Gates, but here to rest as in a safe Treasury,
that the people might resolve upon a happy Deliverance or an utter Destruction.
Nevertheless, whosoever was weak and fainthearted, had leave to depart the
City. Mean while the enemy dealt underhand, and by the mediation of seeming
friends affectionately solicited a Surrender, with terrible information of our
manifold losses abroad, of the rage of the Kings Army, and inevirable
desolation; and withal tendered the opportunity of an Accommodation between his
Majesty and the Citizens. The mouths of the viler people were filled with
curses against the authors of our engagements. We received strange intimations
of dreadful things concerning the State. The whole Country forsook us, and
employed some to represent their desires and thoughts of the business, who in
the general had so far revolted from themselves, as to persuade us to make
our peace with the enemy, and to befool and execrate our perseverance; for they
conceived the standing out of Gloucester, however advantageous to the
Commonwealth, yet miserable for them; because by the falling down of a great
Army, they expected a destruction of corn and cattle, and if at last the King
should not take in this place, to stoop perpetually under two burdens, and be
cast into a remediless condition of misery and poverty. Whereas if the enemy
should prevail, they were sure to rest in the heart of the Kings Country,
far from spoil and plunder, and have as free and ample trade as in times of
peace. The Citizens examined their own strength and grounds of perseverance; a
Common Council was held, the Officers being present, their late protestation
brought to remembrance, by which they were all obliged never to act or comply
with the adverse faction, and upon that pretext jointly refused the tender of
peace. Nevertheless a great number of the Inhabitants were only not
malignants, but born up by the zeal of the rest, and the soldiers power; and
those stuck most to the business, who were held up by the deep sense of
Religion or acknowledged a necessity to withstand a malicious and enraged
enemy, whose implacable hatred urged them to offend against their own designs,
and by horrid threatenings to make the attempt more desperate. A den of Rebels
was the common language: A few days respit recovered the City, and reports of
a sudden relief did rear up the spirits of the common people. No cross,
show, or doubtful resolutions did hinder the business; all suspended their
private cares, and the women and children acted their parts in making up the
defects of the fortifications. The strength of Gloucester was no more then two
Regiments of foot, an hundred horse with the Trained Bands, and a few
reformadoes; there were besides about an hundred horse and dragoons from
Berkley Castle, in the whole about fifteen hundred men: forty single barrels of
gunpowder, with a slender artillery. The works of a large compass, not half
perfect; From the South-gate eastward almost to the North Port, the City was
defended with an ancient Wall lined with earth to a reasonable height; thence
to the North-gate, with a slender work upon a low ground, having the advantage
of a stone Barn that commanded several ways: Upon the lower part of the City,
from the North to the West-gate, (being a large tract of ground) there was no
ancient defense, but a small work newly raised, with the advantage of marish
grounds without, and a line drawn within from the inner North gate under the
College wall to the Priory of St Oswalds. From the West toward the South gate
along the River side, no more defense then the River it self, and the meadows
beyond level with the Town: from the Castle to the Southport, a firm and
lofty work to command the high ground in the Suburbs. The ditches narrow, but
watered round. In this posture did the City stand when the Kings forces
hovoured over the hills, and now and then skirted upon the Town, before a close
siege was laid: upon the tenth of August, they came down like a torrent full of
victory and revenge, with indignation that a forlorn City should stand before
them. Nevertheless they would feign overcome without blood, and the loss of
time, then precious in their full career of victory. For which end His Majesty
came in person before it, that the terror of his presence might prevail with
some, and the person of the King amaze the simple, and seem to alter the case.
Thus they began to work, because the Mayor had answered a former summons from
Prince Rupert, that according to his Oath he kept the Town in His Majesty's
behoof, and some whisperers gave a malignant intimation that the Kings presence
would sway the people. And it was so, that the Town was held for the use of His
Majesty, but according to the sense of the houses of Parliament, and the
Citizens put no difference between a command in person or deputation. whereupon
His Majesty gave this honorable summons by two Heralds at Arms.

Charles Rex.

OVt of our tender compassion to our City of Gloucester, and that it may not
receive prejudice by our Army, which we cannot prevent if we be compelled to
assault it: We are personally come before it, to require the same, and are
graciously pleased to let all the inhabitants of, and all other persons within
that City, as well Soldiers as others know, that if they shall immediately
submit themselves, and deliver this City to Us, We are contented freely and
absolutely to pardon every one of them without exception, and do assure them
in the word of a King, that they nor any of them shall receive the least
damage or prejudice by Our Army in their persons, or estates. But that We
will appoint such a Governor, and a moderate garrison to reside there as shall
be both for the ease and security of that City, and the whole County. But if
they shall neglect this offer of grace, and favor, and compel Us by the power
of Our Army to reduce that place (which by the help of God We shall easily and
shortly be able to do) they must thank themselves for all the calamities, and
miseries that shall befall them. To this Message We expect a clear and
positive answer, within two hours after the publishing hereof? And by these
presents do give leave to any persons safely to repair to, and return from
Us, whom that City shall desire to employ unto Us in that business, And We do
require all the Officers and Soldiers of Our Army, quietly to suffer them to
pass accordingly.


The King by this time drew into the field before the Town, attended by Prince
Charles, the Duke of York, Prince Rupert and General Ruthen, faced us with
about six thousand horse and foot on that side, and two thousand horse on the
other side. After some debate upon the Message, an answer was drawn, consented
unto, both by Citizens and Soldiers, and presented to His Majesty by Sergeant
Major Pudsey, and a Citizen.

WE the Inhab^^^^^, Magistrates, Officers, and Soldiers, within this Garrison
of Gloucester, unto his Majesty's gracious Message return this humble Answer,
That we do keep this City according to our Oath and Allegiance, to and for the
use of his Majesty and his royal Posterity, and do accordingly conceive our
selves wholly bound to obey the Commands of his Majesty signified by both
Houses of Parliament; and are resolved by Gods help to keep this City
accordingly.


His Majesty with all mildness seemed to receive this answer, only to wonder
at our confidence, and whence we expected succor, adding these words, Waller
is extinct, and Essex cannot come. The enemy advanced forwards into the Suburbs
on the East side, where they lost a Commander in the first skirmish, and the
rest were fired out; for upon the return of the messengers the Suburbs on each
part of the City were all in a flame, which did secure and more strongly engage
us, and which the enemy beheld as the act of desperate Rebels; for those
dreadful sights do seem to higthen and blood the minds of men. The next day
we discovered that they had begun their entrenchments on the South and East
parts, the night before in the shadow and shelter of the houses which the
flames had not catched, within Musket Shot of the walls. They in the trenches
plied their work whilst the Musketteers played hard on both sides. Yet our
men from the walls could do little to retard their pioners, but by several
sallies with small parties fell into their trenches, beat them out, gained
some working-tooles, arms and prisoners, and retreated without loss. Our
ordnance likewise from the East gate killed some sew, and among the rest a
Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain of the Queens black Regiment, Sir Jacob
Ashley was then shot in the arm, and upon several approaches we beat of the
enemy, killed and wounded many.

By that time the Welsh forces under the command of Sir Will. Vavasour, were
advanced to the Bishops house, half a mile from the West-gate, one of our
outguards by us intended to keep off the approach of the Welsh, but now
deserted for want of men and that nothing might be lost which we purposed to
defend. Here they left a sufficient guard and passed over the River to join
with the forces that newly arrived from Worcester: who made their leager on the
North-west side of the City. General Ruthen placed his leager behind the
Priory of Lanthony on the South Side very near, but sheltred from our shot by
a rising ground. Sir Jacob Ashley with a strong party quartered in some part of
the Suburbs on the East Side. The East and South ports were dammed up, and
rammed with a thickness of Earth Cannon proof, and the Walls on that side
from port to port were lined to the Battlements, since there we thought to
receive the maine shock.

Three days after the siege laid, an hundred and fifty Musketteers commanded
by Captain Gray, sallied over the works upon the Worcester forces, with whom
the Welsh had not yet joined, fell into their quarters, marched up to their
maine guard, killed a Captain with eight or nine common Soldiers, took five
prisoners, diverse arms, burnt their guard, and retreated without the loss of
any; within a day after upon some suspicion and kind of intelligence that the
enemies Ordnance lay undiscovered in some grounds near the Northgate; Captain
Mallery was commanded forth with a hundred and fifty Musketeers to surprise it,
but finding none, retreated without loss, having killed some, taken a few
prisoners and fired some of their quarters. Upon the sixteenth of August an
other party of an hundred and fifty Musketeers, commanded by Captain Crispe
sallied forth at the North-port, fell into their trenches under the Town wall
on the East Side, marched above half way through them, performed gallantly,
killed above an hundred men as was confessed by some of the enemy, wounded
many, beat them out of their works, and by the help of out Musketeers from
the wall, retreated without the loss of any, only two wounded after a very hot
skirmish, for the space of half an hour, the Cannon and Muskets on both
sides playing most furiously. These executions put those within on a desperate
strain, and heated their minds with blood.

The Enemy was indefatigable and swift in the entrenchments. The works from
the South and East gates, hasted to meet each other; their preparations seemed
more tedious, yet effectual and certain and tended withal to save the lives
of their men. Wherefore they chused not a sudden storm on the lower and weaker
parts of the City, but rather to prepare the assault on the strongest side, yet
most easy to their intention. For there only could they raise the works
without the annoyance of the water-springs, that issued in the lower grounds;
there only could they make battery within Pistol shot of the walls, that
wanted flankers; and when they had once entered a breach there, they were
instantly possessed of the highest part of the Town. On this side therefore were
their Ordnance brought up, and first two Culverin of sixteen pound bullet were
planted on the East side, a little out of musketshot, where they made some
store of shot, but did no execution. Next they planted three pieces of Ordnance
of fourteen and five and twenty pound bullet upon their battery in a square
redoubt, on the South Side, and began to batter the corner point of the wall,
and a brick house adjoining, where one of our men was killed, without more
harm. Then they played upon our Ordnance mounted against their battery point
blanck, and made some slight breach, which was quickly stopped up with
wooll-packs, and Cannon baskets. By this time they had drawn the trench near
the moate, where they made a kind of mine to drain it, and sunk much of the
water: and attempted to cast faggots into the moate, but were beaten off by our
musketeers. At several times they shot large Grenades out of their
Morter-pieces many fell into houses and brake, but did no harm, and one that
fell in the street had the fuz quenched before it came to ground, was takenup
whole and found to weigh three score pound.

After the Welsh and Worcester forces came up, four piece of Ordnance were
drawn a good distance before the place of their leager, and one planted against
the Awnegate, and the Sconces thereunto adjoining. Wherefore a party of about
four hundred Musketeers commanded by Major Pudsey and Captain Gray assisted
by Captain Faulkner, and Captain Massey sallied forth of the Norrhgate. Mean
while a Lieutenant with fifty Musketteers was sent over the works to give them
an Alarm, whilst the greater party got behind their Cannon and breastworkes,
fell upon their maine guard, slew many Officers, two Canoneers with about a
hundred common Soldiers mortally wounded, took a Lieutenant with four more
prisoners, nailed their Cannon, and retreated with the loss only of two
slain, and about four taken prisoners.

The Enemy having planted three pieces of Ordnance against the Southside, and
now three more on the Eastside, and two more near the Eastgate within Pistol
shot of the Town wall, began a most furious battery upon the corner point, and
made above an hundred and fifty great shot against it, whereby the stones were
sorely battered, but the Earth works stood firm. By all this shot only two
persons were hurt, for the Battery was so near, that if the Bullet missed the
wall, it flew quite over the Town, or lighted at random, yet in the intervalls
of the great shot after each discharge our musketeers played hard, and killed
four principal Cannoneers, neither were the people daunted at the noise of
Cannon, which by the slender execution, became so contemptible, that at that
very time women and children wrought hard in lining the walls and repairing the
breaches. The enemy continued the storm by sending Grenades which were guided
by the hand of providence into by-places, and sometimes falling upon the houses
did rend and tear the buildings, when the people within were preserved.

After ten days siege two several parties were designed for the nayling of
the enemes cannon. These were commanded to fall into the trenches and march on
till they met each other. The one party of about two hundred Musketeers of the
Town Regiment commanded by Captain Stevenson and Captain Moore, sallied forth
at the Northgate, to have fallen into their Trenches at the East Port, but by
the mistake of their guide, over a marish ground and full of ditches, were
brought round about to Sir Jacob Ashleys quarter, where most of them came not
up; only forty Musketeers, encountered with five Colors of the Enemy, slew
diverse of them, took two Lievtenants prisoners, forced back the rest, and
marching a little farther, faced and fired at eight Colors more, and so
retreated: In the retreat two Troops of the Enemies horse came on the Rear,
whom our men facing about and charging forced to fall back and made good their
own retreat; in this distracted skirmish two of ours were killed, three hurt,
and a Sarjeant taken prisoner. The other party of the Lord Stanfords Regiment
commanded by Captain Blunt and Captain White, sallied by boat down the River
on the Southpart of the Town toward the maine Leagre, marched up to a Square
redoubt (our Cannon in the mean while playing upon the houses in the Suburbs)
beat them thence, killed a Major with some common Soldiers, and advanced to
meet the other party. But the design failing through the misguidance of the
other party, they were called off, and by the help of our Ordnance made a fair
retreat without loss of any, only two wounded. The failing of the enterprise
crossed a brave exploit and seasible, they might have scoured the Trenches
under the shelter of our Walls: Neither did the Enemy take care to prevent them
by turning the mouths of any one piece of Ordnance upon the entry of the
entrenchment. Nevertheless the cross event did much amaze them, that a small
party should run up to their Headquarters, force their men, and recover back
without a sensible loss. Certainly the care of a higher providence preserved
and brought off those many several parties, when the vanquishing of any one of
them must needs run the City upon extreme hazard; for our whole strength
remained upon the works day and night, except the reserve of a hundred and
twenty men at the maine Guard. One rare and slender Rank were to receive the
storm without seconds, yet the safety of the whole did require those frequent
sallies, a desperate remedy to a despairing City: not only to cast back the
enemies preparations, but to amaze them, that the Soldiers should be held up
in such height of resolution, and cause them to expect more hot service from
within the works: Our men likewise were to be kept in the heat of action to
prevent the fainting of the spirits: Their hands also imbrued in blood did the
more enrage them. Nor by safer means could they overcome the terror, which by
the reputation of the Kings Army might possess their minds: The Enemy were
kept waking by continual Alarums to waste and weary them: And it was the care of
the Governor to cause a perpetual noise; that whenever their Cannon had
been silent for a while, one or two of our Guns gave fire to disturb the calm,
and signify to the Country that we were yet alive; for the besiegers ever and
anon scattered reports of the taking of the Town, with a purpose to prevent our
relief. All things within did presage a deliverance. The sadness of the times
did not cloud the countenance of the people, they beheld their fortunes with a
clear brow, and were deliberate and cheerful in the endeavors of safety. No
great complainings were heard in our Streets, no discontent seized on the
Soldiers, at other times prone to mutiny; men of suspected fidelity did not
fail in action; Every valuable person was active in his own place: The usual
outcryes of women were not then heard, the weakness of whose sex was not
overcome by the terrible Engines of war. And our becalmed spirits did implore
divine assistance without consusion. The Governor personally performed, ready
at every turning of affairs, and gracing the business with speech and
gesture; upon the least intimation of diffidence he pretended rational hopes
of success, adding withal that our late yielding could not mollify the Kings
Army, and if in the close we must needs be lost, no suter means of safety then
by the utmost gallantry to constrain honorable conditions.

The Enemy still prepared for a general storm, mean while seeking to waste our
Magazine, which they knew must needs suddenly fayl, expended their own store,
and daily acted to the terror of the inhabitants; shooting Grenades,
Fire-bals, and great stones out of their Morter-peeces, and had now planted a
Battery on the Southside westward, unto which the lower part of the Town was
open. Thence in one night they shot above twenty fiery melting hot iron
Bullets, some eighteen pound weight, others two and twenty pound weight, which
were seen to fly through the air like the shooting of a star. They passed
through stables, and ricks of hay, where the fire by the swiftness of the
motion did not catch, and falling on the tops of houses, presently melted the
leads, and sunk through; but all the skill and industry of the enemy could not
set one house on fire.

They still played their great shot against the walls, and wrought hard in
filling up the Moat with faggots and earth at the place where they battered,
where also they built a Gallery over the head of the Trench, the breadth of
four abreast; in the shelter whereof they had almost workt themselves over the
Moat. Then we found that they had sunk a Mine under the East Gate; whereupon
the Governor commanded a Counter-mine in two places, but finding the Springs,
left off, conceiving for the same reason the endeavor of the enemy to no
purpose. To discover or interrupt this work, a Sergeant with five daring men
were put forth at a port hole in the dungeon at the East gate, came close to
the mouth of their mine, took off the board that covered it, and for a while
viewed the miners. One of these cast in a hand-Granado amongst them, whilst the
four musketeers played upon them as they ran forth, and with the noise of our
men from the walls gave the whole leager a strong alarm, and crept in at the
port-hole without harm. Wherefore discovering that the enemy notwithstanding
the springs, went on with their mine, we renewed our countermine; for they had
sunk a great depth under the moat, and extremely toyled in drawing up the
spring water, till at length they had gotten under the gate that our miners
could hear them work under them, and did expect to spoil them by pouring in
water, or stealing out their powder.

For a remedy to this mischief, and withal the enemy having planted store of
Canon baskets within half musketshot of the East gate point blank, intending a
battery there, upon the springing of their mine; We made a very strong work
cross the street with a large trench before it, and filled it with water,
intending to raise it up to the Eaves of the houses, and to plant some Cannon
there: we answered their several approaches by so many counter works. A sconce
was built upon a rising ground that looked into their trenches, where we could
plant four piece of Ordnance to clear within the walls a ground called the
Friars Orchard southward, and scour their flank upon their entrance at the
East gate, and so northward. Also an inner work was drawn from the south side
along the middle of the Orchard, and all passages stopped between that and the
East port. And to hinder their gallery we began to undermine for a place to put
forth a piece of Ordnance at the bottom of the wall, to batter the flank
thereof; which was perfected and a saker there placed. Commanded men were drawn
out upon the walls, Grenades provided, and when the great Gun played upon the
gallery, the musketeers sent plenty of shot, and cast diverse Grenades into
their trenches; in the mean while (they firing their Ordnance against the top
of the wall) we cut off a maine beam of the gallery with our bolt shot. But
the same day the enemy had sunk a piece against the port-hole of out mine, and
forced us to withdraw the sakre, yet we cast them back three days work.

And because all this side of the Town had no flankers, nothing did more offend
the enemy in their entrenchments then an old Barn at a corner point, near the
North Port, in which was mounted a Piece that commanded three several ways,
and obliquely looked into their Trenches, and often times did good execution upon
the pioners. This was the chief strength of that side, conceived the weakest
part of the Town. Upon the Key head an half moon was raised, with a
breast-work upon Seavern side under the Castle, and the river chained, to
defend an assault from those high grounds beyond the river, which was ever
feared by those within.

His Majesty constantly residing at a miles distance, would not solemnly invite
by public Summons, lest he should detract from the honor of his enterprise:
Nevertheless, those about him dealt underhand by sundry advertizements of the
Kings displeasure, threatenings, persuasions, and many intimations of possible
grace and favor. Some of our neighbors in their own names desired admission
to a conference, and persuaded the Surrender of the City, in regard of the
great power and terrible menacings of the enemy, with the small hopes and in a
manner impossibility of relief; adding withal the heavy burdens under which
the Country groaned. The Governor made answer, that we were sufficiently
conscious of our own strength, and the ground of our resolution, and that we
did not think our selves obliged to the enemy for the hopes and offers of
favor. These manifold persuasions made the besieged more obstinate, and
enabled them to understand themselves as a people worthy of entreaty, a prize
worth the purchase, and in no wise lost or desperate, the enemies themselves
being Judges.

As the ^ouldiers within were heated with their own performance, so the enemy
without being wasted in a lingering design before the hour of service came
grew feeble in their own thoughts and to us contemptible. Our common soldiers
took to themselves a liberty to revile, prevented and confounded the enemy with
the self-same language in which they were wont to abuse and scorn our party;
which contumely, though it begets a more deadly hatred and desire of revenge in
generous minds, at that time did deject exceedingly and debase the spirits of
their private soldiers, who had never performed one gallant achievement, and
to whom the sturdinesse of our men was well known. The slownesse of their
design in that form of a leaguer, proceeded from the desire of saving their
foot, with this presumption, that there was no power to raise the siege; which
confidence deceived them, till too late; for their foot, after those many
knocks, and the first fury spent, were not so capable of the service, without
the help of many tedious preparations. Wherefore besides their mine and
battery, they framed great store of those unperfect and troublesome engines to
assault the lower parts of the City. Those engines ran upon wheels, with planks
musket proof, placed on the Axel-tree, with holes for musketshot, and a bridge
before it, the end whereof (the wheels falling into the ditch) was to rest upon
our breast works.

Our relief seemed slow, and the straitness of the siege debarred all
intelligence. Only two Spies which we sent out, returned from Warwick, and
brought news of the advance of the Lord General. The report of his
Excellency, who then lay under a cloud, did give no great assurance. The truth
is, the sense of the depth of our distress did not reach us: Sir William
Waller, upon whom the Citizens of London cast their favor, had not the
relics of an Army. The Generals Army crumbled away: the malignants of London
fomented tumults in the City, and insurrections in Kent distracted the
business. The house of Lords voted a treaty with the King, the house of
Commons debated the matter. The resolution of Gloucester turned the stream,
whose succor was resolved upon as the Kingdoms safety. The recruit of the Army
was too slow for the service. The London trained Bands or none, must relieve
us; but could not agree who should undertake the business. Essex was not
favored but the more prudent saw that he must be the man. That none might
decline the service upon whom the lot fell, the shop windows were commanded to
be shut up and trading for a time suspended. The expedition was hasted in every
pulpit carried on with continual fasting and prayer: an Army was framed in an
instant, and marched with incredible swiftness. Prince Rupert with the
greatest part of the Kings horse drew from Gloucester to retard their march,
but still appearing in the Van did no more then drill them along. The enemy
stayed before us till the last hour, judging every particle of time a great
advantage not knowing what a moment might bring forth. They within not
satisfied with the former intelligence, sent out two other Spies with a double
signal, first one fire on the side of a hill to signify their escapes, and
two fires on the same place if they heard good news; which latter was
accordingly performed and beheld by us.

The fifth of September was appointed for a public Fast, to be kept by such as
might be spared from labor. This day we discovered their carriages marching
from the leaguer, and their horse and foot marching after; yet we were not
confident of the raising of the siege till the men were drawn out of the
trenches, and the reerguard fired their huts. We then perceived that God had
sent a deliverance, and that in the close of a solemn Fast, as a gracious
return of prayer.

This evening the Lord General came to the brow of the hills seven miles from
the Town, and fired a warning piece, but by reason of the contrary winds the
report was not heard, neither did the news reach us that night. Wherefore we
did not venture upon the Reere of the enemy with our slender and wearied
forces, but kept as strong and watchful guards as any time before; presuming
that relief at hand had raised the enemy, yet suspecting that in point of
honor they would attempt something worthy of a Royal Army. But abiding before
us to the last extremity, they were driven away with great confusion, after so
many vows of victory and revenge, when their mines, batteries, and engines
were in readiness. This hurry preserved the Country from injury, which by
them was devoted to ruin. His Majesty was forced to leave the Town behind
him, and constrained to a tedious march in that tempestuous rainy night; their
carriages were not got up the hills till the next morning, which distraction
was not known to us: and the Generals Army was tired with long and continual
marches. The admirable care of providence was beheld in the season of our
relief, when all things were prepared by the enemy for a general storm; our
ammunition consumed, but three single barrels of powder left in our magazine,
and not so much more elsewhere: in the little harm done by their Cannon, and
Morterpieces, that sent amongst us so many terrible messengers. Our lost men
taken or slain, did not amount to the number of fifty, and of these but two
Officers were slain. Captain Harcus and the Governors Ensign; yet we killed of
the Enemy (who never ventured an assault) above a thousand men, by the lowest
confession. The King expended much in Ammunition, Engines, and keeping together
the discontented Soldiers, besides the loss of his precious time in that full
tide of Victory. Here was a bound set to the swelling of those proud waves and
the rock that split that Army; when the Queen was said to be transported with
passion because her counsel was not followed, who advised the King to wave
Gloucester and advance for London, whilst the Parliament had no Army in the
field, the number of Malignants in the City did equal the rest, began to raise
tumults, and the actions of State were unresolved. This City diverted the
enemies thoughts from that rare opportunity, which not so conscious of the
Kingdoms weakness, held up beyond reason, and gave a breathing time to the
State to effect its own relief. Great was the failing of the Kings hopes in
this defeat, who by the gaining of this town, would have held an undivided
uninterrupted command, and the granary of the Kingdom in the heart of his
Country, on the West bounded with the Sea, clear through the middle of the
Land to the Northern parts, where also the Earl of Newcastles Army prevailed,
and in breadth reaching from the utmost Wales to the London Association, and
backed with Ireland, with whom an Accommodation was then preparing.

Nevertheless the raising of the siege was but an unperfect deliverance. The
success of the Generals Army with the supply of our wants were to make it
complete. For the enemy continually lay at our doors, commerce was clean taken
away, and we far distant from the fountain of future supplies; Wherefore
during the stay of his Excellency, parties of horse were continually sent
abroad to fetch in provisions out of the Enemies quarters, and Malignants
estates. The Granary was quickly filled. The General left three Culverins,
forty single barrels of Gunpowder, and set the Garrison in order.

The London Train-Bands and Auxiliaries supposing the work already done, and
the date of their Commission expired, earnestly contended homewards, yet must
they break their way through the Kings Army, and give him some further blow to
secure and perfect the relief of this Garrison; for so confident were the
enemy of their own strength, that many thought his Majesty ill-advised in not
fighting with the Earl of Essex near Gloucester: wherefore the General was
to secure this retreat, to take heed lest he be penned up in these parts, and
with that speed made after the Kings Army (which by this time had gotten some
miles in the Van of our Army) that some horse and foot out of the remote
quarters marched above thirty miles before they rested. They came up before
Cirencester where the King had left a strong party. The forlorn hope entered
the Town whilst the rest surrounded it, killed the Sentinel sleeping, marched
up to the Market Place without opposition (the enemy supposing them Prince
Maurice his Forces, that night expected) till they entered the houses and
surprised them in bed, took four hundred men, and thirty Cart-loades of bread,
cheese, and other provisions, a great relief in a wasted Country, and the
only support of the Soldiers against the Battle at Newbery.

The success of which Battle did close up with honor, that happy and gallant
undertaking of the Lord General, and the Citizens of London: As brave a
service as these Wars can show forth, enobled by its wonderful rise, lively
progress, nimble expedition, admirable fortune and honorable conclusion.
Notwithstanding his Excellency had hereby disabled and broken the Kings Army,
and secured the Garrison of Gloucester from a sudden reverse; yet his own Army
was sorely bruised, and retiring to London, left but a little burden upon the
Enemy on that side. By which means they were free to molest these parts, and
this Garrison left to beat the brunt, provide for it self, and run the danger
though not of an other siege, yet of blocking up and ruin by the spoil of our
Country, which that party decreed to destruction; and the Enemy at the door
and the distance of our friends did threaten no less. Not a man could be left
by the General to increase our strength, nor money to content the Soldier;
there was only an assurance of help from the Parliament, when the arreares of
Officers and Soldiers were large; the Governor made certain propositions to
the Parliament concerning the support of this place; That since at such a
distance he could not expect a constant supply, they would send down at once
ten thousand pounds and a thousand men, far below the places due; according
to the terms of the Soldiers entertainment, might set things in a thriving
way, and enable the Soldier to act of themselves without those continual
cravings and outcries against the State. Upon which terms the activenesse of
this Government gave assurance of the framing of an Army to master the Country
then enthralled to the enemy, yea, to lie upon the enemies quarters, consume
their store, distress their chief Garrisons of Bristoll and Oxford and
endanger the rest as Hereford and Worcester, and stop their supply of men and
money. Such a strong beginning had been more then half way to the end of the
work.

But the State seemed to walk in a frugall course and desire a daily dropping
of relief, rather then to entrust much, which is not the way of great
performance nor can bring to the end of the design; when as this rational
adventure might give the increase of an hundredfold: and upon the failing
hereof the greatest mischief could be no more then the loss of that expense.
Wherefore they voted a supply and raised men and moneys in a languishing way,
that those five hundred listed for Gloucester were reduced to a fifty, ere they
could reach us, and the greatest part of the money squandred away without a
sensible advantage to this Garrison.

After Newbery fight Sir William Vavasour was sent to Hereford, with a strong
party to raise Forces in those parts with Commission to command in chief in
the Countries of Gloucester and Hereford, and a command from his Majesty to
distress Gloucecester on the Welsh side, and to Garrison Tewkesbury.

Colonel Massy was not satisfied in keeping his own Garrison, but eager of
continual service, to destroy or disable the enemy, for which no other place
in the Kingdom was conceived capable of the like advantage: Wherefore by
himself urged, he set upon the Parliament with importunate complaints that for
lack of strength great opportunities of service to us and disservice to them
were lost. And a greater mischief did exercise this government, the want of
men and money, and ammunition to defend it self; upon which, extreme scarsity
of provision was like to follow, and in these hopes did the enemy bless
themselves; so that the advantage and honor of maintaining the City against
the violence of an Army was like to vanish in the lingering death of the place.
And the Governor was about to embrace an other command in the Generals Army,
yet reserving a submission to the Parliaments pleasure who required him to
continue his service in this Government. This charge was surrounded with
difficulties and each day brought forth some new birth. When the enemy begirt
us in their Winter quarters, the hopes of our promised succors were past
without the Convoy of an Army. Not one Gentleman of the Country durst be seen
to assist us, no Member of Parliament did reside here to encourage the
business. All things rested upon the Governors sole care both to store the
Garrison with provisions, and raise money out of that small pittance of the
Country out of the enemies hands. The discontent of the Soldier was now
heigthned and ready to cause a disbanding. To make good the place was the
Parliaments command: and inevitable necessity was the chiefest law to support
it. Wherefore apprehending more misery then in the late siege, the Governor was
constrained to lay some easy taxation on the Country to supply the present
exigence, whilst the enemies power extended on all sides almost to the Gates of
Gloucester. Hereupon daily complaints were brought before him, that the taxes
were unequally rated by the Officers of the several Parishes, that such as
were broken by the enemy, were rated as high as if their Estates were entire.
The Governor represented these things to the Parliament, earnestly begged
their direction in his intended course, which by them was not in one syllable
contradicted: Wherefore at a Council of War the condition of the Country
was debated upon, and an order made that some Officers and Citizens should be
entreated as a Committee to hear and rectify the complaints concerning
assessements, and to use that moderation which reason did require. Not long
after a petition was presented to the Governor in the name of the Country,
That one Monthly rate without other charge, might be imposed upon them,
likewise that the rate might be made according to equity, and the poor spared;
that the money might be paid in to the common Treasurer, whence it should
issue as necessity required, and that a choice Committee might be appointed to
over-see all the money rated, received and disbursed. The Governor to manifest
his desire of the peoples satisfaction, and that things might be carried in a
just and equal way, ordered by the consert of a Council of War, that a
Committee of Officers, Citizens, and Country Gentlemen, should regulate the
assessements of the Country according to their desires. Some of which
Gentlemen not long after were of the Committee for these Counties by Order of
Parliament.

Moreover, this Committee moved at a Council of War for a further power to
hear and determine such businesses as by the Governors special order should
be referred unto them, to examine upon oath, and commit all such persons
(Officers and Soldiers only excepted) as should offer contempt; and this they
enforced with these reasons: 1. Because there was no Committee of Parliament
then in being, nor would any adventure such an undertaking in an oppressed and
distracted Country; and the necessities of the Garrison did admit of no delay.
2. That this Committee consisting of Soldiers, Citizens and Country
Gentlemen, would give satisfaction both to the Country men, who paid their
money, when themselves were acquainted with its necessity and disposal; and to
the Soldiers, who being privy to the receipt of the money and the Countries
indigence, might be contented with a slender entertainment: that at once it
seemed to prevent discontent in the Country, and mutiny in the Soldier. 3.
That the Petitions of the Country pressed upon the Governor in such
multitudes, that a great part of his time which might be spent against the
enemy to better purpose, was taken up herewith, or many persons must needs be
exposed to injury and oppression. 4. Because all course of Law from Westminster
was then stopped, not a Lawyer left in the Country, no Court of Equity to
relieve the oppressed, or curb the extremity of the Law, whose present want was
not so much in settling estates and determining right, as in providing for the
support of the Garrison, then like to be ruined; of which the Kings partee had
as great a confidence as before the Siege. No Landlord could receive his Rent,
no intercourse of Trade between man and man, whereby to enable them to pay
taxations. And for these reasons such an Order by the Council of War was
then assented unto.

In this the people never groaned under the Governors power; their voluntary
submission was a witness of his moderation. And this authority had more of
entreaty then constraint, only the Sword had some influence of fear upon the
injurious; the proceedings of the Town-Court not suspended, but sometimes
entreated to forbear upon equitable considerations. And when the Governor
began to observe some derogation from his intentions, by this Committee, he
instantly sent a Prohibition. It Was never his thought to rule by the Sword, but
in a desperate case by the same to cut out a way wherein the rules of Law and
Justice might freely pass. He was ever unwilling to take the charge upon him,
and by several Letters requested the Parliament, that the burden of
Government might be laid upon some other; or if that charge must rest upon him,
that they would send down a Committee, that might take off the former cares,
and permit him to look to the well ordering of his Forces for the safety of
this place, and to enlarge his quarters, that the service here might not be
only to keep Gloucester, but weaken the Enemy, and beget friends daily to the
Parliament.

Such was the face of Government within the City, whilst the Enemy acted his
part without, and bore down by force on all sides. From Hexeford Sir William
Vavasour with about seven hundred horse and foot marched into Tewksbury, with a
purpose to garrison that Town. A wide and open place not easy to be held by us,
who had neither competent strength nor time to fortify, the Kings forces
continually lying upon us. Sir William made show of settling the Garrison,
styled himself Governor of Tewksbury, invited the Country with promises of
moderation and candor in all his proceedings; yet these Welsh Forces had scarce
taken up their quarters, but received an Alarm from Gloucester, by a party
that went up in a Friggot: And the common soldiers partly discontented with
their Officers, who had often deceived that innocent people, and betrayed them
to the Sword; and partly repining for want of pay, fell into a desperate
mutiny, forced their Commanders, chose rather to be killed then to fight, and
constrained their flight out of the Town, hasted over Vpton Bridge, and did
scarce look back, till safe in their own Country; and it was to be suspected
that many late knocks had beaten out their spirits, but chiefly that they were
afraid of this Country air, in which they could never thrive. By this means
the excrescence of Sir William Uavousors government was pared off, and himself
driven to retire into Hereford.

Nevertheless we are cooped up with the enemies garrisons round about, and
wholly divided from the rest of the Parliaments Army. Sudely Castle was
maintained by the Lord Chandos, a great stop to our intercourse with Warwick,
which was the only way of commerce with London, that a Scout could not pass
without extreme hazard. Berkley Castle was held for the King by a Scottish
Captain, and subdued the richest part of the County. In the heart of the
Forest Sir John Winter strongly fortified and defended his own House: And now
the enemy had put a garrison into Beverstone Castle, resolving withal not to
leave one strong house unguarded, both to enlarge their own quarters, and to
stop our markets and contribution. Our Governor began to look forth, and first
for want of quarters was enforced to send abroad his own Company, which were
placed in a defenceable house at Frampton upon Severn. These were a stop to the
incursions from Berkley, and furthered the safety of that side of the Country.
An hundred and fifty Foot of Colonel Devereux his Regiment garrisond a strong
house at Presbury, within four miles of Sudely Castle. These sorely vexed the
enemy in those parts, did a little open the passage toward Warwick, and the
house proved a good resting place in the repasse. Another guard was set at
Westbury on the edge of the Forest, to affront Sir John Winter, a most active
enemy, and one chief Agent of the Popish Faction. Sir John, assisted with the
Lord Herberts Horse, threatened us out of the Forest, and had made a passage
over Seavern at Newnham, to afflict those parts beyond the River.
Notwithstanding all this, our small party by continual action upheld their
repute. Some weeks after the raising of the siege, the Governor marched with
his two Troops and two hundred musketeers before Berkley Castle. The musketeers
faced and kept in the enemy, whilst the Horse fell into the Country beyond to
fetch in the persons of some principal malignants, but in stead of them met
with the Lords Herberts Troops, and an hundred and forty Horse besides, which
came to relieve the Castle. Our Horse with some few musketeers fell upon them,
put them to a retreat, and slew some few without any loss to our party, who
drew off expecting the opportunity of a greater strength.

About this time Sir John Winter entered upon the Government of Newnham;
whereupon he took the courage to plunder the Villages near Gloucester: his
Horse came within three miles of the City, and drove away store of the Country
cattle. The Governor receiving intelligence, drew forth his small number of
Horse not exceeding seventy, made after and pursued them to the entrance of
their new Garrison; where they had already secured their plunder: in the
retreat five Troops of the Lord Herberts Regiment fell on the rear; our men
drew up in a narrow lane ready to receive the charge, fired upon them, and put
them to a running retreat. An Officer with twelve Troopers made the pursuit,
took one horse colors, and some prisoners, and killed a Cornet, and
Quartermaster, which event made Sir John Winter for present quit that
government with much distraction.

At that time there was no lofty stage of action, because the present enemy did
yield no gallant opportunity. Sir John Winter was wise for himself, nimble in
inferior businesses, delighted rather in petty and cunning contrivance then
open gallantry, referred all his industry to his own house, or the limits of
the Forest, vexed his neighbors more then weakened his enemy, and advanced the
Catholic Cause no other way then by the plague and ruin of the Country.

On the other side of the City the enemy was imboldned to erect new Governments
at Tedbury and Wotton Underedge. These did invite the Governors march that
way, who withal had his eye upon Beversione Castle newly garrisond, and
commanding the rich Clothiers of Stroodwater: hither he advanced with a party
of three hundred foot and four score horse. These horse sent before were so
formidable to the enemy at Tedbury, that the Governor Horatio Carry with his
whole Regiment were put to flight, and dissipated with the loss of fourteen
of their men slain and taken prisoners.

Colonel Massey brought up his men and two Sakers against Beverston Castle,
where having surrounded it, he planted his Guns within Pistol shot of the
Gate, and gave fire several times. Fifty Musketeers ran up to the Gate at
noonday and fixed a Petarre, which nevertheless failed in the execution.
Those from within threw Granodoes amongst our men, but hurt none, who although
thereby forced from the Gate, yet they ran up the second time, being open to
the full shot of a secure enemy, and brought of the Petarre with much
gallantry. The design was not feazible for a quick dispatch; for the Gate was
barricado'd within, the night came on, and those remote parts did promise no
security to so small a party; likewise the state of the City required them
nearer home: wherefore after twelve hours the party was drawn off, and in the
retreat advanced toward Wotton Underedge, where the enemy had placed a kind of
temporary Garrison with a Regiment of horse; they prepared for the coming of
our Forces, drew up on a Hill before the Town to face them, and at night
retreated to their Garrison; Where our men arrived somewhat late, and found the
enemy all mounted, sell upon them and put them to flight, of whom about six
were slain, and twelve taken prisoners, the rest escaping to Bristoll.

The next day by an overruling hand of providence, our party was led back to
Gloucester, contrary to the hope of Sir John Winter and his Accomplices. These
having intelligence of the Governors absence with a strong party, and
supposing the Garrison thereby weakened, sent to all the quarters of the
Forest, Monmouth and Herefordshire, to draw together and advance for the
surprisall of Gloucester. It was afterward suspected a complotment, to be
managed by the assistance of Malignants in the City. Late at night the
Governor had notice of the enemy in the Forest. Thereupon he commanded
Captain Crispe to draw fifty Musketeers from the Guards and march three miles
that way, making good a house that stood on the passage. As yet there was no
suspicion of a Plot, but before our party had passed a mile and half, they
encountered the enemy who were drawn up Horse and Foot in a broad lane near
Highnam House, instantly fired upon them, slew a Captain, and some four
common soldiers. The enemy were amazed at the sudden and unexpected encounter,
forced back with fear, and retreated to Huntly, where Sir John Winter had
secured his own person: But distracted by the strange repulse, marched off in
great confusion at the approach of fifteen horse that fell in amongst the
whole Brigade, slew seven or eight, and took ten prisoners.

This discomfited the enemy and dashed the design; yet the Hereford and
Monmouthshiere Forces kept their randevouz at Coford in the Forest, and still
threatened the City. No means for the reducing of this place is left
unattempted, and at this present treachery was the grand design and overruled
all their proceedings, and prevented many mischievous acts of open hostility,
which might easily have destroid us; for diverse Malignant Gentlemen of this
County went about to cast this City into extreme poverty and exigence by the
Countries ruin: Wherefore conceiving the present enemies not sufficiently
cruel, they importuned his Majesty that Colonel Charles Gerrard might quarter
upon us with his Brigade, to devour, spoil and burn, besides the expectation
of all the mischief the Lord Herbort and Vavasour can do. But this malicious
council and instigation though most opportune for the Kings purpose, was
afterward crossed by their own party, waiting upon the success of a close
design.

About this time was the act of Pacification made by the King with the Irish
Rebels, which began to undeceive the world, and wipe of the Varnish of the
former Oaths and Protestations. The world could not believe that any command
or power could so soon allay and quell those Irish storms, but that word
which raised them up: Then did the effect declare the cause of those rare and
slow Proclamations against that bloody Rebellion, and strange intercepting of
relief sent from the State to the distressed Protestants. The greatest admirer
of the Kings Declarations could judge no less then that those Rebels did
better comply with his intentions then the Parliament of England; since his
Majesty having two enemies, is resolved to make peace with one to crush the
other; he will fall in with that party that carries least contradiction to his
maine design; and this was the Rebel of Ireland; whose chief aim likewise
his Majesty must not abhor: for there can be no lasting compliance without a
mutual engagement. Besides, the heads of that Rebellion were brought over not
as accessaries, but principals in the Kings war, and admitted to the secret
Council. And to color the Pacification, the loss of that Kingdom and all
the sufferings of the English Protestants were charged upon the Parliament. The
English Forces in Ireland were possessed with the opinion of neglect in the
State, and were taken off the persuite of a just revenge upon those cursed
Rebels to war against their native Country, and tear the bowels, of the
mother that bare them, and therein act a part, and cast in their lot with the
Rebels themselves.

Some of these Irish Forces landed at Bristoll, and thence fell down upon
Gloucestershire: Colonel Min, and Sir William St. Ledger, with both their
Regiments, making up eight hundred or a thousand Foot, and a hundred Horse, all
resolved men, with eight Piece of Ordnance, advanced to Thornbury. Colonel
Massey proclaimed entertainment to all such as would tender their service to
the Parliament, and many private soldiers resenting the difference of the
cause came over daily. About the twentieth of December, a party of two hundred
horse and Dragoones commanded by Captain Backhouse, were designed to beat up
their quarters at Wotton, where they were lately arrived from Thornbury:
Wherefore the party advancing thither, suddenly fell in among them, and found
eight hundred men, charged up to the maine Guard, and for a while were masters
of four Piece of Ordinance, but over-matched and borne down by their numbers,
were forced to retreat, yet having first slain, wounded, and taken many of
them without the loss of a man. At the same time some of Colonel Vavasours
Forces undertook to settle at Upton upon Seaverne, but at the first show of an
approach from Gloucester quitted those quarters.

Once more do the clouds gather round about, the storm threatened by the
enemies fury, and more violently driven by the malice of some Country
Gentlemen begins to arise; The Malignant Gentlemen of Cotswold provide Arms,
and garrison strong Houses. Forces from Oxford were expected at Painsewick and
Stroud; the Irish were to lie on this side Berkely, the Lord Herbert and Sir
John Winter in the Forest, the Lord Chandos at Cheltenham, Sir William
Vavasour and Sir Walter Pie at Tewkesbury, so that by them our destruction is
decreed and seems as a thing done.

Every corner of the Country is pestered with the enemies Garrisons, as
Newneham, Lidney, Monmouth, Hereford, Worcester, Dimmock, Newent, Highleaden,
Tainton, Tewkesbury, Sudely, Saperton, Beverston and Berkely. Opposite to these
was the Governor constrained to erect petty Garrisons, as many and as near as
possible; for the Kings Forces were again advanced out of Herefordshire with a
greater strength and well prepared. Sir William Vavasour, Sir Walter Pie, and
Colonel Wroughton are arrived at Tewkesbury, and began to fortify, having a
great power with them till the Town was settled, and made strong; yet still
disturbed by continual Alarums from Gloucester, though the Land-flouds hindered
our design upon them. The Irish Regiments rose from Wotton, and thence made
over the Hills for Tewkesbury. And because their march was interrupted by our
parties, the Lord Chandos horse joined with them to strengthen and secure
their, advance to Cheltenham; whether they came with four small Piece of
Ordnance. Our men still flirted upon them. And a Party of Horse and Dragoones
commanded by Major Gray, fell that night into Charlton Kings, and had surprised
the Lord Chandos in his quarters, had he not made a private escape, where the
search after him caused the loss of seven or eight private soldiers; yet they
slew some of the enemy, took ten prisoners and some few horse. The next day the
Horse and Foot bended their course to Tewkesbury; our men waited upon the
march, and kept them up close, that those parts of the Country received but
little damage; when these had joined with the other Regiments, they were
supposed to make near upon two thousand six hundred Horse and Foot.

After a little stay, a part of these forces were drawn off toward
Warwickshire, to join with the enemy that there waited the intercepting or
surprizall of our supplies from London, then long and earnestly expected and
noised abroad, our powder being welnigh spent, and necessity constrianing us to
use a kind of match made of Bast. Sir Walter Pies Foot, and Col. Wroughtons
Horse remained at Tewksbury to block up the City on that side, in and about
which Town fifteen hundred Horse and Foot were constantly quartered; Colonel
Washingtons Regiment kept Garrison at Evesham, and a Regiment of Horse lay at
Parshore, besides a considerable strength at Sudely. These thought to swallow
up our approaching succors, or if they did not come, speedily to compel us to
yield up the City; for it was reported with the enemy, and believed by many,
that we suffered extreme penury.

And though provisions were not much wanting, being in a fat Country, yet the
real exigences of the Garrison were great; for lack of pay the discontents of
the Soldiers were desperate and endless. In most of the Officers a general
neglect of duty, who for the least check would throw up their Commissions, to
the Governors great discontent and trouble. Many inferior Officers forsook
us, and common Soldiers ran to other places that yielded a large and
constant entertainment, and required less service; whilst honest and gallant
men that did not desert their Colors, were exposed to misery and want; yet
could we not want men, who daily offered themselves to the service, had we
moneys to pay them. Neither had we any power of men to raise moneys for the
Garrisons maintenance. Our out-guards as Presbury, Wesbury, Essington,
Frampton, Froster, set to preserve the Country, and keep the Markets open, did
eat up the greater part of the Contribution, and consume our men and
ammunition, besides the daily sending out of parties. It Was a kind of shifting
life and wonderful, that the Officers command should find the least measure
of obedience. Some Offcers did expend their own means to keep their Companies
entire; the Governor was necessitated at his own charge to billet above
threescore Soldiers, besides the charge of a Troop. The Country was
impoverished, the Commission of Excise was not settled, and brought in no
considerable sum. The Citizens were restrained of Trade, and the ways of
Commerce stopped up; and therefore at present they were quite left to the
Garrison. Besides the slownesse and low reports of our succors did exceedingly
dis-hearten the people. Many Country Gentlemen that were not the Confidents of
the contrary Faction, were about to comply with this Government, especially
upon the Parliaments Declaration of pardon; but the notice of those slender
supplies, and the thought of the States supposed neglect, turned them off, and
made them more violent against us. For this lasting suspense and bondage under
two parties did vex them: wherefore his Majesty was again importuned, to destroy
and fire the Country, if he could not lodge his forces so near as to block us
up.

The Garrison nevertheless did not only defend its own territories, but made
sundry adventures and inrodes upon the Enemies quarters, staved off, and kept
them within their bounds. The Governor had built a Friggot for service upon
the River, to secure the Country near Gloucester, on that side Seavern,
because the Enemy commanded greatest part of the River, and landed at their
pleasure upon our quarters, from Bristoll and Wales. This Friggot was sent down
Seavern manned with Seamen and a party of Soldiers, for whatsoever attempt
sudden opportunity should offer; and arriving at Chepstow, our musketteers
hasted ashore, and entered the Town, where they surprised most of the Officers
of Colonel Oneales Regiment, raised under the command of the Lord Herbert.
These never dreamed of an enemy from Gloucester, in that corner of the Land, at
such a distance. And this was the advantage of the service, that by the
surprizall of the Officers, it prevented the raising of that Regiment of horse
which shortly after would have plagued the Country. Our men having secured
their prisoners, and ready to made homewards, another prize fell into their
hands, where they took a Vessel laden from Bristoll with Oil, Wine, Sugar,
and other commodities. These little services were answerable to the times, and
upheld the esteem of the Garrison in that low ebb. This Expedition gave an
Alarm to Bristoll, and all Wales, who to prevent the like inrode, sent up
diverse Friggots to guard the River.

At this time Sir William Vavasour began to appear from Tewksbury, and made an
attempt upon Bodington House, a petty Garrison of ours, only to preserve the
Country. Hither he came up with five hundred foot and two pieces of Ordnance,
fired his Gunnes against the House, and engaged himself in an assault. The
place was maintained by them within till a small party drew from Gloucester,
the report of which (at three miles distance) caused Colonel Vavasour to draw
of and return back to Tewkesbury, with the loss of eight or ten men before the
House. Neither did Vavasour seem to act with that violence, which the outside
of the enemies design did look for: whether retarded by the dullness of nature,
or the notice of some close contrivance. However, the slownesse and ill
success of his actions rendered him obnoxious to the jealousies of his own
Party; which suspicion was easily increased by the intercourse of civility
between him and Colonel Massy, when the known fidelity and constant
endeavors of the one could enable him without offense to his own side to
disport with an enemy in such complements, as the other had not the liberty to
use. Such neglected passages have a great weight in the balance of reputation
and honor: since the mind is not revealed by it self, and wise men as well
as fools oft-times have only the event to guide their judgments.

On the other side of the Town, we had continual skirmishes with Colonel
Veale newly made Governor of Berkly Castle, and assisted with the Lord
Inchequeens Regiment of Horse. This enemy was no way formidable nor mischievous
in any thing save the plunder of the Country, by whom he was oft-times beaten
back and kept in awe by the assistance of Frampton garrison. The Church at
Newnham was again fortified and defended by Sir John Winter with a sufficient
strength of men, and four Pieces of Ordnance, whence he might run up to the
Gates of Gloucester, rob the Country and take men's persons at pleasure, only
we kept a guard at Arlingham to hinder his passage over Seavern.

Colonel Man lay strong at Newent, Highleaden, and Tainton: The Governor
could do little on that side, only he placed a Garrison at Hartpury Court,
both to preserve Cosselawne, and to endeavor the engagement of Colonel Min.
Our Garrison at Frampton was removed to Slimbridge within four miles of
Berkley; we had other guards likewise at Essington and Froster, to preserve and
enable the people to contribution. Thus was the City pestered on every hand,
and fetched its livelihood out of the fire, with continual hazard, forcing the
enemies quarters, and defending its own; parties were daily drawn out by the
Governor, who then could not aim at victory, nor expect any great
performance, though the common people repined that he did not always conquer,
when it was conquest enough to keep the enemy in action, and prevent their
extravagances, to bear up the hearts of our friends, and signify to the world
that we were yet alive. Though the Governor was not invited abroad, yet he
strove to make opportunities according to the stock of Ammunition that was left
him; that counsels might spring out of the midst of action. He drew out upon
Tainton with two hundred Musketeers, and with a hundred horse faced the house
only to keep in or amaze them, but when the horse marched off, some of their
Troops fell on the Reareguard and charged the Governor, who re-encountred and
charged home some distance before the rest of the Troop, and by the breaking of
the curb, his horse carried him amongst the enemies Troops, with whom for a
while he grappled, and was rescued by the gallantry of a common Trooper, by
which time our Musketeers were brought up, and beat them back without loss to
us.

The Governor choosed rather to make work for the enemy, and to seek him in
his own quarters, then lie at home to expect the challenge; yet did he play a
wary game and though zealous of honor, yet more true to the maine chance and
tender of the lives of men: wherefore he advanced again with four hundred
Musketeers and fifty horse, came before Tainton, and with a small party faced
the house, having laid some Ambuscado's with a purpose to allure them into the
snare, and cut off their men, as well to encourage the Country as weaken the
enemy, but they did not adventure out. When we drew thence, our men beheld a
fair body of horse at Highleaden, whereupon a forlorn hope of our Musketeers
with twenty horse advanced upon them, and found their Horse and Foot drawn out
of Highleaden House: These were to join with Colonel Min, who at that instant
was marched out of Newent, with a purpose to fall on Hartpury Garrison. Here at
the first some few of our horse gave the charge, hurried the enemy and beat up
their Ambuscadoes: then they drew out their whole Garririson and sell on; Their
horse did not stand to it, but with their foot there was an hot skirmish almost
an hour: And though our seconds were slow in coming up yet did the forlorn
hope drive them from hedge to hedge, and after a while our body coming on beat
them in, and pursued them up to the very house, took some few prisoners, and
came off with the loss only of two men.

Such multitudes of the Kings Forces lay upon us to oppress the Country and
intercept our relief, that they were extremely straimed of quarter, and
enforced to look forth for livelihood. Whereupon two thousand Horse and Foot
marched from Tewkesbury to Painsewick to gather contribution, and rob the
Country about Stroudwater: The Governor drew out two hundred Musketeers with
an hundred horse, and marched to the top of Bruckthrop Hill expecting the
enemy, whom he found divided into three bodies and himself born down by their
multitude, for whilst two parties faced him the third stole down an hollow
lane, and had almost surrounded him unawares by the negligence of the Scouts,
so that our whole body was brought into great danger, driven to a sudden and
confused retreat, and the Governor himself, left deeply engaged; yet most of
our men got off, being preserved only by the gallartry of a few resolved men
that stood in the breach; and of them Captain George Massy striving to retard
the pursuit, grappled with three together hand to hand, received a sore wound
in the head, and was happily rescued by a Sergeant of the company; of ours, two
Lievtenants and sixteen private Soldiers were taken prisoners, the rest in
disorder ran down the steep through a rough and narrow lane, and recovered an
house at the foot of the Hill, where a party was left to make good the retreat,
and the enemy durst not pursue, by which means all the bottom was preserved
from spoil; next day they retreated to Few esbury laden with plunder.

Suddenly after this repulse, we lost two small Garrisons at Westbury and
Huntly, by the treachery of Captain Thomas Davis, who sold them at a rate to
Sir John Winter. This Davis commanded the Guard at Huntly where himself by
night some distance from the house attended the enemies coming, went in before
them as friends from Gloucester, gave them possession, and having accomplished
that piece of treason, immediately marched to Wesbury where he was received for
a friend, and led in his train of Cavaleers, that both places were surprised
in two hours, and above eighty men and arms lost in that great exigence. This
Villain was posted on the Gallows in Gloucester, and the Lord General was
desired that his name might stand upon the Gibbet in all the Parliament
Garrisons

During these things, a Treason of higher nature was plotted by the Enemy, to a
self-delusion in the close, a greater birth requiring more time to bring forth.
It was first conceived the nineteenth of November, and for near ten weeks had
the prime influence on their whole course in these parts; and is now ripe for
action. All the force they can make from Oxford, and the Irish are drawn
together. The Lord Herbert, Colonel Vavasour, and Sir John Winter lie upon us,
and Prince Rupert himself lying at Newent, hoping to effect this great Design.
Fifteen colors of horse arrived at Cirencester, and five hundred horse and
foot advanced to Saperton and Musarden, within ten miles of this Garrison.
There were of the Enemies forces round about, near six or seven thousand.

The failing of their endeavors and hopes in the late siege, brought forth a
despair of reducing the City by storm, and put them upon the ways of
treachery, who therein illuded themselves, and were over-acted in their own
councels. One Edward Stanford an Esquire, and a grand Papist, assaulted the
fidelity of Captain Backhouse once his friend and acquaintance. He presumed
that former friendship might make way to admit the plot, and Backhouses power
and interest in the Governor made it (in his conception) very feasible.
Wherefore in a private Letter he tendered the renewing of ancient love, not only
to the procuring of the Kings pardon, but a greater advancement and fortune
then the condition of those whom he served, could raise him to. This might be
purchased by the delivering of Gloucester into their hands, which was not hard
for him to perform considering the nature of his employment And the honesty of
the enterprise was grounded on the old proverb, fallere faltentem non est
fraus. An hasty and abrupt temptation and the tempters irrational confidence
did befool him in the first onset, who knew not either to propose or expect
such grounds of assurance as the thing did require: but set upon a knowing man,
without the knowledge of any imbred inclination to treason or present
provocation. Except a strange levity, a mind set on mischief, the conscience
of delinquency, or desire of revenge, vain glory, or riches, are the sole aims
of a Traitor, and the hopes of either must appear large and certain; but here
an attempt is made on such a one who neither by fear was compeld to provide
for himself, nor enraged against his own party, but acknowledged a present
felicity in the work in hand: as though it were possible to persuade a man
wittingly to contrive his own overthrow.

The Letters were no sooner received, but communicated to the Governor, who
advised to embrace the business, and hold a correspondence with that party,
practizing that rule by themselves propounded, for these reasons: First, it was a
delight and glory to take them in the snare which themselves had laid; and the
advantage was great. 2. That this treason (already secured) might prevent other
conspiracies against the City, so long as they had fair hopes of prevailing by
this; lest the contrivance of a second should confound the disposition of the
first. 3. That the Country under the command of this Garrison, which upon the
petition of the malignant Gentry was devoted to destruction, might be preserved
and spared by the Enemy, in hope to enjoy the benefit thereof themselves; for
the embracing of this plot did not draw on the Enemy, but held his hand and
suspended the execution of his fury. 4. To spin out the plot, and feed their
expectation till the Country had vented in the markets their spare provisions
of Corn and Cattle. 5. That the Enemy possessed and taken up with the gayning of
the City, might give the Parliaments Forces in other parts of the Kingdom a
greater freedom to execute their designs. 6. That a flattering promise might
allay their fury till the winter were past or our relief come, and we be able
to feed them with harder meat; and that themselves might taste the cursed
fruits of Treason, to a selfe-shame and confusion. The Design was communicated
to Captain William Singleton Alderman, and Captain Read.

For these and the like reasons, Backhouse undertook the business, and
returned an answer in a liberal garb, protesting that he honored his Majesty
with his soul, and was ready to perform all real service. He seemmed withal
to promote the plot by requiring sworn secrecy, and agreeing upon a trusty
messenger: and that he might seem more deeply to relish the matter, caught
hold on the promise of Reward, and required some unquestionable assurance, that
he might not play an after: game poorly. Thus the fraud is returned upon them
by one that strives to maintayn the repute of integrity, conceiving it no
transgression of Military Honor, to deceive them into a snare by verbal
equivocation, as well as by a doubtful action, the common way of the
Stratagems of War. This confident Reply and the palpable discovery of a
sudden change, did not render him suspected, but beyond all reason gave the
complotters great contentment, who did not enquire into the conviction and
change of his thoughts by due degrees. Stanford desired him forthwith to
express his conditions, propose the way, and descend unto the particulars of
the service, assented to constant intercourse, and assured him that none but
the Lord Digby should be privy to the Design. Captain Backhouse drew the model
of the plot in this following Letter to Mr Stanford.

SIR,
YOU desire my conceit in proposal of particular Propositions, and of my
Reward: To both which I shall thus propose unto you to present to more mature
judgments: Whether I may not by drawing out my Troop in an evening (as I can
do at any time) meet with your forces, and bring them in at the gate on the
sudden in a moonshine night, and so master the first guard, which may easily be
done, and not discerned till too late; my Troop being above three score, who
may be all in the rear, and at your mercy, though I my self shall lead in the
force, which cannot give the alarm in the night so soon as to prevent the
design. Whether if I persuade the Governor with a strong party of Horse and
Foot upon some design to lie out all night eight or ten miles distant from the
Garrison (as I know I can do) and I my self stay at home, in whose absence
you may safely advance in the evening to the Towns side, when I can come out to
you, and so bring you in under color of our own forces. Whether if I find
out a place stenderly guarded, and somewhat easy to come in at, I may draw off
the sentinels upon some pretense, as I can do, being known unto them all, and
there direct your entrance. Whether if I send for hay, and give you notice of
the very time of its coming in, which must be in the night, I may not after
the Carts bring in some men as Carters, who may have snaphance muskets in the
Carts and some Dragoons to fall in in the rear of the Carts, who may master
the first guard and possess the Ordnance there, and so let in both Horse and
Dragoons who with such Ordnance may march through all the streets in the Town.
These several ways I propose for the present, but I conceive that those who
have been versed in the taking of Towns may make more choice of Propositions,
any of which if I apprehend it feazible, I shall gladly undertake, or render a
reason of my dislike. As for my reward I am right sensible of how great
concernment the business is to your side, and although it be utterly against
my spirit to indent before hand, especially with such gallant and noble
personages; But the straits I have been put into for lack of money, (having
received no pay for my self from those whom I serve) and my estate and charge
bids me look to that. I shall expect two thousand pound to be secured, two or
three hundred whereof I shall desire you as my friend to procure in hand, that
I may be enabled to bear up my port and credit, especially among the common
soldiers and Under-officers of the Garrison, to whom I must be open handed,
and engage affection, that they may be ready at my call. Secondly, to engage
mine own Troop, and to bind such unto me with a silver cord, as I shall find
fittest for my purpose; and withal plentifully to reward the entercoursers
between you and me, that they may execute our commands with all celerity and
trust. This I leave to your consideration and manage, and hope that ere long
we shall meet to discourse it, when all the world shall not know.

R. B.


These Propositions are sent to Oxford, entertained by the Kings
Cabinet-councell, the Lord Digby becomes the great undertaker, and ratifies the
proposal of Captain Backhouse in the following Letter:

SIR, You having so far declared your desires to serve His Majesty unto my
very good friend Master Stanford, I think it fit you should now receive some
more authentic assurance of His Majesty's gracious acceptance thereof, then
perhaps you will think his bare assurance to be. Therefore I do here
solemnly engage my word unto you both as a minister of State, and a Gentleman,
that if you shall perform faithfully what you promise there, you shall
punctually receive immediately after, such a pardon as your self shall desire,
and the sum of two thousand pounds. As for the three hundred you desire in
present, such a confidence I will have in your word, that as soon as ever I
shall have received your answer to this under your hand, it shall be forthwith
paid into whatsoever place you shall appoint, or to what person. As for the
particular ways of effecting our design, those you propose are very
rational, but the choice, and disposition thereof must be between you, and
those that are to execute it, with whom if it were possible you should procure
a meeting at some unsuspected place. I do propose unto you the choice of
several men, and whom of them you shall like best, and think fittest by
reason of the place where his command is, to him alone, and to no other the
business shall be imparted, whether Sir William Vavasour commander in chief
of the forces now in Gloucestershire, or Colonel Mine, Commander of a brigade
of the English that come out of Ireland, or Colonel Washington who is at
Evesham; or lastly, whether the Governor of Berkley-castle. As soon as you
shall send me an answer you shall receive satisfaction, from him who hopes you
will so behave your self as to make me,

Your assured friend, G. D.


Here this degenerate Lord sels his honor and betrays the esteem of
gallantry, by promoving and engaging himself to reward the vilest treason, and
to insinnate himself into the close workings thereof, when many brave spirits
out of their abundant justice have disdained the proffer of so base a service.
And herein did he derogate from the repute of an able Statesman in relying
upon the doubtful expressions of an unknown person, and whose condition could
not invite any of the least ground of belief.

Hereupon a correspondency was held with the Lord Digby; unto whom Backhouse
made his reply, that his Lordships directions suited with his own former
proposals made unto Master Stanford, to wit, that the Commander of the forces
to be employed herein must be conscious of the design; and as touching the
choice of a chief actor on their part, he conceived Sir William Vavasour the
fittest man, because he was nearest the business, his men lying at Ledbury,
when the rest were more remote and of inconsiderable strength: as also because
he had the best advantage to make his approach undiscovered, there being no
suburbs nor house near the City from his quarters, nor any out-guard to give
the alarm. And for himself, upon a few days notice he would comply with their
expectation, as the actors should agree upon all circumstances.

Upon this they returned large expressions of reward, and honor, but the
present payment of the three hundred pound was waved by Stanford, as much as
possible, upon pretense of the danger of mis-fezance in the maine plot.
Backhouse would not admit the excuse, importuned the payment, as well to have
something in hand, as to let them know the great wheel that turned him about,
that the palpable show of corruption might make them more confident. Neither
could they well keep back the earnest of this guerdon, lest they should
render themselves capable of his dislike jealousy, or seem to suspect his
trust, whose adventure (if real) in every line was sufficient to ruin him,
and he left to bewail his own misfortune: wherefore it was resolved that
this Stanford and Captain Backhouse should debate upon the business by word
of mouth; they met accordingly in Cosl^wne at an hour appointed, without arms
or attend^nts, where Backhouse received two hundred pounds in hand, with a
promise from Stanford to discharge a Bond of fifty pounds, and was not once
urged in the whole conference to an asseveration of fidelity by protestation or
oath. He received likewise the contrivance of the plot laid by Master Stanford,
Sir William Vavasour, and others that were lately come to Tewkesbury, which
ran thus: That Colonel Massy should be drawn out of the Garrison with a
strong party toward Berkley-castle, having assurance that the Castle should be
rendered, which was really intended by them, that the gaining of Gloucester
might be the more facile. In the absence of the Governor Captain Backhouse
was to open the gate, and deliver the word. Thus was the plot proposed and
approved by Backhouse, but with additionall advise, that their forces might
with all speed relinquish Tewkesbury, because he should never persuade the
Governor to draw forth such a party, whilst they lay so strong upon us. This
also was assented unto by the complotters, being secure of their agent, and
blinded with extreme desire and confidence. And had not the proposal of the
enemy been by themselves deserted, we had possessed Barkley-castle, and placed a
garrison in Tewkesbury. Yet so far did they prosecute the business, that Sir
William Vavasour sent to require the Governor of Berkley to draw out his whole
garrison (which was refused, without the Kings, or Prince Ruperts special
command) himself also commanded a great part of his foot to Parshow, professed
his endeavors to march with the residne, and all the horse; but that His
Majesty's Commissioners were so averse as by no means to consent or permit,
unless they might know and approve the design, whom he professed to leave
unsatisfied, lest he might do Backhouse a disservice, and prevent or disturb
the motion* Notwithstanding Backhouse knew well enough that the (...) of (...)
Tewkesbury, and the whole Court at Oxford are full of this complement; and so
close was the business carried that the London Mercury had blazoned him for a
Traitor. Wherefore upon this pretense they run back to one of the former
Propositions, to wit, that he would draw forth his own Troop, with one more,
which should be put in the rear of their horse, and himself lead the forlorn
hope into the Town. But he exquisitely declined this way pretending himself
not a little dashed at the disturbance of the first intention, which in his
own thoughts ran so feazeble, and alleged the Governors watchfulness in
observing the garrison of Tewkesbury, that he had given private commands to the
Officers both of horse and foot to be instantly ready upon the first advance of
their forces, and kept abroad night and day good parties of horse to bring
intelligence. So that he could not join with them, without suspicion or
discovery: and as he should be glad to confirm their opinion of his real
performance, for whom he did thus hazard his life and fortune, so should he be
infinitely unwilling to put them upon any enterprise which to themselves might
prove prejudicial: he minded them withal that the true frame of the plot was
the life of the action. That one misfeizance in a business of this nature was
never to be repaired, but crossed the perfection of such an enterprise, wherein
he protested himself happy if he might sacrifice himself to accomplish the
same according to his desires. In the close he gave his opinion, that the
Governors absence was the chief requisite to prepare the business, that his
presence was not consistent with the safety of their side, especially if the
alarm be taken at the first entrance. Wherefore he was once more confident to
urge the relinquishing of Tewkesbury, and upon the removal promised to
possess the Governor with a private intelligence of the surrender of Berkley,
and persuade him to embrace the supposed opportunity, whilst himself should
remain at home with the command of the horse left for scouts, and act the
business with more ease and safety.

This motion effected its intended purpose to bring them on at the West Port,
to our best advantage against them, and Sir William Vavasour seemed to incline,
but craved a little patience till the contribution were brought in to satisfy
the Soldiers. Master Stanford required a particular information of the state
of the garrison, and received an account of the several Ports, Forts, great
Guns, Draw-bridges, Provisions and Ammunition. This was taken for a pregnant
testimony of Backhouse his fidelity, and made them the more bold to come on,
who were gulled with such a slender notice of trivial things, that the meanest
boy which passed through the streets might give as great satisfaction: but
whatsoever was of concernment he represented to the best advantage of the
garrison.

After much variety of intercourse, Sir William Vavasour urged the execution,
in regard the Parliaments Army grew so strong, that what they attempted was to
be done out of hand. The plot was thus disposed by Captain Backhouse, as well
to secure his own person within the gates, as to render the design more
probable. That whereas being Commander of the horse he could require the Keys
of the City for the sending forth of scouts, he proposed this way to their
liking; that the very night of their approach he might provide Scouts out of
his own Troop who should not be ready till the business were acted. Mean
while himself would take the Keys, repair to the West gate, and pretend to
stay for their coming, and set the guard which is usually slender to drink in
an Alehouse: In which time they might advance, find no living soul but
himself at the gate, or a few drunken men, and pretend withal to be our own
men from Churcham, where we had a guard of horse and foot, which if they did
not disturb would continue there awhile, and further the performance.

Thus the safety of the Country, and our small garrisons was still interwoven
in each part of the plot: and they deceived with so great a semblance of
reason, that they could not suspect, though in every motion he constantly
waved selfe-ingagement, and personal danger. The maine care of the business
is to draw them on to a selfe-destruction: and the last model complies with
their fancy in each particle, and to their second thoughts likewise appears
still more rational. On the fifteenth of February the (...) time is come, nine
of the clock at night is the hour appointed, the guards are to be drawn off
from the further Bridge, and the Sentinells to be taken in. Prince Rupert is to
advance with fifteen hundred horse and foot, and it would be very satisfactory
if Captain Brickhouse met them with his own Troop pretending to beat up a
horse quarters, but this they urge not it it be found inconvenient. In the
evening a Messenger is dispatched, from Gloucester to the Enemies quarters,
with the watch word for their assurance and some private directions for their
march up the Town; while himself waited at the Gate, which he undertook to set
open, if they came by nine of the clock, or within half an houre-after.

After the messengers dispatch, the ports were shut up round the City, careful
Sentinells set, The Governor called a council of War, acquainted the Officers
with the Plot, gave order that as well Citizens as Soldiers should continue
that night in Arms: drew to the Westgate three pieces of Ordnance, and a
strong guard of Musketeers well provided with Grenades, and commanded four
stout men in a boat under Ouers Bridge half a mile distant from the gate to
lie under the maine. Arch, with direction that upon the firing of the first
Ordnance they should out a cable rope, which being done the Bridge would fall
into the River. By which means they had all been killed, drowned or taken
being cooped up in an Island open to our shot without possible means of
escape. In this preparation and posture we continued all night, watching the
time to have delivered our selves from the future mischief of such blood
thirsty Enemies, They advanced with their whole body of horse and foot, but
before they came within a mile and a half of the City it was open day, when
having lost the time by the slownesse of their manch, they durst not come on
but instantly retreated to Newent, from thence Captain Backhouse was informed
by letters of the reason of their faylings, which induced us to believe that
the Enemy did not yet know that their design was destroyed. Wherefore we
endeavored secrecy, and the next day suffered no man to pass the ports,
desired to salve the matter and bring them on once more, but the whole frame
quickly fell asunder, though the languishing enemy gave some cold entertainment
to a few patching letters, because they were ashamed to acknowledge such a
strong delusion.

As they had all justly perished in their own hellish mischief, so are they
deservedly branded with notorious folly in the whole manage: and the chief
undertakers might have learned not to indulge their hopes of fair conclusion
by their own subtilty cogitations, and the show of a neat contrivance, when
nothing beneath a like mutual engagement, and strong necessity does deserve
assurance and confidence. Nevertheless the pregnant hopes of this maginary
treason, as it brought forth a lie to the contrivers thereof, so it wrought
much good for this garrison, and the common service of the State. The embracing
of the motion held up the desires of the enemy, and made them less active
elsewhere. It preserved the Country till our succors came which were every day
expected. Neither was this plot the cause that the power of the enemy did bear
hard on the Country (for here was the confluence of their Winter quarters) but
since we must bear their burden, it made it the less grievious. 'Twas
impossible to keep out an Enemy, but all the skill was to allay his fury and
hinder the acting of mischief: which was carried on with violence by the
Malignant Gentry, and that party that were not privy to or disliked the Plot;
inso much that Sir William Vavasour was complained of, reviled and cursed: and
at once lost the opportunity of action and advancement in the Kings Service.

The Enemy swarms in every corner, except the County of the City and Whitstone
hundred, that each day creates new troubles, and the Governor constrained on
one side, or other continually to draw out strong parties, to defend our
selves, maintain our Markets and encourage that part of the Country which is
yet clear: All advantages were taken to engage the people and herein did the
Governors industry put forth it self in settling the Country in a posture of
defense, when the command of the City did not reach above three miles some
ways, and not above seven miles on the best side. At several Randezvouzes
published the national Covenant and Declaration of both Kingdoms expressing
their mutual care of repayring our breaches and perseverance in their maine
undertaking, which gave great satisfaction to such as were damnityed in this
cause, and confirmed unto them the vigor and strength of the Parliament. By
which means the nearer parts became wholly ours, not only yiedling a supply of
maintenance, but engaging themselves on their own and our defense. And some of
them that did not seem to confide in the State were drawn in being first
enraged by the Enemeis cruelty, which discontent and desire of revenge the
Governor cherished, and raised to an open Declaration, and unawares of the
multitude put them beyond the hopes of a fair retreat. So that these men
observed the Enemy upon every motion sent alarms to the City, and in a great
part took off the fear of a sudden surprizall.

Amidst these things the expectation of the London supply, and the daily hopes
of money strongly upheld the common Soldiers by a mere delusion: its delay
became a greater advantage, since its real strength had before bin crumbled to
dust. No part of the Kingdom was capable of better service by a considerable
number, yet a mean and slender relief did not only not shake off the
burden, but disgrace the business and contract, and sink the minds of men
when hope does enlarge and bear up.

The Governor therefore advised the stay of the Convoy, and was willing to
expect such a party as might enable him to bear off the Enemy fifteen miles
round about. Want of Ammunition was the greatest exigence, and the preserving
thereof; till a supply came was the maine hinderance of all designs?
Nevertheless we had perpetual Bickerings, that the Enemy might not grow upon
us and our daily nimble performances were unto them as a continual dropping.
Amongst others a party of horse and Dragooners issued forth as far as
Marshfield, fell upon a Troop of horse quarters there and brought thence a
Lieutenant, Cornet, and Quartermaster, with a few common prisoners, and such
horse and Arms as the Troop did yield. Whilst Colonel Ueales foot, and the
Lord Incheequeenes horse lay in and about Berkely, and sorely oppressed the
Country, we fell into a horse quarter of Incheequeenes* Regiment, and took a
Major and two Captains, three Lieutenants, two Cornets with two Colors and
other inferior Officers and Soldiers, to the number of three and twenty, all
this while the strength of the Kings army is lodged between us and Warwick, to
intercept our relief and in thought have already divided the spoil.

Sir William Vavasour willing to act something in the latter end of the day, to
repair his credit in the Kings Army, desired a greater strength with a
sufficient Artillery to distress and straiten Gloucester, and having obtained
two Culverins from Oxford, with a proportion of powder, he advanced with a
strong Brigade toward Painswick with unusual preparations and expectation.
Their march afflicted the Country, and endangered our out-garrisons. The enemy
were confident to the last that extremity would compel us to yield up all to
their mercy. Sir William Vavasour entered Painswicke with as gallant horse and
foot as the Kings Army did yield. Here the Governor had placed a guard in a
house near the Church, into which the Church also was taken in by a Breast work
of Earth. The intention of the guard was to command contribution, and keep off
a plundering party: and order was given to the Lieutenant which commanded to
maintain it against a lesser party, but if the maine body and Artillery
advanced upon them, to relinquish it and retreat down the Hill to Bruckthrop
(where the Governor had set a guard to prevent the Enemies falling down into
the bottom) for which purpose they were assisted with a Troop of horse, to
make good such a Retreat if need were. But the Lieutenant more confident of
the place, and not understanding the strength of the Army, and not willing to
draw off before the last minute, was enforced by the Enemy to engage himself,
and many willing people of the Neighborhood in that weak hold, and upon the
first onset deserted the house being the stronger part, and betook himself to
the Church, which wanting flankers the Enemy had quickly gained by firing the
doors and casting in hand-Granadoes, some few were slain in defending the
place, and the rest taken prisoners. We lost three inferior Officers, seven
and thirty common Soldiers, and many Country men; At that season the Governor
had commanded to Stroud, another guard of fifty Musketeers to support and
strengthen the place in its own defense. But Ammunition was their only cry,
which struck us dead, and constrained the Governor to withdraw that party to
the garrison at Essington; For our Magazine did then yield no more then six
single barrells of powder, by which means he was wholly disabled to encounter
the Enemy; Only to preserve the bottom, he drew forth the greatest part of
both Regiments with their Colors displayed to flourish at a distance, and
summoned the Volunteers of the Country whom himself had engaged in a posture
of defense. These were to increase the appearance of strength by day, and at
night to guard the several passages. So that the Enemy durst not adventure
below the Hills, nor seek us in our advantages, nor was it safe for us, who
wanted horse, to set upon them in those large and open places; Either party
kept their own ground. They wasted the Hill Countries, whilst we secured the
Vale: and the Soldiers sustained hard duty in marching to and fro to give the
Country satisfaction, where the Enemy prevailed they plundered to the bare
walls, and this was the accomplishment of the great service, so long expected
from Sir William Vavasour.

This Brigade, upon the defeat of Sir Ralph Hoptons Army, by Sir William
Waller at Charrington Down, was commanded hence and instantly marched for
Cirencester and so to Oxford, our horse made after them but could not recover
the Rear, only they lighted upon some straglers, and in the whole business we
killed and took near fifty men. This diversion relieved Gloucester which else
had bin blocked up to the Gates, and cast into as great necessity as ever. In
this pinch we received twelve horse load of Ammunition strangely conveyed
between the Enemies garrisons, only by the Carriers and a foot post, when their
designed convoy that set forth a little after and missed them, gave them for
lost and returned to Warwick; The residue of the relief was stolen by parcells
through the enemies Quarters, for though their greater body was drawn off, yet
were we still vexed with their garrisons. Not long after there arrived another
portion and three Troops of horse to make up the Governors Regiment. At
length came Lieutenant Colonel Ferrar that had the command of these succors
with a little long expected pay for the Garrison. As for the Foot Soldiers
that came with him out of London, in regard they came several ways and at
several times in a lingering march with want of pay, and some taken prisoners,
about fifty came to Gloucester, and of the rest, no good account could be given.

When Vavasour was called off the Enemy revived and grew bold under a more
active Leader Colonel Nicholas Min, who commanded the Irish Brigade. In the
first entrance he began to lash out, and made assayes of action, cut down the
Bridge at Masemore, allarmed the City from the Vineyard Hill, and took diverse
of our men that issued out upon a sally over the River in a boat.

At this present there came daily cries for the relief of Brampton Castle in
the remote parts of Herefordshire, which held out a long time in the midst of
the Enemies Country to the expense of much time and blood. And their succor
was the more importuned by the rage of the Enemy, which had lately acted their
cruelties upon forty prisoners of the same command taken by Colonel Woodhouse
in Hopton Castle, which were basely murdered after the surrender. Colonel
Massy had no forces under his command to undertake a march through the midst
of the Enemy, when they pressed hard on our own borders, and the Brigade of
horse assigned for the Convoy, and commanded by Commissary General Bher were
unwilling to undertake the service. Yet while these horse remained here, the
Governor desired to set them a work that they might not act only to the
spoil of the Country. Wherefore they joined with a party of our foot, and made
an attempt upon Newent, Colonel Mins garrison, but were called off in the
midst of the service by a special order from the L. General.

The Enemy have lost the hopes of their Winter action, and this garrison made
the best of a bad game in continual petty services and small parties, yet
beyond the strength of the place, not to conquer, but live, nor to destroy the
Kings Forces but to stave off or delude them. But to enable Colonel Massy to
march with a better strength, Colonel Purefoy with his Regiment of horse about
the first of April 1644, was by the Committee of both Kingdom, commanded into
these parts, and the maine design was to remove or take in the garrisons that
lay round the City. These horse having brought but a slender part of the
Ammunition, and none of the Arms that were sent from London were remanded to
Warwick, for the Convoy of Match and Powder: The Governor resolving not to
undertake a march or action of time without a proportion of Powder, both for
the field and garrison. Upon their second arrival these horse with a party of
four hundred foot were drawn out with two small pieces of Ordnance, and
advanced into the Enemies quarters, first with a purpose to seek out Colonel
Min, who was lodged in the nearer parts. But upon the report of our march he
fell back from Newent and hastened to Rosse, where he began to fortify the
Church with his own and Sir John Winters Regiments. The Governor made forwards
into Herefordshire, and kept his head quarters at Ledbury to appear unto the
Enemy, and in their own Country provoke them to action, and in the mean while
to fetch in moneys for the supply of the Soldier, and to ease our
Neighborhood, which till then did bear the whole burden. Our horse that lay
near upon their garrisons had some encounters, but with no considerable party.
From Hedbury an hundred and fifty Musketeers with the whole strength of horse
were drawn toward Hereford to command the Country, and face the garrison which
feared our approach, and for that cause fired a lone house near the City, but
none did adventure to sally forth or fall on the Rear in our retreat, so we
marched through the greatest part of the County, but the grand Malignants were
fled with the best of their substance. The Governor resolved to attempt the
lesser garrisons, but the noise of our march had reached Prince Rupert, who
thereupon was come to Evesham with as great a strength of Horse and Dragoones
as he could draw together with a purpose to fall over Upton-Bridge, and get
between Gloucester, and our forces, whilst Colonel Min and Sir John Winter
held us in play in these parts. Wherefore being advertised of the Princes
march, and suspecting his intention, he drew back the party as well to refresh
and preserve his men as to make the Enemy secure.

But within four days the like number were again drawn out toward the
Forest side to attempt and act something upon Myns forces, and first they came
up upon Westbury, once our own garrison, but betrayed into the hands of Sir
John Winter. Here the enemy held the Church, and a strong house adjoining. The
Governor observing a place not flanked, fell up that way with the Forlorn
hope, and secured them from the danger of shot. The men got stools and ladders
to the windows, where they stood safe, cast in Grenades and fired them out of
the Church. Having gained the Church, he quickly beat them out of their works
and possessed himself of the house, where he took about four score prisoners,
without the loss of a man. The enemy had an other guard at Little-Deane,
whither the Governor commanded a party of horse to give them alarms whilst he
fell upon Westbury. These horse found the enemy straggling in the Town, and
upon the discovery of their approach shuffling toward the garrison, which the
Troopers observing, alighted and ran together with them into the house, where
they took about twenty men. Near unto which guard Lieutenant Colonel
Congrave Governor of Newnham and one Captain Wigmore with a few private
Soldiers were surrounded in some houses by the residue of our horse. These had
accepted quarter, ready to render themselves when one of their company from the
house kills a Trooper, which so enraged the rest, that they broke in upon them
and put them all to the Sword: in which accident this passage was not to be
forgotten that expressed in one place an extreme contrariety in the Spirits of
men under the stroke of death: Congrave died with these words, Lord receive my
soul; and Wigmore cried nothing but Dum me more, Dame me more; desperately
requiring the last stroke, as enraged at Divine revenge.

Colonel Massy pursued the success (whilst his own men were full of life
and hope, that the confidence of the enemy might be dashed by a quick
surprisall.) And the very next day came before Newnham, where a strong party of
Sir John Winters forces kept garrison in the Church, and the Fort adjoining, of
considerable strength, who at that instant where much daunted and distracted by
the loss of Congrave their Governor. Our men were possessed of the Town
without opposition, and recovered the houses by which they got near the
works. The Governor commanded a blind of faggots to be made athwart the
street, drew up two pieces of Ordnance within Pistol shot: and observing a
place not well flanker'd. where he might lead up his men to the best advantage,
himself marched before them, and found that part of the work fortified with
double pallisadoes: (the Soldiers being provided with Sawes to cut them down,)
and having drawn these close within a dead angle, and secure from their shot,
and drawing the rest of his force for a storm, the enemy forthwith desires
parley, and to speak with the Governor, which he refused, and commanded a
sudden surrender. In this interim some of the enemy jumpt over the works, and
so our men broke in upon the rest, who ran from the out-worke into the
Church, hoping to clear the mount which we had gained. But our men were too
nimble, who had no sooner entered the mount, but rushed upon them before they
could reach home, and tumbled into the Church all together. Then they cried for
quarter, when in the very point of victory a disaster was like to befall us, a
barrel of Gunpowder was fired in the Church, undoubtedly of set purpose, and
was conceived to be done by one Tipper a most virulent Papist, and Sir John
Winters servant, despairing withal of his redemption being a prisoner before,
and having falsified his engagements. This Powder blast blew many out of the
Church, and sorely singed a greater number, but killed none. The Soldiers
enraged fell upon them, and in the heat of blood, slew near twenty, and
amongst others this Tipper. All the rest had quarter for their lives (save one
Captain Butler an Irish rebel, who was knocked down by a common soldier)
and an hundred prisoners taken. The service was performed without the loss of
a man on our side.

After this dispatch the Governor marched to Lidney house, with purpose to
attempt according to what he should find meet, and in the first place summoned
the same to a surrender, which being refused, and he finding the house
exceedingly fortified, and no less provided with victual and force, engaged
not upon it: And understanding that Col. Mine with a considerable strength of
horse and foot, assisted by the Lord Herberts forces, and Sir John Winter, was
come as far as Coford; he was enforced with more expedition to draw off, for
the gaining of the hill toward them, there expecting the enemies advance till
toward evening, when he marched off his wearied men to Gloucester, first
having fired Sir John Winters Iron-mils and Furnaces, the maine strength of his
estate and garrison.

After these things many Gentlemen of the County began to look toward the
Parliament, and tender their obedience, desiring Protections from this
government, to secure themselves from spoil, and the soldiers violence.
Nevertheless as the personal estates of all known delinquents within the
reach of this command were seized, and the profits of their Lands sequestered,
so these men were not to be ignorant or insensible of the value of their peace.
Concerning some the Governor desired the direction of the Houses, yet granted
Protections with strict provisoes only to preserve their persons from the
violence, and their estates from the plunder of the common soldier, for the
advantage of the public, till a full conviction, or the pleasure of the
Houses were by themselves or their Committee made known. And this he did
according to the Parliaments undeniable justice, and the example of other
general Officers. As for the moderate offenders, unless the state of things
did require or permit their utter destruction, he had no other way but to
endeavor to make them our friends and confidents, and since it was resolved
they must live amongst us, he desired by love and gentle dealing to hold the
way secure and open, that they might embrace the condition without discontent
or fear, and for these protections he reserved nothing to himself but caused
the moneys to be paid in to the public Treasurer for the use of the garrison.

Neither was he sluggish in the spring of action, but immediately fell upon
another design, the surprisall of Tewkesbury, by an unexpected onset. For the
enemy by the number of their men, and the natural strength of the place, with
the works well begun, were sufficiently provided to receive an expected and
open storm, and the Governor shunned all desperate hazzards, because he did
not march with supernumerary forces, but the maine strength of Gloucester.
Wherefore to deceive the enemy the foot were drawn forth at the West-gate,
bearing the show of an advance into Herefordthire, and the Horse kept their
Rendezvous, and looked the same way. But in the evening the horse came back
and marched through Gloucester toward Tewkesbury, having first sent a guard to
Upton-bridge: while the foot came on beyond Severne. The design had taken
effect, had not the foot by their slow march or mis-guidance passed the hour,
which was break of day, for they came not before the Town till an hour after
Sun rising, when we were found not sit to assault a waking and prepared
enemy. To withdraw nevertheless, did seem but a feeble business for such a
fair body of horse and foot displayed before the Town, and carried before it
the appearance of a baffle: yet the Governor, though naturally jealous of
honor, could digest such mis-fezance, when the safety of his own men
required, knowing that the opportunity of service would in good time cancel a
mis-grounded ignominy, and in his whole course, whenever the present exigence
did not urge a greater hazard, neglected the hopes of those victories that
could not be gained without the weakening of that party on which the maine rest
did lie.

This party was presently sent over the River, and marched toward Rosse to
prevent the joining of Colonel Mine (now made Commander in chief in the room
of Sir William Vavasour) with Sir John Winter, and the Welsh forces, as also to
raise moneys for the garrison out of the remoter parts, to enlarge our own
quarters, engage the Country with us, or to lie ready for all occasions of
service. There our horse and foot arrived, with two pieces of Ordnance, and
found Wilton-bridge guarded by Captain Cassie, and thirty Musketeers from
Gudridge-castle; a party of our horse advanced upon them, forced the River, and
got beyond them; after some dispute beat off the guard, wounded and took the
Captain, slew many of his men, and took the rest in the chase almost up to
the Castle. Our forces rested here a few days, and summoned the Country to
appear, it being the Governors constant endeavor to add daily friends unto
the Parliament, and to put the Country into such a posture, that upon all
alarms they might gather to an head for their own defense, and hereupon many
came in and declared themselves, by taking the National Covenant. Whilst the
engagement of the Country was thus prosecuted some emergent occasions drew the
Governor to Gloucester, where he found a prisoner Captain Oglethorpe
Governor of Beverston-castle, a man rendered odious to the Country by strange
oppressions and tyranny, and who lost himself basely being taken by some of
our Scouts in a private house courting his Mistress, and when once taken, not
so high and stern before, but now as vile and abject. By which means the
Governor was made sensible of the weakness of the Castle, but much divided
in his own thoughts, whether to leave the Country that came on so fairly to
a selfe-engagement, and neglect the Contribution already levied, but not paid
in, or desert the hopes of agallant service: till at last considering the great
command of the Castle, that the gaining of it would free the Clothiers of
Stroudwater from the bondage and terror of that government, and might prove a
great detriment and annoyance to the enemy, in stopping or disturbing their
passage from Oxford to Bristoll, he turned his thoughts to the business, put
on and resolved to try for it. Wherefore he drew from Rosse without delay, and
commanded his foot over Severne at Newnham passage, whilst the horse marched
through Gloucester: the next day he came before Beverston, and demanded the
Castle in the name of the King and Parliament.

The Lieutenant that commanded, at the first return sent an answer of
compliance, far from the language of a soldier, and without one confident
expression. They quickly came to a parley, and rendered upon conditions that
both Officers and common Soldiers leaving their Arms, Ammunition, Bag and
Baggage, should freely pass to whatsoever garrison of the Kings themselves
desired, only four Officers had the privilege to take each man his horse. So
that without loss or danger we were possessed of Beverston-castle, to the great
content and satisfaction of the Country round about. 'Twas lost unworthily on
the enemies part, who might have held it with ease. Of so great simplicity was
he conscious that commanded the Garrison as to ask the place, whether our
forces intend the next march, expressing his doubts of Malmesbury, and fear of
being taken the second time. Nevertheless they required a conduct thitherward
and were guard d along by two Troops of horse, and that very day our forces
fell before it.

Whilst the horse faced the Town Colonel Massy sent in the Summons, but this
enemy put on the appearance of bravery fired upon the horse, and Colonel Henry
Howard Governor of the Garrison sent back a resolute answer. Thereupon our
foot and artillery were brought up from Tedbury, and within two hours drawn
into the Suburbs and lower part of the Town. The foot broke their way through
the houses till they came almost up to the works, and the only place of
entrance into the Town, which is built upon the level of a rock. Colonel
Massy caused a blind to be made cross the street to bring up the Ordnance,
within Carbine shot: when on the sudden the fancy of an Alarm seized upon our
men in the heat of the business, that the enemy were sallying out upon them,
which was nothing so. This unexpected accident struck those men that at other
times would brave it in the face of an enemy, with such distraon and fear,
that they all fled, and left their Cannon in the open street. This mere
conceit was like to overturne all: but they within observed not. After a while
the Soldiers recovered themselves, regained and kept their ground, and the
Governor resolved to storm the Town in three places at once. The several
parties were drawn out to the places of assault, but this design miscarried
through the misunderstanding of the signal. The parties return unto the
Governor, who resolved to make the assault at break of day in one place where
himself kept the only passage into the Town, having no drawbridge at the
entrance, but only a Turn-pike, whereas the other parts were almost
inaccessible, guarded by a steep descent, and double channel round about. The
houses within Pistol shot of the works were our maine advantage, by which
means our men were brought safe under the shelter of their works. And the
Governor observing the late effects of a panick fear amongst his own men,
gave the charge that they should fall on all together with a sudden and
confused noise, to amaze the enemy, and disturb the command of the Officers.
The forlorn hope advanced, seconded with a good reserve, all put on together,
came up to the Turn-pike, and threw in Grenades, the enemy made many shot at
random, in the disadvantage of a rainy night, and their muskets lying wet on
the works. So that our men came all in a croude to the narrow passage, and
thronged in, and not a man slain or wounded in the storm. One only was
killed the night before in helping to make the blind. Colonel Howard was
taken at the works after three shots received in several parts of his
garment, each of which missed his body. An hundred musketeers were taken
prisoners, many having escaped, besides those of Beverston-castle, who came
hither for refuge the day before. This service was performed gallantly by our
men, after three days continual march. Upon the first entrance Colonel
Massy preserved the Town from plunder, nor at any time did he suffer his
soldiers to ransacke any place that he took by storm, giving this reason,
that he could judge no part of England an enemies Country, nor an English Town
capable of devastation by English soldiers. After a little stay to settle the
garrison, and Country, and to command in some moneys for the satisfaction of
the soldiers, and present supply of the brigade, he returned to Gloucester;
and the Warwickeshire horse were called off into their own Country.

After few days the Governor having breathed himself and his men, resolved
to attempt the taking of Tewkesbury, a bad neighbor to our head garrison, and
where he had suffered the repulse twice before. He was able to draw forth an
hundred and twenty horse, and about thirty dragoones, with three hundred foot.
For his strength was no more then the standing forces of the City, a great part
of which were now swallowed up by the garrisons lately taken in. The horse and
dragoones commanded by Major Hammond advanced some few hours before the Foot
and Artillery, and were to alarm the enemy till the foot came up. They made a
hault a mile from the Town, and drew out a pretty strong forlorne-hope,
conceiving they might possibly surprise them, if they had not as yet took the
alarm, and first three men were sent before to espy if the Drawbridge were
down, and six more behind went undiscovered; next unto these marched the
forlorn hope, and the maine body in the rear. In this posture they advanced
up to the Town, where they found the Bridge down, the guards slender; the enemy
without intelligence, and supinely negligent. On went the first party, killed
the Sentinels, a Pikeman and a Musketier without match, and made good the
bridge: the forlorne-hope rushed in, and after them a full body of horse and
dragoones, fell upon the guards, came up to the maine-guard before the alarm
was taken, overturned their Ordnance, and charged through the streets as far
as the bridge Worcester way, where they took Major Mine the Governor of the
Town. The enemy threw down their Arms, many escaped by flight, and many were
taken prisoners. Colonel Godfrey was slain in the first charge, as also
Colonel Vavasours Quartermaster-generall, and a Lieutenant, all Papists,
besides a Sergeant, with about six common Soldiers. Our Officers and Soldiers
supposing themselves wholly victorious, dismounted and went into the houses,
some in the vanity of their humor, others for plunder, whilst all slighted
their own guards, and the making good of the bridge at which they entered, and
neglected the taking and disarming of the maineguard, which lay in the heart of
the Town, and cleared every street. Whereupon those at the main-guard
observing the horse not seconded with foot, took courage to charge some of our
horse now in confusion, and many of the enemy out of the houses ran to the
guard, and so strengthened it, that they issued out upon our men, put them to a
retreat, beat them out of the Town, and took some few prisoners. But before
they were beaten out they had cut down two Draw-bridges, and secured the
Governor Major Mine, who was passed over Severne with a small party that took
him beyond the Town. By this time Colonel Massy was come up with a few horse
half a mile in the Van of the foot, which hasted after to make an assault in
this instant of time. But the bridge toward Gloucester was again drawn up and
the works manned on that side; here the governor placed his company of
dragoones, and gave order to fire upon them, whilst he drew his men round the
Town, it being now dark night; but before he could reach the farther end,
where he entered about midnight the enemy were fled toward Worcester, being
daunted at the first assault made by the horse, observing withal our foot now
brought up, their own Governor lost, their Officers slain, and most of the
common Soldiers already run away. The Townsmen through fear durst not give
the least intelligence of what had happened. By which means they were past the
recovery of our horse already tired, besides the night and dark weather
hindered the pursuit. Only we took some scattering foot, to the number of
four and twenty, with a Lieutenant. Upon our entrance we found eighteen
barrels of Powder, left by their haste, an hundred and twenty skeyns of Match,
two hundred new Pikes, four and thirty large hand-Granadoes, good store of
Musket Shot, and two brass Drakes. Most of their Muskets were thrown about in
the fields, ditches, and rivers, many of which were afterward found, but the
place it self was of greatest consequence, and worthy of the service, being
now a strong Frontier-town securing that side of the County, and commanding a
good part of Worcestershire: and in this nicke of time extremely cross to the
intentions of the Kings Army. The enemy confessed themselves to be near seven
hundred strong, when our whole body could not reach that number. That very day
Colonel Mine was to march from Hereford to aid this Town: but prevented by our
possession.

These things were acted here while the Earl of Essex and Sir William Waller
lay near Oxford with both their Armies, and compelled His Majesty to withdraw
himself from his strongest hold. The King having shifted between them both by
a close and nimble conveyance, and being on a swift march over Cotswood hills
had this Town of Tewkesbury in his thoughts for his own pass, and a stop to
the pursuing Army, not understanding his loss till within a days march of the
place. The intelligence of this surprisall, and that Upton-bridge was made
unpassable, perplexed the King, and turned aside the course of his flight
toward Evesham: where he quartered for a night, and rose thence in great
distraction, and caused all the bridges in those parts to be broken down after
him, to hinder Sir William Waller in the pursuit, whom he expected in the Rear
every hour. In such a hurry, confusion and fear did the Enemy run, that a
smaller party of horse only with the report of the foot coming after, in a
constant and close pursuit might have consumed and dissipated the whole army:
which nevertheless remained a body with life in it self, and quickly grew up
to the perfection of parts.

The Governor had reduced these parts into a reasonable condition of ease, and
security, made a convenient pass for the Parliaments forces through the heart
of the Kings Country, and blocked up the course of the Enemy almost on every
side, unless the maine Army did march. Malmesbury and Beverston-Castle lie in
the Road from Oxford to Bristoll, and enforce the lesser parties to fetch a
compass by Worcester and Hereford, thence round about into Wales, and at last
to pass the River of Severne below Berkely Castle.

When the King had winded himself out of the snare, Sir William Waller could
not well follow the chase with his foot and a train of Artillery, though the
horse might perform gallantly to the ruin of those who resolved rather to
fly before them then fightupon any terms. Wherefore he made some pause by
the way with a purpose to march his great Ordnance to Gloucester, and appointed
Colonel Massy to meet him before Sudeley, where he performed an acceptable
service to this Country. The Governor forth with faced the Castle, beat in the
Enemy, and took twenty horses from under the Castle walls, expecting the
arrival of Sir Will. Waller: who came up within few hours with a strong party
of Horse.

The Enemy within discharged their Ordnance, and fired their outhouses like
men resolved upon extremities rather then to yield up or lose the garrison. In
the evening Sir William Waller summoned the Governor of the Castle: and it
fell out that the very name of his Army and presence struck them to the
surrender of that hold that might have expended the lives of many, and much
time then precious in that great advantage on the Kings distressed Army: yet
they refused to render at the first summons. The Battery was planted within
half Musketshot. But the great pieces did little execution upon the soft and
yiedling stone, nor could the Castle be taken by battery: but one shot by
chance took off the head of their Cannoneer, and exceedingly daunted the common
soldier: and the Governor Sir William Morton did in his own thoughts incline
to a surrender, whether out of a natural fear or free choice. He was known
to be active and violent in the Kings service, of an high spirit and bold,
bearing before him the semblance of valor and supposed by an high degree of
enmity most obnoxious to the justice of the Parliament, one that had the repute
of a knowing man, able in the profession of the Law, and versed in the ways
and actions of men. He was likewise more strongly linked unto that cause by the
late honor of Knighthood, which by the State is held no better then a note of
infamy, to stigmatize those persons that have been eminent in the disservice of
the Commonwealth. Notwithstanding this, being lost and desperate in the
opinion of the Parliament, he gave up that strong hold and himself into their
hands, having not provided for the indemnity of his own person: when by his
own party, likewise he must needs be branded with treachery or cowardice, and
so lost on all hands. So that no faction seems to be assured of its principal
confidents, and that no resolved nature or judgment can secure the strongest
enterprise to a wise and honorable conclusion. After the surrender Sir William
advanced thence to seek out the Kings Army, and left the Castle to be kept by
the Gloucester forces.

By this time the Enemy had no footing in the County save Berkely-Castle and
Lidney house; And as this government had by maine force gained every step of
its command, so no less skill and virtue is required to maintain the
victories, we have the possession of Gloucester, Tewkesbury, Sudely, Newneham,
Beverston, and Slimbridge, all to be defended and maintained at so great
distances only by two Regiments of foot. For Malmesbury was kept by Colonel
Deveraux his Regiment, who was appointed Governor under the command of
Colonel Massy, unto whom the disposition and settlement of that garrison was
entrusted by the Parliament. For want of money the City Regiments were weak
and uncertain in duty and service, and the Soldiers ran daily to other
garrisons, where they found always constant pay and less hardship: But the
Governor could find none so rational as to clap them in Irons, or give them
back to his justice. For this cause he was perplexed in each design,
uncertain of the achievement, and could not wait for a regular disposition,
and train of circumstances: but nimble in the secret and sudden motions of the
time and season: and sometrue resolving upon the sole guide of providence, but
in this never running a greater hazard then the shame of a non-performanee.
These many garrisons having taken up the whole strength; for want of a marching
brigade, we were deprived of the fruit of our labors in the supplies of moneys
to be commanded out of the Enemies quarters, and disabled to relieve the remote
parts that were by this time united under the power of this government. So that
the first fruits were nipt in the bud, and we remain miserable after so great
enlargements, being enforced to cry to the Parliament for help, which we should
have held a disparagement, had we received a stock to improve to a larger
support, and livelihood. Wherefore the house of Commons taking notice of the
many good services of Colonel Massy, made an Order for the recrute of his
Regiment of horse and foot in the first place, and to make up a competent
Brigade, Colonel Tho. Stephens had commission for a Regiment of horse, and
Colonel Edward Harley for a Regiment of foot. In which business the Governor
advised, not to raise men and horse at Londm, whither the refuse of the Army,
runnegadoes, and such as disliked the conditions of their former entertainment
were wont to repair, but only to procure moneys to be sent into the Country,
where horses might be raised at a cheaper rate, and able men were easy to be
found, and chiefly where we might rob the Enemy of their maine strength, from
whom great multitudes were ready to flow in upon the hopes of entertainment.
And before this time since the late siege at least a thousand of the Enemy,
that here tendered themselves to the service, went from us for lack of pay. This
was a speedy course and effectual, which might carry on the work whilst we
were in a thriving way.

At that time the affairs of the garrison were a little interwoven with some
passages of the greater Army, Sir William Waller was led into the Northern
parts, in the pursuit of His Majesty, straining to reach or get beyond him.
But the King doubled in the chase, hasted back by Worcester toward Oxford, and
left Sir William a few days march in the Rear, who nevertheless made after
with all speed, but was constrained to rest at Gloucester to refresh his weary
Soldiers. And purposing to fall upon the Kings Army, importuned the Governor
to lend his assistance, which was extracted out of the extreme penury of these
parts, only for a quick dispatch. Two hundred and seventy Musketeers with a
Company of Dragoons were sent from Gloucester, and a hundred Musketeers from
Malmsbury which did not a little necessitate the place, and stop the actions of
this command which had so many Garrisons to make good, and defend the Country
from the neighboring Enemy that began to threaten from every quarter.

At this time there happened a dispute between the Kings Army and Sir William
Waller at a Bridge near Banbury: where some few were slain, and taken on both
sides, but on ours the chief miscarriage was the loss of some Ordnance. After
this brush the King marched off into the borders of Worcestershire, and Sir
William Waller toward Buckingham, to join with Colonel Brown. Our Country
is in danger of ruin by the falling down of the Kings Army, whose main body
lay for a while about Breedon three miles from Tewkesbury: where his Majesty
being informed of the weakness of the place, drew near with a purpose to
storm it, advanced the Ordnance within a mile, and sent out parties to
skirmish. Colonel Massy upon the first intelligence clapped into the Town two
hundred Musketeers, for an additionall strength, and to encourage those
within: Himself in the mean while with a hundred and fifty Musketeers in
Cos^^awne waited to encounter with an other party of the Worcester forces, whom
he staved off with the loss of five or six men near Vpton bridge, and passed
over Seavern to Tewksbury. Upon notice hereof, the Enemy drew thence, and
retreated toward Parshowe, and Evesham. There the King pretended to pass over
the River into Herefordshire and Wales, and gave command that all the Bridges
should be made up, but his design lay Westward. Wherefore he made up the hills,
marched the first day in the view of Shudely Castle over the Downs, and came
that night to Cubberly seven miles from Gloucester, and from thence marched the
next day by Beverstone Castle to Sodbury. They went on like a flying Army,
surprised the Country, but they only touched and away; And our weak troops
drove in the straggling plunderers. For the Governor commanded a party of horse
to follow the Rear of the Enemy, whilst the rest were employed in a necessary
defense in sundry places. These did seem to give them a gentle convoy over the
hill Country toward Bristoll; and though the Van of their horse were too
nimble for us, and drove great store of the garrison cattle, that lay in their
way, yet the Contrymen were saved from any great matter of loss, and the
parties of horse brought into our garrison between 50 and 60 prisoners, officers
and soldiers; and though they could not retard the march, yet made them pass
forward with much watines and fear.

In the mean while Coll: Min, together with Sir John Winters forces take the
advantage of our weakness to spoil and destroy our friends on the Forest side,
Sir William Russell and the Governor of Worcester make incursions on that side.
And the garrison oppressed with many out-guards, and multitudes of prisoners
within, had much ado to preserve the neighbors from ruin. Colonel Min
advanced from Rosse, where he quartered his regiment, within half a mile of the
City, drove away the Country cattle, and took the persons of many. And the
forces of Berkely Castle act a sufficient part in the general mischief. The
Governor looks round about him, and though he cannot hope to lay them flat, and
subdue their spirits, yet he can check their insolence, and make them stand on
their guard. He commanded a party of horse and Dragoons toward Berkley, who
fell upon the guard of the Town, beat them into the Castle, slew eight or ten,
took prisoners Captain Sandys with a Lieutenant, Ensign, Sargeant, and seven
common Soldiers; whence likewise they brought away forty or fifty arms, and
took from out of the Park under the Castle wall about fifty horses with other
cattle. An other party was commanded within four miles of Worcester, and
surprised in their quarters Sir Humphrey Tracy, Lieu: Coll: Hely, and Captain
Savage, and brought them prisoners to Gloucester.

By this time an increase is added to the garrison forces by the arrival of
Col: Stephens with three troops of horse, and two troops of Coll: Harlyes
Regiment, which did enable the Governor once more to appear in the field: and
draw out against Colonel Min, a serious and active Enemy, and a perpetual
terror to the Country, whose ruin was again contrived, and resolved upon. And
for this design strong preparations were made by the Enemy round about. The
Governor had some discovery out of their own quarters, and upon advertisement
that some forces out of Hereford and Wales went over the River at Aust passage,
advanced with his horse toward Berkly Castle, and thence to the passage, where
they missed not half an hour of the surprisall of the Lord Herbert. The notice
of the march of our horse into the remote parts of the County hastened Mins
expedition for Gloucestershire. And our intelligence abroad gave a timely
advertisement of the work in hand, which a little after was fully confirmed by
letters taken out of Colonel Mins pocket, to wit, that Hereford and
Worcestershire were to join their forces about Cosselawne, and with an
over-powering Army to march up to the gates of Gloucester, to the utter
devastation of the parts adjacent with fire and plunder, and to burn up the
corn on the ground, it being then near harvest. Hereupon the Governor marched
back with his troops to Gloucester, from whence he commanded two hundred and
twenty Musketeers, and ordered an hundred Musketeers from Tewksbury to meet
him on the march, to prevent this great noised Army.

Whilst the orders for the march were giving forth to the Officers of horse
and foot, there fell out a sad accident between Major Gray, and Major Hammond,
which was like to dash the whole action. The heat of a quarrel then brake
forth by occasion of a verbal contestation at a Council of War the same
day, when both had orders to march, and were commanded to their particular
charges. Major Gray began to question Hammond for his hasty language, and to
require satisfaction. This challenge at the present was refused or slighted,
wherefore impatient of the supposed injury, and full of revenge, he smote him
on the face with his fist: upon this to swords they went in the street, and
after a little clashing, Gray received his deaths wound by a thrust in the
neck, and expired in the place. This miserable accident was like to beget a
greater mischief among the Soldiers, who being in Arms, and ready to advance,
came back with full stream of violent resolution for the present revenge of
Grays blood: that the whole City and garrison was not far from an uproar. It
rested on the Governors sole care to allay that violence of the Soldier, who
used his best art, and industry to appease them, whilst the Officers indulging
their own discontent at the loss of their Major, fell quite off the hinges:
After an hours dispute, and entreaty the tumult was in some measure qualified,
that the most were persuaded to march, as it was high time, when the Enemy came
on within three miles of the City with a resolution if not to lay waste by fire
(as they threatened) yet to plunder and take away the persons of men, their
goods and cattle. The business was put forwards, but with little help from
the discontented Officers. Late in the afternoon our party began to advance,
and at High leaden passage got over the brook. The Enemy were quartered in
Hartpury field, and commanded to lie close. Our men came up to a bridge within
a quarter of a mile of them in the dark night, gave them an alarm, and took
ten prisoners, and an other party of our horse that quartered near the Lawne
took diverse that were sent that way to plunder. But their main body evaded us,
and with great speed marched that night to Redmarley, and we after a tedious
wandering to find them out came to Eldersfield two miles from their quarters,
where we rested two or three hours to refresh ourselves and horses.

At break of day we prepared to advance upon the enemy, when the beating of
their Drums minded us of an early march: and by six of the clock we came up to
their randezvous, their horse consisted of an hundred and sixty, and their foot
of eight hundred and fifty: and of them six hundred and forty Musketeers by
their own confession: all drawn up into battalions, and the hedges lined with
Musketeers. To beat them out of their advantages the Governor divided the Foot
into two bodies, and drew out the Horse into single troops, because the
frequent enclosures would not make room for a larger form (the Enemy in the
mean while plying us with small shot) and having disposed of his own troop,
with the hundred Musketeers from Tewkesbury newly come in, and many of the
Country inhabitants armed with Muskets, and good resolutions to one part of
the Town, he drew the Gloucester Musketeers about an hundred and sixty (for
the rest remained at home ready to raise a mutiny for the misfortune of Grayes
death) and the greatest part of the horse to an other place of best advantage.
Himself advanced with this party, and led the Van, which consisted of three
troops: these were seconded with three other troops left to the command of
Captain Backhowse. Some of the Foot were placed in each Flank of the Horse, and
one single troop with the rest of the foot brought up the Rear. They were
drawn out into this posture, marched up to the face of the Enemy, the Governor
in the Van, next unto him Colonel Harley in the head of his own troop,
gallantly, and in good order, gave the charge, beat them from their
ambuscadoes, put their horse to flight, and in the instant of time got into the
Van of their foot, cut down, and took them prisoners, that few escaped our
hands. The Horse and Foot, both Officers and Soldiers, played their parts with
resolution and gallantry. The Enemy was left to our execution, and their whole
body broken and shattered, many wounded and slain, but more taken. Major
General Min was slain on the place with an hundred and seventy. Among the
Officers, Leiftenant Colonel Passy then mortally wounded, Major Buller, seven
Captains, four Leiftenants, five Ensigns, twelve Sergeants, and near three
hundred common Soldiers were taken prisoners. Some troops advanced in the
pursuit five miles from the place of the sight; but upon the view of a strong
party from Worcester that came to join with Colonel Min, they were enforced to
leave the pursuit, and prepare for a second encounter. And a strange hand of
providence kept asunder the Hereford and Worcester forces, whose joining would
have proved unto us an inevitable destruction. For Leiftenant Colonel Passie,
who commanded this fresh party of an hundred, and fifty horse and five
hundred foot, just upon the beginning of the fight was riding up to Mins
Brigade to bring news of their arrival, but happily intercepted, and wounded
by our Scouts, and left for dead. So that neither Enemy had the knowledge of
each others condition; But the Worcester forces advanced within two flight shot
of the place, whilst our men were scattered here and there in the chase of a
vanquished Enemy, nor did the Governor when the first brunt was over, expect an
afterbirth.

The first discovery was made by Colonel Broughton, and Captain Backhowse,
upon whom a blunt fellow charged up from the head of the main body in the
entrance of a crosselane. Him they surprised in the name of friends, drew him
aside from the view of the company, and informed themselves of the strength at
hand. Forthwith they make a noise in the Enemies hearing, pretending to fall on
with a body of ours ready for a charge, by the sudden outcry daunted and drove
back that strong party, and made way for the Governors retreat, and those with
him, which were now dispersed, secure of the victory, and following the chase.
Our straggling persuers were gathered together, drew back to the place of the
fight, and there expected the charge, choosing rather to make good the victory
achieved upon so great hazard and disadvantage, then venture all by seeking
out a fresh and doubtful Enemy with our few and weary Soldiers. Only three
or four slain, five or six wounded, amongst whom Colonel Harley received a
shot in the arm. The success of this design cut off the maine strength of
the Kings forces in South Wales: and secured the Country from our plundering
neighbors on the Welsh side. The body of Colonel Min was brought to
Gloucester, and vouchsafed an honorable burial. His death was by his own party
much lamented, together with the loss of a brave Regiment that were commanded
from Ireland to fight here a against the justice of that cause, upon which the
Irish war was held up, and owned by the whole Kingdom. And it has been
observed, that as the Irish Pacification was unlucky and reproachful to the
outside of the Kings actions amongst his Protestant party; so the Commanders
that came thence were unfortunate in all their designs, and in the end
miserable.

When the Governor had settled his affairs at home in reasonable security, his
desires and aim was to put in for the advantage of a more general service:
and pitched upon these two proposals, the one to make a diversion from the Lord
Generals Army then blocked up in the West, the other to keep back Prince
Ruperts straggling forces which then lay between Shrewsbury and Worcester a
little after the great Northern defeat. And these the Prince earnestly desired,
that upon this rubbish he might frame an Army for the close of the Summer
action.

Wherefore if possible to endeavor a diversion from the West-parts, the
Governor drew toward Bath with one hundred horse and foot (the Forces lent to
Sir William Waller being in part returned) with a purpose to disturb the Kings
quarters, and withdraw a part of the maine Army to enable Bristoll and Bath. On
the hills likewise he might expect to encounter Prince Rupert from Bristoll, who
fled thither with about three hundred horse presently after the discomsit in
the North. But within a few days upon advertisement of the miscarriage and
disaster of the Lord Generals Army, he drew back, and the rather having
intelligence that the Prince had commanded Colonel Charles Gerrard out of
Wales, and the relics of his own Army to break their way through our country
into the Western parts. These were reported to lie near Worcester, waiting
there for a clear pass, and by all means to escape Colonel Massy. They were
to take their course over Coltswold Hills, or by the borders of Herefordshire to
make into the Forest of Deaue, and thence over the River at Aust. Wherefore the
Governors maine business was to prevent this this Conjunction, and block up
either passage. In his retreat toward Gloucester, he fell down before Berkely
and lodged his men two days in the Town, summoned the Castle, and made show of
an assault; but this was taken up in the way besides the intention of the
design, and though the loss of six or eight men by their own folly gave
Colonel Veale occasion of boasting, yet for all the pretended great service in
maintaining the place that was never attempted, he was immediately after
cashered that Government by the Princes order. But before Colonel Massy drew
thence, he caused the boats to be fired at Aust passage: and intending to pass
over Seaverne at Frampton to meet Prince Ruperts Forces, received an alarm
that they were already in Gosse Lawne, whereupon our marching Brigade hasted to
Gloucester, where they found that many of those troops under the command of Sir
Marmaduke Langdale were newly come into Herefordshire, and that a party of them
joining with Colonel Lingens horse had advanced within six miles of the City
of spoil and plunder those Parishes that were joined in one Association to a
mutual defense, and the aid of this Government.

The Governor persued his design drew forth toward the Lawne, and stopped
their course on that side Seaverne. Where upon they took their course through
Worcester, where they obtained an additionall strength from Colonel Sandys his
horse, and Sir William Russels horse and foot, with all the foot that Dudly
Castle and those parts could afford them. And now conceiving themselves able
both in power and advantage of the march, having (as they supposed) left
Colonel Massy beyond Seaverne, and too far in the Rear to reach them,
resolved to break forth, hoping both to pass clear, and relieve Banbury in the
way. But the Governor being certified of their march, forthwith conveyed his
men over Seaverne at Tewkesbury, and recovered the hills as far as Stanway,
and got before them, in the mean while gave notice to the Major of the Earl
of Denbighs horse, that lay near Tewkesbury in Worcestershire, who the Jame day
brought up two hundred horse to join with our party on the hills. Nevertheless
the Governor understanding nothing, but that the Enemy was marched to Stratford
upon Avon, and so beyond his reach, sent back the Foot almost tired with
tedious and continual marches, and with his horse resolved to join with
Colonel Fines at Banbury. But he found at the return of the Scouts, that about
five hundred horse near at that instant got over the River on this fide
Evesham, and made their approach near his quarters, and that a party of Foot
were left at the Bridge to make good the repasse; one half of the Forces in the
mean while lying at Evesham, and the other near Parshowe. Our men appearing on
the hills, the Enemy took the alarm retreated suddenly, and for a while lodged
themselves beyond Worcester. Their number was computed by such as beheld them
to be about five and twenty hundred horse, ill armed, and the surviving part of
the ruins of the Northern Army. Again to prevent their incursions into the
remote parts of the County beyond Seaverne, a competent strength of horse and
foot were commanded over, and withal to attend the Enemies motion.

In the midst of this and other designs of consequence at that time depending,
the Governor with all the Officers of horse and foot were much distressed for
lack of that support, which the necessity of the service did require, and the
extreme want of the common Troopers drove them daily away. Every performance in
the whole course of this Government was filled with much distempers: and though
the exigence of the Soldier has been great in many places, yet the gleanings
of other Brigades have been better then our vintage. No Officer had any portion
in the Contribution money: no pay for the troops for many months together, no
allowance for Scout, Spy, or Intelligencer, who observe only the liberal and
open handed, nor the hopes of reward to encourage the Soldiers gallantry: That
the endeavors of the Governor in keeping together, and increasing the Forces
were nigh lost. Neither was any means allotted to the supply of the necessary
attendants and Officers of a marching Brigade. And in the heat of service the
nature and terms of the Governors command were disputed, and it was very
questionable whether to provide for the attendants of a march: that only a
proportion seemed to be cared for, that might live within the walls of
Gloucester, and nothing to further such action that might restrain, and lessen
the strength of the Enemy, preserve the Country, and pass withal to the
relief of remote garrisons. Nevertheless the establishment of such a power was
required in these parts as might check the Enemy in all his marches and
recruits: and this strength far greater then the stint of that constant number
which the garrisons took up.

In this extremity the Governor was constrained to act, and marched on in the
pursuit of the Enemy, who kept randevous near Hereford with forty two troops
of horse, resolving to pass the Severne at Aust, not daring to adventure over
the hill Country. And to guard the passage, Prince Rupert sent into the
Forest a commanded party of five hundred horse and foot. These began to
fortify Beachly for a lasting guard, a place of extreme difficult approach,
being a gut of land running out between Seaverne and Wye, and the only
commodious passage, from Wales to Bristoll, and the Western parts, being the
maine intercourse of the Kings Army, and a strong reserve for the last
exigence. It was high time therefore to crush this design, and nip the bud of
so great hopes. The Governor advanced upon them some four days after they
began their fortifications, and had drawn the trench half way from the banks of
one River to the other, when the other part was well guarded with an high
quick-set hedge (which they lined with Musketeers) and a ditch within with a
fair meadow beyond, wherein they had made a re-intrenchment. The strength
consisted near of six hundred horse and foot, which at the first coming on
lighted upon a party of horse from Chepstow, took some, and drove the rest
into the River: then faced the Enemy within Musket shot that Evening, and so
continued the next morning, waiting the opportunity of an assault, for at high
water the place was inaccessible, by reason of their ships which guarded each
River with Ordnance, lying level with the banks, and clearing the face of the
approach from Wye to Seaverne. Wherefore the Governor taking the advantage of
low water drew forth a party for the onset. These were brought near the place
of entrance, where the Enemy intended a drawbridge, with order to storm the
works which as yet were not finished. Out of the forlorn hope the Governor had
selected ten Musketeers to creep along the hedges, and thenceto fall into the
very breach. These gave the first alarm, and caused the Enemy (according to
the meaning of the plot) to spend their first shot in vain. And when the first
volly was given, ere they could recharge their Muskets, the Governor gave the
signal by the discharge of a Pistol: on went the Forlorn-hope, and the
Reserve following, the Trumpets sounding, and the Drums beating, run up the
Works, rushed in among them, and fell upon the hack, when the whole and each
part of the action was carried on without interruption, and the Soldiers went
up in such a regular march, and so great solemnity, that it seemed more like
the pomp of a triumph then the confused face of a fight. Of the Enemy some were
killed, and the rest taken prisoners, besides some few that recovered the
boats, and many of them that took the water were drowned. And to grace the
service, it was performed in the full view of a multitude on Chepstow side,
whilst the great guns played from each River which cast beneath the banks by
the low ebb did no execution, but by their noise, and semblance of terror,
both raised the Soldier, and conduced to the majesty of the victory.

This good success, and the season held forth a fair opportunity to compass
an other design at that time in agitation. Some overtures were made by
Lieutenant Colonel Kyrle of the delivering of Monmouth into our hands. Many
did urge the present acceptance of the plot, and an hasty performance, and were
discontented in that which they called slacknesse in the Governor: when as
neither the method of the plot was propounded in the general (the
circumstances being left free) nor the present state of things gave leave to
manage the business, when the following Army of P: Rupert was to be
intercepted, a work of greater concernment, and more beseeming a public spirit
then this latter: But at that time it was the usual mistake of particular
Associations to confine every enterprise to their own Counties, and divide the
Commonwealth into so many petty kingdoms. And in this did Colonel Massy deny
himself, in spending the latter part of the Summer in prosecuting a less
plausible and appearing service, though of larger concernment. But having now
pursued the Princes horse into Wales, and destroyed the Enemies project in
fortifying Beachly, he quartered with his horse and foot near Monmouth on the
Forest side; and receiving an answer to a message lately sent to Lieutenant
Colonel Kyrle, propounded unto him, and followed this way. That he would
feign a Post from Gloucester side to desire a sudden return with his forces
thitherward, to secure that part of the Country from the Enemy, which was
already fallen out from Bristoll, and Berkley: and this message was to come to
his hands at Mr. Halls house of High meadow, a grand Papist, where it would
take wings for its dispatch to Monmouth, by which means Kyrle commanding the
horse might easily draw forth some troop to follow the Rear of our party.
Hereupon the Governor feigned a sudden retreat to Gloucester, and having
marched back three miles, lodged his forces in a thicket of the Forest: and
sending his Scouts abroad, prevented the Enemies discovery. In the mean while
the intelligence reaches Monmouth, and Leift: Col: Kyrle draws out, whom the
Governor surprised at midnight in High meadow house, with his troop of thirty
horse: and with as little noise as possible advanced thence to Monmouth.
Nevertheless it was not so deep a silence but the alarm was given by the Cornet
of the troop, who escaped the surprisall, and the attempt made the more
difficile, if not desperate. The Town took the alarm, stood upon their guard,
expecting an Enemy. Notwithstanding this, Kyrle with an hundred select horse
arrived at the Towns end, confidently came up to the drawbridge, pretended a
return with many prisoners taken, persuaded the guards, and prevailed with
Coll: Holthy the Governor of the Town by the Officers of the guard, to let down
the drawbridge, which was done but with much jealousy, and a strong guard,
and the bridge presently drawn up again: insomuch that the first party were
like to be held prisoners in the Town. Our forlorn hope saw that it was time to
lay about them, they declare themselves, overpower the guard, and make good
the bridge: and in this there wanted not those that kept a strict watch over
Kyrles deportment, who acted his part with dexterity and valor. Our body of
horse and foot were at hand, had a large entrance, subdued the Town in a
moment, and spared the blood of the surprised Soldiers. But the dark and rainy
night fitted the governor of Monmouth with the major part of the garrison for
an escape over the dry graft. We took one Major, three Captains, and diverse
inferior Officers, threescore common Soldiers, five barrels of powder, and
some arms: but the Town it self was the best prize, being the key of
Southwales, and the only safe intercourse for the Kings Army between the West,
Wales, and the Northern parts.

The taking of Monmouth gave a fearful alarm to the whole Country, especially
to the Earl of Worcester at Ragland Castle, who raised the Country, and called
in Prince Ruperts horse to their assistance. The Ragland Papists made the poor
Welsh believe that we came to put man, woman, and child to the sword, and
filled their fancies with as many strange conceits of the Roundheads, as the
poor Spaniards had of the English after their revolt from Rome, it being easy
to persuade an irrational and stupid people. Forthwith they appear in arms
against us. Wherefore two days after our entrance, the Governor sent out a
small party of Musketeers, commanded by Capt: Rochford, to quash the rising of
the Country. Our men find out the randevous, with a kind of guard defended by
Captain Gainsford, with his ragged Regiment. These upon the first onset were
all put to flight, ran an hundred ways like a barbarous people, were pursued
by our horse, about twenty knocked on the head and sixteen taken prisoners. To
revenge this loss, Sir Will: Blaxton with his brigade of horse, joins with the
Country Trainhands, and the forces from Ragland, and Chepstow, making
(according to the best relations, five hundred horse, and twelve hundred foot.
Of this preparation we were not advertised, till they fell upon one of our
horse quarters in a strong house near Monmouth, where we lodged two troops, and
by good hap ten Musketeers to secure the quarters. The house was made good by
the resolution of Captain Bailey, and Leift: Page, till the Major of the horse
had drawn up the troops, and faced the Enemy, whilst the Governor commanded
out of Monmouth a hundred and fifty Musketeers. But before our foot could
reach the house, their horse drew thence, encountered with a party of ours, and
being recharged by Major Backhowse, were beaten back to the foot. By thistime
our Musketeers were brought up, and in the first charge put the Enemy to a
confused running retreat, slew seventy, and wounded many, took threescore
prisoners. Of the Officers, a Major of horse, and two Captains were slain, one
taken, and Sir William Blaxton shot in the thigh. But the pursuit had an early
stop by a small river which the Enemy passed, and plucked up the bridge: or
their foot had been wholly routed and taken. The prisoners that were of the
Country people the Governor entreated kindly, and after a few days sent them
home by parcels, and each man with a little note or letter directed to his
master, or the several Parishes, to signify that the intention of the
Parliament, and the present government, was not to destroy, or enslave their
persons, or take away their livelihoods; but to preserve their lives and
fortunes, to open the course of justice, and free them of their heavy burdens
under the forces of Rupert a Germane Prince. At the free discharge of the
captives, they began to resent the Governors humanity, as before by the
slaughter of their men they had felt the force of arms. And the dispersed
papers did in part undeceive the people, and dislodge their fears; our horse
marching peaceably, and doing no spoil or violence.

After the appeasing of the Country tumults, the endeavors of the Governor
were to reduce that people to a willing, and cordial obedience. He dispatched
many letters of invitation to the gentlemen of the Country, and gave assurance
to the best affected of his purpose to defend and make good the Town. But all
were silent, and not two valuable persons did own the business. On the other
fide, they did not stir a foot at the summons of the Earl of Worcester: and in
confidence of the justice of this party they frequented our markets; whereas at
our first approach they drove away all their cattle, into the remote parts of
the county: yet most of the gentlemen fled from their houses. The greatest part
of P: Ruperts forces lie still under our arrest in Wales, where they decrease
and drop away, discontent and burden the Country, between whom there arise
perpetual quarrels. And the truth is, even those people whose affections
comply with the Kings design, could never correspond with the Soldier of that
faction, with whom there is no dealing for very friends. Insomuch that the
general hatred of the soldier might drive in to the Parliament, a moderate
enemy, and such as breathe a more cool spirit of malignity, when the State
shall reach out the hand to clear the way, and make good the engagement.

Colonel Massy seems now to have spread the Branches of his government beyond
the sap and strength of the root, and the extreme parts grow burdensome to the
main body. He had neither horse nor foot to maintain what was gotten,
considering the strivings of the Enemy to repossesse themselves of Monmouth.
For which end the whole power of Southwales that is fit for the march under the
command of Colonel Gerrard are come as far as Abergenny, Vske, and Ragland.
Sir John Winter must bring forth his masterpiece to the world, and once more
assisted with four hundred from Bristoll, purchased at a high rate, and added
to a hundred of his own men, with all the aid Prince Rupert can send,
undertakes to fortify Beachly. The noised strength of the Enemy round about
did contribute to the design with all fierceness, fince the want of a guard
upon this passage did render all Southwales of little value. And it highly
concerned us to endeavor the preventing this project, which threatened the
ruin of the Forest, the intercepting of the passage between Gloucester and
Monmouth, and to render that garrison in great part useless. The Governor had
a hard game to play, always put upon desperate hazards without a sufficiency
to accomplish or make good. For the case was questionable whether to desert
Monmouth, or seek to maintain it, having no competent number for a Town yet
unfortified, generally malignant, in an Enemies country, at a great distance,
and with a difficult pass: but that the wonderful success of Beachly twice
fortunate determined the doubt. The business was not capable of deliberation,
nothing but a quick dispatch had the show of safety. Gerrard was to be kept
from joining his fortes with these in the Forest, who when once fortified were
not to be beaten out, having all the advantages of Sea and land. And although
his Forces hovered about the Country, pretending to fall upon Monmouth, yet
about midnight, October. 13. one hundred Musketeers were drawn thence with eight
troops of our poor horse unto Clurewall, expecting there to meet the Newnham
foot drawn off for this design, the garrison supplied in the interim by the
Country Volunteers. In the close of the next evening they approached near the
Enemy, where no good presage did favor the business. The horse failed six
hours of the time appointed, whom the constant want of pay, and hands bound up
from plunder, made irregular, and disabled the Commander in chief to reward or
punish. Himself must manage the design not by advice only, but personal
action, and act a part in the duty of each inferior Officer. That night we beat
up their ambuscades, forced them within their works, and by frequent alarms
kept them waking, yet as much as possible from working. The next morning at
break of day was the time reserved for a storm: but the foot were all
straggling, and could not be gathered up, insomuch that the Governors own troop
with no more then fourscore Musketeers made the onset, and by Gods help
performed gallantly. They found the Enemy well prepared, the works followed
with dexterity and diligence, with much art and cost on pallisadoes, and
breast-works, and the most defective places from Wye to Seaverne defended with
a tall quick-set hedge, and a ditch within, the Pinnaces riding in each River
with Ordnance to play upon us, and the line so strongly guarded with hammer
Guns, and Murderers placed on the Flanks at either end, that it seemed
impossible to storm the same by day without apparent great loss; yet was the
Governor to wait for low water, that the Guns from the ships might not reach
us, which happily fell out at the opening of the day; yet were we in the reach
of the Ordnance planted on the Weleh shore, and equal to our height. He laid
holdon the instant of season, with a small party in a silent march came close
to the works; whereupon after the taking of the alarm, when the Enemy had spent
many shot, our men forced two or three Pallisadoes, that some of the foot and
the forlorn hope of horse brake in: but finding themselves at a stand between
the Pallisadoes and the quick-set hedge lined with Musketeers, began to face
about when there was no looking back, nor passing forwards, by reason of the
continual shot. In this party was the Governor engaged, who now became the
Leader of the Forlorn-hope, and with not a little difficulty forced his own
horse over the hedge, fell in among them, was recharged furiously, his
head-peece knocked off with the but-end of a Musket, and strangely preserved,
till three or four foot and some horse brake over the hedge after him, then
there came up a full body of horse and foot, and by maine force bore down
before them a resolved and prepared Enemy, slew thirty, and took prisoners a
Leiutenant Colonel, one Major, two Captains, three Leiutenants, three
Ensigns, with other Officers, and common Soldiers, to the number of two
hundred and twenty. They forced Sir John Winter down the clift into the river,
where a little boat lay to receive him, and convey him thence into the ships,
riding within Musket shot of the shore, with many Musketeers and great shot.
Many took the water, some whereof were drowned, and others saved themselves by
recovering the boats. Prince Rupert the Patron of this design, was expected
there the next high water, being then upon the river, but extremely prevented
and crossed in the height of his desire and confidence.

It was a brave exployte and true victory upon such an eminent disadvantage
over a formidable enemy. They were stronger within the Fortifications then six
times the same number in the open field. The storm that hovered was blown
over, and we calm, and secure in the possession of Monmouth. But as for this
neck of land so fortunate and famous to the Government of Gloucester for two
remarkable victories: though Sir John Winter and the Welsh forces had their
eye continually upon it, yet the neglect of the place was no oversight in our
Garrison, but caused by the incapacity of the place it self, it being
impossible to be held by us till we were Masters at Sea, because at every flood
the ships on the Seaverne lay level with the highest ground. Wherefore it was
resolved by a Council of War that the buildings should be demolished, and
all trees and hedges cut down. The taking and securing of Manmouth was a fair
beginning, and almost the possession of half Wales. But as yet the County
became unserviceable to us, and we made loosers by enlarging our bounds.

The Substance of Gloucestershire was expended in maintaining the Garrison
foot, and the Horse left wholly unfurnished, yet bound up from plunder and
rapine: neither did we find that assistance in the County as was expected and
promised: considering which, with our mean forces and slender pay, no
progress could be made in gaining the Country, but the time was spent in
light skirmishes, and surprizals between petty parties on both sides: and we
sustained some loss by Colonel Broughtons Captain Leiuetenant who with fifty
soldiers undertook to garrison a house near Godridge Castle, neither obvious
to releife, nor caring to fortify or store the place with victuals. This was
done in the Governors absence without order, disavowed by all, and owned only
by the Captain himself: whose plea was, that he had no support for his men,
and was enforced to get his living there. But within a few days his house was
fired upon him, and he and all his carried prisoners to Hereford before releife
could reach them.

Notwithstanding our necessitous condition, the Parliament were informed of
great multitudes, and a burden of supernumerary Officers and Soldiers, and
seemed to require out of the superfluity of those parts an assistance more
ample then the maine strength of the place. It was hard to take a just and full
view at such a distance; and peradventure perpetual action, and the great
things effected here, might multiply the numbers of the Garrison, and represent
things in the largest form. But the voice of the people gave out that we were
kept low by the malice of misinformations: and that the soldiers cry could not
be heard, because they were apt to be thought ever craving and querulous.
Wherefore at that season there came some particular commands from the Powers
above, which did not correspond with the State of our Affairs, or the ground
of the enjoined Service. November the tenth Colonel Massy received
Instructions from the Committee of both Kingdoms to march with all the
strength he could make, into the Borders of Oxfordshire to prevent the joining
of the Welsh forces under the Conduct of Colonel Gerrard with the rest of the
Kings Army, or to take advantage of the enemy, or join with the Parliaments
Army as occasion did offer. This command found him overwhelmed with manifold
employments, and in that instant of time some Monmouthshire Gentlemen tendered
their assistance to the taking in of Chepstow Castle, which the Governor was
ready to embrace, (that Wales might fall under the power of the Parliament) but
with much wariness, having many irons in the fire. Nevertheless lying under a
greater weight of envy, he resolved to obey the former Orders against the
progress and reason of his affairs; wherefore he called off his own Regiment
of horse from about Monmouth, where the enemies vigilancie was not little, and
the malignity of the town wondrous great; with the Regiment of horse, he
hasted toward Eversham, where the Enemy had arrived before, whose march he
could not interrupt or retard since they were eight for one. But before this
march having drawn a small party out of Monmouth, he commanded from Gloucester
his own company, and another company of the same Regiment to the security of
that Garrison, and committed the charge of the Town in his absence to Major
Throgmorton then Sergeant Major to Colonel Harley, who by Order of Parliament
was designed to that Government, but with no Power to command out a Party upon
any design, having no thought that the forces left there were fit to be
employed upon any service, more then the defense of that place: Besides, he had
waved the offers of Chepstow till he might gain an assurance of making good so
much ground in an enemies Country; for it was always his desire in engaging
any people to those masters whom he served, to foresee a possibility of
continuing that engagement, least he might do them a greater disservice by
dashing the resolution of others, who intended the same course, and by grasping
beyond his reach take off their inclinations who might be gained in due time.
Notwithstanding the Governors express Order, at the earnest solicitation and
promises of some well-affected in the Country, and the vehemency of others,
who thirsted after the glory of some achievement in the Governors absence, the
Major yielded for the drawing out of a party for Chepstow, and stretched his
power beyond the knowndiscipline of war, fearing either the brand of
cowardice, or the censure of a man unwilling to do his Country service, though
he declared his judgment against it. Wherefore he advanced toward Chepstow
with three hundred commanded men: having some conceived assurance of gaining
the Castle by surrender or onslat. The news is conveyed forthwith to the
Enemy, who draw together all the strength they can make, of horse and foot
from Ragland, Abergeveny, Hereford, and Godridg^, and November the nineteenth
about break of day, came near the town, and lay undiscovered behind a rising
ground, at a quarter of a miles distance, never thinking to make an attempt,
muchlesse to surprise it; but as the Governors inavoydeable absence, and the
impertinent enterprise of Monmouth garrison did cause their approach, there
being not above a hundred and fifty left there; so the negligence of the
Captain to whom the Keys were entrusted in the Majors absence, gave up the
town into their hands. So remiss were the slender guards, that the Treually
was beaten and none took the alarm. The enemy observed it, and took the
courage to attempt the surprisall, came upon the higher side of the town, that
looked toward Hereford, having only a sloping bank cast up to a reasonable
height, with a dry graft of no depth; Insomuch that the Gaurds and Sentinells
being all asleep, or supinely negligent, above forty men presently climbed
over, and fell down to the next Port, where they found no more then six men,
who fled from the guard upon their coming on; with that one takes an iron
bar, breaks the chain, forces the gate, and sets it open to the whole body
of horse, who rid up the town with full career, seized upon the maine guard
before one man could be ready to give fire, and cook the rest in their beds;
it was done in a moment, where we lost Colonel Broughtom, four Captains,
Lieutenants and Ensigns, some of the Committee, together with common
soldiers, in all, about one hundred and threescore prisoners, two Sakers,
besides a Drake, and nine hammer Guns taken at Beachly, with Ammunition and
Provision, and at least four hundred muskets.

The news of the taking of Manmouth reached Colonel Massy near Burford,
prosecuting the commands of the Committee of both Kingdoms, and there abiding
to meet the Lord Grandes^on, with the Worcester forces who endeavor for
Oxford; hence he makes haste to the relief of the party sent out against
Chepstow, and to bring off the rest that remain upon their guards in that
County: and at Gloucester understood that the party sent for Chepstow were
safely landed, on this side Wye, having effected nothing of their design; the
Governor met them in the Forest, and thence marched to Rosse, where he hoped
to have passed the bridge, to the relief of Pembridge Castle, which was made
an out-guard to the garrison of Manmouth, but found the bridge broken down,
and the river made unpassable, by the sinking of boats on the other side, and
a guard of horse to defend it. Here we had some disputes with the Enemy for two
days: but those in the Castle having no means of a longer subsistence, were
enforced to surrender upon quarter, and the freedom of their persons, most of
the common soldiers revolted, being formerly of the Kings Army, and our
prisoners.

The base neglect of the Officers had not the least share in the unfortunate
loss of Manmouth, and daily wants increased the neglect, and weakened the
Governors hand in inflicting condign punishment. And as the Parliaments
Service was by many degrees cast back by this misfortune: so the Forest in
special was hereby sorely plagued being left open to the spoil of the enemy,
against whom they were preingaged by Colonel Massy, and of late had declared
themselves more freely. And though the general multitude seemed to be brought
in by the hatred of Sir John Winter, whose name and faction the people did
abhor; yet at that time the tie of affection and necessity drew them to a
strong combination. To provide for their safety was the Governors maine care,
wherefore instead of one good baracadoe, the Town of Monmouth, sundry
Garrisons are erected in the Forest, for want of an ample strong-hold, and
these expended greater portions of Men and Ammunition, though the limits of the
Government were much contracted. The Garrison of Highmeadow did affront
Monmouth, and furthered the preservation of that side: Ru^rdeane was a stop
to the Plunderers from Hereford; And those at Kidney were kept in by another
party at N^^t. These lesser places distracted the Governor on every side,
willing but not able to preserve all them that desired to live under his
protection.

Some weeks before, the Governor had commanded a party to Tate-Court within
ten miles of Bristoll, to secure the Neighborhood being a well affected
people: but in this distraction he resolved to call off those men, who
peradventure might maintain themselves in a kind of imprisonment; but in no
wise preserve a Country that was then filled with the Kings forces, so near
Bristoll, and far from releife, especially in the Winter. Nor at that season
could they draw off without a stronger Guard and Convoy. To this end the
Governor marched to Kingscoate with three hundred Horse and Dragoones,
intending to send a party to bring off that Garrison: but receiving
advertisement of a Regiment of Horse, quartered that night in S^dbury, he fell
down thither, where he found an enemy there arrived to the assistance of
Colonel Gernard against Tate-House; here he resolved to undertake them that
night, and had no sooner appeared at the Towns end, but the first Guard
fled, and our men marched into the Town one by one, because of the enemies
baracadoes, went up to the maine Guard consisting of forty Horse, who being
surprised and daunted at the sudden entrance of our men, and not confiding in
their own strength, quitted the place, and left the rest in their quarters,
most of which escaped on foot by the back side of the Town. We took
fourscore Horses, many Arms, twenty prisoners, and of them two Captains, and
the next morning brought off the forlorn Garrison.

In the depth of Winter, when each parcel of the Parliaments Army had retired
into London, or the securer parts of that Association, and the Kings forces
were dispersed into the several quarters: Cirencester and the hill Country of
Gloucestershire, was assigned to Sir Jacob Ashley, having the Command of three
Brigades of foot, and assisted with the Queens, Prince Ruperts, Prince
Maurices, and the Lord Wilmots Regiments of Horse with others. His design was
to destroy the Country, and live upon the ruins thereof: whose incursions on
that side, and the Bristoll forces about Berkely, with the Worcester, Hereford,
and Monmouth forces on the other side, act something daily to the spoil of a
miserable Country, which is left as the Kingdoms forlorn hope, and croucheth
daily between two burdens. The distressed Neighborhood did seem to
challenge those several Armies then in being, which lay rusting in their
quarters, to keep the Associated Countyes where no fear was, when they might
prevent the ruin of their friends, and starve the enemy who live upon our
fatness; when they might hinder the Kings Recruits, disturb their Winter
calmes, and make them fight for the possession and enjoyment of their own
Territoryes. But in the deep silence of that part of the Kingdom, these parts
are borne down by the maine Bulk of the Kings Army, without the least
inablement at present, or the hopes of future releife.

The enemies whole burden rests upon this Government. Colonel Massy placed a
Guard at Lypiat, commanded a party of Horse and Dragoones to Strouds a place
most exposed to spoil: and set Guardes of Horse at several places of
advantage. These Guardes affronted Sir Jacob Ashley in the stop of
Contribution and Plunder, the indignation whereof drew him out of Cirencester
with four Regiments of Horse to Hampton Road, where he divided his men, and
sent them out three several ways to surprze our Horse in their quarters, and
plunder the Country. Each party failed of the design, through the favor of
Providence to that well affected people. At each Guardes some few that took
the Alarm did encounter and stave off the enemies first violence, till the
rest of a few slender troops were drawn up, and encouraged by the Governors
fortunate arrival from Gloucestershire at that instant, charged and overcame a
far greater power, which were also engaged to fight by their heavy plunder,
and difficult return. In the whole about eight or nine slain, and twenty of
the best men of the Queens and Princes Regiment taken prisoners, and of these
one Captain, and Cornet. The success did revive and engage the Country.

Yet after a few days Sir Jacob Ashley marched out of Cirencester with a
greater power of Horse and Foot, and assaulted the Guard at Lypiat in the
absence of the Captain that commanded there, with instructions from the
Governor to draw off, if at any time an Army fell down. But the House being
unfortifyed was soon taken, and incapable of defense, where we lost a
Lieutenant, and fifty private Soldiers. At which very time we had lodged three
hundred foot within Muserden House sent thither the day before, with orders to
defend it as a Garrison, who had no knowledge of the enemies approach till they
came within half a mile. They remained in the House according to command, but
in no defensible posture, nevertheless expecting the Onset every moment. The
surprizall of these men was prevented by a mere accident of the Governors
Arrival, who faced the great Body with no more then sixty Horse, till the
Foot were drawn off the Hills.

That the strength of the Kings Army should lie upon us, was not strange, but
that no care was had of a competent provision for a deserving Country, was
beyond the conceit of them that beheld our misery. The enemy were strong in
horse, and our few divided into so many parcells and swallowed up in the petty
guards, that no sooner could we draw to the rescue of one side, but the forces
on the other hand fell on to the ruin of the poor people. The Governor knows
no remedy but by daily shifting motions, and becomes an Ubiquitary: He can
attempt no design, but first in his own person faceth the Enemy on the
contrary side, and fills them with the alarm of his presence; Sir Jacob Ashley
sends Warrants for contributions to the gates of Gloucester: The forces from
Hereford were marched forth to Canon-Froome toward Lidbury; whereupon the
Governor advanced with a party of horse and foot as far as Bosbury waiting
for action, but stayed only for a night, having placed guards toward
Worcester and Hereford in the most passible ways for the Enemies approach, and
fell into one of their quarters, took a Captain and his Cornet, with some
common Troopers, and fifteen horses; the Enemy falling down from Cirensester
suddenly fetches home this party.

Whiles these things happened, the Governor received a command from the
Committee of both Kingdoms to attempt Campden House, newly Garrisoned by the
Kings forces, under Sir Henry Bard; and the horse of Warwick, and Coventry, by
command of the same Committee were to aid and receive Orders from him in the
prosecution of this design; Colonel Massy took courage to resolve them of
the incapacitie of that service for the present, since it could not be done
without greater loss to the State then the fortune of the action could
countervaile; for it was a work of continuance that required our whole
strength; and that side of the Country from which we drew must be given up to
destruction, and the Enemy waited no greater advantage then to fasten the
Governor upon a tedious enterprise: besides, the intendment was unvailed in all
those parts that were required to send aid, and before the Orders of the grand
Committee came to his hand, the London Mercuries had proclaimed it to the world.

The Earl of Worcester, the Lord Herbert, and their Agent, Sir John Winter,
bestirre themselves to patch up the lingering life of the Garrison at Lidney,
and have procured from Prince Maurice at Worcester a regement of horse and
dragoones, by whose assistance he was confident to have beaten up our small
guards in the Forest, and enlarge his own quarters; to bring the Forest once
more under his power to the destruction of the people, and the great advantage
of the Kings Army, and Bristoll in special, furnishing them with iron, wood
and coals. The reminding of so great a mischief to the Parliaments Service
made the Governor careful to prevent him, and with an answerable number of
horse and foot advanced into the Forest toward Lidney, where Sir John and
his party got in before him. But after a few small skirmishes, to no valuable
loss on either side; the Governor set guards upon all the passages, and
imprisoned the Enemy in their own strong hold, and again drew off the maine
body in the view of the Garrison. The Enemy observing his march, and supposing
the expedition for Gloucester, sallied out upon Sully-House at a miles
distance, and a temporary garrison for the blocking up of Lidney. In the
instant of time the Governor returns to this guard, and understanding by the
Scouts their near approach, drew out a forlorn hope, faced and charged them,
retreated alittle, and faced them again with the exchange of few shot, till
the Enemy were brought up so high that they discovered our body. Hereupon they
make a sudden retreat, our forlorn hope fall on, and the body follows,
turned their horse to flight, who forsook the foot, and left most of them to
our mercy. Here we took one Captain, with five and twenty common soldiers,
having slain a Captain, two Leiutenants, and twenty six soldiers. The whole
action upon those forces from Worcester was performed only with the loss of
twenty horses, and a few men surprised in their quarters, which nevertheless
cost the Enemy the life of a Major. The passages from Lidney are all guarded by
our horse to starve those within, and preserve the Forest from their plunder.

The Governor having his hands and thoughts filled with these distractions,
was yet more perplexed by a fresh and unknown engagement of Colonel Stephans
in Wiltshire. It happened that about this time the enemy had garrisoned an
old, but repaired Castle at the Devizes. And to prevent the spoil of the
Country near Malmesbury, Colonel Deveraux had erected a garrison at Rouden
House between the Devizes and Malmesbury; and before it was settled or well
furnished with Ammunition and Provision, it was set upon, and sorely
straightened: Colonel Stephens being newly made Governor of Beverston Castle,
was desired to give aid to the relief of the house, and sets upon the service
without Colonel Massies Order, or knowledge in those his manifold
preingagements; wherefore he advanced to succor the besieged with three
Troops of his own Regiment, and some Malmesbury foot, and though he failed
of a parry of horse to be sent from Colonel Devereux, undertook the
business, broke through the Enemy with much difficulty and hazard, and
relieved the house with provision and powder, but failed in the concluding
part; for when he might with far less difficulty have forced the way back
through a troubled enemy, he alighted unwarely and went into the house to
refresh himself, thereby giving the besiegers time to rally, and to cast up a
breastworke before the passage, that he, with the rest, being four hundred
horse and foot, were all cooped together, and the poor besieged are most
desperately straitened by this kind of relief. They without are five hundred
strong; the news runs to Gloucester and calls for help, which had not
needed, had Colonel Stephens imparted the business to the Governor, as he
ought, and waited to have set the Country in a posture on all sides to face the
Enemy, whose inrodes in the mean while were expected from each quarter. They
were already drawn out of Cirencester, Farfard and Leehlade, and keept their
Randevouz on the hills by Cirencester. From Hereford they stir with a great
strength on that side, and in the Forest, those that are penned up in Lidney
strive to break prison.

Notwithstanding this at our first alarm, the Governor sent his own Captain
Leiutenant, and threescore of the choice horse well appointed, and all that
could be spared, unless he would ruin the Forest: and now the work of
releeving this place is made more difficult, the Enemy round about being drawn
together with a purpose to swallow them up, or more gladly to fight with
Colonel Massy at such advantage on the hills and far from home; yet the
best face is put on a bad matter, the threescore horse were to join with an
hundred horse and dragoones from Malmesbury to break through the Enemy, and
these added to the four hundred and thirty within the house, were conceived
able to force a passage through the midst of the first five hundred. But now a
greater power are come up to the house, at least three thousand men: Sir Jacob
Ashley did contribute much to the strength of the besiegers by draining his
quarters at Cirencester, whom the Governor could not prevent, nor follow,
except with the loss of his interest in the Forest; only he raised the
Country about Stroudwater, to face the Garrison of Cirencester; our horse
advanced up to the first guard, and slew the Sentinel, hoping by this alarm
to draw back the residue from Rowden House: And though the weather dispersed
and drove back the Country forces, yet such hopes did revive the business,
that two rainy nights might be an opportune and active season for Colonel
Stephens to break through, and then which no greater could be expected. Our
second party of horse went on for Malmesbury to releeve the besieged at Rowden,
and by the way releeved Beverston Castle with Ammunition, but came too late for
the maine design; for the more potent Enemy had so strongly guarded the
passages, that the relief of the house became desperate, and they within
presently surrendered upon quarter for their lives.

The Regiments of horse are much broken, and reduced to an inconsiderable
number; the Enemy grows strong, and a stream of ill success flows in upon
us. Colonel Hopton, for whom the Governor procured a Commission, upon his
promise of raising four hundred horse and arms at his own charge, without
the help of the State or Country, having got together about threescore horse,
and forty foot, undertook with these men to garrison Castle-dit^^ near
Ledbury in Herefordshire, having neither order nor directions from the
Governor, who conceived the house not to be defended, and required him to
desist the enterprise; the order is neglected: But not many days after, a
party drawn out of Hereford, had not lain before it four and twenty hours,
but he, with his forty foot, and twenty horse were taken, and carried prisoners
to Hereford, ere the Governor could come with relief, who lighted
nevertheless upon a few straglers in the rear, and took thirteen prisoners.

Mean while Sir John Winters releife lies under the arrest, yet so as we would
gladly rid our hands: for the Guards set round his House to the safety of the
Forest, did always distract our designs. These Horse are impatient of a
longer imprisonment, and after a sore distress break their way through our
quarters into the utmost parts of the Forest toward Chepstow, and join with
a party of foot from Chepstow landed at Lancaught, where they intended to
fortify and to make good the Pass over Wye: by which means they might issue
out of Wales at their pleasure. The place contains four hundred acres, having
a very straight entrance. Hereupon our several Guards drew together and
summoned the Country to aid and came up to the enemy, who were divided in
opinion: one part held it meet to make good the passage, the rest persuaded to
draw out into the Field and fight. These latter prevailed, and for a while both
parties faced each other. Our men drew out a forlorn hope of Foot, the place
so requiring, next unto these a forlorn hope of Horse, and the rest were
appointed for a reserve. Their Horse violently charged our forlorn hope of
Foot, who were ready to give back when our Horse came in opportunely and
played their parts, whereat the foot took courage, and fell on all together,
and with one charge turned the enemy to flight, that they killed few on the
place, but drove them up to the River side, and fell upon the hacke in the
pursuit, and so cooped them up that few escaped their hands. About fourscore
were slain, of whom were Colonel Gamme, and Colonel Vangerris; of the
residue some adventured the River to recover the Frigate: many were drowned of
whom Colonel Poor Governor of Berkely Castle; but Sir John Winter and his
brother with some few besides escaped only of an hundred men from Chepstow,
and an hundred and fourscore Horse and Dragoones from Lidney House. The
remainder fell into our hands, an hundred and twenty taken prisoners, of whom
two Leiutenant Colonells, four Captains, and diverse inferior Officers. This
was the last blow of three which Sir John Winter received one in the neck of
another.

These things happened about the time of the taking of Shrewesbury, which
called off the Kings forces from these parts: Sir Jacob Ashly marched from
Cirencester, and Prince Rupert out of Herefordshire to relieve his brother
Maurice near Chester. The Governor was employed in observing the enemies
motion, but with a strength every day more slender, having lost most part of
his own troop with some pieces of others by an other miscarriage in fetching
our Arms and Ammunition from Warwick, and in the Conveying of some Clothiers
Packes of great value, which were taken between Campden and Banbury through
the misguidance of the Officer that commanded.

Nevertheless he advanced into the nearer parts of Herefordshire with two
hundred Horse and five hundred foot, to startle the enemy or make some
diversion, supposing they bent their course to the releife of Westchester. Here
he found great multitudes of the Country people appearing in Arms, but
standing on their own Guard, and declaring themselves for neither side. It was
hoped nevertheless they might be made of good use, and the best affected of
them gave Colonel Massy that satisfaction as was meet, by whom he understood
the condition of their engagements. The Governor of Hereford sending for hay
and contribution to his Garrison, was so far denied by the Country that it
came to blows. The people rising to resist, some few men, and as it was
reported women and children were slain, and some carried prisoners to
Hereford: also some of the Hereford forces were taken by the Country men. The
next day the Alarm went throughout that side of the County, and some parts of
Worcestershire. The people gather into a Body, and march to Hereford. Here they
stayed some days with a resolution to have certain Articles granted by the
Governor of that Garrison. The sum of their demands were to this effect,
that such of theirs as were held prisoners there, should be delivered
forthwith; that satisfaction be given to the Country for the loss they
sustained by plunder, as also to the wives and children of those that were
slain: that the Country might be freed from Contribution and all manner of
Payment to the Soldier; that since the present forces of Hereford were not
able to defend the County, they forthwith quit the Garrison, and leave it to be
kept by the Country, who are able to defend the same, and the whole County
with less charge. These and the like trivial passages did they discover to
the world, as it is wont to happen in such popular Commotions. In the mean
while several Posts were dispatched to Colonel Massy at Ledbury, and letters
returned from him to them, and in particular to some Gentlemen, the chiefest
and best affected. These letters received by the Country people, took well
with some; but the general vote was that they needed not his help to gain
Hereford, which they conceived; would be delivered up by the Citizens, whom
they knew to be of one mind with them. Other messengers came from them with
entreaties to march up to Hereford, promising concurrence in assaulting the
Town; others would have him fall upon another Garrison at Canon-Froome. The
Governor made answer to the several Messages, that he desired to confer
with some of their best entrusted Gentlemen and Yeomen, expecting meet
security that either by Protestation or taking the National Covenant they give
him an assurance of their standing with the Parliament, requiring them to cast
off the enemy, and receive orders from him, to act nothing of themselves
without the consent and approbation of Parliament, without which engagement he
could not join or act with them. To this they replied that they held it a
thing of evil consequence, and dangerous to declare themselves, and they knew
their ability of themselves to perform what they had resolved, entreating him
to march back with his men, giving assurance that they were our friends, but
could not declare for either side: this act of theirs being a just defense
against the unjust proceedings of the Committee and Soldiers of Hereford, and
to secure the Country from contribution and quarter. The Governor makes
answer to this resolve, That the course they had taken was neither safe nor
legal; for it in this confused manner they should gain Hereford, it would do
them little service: unless they were able to keep it from the Kings Army,
and be able of themselves to beat them wholly from that side Seaverne, that no
incursion could be made on their Country from any part: that they would
distress themselves without releife, because their illegal way would not be
owned by the Parliaments forces: for though they have undertaken the
preservation of the Kingdom, yet they can give no protection to any that will
not join with them in that way which the representative Body of the Kingdom
thinks fit. For a third party cannot be in England. And therefore they have no
way of safety or justification in this action, but a speedy declaration for the
Parliament, from whom they would find security and protection and after
assurance of fidelity, a settling of the Country to their own likings. He gave
them likewise to understand, that the charge of the Parliament in maintaining
the Soldiers, and of the Country in contribution, did thence arise; that the
people being disingaged in person might look to their Husbandry; declaring
withal that the disunion of the Country not understanding their interest in
the Parliament was the sole cause of the entertayning of Soldiers. For had the
whole Kingdom rose in time and expressed themselves of this opinion, that they
would stand up as one man against the Popish party, and enemy of their
Country: the work had been long since done. But their drawing back put the
Parliament upon this way of raising Arms upon their stock and expense, or the
Kingdom must needs fall. He minded them likewise that if they lost this
opportunity, of closing with the Parliament, nothing but destruction would
follow; that if they closed with Hereford, and composed the difference, this
compliance might last till Prince Ruperts return, and then they must look to
pay for this rebellion: but if they purpose at last to fall in with Rupert, it
would hasten their bondage, yet givethem no security.

This kind of intercourse passed between Colonel Massy and the Country
people; mean while he drew back to Rosse, waiting the event of this
commotion, but not engaging himself amidst a promiscuous and doubtful
multitude. He represented likewise to the Committee of both Kingdoms, what
advantage the gaining, and disadvantage the loss of this opportunity might be
to the whole work: that their expressions of their esteem of himself, and
his gentle dealing with them were great: that the weakness of his forces,
cheifely of Horse, was the maine business that caused the Major Part to
decline his invitation: importuning them if they desired to gain this party,
as also a leading party to the whole Kingdom, to send a considerable strength
of Horse; and if the forces said to be intended, had come to him, when
fifteen thousand appeared in Arms before Hereford, and of them six thousand
Musketeers, and some well mounted, he had gained a full testimony of
compliance with the Parliament, and drawn them with ease to aid him against
Prince Ruperts Army, when they were in the mood, so far incensed and
enraged. And to complete the design, a Recruite for the Regiments of Horse
was necessary, and that the Auxiliaries should bring along their means of
entertainment; for the sending of strength without money did more wound then
heal us; for the Soldiers challenge their pay or plunder; And as it was
hateful to the Governor, so the State of the Country would not permit him to
spend his time in gathering contribution. But for want of a just and due
supply, these men were lost to us and to themselves also, concluding a peace
with the Governor of Hereford, and obnoxious and open to the Kings Army.

Hereupon Colonel Massy marched from Rosse, and passed the Seaverne toward
Berkely, purposing to join with Sir William Waller, who was noysed to be come
into the Borders of this Country, when the day before some of the Berkely
forces had issued out toward our Garrison at Slimbridge: but ere they could
retreat to the Castle, the Garrison forces fell upon them, slew twelve,
whereof one Captain, an Irish Rebel, and took twenty five prisoners, whereof
two were Captains and one Leiutenant. The Governor with his party advanced
thence toward Chipping-Sodbury, where Colonel Strange with a party of Horse
began to fortify: but upon the notice of our Advance retreated to Berkely.

No sooner had the Herefordshire men disbanded, and returned to their own
houses, but Prince Rupert falls back out of Shropshire, and comes upon them
with his whole Army. The noise of his Arrival does hasten the Governors
return to Gloucester: who drew thence two hundred Horse, and five hundred
foot into the Borders of Herefordshire, where many of the Country people
resorted unto him, some with fire weapons, some with others: but the want of
strength, especially of Horse, rendered him of little capacity to preserve
them. The people having good desires, but daunted with the greatness of the
enemy, and the slenderness of our forces, were wholly lost. Sir William Waller
was importuned to draw this way, or to send a strong party which might prove of
the greatest advantage to the Kingdom, when the Princes design was to lie on
that Country to recruite his Army with men, horses and money for the Spring
action, and the approach of the Parliaments Army; and would not only bring in
the Country, and make them firm to their service, but disappoint if not
destroy Prince Ruperts Army, at that time the greatest in the Kingdom, being a
confluence of the forces of Prince Rupert, Prince Maurice, Colonel Gerard,
Lord Hastings, Lord Ashly, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale. These men bear all
before them, take men's Persons, spoil their Estates, disarme the Country,
reap the benefit of the late insurrection, and extract money by force and
terror from the poor people: whose destruction as well as their late rising
in Arms is wholly lost to the Parliament, and serve only to make up the
enemies recruite. The Princes impresse men in great abundance in Hereford,
Monmouch, Worcestershire, raise great sums of money, get good store of Arms:
necessity in part casting them upon such ways of violence; and coercive power.
And though the pressed men were of suspected fidelity, and less value, and had
often deceived them in the heat of battle: yet they conduced to the sudden
forming of an Army when the Kings Affairs grew desperate, and thrust in with
the old Volunteers made up the bulk of a great Body. Thus both the strength
and the ruins of the Country are left to the enemy, when by the aid of
twelve hundred Horse in the beginning of this insurrection, the hopes of the
business might without vanity promise the Parliament many thousand fighting
men of all sorts besides those already in pay.

Sir John Winter the plague of the Forest once more importuned the releife of
Lidney House, and obtaines from the Prince about two thousand Horse, and
fifteen hundred foot, who break in to destroy the Country and disarme the
Inhabitants. The Governor with what strength he can make marched to Wesbury
and quartered within a mile and a half of the enemy, and gave order to the
Guards that beset Lidney, that the foot be drawn off to the Garrison of Nast,
and Highmeadow, and the Horse repair to the Randevouze, which was done without
loss, when the Forest was full of the enemy. He preserved likewise the lower
parts near the river, but for want of horse wherein the enemy did abound,
could not without extreme hazard and loss advance to the further parts, where
they kept their Randevouze, and which they laid wast, plundering the houses to
the bare walls, driving all the cattle, siezing upon the persons of men, and
sending them Captives to Monmouth, and Chepstow, except such as escaped to us
by flight, (as many did with their Arms) and some few that saved themselves in
Woods and Minepitts. The enemy did not adventure into the lower and nearer
places, where our foot lay ready and resolved to undertake theirs if they came
on. Our Neighboring parts of Hereford and Worcestershire, run the like
fortune with these in the Forest, and look black upon this Garrison which
was not able to preserve them. The Kings forces returned the second time into
the Forest; and took the gleanings of the former Harvest: yet the nearer
parts are still prrserved. The enemy raised themselves to a great power,
already reputed six thousand horse and foot, and seem to endeavor
Northward, wherefore the Governor intending to help the Country, by driving
up the Rear of their march, or to put in for any service, advanced to Lidbury
with four hundred horse and five hundred foot, his whole marching strength,
notwithstanding the addition of two hundred and fifty Horse from Northampton
and Warwick, and with this party attended the enemies motion. Hither Prince
Rupert advanced with the best part of his Army, of whose approach neither spy
nor Scout from the Out-guards made the least discovery, till they came within
half a mile of the Town, horse and foot, to surprise or at least to surround
us. The Governor instantly commanded the Horse to mount, and drew up the
foot, though not in so good order as he might, by reason of the sudden Alarm;
and suspecting what he afterward found, that the Prince would endeavor to
compass him in, he marched off the foot with all due speed that the enemies
right or left wing might not get before us, which they endeavored by sending
one party to the Towns end to keep us in action there, whilst two other parties
fetched a compass upon either hand. In the mean while he brought up those few
horse, that were not upon the Out-guards to charge the enemy at their first
entrance, and placed an Ambuscado of twenty Musqueteeres to make good the
retreat. But the business was acted so, that the Governor in person with the
Field Officers and Captains were enforced to entertain the enemy with
several charges, and bear their brunt alone, till the foot had rid some
ground before them. In this part of the skirmish their loss was the greatest
for number, of ours only Major Backehouse mortally wounded, the Governor, whom
the Prince aimed to charge, had his horse wounded under him by two severoll
shots. Our men drew off as was meet, and made good the retreat three or four
miles to the enemies loss, till they came up to a place of shelter, when
hasting to get before the right wing of the enemies horse, they were put into
some confusion. And the Horse having no great desire to fight, neglected the
advantage of the place, to stop the pursuit though the Governor endeavored
what he could to engage them. That the enemy fell in among the Rear Guard of
the foot, where he lost near two hundred men taken prisoners: many Country
men being taken in to make up the number. This business cost them the lives of
some gallrnt Officers, and the Prince missed his aim of surprising Colonel
Massye, but the Governor supposed the stay of the Princes march an advantage
to the Service.

Nevertheless the Army continued some days after, between Hereford and
Worcester recruiting daily, and seem to put much confidence in the Country,
whom they cause, not only to abjure the Parliament, but bind over to
themselves by solemn oath, swearing in the presence of God; That they believe
no power of Pope or Parliament can depose the King, and obsolve them from their
natural obedience to his Royal Person and Successors, that the two Houses of
Parliament without the Kings consent, have no power to make Laws, or to bind
or oblige the subjects by their Ordinances, that they believe the Earl of
Essex, and Manchester, and Sir Thomas Fairsaxe, Sir William Waller, Colonel
Massy, together with all such as have already, or shall hereafter take up
Arms by Authority, or commission from the members of Parliament at
Westminster, pretending to fight for King and Parliament, do thereby become
actual Rebels, and as such ought with all their adherents and partakers, to
be presented and brought to condign punishment: that they will never bear
Arms in their quarrel, but will, if they be thereto called, assist their
Sovereign and his Armies in the defense of his Royal Person, Crown, and
Dignity, against all contrary forces to the utmost of their skill and power,
and with the hazard of their lives and fortunes; that they will not discover
the secresies of his Majesty's Army unto the Rebels, nor hold any
correspondence with them; and all designs of theirs against the Kings Army,
for the surprising or delivering up of the Cities of Hereford or Worcester, or
any other of his Majesty's Forts, they shall truly discover to those whom it
shall concern, so soon as it comes to their knowledge. That his Majesty's
taking up Arms for the causes by himself so often declared in Print is justly
necessary. That they shall endeavor all they can to hinder popular tumults,
risings, randevouzes, meetings, confederacies, and associations of the people,
towns, hundreds, and countries, which are not warranted to assemble by his
Majesty's express commission, or by power derived from him by virtue of his
Commissions, and in the sense he means it, and that they detest from their
heart that seditious and traitorous late invented national covenant, and
protest never to take it. All these particulars they vow and protest sinceerely
to obsolve without Equivocation or mental Reservation. This Pretestation was
strictly enjoined by the Princes, to be taken by all without exception, in the
Counties of Mounmouth, Glamorgan, Breekno^ke, Radnor, Hereford, and Worcester.
Nevertheless this constained act could not knit the hearts of a male-contented
Country to the love of that side, nor could the State permit the enemies
exaction and violence by this vow eternally to bind up the people from
well-doing.

The Princes Army is the maine rest of the Kings Affairs which they strengthen
daily by impressing the Country, taking in lesser Brigades, and draining the
Garrisons, and a part of Gorings Army passed over the Seaverne from Bristoll
into Wales, and so to Rupert at Hereford. After a little stay to perfect the
recruite the enemy drew thence, the Infantery and Artillery lay between
Worcester and Beaudly commanded by Sir Jacob Ashley, whilst Rupert and Maurice
with the horse and some select foot fetch off the King from Oxford, assisted
also with Gorings Horse and Dragoones, who left his Majesty at Stew and marched
back over the hills into the West through our Borders.

The Governor received another dropping by the addition of two Troops from
Newport-Pagnell, the Auxiliaryes were in all three hundred and forty: his own
so few, weak, and ill armed, that he could scarce muster a hundred fighting
Horse: and those much discontented, observing the rest in good equipage, but
themselves in the constant action of Soldiers naked and miserable. These are
employed in attending the enemies march, to preserve the Country what they
may; yet they disturb it with frequent Alarmes, and sometims beat up the
lesser parties, and upon sundry attempts took one Colonel, diverse Captains,
with inferior Officers and soldiers.

Sir John Winter despairing of longer subsistence and livelyhoode, deserted and
fired his house at Lidney, having first spoiled the Forest and so before hand
with revenge. By this time the Counties round about are cleared of the Kings
Army, and Colonel Massy received a larger supply of Horse from the remainder
of Colonel Bher and D'albeirs Regiments commanded by Major Buller: and thereby
enabled to undertake some important Service. Evesham was beheld as the most
opportune and of greatest concernment in distressing Worcester cester, and
establishing the Committee by Order of Parliament for that County. Wherefore
the Governor drew before it with five hundred foot from Gloucester, and two
hundred from Warwick, who belonged to the Worcester Committee, with a strong
able Brigade of Horse, and in the name of the King and Parliament summoned
Colonel Robert Leg Governor of the town, to make a speedy surrender of the
Garrison with all Persons, Arms, Ammunition and Provision, which he there held
against the justice of them both, or upon refusal to expect such justice as
fire and sword would inflict. And to this he expected a speedy answer. Colenell
Leg sent back the Summons with this answer. You are hereby answered in the
name of his Majesty, that this garrison which I am entrusted to keep, I will
defend so long as I can with the men arms and ammunition therein, being
nothing terrified by your summons. I perceave you are a stranger to our
strength and resolution, further treaties will be troublesome.

Upon this return the Governor prepared the design, and ordered to each
Officer his charge in the storm. The assault was to be made on each part of
the town. The side that looks toward Worcester was to be stormed in five
places with one place at the bridge on the other side of the river. The
commanded parties of the foot were lead on by the several Captains, and
seconded by the Horse divided into three Bodies. After the disposition of the
design, and the night spent in Alarmes, the Signal was given a little after
break of day, when both horse and foot fell on together with life and heat
in a furious assault, broke up the Pallisadoes, filled the grafts with faggots,
and other preparations, made sundry passages, recovered the works, and stood
firm on the Parapet, whilst the Musketeers from within played furiously. The
foot having recovered the shelter of the ditch beat off the enemy, got up by
scaling ladders, stood on the breast works, and some entered but were again
driven up by the Horse to the top of the works, where they stood firm and
fired, but after a while ready to be beaten off by the violent charge of the
enemies horse, till a party of our horse on that fide drawing up close, and
having a small breach made for their entrance, fell in and beat off the enemy
from that bull warke; whilst another party made an entrance near the Bridge.
And now they tumble over the works on all sides: and charge up both horse and
foot with equal gallantry, bore down the enemy and mastered the Garrison.
The conflict was hot and difficult for almost an hour, and maintained by the
enemy with much resolution. The lives of the Officers and Soldiers were
wonderfully preserved in that violent storm, when each man was exposed to the
hazard of the most daring enemy. Of the Officers two only wounded, and ten
private soldiers slain, and twelve of the enemy. The prisoners taken in the
garrison were five hundred and fifty on the list, of whom two Colonells one
Major, thirteen Captains, with other Officers and Gentlemen reformadoes to
the number of seventy. Many Gentlemen and Officers that charged with the
Governor, acted their parts with courage, and spurd on the valor of the
soldiers. The reserve of foot divided into three bodies, to second the
assaylants performed as became resolved men, and the whole action was complete
according to the Idea and Platform of the design. The Evening before to keep
off an approaching enemy from Worcester, about a hundred horse were drawn out,
and kept guard five miles from Evesham, faced a party of horse from Worcester,
whose hasty and distracted retreat gave such an alarm to the whole City, that
they fired four piece of Ordnance before day, and alarmed the Country round
about, when the Conquest was already secured, and the Parliament Masters of
Evesham.

This performance was the concluding honor of Colonel Massies government,
after his remove from the present command was resolved by both Houses of
Parliament, when the desires of promoving the public service made him to
hazard the fame of his former achievements by the doubtful issue of the last
action.

Some days before he had an honorable invitation from the Western
Gentlemen, and the same day that he entered Evesham, received a Commission from
the Lords and Commons to lead an Army in the West: The Parliaments command
found the Governor absolutely free in affection and choice, willing to comply
with their pleasures, neither longing to stay, nor eager of a change, but in
any place ready to spend his blood in the Kingdoms Cause, if he might not
spend it in vain. Nevertheless the City and County of Gloucester did much
resent it, and something repine that their Governor should be snatched from
such a people as had done much, and suffered much in their fidelity and
resolution without president (considering the many assaults) that had
sacrificed their lives and fortunes in preserving this City and the Kingdom
therein, that had borne so much in the firing of the Suburbs, in the burning of
many houses near the town, some by the Enemies malice, and some by themselves
for safety, and the pressures of the Country under both Armies. They cast up
the consequence and concernment of the place, being the Center, Garden and
Granary of the Kingdom, the Blocke-house to the river of Severne, and a bar
to all passages between Worcester, Bristoll, and the Sea, the stop of
intercourse between Oxford and Wales, the Key to open the passage upon the
Welsh and their Frontiers, and the lock and bar to keepe-out their
incursions: the only refuge and safety for the Parliament party and friends in
that part of the Kingdom, and the Enemies sole hinderance from the command of
the whole West. Besides, this they had strong desires of retaining their
Governor having so long experience of his judgment to foresee dangers, and
care to prevent them, of his readiness to issue out for offense and defense
upon each incursion, of his indefatigable industry in taking the advantage of
all oportunities to weaken the Enemy, and happy success in all enterprises, of
his disposition and comportment, by which he cherished the well-affected,
ratisfied and confirmed the indifferent, reduced the very malignant: and by
himself engaged the Country to arms, and governed the soldiers from mutiny,
rapine, and plunder, or other violence in the Garrison or Country. To all which
they added an unavoidable prejudice against any stranger, though in himself
able and faithful, considering the many bypast plots, and the Enemies
implacable malice who breath out threatenings daily. Such was the sense of the
people universally. And the Major and Aldermen with the whole City Nemnie
Contradicente did so far honor themselves in vindicating Colonel Massy, as
to petition both Houses of Parliament for his continuance in the Government,
representing in express terms his noble disposition, constant and unwearied
pains, blessed by God with extraordinary success, and his maine influence on
the hearts of the people in general, most of them being by him engaged in
arms for the Parlinment, and upon the whole so idiery, who were kept together
to serve in this Country, chiefly by the love and respect they bear to him.
And this they acknowledged not with an intention of prescribing rules to the
State, but out of their care and zeal to the common Cause. They likewise
importuned the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of London, upon the
mutual bonds of former engagement, in defending and raising the late Siege of
Gloucester, to represent unto the Parliament the sense of their fears, and the
Countries distraction at the removal of Colonel Massy: complaining of the
sinister ends of some few persons who brought in a cross Petition, with
Articles in the name of the County of Gloucester, which no part of the County
did ever acknowledge, and of which no corner thereof was conscious.

The House of Commons would not accept the charge against Colonel Massy, and
that they might deal in the business without partiality, refused also the
Countries Petition. Nevertheless the Speaker was directed in the name of the
House, by way of answer to their requests, to let them know, that they were
very sensible of the dangers that might attend an alteration in that kind, but
that the Governor provided to succeed might speedily give such assurance
against such dangers, that there will be no cause for them to continue, much
less to increase their fears. That the House was confident that their
constant readiness to comply with the public, would also in this particular
of Colonel Massies removal make them rest content in the resolution of the
Parliament in that matter. Though Gloucester be a place they prize, and care
for as much as any in the Kingdom, yet for the present it was thought of
greater necessity to employ him in that command of the Western Forces and
they cannor doubt of the concurrence and submission of those well-affected
parts in whatsoever is judged to be of public advantage.

Hereupon it was ordered the third of June, 1645 by the Lords and Commons, that
Master Luke Nurse Major of Gloucester, Alderman Singleton, and Colonel Blunt,
or any two of them shall have the command of the Garrison of Gloucester, and of
the Forces and Garrison in Gloucestershire, in as ample manner as Colonel
Massy had till the appointed Governor come down to his charge there, or the
Houses take other order.

Colonel Massy in the mean while labors to disingage the affections of the
Country, and to take off discontents and mutiny, and beseeches the Parliament
to send down the succeeding Governor that he might seek to interest him in
the hearts of the people, whom he never desired to indeare unto himself, but
to those Masters whom he served, which was a full testimony of a true Servant
to the State, upon the sole terms of Conscience and Honor.

FINIS.

