NICOMEDE.

A Tragi-Comedy, Translated out of the French OF MONSIEUR CORNEILLE, By JOHN
DANCER.

As it was Acted at the Theater Royal DUBLIN.

Together with an Exact Catalogue of all the English STAGE PLAYS printed, till
this present Year 1671.

Licensed

Dec. 16. 1670. Roger L'estrange.



LONDON: Printed for Francis Kirkman, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Thames Street over against the Custom-House. 1671.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS, Earl of Ossory.
My Lord,
THis PIECE being made English in your Honors Service, and by your Command,
having already passed the Suffrage of the Stage, and now made more public by
passing the Press, I thought it my Duty (in the Authors absence) to present it
to your Honor: I shall not say any thing of the PLAY, because I had no hand in
it; but I have made bold to that, to add a Catalogue of all the English Plays
hitherto printed. I have done it as perfectly as I can, in respect that nothing
which is imperfect ought to be presented to your Honor. If you accept and
peruse it, it is the utmost ambition of

Your Honors humble Servant, Fra: Kirkman.

The Actors.
PRUISAS, King of Bithinia. FLAMINIUS, The Roman Ambassador. ARSINOE, Second
Wife to King Prusias. LAODICE, Queen of Armenia. NICOMEDE, Eldest Son of King
Prusias, by a former venture. ATTALUS, Son of Prusias and Arsinoe. ARASPES,
Captain of the Guards to Prusias. CLEONE, Confident to Arsinoe.
The Scene at Nicomedia.

NICHOMEDE. A Tragi-Comedy.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Nichomede and Laodice. Laod. MY Joys Sir, must exceed, to find that you,
To whom so many glorious Wreaths are due,
My Chains, to all these Laurels can prefer,
And be my Captive, though a Conqueror,
That all those Actions which the World dismay,
To such low Merits should their Homage pay;
And yet amidst this height of Joy, I find
A secret Passion which afflicts my mind.
With fear I see you fear that springs from Love,
Doubtful this Court to you may fatal prove.
You have a subtle Step-Dame, Sir, whose wit
Has made your Father to her Charms submit,
And she does manage him with so much Skill,
He Is but the Property to act her Will;
What She enjoins more force than Law does bear,
And then what Safety can you hope for here?
Besides her Hate, which was enough before,
Is from our mutual Love, increased to more,
And now her Son, your Brother's returned too,

Nicho. I know it, Madam, and that he courts you.
The Romans did him home from Hostage send,
Not out of kindness, but a weightier end.
I too well find what 'twas did him recall,
He was Flaminia's price for Hannibal.
That mighty Man was for his Ransom paid,
And by the King had been to Rome betrayed,
Had not his Courage taught him how to free
Himself by Poison, from that Slavery,
Which gazing Romans exercise on those
Who were their Terror, whilst they stood their Foes.
'Twas not till after my last happy Fight
Which Cappadocia's Kingdom did unite
To our Bithinia, I this News did hear
Which made me weep for him, and for you fear:
That Fear begat an Anger would break forth*
So to Theagenes, whose steady worth
I knew, I of the Army gave command,
And hither flew, these Troubles to withstand,
Hoping my presence would my Queen oblige,
For still Flaminius does the King besiege,
And if that Hannibal his Errand were,
He, being dead, why stays he longer here?
Unless it be, which I believe too true,
To aid my Brothers weak pretense to you.

Laodice. I doubt not, but this Roman virtue may
Strive to oblige the Queen in her own way;
That bloody Sacrifice she paid to him,
Must have engaged him to the utmost crime:
But, be it so, yet why should you complain,
Why should you fear the worst he can obtain?
My love over you a weak Ascendant has,
If it is your Presence, must secure its faith.
That Spirit must be mean, which does prefer
Poor Attalus, to Asia's Conqueror.
Att'lus, of whom the most that can be se'd,
Is that he was a Roman Hostage bred,
And at full height of Courage will appear
To shake at Eagles, and an Adile fear.

Nicho. Death, Madam, Death, shall here an Empire gain,
E're I such jealous thoughts do entertain:
I Force from them, not weakness fear in you,
For what if Rome appear against us too --

Laodice. Sir, I Am a Queen, and bear that Noble Soul,
Which Rome, nor your Kings Thund'rings cannot control.
Though he my Guardian be, he cannot have
More power over me than what my Father gave.
Whose Will having designed me yours, there is none
Can choose elsewhere for me, but I alone.
By my own choice, and by my Fathers care
I Am destined Spouse to the Bithinian Heir.
And this great Heart of mine will never bend
To let a Subjects Right over it pretend.
Banish your doubts.

Nicho. Ah Madam, let me fear
Whilst I behold you thus exposed are
Unto a Fury, who both has the Will,
And Power to act, all she conceives of ill.
Who, but to place a Crown on her Sons Brow,
Would Justice, Law, and Nature overthrow,
And greedily the sacredst Rights invade:
She may force you, who Hannibal betrayed.
Nor can there Faith from those expected be
Who break the Laws of Hospitality.

Laod. As little Natures Laws will you protect
From those who to such Rights show no respect.
Your being here advances her Design,
And does expose both your own Life and mine.
Coming without leave, some suspicion wears,
And she will buzz it in your Fathers Ears.
Who by her Charms too soon will be inclined
To sacrifice you to his jealous Mind.
Then I, who stood so firm before, become
A Victim to the Mother and the Son.

Nich. 'Twas fear of you that made me take this course

Laodice* Whilst you were in the Camp I feared no force:
This, this Sir, you for my support should do,
Order things so that they may still fear you.
Back to your Army, then protect me there,
They are secure to act whilst you are here.
But Armies Rules to Politicians teach,
And you may boldly do it out of reach.
Valor, though high, to numbers still must yield,
You're but one here, they none, when you're in the Field.
And though the noise of Victory sound high,
It Is seldom Fame has quelled an Enemy.
Sir, were you both the Worlds Delight and Dread,
Entering the Court, you tamely yield your Head.
Once more I say return, by that Renown
You there have gained, you here will best be known:
Return, and with your own, secure my Fate,
You banish mine, when you their Fears create.

Nicho. Ah! To the Camp persuade me not to go,
There the Queens Hate, her Murderers do sow
Secret and thick: Two I have brought along,
By their Confessions to make known my Wrong,
And disabuse the King, who though he be
Husband to her, is Father still to me.
And though she Nature should to silence charm,
Yet three great Kingdoms added by this Arm
Unto his Crown, will loudly let him know,
That he does something to my Valor ow.
Or if that by the Rigor of my Fate,
I must become the Victim of her Hate.
If both the Camp and Court my Life pursue;
Will you deny me then to dye by you?

Laodice* My past Advice I trembling now recall,
If we must die, let us together fall.
Courage, brave Prince, they may perhaps ensnare
Themselves, in those Traps they for us prepare.
The People love you, and abhor their Arts,
And he Reigns safest who does Reign over Hearts.
But here is your Brother --

Nicho. Since he does not know
Who I^am, keep me undiscovered now.

SCENE II.
Laodice, Nichomode and Attalus. Attalus. Must then the Charms dwell in those
Eyes appear
Only to me, of all the World, severe?
Shall I never gain one of those blessed regards,
With which you, Madam, use to conquer Hearts?

Laod. To conquer yours, if these Sir, don't suffice,
When I design't, I Will speak it by my Eyes.

Atta. Of what is all yours, you can no Conquest make.

Laod. Then a more pleasing Mein, I need not take.

Atta. But yet to keep that heart, I must implore.

Laod. I rather had such ill got Goods restore.

Atta. It Is Value is too poor, your Soul to touch.

Laod. To juggle Sir, I value you too much,
Our distance of Degree admits it not,
Then for the heart you tell me I have got,
Where should't be kept?

Atta. Ah Madam, in your Breast,

Laod. That Place is by another, Sir, possessed*
And you so often has this great Truth bin told,
That your Address as senseless is as bold.

Atta. Happy the Man, whom Fortune so does grace,
To give admission to so blessed a Place.
But I should think him happier far who might,
Fairly dispute, and gain from him this Right.

Nicho. E're that be done Rivers with Blood must swell,
This Conqueror Sir, preserves his Conquest well.
Go ask his Foes, amongst them 'twill best be known,
What it is to gain that Fort he once has won.

Atta. But there is one who will assault it so,
That he must yield it where he will or no.

Laod. You may mistake,

Atta. If the King be the Man.

Laod. He Is just and wise, and wills but what he can.

Atta. And what cannot his Sovereign Greatness do?

Laod. Talk not so high, he knows what is my Due.
Though King, he acts as to a Queen with me,
That Is not by Force, but by Civility.

Atta. There Is much included in the civil prayer
Of Kings, unto whose power we subject are.
But if a Kings request can take no place,
Yet Rome with hers will my Addresses grace.

Nico. Rome Sir?

Atta. Yes Rome, do you her kindness fear?

Nico. No Sir, but lest some Roman over-hear,
For if Rome knew the Addresses by you made,
Youl'd gain her Anger, whilst you hope her Aid.
Scorning to see her Nurs^ing own a Flame
Injurous to the luster of her Name.
That Title which does so much glory wear,
Of Roman Citizen, sheel'd from you tear,
For she too mighty thinks it to bestow
On that poor soul, can to a Queens love bow.
Have you forgot that neither King, nor Queen,
Rome equal to a Burgess do esteem.
If she have formed in you that generous Mind,
Let her the impressions of her Maxims find.
Resume a pride then worthy her and you,
And studying something to your glory due,
Pursue this Ignominious Flame no more,
But ceasing the Armenian Queen to adore.
Seek out a Love more worthy your high place,
That Is of some Tribunes or a Pretors Race.
For such a highborn Match Rome thinks you fit,
And lest your Royal Birth exclude you it.
By her Adoption you have put on,
Authority for such Ambition.
Break loose then, Sir, from this reproachful Chain,
And leaving Queens to Kings they so disdain.
For things more vast and high, your thoughts reserve,
And so your greatness, and Romes pride preserve.

Attalus. If this man, Madam, do to you belong,
Forbid his boldness, or restrain his Tongue,
That I his utmost insolence might hear,
I yet have forced my Anger to forbear,
But if he shall continue in this strain,
To smother 't longer, I shall strive in vain.

Nicho. No matter, Sir, to whom I do belong
Can Reason loose it is value on my tongue?
Set Love apart, and I Will be judged by you,
What Glories to this Roman Name are due,
The King and Queen, so high the Title prized,
They Will not be pleased to see it now despised.
Their value of the mighty thing appears
In giving up to it your Infant years.
From four years old 't has robbed them of your sight,
Can you think now, they will that Glory slight.
Or suffer for the Marriage of a Queen,
You forfeit Honors they so much esteem;
No rather jealous of so rare a Treasure.

Attalus. Madam, once more I ask, Is it your pleasure,
That insolent man of me, this scorn should make?
Or is 't from you he does his freedom take?

Laod. Since talking to you as a Roman, he
Offends you Sir, give me the liberty,
To treat you in a way which you may own
With no less Honor, that is a Monarchs Son.
But Sir, in this degree you must allow
You to a Prince your Elder, ought to bow.
That though so near allied in blood you be,
It takes not from his difference of degree,
But to his Birth there ought respect be paid,
Yet you, he absent, does his Rights invade.

Atta. If that Right be the Honor to be yours,
One word from you, that Right for me procures.
And if my Birth does lessen my degree,
It Is by you, Natures fault repaired may be;
But if as a Kings Son, I so much owe,
Permit that I speak like a Roman now.
And know there is none born so, but are designed
To command Monarchs, and be unconfined;
Know that my Love's the Project of a Soul,
Contemns Subjection, and disdains Control;
Know that --

Laod. I know that in my Crown you find
More Charms, than in my Person, or my Mind;
But such as I am, both my Crown and Me,
Are vowed that Brothers, who your King must be;
And were He here, his Presence might give end
To all this mighty Passion you pretend.

Attalus. Might I but see him, he should know from me --

Nicho. Beware, such Wishes, Sir, may dangerous be;
For if he hear them, you may chance to prove
The Vengeance due on those attempts his Love.

Atta. Sir, you shall pay me that Respect is due.

Nicho. I know not who omits it of us two.

Atta. Whilst thou know me, dare thou thus boldly prate?

Nicho. By knowing you Prince, I can set my Rate,
But you being ignorant of my Degree,
Cannot tell what you ought to pay to me.

Atta. Ah Madam, suffer my just Anger may

Laod. Yes, yes; but now your Mother comes this way.

SCENE III.
Nichomede, Arsinoe, Laodice, Attalus, and Cleone. Nicho. Pray Madam, let the
Prince your Son here, know
What Is the Respect he unto me does owe;
For want of it he is outrageous grown,
A fault which surely does but ill become
Such rare bred Minds.

Arsinoe. Sir, do I then see you!

Nicho. Yes, and you shall see Mithrobates too.

Arsinoe. Oh that is a Traitor!

Nicho. He talks something true,
You best know if it ought to trouble you.

Arsinoe. This swift Return I cannot understand,
Where is your Army?

Nicho. Under good command.
Of my return you soon the Cause shall hear,
I left a Master and a Mistress here.
One Rome and you have taken frommy Cares,
The Other I Will save both from your Hands and theirs.

Arsin. Is this the Cause that does you hither bring?

Nicho. Yes, and I hope you will serve me with the King.

Arsin. Yes Sir, I Will serve you, just as you hope so:

Nicho. Of your good will I the assurance know.

Arsin. I Will go and to the King this Business move.

Nicho. And I Will go think how I may grateful prove.

Arsin. Do so, you may depend upon my Care,

Nicho. Whilst I know yours, you guess what my thoughts are

Atta. Madam, is this Prince Nichomede?

Nicho. Yes Sir,
Who comes to see if Rome can you prefer,
To him.

Attalus. Excuse me if I did not know.

Nicho. Your self Prince, a deserving Rival show.
And if you dare design t'assault me here,
Still in your looks a noble boldness wear.
But as ^ to her Aid, am singly come,
Threaten me not with the Kings Power, or Rome;
As I defend, do you attempt alone,
I Will set by all pretenses to the Crown.
Try it thus Prince, and we shall soon see then
If Rome, or Hannibal breeds braver Men.

SCENE IV.
Arsinoe, Attalus, and Cleone. Arsin. Go, that Excuse of thine to him was base,
When thou beheldst him brave me to my Face.

Atta. Madam, what could I do in this Surprise?
This quick return destroys your Enterprise.

Arsin. No Attalus, it gives it Life, and Heart,
Go thou and find Flaminius on my part.
Let him in private here conducted be,
And of thy Fortunes leave the Cure to me.

Atta. But Madam, if --

Arsin. Go, no more if, nor and,
When done, thou these Intreagues shall understand.

SCENE V.
Arsinoe, Cleone. Cleo. Madam, do you hide from him his own Concern?

Arsin. Yes, and have Reasons thou do not discern.
I fear his heart would my Designs oppose,
I fear that virtue which to Rome he owes
Has taught him, there is no Glory so sublime,
Can recompense the hazard of a Crime.

Cleon. Those should guess Rome less scrupulous, who knew
How Hannibal she did to death pursue.

Arsinoe. Be not in charging Rome with Guilt deceived,
'Twas I, and but one Roman, who contrived
The whole Intreague of that great Heroes Fall;
Rome still had granted Life to Hannibal,
And would not for a more inviting Cause,
Have made a Breach of hospitable Laws;
For though whilst she did his great Conduct know,
Prudence forbad his Sojourn with a Foe,
And therefore to make good his Peace with them,
Antiochus was forced to bannish him.
Yet freed both from Romes Envy, or her Fear,
We being Allies, he might have still lived here.
Had not Revenge prompted Flaminius too,
Things which the Senate would have blushed to do.

Cleone. What desperate Cause could raise his Hate so high,
That to allay it, Hannibal must dye?

Arsin. A Fathers Loss of Honor, and of Life,
Have thou not heard, how in that fatal strife
'Twixt Rome, and Cart^age, in one bloody Scene,
Acted nigh to the Lake of Thrasimene,
Flaminius Father, then Rom^s General,
Fell by the mighty Hand of Hannibal?
The Son since burning to revenge that shame*
A close Conspirator with me became,
And for to have the object of his Hate
Delivered up, procured the Roman State
To send my Attalus from Hostage home,
And farther whispered Jealousies in Rome
Of Nichomede's Conquests here, which might
(Should he to them the Armenian Realm unite
By Marriage with Laodice) one day
To Romes increasing Greatness put a stay;
On which the Senate, who now jealous grew
Of such an Empire, and such Valor too,
Did him as their Ambassador propound,
To break the Marriage, and the Empire bound:
And this is what Rome undertook to do.

Cleone. And this makes Attalus, his Mistress woo,
But yet, why did not Rome her self concern,
E're his Return had made her Love too firm?

Arsin. No, for whilst he a conquering Army led,
'T had been too much to affront him at their Head.
Here we dare do it, and 'twas my Plot at length,
By cunning slights to draw him from his Strength;
To Mithrobates, I did teach the way,
Who seeming false to me, did him betray,
Whispering a thousand pannique Fears, that he
Had been to murder him, suborned by me,
That fiery Spirit by degrees he won,
And gently leads him to destruction.
I know he will to the King for Justice call,
But from that Justice he shall find his Fall.
His Accusations as my Engines move,
Will fortify me in his Fathers Love.
At his first sight I did appear dismayed,
And by my change of color seemed afraid;
But he mistakes much that Surprise of mine,
Since his Return, was wholly my Design.

Cleone. But what e're Rome or Attalus pretend,
That Queen will never to his wishes bend.

Arsin. The Love he shows to her I have designed
Only the King, the Court, and Rome to blind,
Not that I would the Armenian Crown procure,
But our Bithinian, for my Son secure.
That done, I care not where the Queen espouse,
But freely leave her whom she please to choose.
This Passion of my Sons if only pressed,
To raise fresh Tempests in the Princes Breast;
Who when he sees the King set on by Rome,
An Advocate for Attalus become,
Will grow outrageous, and induced be,
To brave that Father is as fierce as he.
Whose Hea^ by cunning ways to Flames I Will blow,
And work this daring Lovers overthrow,
Before he blinded by his Love, shall see,
The least intreague of this great Mystery.
By this thou see all that I do pretend,
But sure Flaminiu^ does me now attend.
I Will go -- the Secrets of thy Queen preserve,

Cleone. My Faith long tried does not a Doubt deserve.

ACT II. SCENE I.
Prusias, and Araspes. Prusia. WIthout my Orders, durst he then come here?

Arasp. Pardon, Great Sir, you wrong him if you fear;
Prince Nichomede's Thoughts are all ^o just,
'Twere injury to virtue to mistrust.
It Is true you any other might suspect,
This quick return does seem to want respect.
And might give place to doubtful Thoughts, to know,
The Springs from whence does such impatience ^low.

Prusi. I see 'em well, this Act appears to me,
A pure Attempt on my Authority;
His happy Victories have raised his Soul
So high, that now he does abhor Control
Scorns to depend, and thinks he has a Right
To Rule, since he has purchased it by Fight.
Heroes, like him, believe when they obey,
Their Glories and their Greatness they betray.
And cast a shadow over their mighty Deeds:

Arasp. Sir, heat of blood in youth that Humor feeds.
Their to wring Spirits are by success blown high,
And whilst Camps do their Fortunes deifie.
They of Command gain such a habitude,
Obedience after seems severe and rude.

Prusias. Speak all Araspes, say a Subjects name
Sullies their Acts, and does eclipse their Fame.
That though Fate does design 'em Crowns, they grow
Impatient, if her motions be too slow.
That they conceive that Father does them wrong,
Who makes them tarry for their Right too long.
That hence it is first they Factions seek to raise,
Gaining our Subjects hearts, by secret ways.
And then if still to us a life they spare,
Granting us a few days perplexed with Care,
Yet insolent and disobedient grown,
They leave us but the shadow of a Crown.

Atta. This might of others Sir, be the Intent,
And what would ask sit Counsel to prevent;
But here Advice like that would ill become,
You're a kind Father, he a virtuous Son.

Prusi* Were I not kind, how faulty must he prove?
His innocence depends upon my Love.
It Is only that makes his offense be none,
Or only that will rob me of my Crown.
For my experience tells me youth in vain,
Opposes Virtue to desire of Reign.
Ambition, is a thriving Plant, and finds
Its proper Soil in such heroic Minds.
How often is it writ in Characters of blood,
Man's Itch of Rule, could never be withstood.
For if that Passion once our hearts surprise,
Religion's dumb, and Nature has no Eyes.

Arasp. Sir, these reflections cannot sure be due
To that high Service, he has done for you.

Pru. Araspes, this I from his Service own,
Increasing of my Power heleaves me none.
He Is not my Subject now, unless he please,
Who makes me Reign, may Reign himself with ease:
In short, his Merit's grown so bright, and high,
Its dazzling Luster does offend my Eye.
For naturally we abhor the sight
Of those, whose benefits we cannot requite.
All his great Acts speak here at his approach,
And so his presence is a close reproach;
Which tells me, thrice he has these Temples crowned,
That all I can give him's a Spot of Ground
To these Dominions, which his conquering Hand,
And prosperous Valor adds to my Command.
Thus I must blush, though I prorogue my Fear,
And shame's a Burden Monarchs cannot bear.
Shame, in whose boiling Jealousies I find
Those pestilent disturbers of my mind,
Which tells me, that he may do what he will,
And Crowns are Sovereign Prompters to do ill.

Arasp. In any other whom you might mistrust,
I know what Policies were safe and just;
That Subject must be false, who is grown too high,
Although he never thought a Treachery.
Power Sir, in Subjects is a Crime of State,
Which prudent Princes, e're it be too late,
By wisely clipping of their Wings, prevent
From meriting severer Punishment.
But for the Prince, his thoughts from crimes are free
And all so just --

Prusias. Will thou his Surety be?
Think thou but he his utmost power will prove,
To revenge Hannibal, or save his Love?
Can he behold, and yet no force pretend,
A Rival Brother, and a Slaughtered Friend?
No, no, he does his Vengeance now pursue,
He has a fair Pretext, and Power too.
He, like a Sun, amidst my States do shine,
Whom Soldiers, and People think divine;
Sure of the first, he now the last will gain,
And fix his Powers on my small remain.
Which yet is not so low, and abject grown,
But he shall find it hard to make it none.
Yet I Will my passion with such cunning wear,
It jealous of his Honor shall appear,
And whilst I make his Glory my pretense,
I Will by obliging kindness, drive him hence.
But if he thus refuses to obey,
I shall be forced to try another way;
For what e're he has done, or I can fear,
I must preserve my State.

Arasp. Sir, he comes here.

SCENE II.
Prusias, Nichomede, and Araspes. Pru. Prince, what affairs could bring you
from the Field?

Nicho. My duty did to just Ambition yield.
First, for the Honor Sir, to tell you here,
That you have yet another Crown to wear,
Then to receive your kind Embrace, and be
A Witness, you approve my Victory.
Sir Cappadocia's yours, Arsaces Throne,
Your Orders by my Arm, has made your own.
And I Sir, thought it was but just to bring
Thanks due unto my Father, and my King,
For the great Glory you vouchsafed this Hand,
To make it Minister of your Command.

Prusi. You might have staid Sir, till I sent for you,
And by your Letters, paid me the thanks due;
Nor ought you to have sullied with a Crime,
That which your Victory adds to your Esteem.
To leave a Camp in any's Cappital,
But above all Sir, in a General,
Be sure, who e're but you, had thus come home,
Had changd his Laurel, for a Cypress Crown.

Nicho. Sir, I confess my easy thoughts gave way,
To those desires which my heart do sway.
I Have erred, but Love to you caused the Offense,
That Passion with my duty did dispense.
My guilt alone from my affection grew,
Else I had faultless been, but not seen you,
A Happiness to me Sir, so sublime,
That if for it, I Am fallen into a crime.
I hope 'twill find not strict severity,
If Love judge in you what it did in me.

Prusi. With a Sons Name a slight excuse will serve,
Him in his Fathers kindness to preserve.
I look upon you, as my sole Support,
Receive this day the Honor of my Court.
The Roman Legate who does audience crave,
Shall see what confidence in you I have:
You Prince, this great Ambassador shall hear,
And answer him, for you're indeed King here,
I Am but the shadow; my age craves no more
But Titles, for the Toiles I took before.
Which I e're long must likewise yield to Fate,
But yours is now the Interest of State.
Upon your self, then a true value set,
But midst your Greatness don't your Fault forget.
Which having made a Breach on Sovereign Power,
I to repair't, confine you to an hour.
After to morrow dare not to stay here,
Your Love by your obedience will appear;
And by example you will best maintain
Your power inviolate, when you shall Reign.
Go then, and by it to the people show,
Our greatest Subjects best know what they owe.

Nicho. Sir, I Will obey, though the Command be hard,
Yet give me leave to ask this small Reward;
Since my late Arms have opened a fair way,
That now with safety we may her convay,
And all Armenia for their Queen does wait,
Please to let me conduct her to that State.

Prusi. The Conduct of a Queen so great and fair,
Becomes your Due, as you are Bithinia's Heir;
But e're that I can send her to her Right,
You know some Ceremony's requisite.
Whilst for her Voyage I things fit prepare,
Go to the Frontiers, and attend her there.

Nicho. She without greater Equipage would go.

Prusi. That Wrong to Majesty I Will never do;
But see, the Ambassador of Rome comes here,
Answer him first, and then we will think of her.

SCENE III.
Prusias, Nichomede, Flaminius, and Araspes, Guard, Attendants. Flaminius. Sir,
e're I take my leave, Rome does command,
That I on her behalf make one Demand.
For Twenty years you to that Senate owe
For a Sons Tutorage, and you may know
By Virtues which his Education grace,
He in their Cares had not the meanest place.
'Bove all, he is instructed how to Reign,
Rome sais't and asks this Credence to obtain
From you, That as a Witness you esteem
Her Cares, you order now a Crown for him,
And you will offend her Sir, if you appear
To slight, what she thought worthy of her Care.
Let me then to the Senate Tidings bring,
Where it is that you design he shall be King.

Prusias. The Senates Cares for him shall never find
Me either, Sir, ungrateful, or unkind.
That he deserves a Crown I must believe,
Since Rome and you do that assurance give;
But Sir, you see a Prince his elder there,
By whose victorious Arms three Crowns I wear,
Who now a Laurel at my Feet does throw,
Some Glory to such worthy Acts I owe.
To speak for me, let him the Grace obtain.

Nicho. It Is none but you Sir, can make Att'lus Reign.

Prusi. Your Interest is most touched in this affair.

Nicho. But to preserve yours, it shall be my Care.
What Is Romes Concern? whence does the Senate take
Power, whilst you Live, and Reign over your Estate?
Live Sir, and Reign, whilst Nature grants you breath,
And leave me then to deal with Rome, or Death.

Prusi. We ought to have Respect for such good Friends.

Micho. Who shares in Life your States, your Death intends.
And of such Friends in Policy --

Prusias. Forbear!
I Will nothing against that Re-publique hear,
To such Allies you should more Reverence pay.

Nicho. Must I see Monarchs stoop to what they say?
Since Rome does for this Prince so much pretend,
Back Sir, to her, the mighty Present send;
If he to Govern does so well deserve,
He is a Treasure which they should preserve,
That he in time might that Republique grace,
Either in the Consuls, or Dictators place.

Flam. Sir, this Discourse so much in scorn of Rome,
Not from your Son, but Hannibal does come;
That proud Abhorrer of the Roman Name,
Has filled his heart with Hatred and Disdain.

Nicho. No, but he fixed it as a Maxim there,
To value Rome, and not her Greatness fear.
He was my Master, which with pride I boast,
And when Flaminius does revile his Ghost,
He must know, he may do me Reason yet
For that dear Life, nor ought he to forget,
That by his Fathers Blood; that mighty Man
His Triumphs over the Roman State began.

Flam. This is Reproach!

Nicho. Do not the Dead revile!

Prusi. Nor you by Contests me with Rome embroyl*
Speak plainly to the King as it is proposed.

Nicho. Well Sir, since then it cannot be opposed,
Attalus must Reign, Rome has resolved it so,
And since what she wills, must for Mandates go;
If this dull World will stoop to such a Sway,
It Is fit when she commands, Kings should obey:
But Sir, though Attalus a mind possessed,
Brave as the Greatest, virtuous as the best;
Though he with all the Merit were endowed,
Might grace a Throne, and make a Monarch proud;
Yet it is too much for you, Sir, to afford
Credit to it upon a Romans word:
If he such Virtue, and such Valor own,
They by their great Effects will best be known;
Give him your Army, let him try to do
That for himself, which I have done for you.
I Will lend him, Sir, if he think fit, my hand,
And gladly will march under his Command:
Let famous Scipio my Example be,
To justify such a Lieutenancy;
Who when Antiochus was by Rome dethroned,
The Orders of his younger Brother owned.
The rest of Asia will to him afford,
Sufficient Employment for his Sword,
Where he may surfeit his ambitious Breast.

Flam. Rome into her protection takes the rest;
Nor must you, Sir, your Conquests there extend,
Unless you will her mighty Powers offend.

Nicho. I know not what to this the King would say,
But I my self perhaps may Reign one day,
Then the Effects we of these Threats shall see,
Mean time, go, and those places fortify.
Prepare my now resolved Designs to oppose,
And in good time your Roman Aids dispose;
And if Flaminius shall their Leading take,
I Will find for him a Thrasimenes Lake.

Prusi. Prince, you my Kindness by these Taunts abuse,
You should a Legate with more Honor use;
The Sovereign Power which does to me belong --

Nicho. Command me either speak, or hold my Tongue.
I cannot say less for a King to those,
Who whilst he Reigns, would Laws on him impose.

Prusi. You offend me Sir,

Nicho. Just as Rome Honors you.

Prusi. Dare you with boldness your Offense pursue?

Nicho. Why? should I, Sir, behold your States confined,
And Stops to my victorious Course designed.
Should I stand still, and hear Rome threaten you,
And be so tame as not to threaten too?
But kindly thank the imperious Tongues, that dare
Restrain my Glories, and my Conquests bare.

Prusi. Excuse those Heats from youthful Blood do rise,
Reason and Time will render him more wise.

Nicho. Reason and Time opened my Eyes before,
And Age, Sir, will but open them the more,
If I had lived as Attalus has done,
And but imaginary Virtue known,
For what is without effects I must term so,
And that which does from admiration grow
Of mighty men, and Deeds does lamely teach,
It Is Imitation must Perfection reach;
If then my thoughts like his, had never soared higher,
Than only Romes great Heroes to admire,
They still would leave me the Bithinian Crown,
As from all times due to the elder Son.
Nor would have so much pressed my Brothers Reign,
Had not I taught your Armies how to gain:
But since by three Crowns joined to yours by me,
Too great a Power they do united see.
'Tmust be divided, and a Blot so gay,
Makes this Prince too well bred Sir, to obey.
To weaken me that he their Turn may serve,
He more than Alexander does deserve.
And I must quit to make his Title good,
My Birthright or the purchase of my Blood.
Thank Heaven my Fortune's past, and those to come
Have cast a Cloud of Doubrs, and Fears on Rome.
You, if you please, those Mists away may drive,
But never think I my consent will give.
The Master to whose Rules I all things owe,
Did not, Sir, teach me how to stoop so low.

Flam. By what you say Prince, it may well be guest,
You have not for Glory fought, but Interest.
And all those great Exploits which you have done,
Make but the Father Tennant to the Son.
The King's at best but Steward of your Right,
You for your self, and not for him did fight;
If those Dominions gained him by your Hand,
Are not to be disposed at his Command;
Those Romans Sir, whom you so much despise,
When they fight, fight for Glory, not for Prize.
Scipio, whose Courage you extolled so high,
Having overcome Romes stubborn'st Enemy;
Claimed not for all the Kingdoms he had won,
More than the mighty Name of African;
But Glory so sublime's not elsewhere known,
And such pure Virtue Rome can boast alone.
But Sir, as to those fond conceits of State,
Your Power, might Jealousies in Rome create.
Consult some graver heads, you will quickly learn,
Your Greatness is too mean for her concern.
Respect unto the King does now restrain
My saying more, but think of this again.
Let less smoke from your Martial Fires arise,
And you perhaps may see with clearer Eyes.

Nicho. When time this difference shall 'twixt us decide,
Perhaps you may not what I said deride.

Flam. Mean time, if you in fighting find such charms,
Press forward Sir, the Glory of your Arms.
For unto them no Progress Rome denies,
But Sir, she always succors her Allies;
If you don't know it, I give you this Advice,
Lest at first sight her Eagles should surprise?
But to the point -- all your ambitious Breast
Claims as your Right, shall be by you possessed,
Enjoy Bithinia, as it is your due,
Po^tus, Galatia, Cappadocia too.
That Birthright, nor that purchase of your Blood,
Shall not make Attalus his Title good.
But since you think they all to you belong,
Rome has not a Design to do you wrong.
A Crown is none of yours that Prince shall wear:
The Armenian Queen is still unmarried Sir,
[To Prusias. The Occasion does the thing it self propose,
You are her Guardian, and of her dispose.

Nicho. To make him King is this then the Design,
Without infringing any Rights of mine?
The Piece with very curious Art is wrought,
And long Intreagues have worthy Issues brought;
But since no Right to me you here afford,
As unconcerned I Will answer but a word:
Only take Care that Princess treated be
Like to a Queen, press not on that degree,
Nor do in her the Rights of Crowns invade,
Or if you do, I Will perish in her Aid;
Know that no place can Laws to Sovereigns give,
But they are at freedom wheresoever they live;
And in these Courts she is at her own dispose.

Prusi. Is this all you to that Request oppose?

Nicho. Yes Sir, that is all, save only that the Queen
Knowing what I can do, too sharp has been.

Prusi. Against her, Sir, in my Courts, what dare you do?

Nicho. Sir, I could speak, but can be silent too.
Only once more advise you, if you please
To Treat Laodice like what she is:
It Is I that beg it.

SCENE IV.
Prusias, Flaminius, Araspes, Guards, Attendants. Flam. What! opposed too here?

Prusi. This from a Lover is no Wonder, Sir:
That fiery spirit heightened by Success,
Hopes to her heart to hinder our Access.
We Will therefore seek that Passion to remove,
Kings Marriages are seldom made for love,
And I have Plots of Greatness, and of Fame,
Will quench Loves Fires, and blow out all it is Flame.

Flam. But loving him, she will be capricious too.

Prusi. If it should prove so, I know what to do.
But she is in fine a Queen, and that Degree,
Seems to require some Formality;
And though my Power over her be absolute,
And might constrain, yet Prayers will better do it:
You first as an Ambassador shall move
The Match, I Will second Rome; and if this prove
But to our Wish, it is better than Commands,
If not, she will be still Sir, in our Hands.
Come then let us go, and as this does succeed,
Take our Advantage further to proceed.

ACT III. SCENE I.
Prusias, Flaminius, and Laodice. Prusi. QUeen, since that Title carries so
much Charms,
It Is Loss, methinks should give you some Alarms;
Power if abused is seldom long preserved;

Laod. This great Advice shall by me be observed,
And if I ever Reign, Sir, you shall see
The Practice of such Noble Policy.

Prusi. Madam, to Reign you take but an ill way.

Laod. You may direct me if I go astray.

Prusi. You slight Rome, and too small respects you give
Unto a King, under whose Command you live.

Laod. If you your Regal Power would better know,
You Will find I pay to both, Sir, what I owe;
If I as Queen receive Ambassies here,
I must as Sovereign before you appear.
Assume a Power which I cannot own,
And in your own Estates affront your Throne.
I them refuse out of Respect to you,
Honors, that in Armenia were my due.
There I might Romes Ambass^dour receive,
And with fit splendour him an Audience give,
Their Answer, as a Queen to his Desires,
Or as the merit of the Cause requires.
Here Sir, I cannot the Mystery understand,
Out of Armenia having no Command;
For all that Heaven does me else where allow,
Is that I live and no subjection know;
Reign over my self, and have in all aboades
No Sovereign, but my Reason, and the Gods.

Prusi. Those Gods your Sovereigns by your Father gave
To me the Power which over you they have,
And you perhaps my one day understand,
W^at's a Kings Reason where he does command.
For proof of it, let us to Armenia go,
I Will bring you thither, but attended so,
That since you stand so much upon your State,
You must prepare to see it desolate.
Wars utmost fury through your Land shall Reign,
Dead ^odies shall make Mountains of a Plain.
And Rivers flow with Blood that I will spill.

Laod. Losing my States, I Will keep my Glory still,
All those vast mischiefs wherewith you me brave,
Shall Not make me subject, though they make me Slave:
My Life is yours, but not my Dignity.

Prusi. This mighty Courage will reduced be,
When all these Miseries to a Head are grown,
And Attalus sits on your Fathers Throne;
Then, then perhaps, that Heart may stoop in vain,
To ask his Hand to seat you there again.

Laod. If of your War such base Effects you find,
There must be a strange Change wrought in my Mind.
But Sir, perhaps you cannot get so far,
The Gods will of my Fortunes have a care.
And raise a man who may my Cause defend,
'^ainst all these Powers which Rome to you can lend.

Prusi. You build your hopes on my presumptuous Son,
But know that both of you to Ruin run;
Think of that, Madam, and resolve to be,
Either a Queen, or else Laodice.
For it is the last Advice I Will give to you;
Make Attalus King if you would Reign. Adieu.

SCENE II.
Flaminius, and Laodice. Flam. Madam, in short, Virtues perfection.

Laod. Follow the King, Sir, your Embassy's done,
Once more I tell you, that whilst here I live,
I cannot an Ambassador receive.

Flam. Madam, what I would say does proceed more
From one's your Friend, than an Ambassador:
From one that of your Safety has a Care,
Touched with the Ills you for your self prepare;
And whilst I do make this my sole Pretense,
You may admit me say with confidence;
Perfection of Virtue does require,
Prudence should be the Checque of your desire,
That of our Interest we should take a Care,
Consider in what times we live, and where,
Else height of Courage in a Royal Breast,
Is but a brutish Virtue at the best.
Which, (by false light of Honor guided) blinds
With its own Merits, the sublimest minds:
Leads Heroes to such a violent Course,
That they from Happiness themselves divorce;
Grasping those Ills, which they should have prevented,
They grow admired, only to be lamented;
Only hereafter with vain sighs to say,
I had Right to Reign, but Passions crossed my way.

Laod. Honor to me appears so fair and bright,
It cannot sure admit of a false Light;
Yet since it is out of kindness, that you do
Instruct me thus, as Friend I Will answer you;
And without asking by what jealous Fate,
You height of Honor prize at that low Rate;
I dare affirm you will by experience find,
Not brutish Virtue Mistress of my mind;
But such as will my Dignity defend,
And repulse those shall on it is Rights pretend.

Flam. Consider Madam, whom you do oppose,
The Wise, and Valiant, make not them your Foes
Which are too strong, but you a King incense,
Who makes increase of Rule his whole pretense;
Whose Army now upon your Frontiers lies,
Numerous, Strong, and skilled in Victories.

Laod. It Is true, he has a Potent Army there,
But such a one, Sir, as I need not fear;
It Is true* 't has with Success and Glory fought,
But when the King shall think by whom 'twas taught,
He Will either checque those Threats of using force,
Or find perhaps that he mistakes his Course;
And e're with it he does attempt my Throne,
Levy another to secure his own.

Flam. Though this were true, whilst in his Courts you live,
He Will force that Reason which you will not give;
He may do what he will, whilst you are here.

Laod. I, now you have said all that I could fear,
But out of my own Realms and in his Court,
Virtue against Tyranny may find support.
Sir, these Encroachments on the public good,
Are by the very people understood:
They know Prince Nichomede, and know the Queen,
Her obstinate Hate to him is plainly seen;
They see the King to all her Humors bends,
And can as well discern his dangerous Friends.
But for my self, whose Fall you think so nigh,
No humor makes me Atta^us deny;
But will to spare these Scorns he must receive,
Though I to him the Style of King should give:
I should regard him as a common thing,
One born to be my Subject, not my King;
My Vassals too, like me, would think him so,
And such Scorns generous hearts cannot undergo;
It Is out of Favor then I don't expose
Him, to such ignominious Slights as tho*

Flam. Madam, if this be so, it is you that Reign,
And over both Camp, and Court are Sovereign.
The King's but an Idea, and does bear
No Sway, but what you him in pity spare.
To receive Embassies is now your due,
Then as Romes Legate let me speak to you;
Or if that Name disgust you here, you may
Still as a private Roman, let me say,
That in these days the only way to Reign,
Is Romes Alliance, and her Aid to gain;
By it to Neighboring States, Kings can give Law,
Quiet their own, and keep their Foes in Awe.
No Monarch better does his Crown defend,
Than whom she graces with the Name of Friend:
By it is Attalus more King, uncrown'd,
Than those whose Temples Diadems surround.

Laod. I knew to what, Sir, this discourse would come,
Kings are not Kings longer than pleases Rome:
But if she have their Crowns at her dispose,
To Attalus she little kindness shows:
She with her Greatness does her self deceive,
Else she will not beg for him what she might give.
Or if that Prince so much her Favorite be,
Why sends she him without a Crown to me?
Why for a Subject strives she thus in vain,
To move that heart, which would a King disdain;
Stoopt he to Rome, or suffered her Commands,
Sullye the Supreme Power in his hands,
My Heart cannot my Glory, Sir, betray,
I scorn these Kings have learned how to obey.
And since at large you see what my Thoughts are,
Spare for the future both your Threats and Prayer.

Flam. But let me pity, Madam, your Mistake,
And beg you yet would from these slumbers wake;
Think but on Rome, think what her Power can do,
Let your own safety change those thoughts in you,
Carthage destroyed, Antiochus overthrown,
To be opposed she is too mighty grown.
Both Sea, and Land, unto her Mandates bow,
And of the World Rome is the Mistress now.

Laod. Mistress o^th' World! how would that Name affright,
Did I not know Armenia is my Right.
Did none to mighty Hannibal succeed,
Or he revived not in Prince Nichomede;
Or had he not to him the Secret shown,
How your redoubled Powers may be overthrown.
That valiant Scholar of a Man so great,
May put his Lessons, Sir, in practice yet;
Asia by three Crowns gained, six Battles fought,
Has proved the Conduct which that Master taught;
But these were Strokes he did for trial show,
The Capital may fear his Master-blow.
And he one day --

Flam. That day is yet far off,
The Gods of Rome do at such threatenings scoff;
That God whose shade at Cannae did appear,
And filled your conquering Hannibal with fear,
But see the Mighty Arm that must become,
One day so fatal to the Stars of Rome.

SCENE III.
Nichomede, Laodice, and Flaminius, Nicho. The Power Rome to her Agents gives
is large,
Or in my judgment you exceed your Charge.

Flam. Sir, if I act more than I ought to do,
The Senate may exact the Account, not you.

Nicho. Go then, and let my Flame the freedom gain,
After your State Intreagues to entertain
The Queen, whose thoughts perhaps suffer such force,
Under the mighty weights of your discourse,
That I the Expense of Time and Art must use,
T'expel those Maxims you would introduce.

Flam. The miseries ill placed Love might bring on her,
Made me for pity be her Counselor.

Nicho. Whilst you to pity her such Causes find,
You're an Ambassador extremely kind
But I must doubt those Counsels which you teach*
Madam, what Treacheries did this Roman preach?

Flam. You grow outrageous.

Nicho. Sir, I should do so.

Flam. Yet to Ambassadors Respect you owe.
All Countries to so sacred a Degree.

Nicho. Boast not so much your Rank and Quality;
Who Counsels, is Ambassador no more,
He has renounced the Charge he had before --
Did he his Answer, Madam, yet receive?

Laod. Yes, Sir, and such as became me to give.

Nicho. Then know, I prize you for no more than thus,
Attalus Agent, and Flaminius;
Or if you force me, I shall add to all,
The Poysoner of my Master Hannibal.
Behold what Honors you from me obtain,
If you would have more, go to the King complain.

Flam. He Will do me Justice, when I make it my Suit,
Or if he fail, yet Rome knows how to do it.

Nicho. You may of both go ask it if you please.

Flam. Prince, think what may ensue such wrongs as these.

SCENE IV.
Nichomede, and Laodice. Nicho. That Counsel for the Queen had been more fit,
My generous Thoughts now to her hate submit;
These thoughts to which my Justice did appeal,
And made me long her murdrous Plots conceal.
Till forced by new designs, I now did bring,
Zenon and Mithrobates to the King;
Who knowing something will surprise his Ear,
He does himself their informations hear.

Laod. I know not what, Sir, the event may be,
But this proceeding's not approved by me;
Nor what should force you to 't I cannot guess,
The more the Queen should fear, she fears the less;
And still the more she is disgraced by you,
She with more fierceness will her Hate pursue.

Nicho. Fain would she make my just Complaints appear,
The effects of my Resentments against her,
But that false Mask of Courage which she wears,
Shrouds but her Doubts, and does disguise her Fears.

Laod. Court Myst'ries are often so close and fine,
We but at Random of their Aims divine;
Whilst to defend me, Sir, you were not here,
Rome never did for Aitalus appear;
Nor to our Loves the least disturbance gave,
But now, whilst you but one days freedom have,
That day, and in your sight the Roman State,
Presses for an Alliance, which I hate;
So that there is nothing which I can perceive,
But urges you with speed to take your leave;
For whilst you still within their Power remain,
Strange Throngs of Fears over my Spirits reign.
The King dotes on his Wife, Fears, Rome, and you,
By your Renown have made him jealous too.
I scarce dare think what I am forced to say,
There Is too much Reason to expect foul play.
And you -- but I see Attalus appear,
What Projects, what Designs can bring him here?
Perhaps the search of me is his Intent,
If so, retiring I Will that Game prevent.

SCENE V.
Nichomede, Attalus, and Laodice. Atta. Madam, that converse was so sweet
before,
Now mine is interposed, is so no more.

Laod. Your importunity that is so extreme,
Me in my second self may entertain;
Knowing my heart my Spokesman he will become,
And answer you as he has answered Rome.

SCENE VI.
Nichomede, and Attalus. I Atta. If, Sir, my presence drives the Queen away
will retire --

Nicho. No, no, Prince you may stay,
For I have something still to say to you,
I laid by all these Rights that were my due;
The Thoughts of being destined to a Throne,
Resolving to maintain my Love alone;
And did request you would attempt her so,
And nothing to the Kings, or Romes Aid ow;
But I must either think your memory's bad,
Or you make no account of what I said.

Atta. You force me ill, Sir to remember this,
Whilst yet between us nothing equal is.
It Is true, you with some Rights of Birthright part,
But will you, Sir, give up the Princess Heart.
Those Virtues did create his Love, decline
And quit those Glories make you seem divine,
Six Battles gained, three mighty Kingdoms won,
The glorious Assault of many a Town.
Sir, with such Seconds, what can equal you?
Make then the Queen indifferent 'twixt us two,
Let her no more that Mass of Glory see,
Heapt on you by Success and Victory.
At once, Sir, let her from heart remove
Your mighty Deeds, your Virtues and her Love,
Or else against all that odds, let me prevail
To place the King, and Rome in the other Scale;
You may by what already is obtained,
Judge there will little by their aid be gained.

Nicho. Prince, this Excuse is very bravely framed
I see you have not lost all your time at Rome,
And if not Courage, have brought Cunning home.

SCENE VII.
Arsinoe, Nichomede, Araspes, Attalus. Arasp. It Is the Kings pleasure, Sir, you
him attend.

Nicho. What I?

Arasp. Yes, Sir, he sent me to that end.

Arsin. Prince, calumnies are easily overthrown.

Nicho. Madam, that Truth by me is so well known,
I wonder you instruct me in a thing
I never doubted --

Arsin. Why then did you bring,
Swelled with vain hopes which will your self ensnare
Zenon, and Methrobates from so far,

Nicho. I was resolved the whole should be concealed,
And you have forced it, if it be revealed.

Arsin. Truth forced it; and did over your Gifts prevail,
Such Undertakings, Sir, do often fail.
They both said somewhat more than what you taught.

Nicho. If you're displeased you that displeasure sought.

Arsin. I cannot be displeased at what I find,
Save that it blemishes so brave a mind,
That to those mighty Titles which you had,
We must the base one of Suborner add;

Nicho. Then to accuse you, they are subornd by me

Arsin. Prince, mines the trouble, yours the shame will be?

Nicho. And thus their Credit you would take away.

Arsin. No Prince, I rather stand to what they say.

Nicho. What have they said which your belief can gain?

Arsin. Two mighty Words which will augment your Fame.

Nicho. May not I know these words of so much weight?

Arasp. The King expects, Sir, your Attendance straight.

Arsin. From him you will hear them, go know his command.

Nicho. Madam, I now begin to understand
His love to you, chasing his love to me,
Will make you faultless, and me guilty be.
But --

Arsin. What? continue what that But does mean?

Nico. Two weighty words which I Will think of again.

Arsin. Those words of so much weight may not we know?

Nico. You Will hear them from the King, to whom I go.

SCENE VIII.
Arsinoe and Attalus. Arsin. My son, we Triumph; this great Nicomede
Begins to see how his Deceits succeed,
Those two Accusers by himself produced,
Which should to kill him, be by me seduced;
But to defame me were suborned by him,
Being startled at so foul and black a sin.
Both accused me, but did declare as soon
They to it by the Princes Gifts were won:
How mighty's Truth before the face of Kings,
It from the Souls dark parts, a secret brings.
That Presence does all Falsehood soon confound.
They Have lost their own, who sought my Fame to wound.

At. Madam, I joy to see such a Deceit
Has left your Glories yet more pure and great.
But put this Business to a closer Test,
And lay aside a while your Interest,
You Will less indulgence to a Humor give,
Makes you those Villains with such ease believe,
Their story twice this day has altered bin,
Subor'nd by you, and then suborned by him.
Against a man in whom such Virtues reign,
Such treacherous Souls should no belief obtain*
A confessed Traitor does not faith deserve.

Arsin. You're generous, Attalus, and I observe,
That even a Rivals Glory's dear to you.

At. If I Am his Rival, he is my Brother too,
We Are of one blood, and that blood in my veins,
Forbids me think him guilty of such stains.

Arsin. And does that blood of yours forbid you less,
To think your Mother is a Murtheress?
Your Mother, whose Destruction must be sure,
Unless his Loss her Safety does procure.

Atta. If I against him such witness scarce believe,
To them against you I can no credence give;
But yet your Virtue that is above all Crime,
May let me keep for him a just Esteem.
His Glory has those jealous Spirits raised,
Which are best pleased when Virtue is disgraced,
Who with base acts (spurred on by Envy) strive
To dark the Luster of so fair a Life
For me, if other minds by ours be known,
Or we can guess of their thoughts by our own,
I must presume that I in him shall find
The self same Maxims, and the self same mind.
With that great Rival I have fair play used,
Not sought his Ruin, nor his Fame traduced.
Those Aids I have, I did demand aloud,
And I think him with such brave thoughts endowed,
That Glory only his Designs inspires,
And but with Merit counters my Desires.

Arsin. Intreagues of Court you never yet did prove.

Atta. Should Princes not like Princes treat of Love?

Arsin. You treat and talk like one did little know.

Atta. Madam, I speak those Virtues Rome did show.

Arsin. From time perhaps you will the knowledge gain,
What Virtues should compose a Monarchs Train.
Mean time, although that he your Brother be,
Think that you have a Mother still of me,
And to defeat what you of this conceive,
Come see how far the King does it believe.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
Prusias, Arsione, Araspes. Prus. ARaspes, bring the Prince --
[Exit Araspes. And pray forbear,
Madam, those sighs which do my Bowels tear,
What need you thus with grief my Soul oppress?
Those Tears will nothing add to your Redress;
Nor is there need of them for your Defense,
Do I his Crimes doubt, or your Innocence?
Or in all I have said, what do you find,
Should make you think that I can change my mind?

Arsi. Ah Sir, what can repair those wrongs that be
Thrown on the Justest by base Calumny?
Virtue once charged with falsehood, can no more
Be made so pure, so bright as 'twas before.
Still some reproachful memory does remain,
Which to the brightest Glory brings a stain.
Whilst, Sir, Detraction harbors in your Court,
And People blindly would the Prince support;
Truth is too weak that Scandal to remove,
They Will think me freed from only by your love;
And if the least Spot rest upon my Fame,
If your worst Subjects but suppose the same,
Can I deserve your love? or do these Fears
Concern too little then to merit Tears?

Prus. You're scrupulous, and do too much mistrust
A Husbands love, that knows his love is just:
Glory by Calumny becomes more bright,
And from its darkness gains a greater light:
But here is the Prince, and you shall see to day --

SCENE II.
Prusias, Arsinoe, Nicomede, Araspes, Guards. Arsin. Pardon Sir, Pardon for our
only stay:
Pardon for Laurels are so fertile grown;
Pardon for the Supporter of your Throne,
Pardon --

Nico. For what Madam? Three Kingdoms won,
Which my death must devolve upon your Son?
For having so far pressed your conquering Arms,
That even Rome has taken the Alarms:
For having too much Regal Power sustained,
For that Renown I through the world have gained,
For having with Success and Glory fought,
Following the Maxims my great Master taught,
If I want Pardon choose amongst these my Crimes;
I know no more, Madam, unless you will join,
That Villains (by some others gained) betrayed
My easy Faith to credit what they said.
That having a clear Soul free from deceit,
I wanted light to see into their cheat.
It Is glory this, and not a crime for one
Who lives in Camps, where no Court Tricks are known;
Who scorning baseness, does not Thunder fear,
And knows no Stratagems, but those of War.

Arsin. Sir, I recant: he cannot guilty be,
Loading me with eternal Infamy,
He only does that common Hate obey,
Men to the odious Name of Step dame pay,
That Humor having in his heart took Root,
He does to me the strokes of Fate impute.
Does Hannibal his Master (having here
The Public Faith) give up himself to fear,
And rather trust his Life and Liberty
To black Despair, than Hospitality?
Those Terrors which his doting Soul invade,
Are only Plots by me beforehand laid.
Though he such Charms in Laodice espies,
It Is I make Attalus see with the same eyes,
It Is I the Aids of Rome against him gained,
And all that wounds him issues from this hand.
But though to blemish h'attempted have*
That Master to revenge, that Mistress save,
All might be pardoned in a Jealous Lover,
But I do something more in this discover;
'Twas not his Love that fostered this Design,
That I Am your Wife, Sir, is my greatest Crime.
From that Name only springs this Calumny,
For else, in short, what can he charge on me?
Have I since first your Armies he did command,
Denied the assistance both of Voice and Hand?
Have I refused him that Renown was due?
And when he stood in need of Aids from you,
And might have perished had they been delayed,
Who better pressed that necessary Aid?
Sent him quick Succors, both of Men and Treasur^*
And to supply his Wants, made it my pleasure;
You know this, Sir, but see he does return
For all that I have done, Reproach and Scorn.
To rob me of your love, has scandal used,
But still in Jealous Lovers all is excused:
I say it again --

Prus. What answer can thou make?

Nico. That the Queens goodness I must wonder at.
I will not say that with those Aids she gave,
By which she did my Life and Honor save,
And which with so much Pomp she does repeat,
She sought by my hand to make Attalus great,
And by this Arm of mine those Glories heapt,
Which this day tells us should by him be reapt;
By what she was to so much kindness wrought,
I leave to Heaven to judge, that knows her thought.
Those gods who heard the Vows she made for me,
Will of our Cause the best Deciders be.
Mean time, since the appearance is so fair,
She spoke for me, I ought to speak for her.
And for her interest, I must let you know,
In punishing two Villains, you're too slow.
Zenon and Methrobates ought to be
A Sacrifice to her wronged Dignity.
They both accused her first, and that scarce done,
They made her faultless, to accuse your Son;
But no way cleared themselves, their death is made
Too just, for having thus with Greatness played.
Offenses done to those of our Degree,
Can no way but by blood, repaired be.
For things unsaid, you cannot pardon give,
The Blot remains whilst the Impostors live,
And sparing them, you Royal Blood expose
Unto the malice of such Tongues as those.
The examples ill your Life in hazard lies,
If you let escape such spreading Calumnies.

Arsin. How Sir, would you destroy 'um for that truth,
Which Heaven did suddenly put in their mouth,
That truth which does restore to you your Wife,
Cancels her Scandals, and secures her Life?
That truth which did your Sentence, Sir, suspend,
Whilst for my Interest he does this pretend?
You have no Cunning, Prince, no Court tricks know.

Prus. Leave 'um, and of your own Defense think now,
Purge your self of a Crime so base and low.

Nico. I purge my self, you cannot Sir, think so,
You know too well those of my Dignity
When they grow guilty, aim at things more high;
Their Failings like their Glories are sublime,
And with their Power they do protect their Crime.
TO have raised your People, brought your Army here,
In an oppressed Queens In'trests to appear,
Snatched her from hence in spite of Rome, or you,
Or all that Attalus Rivalship could do,
And of their Tyrannies have stopped the course,
With all your own, and all Armenia's Force,
Had been fit Crimes for such a Soul as mine,
If I a breach of Duty could design.
Mean Spirits for Revenge use to defame,
And it is most properly the Woman's Game.
Against those Impostors then your Sentence give,
For my sake, or the Queens they ought not live.
At the last moment, men with Heaven make peace,
Truth best appears when Worldly Interests cease,
And those base spirits when about to die,
Perhaps may once more what they said, deny.

Arsin. Ah Sir!

Nico. Pray Madam* the true Cause declare,
Why you should press so hard these Lives to spare;
Or let us think you fear, lest dying they
Might out of conscience some close Plots convey.

Arsi. What hate than this Sir, can more cruel be?
Whilst I Would acquit him, he accuses me.
But Sir, perhaps my presence whets his Rage,
I by my absence may these Heats assuage,
And quieting a Spirit soared so high,
Prevent those Crimes at which he yet may fly.
I will not ask that Pity should procure
For my protection, you a Crown secure.
Nor do I seek my Attalus to save,
That he should half of your Dominions have.
If that your Roman Friends request it so,
I never did of their Intentions know.
They with their Powers may favor still my Son,
But I shall need no Aids when you are gone,
I love too well Sir, not to follow you,
When in these arms you pay to Fates their due,
Upon your Tomb my Love's last Duty, Grief,
At once shall sacrifice my Tears and Life.

Prus. Ah Madam!

Arsin. Yes Sir, when that time shall come,
Your Destiny and mine shall be but one.
Then since he never shall my Sovereign be,
What should I fear? what can he do to me?
All that I ask in favor of that Gage,
That Son, who does so much his hate engage,
Is that he may return to Rome, and there
Finish his days under that Senates care;
To whom you did commit his Youth, and be
A weak Remembrance of your love to me;
This Prince will serve you better than before,
When Jealousies shall wound his Thoughts no more.
And fear not Sir, though thus you Rome defy,
For all her Power his Valor is too high.
The Secrets of great Hannibal he knows,
From whom Rome did receive such mighty blows,
Africa and Asia yet admiring stand,
At those renowned Advantages he gained
For Carthage and Antiochus. But now
I go Sir, and the liberty allow
To your Paternal Goodness, to improve
The tenderness of Nature, and of Love:
I must not longer in your Presence see
My self unworthily reproached be.
Nor would I move your anger against one
Who is your Valiant, and your Conquering Son.

SCENE III.
Prusias, Nicomede, Araspes, Guards. Prus. This in my breast does strange
disorders raise,
Yet Nicomede, I cannot think thee base,
But let us yield somewhat to the Senates Prayers,
And strive to reassure the Queen who fears;
Passion for her, Affection pleads for thee,
I would not have this Hate eternal be.
Yet though I prize them, cannot in my breast
Cherish these thoughts only to break my rest.
I would make Love, and Nature, of accord,
Father, and Husband be; and in a word --

Nico. If I may with you any credit win,
Be neither one, nor the other.

Prus. What then?

Nico. King.
Bravely that Noble Character resume,
Passions in Monarchs hearts should find no room,
Father and Husband are respects not known
To a true King, who should regard his Throne,
And nothing more. Reign as you ought then, Sir,
And Rome will fear you more, than you fear her.
See but how she who dares to threaten you,
With apprehensions does my Loss pursue,
Hoping by losing me, strange things to gain,
Cause she foresees I shall know how to reign

Prusi. Thus then ungrateful i will thy counsel use,
Laodice, or my four Kingdoms choose.
'Twixt thee and Attalus thy King does make
This dividend, thou one of them must take
No longer Father now, but King i'^e be.

Nico. Were you as well King of Laodice;
And could with Justice such a choice propose,
I should ask time e're I my thoughts disclose.
But now to show my will to pleasure you,
Yet with respect not to offend her too,
I answer without frivolous delay,
To your intentions not to what you say.
To that dear Brother all^ those rights transpose
And let Laodice be free to choose.
By that see which is mine.

Prusi. Poor abject mind,
What fury makes thee for a woman blind,
Prefer'st thou her to all thy glorious fights?
To all thy valor to my Realm unites?
After such baseness, do deserve to live?

Nico. I follow that example which you give,
Prefer not you a woman to that son,
By whom those Victories those crowns were won?

Prusi. Do you see me renounce a crown for mine,

Nico. Do you imagine that is my design?
If to my brother what is yours I quit,
I nothing yield having no right to it,
For what can I unto your Crowns pretend?
Till death shall to your Right and Reign give end.
Pardon me Sir the Harshness of the Phrase,
Yet Fate in fine does limit Monarchs days
Your people then, wanting a King, will see
And choose perhaps betwixt that Prince and me*
Sir, our resemblance is not yet so nigh,
But dullest eyes a difference may espy.
And the old rights of birth have often been known*
To call an Exile back to fill the throne.
Or if your Subjects thoughts with yours agree,
Their's others brought under your yoke by me.
And though Rome still her jealousy pursue,
I can do for my self what is done for you*

Prusi. I Will take a course for that!

Nico. It may be done.
If to their Fears you sacrifice your son:
Else your Estates resigned unto that Prince,
Shall not be his, when you are gone from hence
It Is not in secret, that I this declare,
But speak it, that he may himself prepare.
He hears me now.

Pru. Ungrateful without blood.
I shall know how to make his titles good.
And you --

SCENE IV.
Prusias, Nicomedes, Attalus, Flaminius, Aras^es, Guards. Flam. If my affront
this anger draws,
Sir you might spare it to so light a cause
Rome may receive it with resentments due
But I have Friends that shall appease her too.

Pru. I Will do her right, to morrow from this hand,
Attalus shall receive supreme command:
I Will make him King of Pontus and my heir,
And for this Rebel who does so much dare,
Rome shall be Judge what his affronts deserve,
In Attalus stead, he shall for Hostage serve.
And to conduct him fit means shall be found,
So soon as he has seen his Brother crowned,

Nico. And will you send me then to Rome?

Pru. Yes Sir:
Go, ask your dear Laodice from her.

Nico. I Will go, i will go Sir, and shall there appear,
A greater Monarch then you dare be here.

Flam. Rome on your actions will true value set.

Nico. Gently ^^aminius we are not there yet
The Journey's long, and you may be deceived,
Things well begun are often ill atcheiv'd.

Pru. Away Araspes, double now his Guard.

Atta. Sir.

Pru. Thank Rome, and still have this regard.
That as her powers are the springs of yours,
It Is her support alone your power secures.
But Sir I now must your excuse desire,
(to Flaminius. The Queens disgusts some comfort do require.
I Will therefore go but leave him still with you,
Attalus once more give Rome those thanks are due.

SCENE V.
Attalus and Flaminius. Atta. What value shall I on these favors set
Which for the highest Merit are too great?
Your kindness does so far all bounds surpass
It has for my ambition left no place,
Yet Sir I needs must say my Fathers throne,
Would not complete my happiness alone,
That which most charms my spirit is that now,
The Armenian Queen may to my wishes bow.
The scepter which does make me worthy her --

Flam. Will not your passiion in her heart prefer?

Atta. Sir resolutions are not always one,
Our thoughts are often changed by occasion,
Besides it was her dying Fathers care,
She should be spouse to the Bithinian heir.

Flam. She being Queen, that will's no order now,
Further then it is her pleasure to allow,
Besides what can she in a Crown respect,
Given in that Princes wrong she does affect,
In you who rob her of a Friend so dear,
And of his fall the only Author are.

Atta. That Prince sent hence, to whom shall she complain
Who can against Rome, and us; her cause sustain,
For still I promise to my self your aid,

Flam. Cou^s^ls are different by occasions made
And to be plain, Prince i will not promise it,

Atta. At this Rate Sir you do confound me quite
By Sovereign power I am out wretched grown
If I must loose your Friendship with my crown.
But I Romes justice wrong in doubting thus
Have not you her orders?

Flam. Yes for Attalus.
For that Prince whom she from his Cradle kn^w*
But for the King of P^ntus must have new,

Atta. New orders Sir I cannot understand,
Why Rome should crush the work of her own hand
Unless she jealous of my power become.

Flam. What is it you say Prince, what is it you presume?

Atta. Only from you Sir I would comprehend
To what this unequallity would tend.

Flam. I would explain't and would recover you
From these destructive errors you pur^ue,
Rome courting for you the Armenian Queen,
Dispensed with Justice out of that esteem
She had for you, but since she does obtain,
You by more just and equal ways may Reign,
Glory does with her love to you dispense
And stops her acting further violence.
Then leaving that Queen to her own thoughts free
Your wishes must elsewhere directed be.
Rome will a sitting match for you provide.

Atta. But if that Queen consent to be my bride?

Flam. ^Twil hazard yet Romes Glory, and appear
As if some artifice of hers i^^ were.
Prince if my words can any credit gain,
You must endeavor to suppress this flame.
Or if of my advice you take no heed,
Stay for the Senates e're you do proceed.

Atta. Finding such coldness to such love succeed,
Rome loved not me, but hated Nicomede
And whilst to feed my Wishes she does Feign
Contrives my loss then when she makes me Reign.

Flam. Sir that my answers may not be too rude,
To these essays of your ingratitude,
Follow your humor, and your Friends offend:
Your Sovereign now, and all things may pretend.
Yet since it is so fresh you cannot disown
It Is Rome which this day seats you in a throne,
Remember what the King but now did say,
You will be nothing when you loose her stay.

SCENE VI.
Atta. Was it thus Attalus thy Grandsires reigned?
Will thou be King to have thy power restrained
By such a World of Masters? Ah I find,
Titles thus bought are irksome to my mind.
If for such Masters I must gain a Crown
'Twere better to be subject still to one,
And heaven has given him so great and brave
'Twere base to ^light him and become Romes slave,
Then to the Romans let us boldly show
Living amongst them we their Maxims know,
That all they do they to some ends apply
And all their Friendships yields to policy
Then in our turn let us be jealous too,
And act for us what for themselves they do.

The end of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Arsinoe, Attalus. Arsi. TO fear this Rout, I see no reason why
What Is in a moment born, as soon will dye
If darkness does increase its noise, the light
Will dissipate the vapors of the Night.
Less does the peoples tumult me disturb
Then to see, thou can not thy passion curb.
But led, by love so fruitless and so vain
Contemn'st not her, did thee so much disdain
Let that ungrateful from thy thoughts be chac't,
Now thou above her art by Fortune placed;
It was her throne, not eyes, thou should adore;
Reigning without her: love her then no more.
Offer that heart to more obliging chains,
Now thou art a King, Asia has other Queens,
Who would not scornful of thy sighs appear,
But pay those vows to thee, thou payest to her.

Attal. But Madam, if --

Arsin. Why if she should prove kind,
Theirs danger in it not seen by love that is blind:
As Soon as of her Crown possessed thou be
She will engage thee in her hate to me.
But Oh Gods! can her rage those limits keep.
Can thou in safety in her bosom sleep?
Think thou that her resentments will not prove
The sword or poison to revenge her love.
What is it a woman will not in fury do?

Atta. You with false arguments co^ceal the true.
The Senate who no powerful King would ^ee,
Feared that in Nicomede they fear in me.
To a queens bed I cannot now pretend,
Unless I will our sovereign Rome offend,
And since by it my Interests I betray,
To keep her favor still I must obey,
Those profound policies I understand,
By which she hastens to the worlds command.
If any Monarch grows too great and high,
His ruin must remove her jealousy.
Who makes a Conquest gives a wound to Rome,
Which cannot endure too great a power in one.
But always thinks just cause of war appears
Against those whose greatness may over shadow hers.
They who of Empire best the rules do know,
^ill make us all things to their orders owe,
Their power over Kings to that vast height is grown
All stoop to them, while they depend on none,
Madam, too well I am instructed thus,
By the fall of Carthage and Antiochus,
Least I be crushed like one of them, i will bow,
And reasons which I cannot oppose allow,
Fate this compliance from me now commands,
Since you give Nicomede into their hands,
That Ostage will secure my Faith or be,
A Lion ready to let loose on me:

Arsi. This is what I intended to advise
Bnt with this prudence you my soul surprise
These things may change, but let it be your care
To wink at Jealousies which useful are.

SCENE II.
Arsinoe, Flaminius, Attalus, Arsi. Sir is it not a conquest worth the pain
That from a Lover I belief can gain,
Make him with duty that fierce flame control
And seat again his reason in his soul,

Fla. Madam, 'twere well such conquests to pursue
And make this people reasonable too
It Is time their growing tumults to restrain
Or if you strive too late you will strive in vain,
On a weak Bas^s you those Fancyes found
Make you believe they will themselves confound
Rome uses not commotions to oppose
With such tame Resolutions as those
But when to popular rage they will sound retreats
That senate spares hot either prayers or threats
With resolution her affairs she steers
And from her seven hills drives her Mutineers.
Who would a horrible descent have made
If they had longer there regardless staid.
Left to the freedom to act what they please,
As you in this occasion give to these,

Arsi. Since Rome does so, we will to her rules submi^
Her great example does authorize it?
And the King shall -- but now himself is here.

SCENE III*
Prusias, Arsinoe, Flaminius, Attalus. Pru. The whole design does now to me
appear:
These Mutineers are by Armenians led,
And have declared that Queen to be their head.

Flam. I did at first that 'twas her plot suspect,

Atta. For all your cares she pays you this respect*

Flam. Sir now the times necessity obey,
Think what to do, talk does but breed delay.

SCENE IV.
Prusias, Arsinoe, Flaminius, Attalus, Cleone. Cleo. Nothing can now the
peoples rage withstand
Madam they with loud cries the Prince demand,
And have to such a height their Furies born
His two accusers are in pieces torn.

Arsi. Those victims paid unto the peoples hate
We with their Fury may our fears abate,
In those two Wretches blood, their hands being died
They Will think the Prince is amply satisfied.

Flam. Madam if this disorder had no chief,
I should incline to be of your belief.
The peoples rage no further might pretend
But formed designs have seldom such an end,
They press at what they have contrived before
The first bloodshed opens the way to more,
Fleshes, and hardens, does all horror ch^ce
And unto fear or pity leaves no place.

SCENE V.
Prusias, Flaminius, Arsinoe, Attalus Cleone; Araspes. Aras. The tumult toward
the Court sir makes such have,
And your false Guards do quit their Posts so fast,
I dying may my Loyalty assure,
But cannot lo^ge^ sir the Prince secure.

Prus. Lets go, lets go then to these rebels give
That head they seek to crown whilst wee'^ alive
From off the battlements we will to them throw
That precious object which they covet so.

Atta. Ah Sir.

Pru, Yes yes; it is thus we ought to give,
And they who so demand, should so receive,

Atta. But sir you will thus, these mutiners engage
To execute the utmost of their rage:
The Queen, Flaminius nor your Majesty
Cannot in any hopes of safety be.

Pru. What shall ^ to these Rebels then go down
And with their darling, yield them up my Crown,
There Is but that choice: their power outmatching mine
I must my Scepter or my Life resign.

Flam. Though there were justice in what you propose.
Can you sit of that Princes life dispose?
The power you could pretend ore him is gone*
He Is now Romes hostage and no more your Son.
And though a Father have forgot him quite,
I must remember what is the Senates right:
Which taking of his life you must invade,
Of which ^ will be no abettor made,
My Galley's now lie ready in the port
And theirs a private passage from the Court:
If then my counsels cannot this fall prevent,
To my departure first give your consent,
That thereby to the word it may appear,
Rome is more just then you, and less severe,
Expose not her to that contempt and shame,
To see her (...) in her own sight slain.

Arsin. Sir, (...) speak what ^ think's fit to do?

Pru. Yes for there can come nothing ill from you

Arsin. Heaven then to me, a sure device has shown,
To purchase Romes contentment and your own
Since sir his Galleys ready are to go,
He may with ease take home his hostage too.
The designs favored by the private gate,
But all things better to facillitate.
Show your self to the people appear kind,
And seem ^o their desires to be inclined.
And thas amuzing them give time till he
With all their hopes have gained the open Sea,
When if they force^ the Court, and ^iss the Prince,
Appear confused, say Rome has stolen him hence,
Promise your just Revenge shall pur^ue her,
And all that in it her assistants were.
Send after him with the approaching morn,
Flatter them with the hopes of his return,
And with a thousand Arts you may devise,
Still give advantage to the enterprise
How high so e're their transports now appear,
They Will attempt nothing whilst for him they Fear.
Or whilst they shall perceive all force is vain
Thus you assured safety may obtain:
But if they find him we must fly this state,
For at first sight they will him their King create.
You think so I believe si^?

Pru. Yes, I do?
And think the Gods sent this advice to you.
Then this what better could contrived be?

Flam. It gives you glory, life and liberty,
Besides Laodice's still Hostage here,
So that we nothing but delays can fear.

Pru. Then talk no more let us follow the advice.

Arsi. Araspes and three soldiers will suffice,
To guard him, numbers faithless often appear
I Will to Laodice, and secure her.
Attalus where run you.

Atta. I go to try, one project to appea^e the^^ (...)
'Twil add another to you^ stratagem,

Arsi. Think your concerns and mine are still the same
It Is for your sake if ^ in danger be.

Atta. Madam, i will perish or i will set you free.

Ar. Go then the Armenian (...) ^ee.

SCENE VI.
Arsinoe, Laodice, Cleone. Arsi. Must she who caused these harms unpunished be

Laod. No Madam, a fit punishment i will find,
For the small Faults of her ambitious mind.

Arsi. Speak you that punishment who know her crime

Laod. A small abasement will serve for a Queen,
To see her plots prevented may suffice.

Arsi. Say rather that her rashness to chastise,
Scepters and Crown she does deserve to loose:

Laod. Great spirits seldom such revenges use,
When they have once overcome they soon forget
And temperate bounds unto their anger set,

Arsi. Those that believe you would be soon content

Laod. Heaven gave not me a soul more violent,

Arsi. To raise up subjects against their Sovereign
To hazard Kingdoms to the sword and flame,
Into the Court to press their insolence,
Call you this Madam, little violence:

Laod. We Are both mistaken, Madam, and I see,
What I speak for you, you explain for me:
But for what touches me all cares are past
'Twas to serve you that made me hither have,
Least Majesty might suffer something rude
From the enraged fury of a multitude,
Send for the King and Attalus that I
In them preserve the Royal Dignity.
Which else an angry people may assail.

Arsi. Did ever pride over woman thus prevail
You that the cause of these disorders were,
You that in my own courts my Captive are
You whose blood shall atone these crimes and be
A victim to affronted Majesty.
With confidence dare thus your crime pursue,
And talk as if I should ask grace of you.

Laod. Madam, whilst you thus obstinate appear,
You don't believe it is I that command here*
That when I please you shall my victim be
Nor can this Tumult be a fault in me,
Your people are all guilty, and in them,
Justly these acts you may as crimes condemn.
But I Am a Queen and cannot be accused,
I^ for my sa^ety ^ these Rebels used:
Since ^ights of W^^r did never yet deny
Raising revolts against an Enemy
Who ^o^s me of my spouse, I mine may call

Arsin. I am so (...), and what ere befall,
Be sure when ere these Rebels force the Court
That moment with your head you answer for it

Laod. You Will (...) your threats, or on my tomb
Soon see a great and royal (...)
But Madam, could you ^o't although there were
Zenon and Mithrobates harbor'd here,
Think you my plots have bin so lamely framed
But I have likewise your domestics gained.
Find out a man that would his life betray,
That Is fond of dying, and he will you obey,
Yet over Bythinia^ pretend no sway,
Give me free passage to Armenia,
And that you may your own just power regain
Restore my spouse, whom you with hold in vain

Arsin. That spouse of yours, you may toward Rome pursue
Flaminius has him, he will restore him you.
B^t pray make haste, you will miss him else, for he
Is by this time at least a league at sea.

Laod. Could I believe't --

Arsin. You may do it if you please.

Laod. Fly then those furies which my spirits seize,
After the knowledge of an act so foul,
All generous thoughts are bann^s^^ from my soul
But rather as my hostage here remain,
Till with this hand, his freedom ^ regain,
I Will go and pluck him from the midst of Rome,
With all your subjects, and with all my own
At her own gates i will give her my Alarmes,
Supported with ten hundred thousand arms,
My rage shall their her tyrannies subdue.

Arsin. Then you will in fine reign ore Bethinia too?
And in that frenzy does possess you now
The King must of your Regency allow.

Laod. Madam i will reign, and yet not injure him,
Since he is but the picture of a King.
What need he care, who laws does here ordain
Or whether Rome or ^ for him does reign.
But see ^ have an other hostage yet.

SCENE VII.
Attalus Arsinoe, Laodice, Cleone. Arsi. Saws^^ thou them Attalus make their
retreat?

Attalus Ah Madam!

Arsi. Speak!

Atta. Ah Madam! what is done
Sums up all our preceding fears in one.
The Prince is escaped.

Laod. Then Madam fear no more,
I Am now as generous as I was before*

Arsin. Does Attalus delight to affright me too?

Atta. Hope not so well, as to presume it so,
Wretched Araspes led by his ill fate,
With his weak guard no sooner reached the Gate
Through which Flaminius had past to his fleet
But he fell wounded at the Princes feet,
And his few followers danted at that sight
Fearing the like fate took a speedy flight.

Arsin. But who, alas! could wound him in that gate?

Atta. Ten or twelve soldiers who as guards did wait
The Prince. --

Arsin. Ah son there Traitors every where,
Few subjects to their Masters faithful are,
But whence of this could you informed be

Atta. Araspes self did dying tell it me.
But hear what only causes my despair,
To join me with my Father I took care.
But all in vain for coming to the shore.
I saw that Monarch to his fears gin over.
In a small skiff after the Roman flee,
VV^o was perhaps no less afraid then he.

SCENE VIII.
Prusias, Flaminius, Arsinoe, Laodice, Attalus, Cleone. Pru. No, no, believe us
yet too brave to fly,
Here we will defend your gloryes or we will dye.

Arsi. Lets dye, lets dye sir, and not victims be
Unto the fury of an enemy.
It Is better we of our own fate dispose
Then leave it to the Pleasure of onr ^oes:

Laod. By this despair you that great man offend
Much more then when you him to Rome would send.
Since in my breast he such an Empire has
You should believe him worthy of my Faith,
I should disown him, had he not a mind
Revenge cannot animate nor passion blind.
Did not in him all that is generous dwell,
But here he comes see if I know him well.

SCENE LAST.
Prusias, Nicomedes, Arsinoe, Laodice, Flaminius, Attalus, Cleone: Nico. All Is
quiet sir, my sight did soon assuage
The peoples fury and has balm'd their rage*

Pru. Rebel in my own Palace do me brave

Nico. Rebels a title I shall never have:
I come not here sir to reproach your hat^,
Like Captives grown prou^ with their charge of state
Like a good Subject ^ bring that repose,
Which some ill interests sought to discompose:
Not that I would a crime to Rome impute,
She greatness follows with a close pursuit:
And her Ambassador did what he ought,
When to divide our growing powers he sought
But yet sir don't admit him to constrain,
To make her fear, let me your favor gain
Pardon your people, too much heat and rage
In which their love to me did them engage.
Pardon those faults they necessary thought,
Faults which to you have peace and ^af^ety brought
Forgive them you too Madam, and let me
A vowed admirer of your goodness be.
I know what 'twas made you my foe become,
A mothers love would fain have crowned her son.
I will my self assist in the design,
If you can yield he take his power from mine,

As^a. more conquests Madam does afford,
And to crown him you may command this sword
Choose but ore what place you would have him King
And to his hands I will that Scepter bring.

Arsin. Ah sir! why do you farther press this strife,
You Have in your power my glory and my life,
Cannot your ambition their receive an end,
But you will your conquest ore my heart extend.
Against such virtue there is no defense,
My breast to yield bleeds with impatience.
Join then this victory to three Kingdoms wo^
And I in you shall gain another son

Pru. Madam, then I yield too, and must believe,
My glories do in such a son revive,
But for this happiness which we receive
Man't we Prince know to whom our thanks to give

Nico. The Author of it would not (...) be known
But took a pledge from me, which I must own
'Twas here he said it should restored be.

Atta. Sir if you please accept that pledge from me

Nico. By this brave action you best let me know
That in your veins, true royal blood does flow
You are no more the ambitious sl^ve of Rome
But the Redeemer of a Crown become
Brother with my chains others off are throne,
The Kings, the Queens, Bythinias and your own,
But why conceal your self and save the state?
To see your virtue at the highest rate,
I thought against our injustice twould act best,
When not by this weak service prepossest,
And I on one of us revenged might be,
If I had judged ill of what now I ^ee.
But Madam

(to Arsinoe. Arsin. It Is enough I now divine.
What was the stratagem you would add to mine,
And sir my spirits pleased to see my Son
(to Nicomede Has stopped that course of ill, I would have run.

Nico. to Fla. Sir to be plain I think each generous mind,
Might happiness in your alliance find.
But with those Laws which Rome to Kings would give
We cannot from her the style of Friend receive,
Let us then have it free from servitude
Or Enemy will be a name less rude.

Fla: This I must leave sir to the Senates care
But thus much can with confidence declare,
That at the least Prince you will find that respect
Such an Heroic spirit can expect,
And if the name of friend they cannot allow,
They Will think to have found in you a worthy Foe.

Pru. Since thus our civil Jarrs composed are
To render thanks to heaven let us prepare
And that our happiness may firm become
Pray to the Gods to grant us peace with Rome.

The End of the Fifth and Last Act.
FINIS.
A True, perfect, and exact Catalogue of all the Comedies, Tragedies,
Tragi-Comedies, Pastorals, Masks and Interludes, that were ever yet Printed
and Published, till this present year 1671. all which you may either buy or
sell, at the Shop of Francis Kirkman, in Thames Street, over against the Custom
House, London.
A
Names of the Authors. Names of the Plays. Will. Shakespeare AS You like it. C
Will. Shakespeare All Is well that ends well. C Will. Shakespeare Anthony and
Cleopatra. T Will. Shakespeare Arraignment of Paris. P Ben. Johnson Alchymist. C
James Shirley Arcadia. P Will. Rowley All Is lost by last. T Geo. Chapman All
Fools. C Rich. Broom Antipodes. C Sir W. D' Avenant Albovine. T George Peele
Alphonuus Emp. of Germany. T Lord Sterling Alexandrian Tragedy. T Lord Brooks
Alaham. T John Webster Appius and Virginia. T Hen. Glapthorne Albertus
Wallenstein. T Hen. Glapthorne Argalus and Parthenia. P Shak. Marmion
Antiquary. C Tho. Randall Aristippus. I Tho. Randall Amyntas. C Arden of
Feversham. T Cyryl Turneur Atheists Tragedy. T John Jones Adrasta. C Not. Field
Amends for Ladies. C Dr. Maine. Amorous War. C Rob. Cox. Acteon and Diana. I
Torquato Tasso Aminta. P John Studley Agamemnon. T Sr. John Suckling Aglaura.
TC Leonard Willan Astrea. P Lod. Carlisle Arviragus and Philicia, 1st. part. TC
Lod. Carlisle Arviragus and Philicia, 2d. part. TC John Marston Antonio and
Melida. T John Marston Antonio and Melida. T Tho. May Agrippina. T Tho. May
Antigone. T E. W. Apollo Shroving. C John Lilly Alexander and Campaspe. C
Albumazar. C Henry Porter Angry women of Abington. C T. Lupton All for money. T
Nich. Trotte Arthur. T Lady Pembrook Antonius. T Albions Triumph M R. C.
Alphonsus King of Arragon. H Alarm for London. H R. B. Appius and Virginia. T
Andromana. T Andrea in Terence. C Adelphus in Terence. C Abraham's Sacrifice.
Albion. I Tho. Middleton Any thing for a quiet life. C John Wilson Andronicus
Comnenius. T John Dancer Aminta. P S. Tuke Adventures of five hours. C Jo.
Weston. Amazon Queen. TC Amorons Orontus. C Amorous Widow and wanton Wife. C

B
John Fletcher BEggars Bush. C John Fletcher Bonduca. T John Fletcher Bloody
Brother. T Ben. Johnson Bartholmew Fair. C James Shirley Bird in a Cage. C
James Shirley Ball. C James Shirley Brothers. C Tho. Heywood Brazen Age. C Tho.
Midleton Blurt Mr. Constable. C Phil. Massenger Bondsman. C Phil. Massenger
Bashful Lover. C George Chapman Blind Beggar of Alexandria. C Geo. Chapman
Bussy D'Amboys. T Geo. Chapman Bussy D'Amboys Revenge. T Geo. Chapman Byrons
Conspiracy. H Geo. Chapman Byrons Tragedy. T Sir W. D'Avenant Britannia
Triumphans. M John Ford Broken Heart. T Tho. Nabs Bride. C T. D. Bloody
Banquet. T Sr. John Suckling Brenoralt. T Battle of Alcazar. T John Day Blind
Beggar of Bednal Green. C Sir Rob. Howard Blind Lady. C Bastard. T Bottom the
Weaver. I Shakespeare and Rowley Band, Ruff and cuff. I Birth of Merlin. TC
Dut. of Newcastle Bridals. C Dut. of Newcastle Blazing World. C Killigrew
Bellamira ^her Dream. Earl of Orrery Black Prince. T

C
Will. Shakespeare COmedy of Errors. C Will. Shakespeare Coriolanus. T Will.
Shakespeare Cymbeline. T Will. Shakespeare Cromwels History. H John Fletcher
Custom of the Country. C John Fletcher Captain. C John Fletcher Coxcomb. C
John Fletcher Chances. John Fletcher Cupids Revenge. C Ben. Johnson Christmas
his Masque. M Ben. Johnson Cloridia, rites to Cloris. M Ben. Johnson Cynthia's
Revels. C Ben. Johnson Catilines Conspiracy. T Ben. Johnson Case is altered. C
Ben. Johnson Challenge at Tilt M James Shirley Changes, or Love in a Maze. C
James Shirley Chabot Admiral of France. T James Shirley Constant Maid. C James
Shirley Coronation. C James Shirley Cardinal. T James Shirley Court Secret. C
James Shirley Contention of Honor and riches. M James Shirley Cupid and Death.
M Tho. Heywood Challenge for Beauty. C Midleton and Rowly Changling. C Tho.
Midleton Chaste Maid in Cheapside. C Phil. Massenger City Madam. C Geo. Chapman
Caesar and Pompey T Alex. Brom Cunning Lover. C Rich. Brom Court Beggar. C
Rich. Brom City Wit. C Sir W. D'Avenant Cruel Brother. T Sir W. D'Avenant
Cruelty of the Spaniards in Peru. M Lord Sterling Croesus. T Dr. Main City
Match. C Tho. Goffe Courageous Turk. T Ant. Brewer Country Girl. C Dawbourne
Christian turned Turk. T Tho. Nabs Covent Garden. C Charles the 1st. T Tho.
Goffe Careless Shepherdess. TC Cupids Whirligigg. C John Kirk Champions of
Christendom. H Combat of Caps. M Sheppard Committe-man curried. C Rob. Mead
Combat of Love and Friendship. C Costly Whore. C Tho. Killigrew Claracilla. TC
Tho. May Cleopatra. T Sam. Daniel Cleopatra. T Tho. Carew Coelum Britannicum. M
Jos. Rutter Cid 1st. part. TC Jos. Rutter Cid 2d. part. TC Duke of Newcastle
Country Captain. C Geo. Sands Christ's Passion. T John Swallow Cynthia's
Revenge. T Tho. Preston Cambyses King of Persia. TC Tho. Kyd Cornelia. T
Caesar's Revenge T Cyrus King of Persia. T Rob. Wilson Cobblers Prophecy. C
Not. Woods Conflict of Conscience. P Rob. France Countess of Pembrook's Ivy
Church. P Cromwell's Conspiracy. TC Cruel Debtor. Commons Conditions. C Webster
and Rowly Cure for a Cuckold. C Abr. Cowley Cutter of Coleman-street. C Rob.
Davenport City Nightcap. TC E. M. St. Cecily, or the converted Twins. T Dut.
of Newcastle Covent of Pleasure. C Sir Rob. Howard Committee. C Tho. Porter
Carnivall. C Cheats. C

D
John Fletcher DOuble Marriage. C Ben. Johnson Devil is an Ass. C James
Shirley Dukes Mistress. TC James Shirley Doubtful Heir. TC Tho. Heywood
Duchess of Suff. H Phil. Massenger Duke of Millain. T Rich. Brom Damoyselle.
C Sir W. D'Avenant Drakes History, 1st. part. M Lord Sterling Darius. T John
Webster Devils Law-case. TC John Webster Duchess of Malfy. T Chr. Marloe
Doctor Faustus. T Tho. Ingeland Disobedient Child. I Geo. Peel. David and
Bathsabe. TC Lewis Machin Dumb Knight. C John Tateham Distracted States T John
Marston Dutch Courtezan C Darius story. I Barnaby Barnes Devils Charter. T
Doctor Dodipol. C Marloe and Nash Dido Queen of Carthage. T Damon and Pythias.
H Lod. Carlisle Deserving Favorite. TC Rob. Baron Deorum Dona. M Dick Scorner.
Destruction of Jerusalem.

E
John Fletcher ELder Brother. C Ben. Johnson Every Man in his humor. C Ben.
Johnson Every man out of his humor. C James Shirley Example. Tho. Heywood
English Traveller C Tho. Heywood Edward the 4th. 1st part. C Tho. Heywood
Edward the 4th. 2d. part. C Tho. Heywood Elizabeth's troubles, 1st. part. Tho.
Heywood Elizabeth's troubles, 2d. part. Phil. Massenger Emperor of the East. C
Chapman Johnson Eastward hoe. C Richard Brom English Moor, or the
Mock-marriage. C Geo. Peele Edward the 1st. H Chr. Marloe Edward the 2d. T
Edward the 3d. H Tho. Nals Entertainment on the Prince's birth day. I T. R.
Extravagant Shepherd. C John Lilly Endimion. C C. W. Electra of Sophocles. T
Every Woman in her humor. C Interlude of Youth. I Sir Will. Lower Enchanted
Lovers. P Enough's as good as a Feast. Bernard Eunuchus in Terence. C Rich.
Flecknoe Erminia. TC Lord Digby Elvira. C English Princess. T Tho. Thompson
English Rogue. C John Dreyden Evening Love, or the Mock-Astrologer. C Ben.
Johnson Entertainments at King James's coronation. E Ben. Johnson.
Entertainments of the Queen and Prince at Althrope. E Ben. Johnson
Entertainments of the King of England and King of Denmark at Theobalds. E Ben.
Johnson Entertainments of King James and Queen Ann, at Theobalds. E

F
John Fletcher FAlse one. T John Fletcher Four Plays in One. C John Fletcher
Faithful Shepherdess. P John Fletcher. Fair Maid of the Inn. C Ben. Johnson
Fortunate Isles. M Ben. Johnson Fox. C Tho. Heywood Fair Maid of the West, 1st.
part. C Tho Heywood Fair Maid of the West, 2d. part. C Tho. Heywood Fortune by
Land and Sea. C Tho. Heywood Four London Prentices. H Tho. Heywood Fair Maid of
the Exchange. C Midleton and Rowly Fair Quarrel. TC Tho. Midleton Family of
Love. C Phil. Massenger Fatal Dowry. T John Ford Fancies. C Shak. Marmion Fine
companion. C Fleire. C Will. Strode Floating Island. C Robert Green Friar
Bacon. C Fair Em. C John Marston Fawn. C Faithful Shepherd. P Fatal Union. T
Flowers. M Tho. Jordain Fancies Festivals. M Lod. Carlisle Fool would be a
Favorite, or the discreet Lover. TC Geo. Gerbier False Favorite disgraced. TC
D'ouvilly Will. Hemings Fatal contract. T Tho. Norton Ferex and Porex. T Tho.
Decker Fortunatus. C Free Will. T Gibb. Swinhoe Fair Irene. T Rich. Fanshaw
Faithful Shepherd. P Fair Maid of Bristol. Fidele and Fortunatus. Fulgius and
Lucrel John Heywood Four PP. I Rhodes Flora's Fagaries. C Feigned Astrologer. C
Astrea Bien Forced Marriage, or the jealous Bridegroom. TC

G
Will. Shakespeare GEntleman of Verona. C Ben. Johnson Golden Age restored. M
James Shirley Gamester. C James Shirley Gentleman of Venice. TC James Shirley
Grateful Servant. C Tho. Heywood Golden Age. H Tho. Midleton Game at Chess. C
Phil. Massenger Great Duke of Florence. C Phil. Massenger Guardian. C George
Chapman Gentleman Usher C John Cook. Green's tu quoque. C Ghost. C Gentle
craft. C Gyles Goose cap. C Abr. Cowley Guardian. C Sir John Suckling Goblins.
C John Lilly Gallathea. C Mr. S. Mr. of Art Gammer Gurtons Needle. C Geo.
Gascoign Glass of Government. TC Rob. Baron Gripus and Hegio. P Guise T B. J.
Guy of Warwick. T J. T. Grim the Collier of Croyden. C

H
Will. Shakespeare HEntry the 4th 1st. part.. H Will. Shakespeare Henry the 4th.
2d. part. H Will. Shakespeare Henry the 5th. H Will. Shakespeare Henry the 6th.
1st. part. H Will. Shakespeare Henry the 6th. 2d. part. H Will. Shakespeare
Henry the 6th. 3d. part. H Will. Shakespeare Henry the 8th. H Will. Shakespeare
Hamlet. T John Fletcher Honest man's fortune. C John Fletcher Humorous
Lieutenant. C Ben. Johnson Honor of Wales M Ben. Johnson Hymenae. M James
Shirley Hide Park. C James Shirley Humorous Courtier. C James Shirley Honoria
and Mamon. Geo. Chapman Humorous days mirth. C Tho. Decker Honest Whore, 1st.
part. C Tho. Decker Honest Whore, 2d. part. C Henry Glapthorn Hollander. C
Shak. Marmion Hollands Leaguer. C Tho. Nabs. Hannibal and Scipio. T Hieronimo 2
part T Hoffman. T Histriomastix. C Markham aad Herod and Antipater. T Sampson
How to choose a good wife from a bad. TC Sir VV. Lower Horatius. T Tho. Randal
Hey for honesty, down with knavery. C Tho. May Heir. TC Jasper Heywood
Hercules furiens. T John Stndley Hyppolitus. T John Studley Hercules Oetus. T
Edm. Prestwith Hyppolitus. T Hectors, or false challenge. C Henry the 5th. with
the Battle of Agen-Court. H S. S. Honest Lawyer. C John Day Humor out of
breath. C W. S. Hector of Germany. H Hieronymo 1st. part. T Rob. Tailor Hog
has lost his Pearl. C Sam. Daniel Hymen's Triumph. P Bearnard Heauton. in Ter.
C J. D. Hels higher court of Justice. I R. Head Hic and Ubique. C Earl of
Orrery Henry the 5th. H Sir Rob. Stapleton Hero and Leander. T Lod. Carlisle
Heraclius Emperor of the East. T Mr. Rat. Phillips Horace. T

I
Will. Shakespeare JOhn King of England. H Will. Shakespeare Julius Caesar. T
Will. Shakespeare John K. of England, 1st. part. H Will. Shakespeare John K. of
England, 2d. part. H John Fletcher Island Princess. C Ben. Johnson Irish
Masque. M James Shirley Imposture. TC Tho. Heywood Iron Age, First part. H Tho.
Heywood Iron Age, Second part. H Tho. Midleton Inner Temple Masque. M Rich.
Brom Jovial crew. C Sir W. D'Avenant Just Italian. TC Lord Sterling Julius
Caesar. T Cosmo Manuch Just General. T Chr. Marloe Jew of Malta. TC Tho. Randal
Jealous Lovers. C Sr. Ralph Freeman Imperiale. T John Marston Insatiate
Countess. T Jack Drums Entertainment. C John Day Iss^ of Guls. C Geo. Gascoign
Jocasta. T Rob. Davenport John and Matilda. T Fra. Goldsmith Joseph. T Jacob
and Esau. C Tho. Decker If this be'nt a good Play, the Devil's in it. C Jack
Straw's life and death. H James the 4th. H Joseph's afflictions Jack Jugler.
Impatient poverty. Will. Hemings John Evangelist. R. C. Jews Tragedy. T
Ignoramus. C Jovial crew, or the Devil turned Ranter. I John Dreyden Indian
Emperor. T Sir Rob. Howard Indian Queen. T Imperiale, in Folio. T

K
John Fletcher KIng and no King. C John Fletcher Knight of the buring pestle. C
John Fletcher Knight of Malta. C Ben. Johnson Kings Entertainment at Welbeck. M
J. D. Knave in grain. C King and Queens entertainment at Richmond. M Knight of
the Golden Shield. H Knack to know an honest man. C Knack to know a Knave. C
Knavery in all trades. C

L
Will. Shakespeare LOcrine Eldest Son of K. Brutus. T Will. Shakespeare Loves
labor lost. C Will. Shakespeare Leir and his three Daughters. T Will.
Shakespeare London Prodigal. C John Fletcher Little French Lawyer. C John
Fletcher Loyal Subject. C John Fletcher Laws of Candy. C John Fletcher Lovers
Progress. C John Fletcher Loves cure, or the martial Maid. C John Fletcher
Loves Pilgrimage C Ben. Johnson Loves Triumph. M Ben. Johnson Loves Welcome. M
Ben. Johnson Love freed from Ignorance. M Ben. Johnson Love restored. M James
Shirley Loves Cruelty. T James Shirley Lady of Pleasure. C Tho. Heywood Loves
Mistress. M Heywood and Brom Lancaster Witches. C Rich. Brom Lovesick Court,
or the ambitious Politic. Sir W. D'Avenant Love and Honor. C Lost Lady. TC
Peaps Love in it is Ecstasy. P Cosmo Manuch Loyal Lovers. TC John Ford Lovers
Melancholy. T John Ford Ladies Trial. C John Ford Loves Sacrifice. T Hen.
Glapthorn Ladies Privilege C Ant. Brewer Lovesick King. TC Landagartha. TC
Loves Loadstone. C Lingua. C Loves Dominion. P Abra. Cowley Loves Riddle. P
Rob. Gomersal Lod. Sforza. T VV. Cartwright VV. R. Lady Errant. TC Three Lords
and Ladies of London. C Chr. Marloe Lusts Dominion, or the Lascivious Queen. T
Ulpian Fulwel Like will to like, quoth the Devil. R. VVever Lusty Juventus. I
R. VV. Three Ladies of London. C John Tatham Love crowns the end. TC John Day
Law tricks, or who would have thought it. C VV. Chamberlain Loves Victory. C
Tho. Meriton Love and War. T John Lilly Loves Metamorphosis. C London
Chanticlers. C Look about you, or, run Red Caps. C Leir and his three
Daughters. H Tho. Lodge and Robert Green Looking-glass for London. H Liberality
and Prodigality. C Lady Almony. C Luminalia. M Laws of Nature. C T. B. Love
will find out the way. C Love Alamode. C T. Ford. Loves Labyrinth. TC Levellers
Levelled I Geo. Etherege Love in a Tub. C Rich. Flecknoe Loves Kingdom. TC

M
Will. Shakespeare MErry wives of Windsor. C Will. Shakespeare Measure for
measure. C Will. Shakespeare Much ado about Nothing. C Will. Shakespeare
Midsomer nights Dream. C Will. Shakespeare Merchant of Venice. C Will.
Shakespeare Mackbeth. T Will. Shakespeare Merry Devil of Edmonton. C Will.
Shakespeare Mucedorus. C John Fletcher Mad Lover. C John Fletcher Maid in the
Mill. C John Fletcher Masque of Grays Inn Gent. M John Fletcher Monsieur
Thomas C John Fletcher Maids Tragedy. T Ben. Johnson Magnetic Lady. C Ben.
Johnson Masque at my Lord Hayes House. M Ben. Johnson Metamorphosed Gypsies. M
Ben. Johnson Masque of Augurs M Ben. Johnson Masque of Owls. M Ben. Johnson
Mortimer's fall. T Ben. Johnson Masque of Queens. M Ben. Johnson Mercury
Vindicated. M James Shirley Maids Revenge. T Hen. Shirley Martyred Soldier T
Tho. Heywood Maiden head well lost. C Tho. Midleton Mad World my Masters. C
Tho. Midleton Mayor of Quinborough. C Tho. Midleton Michaelmas term C Tho.
Midleton More dissemblers than Women. C Will. Rowley Match at Midnight. T
Phil. Massenger Maid of Honor. C Geo. Chapman May Day. C George Chapman
Monsieur D'Olive C Masque of the middle Temple, and Lincolns Inn George Chapman
M Rich. Brom Mad Couple well matched. C Lord Brooks Mustapha. T Marcus Tullius
Cicero. T Barten Holliday Marriage of the Arts. C Tho. Decker Match me in
London. J. C. Tho. Nabs Microcosmus. M Tho. Randal Muses Lookingglass. C John
Mason Muleasses the Turk. T Mercurius Britannicus. C Geo. Wilkins Miseries of
enforced Marriage. TC John Studley Medea. T Not. Richards Messalina. T John
Lilly Mydas. C John Lilly Mother Boniby. C Sir VV. Lower Martyr. T Massanello.
T John Marston Malcontent. TC Rob. Baron Mirza. T Marriage of Wit and
Science. ^ Chr. Marloe Massacre at Paris. T Edw. Sherbouru Medea. T W. W.
Menechmus. C Lad. Eliz. Carew Marian. T Tho. Lodge Marius and Scylla. T John
Lilly Maids Metamorphosis. C J. C. Merry Milkmaids C Rob. Armin Maids of
Moorclack. H J. S. Masquarde du C'el. M Rich. Flecknoe Marriage of Oceanus and
Britannia Manhood and Wisdom. M Mary Magdalen's Repentance. Milton's Masque. M
M. W. Marriage Broker. C Earl of Orrery Mustapha. T Tho. Jordain Money is an
Ass. C Sir W. D'Avenant Man is the Master C Tho. Thompson Mother Shipton's
Life and Death. C L. Vis. Faukland Marriage night. T John Dreyden Maiden Queen.
C Mrs. Boothly Marcelia. Sr. Chapter Sidley Malberry garden. C

N
John Fletcher NOble Gentleman. C John Fletcher Nice Valor, or the Passionate
madman. C John Fletcher Night Walker, or the little Thief. C Ben. Johnson News
from the New World in the moon. M Ben. Johnson Neptune's Triumph. M Ben.
Johnson New Inn. C Sam. Rowley Noble Spanish Soldier. T Phil. Massenger New
way to pay Old Debts. C Rich. Brom Northern Lass. C Rich. Brom Novella. C
Rich. Brom New Academy, or the New Exchange. C Nero newly written. T Decker
and Webster Northward hoe. C Noble Stranger. C New trick to cheat the Devil. C
Nero's Life and Death. T New Custom. I No body and some body. H Nice wanton.
Sr. W. Lower Noble ingratitude TC John Dancer Nichomede. TC

O
Will. Shakespeare OThello, the moor of Venice. T Will. Shakespeare Old-Castle's
Life and Death. H Ben. Johnson Oberon the Fairy Prince. M James Shirley
Opportunity. C Midleton and Rowly Old Law. C Tho. Goffe Orestes. T Alex. Nevile
Oedipus. T T. Nuce Octavia. T W. Cartwright Ordinary. C Sr. Asten Cockain
Obstinate Lady. C Lod. Carlisle Osmond the great Turk, or the Noble Servant T L.
VV. Orgula, or the fatal Error. T Tho. May Old Couple. C Orlando Furioso. H
Old Wives Tale. Sr. Asten Cockain Ovid. T Sr. W. Killigrew Ormazdes. TC

P
Will. Shakespeare PEricles Prince of Tire. H Will. Shakespeare Puritan Widow.
C John Fletcher Prophetess. C John Fletcher Pilgrim. C John Fletcher Philaster.
C Ben. Johnson Pleasure reconciled to Virtue. M Ben. Johnson Pans Anniversary M
Ben. Johnson Poetaster. C James Shirley Politician. C James Shirley Patrick for
Ireland. H Tho. Midleton Phoenix. C Phil. Massenger Picture. C Sr. W. D'Avenant
Platonic Lovers. C Hen. Killigrew Pallantus and Eudora. T John Ford Perkin
Warbeck. H John Ford. Pity she is a whore T Rob. Dawbourne Poor man's Comfort. C
Lod. Carlisle Passionate Lovers, 1st. part. TC Lod. Carlisle Passionate Lovers,
2d. part. TC VV. Lower Phoenix in her Flames. T Geo. Gascoign Pleasure at
Kenelworth Castle. M Tho. Killigrew Prisoners. TC Sam. Daniel Philotas. T James
Howel Peleus and Thetis. M J. S. Phillis of Scyros. P Jo. Day Parliament of
Bees. M Pedlars Prophecy. C John Heywood Play of Love. I John Heywood Play of
the weather. I Play between Johan Johan the husband, Tib his Wife, etc. I John
Heywood Play between the Pardoner and the Friar, the Curate and Neighbor Prat.
I John Heywood John Heywood Play of Gentleness and Nobility 1st. part. I John
Heywood Play of Gentleness and Nobility etc. 2d. part. I Pinner of Wukefield. C
Philotas Scotch. C H. H. B. Plutus. C Patient Grissel. C Patient Grissel Old. C
Promises of God manifested. Promus and Cassandra, 1st. part. Promus and
Cassandra, 2d. part. Phormio in Terence. C Presbyterian lash. TC Robert Nevile
Poor Scholar. C Alex. Green. Politician cheated C Waler and others Pompey. T
Sr. W. Killigrew Pandora. C John Wilson Projectors. C Rich. Carpenter
Pragmatical Jesuit. C Dut. of Newcastle Presence. C Sr. VV. Killigrew
Princess, or Love at first sight. TC Tho. Killigrew Parsons wedding. C Tho.
Killigrew Pilgrim. T Mrs. Kat. Philips Pompey. T

Q
John Fletcher QUeen of Corinth. C Ben. Johnson Queens Masque of Blackness. M
Ben. Johnson Queens Masque of Beauty. M Rich. Brom Queens Exchange C Rich.
Brom Queen and Concubine. C Will. Habington Queen of Arragon. TC Queen, or
Excellency of her Sex. C Sam. Daniel Queens Arcadia. P

R
Will. Shakespeare RIchard the Second. H Will. Shakespeare Richard the 3d. H
Will Shakespeare Romeo and Juliet. T John Fletcher Rule a Wife and have a Wife.
C James Shirley Royal Master. C Tho. Heywood Royal King and Loyal Subject. C
Tho. Heywood Rape of Lucrece. T Tho. Heywood Robert E. of Huntindon's downfall H
Tho. Heywood Robert E. of Hunting don's death H Tho. Midleton Roaring Girl. C
Phil. Massenger Roman Actor. T Phil. Messenger Renegado. C Geo. Chapman Revenge
for Honor. T Tho. Goffe Raging Turk. T Tho. Rawlins Rebellion. T Cyril
Tourneur Revengers Tragedy. T Lord Barrey Ram Alley, or merry Tricks. C Return
from Parnassus. C Pet. Haustead. Rival Friends. C Ralph Knevet Rhodon and Iris.
P VV. Cartwright Royal Slave. TC John Tatcham Rump, or a Mirror, etc. C Reward
for Virtue. C Robin Hoods Pastoral Maygames. Robin Conscience Robin Hood and
his crew of Soldiers. C John Dover Roman Generals. Rivals. C Will. Joyner
Roman Empress. T Tho. Shadwel Royal Shepherdess. TC John Dreyden Rival Ladies.
TC

S
John Fletcher SPanish Curate C John Fletcher Sea Voyage. C John Fletcher
Scornful Lady. C Ben. Johnson Staple of News. C Ben. Johnson Sad Shepherd. C
Ben. Johnson Sejanus. T Ben. Johnson Silent Woman. C James Shirley School of
Complements. C James Shirley Sisters. C Tho. Heywood Silver Age. H Will.
Rowley Shoemaker a Gentleman. C Midleton and Rowly Spanish Gypsies. C Rich.
Brom Sparagus Garden. C Sr. W. D'Avenant Siege of Rhodes, 1st. part. M Sr. W.
D'Avenant Siege of Rhodes, 2d. part. M Tho. Denham Sophy. T Tho. Goffe Selimus.
T Tho. Nabs. Springs glory. M Swetnam the woman-hater Arraigned. C Sophister. C
Rob. Chamberlain Swaggering Damsel. C Sicelides. P I. G. Strange Discovery. TC
Suns Darling. P John Tateham Scots Figaries. C Geo. Gascoign Supposes. C Jos.
Rutter Shepherds holyday. P John Marston Sophonisba. T John Lilly Sapho and
Phao. C VV. Cartwright Siege, or Loves Convert. TC Solimon and Perseda. C
Stukeley's Life and Death. H Tho. Nash. Summer's last will and Testament. C See
me and see me not. C Wal. Mountague Shepherds Paradise. C Sr. John Suckling
Sad one. T Spanish Bawd. TC Susanna's Tears. Salmacida spolia. I Sr. Rob.
Stapylton Slighted Maid. C Stepmother. TC Sr. VV. Killigrew Selindra. TC Sr.
VV. Killigrew Siege of Urbin. TC Abr. Bailey Spightful Sister. TC Sociable
Compapanions, or the Female wits. Duchess of Newcastle. C Sr. Rob. Howard
Surprisal. C Sr. Martin-marall. C Geo. Etheridge She would if she could. C
Sullen Lovers, or the Impertinents. Tho. Shadwell C

T
Will. Shakespeare TEmpest. C Will. Shakespeare Twelf night, or what you will. C
Will. Shakespeare Taming of the Shrew. C Will. Shakespeare Troylus and Cresida. T
Will. Shakespeare Titus Andronicus. T Will. Shakespeare Tymon of Athens. T John
Fletcher Thierry and Theodoret. T John Fletcher Two Noble Kinsmen. TC Ben.
Johnson Tale of a Tub. C Ben. Johnson Time Vindicated to himself and to his
Honors. M James Shirley Traitor. T James Shirley Triumph of Peace. M James
Shirley Triumph of beauty. M Tho. Midleton Trick to catch the old one. C Geo.
Chapman Temple. M Geo. Chapman Two wise men, and all the rest fools. C Sir W.
D'Avenant Temple of Love. M Tho. Nabs Totenham Court. C W. Rider Twins. TC True
Trojans. H Jasper Heywood Thyestes. T Jasper Heywood Troas. T Tho. Newton
Thebais. T Chr. Marloe Tamberlain, 1st. part. T Chr. Marloe Tamberlain, 2d.
part. T Geo. VVapul Tide tarrieth for no man. C The longer thou live the more
fool thou art. VV. VVayer C Tom Tyler, and his Wife. I Trial of Chivalry. C Day
VV. Rowley and VVilkins. Travails of the three English Brothers. H Rob. VVilmet
Tancred and Gismond. T Rob. Yarington Two Tragedies in one. T Sr. Asten Cockain
Tr^polin supposed a Prince. TC Tyrannical Government. Thersytes. I S. Pardidge
Troades. T Trial of treasure VVebster and Rowly Thracian wonder. H T. VV.
Thornby Abbey. T Tho. St. Serfe* Tarugoes Wiles, or the Coffe-House. C
Tyrannick Love, or the Royal Martyr. John Dryden T Earl of Orrery Tryphon. T M.
Medburu Tartuff, or the French Puritan. C Tho. Killigrew Thomaso, or the
Wanderer. C

V
John Fletcher VAlentinian. T Ben. Johnson Vision of delight. M Phil. Massenger
Unnatural combat T Phil. Massenger Very Woman. C Phil. Massenger Virgin
Martyr. T Sir W. D'Avenant Unfortunate Lovers. T Tho. Nabs Unfortunate Mother.
T R. A. Valiant Welchman. T Fra. Quarles Virgin Widow. C Will. Sampson
Vow-breaker. T Valiant Scot. T W. Duk. of Newca. Varieties. C Untrussing the
humourous Poet C Sam. Brandon Virtuous Octavia. TC Sam. Daniel Vision of the
12. goddesses. M Unfortunate Usurper. T Edw. Howard Usurper. T Ungrateful
Favorite. T T. Porter Villain. T Sir. Rob. Howard Vestal Virgin. T

W
Will. Shakespeare WInters tale C John Fletcher. Woman's Prize, or the tamer
tamed C John Fletcher Women pleased C John Fletcher Wife for a month C John
Fletcher Wit at several Weapons. C John Fletcher Wild-goose chase C John
Fletcher Woman-hater. C John Fletcher Wit without money. C James Shirley Witty
fair one. C James Shirley Wedding. C Tho. Heywood Woman killed with kindness C
Tho. Heywood Wise woman of Hogsdon. C Sam. Rowley When you see me you know me.
H Will. Rowley Wonder a woman never vexed. C Midleton and Rowly Widow. C Tho.
Midleton World tossed at Tennis. M Tho. Midleton Women beware Women. T Tho.
Midleton No Wit Help like a woman's T Geo. Chapman Widdow's tears. C Wedding of
Covent Garden, or the Middlesex Justice of Peace Rich. Brom C Sr. W. D'Avenant
Wits. C John Webster White Devil. T Tho. Decker Whore of Babylon. C Tho.
Decker VVonder of a Kingdom. C Hen. Glapthorne Wit in a Constable. C Decker
and Webster Westward hoe. C Weakest goes to the wall. C Woman will have her
will. C Wily beguiled. C Wine, Beer, Ale, and tobacco. ^ John Marston What you
will. C Tho. Jordain VValks of Islington and Hogsdon C Not. Field Woman's a
weathercock. C Wit of a woman C Tho. Meriton VVandring lover TC Decker and
Webster VViat's History. H Rowley, Decker, and Ford. VVitch of Edmonton. TC
John Lilly Woman in the Moon. C Warning for fair VV^men. T Wealth and health.
T. P. VVitty Combat. TC John Dryden VVild Gallant. Edw. Howard Woman's
Conquest. TC Y
Will. Shakespeare YOrkshire Tragedy. T James Shirley Young Admiral. C Tho.
Midleton Your five Gallants. C

An Advertisement to the Reader.
IT is now just ten years since I Collected, Printed, and Published, a
Catalogue of all the English Stage Plays that were ever till then Printed; I
then took so great care about it, that now, after a ten years diligent search
and enquiry I find no great mistake; I only omitted the Masks and
Entertainments in Ben. Johnsons first Volume. There was then in all, 690.
several Plays; and there has been, since that time, just an hundred more
Printed; so, in all, the Catalogue now amounts to (those formerly omitted now
added) 806. I really believe there are no more, for I have been these twenty
years a Collector of them, and have conversed with, and enquired of those that
have been Collecting these fifty years. These, I can assure you, are all in
Print, for I have seen them all within ten, and now have them all by me within
thirty. Although I took care and pains in my last Catalogue to place the Names
in some methodical manner, yet I have now proceeded further in a better method,
having thus placed them. First, I begin with Shakespeare, who has in all
written forty eight. Then Beaumont and Fletcher fifty two, Johnson fifty,
Shirley thirty eight, Heywood twenty five, Middleton and Rowley twenty seven,
Massenger sixteen, Chapman seventeen, Brom seventeen, and D'Avenant fourteen;
so that these ten have written in all, 304. The rest have every one written
under ten in number, and therefore I pass them as they were in the old
Catalogue, and I place all the new ones last. I have not only seen, but also
read all these Plays, and can give some account of every one; but I shall not
be so presumptuous, as to give my Opinion, much less, to determine or judge of
every, or any man's Writing, and who writ best; but I will acquaint you with
some of my Observations, and so conclude. He that was the first Play-writer, I
find to be one Heywood, not Thomas, but John Heywood, who writ seven several
Plays, which he calls Interludes; and they are very old, being Printed with
the first of our English Printing; and he makes notable work with the then
Clergy. And indeed, by only reading of Plays, I find that you may be
acquainted with the humors of that present Age wherein they were written. Also
by Plays alone you may well know the Chronicle History of England, and many
other Histories. I could enlarge much on this account, having for my own fancy
written down all the Historical Plays in a succinct orderly method, as you may
do the like; I observe that Plays were not only written by professed Poets,
but, also by the best Scholars, and Persons of Honor and Eminency; especially,
in these last hundred Plays, and not only Male, but Female Writers; there
being seven of them in all, four whereof in these last hundred. Although there
are but 806. Plays in all Printed, yet I know that many more have been written
and Acted, I my self have some quantity in Manuscript; and although I can find
but twenty five of Tho. Heywoods in all Printed, yet (as you may read in an
Epistle to a Play of his, called The English Traveller) he has had an entire
hand, or, at least, a main finger in the writing of 220. and, as I have been
informed, he was very laborious; for he not only Acted almost every day, but
also obliged himself to write a sheet every day, for several years together;
but many of his Plays being composed and written loosely in Taverns, occasions
them to be so mean; that except his Loves Mistress, and, next to that, his
Ages, I have but small esteem for any others. I could say somewhat more of him,
and of all the old Poets, having taken pleasure to converse with those that
were acquainted with them, but will conclude thus; that as John Heywood was the
first English Play-writer, so in my Opinion, one Thomas Merito^, who writ two
Pamphlets, which he calls Plays, viz. Love and War, and the Wandering Lover,
was the worst. And although I dare not be absolute in my Opinion, who is the
best of this Age, yet I should be very disingenuous, if I should not conclude,
that the English Stage is much improved and adorned with the several Writings
of several persons of Honors; but, in my Opinion chiefly with those of the
most accomplished Mr. John Dreyden.

Yours, Fra. Kirkman.

Be pleased to excuse the misplacing of 4 of Ben. Johnsons Entertainments in F.
and the omission of this one Play.

Sr. Rob. Howard -- The Great Favorite, or, the Duke of Lerma. -- T

FINIS.

