A CONFERENCE Mr. John Cotton HELD AT BOSTON With the ELDERS of NEW ENGLAND,

1. Concerning gracious conditions in the soul before faith. 2. Evidencing
Justification by Sanctification. 3. Touching the active power of Faith.
Twelve Reasons against stinted forms of prayer and praise.

Together with The Difference between the CHRISTIAN and Antichristian Church.

Written by FRANCIS CORNWELL, a Minister of Jesus the Christ.

London, Printed by J. Dawson, and are to be sold Fr. Eglesfield, at the Sign
of the Mary-gold in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE AND True-hearted lover of his Country, Sir HENRY VANE
Junior, Knight, sometimes Governor of New England; Treasurer of the Navy
Royal, and a Member of the House of COMMONS.
Sir,
1 Cor. 14 27
THe Churches of the Saints and the World, may not be unfitly compared to the
Pearl and the Pebble: though both of one natural substance, earth; yet the
one of rare price, whose beauty is the sunbeames enclosed; the other wanting
it, is cast away as refuse. What makes the Saint more excellent then his
neighbor, seeing both are borne of flesh, both subject to the same
corruptions, sickness, death, but this? Ephesians. 4. 24
The Saints excellency is nothing else but the Image of Jesus Christ the Sun
of righteousness shining in him: For as the moon and stars derive their
light from the sun; 1 Cor. 1. 30
so all the wisdom, righteousness, holiness a Saint has, he deriveth from
Christ. Hence David the King does so prize their fellowship, All my delight is
in thy Saints, Psalm. 16. 3.
thine excellent ones that are in the earth, and them that excel in virtue.
Yea, it is a sure note of a Citizen of Sion, that he honors them that fear
the Lord: Psalm 15.
Whereas worldly men without grace, are rendered in his eyes as vile. Hence the
Spouse acknowledges that all her excellency comes from plantation; Let my
Beloved come into his garden, Cant 4 16.
and eat his pleasant fruit. Yea, Christ declares to Nicodemus that a
believers holiness comes from regeneration; Joh. 3. 5.
that in Christ he may only glory. How does the Lord discover this his
excellency to a believer, by his calling, till that time he lies amongst the
refuse of the world, Tit. 3. 3.
as foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living
in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. But then the kindness
and love of God to man appeared, Col. 1. 13.
by delivering him out of the kingdom of darkness, and translating him into
the kingdom of his dear Son. By which it is manifest, that he is one of
the Chosen generation, the royal priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
the holy nation, the peculiar people, whom he has called out of darkness
into his mavelous light. But when does the Lord discover the truth of his
calling to his conscience? Then when he gives him precious faith; for that
only distinguishes him form the world that lies in sin. Gal. 3. 22. The
Scripture concludes (father, mother, son, daughter, nay the infant that is
borne of the most holiest parents) all under sin, that the promise by the
faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. So that in that
same hour the Lord gives him faith, he gives him an evidence in himself,
Heb 15. 1.
that he loved him in Christ before he was borne, Rom 9 11.
before he had done good or evil, Act. 13. 39.
that he has justified him from all those things he could not be justified
by the Law, Heb. ^. 14.
that he has purged his conscience from all dead works, that his person is
accepted, his sin discharged, Act 26. 1^.
and he has a right to the purchased inheritance amongst them which are
sanctified. Thus the love of Christ revealed to dye for him, to take away his
iniquity, and reconcile him to God; the Spirit given to take away his heart of
stone, Eccl. 36. 25. 26.
gives him an heart of flesh, to cause to walk in his flatutes; yea, and
draws his heart to yield obedience to every commandment of Jesus the Christ.
The truth of this grace given, Right Worshipful, you can give a true
testimonial; for you were once in your natural condition as well as others,
till it pleased God who separated you from the womb, Gal. ^. 15, 1^.
to call you by his grace, to reveal his Son in you; you consulted not with
flesh and blood, but left your native soil, (...)
(in the persecuting times of the Prelates) choosing rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God (according to the light they had received) then to
remain in England and enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Yet there the
Lord exalted your Worship to be the Governor: And in that dawning light,
coming forth out of mystical Babylon, the Lord discovered much spiritual
knowledge, of the riches of his free grace in Jesus Christ, amongst you; you
being freed from the yoke of the TaskMasters here, the Bishops, that kept you
in bondage: you had liberty there to debate those Questions; which the naming
only of them here, would have rendered a man odious. But Satan that envieth
the peace of the Saints; stirred up a spirit of contention amongst you;
especially when these Queries came to be debated.

1 Whether there are any gracious conditions, or qualifications wrought in the
soul before faith? 2 Whether any man can gather his evidence of the assurance
of his Justification from his Sanctification? 3 Whether there be an active
power of Faith, and other gifts of grace in a Christian conversation?
The one side would not believe themselves justified, no farther then they
could see themselves work; making their Marks, Signs, and Qualifications,
the causes of their Justification.

The other side, laid the Evidence of their Justification, only by Faith in
the free Promise: for there are four things that makes remission of sins
perpetual to a believer.

First, The cause of Remission, the sacrificed Body of Christ on the Cross, or
accursed Tree; Heb. 10. 4. By one offering, he has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified.

Secondly, The ground is a free promise tendered to us from God; as to Adam, The
Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15. John. 3. 16. 1
John 4. 10.

Thirdly, The mean is, Faith apprehending it, Phil. 3. 9.

Fourthly, The Spirit of Christ sealing of it, Ephesians. 1. 13.

This truth revealed for the comfort of poor drooping Saints found great
opposition; But the good Lord, stirred up your gracious spirit, to countenance,
and defend them in the midst of strong opposition; and though you were
slighted, and set light by at the end of your Government, as not worthy to be
an assistant, with many other Instruments more; yet the good Lord stood by you,
and strengthened you, and delivered you from the hands of your opposers,
perserved you from the dangers of the Sea; and though at your return to your
Native Soil, you lived like Joseph, a while, in a despised condition, yet the
Lord raised you up to sit amongst Princes. So that though you were willing to
lose life, friends, preferment, for Christ; found you not then, life, peace,
joy, in the Lord Jesus, which was better to you, then all worldly amity;
according to his own promise, In the World you found affliction, but in him
you found peace: And when you were called to be a Member of the high Court of
Parliament, in our distressed and distracted times; the Lord made you an
^nstrument to defect the Treacherous plot of those two brethren in evil; Thomas
Lord Strafford; and William Lord Archbishop of Canterbu^y, that contrived the
destruction of our fundamental Laws, ratified by the Statute of Magna Charta,
by ^abouring to set up an Arbitrary Government, and keeping on foot a Po^ish
Army, consisting of Irish Re^els, and others, to compel the faith^ull, and
true-hearted Nobility, and loyal Commons of England, ^o subject themselves to
their illegal Taxations: hazarding the loss of he favors of the King,
Nobi^^ty, Parents, Friends, and Allies, together with those places of Ho^our
and Maintenance, the King of lemency had freely bestowed; ra^^er then his
Country should be ru^ed, and enthralled, by such accor^^ (...) a branch of that
goodly Caedar, under whose shade, the Innocent and oppressed, tender
Consciences that stand for a through Reformation, agreeable to the Word o^ God,
find rest) ever be forgotten, and left unrewarded; God forbid: I^ is worthy to
be written on a Pilla^ of Marble; and recorded in the Chronicle: that
after-ages may never forget to show kindness, and mercy to your Noble
Posterity that did not think your life (together with your nearest relations
dear unto you, so as to part with them, that you might purchase you Countries
Liberty; I cannot judge him Englands Friend, that enviet^ your honor, and
promotion; Se^ing you are (for the love you hau^ showed to Christ his Truth,
and poor Members, together with you^ Native Country) worthy of double honor.
Now (worthy Sir) seeing all your excellency is nothing else, bu^ the Image of
Jesus Christ, the Son of righteousness shining in you. Dis^ain not to receive
from the hand of a poor despised Instrument that presents this Treatise, The
Learned Conference of Master John Cotton, that he had with the Elders, at the
Bay of Boston in New England. Though I am the least of all Saints, not worthy
to be called a Saint; because ^n the time of the Prelates reign; I ^ided with
them, in persecuting the Faith of Jesus Christ, and imprisoning of his Members;
But did it ^gnorantly, through unbelief, and when the Lord pierced my heart
for it; I trembling, cried, What shall I do? The holy Spirit and the Bride
said, Repent, and be baptized in the name of Jesus, for the remission of
sins, and I should receive the gifts of the Spirit, etc. Then Noble Sir,
though I procrastinated it for a season, at last, I was not disobedient to the
heavenly voice, but arose, and was Baptized; For this cause, have been much
opposed by my old Friends, and Contrymen* But yet remain a Loyal
Cove^nanter, that stands for a Reformation in England, and Ireland,
a^greeable to the Word of God, and the best Reformed Churches: Seeing it is not
the voice of the Churches, but Christ in the Churches we Convenented to hearken
unto as Master Case his Sermon yet testifies.

First, To extirpate Popery; (which I apprehended at the taking of the
National Covenant) was that Doctrine of Antichrist, which does universally
oppose the doctrine of Jesus the Christ. Affirming what Christ denies; and
denying what Christ affirms.

Secondly, Prelacy, viz. The Government of Archbishops, and Bishops, and all
Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy, Root and Branch: as a
Plant the heavenly Father has not planted.

Thirdly, Superstition: viz. Whatsoever is supra Statutum, that has not the
word of God to warrant it.

Fourthly, Schism: Namely, from all those that teach, and co^^sent not to the
wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine
which is according to godliness; from such I must withdraw, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 5.

Fifthly, Heresy: Even from all them that deny that Jesus is the Christ; They
are Antichrist that deny the Father and the Son. Whosoever denies the Son,
the same has not the Father, 1 John 2. 22, 23.

Sixthly, That the Lord may be one: viz. Even the Lord Jesus the Christ, whom
God raised from the dead, and ^et him at his own right hand in the ^eavenly
places; Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and
every name that is named, not only in this world, but that which is to come:
And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things
to the Church, Which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all,
Ephesians. 1. 20, 21 22, 23.

Seventhly, And his Name to ^ one in the three Kingdoms: (that is, as I
conceive it) his power, authority, and royal Commission must be exalted in all
his Offices, to be the eternal King, eternal Prophet, and eternal Priest, in
all things appertaining to the conscience: seeing the loyal Spouse of Christ
has no Head, no Husband, no Lord, no Lawgiver, but royal King Jesus. That
we, and our posterity after us, may live in faith, and love; and the Lord may
delight to dwell amongst us.

For the keeping of which Covenant, I had rather choose to dye, then to deny the
faith of Jesus the Christ: Knowing, that he which confesses him before men,
him he will confess before his Father. But he which is ashamed of Christ, and
his words, in this sinful and adulterous generation, of him also shall the
Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the
holy Angels, Mar. 8. 38. Thus I desire, in the first place, Mat 22. 21
to give to God the things that are Gods; and, in the next place, render to the
high and honorable Court of Parliament, whereof your Honor is a Member, and
to your King, when the Lord shall put it into his heart to return unto his
Parliament, and to join with you, all your dues, Rome. 13. 7.
tributes, customs, fear, honor; and subject my self to obey all your just,
legal, and civil commandments: Knowing, that you set not up the Sword for
naught; ^ Pet. 2. 14
but to be a terror to them that do evil, and a praise, a guard and defense,
for them that do well.

Your poor Orator at the throne of grace, that earnestly prays, that the
Lord will give you, and the great Council of the Kingdom, wisdom and
prudence, to bear with tender Consciences, that desire to exalt Jesus the
Christ in all his Royal Offices, FRAN. CORNWELL.
Orpington, in Kent, the ninth Month, 1645.
To all the Churches of Jesus the Christ, coming out of Mystical Babylon,
gathered, or scattered, that follow the Lamb, the Lord JESUS wheresoever he
goes.
BEloved in CHRIST, Disdain not to Read this Learned Treatise of Master John
Cotton, of Boston in New England, out of any prejudice thou may take against
the person, or publisher of it. What if some judge him a Schismaticke? yet he
regards not man's rash censure: Seeing he can with holy Paul, that before his
Conversion persecuted the Church of God, safely Apologize for himself; Acts
24. 14. That after the way that you call Heresy, so worship I the God of my
Fathers; believing all things that are written in the Law, and in the Prophets.
Verse 15. And have an hope toward God, which you your selves also allow, that
there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just, and unjust. Verse
16. And herein do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of
offense toward God and towardman. But yet this I confess unto you, that I am
less then the least of all the Messengers of Christ; for I am not worthy to
be called a Messenger, or Minister; for I persecuted the Church of God, that
professed the Faith of Jesus the Christ; that held forth all his Royal
Offices, King, Prophet, Priest, according to his outward administration, in
admitting of Members into his Spiritual Kingdom: And sided with the
Antichristian Prelates, and Bishops, that denied, that Jesus is the Christ,
whom the Spirit of God calls Liars, and Antichristians, That denies the
Father and the Son, 1 John 2. 22. For though I, with the Antichristian
Bishops, and Priests, did acknowledge Jesus the Christ, our high Priest that
ever lives to reconcile us unto God; yet we have persecuted them that hold
his Kingly and Prophetical Office to be eternal, as well as his Priesthood,
and the gathering of his Church according to his Royal Commission, Matthew. 28.
18, 19, 20. Hence it is, that Christ divided, becomes no Christ to the
divider; this according to the Vulgar Latin, Solvere Jesum, to dissolve Jesus,
that is, to receive him only in part, and not in the whole, which is the
spirit of Antichrist. Now when the Lord opened the eyes of my understanding,
and convicted me of all the abominations I had done in my spiritual Captivity
under Antichrist, especially, that I had crucified Jesus the Christ in his
Members, being pricked in my heart, I trembling cried, what shall I do? The
Spirit and the Bride, the Lambs wife, said; Repent, and be Baptized in the
name of Jesus, etc. Then I gladly received the Word, was Baptized, and was
added to the Church, Acts 2. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. Yet, by the grace of God, now
I am, what I am; And having from some Friends, received this Learned
Conference, kept it by me as a precious Diamond of great worth, from which my
soul, through the great goodness of God, did reap much spiritual comfort.
And did wait, hoping that some learned and faithful friends of his, would long
ago have Printed a larger, and an exacter Copy of it: But finding none, (I
that am less then the least of all Saints) could not any longer conceal it,
but thought with my self, I was bound in Conscience to publish it, in this
learned Age, wherein there is so much enquiry after truth, for the benefit of
poor, hungry, empty, selfe-denying Spirits; rather then such a Learned Tract
of heavenly light, should always lie in the dust, as unseene, and forgotten.
For this cause alone, I have attempted (Courteous Reader) to present ^o thy
view this Learned Treatise; Not that I have any relation to that Lear^ed man;
nor any command from him ^o do it: But only in love, that this his Learned
Disputation might not be ^uried in silence. Read it therefore (Beloved in
Christ) not for his sake that publishes it; but for his sake that was ^he
Author of it; or rather for the God ^f Truths sake. For whose cause the Learned
Author contendeth for the Faith in these days, wherein the Gos^ell of Truth
has suffered so great Ec^lipses, through the rage and tyranny of the Popish
Antichristian Prelates and Priests.

Thine that earnestly desires to exalt the Lord Jesus the Christ, in all his
royal Offices FRAN. CORNWELL.

A Conference that Mr. JOHN COTTON had with the Elders of the Congregations in
New England, touching three Questions that are here discussed on: 1. Touching
gracious conditions, or qualifications, wrought in the soul before faith. 2.
Touching the gathering of our first evident assurance of our faith from
sanctification. 3. Touching the active power of faith, and other spiritual
gifts of grace in a Christian conv^rsation.

The first Question.
Quest. 1.
WHether there be any gracious conditions, or qualifications, in the soul
before faith, of dependence unto which, such promises are made?

We deny it, for these reasons.

Reas. 1.
If there be any gracious conditions, or qualifications, wrought in us before
faith of dependence; then, before we receive union with Christ: The reason is,

For by faith of dependence it is, that we first received union with Jesus
Christ, Joh. 1. 12.

But there be no gracious conditions wrought in us before we received union
with Jesus Christ;

Therefore there be no gracious conditions, or qualifications, wrought in us
before faith of dependence.

Minor.
If we cannot bring forth good fruit, till we be good trees; nor become good
trees, until we be grafted or united unto Jesus Christ; then there can be no
gracious conditions, or qualifications wrought in us, before we receive union
with Christ.

But we cannot bring forth good fruit, till we become good trees; nor become
trees of righteousness, until we be grafted into Jesus Christ;

Therefore there be no gracious conditions, or qualifications wrought in us,
before we received union with Jesus Christ.

The Proposition is clear of it self, that we cannot bring forth good fruit,
until we be good trees: Mat. 7. 18. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good
fruit. Nor can we become the good trees of righteousness, of the Lords
plantation, Isai. 61. 3. until we be grafted into Christ. Joh. 15. 4. As the
branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine, no more can
ye, except ye abide in me. Verse 5. I am the vine, y^^ are the branches; he
that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for
without me ye can do nothing.

A second proof of the Minor.
If there be any gracious conditions, or qualifications wrought in us before
union with Christ, then we may be in a state of grace and salvation, before we
be in Christ: But that cannot be: Acts 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any
other; for there is none other name under heaven given amongst men, whereby we
may be saved.

Reas. 2.
If there be any gracious condition or qualification in us before faith, then
there may be something in us pleasing unto God before faith:

But there is nothing in us pleasing unto God before faith; Heb. 11. 6. But
without faith it is impossible for us to please him: for he that comes to
God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him.

Object.
But there must be some saving preparatives wrought in the soul, to make way
for faith, and our union with Christ. For we must be cut off from the old
Adam, before we can be grafted into the new: We must be dead to the first
husband, before we can be married un^o another.

Answ. 1.
To works of creation there need^th no preparation; the almighty ^ower of God
calls them to be his people, that were not his people, 1 Pet. 2. 10. And by
calling them to be so, he makes them to be so. Romans 9. 25, 26. As he says
inHosea, I will call them, My people, which were not my people; and her,
Beloved, which was not beloved. Verse 26. And it shall come to pass that* in
the place where it is said unto them, Ye are not my people, there shall they
be called, The children of the living God.

Luke. 11. 21, 22.

Romans 7. 4. and therefore it is by the virtue of Christ's death we have
fellowship with Christ; and that gives the deadly stroke unto our first
husband.

The second Question.
Quest. 2.
WHether a man may evidence his justification by his sanctification?

The state of the Question is thus unfolded.

First, To take a man's sanctification, for an evident cause or ground of his
justification, is flat Popery.

Secondly, To take a man's sanctification, for an evident cause or ground of
that faith whereby he is justified, is utterly unsafe; for faith is built*
upon Jesus, the Christ, the head corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20. Mat. 16. 16. and
not upon works: A good work flows from faith not faith from them.

Thirdly, To take common sanctification, that is, such a reformation and a
change of life as flows from a spirit of bondage, restraining from sin, and
constraining unto duty, and sometimes accompanied with enlargement and comforts
in duty; yet without the sense and feeling of the need of Christ, and before
union with him, to take such a sanctification for an evident sign of
justification, is to build upon a false and sandy foundation.

Fourthly, That when a man has first attained assurance of his faith, of his
justification, by the witness of the Spirit of Christ, in a free promise of
grace, made to him in the blood of Christ, Acts 13. 38, 39. he may discern,
and take his sanctification as a secondary witness, or an evident sign or
effect of his justification.

The Question being thus stated, I propound the Question thus;

Whether a man may gather the first evidence or assurance of his faith, of his
justification, by his sanctification?

We hold in the Negative part.

The first Argument.
As Abraham came to the first assurance of his justification, so we, and all
that believe, as Abraham did; for he is made a pattern to us in point of
justification: Romans 4. 23. Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it
was imputed to him; V. 24. But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we
believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.V. 25. Who was
delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification.

But Abraham came to his first assurance of his sanctification, not from any
promise made thereunto, but from a free promise of grace; Romans 4. 18. Who
against hope, believed in hope, that he might become the father of many
nations: according to that which was spoken, So shall they seed be.V. 19. And
being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was
above an hundred years old; neither the deadness of Sarahs womb. Verse. 20.
He staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in
faith, giving glory to God. Verse. 21. And being fully persuaded that what he
had promised he was able to perform: Verse. 22. And therefore it was imputed
unto him for righteousness.

The promise was absolute, and free, So shall thy seed be as the stars of
heaven: this he believed with full assurance of faith, resting only on the
faithfulness and grace, and power of him that promised, Romans ^. 21.

Therefore we, and all the children of Abraham, come to our first assurance of
our Justification, not from our Sanctification, or from any promise made
thereunto; but ^^om the free promise of grace.

The secoud Arguwent.
No man can take his assurance of the faith of his Justification: But as God
will declare and pronounce him righteous in Christ Jesus.

But God will not declare, and pronounce us righteous in Christ, upon the sight
and evidence of our sanctification.

Therefore we cannot take the assurance of the faith of our Justification, from
the sight and evidence of our sanctification.

The Assumption is proved thus.
If God justifies us (that is) declares, and pronounces us to be righteous,
he does then declare his own righteousness, that he might be just; Then he
does not declare us to be righteous in Christ, upon the sight and evidence of
our sanctification, which is a righteousness of our own.

But when God justifies us, that is, first declares us, and pronounces us to
be righteous, he does declare his own righteousness; that he might be just.

Therefore he does not first pronounce and declare us righteous upon sight, and
evidence of our sanctification, which is a righteousness of our own.

The proof of the Proposition.
It will not stand with the righteousness of God to declare and pronounce a
man just, upon the sight of such an imperfect righteousness, as our best
sanctification is: And therefore when God declares, and pronounces us
righteous; He does it not upon any sight of any sanctification, or
righteousness of ours: But only upon the sight of the perfect righteousness
of Christ imputed unto us.

The proof of the Assumption.
That when God justifies us (that is, when he first declares, and pronounces
us to be righteous) he does declare his own righteousness, that he might be
just, as Paul speaks, Romans 3. 26. and the justifier of him, which believes
on Jesus.

And it is the speech of David, that when God declares himself to be just;
he declares only the sinnefulnesse of the Creature, Psalm. 51. 4.

The third Argument.
If the promise be made sure of God unto faith out of grace; Then it is not
first made sure to faith out of works.

But the promise is made sure of God to faith out of grace, Romans 4. 5. to him
that works not, but believes on him, that justifies the ungodly, his faith
is accounted for righteousness.

Therefore the promise is not made sure to faith out of works.

From the opposition of Grace, and Works, Romans 11. 6 And if by grace then it is
no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace.

(...)
The opposition stands not only between grace and works, but beweene grace
and the merits of works; now no man ascribes the assurance of faith in the
promise to the merits of works.

Answ.
The opposition stands not only between grace and the merits of works: but
between grace and the debt due to works; For so the Apostle Paul expresses
it, Romans 4. 4. Now to him that works is the reward not reckoned of graco, but
of debt.

If the assurance of faith of our justification, do spring from sight of
sanctification, it is by right of some promise made unto such a work, and the
right which a man has by promise to a work, makes the assurance of the
promise, but debt unto him: and then the promise is not sure unto him out of
grace.

The fourth Argument.
If when the Lord declares himself pacified toward us, he utterly shames us,
and confounds us, in the sight and sense of our unworthiness, and
unrighteousness; then he does not give unto us our first assurance of the
faith of our justification, upon the sight and sense of sanctification.

But when the Lord declares himself pacified toward us, he does utterly
ashame us, and confound us, in the sight and sense of our unworthiness, and
unrighteousness.

Therefore he does not first give us assurance of the faith of our
justification, upon the sight and sense of our sanctification.

The consequence is plain from the Law of Contraries: For, if the Lord shame
us with a sight and sense of sin; he does not then, first comfort and
encourage us, with the sight and sense of sanctification.

Minor is proved, Ezekiel. 16. 63. Romans 4. 5.

Ezekiel. 16. 63. That thou may remember and be confounded, and never open thy
mouth any more because of thy shame; when I am pacified toward thee, for all
that thou have done, says the Lord God.

Rom 4. 5. To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteousness.

The fifth Argument.
When sanctification is not evident, it cannot be an evidence of justification.

But when Justification is hidden, and doubtful, Sanctification is not evident.

Therefore Sanctification cannot be our first evidence of Justification.

Minor.
When Faith is hidden and doubtful, Sanctification is not evident:

But when Justification is hidden and doubtful, Faith is hidden and doubtful.

Therefore when Justification is hidden and doubtful, Sanctification is not
evident.

The first proof of the Major.
If Faith be the evidence of things not seen, then when Faith it self is
hidden and doubtful, which makes all things evident, what can be clear unto
us.

But Faith is the evidence of things not seen, Hebr. 11. 1.

Therefore when Faith it self is hidden and doubtful, Sanctification cannot
be evident.

The second proof of the Major.
If no Sanctification be true and sincere, but when it is wrought in faith:
then neither can it be evident. But when it evidently appears to be wrought
in Faith: Therefore when Faith is hidden, and doubtful, Sanctification cannot
be evident.

But no Sanctification is pure and sincere, but when it is wrought in Faith:
nor cannot be evident, but when it evidently appears to be wrought in Faith.

Therefore when Faith is hidden and doubtful, Sanctification cannot be evident.

The sixth Argumont.
Such a Faith as a practical Sillogisme can make, is not a Faith wrought by
the Lords Almighty power: For though Sillogismus ^i^em facit; yet such a faith
is but an ^umane faith; because the Conclusion follows but from the strength
of reasonings, or reason; not from the power of God, by which alone Divine
things are wrought, Ephesians. ^. 19. 20. Col. 2. 20.

But the Faith which is wrought by a word, and a work, and the light of a
renewed Conscience without the witness of the spirit; and before it, is such a
Faith as a practi^all Sillogisme can make.

Therefore such a Faith as is wrought ^y a word, and a work, or by the ^ight
of a renewed Con^cience, without the witness of the Spirit, and before it; is
not a Faith wrought by the Lords Almighty ^ower.

The proof of the Minor.
From the condition of all these ^hree; the Word, the Work, and the ^ight of a
renewed Conscience; they are all but created blessings, and gifts. Therefor
cannot produce of themselves a word of Almighty power. Because the Word without
the Almighty power of the Spirit is but a dead Letter; and the Work has no
more power then the Word; nor so much neither. For Faith comes rather by
hearing of a Word* then by seeing of a Work, Romans 10. 17. And the light of a
renewed Conscience, is a created gift of spiritual knowledge in the conscience.

Object. 1.
1 John 2. ^. Hereby we know that we know him, that we keep his
Commandments. 1. John. 3. 14. We know we have passed from death to life,
because we love the Brethren. Verse. 19. Hereby we know we are of the (...).

Answ. 1.
No better Answer need to be expected then what Calvin has given in the
exposition of these Scriptures; who thus expounds them.

Though every believer has the testimony of his Faith from his Works, yet
that comes in a posteriori probatione, a latter, or, secondary proof,
instead of a sign. Therefore the assurance of Faith (says he) does wholly
reside in the grace of Christ; and we must always, says he, remember, that it
is not from our love to the Brethren, that we have the knowledge of our estate,
which the Apostle speaks of, as if from thence were fetched the assurance of
salvation. For surely we do not know by any other means, that we are the
Children of God: but because he seals unto our heart by his Spirit, our
adoption of us out of free grace: and we by faith receive the assured pledge of
him* given in Christ's love. Therefore as an addition, or inferior help, for a
prop unto faith, not for a foundation to lean on.

Answ. 2.
Certain it is, that those which ^ohn writ unto, were three sorts of ^en: Old
men, Young men, and Babes: ^et there was none of them but did know their good
estate, by the knowledge of the Father; before they knew their good estat by
their brotherly love: For even of Babe^ (he says) they knew the Father, 1 John
2. 13. And therefore by the rule o^ relation, they knew their Son-ship^ and
adoption: And if it should be asked, how they knew it; John tells, By the
unction they had receive^ from Christ,^ Ioh. 2. 27. that is, b^ the spirit it
self, which taught them t^ know all things; which no created gifts of
Sanctification could do. Even in nature, children do^ not first come to know
their parents either by their lov^ to their brethren or by their obedience to
their parents; but from their parents love descending on them: So we loved him
because he first loved us, 1 John 4. 19* Herein is love, not that we loved God,
bu^ that he loved us, and sent his Son to bee^ propitiation for e^r sins, 1
Ioh. 4. 10.

Object.
If John could give sanctification for an evidence of adoption, to such a knew
their good estate before by the witness of the Spirit; this were but to light
a Candle unto the Sun?

Answ. 1.
Whether were it more absurd to light a Candle unto the Sun, or to light a
Candle to see to a man's eyes; Now faith is instead of eyes unto the soul: By
Faith Abraham saw the day of Christ, and rejoiced, though it were a far off,
Ioh. 8. 56:

Answ. 2.
The same Apostle says, that ^here be six Witnesses that give ^ight and
evidence unto our spiri^uall life in Christ: of which three ^e in heaven, and
three on the earth; and the Spirit in both: yet he did ^ot think it a vain
thing to give ^he water of Baptism, (as out of ^he death and resurrection of
Christ we receive the power to walk in new^esse of life, Romans 6. 3. 4.) as a
witness after four of the greater lights.

Answ. 3.
If you take Sanctification for a ^reated gift, it is indeed but a Candle to
the Sun. But when John ^aketh it, but to confirm faith, ^he means then,
the Spirit of God bears witness in it: or else the testimony of
sanctification, though it be a divine gift or work, yet it would not give a
divine testimony, nor increase divine faith; for the heavens and earth are
divine and supernatural works, yet they do not give divine testimony of the
Godhead, unless the Spirit of God himself do bear witness in them.

Therefore John giving sanctification for an evidence of a good estate, to such
as already knew it, by the witness of the Spirit, is not a lighting of a
candle to the Sun; but as the setting up of another window, though a lesser,
to convay the same Sun light into the house another way.

Object. 2.
In 2 Pet. chap. 1. from verse 5. to 10. the Apostle exhorts us, by adding
one gift of sanctification to another, to make our calling and election sure.

Answ.
Let Calvin answer for me: This assurance (says he) whereof Peter speaks,
by adding grace to grace, is not in my judgment to be referred unto
conscience, as if the faithful did thereby before God know themselves called,
and chosen; but if any man will understand it, of making of it sure before men,
there will be no absu^dity in this sense: Nevertheless it might be extended
further, that every one may be confirmed in their calling; by their godly and
holy life. But that is a proof, not from ^he cause; but from a sign, and
effect.

Object. 3.
There be many conditional promises in the Gospel, which are made to the gifts
and duties of sanctification; which are all in vain, if poor drooping souls,
finding such gifts, and duties of sanctification in themselves, may not take
comfort from them, according to the promise.

Answ. 1.
The conditional promises are made to poor drooping souls, no^ in respect of
such conditions, or as they are qualified with such gifts and duties of
sanctification; but in respect of their union with Christ, to whom the promises
belong, Gal. 3. 26, 28, 29. The fruits of such an union with Christ, such
duties and gifts of sanctification be, when they be sincere: otherwise, if the
promises were made to such souls, in respect of such conditions, then the
reward promised would belong unto them, not of grace, but of debt, Romans 4. 4. A
promise made to any condition, after it be made, it becomes due debt to him,
in whomsoever such condition is to be found: But therefore that such promises
might be of grace, they are made to us, not as we are endued with such and
such conditions; but as we who have such and such conditions are united unto
Christ. Whence it is, that such blessings offered in such promises, as they are
tendered to us in Christ, so are they fulfilled to us in Christ. Whereupon, we
look for the blessing, not in our gifts and duties; but in going still unto
Christ, for a clearer and fuller manifestation of him to us, and of comfort in
him. As for example, A thirsty soul, to whom promise is made that he shall be
satisfied; he looks not presently to be satisfied from his thirsting, nor
from any right his thirsting might give him in the promise; but he looks to
be satisfied by going unto Christ, in drinking more abundantly of him by his
Spirit, as Christ himself directs such drooping souls to do: and so we are
to make use of such kind of promises; Joh. 7. 37, 38, 39.

Answ. 2.
No man can see his gifts and duties of sanctification in himself, but he
must first have seen Christ by faith, the Spirit of Christ enlightening his
understanding in the knowledge of him. As in case of mourning, to which many
promises are made, No man can (with Evangelicall repentance) mourn over
Christ, and for himself, until the Spirit work faith; and by faith beholding
Christ, he has seen him crucified, and by him, Zech. 12. 10. So then these
conditions, and the promises made to them, do not give us our first sight of
Christ, nor the first glymyse of light and comfort from him; but rather our
sight of Christ, and some glympses of light and comfort from him, does beget
such conditions in us.

Answ. 3.
Such conditional promises are not in vain, though poor drooping souls have
found no comfort by them, and though they cannot suck present comfort from
them, and from their good conditions accordingly to them.

Reas. 1.
Because these promises being discerned in a Covenant of free grace made in
Christ, by them do work (if they were not wrought before) or at least confirm
such conditions in the soul. As when God promised them to send a Redeemer out
of Sion, unto them which turn from transgression in Jacob, Isai. 59. 20. the
Apostle expounds it, That Christ shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away
transgression from Jacob: which is as much as if he should say, He shall work
that condition which the promise was made unto. And this the Apostle makes to
be the meaning, and the blessing of the promise, according to the Covenant of
grace, Romans 11. 26, 27.

Reas. 2.
The promises are not in vain to such souls, in whom such good conditions are
wrought; because they direct them where they may find comfort, and satisfying
to their hearts desire: to wit, not by clearing their good conditions in
themselves; but by coming unto Christ, and drinking a more full draught of his
Spirit; as Christ directs thirsty souls to do, Joh. 7. 37. If any man
thirst, let him come to me, and drink. V. 38. He that believes on me, (as the
Scripture says) out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. V. 39. But
this he spoke of the Spirit, that they which believe on him, shall receive.

Object.
But why may not the holy Spirit breathe his first comforts into our souls,
even on such conditions? Is not this to limit the Spirit, who is free, and
blows where he lists? Joh. 3. 8.

Answ.
He does not breathe his first comforts in such conditions, because he lists
not: it is not his good pleasure to give us our first comfort (which is the
comfort of our Justification) from our own righteousness, before he give us
comfort in the righteousness of Christ. The holy Spirit in all his
dispensations to us ward, delights to receive all from Christ, rather then
from us; that so he might glorify Christ in us. The Comforter whom I shall
send to you, he shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and show it
unto you, Joh. 16. 14. Nor will he so much dishonor the righteousness and
grace of the Father of glory, as first, to pronounce and declare us justified
in the sight of our own righteousness.

Object. 4.
In Mat. 7. from verse 16. to 20. The tree is known by his fruit.

Answ.
True, to others; but not unto himself. If a tree could know it self, it
would first come to know it self, by seeing upon what root it grew, before it
came to see what fruit it did bear; Joh. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Object. 5.
But this Doctrine is new, it is not ancient, nor gray headed.

Answ.
The Doctrines of the Covenant of free grace are ever new; because they are the
Doctrines of the NewCovenant, which can never wax old: should it once wax
old, it would soon vanish away, Heb. 8. from verse. 8. to 13. though it be as
ancient as Abraham, yea, as Adam; for he had his first comfort and assurance,
in an absolute promise of free grace, Genesis 3. 15. yet it has ever seemed new
in every age.

Augustines Doctrine of Conversion, that is of grace, and not of free will.

Luthers Doctrine of Justification, that is of faith, not of works.

Calvin's Doctrine of Predestination, that is of grace, not of faith and works
foreseen: were all of them thought new Doctrines in their times; and yet all
of them the ancient truths of the everlasting Covenant of grace.

And surely, for this Doctrine in hand, Calvin is as clear, as my hearts desire
to God is we all might be; his words have been partly rehearfed before, in the
answer of some Objections; and partly in my large Answer to your Reply.

Bellarmine takes it to be the general Doctrine of the Lutherans, That,
Assurance of faith goes before works, and does not follow after, Institnt.
lib. 3. cap. 9. And Pareus in answer unto him, says, That though there be an
assurance that follows good works, yet the former assurance from the witness
of the Spirit goes before.

And seeing they that are the chief Reformers of the Protestant Assemblies, do
generally make sanctification a fruit of faith, and do define faith to be, A
special assurance of mercy in Christ; it must needs be out of controversy
their judgment, That a man receives his first assurance, not from his
sanctification, which they make to be an effect flowing from it; but from an
higher principle, even from the grace of the Father, and the righteousness of
the Son, the Lord Jesus Christ; and witnessed by the holy Spirit.

Bilney, in the Book of Martyrs, in his Epistle to B. Tu^stall, relating the
manner of his conversion, pro^ested, That when he had wearied himself in many
superstitious works of fasting, and Popish penance, he received at last his
first assurance, from that place in Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 15. he calls it a
most sweet word unto him, This is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be
received, Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the
chief. A word from an absolute promise, set home unto him by the ^oly Spirit,
without respect of any sanctification formerly wrought or seen in him.

Alas, how far are they mistaken, that think the contrary Doctrine has
been sealed with the blood of Martyrs?

Zancheus his judgment, though he was a godly and an eminent learned man, yet
I would not have named him, but that Mr. Perkins highly approved his discourse,
and translated it, as a choice piece, into his own Volume, which makes it
obvious to every godly Reader, that studieth Perkins learned Works; Page 429.
the first testimony, says Zanchey* and Por^ius, for him; by which God assures
us of our election, is that inward testimony of the Spirit, of which the
Apostle Paul speaks, Romans 8. 16. The Spirit witnesses to our spirits, that
we are the sons of God; And afterward coming to give some direction how a
man may know, whether this testimony be true, and proceeds from the holy
Spirit, or no.

He answers, Page 433. three ways.









work, or from any worthiness in us; but from the alone goodness of God the
Father, and the grace of Christ freely bestowed, and in this manner the Devil
will never persuade any man.



Answ. 2.
For the second Answer to the imputation of Novelty; Either (says John Cotton)
I am exceedingly deceived, or it justly falls upon the contrary Doctrine, and
they are much mistaken that think otherwise; I never read it to my best
remembrance, in any Author old o^ new: that ever a man received his first
evidence of the faith of his Justification, from his Sanctification* unless it
be one, (whom I met with within these two days) Printed within these two
years, that maintains our first comfort of Justification from
Sanctification. But ^enerally all our English Orthodox Teachers do oppose it.

Amongst the English Teachers one, for ought I know, did more ^dvance the
Doctrine of Marks and ^ignes, then Master Nicholas Byfield, ^^d yet he himself
professes, that ^umane reason cannot believe such ^reat things from God, from
any ^^ing that is in us: But only be^use we having the Word of God ^suring
such happiness unto such ^ lay hold upon the promises con^ined in it. So that
it is that which ^eedeth Faith, or as he calls it, ^e persuasion of our good
estates^et notwithstanding, says he, the ^^surance of Faith is much increased,
^^d confirmed by Signs; the for^er part of which speech, touch^^g the first
begettings of the assu^^nce of Faith, consents with me; the latter,
concerning the increasing and confirming of the assurance^ argues plainly his
consent, thu^ far also, that he meant not that the assurance of the Faith of
Justification should spring from Sanctification: But when he would have the
assurance of Faith to be increase^ and confirmed by the light (...) Signs, I
would not refuse it; (...) by the assurance of Faith, h^^ means only
assurance of Knowledge; or if he means only a^surance of Faith, properly so
called, I would then put in this ca^tion.

That then the Spirit of Go^ himfelfe had need, by his own t^stimony, to
reveal our justificat^on unto us, and Gods free grace (...) accepting us in
Christ: or else it (...) not Word, nor Work, nor t^^ light of a renewed
conscience, th^^ can increase, or confirm, the ass^rance of Faith of our
Justificatio^* But only the manifestation of Go^ Free Grace, in a Divine
testimony, ^atified by his own good Spirit.

The third Question is concerning the activenesse of Faith: The Controversy is
Quest. 3.
WHether Faith concur as an active isntrumental cause to ^ur Justification?

In the explicating of it, I must ^^rst speak what it is that justifies ^^ee.

First, we do believe, that in our ^ffectuall calling, God draws us to ^nion
with Christ, Ioh. 6. 44. Sheding abroad his Spirit in our hearts, Romans 5. 5.
And working Faith in us (...) receive Christ, Ioh. 1. 12. 13. And (...) live by
Faith upon him, Gal. 2. 20.

Christ, but we are accounted of God ^s his adopted children in Christ, Gal. ^.
26. Ephesians. 1. 5. and so are made heirs of righteousness, Galat. 3. 29. God
imputing the righteousness of his Son Jesus to us for our justification,
Romans 4. 23. 24. 25.

As we were no sooner alive in the first Adam, but we became his children, and
heirs of his transgression; God imputing the guilt of it to our condemnation.

Now in this we all consent; that in receiving the gift of Faith we are merely
passive.

But yet a double Question here arises.

Quest. 1.
Whether in receiving of Christ (or the Spirit, who comes into our hearts in
his name) we be merely passive?

Quest. 2.
Whether our Faith be active to lay hold upon the righteousness o^
Christ,before the Lord do first impute the righteousness of Christ unto us.

Our Reasons are.
Reas. 1.
If it be the spirit of Grace she^ abroad in our hearts, that does be^ get
Faith in us: then if we were Passive in receiving Faith, we are much more
passive in receiving Christ, or the Spirit of Christ, that begets Faith: for
if we have no life to be Active until Faith come; we have much less life to
be Active before the Cause, and root of Faith come.

But it is the spirit of Grace, shed abroad in our hearts, that begets Faith
in us, Zech. 12. 10.

Therefore if we be Passive in receiving Faith; we are much more Passive, in
receiving the spirit that begets Faith.

Reas. 2.
If we be active in laying hold on Christ, before he has given us his Spirit:
then we apprehend him, before he apprehend us: then we should do a good act,
and so bring forth good fruits, before we become good trees; yea, and be
good trees before we be in Christ.

But these are all contrary to the Gospel, Philip. 3. 12. 13. Matthew. 7. 18.
John 15. 4. 5.

Therefore we be not active in laying hold on Christ, before he he has
given us his Spirit.

Whether our Faith be active to lay hold upon Christ for his righteousness,
Quest. 2.
before the Lord do first impute the righteousness of Christ to us; we
conceive no.

For these Reasons.
If the sin of Adam were imputed unto us for our condemnation, Reason 1.
as soon as we were alive by natural life before we had done any act of life,
good or evil: then the righteousness of Jesus Christ is imputed unto us to
our Justification, as soon as we be alive unto God by Faith, before we have
done any act of Faith.

But the former is plain, Romans 5. 18. 19.

Therefore the latter also.

Reas. 2.
If our Faith be first active, to lay hold upon Christ for his righteousness,
before God imputes it unto us; Then we take Christ's righteousness to our
selves, before it be given unto us.

But that we cannot do, for in the order of nature, giving is the cause of
taking; unless we take a thing by stealth.

Reas. 3.
If our Faith be first active in laying hold on Christ for his rightenesse,
before God impute it unto us; then we do justify God, before he does justify
us.

For he receives the testimony which God has given of his Son: that God has
given us life in his Son, he has set to his seal that God is true, John 3.
33. And so he which justifies God, as others that do not receive the
testimony, condemn God of lying, 1 Ioh. 5. 10.

But we cannot Justify God before he justi^e us; no more then we can love him
before he first loved us, 1 Ioh. 4. 19.

Reas. 4.
If our Faith be first active to lay hold on Christ for his righteousness,
before God impute his righteousness unto us: Then we are righteous men to act,
and work out our own righteousness, before we be righteous, by the imputed
righteousness of Christ.

But we be to our best acts and works of righteousness, unrighteous, till our
sins be pardoned, which is not until the righteousness of Christ be
imputed to us.

Reason 5.
In the order of nature, the object is before the act that is conversant about
it: Therefore it is in the order of nature, before the act of our Faith.

Object. 1.
To believe on the name of Christ is an act of Faith; To believe on the name of
Christ, is to receive Christ, John 1. 12.

Therefore the receiving of Christ is by an act of Faith.

Answ.
The place in John, upon which the weight of this Argument lies, says no
more, but that they which received Christ in the second Aorist in the time
past, do believe on his name in the time present. Which we willingly grant;
that they who receive Christ, their faith becomes active through him to
believe in his name, that so they might receive him, and his righteousness.

Object. 2.
We are justified by Faith, Romans 3. 28.

Answ.
When we are said to be justified by Faith; It is by the righteousness of
Christ imputed unto us.

Object. 3.
Abraham's To credere, his act of believing, was imputed unto him for
righteousness, Rom 4. 3.

Answ.
It is taken generally amongst the Learned, for a singular opinion of Master
Wotton, that To credere, the act of believing should be imputed for
rigteousnesse.

For, indeed, the act of believing is neither a righteousness according unto
the Law; For the Law is perfect, Psalm. 19. 7. Nor a righteousness according
unto the Gospel; For the act of believing is an act of our own, though given
of grace: But the righteousness of the Gospel is not an act of our own And
therefore Paul desires that he may be found in Christ, not having his own
righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3. 9. to wit, the
righteousness of Christ imputed.

Object. 4.
But this Doctrine is opposite unto the stream of all the Learned; a passive
Faith is not heard of amongst men, and they do genenerally make Faith an
isntrumental cause of their Justification.

Answ.
A passive Faith is rarely hard of out of my mouth, but yet the thing meant by
it, is never rare in the writings of the learned, nor sometimes the word
passive Faith.

Two things are meant by the word of Faith, and may be said to be passive in
our Justification, in a double respect.

called passive, before it puts forth any act, and we are justified as soon
as by an habit of faith we are alive in Christ; in the first moment of our
conversion, before Faith has put forth any act: as we were all guilty of Adams
sin, before we were active to reach forth any consent unto it.

Christ, to fetch Justification from him, till Christ have first laid hold on
us, and imputed his righteousness to us; and declared it unto us by his
Spirit, in a free promise of Grace: And then Faith becomes active, actually
to receive Christ's righteousness; and actually to believe on it, either by way
of dependence, or assurance.

For the truth is, seengi we are not justified, neither as it is a gift in us;
nor as it is an acting and working from us; but in regard of his object, the
righteousness of Christ whch it receives.

Therefore which way soever Faith may receive Christ first or last, by the same
way we may be justified by it.

Now Faith of it self, even the habit of Faith is an emptying grace, and so is
as an empty vessel, fit to receive Christ and his righteousness.

And both the act of Faith, whether of dependence on Christ, or of our assrance
in Christ, carries us out of our selves unto him, and so makes us fit to
receive Christ, and his righteousness.

Thus I have explained what I mean by a passive Faith.

Let me show you, that neither the Word, nor the naming of it, is an untruth
from our best learned men of eminent worth for parts and abilities.

Calvine in his Institutions, Lib. 3. cap. 3. Sect. 5. Quoad Justificationem.

Ursinus in his Catechism, Quest. 60, Sect. 5. Potius Deum primum.

Chemierius de fide, lib. 13. Chap. 6. Verissimum esse duo.

Doctor Amesius in Medullam Theologiae, lib. 1. Cap. 26. Recepti Christi.

Paul Banes on the Ephesians 2. Vivificant. He quicken us, since he acknowledge
a passive receiving of Christ, he must acknowledge a passive Faith: for there
is no receiving of Christ, but by Faith.

In a Book of choice English Sermons, that goes under the name of Doctor
Sybbs, and our Brother Hooker, and master Davenport, there one styled the
Witness of Salvation, on Romans 8. 15. 16. where in Page 135. are these words:
In Justification, Faith is a sufferer only; But in Sanctification, it works,
and purges the whole man.

As for our Learned men that do generally make Faith an isntrumental cause of
their Justifica^ion. I confess it is true; But I do not understand them (as
Chenerius does in the like case) to mean no other kind of causa; then Cause
sine qua non, or, Causa removens, or prohibens. For Faith keeps the Soul
empty of confidence in it self, and makes a way for the receiving of the
righteousness of Christ. Even as the poor* Widows empty vessels made a way
for the receiving the oye out of the Cruse; whereas the fullness of the Vessel
caused the stay.

The good Lord empty us more and more of our selves, that we may be filled
with him, Out of whose fullness we receive grace for grace, John 1. 16.

Gloria sit soli Deo.
Twelve Reasons laid down against prescribed and stinted Forms of Prayers or
Praises.
Reas. 1.
BEcause it is against Gods glory, in stinting unto him such a daily measure of
Service (consisting of Prayer or Praise) and so hindering the spiritual
petitions and phrases, that otherwise would be, if Gods good gifts were used.

Cor. 14. 15, 16. in making their gifts needless and useless, when they can
serve themselves with Books, and Forms, without them.

Spirit; because it has no spiritual employment for Prayer nor Praise in his
spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

Nadab and Abihu, for offering with strange fire which God commanded them not,
were destroyed with fire from the Lord, Levit. 10. 1, 2.

Vzzah, for touching the Ark contrary to the order of the God of Israel, was
smitten dead, and Israel had a breach made amongst them, 1 Chronicles. 13. 9, 10,
11. compared with 1 Chronicles. 15. 12, 13.

Jeroboam devised worship at Dan and Bethel, though he pretended by it to
worship the true God, and advance the worship of Jehovah; yet he worshipped
nothing but the Devils, and Calves that he made, 2 Chronicles. 11. 15. And it
became a sin to Jeroboam and his house, to destroy it root and branch, and
all the Kings that countenanced and upheld it; 1 Kin. 13. 34. 2 Kin. 17. 21,
22, 23. But such as feared the Lord amongst them, both Levites and Priests,
left their Cities, and possession; and of the people, such as set their heart
to seek the Lord God of Israel, came to Jerusalem: So Jeroboams Kingdom
weakened; but Rehoboam, that gave liberty of conscience to worship the true God,
strengthened; 2 Chronicles. 11. 16, 17.

Now, was God so jealous of his glory under the Law, that he that ^inned
against that worship which God by Moses prescribed, he died without mercy? how
much severer punishment are they worthy of, that sin against the Sons
authority, seeing he is Lord of the spiri^uall house, whose house are we,
Heb. ^. 6. And the heavenly Father commands us to hear him, Mat. 17. 5. and
that in all things, or our souls must perish, Acts 3. 22, 23? Now, if we
worship God in prayer or praise* or any other way, by any innovation or
invention of man, let us hear what our Prophet Jesus says In vain ye
worship me, teaching f^^ Doctrines the Commandments of me^ Esaias 29. 13, 14.
Mar. 7 6, 7, 8. An^ however it may seem glorious (...) our eyes, yet God has
set th^^ stigma on it, That it is a vai^^ worship.



Christ by his death has free me from the whole Ceremonia^ Law, so that if I
consent to rea^ again what Christ by his dea^ has abolished, I crucify
Christ make my self gailty of his blou^ and as much as in me lies, exp^^ him
out of the Nation.

Now, the Ceremonial Law h^ his constitution in Israel, either from Moses, or
from God: Not from (...) for he was a servant in his ^ouse, and he did
nothing in the Tabernacle, nor about it, but what God showed him, Exodus 25. 4.
Acts ^. 44. But the Ceremonial Law (...) his original law from God: Now, if
the death of Christ were ^f that power, to put an end to the ^hole Ceremonial
prescribed ^orship, so that whosoever should ^are it again should crucify
Christ, and make us guilty of his blood, etc. ^hen, that death of Christ is of
^^rce, to put an end to man's Cerenoniall Worship:

But the first is true; Ergo, the ^^ter.

Object.
The Consequence is denied.

Answ.
That power which can disanull ^e greater, must needs disanull the ^^^er; if
the death of Christ put an (...) to the heavenly Fathers Cere^oniall Worship,
and in prayer and ^aise, at, or before the Ark, or in ^e Temple; then it will
put an and to all man's devised Worship, unless you will advance the authority
of man above God the Father. Col. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. If Christ by his death
has freed us from the rudiments of the world, the Mosaicall Ceremonies, why
living in the world are we entangled with ordinances, after the doctrine,
traditions, and commandments o^ men?

Object.
But they are set up for the glory of God.

Answ.
Not I, but Paul shall answer fom me; They have a show of wisdom, i^
will worship; but it is only a show there is no substance in it.



Cor. 1^. 15, 16. Rom 8. 26. Gal. 4. 6.

conscience to be practiced, which God has left arbitrary, to be used
according to our necessities; If we be afflicted, then pray; if we have tasted
how bountiful the Lord has been to us in blessings, then let us praise him;
Jam. 5. 13.

Woe be to them that follow the way of Balaam, who taught Balack to cast a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, Revel. 2. 14. Jud. v. 11. Now
offenses must come, but woe unto the men by whom they come: It were better for
me, that a millstone were hanged about my neck, and that I were cast into the
sea, then that I should offend one of these little ones, Luke 17. 1, 2.

spiritual Worship, performed, or offered in his spiritual house, the
Congregation of the faithful united;) Now if our consciences condemn us, God
is greater then our consciences, and he will condemn us also, 1 John 3. 19.
for he knows all things. Therefore I say to you (who blame us for not
frequenting devised forms of Worship in prayer and praises) as Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego did to King Nebuchadnezzar, We are not careful to answer
you in this matter; Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us out of your
hand: But if he will not, be it known to you, we will not serve your gods; nor
worship our God in that devised way that men set up, Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18.

work of the holy Spirit, Romans 8. 26. Gal. 4. 6.

Cor. 14. 15, 16.

Soli Deo honor and gloria
FINIS.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE Spiritual TEMPLE: OR THE SPOUSE Prepared for the LAMB,
The LORD JESUS.

Written by FRANCIS CORNWEL, a Minister and Servant of Jesus, the Christ, for
the benefit of poor distressed conscences, in City and Country.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson. 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE, and the true lover of all conscientious Covenantours, that
stand up for a through Reformation, according to the word of our good God, in
England, and Ireland, CORNELIUS HOLLAND Esquire, a Member of the House of
Commons Assembled in Parliament.
SIR,
DAvid describes the godly man, by his pleasure, and by his pains: First, the
pleasure of the godly man, in these words: Psalm. 1. 2.
He delights in the Law of the Lord. Secondly, the pains of the godly man:
And in that Law he meditateth day and night; not only in the day appointed for
man to labor in, but in the night also appointed for man to rest: the reason
is, because it is his meat and drink, to do the will of his God. (Honored
Sir) The Word of Christ being the Rule of Englands Reformation; the good Lord
(that writes his Laws in his peoples hearts, according to his new Covenant of
Grace: Heb. 8. 10.) put it into my mind, seriously to consider, What Schism
was, that I had covenanted against. And searching the Scriptures, I found it
thus written, 1. Tim. 6. 3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to the
wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ; and to the Doctrine
which is according to godliness. Verse. 4. He is proud, knowing nothing; but
doting about Questions, and strife of words; whereof comes envy, strife,
raylings, evil surmisings. Verse. 5. Perverse disputings of men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth; supposing that gain is godliness; from
such withdraw thy self. Yea, and after a further enquiry, to understand aright
the things that are controverted amongst us; by the good providence of the
Almighty, I found two Texts of holy Scripture, setting forth two sorts of men,
Diametrally opposing one another, as light does darkness, truth does
falsehood; the one th^s written: 1 John 5. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is
the Christ, is borne of God. And the other, thus; 1 John 2. 22. Who is a liar,
but he that denies that Jesus is not the Christ, He is Antichrist, that
denies the Father and the Son. And when I thought to understand the
difference, it was to hard for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God;
where the Father of glory, of his good pleasure, revealed to me (the most
unworthyest of all his servants) the truth of that; which (I conceive) is the
root of all our Controversies, and gave me to understand the meaning of the
Scriptures, 1 John 5. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, viz. the
eternal King, Prophet, Priest of the Church of the new Testament, ratified
with his blood, whom the Father of glory has exalted to be Lord and Christ,
Acts 2. 36. and head, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. Is borne of God. Seeing no man
can say, (that is confessed) that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Spirit, 1
Cor. 12. 3.

Hence I find it written, Joh. 1. 11. Jesus came to his own, but his own
received him not, that is, for the Christ, that Messiah which was to come: but
only for the Carpenters son; Matthew. 13. 58. The reason was, because none
could understand that Mystery: but they only to whom the Father of heaven
revealed it, Matthew. 11. 14. Hence, when Jesus demanded of his Disciples? Whom
do men say that I the Son of Man am? Peter answers, thou art the Christ,
the Son of the living God: Jesus answers, Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona;
for flesh and blood hatb not revealed this unto thee; but my Father in heaven.
And thou art Peter, and upon this Rock (Jesus the Christ, whom thou have
confessed) I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it, Mat. 16. 16, 17, 18. Many for fear durst not in those days
confess Jesus to be the Christ: Instance the Parents of the blind man: Because
the Jews had agreed, that if any did confess, that he was the Christ; He
should be put out of the Synagogue, John 9. 22. But so many as recived him
(viz. to be the Christ) to them he gave power to be called the sons of God;
even to them that believe in his name; which were borne not of blood nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, But of God, John 1. 12, 13* And as
for that other Text of the holy Scripture that does universally oppose it the
heavenly Father gave me thus to interpret it: 1 John 2. 22. Who is a liar ( viz
^orne of the evil one, who is a liar, and the father of lies, and abode not in
the truth, John 8. 14. But he that denies that JESUS (whom he confesses
dyed for his sins; and rose again the third day, according to the
Scriptures) Is not the Christ, viz. the anointed King and Prophet of his
Church, in all his outward administrations and institutions, in admitting of
Members into his spiritual Kingdom, according to his royal Commission,
Matthew. 28. 18, 19. Mark. 15. 15, 16. (though he acknowledge him to be his
eternal Priest that ever lives, to make intercession to God for him, Heb. 7.
25. He is that Antichrist (viz. an enemy and adversary to Jesus the Christ)
that denies the Father and the Son, He that denies the Sons Authority, to
be the eternal King, and his Commission to be in force, Matthew. 28. 18, 19,
20. Mark. 15. 15, 16. and to be the eternal Prophet; and his word to be the
eternal rule for Doctrine and Government; aswall as his eternal Priest to
reconcile him to God Denies the Father, that sanctified the Son, and sent
him into the World, John 10. 36. and raised him from the dead, and exalted him
to be Lord and Christ, Acts 2. 36. Hence it is (my Honored friend) First,
that in all my writings, I have studied to exalt Jesus the Christ, it being the
Primitive. Faith once given to the Saints, Math. 16. 16. Secondly, to
distinguish Jesus the Christ from all others named with the name of Jesus in
Scripture Record: as Joshua is called Jesus, Hebr. 4. 8. etc. others. Thirdly,
because I find the Scriptures giving that Title to him in diverse places.

John confesses, I am not the Christ, John 1. 20. The Woman of Samaria said, I
know the Messiah comes which is called the Christ, John 4. 25. Apollos
mightily convinced the Jews, showing by the Scriptures, that Jesus was the
Christ, Acts 18. 28. Now that I received from the Lord, I could not but make
known to you, You being one of the tender hearted Loyal Covenanters, a Member
of that High and Honorable Court, under whose shade Conscientious Covenantours
(that contend for the faith of Jesus the Christ, once given to the Saints) find
rest.

Know (worthy Sir) that the departure from the faith of Jesus the Christ, is a
cause of so many Schisms, and Heresies maintained in the earth. Disdain not
therefore to read a little Treatise, called the Difference between the
Christian, and Antichristian Church, Deliniated according to the Scripture
Record, though the truth therein contained (like the Two witnesses, Revel. 11.
3.) have long mourned in Sackcloth: Yet if God give you an heart to receive it,
It will be a Jewel surpassing all earthly Treasure. For if Jesus the Christ
be your Prophet to teach you, his heavenly Father will, Matthew. 17. 5. Acts 3.
22. 23. He will then be your King to protect you, Matthew 28. 20. Your Priest to
intercede for you, Joh. 27. 20. Your Judge to acquit you, Joh. 12. 48. and if
the love of Christ draw you to keep all his Commandments (though in the world
you meet with af^liction for his sake; yet in Christ you shall find peace) for
the Father, Son, and Spirit will dwell in your heart, and take it for the
Sanctum Sanctorum, where they will abide to cheer and refresh you, Joh. 14. 23.
And if you confess, him in this world before men: He will confess you before
his Father, and proclaim it to your eternal peace and comfort, (Euge bone
serve) Well done thou good and faithful servant, enter into your Masters joy.
Matthew. 25. 21.

Orpington in Kent* the tenth Month, the first day, 1645. Yours, who
contendeth for the faith of Jesus the Christ. FRANCIS CORNWELL

To all loyal Covenanters, contending for the Faith of JESUS the CHRIST, once
given to the Saints; Mat. 16. 16, 17.
CVrteous Reader, be not too censorious concerning him that is the Publisher of
this little Treatise, styled, The difference between the Christian and
Antichristian Church, as if he condemned the Ages and Generations that are
past, as in a lost condition; because he says they have built their house upon
wood, and hay, and stubble, and not upon the sure rock Jesus the Christ: Far
be it from him to judge so ^ashly of the Ages and Generations past, or present,
concerning their final estate; for ^ee is commanded to judge no man before ^he
time, knowing that they stand and fall to their own Master: And, we shall all
stand before the judgment seat of Christ; And then and there every one shall
give an account for himself to God, Romans 14. 4, 10, 12. Knowing, as it is
recorded in the inspired Scriptures, that If any man build upon this foundation
(Jesus the Christ) gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay stubble; Every man's
work shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it; because it shall be
revealed by fire: and the fire shall try every man's work. If any man's work
abide, which he has buil^ thereon, he shall receive a reward: If any man's
work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss; but himself shall be saved yet so
as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15.

Secondly, Know that the discovery of this truth was (as the vision that is his
for an appointed time) and is become unto us, as the words of a book that is
sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this I pray
thee: And h^ says, I cannot; for it is sealed. And the book is delivered to
him that is not learned, saying, Read this I pray thee: An^ he says, I am not
learned, Esaias 29. 11, 12* So that it is not in him that is learned, no^ in him
that is unlearned, to discover the mystery of iniquity, by which Antichris^
has filled the Temple so full of smoke, that no man can see how to enter into
it, unti^ God enlighten him; which caused the Lord Jesus in the days of his
flesh, to break out into an Eucharistia of praise, looking on his Disciples, I
thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things
from the wise and learned, and have revealed them unto babes. Even so, O
Father, because it seemed good in thy sight, Mat. 11. 25, 26. That the whole
glory in discovering of truth to any, might be given unto God.

Thirdly, Know (gentle Reader, who art a searcher after truth in these
inquiring times) that the Publisher wrote this Treatise, to discover that the
difference lies not so much amongst us in point of Baptism; as it is about
the Doctrine of the Faith of Jesus the Christ, the Son of God; which
whosoever believes and confesses, that Jesus the Christ is the Son of God, it
is lawful to baptize him, Act. 8. 36, 37, 38. And, to which Faith of Jesus the
Christ, and Baptism, the promise of receiving the gifts of the holy Spirit is
given, Act. 2. 38, 39. And though for publishing this mystery of Faith, which
has been hidden for some Ages and Generations that are past, he suffer
reproach and contempt from the hands and tongues of some; yet, if the will of
God be so, it is better he suffer for well-doing, then for evil. Yet the love
that he bears to the loyal Covenanters in the Nation, constrains him to
do it, rather then his Countrymen should ever remain in blindness, under
the power of Antichrist.

Thine, who is the unworthiest of all the servants of Christ, (who is content
it should be said of his good name, that is as a precious ointment, as Luther
said of Moses his body, Let it die and rot, so God may be glorified, and Jesus
the Christ exalted in all his royal Offices;) FRAN. CORNWELL.

A DESCRIPTION Of the Spiritual TEMPLE.
THe Spiritual Temple of the New Testament, the New Jerusalem which came down
from heaven, the Bride prepared for the Lamb, the Lord Jesus the Christ,
Revel. 21. 2. may not be unfitly compared to the material Temple of Jerusalem,
in the letter, whose foundation stone was of earth; whose materials were hewn
stones, compacted into one edifice or Tem^le: the furniture thereof was an
Altar, a Sacrifice, and a Priesthood; who were made after the law of a carnal
Commandment, Heb. 7. 16. which was typical, and was not to continue for ever;
but only to the time of Reformation, and then the glory of it should vanish
away. In which material Temple, none must come thither to worship, but the
circumcised Jews and Proselytes; for the uncircumcised and unclean were an
abomination, and must not enter in at the gates thereof; Ezekiel. 44. 6, 7. And
for the defects the people of Israel and Judah committed in their worship, so
long as they continued in their integrity, the high Priest went once every
year into the Holy of Holiest, and that not without blood, to offer up for
himself, and for the errors of the people, Heb. 9. 7. Yea, and great were the
privileges that belonged to the Jewish Church: To them (says Paul) pertained
the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and
the service of God, and the promises: Who are the fathers, and of whom, as
concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen.
Romans 9* 4 5. But Christ being come an high Priest of good things to come, by a
greater and a more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not
made of this building, Heb. 9. 11. reareth up a spiritual structure, or house.

1. Whose Foundation was the living stone, who has life in himself, Jesus the
Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Seeing other foundation no man can lay, save that is
laid, Jesus the Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 4. For there is salvation in none other, Acts
4. 12.

2. The spiritual Materials are such as are borne of water and of the Spirit,
Joh. 3. 5.

Quest.
Who are they which are born of the Spirit?

Answ.
Such men and women as through a Gospel Ministry are brought to believe, and
manifest by their confession, that Jesus who was crucified, dead, and risen, is
the Christ, is borne of God, 1 John 5. 1. For no man can say (that is,
confess) that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Spirit: and being born of
water, they are manifested to be lively stones, that have received life from
Jesus the Christ, the living stone, 1 Pet. 2. 4. and fit spiritual materials,
to be set into the spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

Quest.
3. What is the Form of this spiritual house?

Answ.
Union: They which gladly received the word were baptized, and were added unto
the Church (and so were compacted into one spiritual house, whereof Jesus the
Christ is Lord: Heb. 3. 6. But Christ as a Son over his own house, whose
house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope
firm unto the end:) And these continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine,
and fellowship, in breaking of bread, and prayers, etc.Act 2. 41, 42.

The Furniture of this spiritual ^ouse of the new Testament, where^f Jesus the
Christ is the King, Priest and Prophet, is a Priesthood, Sa^rifice, and an
Altar; but all spiri^^all.

Gal. 3. 28. Yea, every ^ember of this spiritual house are ^ade Kings and
Priests to God the Father,Revel. 1. 6. Yea, and the whole Church united into a
body, is a cho^^n Generation, a royal Priesthood, an ^oly Nation, a peculiar
People; that they should show forth the virtues of him that has called them
out of darkness into ^is mavelous light: Which in times ^ast were not a
people, but are now the people of God, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10.



1. Psalm. 141. 3.
The first is Prayer, which the spirit of Christ forms in the heart ^f a
believer, whereby he lays ^pen all his spiritual and temporal wants unto
God his Father, in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ, through whom he
has received a promise to be heard, and to have his request granted; Joh. 16.
23, 24.

2. Secondly, Praise is a spiritual sacrifice, offered up unto God
continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name, Heb.
13. 15. Which is done by praising God in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, which the Spirit o^ Christ forms in us, to sing, and make melody in
our hearts to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 19. Col. 3. 16.

Quest.
What is a Psalm?

Answ.
It is a rehearsal of those special^ mercies and particular experience^ that
the Lord has done for a believer, when his soul was brough^ into great
adversity; and when the Lord delivered him, the Spirit o^ God in the days of
his mirth brings into his mind, and causes him with heart and lips to bless
the Lord in the Congregation, for his mercies received.

Thus Hannah, that was barren, ^he Lord made to keep house, and ^o be the
joyful mother of a son, ^ingeth her song of praise, 1 Samuel 2. ^. My heart
rejoices in the Lord, my ^orne is exalted in the Lord, my mouth is enlarged
over mine enemies; because ^ rejoice in thy salvation.

Mary the mother of Jesus sings her Magnificat; My soul does magnify the
Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior, Luke 1. 46, 47.

So when the Lord had made good unto old Zacharias what he had foretold him
concerning his son John, Luke 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. being filled
with the Spirit, breaks forth into his Eucharistia of praise, Luke 1. 68.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people.

Yea, and old aged Simeon sings his Nunc dimittis, Lord, let thy servant
depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

Nay, King David upon his har^ warbles out the special mercies and favors,
and deliverances Go^ had done for his soul, Psalm. 103 Bless the Lord, O my
soul, and (...) within me bless his holy Name. Bles^ the Lord, O my soul,
and forget (...) all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thi^^^ iniquities: who
heals all thy diseases Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: who crowns
thee with lovin^ kindnesses, and tender mercies, and^ Nay, the Psalmist
exhorts the Traveller, the sick man, and the Mariner, to praise God for
their special mercies received; Psalm. 107.

Hence (holy Paul says) I will pra^ with the spirit, and I will pray wit^
understanding also: I will sing wit^ the spirit, and I will sing with
under^standing also. Else, when thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall he
which occupies the room of the unlearned* say, Amen, at thy giving of thanks?
^ Cor. 14. 15, 16. So that to sing bless, and give thanks, in the language of
holy Scripture, is all one.

Hence, as spiritual Prayer is a Sacrifice, Psalm. 141. 2. offered up unto God
our Father in the name of Christ, to comfort, solace, and cure a sad and
grieved spirit; so spiritual praise is a Sacrifice, tendered to the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, through Christ, Heb. 13. 16. by a merry and rejoicing
Spirit, for the special mercies and blessings spiritual, and temporal, that
the Lord has bountifully bestowed on him. According to that of the Apostle
James, Is any afflicted amongst yo^, let him pray? Is any merry amongst you,
let him sing? James 5. 13.

Spirit of grace and supplication, Zech. 12. 10. The more the Spirit of Christ
opens the eyes of their spiritual understanding, to look up by faith upon a
Jesus, who for their sins was peirced, the more will their hearts be pierced
with godly sorrow for their sins, which brings repentance to salvation,
never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. and to loath themselves in their
own eyes, for all their spiritual and corporal abominations, Ezekiel. 36.

Hence believing David the King, that sorrowed after a godly manner, for all
his iniquities, said, The sacrifices of God are a troubled spirit: A broken and
contrite heart for sin, o^ God, thou will not despise, Psalm 51. 17.

4. Sacrifice; is a free, ready, and cheerful contribution to the poor^ and
needy members of Christ Hebr. 13. 16. To do good and distribute forget not,
for with such a sacrifice God is well pleased, Phil. 4. 18.

5. Sacrifice; is an holy life, which the Spirit of Christ forms in us. Romans
12. 1. I beseech you brethren upon the mercifulness of God, that ye present
your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable to God, which is your
reasonable service. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a price; glorify God
therefore in body and spirits which are Gods.

The Altar, that sanctifies the person and the Sacrifice, and makes them both
acceptable unto God, Is Jesus the Christ. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye also as lively
stones (that have received life from Jesus the living stone) are built up a
spiritual house, and holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God, through Jesus Christ.

To this Spiritual House, or Church of the New Testament, gathered according
to the royal Commission of King Jesus, Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20. as the Churches
in Judea, in Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, etc. were constituted. The
Promises were made:

Corinth 6. 17, 18.

The blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses them from all their sins, 1
John 1. 7. 1 John 2. 1, 2.

Thirdly, So many as have been b^ptized into the name of the Lord Jesus; (that
is, into the profession of Faith that the Apostles taught, to wit, that men
should believe in a Crucified, dead, and risen Jesus, whom God has exalted to
be Lord and Christ) had the promise of receiving the gifts of the holy Spirit.

Quest.
How prove you that to this Faith and Baptism, the gift of the holy Spirit was
granted.

Answ.
Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the g^fts of the holy Spirit. For
the promise (of giving the holy Spirit) is to you, and to your children, (as
Joel the Prophet foretold;) I will power out my spirit upon all flesh; and your
Sons and Daughters shall prophecy; and your old men shall dream Dreams;
and your young men shall see V^sions, and also upon the servants, and upon the
handmaides, in those days I will power out my spirit, Joel 2. ^8, ^9. And all
that are a far off, even so many as the Lord our God shall call,verse 29. and
to the twelve in Asia^he promise was made good, Acts 19. 5, 6, 7. And when this
Spirit is come, he will guide thee into all truth; for he shall not speak of
himself: but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall ^ee speak, and he will
show them things to come, John 16. 13. Yea to be to the whole Church, as a
River that shall make glad the City of God, Psalm. 46. 4. compared with John 7.
37. If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink; verse. 38. He that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living waters. Verse. 39. (But this he spoke of the Spirit, that they that
believe on him shall receive: For the holy Spirit was not yet given, because
that Jesus wa^ not yet glorified.) But when Jesus was by the right hand of his
Father exalted, he received of the Father the promise of the holy Spirit; He^
has shed forth this, which you now se^ and hear, Acts 22. 33.

A
Fourthly, All things that ar^ lost and accursed to mankind by the fall of the
first Adam: are restored and sanctified to the use o^ the believers, in and by
the second Adam, Jesus the Christ. All things are yours: Whether Paul, or
Apollo* or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come, all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor
3. 21, 22, 23. Hence the unbeleeving wife is sanctified to the use of the
believer: And she being an unbeleever dwelling with the believing husband is
sanctified, to bring forth an holy Seed to the use of the believer: though the
child be borne in sin, and by nature the child of wrath, as the most
prophanest Pagans are, Psalm. 51. 5. Ephesians. 2. 3. Void of understanding, not
able to distinguish betwixt good and evil: Yet, Titus 1. 15 Unto the pure, all
things are pure: Nay, the meat and drink and the Creature which God has
created, are sanctified to his use; 1 Timothy, 4. 3, 4, 5. For every creature of
God is good, and nothing to be refused; If it be received with thankesgiving:
For it is sanctified by the Word and Prayer.

Quest.
What Privilege has the unbeleeving party, by dwelling and abiding with the
believer?

Answ.
Great is the Privilege, if he, or she, will abide; for living under them,
where the holy Spirit breaths, and his lips drop as the honey comb; the
sweet precious treasure of the Gospel of grace; What know thou, oh thou
believing husband, whether God will not make thee isntrumental to save thy
wife? though an unbeleever: Or what know thou, oh thou believing wife?
whether God will not make thee isntrumental to save thy husband? 1 Cor. 7. 16.
And when he is converted, he will bless God for you, (as David did for
Abigail, in another case) Blessed be the Lord for you, and blessed be your good
counsel, for you have been an instrument to convert a soul from the error of
his way, and save a soul from death, and hide a multitude of transgressions.

Quest.
Is it not a greater Privilege for an Infant to be borne of a believer, then to
be borne of a Jew, a Turk, or an Heathen?

Answ.
yea; For the Children borne of believers are brought up in holy instruction,
1* Tim. 3. 15.
and education from their childe-hood (as young Timothy was taught in the
Scriptures from his youth, by his mother Eunice) seeing it is the charge, the
holy Spirit has laid upon believing Parents: Ephesians. 6. 4. Fathers provoke not
your children to wrath; But bring them up in the nurture and fear of the Lord.
Whereas if their Parents were Jews, and Turks, and Heathens, the Parents
being without Christ, being Aliants from the Commonwealth of Israel; and
strangers from the covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the
world, Ephesians. 2 12. Their children brought up with them, follow after
Superstitious vanities; and ferve dumb Idols, as their Teachers, and Fathers
led them, ^ Cor. 12. 1.

Fifthly, They are people live under precious promises: And he has promised,
that the eye of his providence shall be over them, all their days for good:
He bids them not distract themselves with immoderate carking care: Mat. 6.
25.
For what they shall eat, or what they shall drink, or yet for their bodies,
what they shall put on.

Reasons Christ gives are two.

Reas. 1.
First, Your heavenly Father knows ye have need of all these things.

But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you, Matthew. 6. 33. Now the members of the Church of
Christ, gathered according to Christ's Institution, Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20. are
the Children of the Kingdom; and under the Promise, that God, as a Father,
will provide for them; Therefore they are exhorted to be careful for nothing:
But in every thing, by Prayer, and Supplications, with thankesgiving, let their
request be made known unto God, Philip. 4. 6.Hence the Apostle exhorts the
Church of ^he Hebrews; Let your conversation be without covetousness; and
be content with such things as ye have: For he has said, I will never fail
thee, nor forsake thee: So that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper. And I
will not fear what man shall do unto me, Hebr. 13. 5, 6.

Sixthly, They are under the promise of Audience, whenever they come to
petition in the name of his Son Jesus the Christ, for what they want, be they
few or many: Matthew. 18. 19. I say to you, that if two of you (believers
baptized) agree in earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, It shall
be done for them of my Father in Heaven. Verse. 20. For where two or three are
gathered together in my Name, (that is, by his Power, Authority, and Royal
Commission, he has promised his presence) there am I in the midst of them; to
hear and return them an answer to their request; yea, and to protect and
preserve his Church, gathered in every Age, to the ends of the world. Thus at
the Prayer of the Church, that was reproched, for holding forth the Faith of
Jesus; the gift of the holy Spirit was given, to speak the Word of God with
boldness, Acts 4. 31. At the earnest suit and intercession the Church made unto
God, Peter the Apostle was released out of his Imprisonment, and brought to the
house where they were praying, Acts 12.

Magna Charta of the Gospel, Matthew. 28. 18, 19, 20. Marc. 16. 15, 16. though
while they are in the Wo^ld, they are for the Faith of Jesus the Christ killed
all the day long (either in their good names, by r^proch, and ^lander; or in
their estates, by the ^ighty Nimrods of these oppres^^ng days, they are
exposed to plun^er and spoiling, which they are to ^ake patiently, Hebr. 10.
32. or in their Liberties to be imprisoned, for ^ontending for the Faith of
Jesus ^he Christ, 1 John 5. 1. Once given unto the Saints, or forbid to preach
any more in his name, as the Apo^tle Peter was, Acts 4 18. or to have their
lives taken violently from them, as James the Apostle was by ^he Tyrant Herod,
Acts 12. 2. 3. And accounted, But as sheep for the slaughter, (regarded no
more by the Wolves in sheep clothing, then the bloody Butcher regards the
life of his sheep;) yet the poorest member amongst them is rich in faith, and
heir of the Kingdom which God has promised to them that love him, James 2.
5. Yea, and the whole body of believers, walking in that faith and order,
Christ has prescribed, with perseverance in the faith unto the end, shall be
more then conquerours, through him that loved them, Romans 8. 36.

Yea, next to the Paradise of glory; there is no Society like to this
Spiritual Corporation of Saints, where the Lord will dwell in the midst of
them, and give them light: Hence was the beloved Apostles Utinam, Oh that you
had fellowship with us, 1 John 1. 3.

Object.
Why was it such a Privilege?

Answ.
Truly, our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: So
that the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, and Saints, make up but one Society,
or Family, where God will dwell, to comfort and solace them: the good Angels
their guard, to protect and save them (as they did once the Prophet Elisha from
the troop of the Aramites, 2 King. 6. 17.) seeing they pitch their tents round
about them that fear him, Psalm. 34. 7. And are sent forth to be ministering
Spirits, to minister unto them that are heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. And
when they die, they resign their spirits to God that gave them, as the
Proto-Martyr Stephen did, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts 7. 59. to remain
in the mansion prepared for the spirits of just men departed. So that happy are
the people that are in such a case; yea, blessed are those Churches that have
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for their God.

Quest.
What is the Antichristian faith?

Answ.
It is to deny that Jesus (whom they confess dyed to take away the sins of
the world) is the Christ.

Quest.
How prove you that?

Answ.
1 John 2. 22. Who is a liar, ( viz. borne of the evil one, who is a liar, and
the father of lies, and abode not in the truth, Joh. 8. 44.) but he that
denies that Jesus is the Christ? (viz. the eternal King, Prophet, Priest of
his Church, bought with his own blood) he is Antichrist (an enemy and an
adversary to Jesus the Christ) that denies the Father and the Son. For he
that denies the Sons authority, to be the eternal King and Prophet of the
Church of the New Testament, to the end of the world, according to the royal
Commission he received from the Father of glory, when he raised him from the
dead, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. compared with Mar. 16. 15, 16. as well as his
eternal Priest, that ever lives to make intercession to God for him, Heb. 7.
25. he denies the Father that sanctified the Son, and sent him into the
world, Joh. 10. 36. and raised him from the dead, and exalted him to be Lord
and Christ, Act. 2. 36. Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23.

Quest.
What Congregations deny that Jesus is the Christ?

Answ.
Even all such as build their house upon the hay and stubble of man's inventions,
and not upon the precious stone, Jesus the Christ, in whom only salvation is
found, Act. 4. 12.

Of which sort of builders are these:

The first sort are those that build their house upon the person of Peter, and
so successively upon the P^pe. These the Spirit of God discovers to be
foolish builders* because there is no salvation in Peter, nor Pope: the Apostle
Peter himself being the Judge to decide the controversy, Acts 4. 11. Peter
speaking of Jesus the Christ, says, This is the stone which was set at naught
of you builders* which is become the head of the corner. Ver. 12. Neither is
there salvation in any other; for there is none other name under heaven given
amongst men, whereby we must be saved.

The second sort are those that build their house upon the Office of Peter, and
so successively on the Officers: So that if the Officers united into a body in
Council err, the whole Church that receives their faith, from their Edicts
and Decrees, err also. Now, that Counsels may err, and have erred, in things
appertaining to God, appears in the 21. Article of the Church of England, by
Law established; as appears. Adoration of Images was established in the
second General Council of Nice. The Popish Clergy were advanced above all
earthly Princes, by the Council of Lateran. And Priests prohibited to marry,
which is honorable amongst all men, Heb. 13. 4. by the said Council. The late
Trident Council erred in many things grossly; as in exalting the traditions of
men to be of equal authority with the word of God; Trident. Sess. 4. Decret.
Together with the invocation of creatu^es. Or any other Council, that should
decree, that grace comes by generation; or, Believers should beget believers:
or, Christians beget Christians: then the whole Church that build their faith
upon such corrupt Counsels may err also.

The third sort are all those that build their house upon another man's faith,
and not basing or laying the foundation aright, on the Gospel faith; to wit, to
believe in a crucified, dead, and risen Jesus, whom God has exalted to be the
Christ: If they err in the object of their faith, Jesus the Christ, though
they own him to be Jesus their eternal Priest, to make intercession to God
for them; yet if they deny him their eternal King and Prophet, in all his
outward institutions, in admitting of members into his spiritual Kingdom,
they build but on a sandy foundation, and not on the sure rock Jesus the Christ.

These Congregations, when the storm of Gods ind^gnation blows upon them, it
will fail them* because they were so foolish as to build upon the sand, Mat.
7. 26. and not upon the immovable rock Jesus the Christ; seeing other
foundations no man can lay, save that is laid, Jesus the Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11.
Paul calls him, The corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20. Peter, The living stone, 1
Pet. 2. 4. Yea, The chief corner stone, elect and precious: he that believes
on him shall not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2 6. Unto you that believe (in Jesus the
Christ, he i^ precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7.

Now, the true Spouse of Christ can have no communion with such as deny Jesus
the Christ their only Rock, in whom salvation only i^ found, Act. 4. 12.

First, Because she is a loyal^ Spouse, that has no head, no husband, no
Lord, no Lawgiver, in things appe^taining to the conscience, but royal King
Jesus: no^ will admit any other pretende^ Spouse to have fellowship with her*
that is partly governed by the wor^ of Christ, and pa^tly with the chaff^ and
straw of their own traditions, in Gods spiritual worship, or in admitting of
m^mbers into his spiritual house: Knowing, that in so doing she should be
found to be a Monster, that has two heads; o^ else like to that proud harlot
R^me, that has a divided heart, that goes a whoring after two husb^nds;
Christ, and Antichrist.

Secondly, This loyal Spouse her love toward her husband the Lord Jesus the
Christ, is tender and compassionate love; she cannot endure to hear her
husband should be spoiled of any of his royal dignities, either his Kingly or
Prophetical, as well as Priestly Offices: She cannot with harlot Rome be
content with a divided Christ; but with the true mother she must join only
with them that will have a whole Christ, or no Christ. Christ her King, and his
Commission to be eternal, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. Christ her Prophet, whose
voice she must only hear; as the Father of glory has given her in charge to
do, Mat. 17. 5. Yea, and the extent how far, in all things, whatsoever he
shall say; Act. 3. 22. Knowing, the danger follows, her soul shall be cut
off from his people, Act. 3. 23. reckoned no sheep of his fold, Joh. 10. no
Spouse of her royal husband, Ephesians. 5. 24. as well as her eternal Priest, to
make intercession for her, Heb 7. 25. because she knows, Christ divided,
becomes no Christ to the divider: And this, according to the Vulgar Latin, is
solvere Jesum, to dissolve Jesus, to receive him only in part, and not in the
whole; which is the spirit of Antichrist, etc.

Lastly, The Christian Church, Christ's loyal Spouse, knows that her royal
husband is jealous of his glory, and will not endure his Worship should be
corrupted with the inventions of man; therefore she deserteth the communion of
all such as have forsaken Christ, the fountain of living waters, and dig to
themselves cisternes, broken cisternes, that will hold no water. Hence it is as
possible for light and darkness to agree in one subject, and the Temple of
God, and I^ols: as the Church that has Christ for her head, and the Word to
be the rule of her Doctrine, and Government. And those Congregations that are
governed, partly by the Word of Christ, and partly by their own T. aditions,
should have communion together.

Quest.
But have Gods Elect in Babylon any power of themselves to return out of the
Land of their spiritual Captivity under Antichrist.

Answ.
Nay: Until God enlighten them, that are dark; and quicken them that are
dead, and cause them to return, by being obedient to a Gospel Ministry: as
formerly he brought in our forefathers, which were Gentiles as well as we, and
strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, and Aliants from the covenant of
Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, by opening their blind
eyes: and turning them from darkness to light; and from the power of Satan,
unto God; that they might receive the remission of their sins, and an
inheritance amongst them which are sanctified by Faith in Christ Jesus, Acts
26. 18. Now as many as shall be obedient to the voice of the Lord, will be
unequally yoaked no more with unbeleevers, but will become obedient unto the
voice of the holy Spirit, and come out from amongst them, and be separate; and
touch no more any of the unclean thing; and then the Lord will make good his
promise: To be a Father unto you, and ye shall be his Sons and Daughters.
Having therefore these Promises (dearly beloved) Let us cleanse our selves
(even so many poor Iaphets, as God shall persuade to dwell in the Tents of
Shem;) from all filthynesse, both of the flesh, and of the spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of the Lord, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 17, 18. Chap. 7, Object.
1.

If all Churches come out of Babylon by degrees; then you condemn all Churches
that are not of your judgment?

Answ. 1.
We condemn no Churches that are built upon the tried stone: the precious
Corner Stone; the sure Foundation, Esaias 28. 16. Jesus the Christ. Seeing other
foundation can no man lay, save that is laid Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Whom
Paul calls the corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20. Peter, the living stone, 1 Pet. 2.
4. Yea, the chief corner stone, elect and precious, 1 Pet. 2. 6. For there is
salvation in none other, Acts 4. 12.

2 And that holds the Gospel Faith: namely, that they believe in a
crucified, dead, and risen Jesus (through whom they obtain remission of
sins) whom God has exalted to be Lord, and Christ, viz. eternal King*
Priest* and Prophet, and head of the body of his Church, Ephe. 1. 22, 23. which
must be preached among all Nations; beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24. 46, 47,
48. And constituted according to the Commission given to the Apostles, Math.
28. 19, 20. which is left as a rule for the g^thering of all Churches, to the
ends of the World; seeing the Word of Christ is eternal. The word of the Lord
endures for ever; and this is the Word, which by the Gospel is preache^ unto
you, 1 Pet. 1. 25. Yea, and after their apostasy, under the spiritual
Babylonish captivity, to reform any error crept into the Churches of the old
and new Testament: It was their holy custom, to reduce all things to their
first Institution: Quod primum verum, that which was first is true, according
to ertullians j^dgement. For instance, so (...) David in the miscarriage of the
Ark of God, 1 Chro. 15. 2. 12. 13. And it was zealous Iosiahs rule (whom the
Spirit of God so comme^deth in Scripture, that none was like before him for his
Reformation) 2 Chr^ 34 31. The like example took Nehemiah after his return
from the Babylonish Captivity, Neh. 10. 29. To observe all the Commandments of
the Lord, and the Statutes which Moses the servant of the Lord gave them to
keep. So in reforming of the particular Churches of the New Testament, whereof
Jesus the Christ is head, King, and Prophet (if ever they be rightly brought
out of their Spiritual Babylonish captivity under Antichrist) we must reform
all the Innovations, as the Lord Jesus himself reformed the long-spread error
of Bygamie and Polygamy. Non fuit sic ab initio, From the beginning it was not
so, Matthew. 19. 7, 8. Yea, and we must so follow Paul (as he followed Christ, 1
Cor. 11. 1.) in reforming the abuses crept into the Church of Corinth, reducing
all things to the first Institution: With a what I r^ceived from the Lord, that
I delivered unto you, 1 Cor. 11. 23.

Babylon, that make enquiry after truth (as the daughters of Jerusalem did of
the Spouse, Cant. 5. 9. What is thy beloved more then another beloved; oh thou
fairest among women? What is thy beloved more then others beloveds, that thou
do so charge us? And truth being r^vealed to them, join with us in the
practice of truth, (as the Daughters of Jerusalem did with the Spouse, Cant. 6.
1. Whither is thy beloved gone, oh thou fairest among women? Whither is thy
beloved turned aside that we may seek him with thee?) The Spouse gives them a
gentle, and a loving direction, Cant. 6. 2. My beloved is gone into his garden,
to gather Spic^s: to feed in the garden, and to gather Lillies.

Christ (though they own him their eternal Priest, that ever lives, to make
intercession to God for them Hebr. 7. 25.) yet they deny him their King and
P^ophet in all his outward administrations, in admitting of members into his
Spiritual Kingdom; stablished according to Christ's eternal Commission, Mat.
28. 18, 19, 20. and are ^uil^ upon wood, hay, and stubble, 1 Cor. 3. 12. Now
though these pre^end to come out of Babylon, yet they persecute, scof^e* and
deride all poor weak enq^i^ing souls, for seeking after the pure ways of
that spiritual Worship, that Jesus the Christ has appointed, and established
in all the Churches of the Saints, gathe^ed according to the P^imitive* pattern
Act. 2. 41 42, 43. as the watchman ^id the Spouse, Cant. 5. 7.

them for the truth they deliver, (as the Jews did of old the Lord Jesus, and
their own Prophets, as it is written, 1 These. 2. 14. For ye, brethren, became
followers of the Churches of God, which in Judea are in Christ Jesus; for ye
have also suffered like things of your own countrymen, even as they of the
Jews: Verse 15. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and
have persecuted us, and they please not God, and are contrary to all men; Ver.
16. Forbidding us to preach to the Gentiles, that they may be saved, that they
may fill up the measure of their own iniquity, that the wrath of God may come
upon them unto the uttermost.) Upon these sorts of men, not we, but the Lord
Jesus has set this dreadful doom, This is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light, because their
deeds are evil. For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither
comes to the light, least his deeds should be discovered, John 3. 19, 20.

Babylons downfall ^s pronounced, R^vel. 14. 8. Babylon ^s fallen, it is
fall^n, that great City; because she made all nations drunk with ^he wine of
her fornications. V 9. After that followed a third Angel, that cried with a
loud voice saying, if any man (be he high or low, rich or poor, noble or
ignoble, bond or free, male or female) worship the Beast (that Antichrist of
Rome, that exalts himself above all that is called God, or worshipped) or
his Image, (that is, his Government, that receive their power and ju^isdiction
from, in, or under him) or his mark, (viz. his Canons, Constitutions, Edicts*
or Decrees) into their hands, (viz. to fight, or write in the defense of them)
or into their foreheads, (to plead or preach for them) mark their doom, The
same (not that do it ignorantly through un^belie^e, that are mislead by their
Teachers; but they which sin against knowledge, obstinately to defend their
Antichristian practices^ shall drink of the wine of the wrath o^ God, which is
poured out without mix^ture into the cup of his indignation, an^ they shall be
tormented with fire an^ brimstone in the presence of the hol^ Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb^ And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever
and ever: and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the Beast and his
image, and receive the mark of his name, Revel. 14. 10, 11^ The good Lord of
his great mercy grant to all those that belong to his election (that linger
after false and Antichristian ways and practices) repenting hearts, to forsake
their sins, that none of that evil threatened fall upon them. Amongst which
marks of the Beast, Is not the decree of Pope Innocentius the third? Decret.
Gregor. lib. 3. ^it. 42. cap 3. as Doctor Willet in his Synopsis Papismi de
baptismo infanti^m, cites: That whereas Circum^ision (by the commandment of
God) was conferred upon the in^ants as well as the elder sort; so Baptism
also, which succeeds in ^he room thereof, and is more general to men and
women, must ^e conferred to both. By which Decree, the Nations in name and
title have been christianized, (though ^n the power they have denied it) and
have killed many a precious Saint, under the brand of Heretics, for opposing
it: whereby, the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine
of her fornication, Revel. 17. 2.

But the Spirit of God describes the true Church, after Babylons downfall,
Revel. 14. 12. Here is the patience of Saints: here are they which keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. And is it not a commandment of
God, that all Churches should be gathered according to the Commission of King
Jesus? Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. Mar. 16^ 15, 16.

Saul did, Act. 26. 9, 10.) for keeping the commandments o^ God, and the faith
of Jesus, Mat^ 16. 16. 1 John 5. 1.) as no true Churches of Christ; but rather
Synagogues of Satan: for, no hurtful thing shall be in the holy mountaine^ Esaias
65. 25. The wolf and the lam^ shall fold together; and the lion shall eat
straw like an ox; and the dust shall the serpent eat: They shall not destroy
in all my holy mountain, says the Lord As likewise, Esaias 11. 6, 7, 8, 9.

Babylon by degrees) should crucify Christ in his members, for contending for
the faith of Jesus the Christ, once given to the Saints, Mat. ^6. 16, 17, 18.
yea, reproach, whip, crop, and persecute them, for holding the Commission of
their royal Master Jesus the Christ, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. that Antichrist by
his Decretals, and Popish Councels, has defaced, (as of late the Arch-Prelate
of England did some Worthies, that stood for a Reformation according to the
light God discovered unto them) then they in such an estate were no true
Churches of Christ; but Congregations that are hardened, and speak evil of
the way before the multitude, and are to be separated from, Act. 19. 9.

But if they be meek, and gentle, peaceable, and willing to be instructed,
inquiring after truth, it being discovered by the true Spouse (whom God has
enlightened to direct them,) we contemn not those daughters; but rejoice in
their fellowship, tender them as lambs of Christ, that have a longing desire
to be added to that sheepfold, whereof* Jesus is the true shepherd; though as
yet ignorant of the way of truth in many things* But as for the neutrall party,
tha^ are neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm, God will spue them out o^ his
mouth, Revel. 3. 15, 16.

Quest.
Whether the Church of Christ is not now to be recovered out o^ an Antichristian
estate, that denies that Jesus is the Christ, 1 Joh^ 2, 22. and crucifieth
Christ in hi^ members; as the Church of the New Testament in the Apostolical
times, was gathered out of the National Church of the Jews (that was of old
once a true state until they crucified Jesus the Christ in his humane nature;
whom God raised from the dead, and exalted him to be Lord and Christ, Act. 2.
36.) i^ God shall by his Gospel-Ministery wound and prick their hearts for
their sin of crucifying Christ in his members, that confess the faith ^f
Jesus the Christ, 1 John 5. 1. (as ^ee did once the Jews that crucifi^d the
Christ, their Messiah, in his ^wne person, Acts 2. 37.) so that ^^ey trembling
cry out, Men and ^^ethren, what shall we do?

Answ.
Must not the Reply be that ^oyce that the holy Spirit spoke by ^e mouth of
Peter, Repent, and be ^aptized every one (...) you in the name of Jesus for the
remission of sins: and ye shall receive the gift of the ho^ Spirit. For the
promise is to you, and (...) your children, and to them that are ^farre off,
even so many as the Lord (...) God shall call. And with many other words he
said, (and must not ^ee do so likewise? seeing what^oever things ^ere written
afore-time, were written for our learning, Romans 15. ^.) Save your selves from
this unto^ard generation. Seeing the same wrath is fallen on them (as was on
^he Jews, for killing the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, 1 These. 2. 14,
15, 16.) seeing they crucify Christ in his members, that contend for the faith
of Jesus the Christ (as Paul did, Act. 9.) Now so many as shall gladly receive
this word and be baptized, shall be saved from wrath; as Noah and his family
were saved in the Ark, from perishing by water; seeing it is written, by the
like figure Baptism saves, 1 Pet. 3^ 20, 21.

Reas. 1.
The Reason is, first, Because the time of our ignorance God has winke^ at;
but now (seeing light is come and truth is revealed) the Lord Jesus commands
us every where to re^pent, etc. Acts 2. 38. Else our con^demnation will be
heavy, Joh. 3* 19, 20. This is the condemnation, ligh^ is come, and men love
darkness more then light, because their deeds are evil, etc.

Paul and the Jailer, in the time o^ our ignorance, beaten and perse^cuted
Jesus the Christ in his mem^bers, that contend for the faith 1 John 5. 1. and
we though within our selves we ought to do something contrary to the name of
Jesus of Nazareth (as Paul did in the time of his ignorance, Act. 26. 9.) If
God shall by his good Spirit convince us of the evils that we have done, so
as that we trembling cry, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Must not the
reply be, Repent? etc. Act. 2. 38. Else, shall they not be disobedient to the
voice of the Spirit that speaks? seeing Paul and the Jailer arose and were
baptized, Acts 9. 18. and 16. 33.

Reas. 3.
Thirdly, Because there is no promises of salvation to be found in the
Antichristian states, that deny Jesus the Christ, 1 John 2. 22. The Reasons are,

the Christ, 2 Cor* 1. 20. He that believes in the Son of God has life,
and he that believes not in the Son of God, has not life; but the wrath of
God abides on him,John 3. 36.

being Aliants from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
Covenant of Promise; having no hope, and without God in the world. But once
believers in Christ, Ye who were sometime afar off, are made nigh by his
blood, and through him have access by one Spirit unto the Father. And are no
more strangers and forraigners: but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of
Gods household, etc. Ephesians. 2. 12, 13. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

Church in all his outward administrations, in admitting members into his
spiritual kingdom, Math. 28. 19. 20. though they own him their Priest, that
ever lives to make reconciliation to God for them, Hebr. 7. 25. They deny the
Father, that sanctified the Son, and sent him into the world, and raised him
from the dead, and exalted him to be the Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36. Ephesians. 1.
20, 21, 22.

John 2. 22, 23. Whom the Father of glory commands us to hear, Math. 17. 5.
Yea, and the Apostle Peterciting the Testimony of Moses, says, Truly Moses
said to the Fathers, The Lord your God will raise up a Prophet from the midst
of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever
he shall say: and the danger follows. It shall come to pass, that every
soul which refuses to hear the voice of that Prophet, that soul shall be
cut off from his people, Acts 3, 22, 23.

The Reasons are these.
First, If Jesus the Christ be not our Prophet to teach us, he will not be
our King to protect us: Math. 28. 10. Teach them, says Christ, to observe, all
things that I command you: And lo, I am always with you to the end of the
world.

Christ be no Prophet to teach us his heavenly Fathers revealed will, he will be
no Priest to intercede for us, Ioh. 17. 20. I pray not for these alone, but for
all them that shall believe in me through their word. Now it is not their word
that they speak, but what they have received from Christ to speak. Seeing it
is written 2 John 9. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ, has not God: but he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, has both
the Father and the Son. Verse 10. If there come any unto you, and bring not
this doctrine, receive him not to house, neither bid him God speed. Verse 11.
For he that bids him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds.

John 12. 48. He which rejects me, and rece iveth not my words, has one
that judges him; the words that I have spoken, the same shall judge us in the
last day. And then like the wise Merchant, let us cast up our accouut, what it
will profit us? If by denying to hear the voice of our Prophet Jesus, we gain
the world, and in the mean season loose our precious souls. Knowing the Son
of man shortly will come to judge the world: And then they which be ashamed of
him, and his words, in this sinful and adulterous generation, of them will
the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father* with
all his holy Angels, Mark 8. 38.

John 2. 22. and will be partakers of their sins, we shall be partakers of
their plagues, Revel. 18. 4. And for our unbelief, in persisting to persecute
them, that contend for the faith of Jesus the Christ, Math. 16* 16, 17, 18. The
wrath of God abides on them, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14, 15, 16.

Christ, that they waiting shall receive the gifts of the Spirit. But rather
that they shall be given up of God to strong delusions, to believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might
be saved.Verse 11. For this cause, God shall give them up to strong delusions
to believe a lie. Verse 12. That all might be damned that believe not the
truth, but have pleasure to continue in unrighteous practices. 2 Thessalonians. 2 10,
11, 12.

Object.
But there is a promise to all poor enquiring souls, that in the time of
their ignorance and unbelief, have denied Jesus the Christ, their eternal
King and Prophet, as well as Priest, and now by the Spirit of God being
convicted, that they are liars and Antichristian, that deny the Father and the
Son, 1 John 2. 22. And being pricked at the heart, now trembling, cry out, Men
and brethren what shall we do?

Answ.
The Spirit of Christ in the inspired Scripture, says: Repent, and be
baptized* every one of you in the name of Jesus for the remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the gifts of the holy Spirit, Acts 2. 38.

Ephesus, baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, and and Paul laid his hands
on them, and they spoke with new tongues, and Prophesied, as Joel the Prophet
foretold, Joel 2. 28. I will power out of my Spirit upon all flesh, etc.

Object.
But were those Disciples Paul found at Ephesus (that had been baptized by John
the Paptist) rebaptized by Paul?

Answ.
In answering this objection, I conceive: First, there was a vast difference
between Faith and Baptism; John preached before the suffering, death, and
resurrection of Christ: And the Faith and Baptisine Christ commanded his
Disciples to preach after his Resurrection, Luke 24. 46, 47.

Secondly, John the Baptist preached the Baptism of repentance* saying, that
they should believe on him that was to come after him, Acts 19. 3, 4. Whom
Christ himself declares to his Apostles, being come in the flesh that he must
go up to Jerusalem, fall into the hands of sinners, be killed, and the third
day rise again, but the Disciples understood it not, though it were declared
to them, and they were afraid to ask him, Mark. 9. 31, 32. Much more John
understood not, that Christ should dye, and rise again from the dead.

John sent two of his Disciples to demand of him, Whether it were he that
should come, or shall we look for another? Christ answers, Go tell John,
the blind see he deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the poor the Gospel is
preached, and lessed is he that is not offended in me,Math. 11, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

John: This was that Elias that was to come, that should prepare the way before
him,Mal. 3. 1.

for he saw him come in the flesh, and said to two Disciples, Behold that Lamb
^f God which takes away the sins of he world, John 1. 29. Yet he that is he
least member in the kingdom of heaven is greater then John: because after the
death and resurrection of Christ, they could preach and declare that great
myst^ry of godtinesse, 1 Timothy 3. 16. that John the Baptistnever knew.

But the Apostles after the resurrection of Christ, he having opened their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures, said unto them, That
it behooves, Christ to suffer, and rise again the third day, that repentance
and remission of sins should be preached in his name, amongst all Nations,
beginning at Jerusalem: and ye are witnesses of these things, Luke 24. 46, 47,
48.

Again, John the Baptists baptism, was the Baptism of water only but had no
promise of the holy Spirit annexed, as himself confesses, Math. 3. 11. I
indeed baptize you with water to repentance: But he that comes after me is
mightier then I* he shall Baptize you with the holy Spirit and with fire.

until Christ was glorified. John 7. 39 compared with Acts 2. 33.

But to the Faith and Baptism the Apostles preached after the death, and
resurrection, and ascension of Christ into glory, there was a promise of giving
the gifts of the holy Spirit, Acts 2. 38. Repent, and b^ Baptized, every one of
you in the nam^ of Jesus for the remission of sins: and ye shall receive the
gift of the Holy Spirit: as the Prophet Joel foretold, Joel 2. 28. and the
twelve at Ephesus received, Acts 19. 6.

Answ. 2.
I affirm, that the twelve at E^hesus, that had been Baptized by John, or his
Disciples Ministry, were rebaptized by Paul, or them that were with him in the
time of his Ministry; for these ensuing Reasons.

Reas. 1.
First, In respect of the different dispensations. The Faith and Baptism that
these twelve had received from John, or his Disciples Ministry, though it was
a saving Faith all the days of John and his Disciples Ministry, yet it was not
a saving Faith after the death, and resurrection, and ascension of Christ into
glory, in the time of Paul's Ministry: For John and his Disciples preached the
Baptism of Repentance; saying, that they should believe on him that was to
come after him* that was in Jesus Christ, that was to be crucified. But Paul
and Timetheus preached, that Jesus indeed is come, and crucified, dead, and
risen, through whom all that believe shall have remission of sins, Acts 13.
38, 39. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4.

Reas. 2.
Secondly, Because this Faith that they had received from John, or his
Disciples, in the time of Paul's Ministry would not save them: Because they
denied the Resurrection of Christ from the dead: Looking only for him to come,
and to be crucified; and were ignorant that he was crucified, dead, and risen:
And then according to the doctrine of the Holy Spirit, by the mouth of Paul, 1
Cor. 15. 14. If Christ be not risen, our Faith is vain, and our Preaching is
vain.

Reas. 3.
Thirdly, If the Faith and Bap^isme of John, that declared that there was a
Jesus to come to be Crucified; and the Faith and Baptimse of Paul that
declares that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures, and rose
again the third day according to the Scripture, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. Be all one
for substance (as some of the Learned amongst us affirm) then are we found
false witnesses of God, because we have testified of God; that he has raised
up his Son Jesus Christ, whom he ^aised not up if the Faith and Bap^isme of
John be in force at his day, ^ Cor. 15. 15.

Reas. 4,
Fourthly, If the Faith and Bap^isme of John be in force under the time of
Paul's Ministry, Acts 9. 3, ^. Then was the preaching of Paul vain, and the
faith of all that received his Gospel, (to wit, That Christ dyed for our
sins, according to the Scriptures, and rose again the third day, 1 Cor. 15.
3, 4.) vain, and that they were yet in their sins, 1 Cor. 15. 16. 17.
Neither were the gifts o^ the Spirit then given: For they were not to be shed
forth until Christ wa^ risen and ascended up into glor^ Acts 2. 33. which is
blaspemous to imagine, or to divulge and declare abroad.

For these Reasons, I conceiv^ there was a nullity of the Faith an^ Baptism of
John, which was to continue but till the death and resur rection of Christ: And
the twelve in Asia were rebaptized into the Faith of a crucified, dead, and
risen Jesus, whom God exalted to b^ the Christ. And Paul laid his hand on them,
and they received the hol^ Spirit, Acts 19. 5. 6.

(...)
May it not rather be, that with Apollos, they were more fully instructed what
it was to be Baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus.

(...)
Nay; Because there was as vast a difference, according to the distin^^ion I
formerly laid down, be^weene the Faith and Baptism of ^ohn and his Disciples
before the eath of Christ, and the Faith and ^aptisme of Paul; and ^he residue
of the Apostles after the death and resurrection of Christ: As now is ^etwixt
the Jews at this day: and ^s that truly believe in Jesus the Christ, 1 John
5. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. For the
Jews at this day be^eeve (as John and his Disciples then taught, That they
should believe on him that should come, Acts 19. 4.) even in that Messiiah whom
they wait ^or. And we believe (as Peter and Paul then taught) That Christ
indeed is come, and crucified, dead, and risen, and exalted to be the Christ,
Acts 2. 36 Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23.

So that, if the Jewish Faith be not a saving Faith at this day; Seeing they
look for a Messiah to come: when indeed he is already come, and crucified,
dead, risen and ascended to glory; So that we wait now for a Savior from
heaven, Jesus that shall deliver us from the wrath t^ come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
Neither could the Faith of those twelve Disciples Paul found at Ephesus be a
saving Faith in the time of his Ministry because Christ was come (though they
were ignorant of it, being a that time in Asia) and had finished all those
things that were written of him in the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the
Psalms, Luke 24. 44. But as neither the twelve Disciples of Christ could not
understand that all things were fulfilled of him: until he had opened their
understandings, that they might understand the Scriptures: And then they
rightly understood the end of his suffering, death, and resurrection: namely,
That repentance, and remission of sins, should be preached in his name among
all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24. 45, 46, 47, etc. So neither could
these twelve Paul found at Ephesus know it; because, they had not heard,
whether there were any holy Spirit, yea, or nay; and so were ignorant of the
death, and resurrection of Christ, until the Lord was pleased by his good
Spirit to open their understanding, by the ministry of Paul; therefore it is
written, When they heard it, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus,
Act. 19. 5.

Object. 2.
Was there any necessity that they should be Rebaptized; would not a more
perfect instruction have served?

Answ.
Nay: Because those twelve were departed into Asia, after they had received the
Faith and Baptism of John, and were ignorant whether there were any holy
Spirit yea or nay, Acts 19. 2. Because John's Faith and Baptism (as I have
formerly showed) had no promise of giving the gifts of the holy Spirit, Mat. 3.
11. If they therefore should continue in the Faith and Baptism they had
received from John, they had no promise that waiting they should receive the
gift of the holy Spirit. But to the Faith and Baptism that Peter and the
residue of the Apostles preached, there was a promise of giving the gifts of
the holy Spirit, Acts 2. 38. And when these twelve which had been baptized by
John, or his Disciples, heard it, they submitted them selves, and were baptized
in the name of the Lord Jesus; (viz. into that profession of Faith Paul
preached, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4.) And when Paul had laid his hands on them, the holy
Spirit came upon them, and they spoke with new tongues, and prophesied; and the
men were about twelve, Acts 19. 5, 6. Such an instance likewise we have in
Samaria; Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and the
name of Jesus Christ, and they were baptized both men and women, Act. 8. 12.
When the Apostles which were at Jerusalem heard it, they sent Peter and John
unto them: And when they were come down, they prayed, that they might receive
the holy Spirit: (For as yet he was fallen upon none of them, only they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus) Then they laid their hands on them, and
they received the holy Spirit, Acts 8. 14, 15, 16, 17. So that by the
examination of these texts of holy Scripture, it appears to me, that these
twelve that were formerly baptized by John, and then afterward by Paul were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; and then the Lord according to his own
free promise, Acts 2. 38. gave them the gifts of his holy Spirit, by his
ordinance of Imposition of hands; that the earth might be filled with his
glory, and his Church replenished with gifts meet for the ministry, Ephesians. 4.
11, 12.

Object. 3.
But was Andrew and the other Disciple John baptized, Rebaptized by the
Disciples of Jesus the Christ?

Answ.
Nay: Because that Faith which John preached and baptized into, and the Faith
and Baptism that Jesus and his Disciples preached before his sufferings, death
and resurrection, was all one in substance, and to one peculiar people, the
Jewish Nation. Mat. 3. 2. John preached, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is
at hand. So did Jesus, Mat. 4. 17. Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. So Christ commanded the twelve, As ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom
of heaven is at hand, Mat. 10. 7. Likewise the seventy, The kingdom of heaven
is come nigh unto you, Luke 10. 9. Peter and all the Disciples were ignorant of
the death and resurrection of Christ, until he was risen from the dead, Mar.
9. 31, 32. compared with Luke 24. 6, 7, 8. They wait for the fulfilling of the
promises as well as John's Disciples, Luke 24. 19, 20, 21, 22.

Object. 4.
But were the twelve Disciples of Christ, and the seventy, Luke 10. that had
accompanied with him from the time of John's Baptism until the time of Christ's
ascension into glory, that had been baptized, were they also Rebaptized after
the death and resurrection of Christ?

Answ.
The Answer is, Nay: Because they had the promise of the holy Spirit to be
given them, without any more baptizing with water. Acts 1. 5. John truly
baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy Spirit not many
days hence. And the Lord made good his word of promise, they were filled with
the holy Spirit, when the days of Pentecost were fully come, Acts 2. 2, 3, 4,
5. Thus I have answered the Objections.

Reas. 7.
Because, If two Disciples of Christ agree together in earth, touching any thing
that they shall ask, they have promise it shall be done for them of his Father
in heaven, Mat. 18. 19. But there is no promise to any people in faith and
order, but a people agreed: Reas. 1. Because two cannot walk together unless
they be agreed, Amos 3. 3. neither can the heart of two believers truly consent
to pray together, unless they be agreed touching the things they will ask of
the Father of glory. Reas. 2. Difference of opinion causes difference of
affection, and is an occasion of many dear and precious souls to withdraw
communion; as is to be seen in Barnabas and Paul, dissenting about the choice
of a companion, the contention grew so hot, that they separated the one from
the other, Reas. 8.
Acts 15. 37, 38, 39, 40.

Two or three Disciples of Christ, gathered together in his name, (that is, by
his power, authority, and royal Commission) where-soever, (whether in the
mountain, or in the desert, or in ship, or in the dungeon) there will Christ
be in the midst of them, to hear and grant their petitions, or deliver them
out of trouble; as he did Peter out of the prison, at the intercession of the
Church, Act. 12.

Reas. 9.
To all such as walk in this Gospel faith and order, the Lord Jesus has
promised a greater manifestation of his presence, and Spirit, Joh. 14. 26. And
John in the Island of Pathmos ^ound it, Revel. 1. 9, 10. Yea, and to all them
that love him and keep his commandments, the Father and the Son has
promised to own their poor hearts to be his Temple and Palace, where he will
abide and dwell; Joh. 14. 23.

Reas. 10.
Lastly, All such as are congregated in Gospel faith and order, have a promise
from King Jesus, of Royal Protection in their greatest dangers, Heb. 13. 5, 6.
So that with the Prophet Habacuck they can glory in Christ, in their greatest
extremities, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Though the vine do not yield her fruit, and the
fatness of the olive fail, and the herd perish from the stall; yet will I joy
in the Lord, and rejoice in the God of my salvation.

Quest.
But is there any hope to see the Nation of England reformed according to the
Primitive pattern, founded upon the word of the eternal Truth? Ephesians. 2. 20.

Answ.
Yea. First, Because there was never a more exact Covenant taken in no Realm,
or Nation, since the days of zealous Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 31. and Nehemiah,
Nehem. 10. 29. than is in these our days, to see a through Reformation in
England and Ireland, according to the word of God; and to extirpate Popery,
Prelacy, Superstition, Schism, He^esie, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline;
that the Lord should be one, and his Name one, in the ^hree Kingdoms. So that
we are ^ot to leave so much as an hoof behind us of any Superstition, or
Romish relic, or any humane Tradition, in Gods worship, to be ^etained;
though it have remained under the venerable garb of An^iquity, Universality,
and Unity, ^he three great pillars of the Roman Hierarchy.

Reas. 2.
Secondly, Because there are in ^he Synod some learned, pious, ten^er,
conscientious men, that in the ^ayes of the cruel and ambitious Prelates (like
the Priest and Levites, (...) the days of idolatrous Jerobo^m, that served the
Devils and the Calves he made, 2 Chronicles. 11. 13, 14, ^5.) left all their
maintenance, and went and lived in a strange land, to enjoy the liberties of a
good conscience, and worship the Lord Jesus according to the light they had
received; that are at this day truly sensible, what a burden the Penal
Statutes have been in ou^ Land, in former times, to tende^ consciences, that
desire (without any sinister ends) to see a Reformation according to Gods word*
therefore will never consent t^ have such a Penal Law enacted (as the Prelates
of England onc^ obtained by fraud and policy, in the days of Richard the
Second to kill the English Subjects, that would declare the whole truth o^ God,
so far as it was revealed to them, and keep a good conscienc^ toward God and
man: which occasioned the death of some of the Nobility, Gentry, and Ministry
in the Nation; with many other of inferior rank.

Thirdly, There are in the hig^^ and honorable Court of Parliament, some such
conscientious tenderhearted men, that in the Pre^ates days left, if not sold,
their ^ossessions, to go into a desolate ^ildernesse, to worship the Lord
jesus in spirit and truth, according ^o the light God revealed unto them; and
many other were fol^owing after, that are truly sensi^le, that it has ever
been a plot of the Bishops and Priests to labor ^o enthrall the English
Nobility, and Commons in Parliament, to ^^ake Laws to kill and imprison ^he
conscientious in the Land, that ^oe desire to worship the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ in spirit and truth, according to his revealed will in his own
word, under the spe^ious pretenses of unity, and uniformity in the worship of
God: as ^he Statutes of K. Henry 8. K. Edward 6. Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth,
^eclare.

Fourthly, It is obvious to every well-affected Subject in the English Nation,
that when our Brethren that noble, ancient, warlike Nation the Scots, contended
for a Reformation according to the light they ha^ received, and casting off
Rome proud Papal and Prelaticall Government, with all their devise^ forms of
Worship, they must have dyed; the English Prelates had s^ far incensed his
Majesty against them, and raised large sums o^ money toward the levying of a^
Army, to kill and destroy them had not the Lord by his special^ providence
prevented it.

Reas. 5.
Fifthly, When the Lord opened the eyes of our dear and thric^ noble Patriots
of our Country assembled in Parliament, to make a solemn Protestation, to
oppos^ all Popery and Popish innovations, and to extirpate Episcopacy root and
branch, as a Plant the heavenly Father never planted; Then evil counsel
prevailed with the King to withdraw from his Parliament, and under the pretense
of a Guard to protect his Person, to make war against his Parliament, that
they should dye: But our faithful Nobles, and true hearted Commons in England
reply, Shall our Ionathans dye? who have in part freed our consciences from
Roman Traditions, and ancient corrupt Festivals, and covenanted with us for a
pure Reformation agreeable to the word of our good God, and have preserved our
estates and liberties from an Arbitrary Government; shall they dye which have
wrought such a deliverance in the Land? they shall not dye: we will bleed our
selves before an hair shall fall from their heads, if either we with our
persons, prayers, counsels, states, or swords can prevent it. And has the
Lord given such a blessing to our endeavors, that God has made the righteous
of the Land, (next to the Lord) a wall of defense to the Parliament; shall it
ever therefore enter into the heart of loyal and tenderhearted Covenantors to
have such hard thoughts; that the Parliament will ever consent to burden us any
longer with unjust Penal Statutes, who have thought nothing too dear for
them, but have jeopardized lives and livelyhods for their preservations.
Especially, they being sensible what a burden such penal Laws have been to
tender Consciences, and what an hinderance they are for propagating truth.

Reas. 6.
Sixthly, All the faithful in the Parliament know but in part; and the more
they taste of the honey of Gods eternal truth, the more their eyes are
enlightened to see, they have not as yet attained to a full Reformation. And if
now they should build but upon the least hay and stubble, they should not only
suffer loss; but lay a foundation of a new rent in the Ages and generations to
come: yea, and look what unjust Penal Statutes they impose now; may perhaps
fall as heavy upon their Posterity, as sometime did upon that famous Lord
Cobham, that gave his consent to the Statute of Lolordi, and afterward was put
to death for a Lolord.

Reas. 7.
Seventhly, The Lord has added such a blessing to the pious endeavors of the
Parliament, that they have discovered many things to be truth; that the Learned
Prelates in former times adjudged to be Heresies: As the parity of the
Ministry. Superstitious forms of devised Worship, called Divine.
Superstitious Festivals, formerly esteemed holy Feasts, now taken away, that
men may follow their honest labor six days, and Sanctifi^ a Seventh, as a day
of holy re^^ to the Lord; being now the first day of every week; as the holy
Scripture has left us a rule of practice to observe and do, Act 20. 7. And
he which has begu^ this great and happy Work of Reformation by this
Parliament: we are confident, will never leave them until he has made them
instruments, either to perfect it; or a^ least, to give to all his faithful
Daniels, liberty of Conscience, to worship the Lord in Spirit and truth
according to his will revealed against whom they can object nothing, unless it
be in the matte^ that concern the spiritual worship of their God; Seeing
the^ have learned to give Caesar his due Tribute, Custom, Fear, Honor; Yea
and lay down their lives, rathe^ then just and lawful Magistrate should not
be maintained among us, and obeyed in all their just, Legal, and Civil
commandments. Knownig, they carry not the Sword for naught, but for the
punishment of them that do evil, and for the praise, and defense of them that
do well.

Lastly, the wrondrous power of the Spirit of grace, in enlightening dark
minds with the knowledge of his Truth; and scattering the knowledge of it, all
the Kingdom over, in Cities, Countries, and Camp, and causing men of
singular parts of learning to bring their gifts toward the building up of Zion;
and pouring out of his Spirit (as Joel the Prophet foretold, Joel 2. 28.) upon
all sorts of people, both young, and old; rich, and poor; which is to me a
plain demonstration, that the Lord will never leave us, until he has made
his new Jerusalem, the praise of the whole earth, and prepared the Spouse, the
Lambs wife; Yea, and advanced Jesus the Christ once again upon the Throne, to
be the Head, King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church, according to the ancient
Prophecy of David, Psalm. 2. 6.

Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion.

Gloria soli Deo.
FINIS.

