THE Course and Practice OF THE COURT OF COMMON PLEAS, At Westminster.

Heretofore Written by THOMAS CORY, Esquire; Late Chief Prothonotary thereof.

AND Now continued, and fitted to the Practice used at this day, with Additions
by W. B. a Clerk of the same Court.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, Henry Twyford, and E. Flesher, Assigns of
Richard Atkins, and Edward Atkins, Esquire; M.DC.LXXII.

Cum Gratia and Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

A TABLE OF THE Principal Matters.
Concerning Prisoners, Fol. 1 Of Bayl, Fol. 4 Concerning the writ of Clausum
fregit, and special writ containing the declaration at large; and of fileing
New Originals, Fol. 8 Of Imparlances, Fol. 9 Of Signing and entering Judgments,
Fol. 12 Of Appearances upon Exigents, Habeas Corpus, pluries capias,
distringas, etc. Fol. 14 Of Attachments upon Contempt, Fol. 15 Of amending
Entreys, etc. Fol. 17 Of reading Demurrers, special Verdicts etc. in Court; ^^d
the Course used therein by the Prothonotaries, Fol. 20 Of the chief
Prothonotary, Fol. 21 Of the Test's and returns of writs in all Actions real
and personal, and those brought by Attachment of Privilege, etc. Fol. 23 The
ancient Course of giving warrants to confess Judgments, Fol. 24 Of Renewing
Judgments by Scire Facias, Fol. 26 Of persons taken in Execution in foreign
Counties, Fol. 27 Concerning the Privilege of the Clerk of the Court, Fol. 28
Of carrying down causes to be tried by proviso, Fol. 29 Of giving notice upon
writs of Inquiry and Nisi prius, Fol. 30 Of declaring upon Reversal of
Utlaries, and Bayl to writs of Habeas corpus, Fol. 32 Of appearing in Quare
Impedit, and wast upon the distress of are sting Judgment, Fol. 33 Of matters
concerning the Prothonotaries, and of the Clerks, and Attorneys of the Court,
and their Clyents, Fol. 34 Of Trials at Bar, Fol. 35 Of declaring in causes
removed, as well out of Inferior Courts, as otherwise, Fol. 36 Of an Habeas
corpus, Fol. 41 Of declaring upon Mesne process, Fol. 42 Of Nonsuits, Fol. 45
THE Course and Practice of the COURT of COMMON PLEAS.
Concerning Prisoners.
IF a Prisoners Body with his Causes be removed by Habeas Corpus or Writ of
Privilege, if the Prisoner be there in person, he must undertake in double the
sum, and his Bayl in the single sum. But if the Prisoner be not there in
person, then the Bayl must be in the double sum.

If such a Prisoner when he comes in Court, or before the Judge, has no Bayl,
he is either to be committed to the Fleet, or remanded, but he cannot be
committed to the Fleet unless there be some process of the Common Pleas
returned, or unless he be brought to the Bar, and the Record of a Judgment or
Utlary be brought in Court to charge the Prisoner with in Court; but now the
Common Practice is upon removal of a Prisoner by Habeas Corpus, to feign a Writ
of Capias, or Attachment of privilege to turn the Prisoner over to the Fleet.

If a Prisoner be committed to the Fleet pro defectu Manucaptorum, and lies
three Terms there, and the Plaintiff does not in that time Declare against him,
then upon a common Appearance the Prisoner is to be discharged out of Prison;
but if the Plaintiff offers to declare, and the Prisoner will not appear, then
the Prisoner must remain still in Prison, and the Plaintiff may sue him to the
Utlary notwithstanding he is in Prison.

Of Bayl.
IF the Bayl bring in the Principal at any time before a Plea pleaded to a
Scire facias versus Manucaptores, or before Judgment by default, the Court has
used to receive the Principal in discharge of the Bayl; and if the Plaintiff
will pray him in Execucion, he shall have him; if not, then the Principal shall
be discharged, and the Plaintiff may take him in Execution when he can Arrest
him; or he may sue forth Execution against his Lands and Goods: but anciently
the Principal could not render his body in discharge of his Bayl after he was
returned Non est inventus upon Record, upon the Capias ad satisfaciendum, but
now the Court has the middle way, which is, to receive the Principal upon the
return of the first Scire facias, but not after that.

If the Defendant comes in by Cepi corpus returned in debt for twenty pounds or
above, or in any Action upon the Case, or Trespass ad dampnum vel valenciam
viginti Librarum or above; or if he be Utlawed in any of these Actions ad
dampnum vel valenciam viginti Librarum or more, and reverseth the Utlary, the
Defendant in such a case ought to put in Special Bayl, but in all other cases
(except in Writs of Privilege at the Suit of an Officer) Defendants appearance
shall be received without Special Bayl. But this course is now altered by the
late Act of Parliament; so that the Plaintiff cannot have special Bayl unless
it be in the Writ Debt twenty pounds or upwards; and in all other Actions, the
true cause of Action must be set forth at large in the Writ whereupon the
Defendant is Arrested, otherwise a common Appearance is sufficient.

In all Writs of Privilege at the suit of an Officer of the Court, the
Defendant, if he be Arrested, must put in special Bayl, although the debt or
damages demanded, be under twenty pounds; and if an Officer or Attorney of the
Court be sued, he ought to be sued by Bill at the first, and not by Original,
and if he shall refuse to appear, he shall be forejudged the Court, and then he
may be Arrested, and so is the common course, but it is reserved to the
Plaintiffs choice, whether he will sue him by Bill or Writ; But if one
privileged person sue another, the Plantiff may, and does usually Arrest the
Defendant, whether he be of this, or any other of the Kings Courts at
Westminster, for that the first privilege destroys the second.

Concerning the Writ of Clausum fregit, and special Writ, containing the
declaration at large; and of Fileing New Originals.
IF the Defendant formerly had been Arrested upon a Clausum fregit, the
Plaintiff might have declared in any personal Action thereupon, except in debt:
But of late they have used, and do now use to declare in debt, upon suing forth
a New Original in debt.

Of Imparlances.
IF the Defendant appears upon an Arrest by Clausum fregit (which is a general
Writ, and may be said to be the Common Pleas Latitat) he must have an
Imparlance of Course; but if the Writ whereupon he was arrested be special,
according to the truth of the Action, and retornable the first or second retorn
in any Term, so as a Venire facias may issue forth, there the Defendant ought
to answer the first Term in all personal and mixed Actions; but in real Actions,
the Defendant shall have one Imparlance of Course.

The reason why they have had Imparlances in all cases in the Kings Bench is,
because the Defendant being arrested upon a general Writ, a Latitat could not
know the cause of Action until the Declaration. And this reason holds in the
Common Pleas, where the Defendant is arrested upon a general Clausum fregit:
But in other Special Writs where the very Declaration is in the Writ, and the
Defendant might when he is arrested see the Declaration in the Writ, there he
ought not imparle, but to answer the first Term, as well in the Kings Bench
upon their new Writ of Aceciam bille, as in the Common Pleas upon Special Writs.

Of signing and entering of Judgments.
BY the course of the Court, after the ordinary rules given in the Office be
out, the Plaintiff may enter Judgment by nichil dicit, (if the Defendant does
not plead) and this is as well in Ejectment as in all other personal Actions,
without moving of the Court. But of late it has been used in Quare Impedit,
and Ejectment, to move the Court before they enter Judgment, and so is the
Common practice now used.

But in all real Actions no Judgment is to be entered by nichil dicit without
motion in Court; and there was formerly a rule made, that no Judgment by
default should be entered in Ejectment, without moving the Court; which rule was
afterward altered by another, and then Judgment might have been entered by
default upon a Rule entered by the Secondary, so as the Parish where the Lands
lie were expressed in the Rule. But now Judgment cannot be had by default in
Ejectment, unless upon motion in Court, and Affidavit thereupon made, that the
Tenant was actually served with a true copy of the Declaration, and that the
contents thereof were read unto him; or he, or his Wife, or his Servant, were
acquainted with the meaning thereof.

Of Appearances upon Exigents, Habeas Corpus, Pluries Capias, Distringas, etc.
IF the Defendant appears upon the Exigent, or upon the Habeas Corpus, Pluries
Capias, or Distress, or upon Bayl put in upon a Habeas Corpus, or upon an
Utlary reversed, then by the course of the Court the Defendant must answer the
first Term, because he has stood out so many Process: and in such cases the
Court does not use to change the Visne.

Of Attachments upon Contempt.
IF an Attachment be granted upon a contempt sworn by Affidavit (as it ought)
and the Defendant is Arrested thereupon, and brought into Court, he ought to be
committed to the Fleet, and then to be examined upon Interrogatories: if he
clear himself upon his Oath, he shall be discharged, and have his costs paid
him by the Prosecutor. If guilty, he shall be fined; but in this case the
Prosecutor shall not be admitted to prove the Defendant guilty, after he has
cleared himself upon his Oath. But the course now used in such cases, is, for
the Defendant with Sureties, to enter into a Recognizance in Court for his
appearance de die in diem, until he be discharged, and then to turn him over to
the Secondary to be examined upon his Oath upon Interrogatories, but for want
of Manucaptores to send him to the Fleet.

Of amending Entries, etc.
BY the course of this Court every Declaration and Plea ought to be entered upon
Record, the same Term it is delivered or pleaded, and every Issue and Demurrer
the same Term it is joined; and therefore if it be altered or amended before
it be entered, he that alters must pay costs, but if it be once entered upon
Record, then there can be no amendment without consent, or Rule of Court upon
Motion.

The Roll wherein the Declaration is entered with an Imparlance to it, is called
the Imparlance Roll: the Roll of the next Term after, wherein the Declaration
is again entered as before Verbatim, together with the Issue or Judgment to it;
that second Roll is called the Issue or Judgment Roll; and if the first Roll,
which is the Imparlance Roll, be right; and the second Roll, which is the Issue
or Judgment Roll, be mistaken, the Imparlance Roll is the warrant to amend the
Subsequent Roll: and if the Imparlance Roll be mistaken, and the Issue Roll
both, yet if the Original Writ be right, all the subsequent Writs and Rolls
are amendable by the Original.

If the Defendant pleads a special Plea, he may wave it the same Term before it
be entered, or any Replication made thereunto, and plead the general Issue; but
if the Term be past, it is intended to be entered, and therefore cannot be
altered or waved without consent or motion in Court: yet if in truth the Plea
be not entered, but still in Paper it may be amended upon payment of Costs.

Of Reading Demurrers, Special Verdicts, etc. in Court; and the course used
therein by the Prothonotaries.
AFter the Bar have been once heard over, then Records of Demurrers and Special
Verdicts are read, and Wagers of Law taken by the Secondaries. In order, the
first Prothonatory begins first, and then the second and third Prothonotary in
their courses; and until the Books be delivered to the Judges, and the Record
read, the matter in Law ought not to be spoke to at the Bar.

Of the Chief Prothonotary.
THe chief Prothonotary swears all the Officers and Attorneys of the Court,
and enters the Admissions of Record for the Officers, and for the Attorneys, he
enters them in his Remembrance Roll, that they were, Jurati in Curia, and makes
certificate thereof unto the Clerk of the Warrants, by which he enters the
Attorney's name into the Roll.

The chief Prothonotary ought to enter all Patents made to the Justices or
Officers of this Court, and other Patents of Grace by the King to the Court,
and ought to have the first Plea Roll, and the first Common Roll of the Court,
and to enter all Writs of Adjournment of the Terms.

Of the Teste's and Retorns of Writs in all Actions real and personal, and
those brought by Attachment of Privilege, etc.
THere must be nine retorns between the Test, and the retorn inclusive of all
Writs of Formidon, Writs of Right, Ayel, etc. and in Dower five retorns, and in
all other Personal Actions fifteen days, except in Actions brought by
Attachment of Privilege which are retornable, de die in diem: and the like is,
where the suit is by Bill against a Privileged Person, in which cases, the
Continuances are, de die in diem, and always upon a day certain, and not upon
a common Retorn.

The ancient course of giving Warrants to confess Judgments.
THe Principal in a Bond might formerly have given Warrant to appear for
himself and his Sureties, and to confess Judgment for all, and it was Warranted
by the course of the Court: But if the Surety dyed, the Principal could not
confess Judgment against the Executor of the Surety, for then he should take
away his Plea of plene Administravit: And so it was if the Principal dyed, his
Executor could not confess Judgment against the Surety. But this Practice is
quite altered, so that no Principal or other can give Warrant for any but
himself only.

Of Renewing Judgments by Scire facias.
IF the Plaintiff in a Judgment dies, his Executor must renew the Judgment by
one Scirec facias; but otherwise it is where the Defendant dies, there must be
two Writs of Scire facias, unless there be Scire feci returned by the Sheriff
upon the first Writ of Scire facias, for one Scire feci does amount to as much
as two Nichil's returned.

Of Persons taken in Execution in foreign Counties
NO Defendant can be taken in Execution in a foreign County, until there be
first a Writ of Capias ad Satisfaciendum, sued forth in that County where the
Action lies, and Non est inventus returned thereupon, and filed; or that there
be an Execution in the Proper County entered upon the Roll, and a Testatum
awarded.

Concerning the Privilege of the Clerks of the Court.
THe Clerks of the Court may resort to the Rolls of the Court, to examine their
own Entries, and make them right, if there be no Writ of Error brought, nor
Rule of Court, nor Recordatur entered to the contrary; in which case the Clerks
hands are rendered useless, so as he cannot amend any thing in the Roll, without
a Rule of the Court.

Of carrying down Causes to be tried by Proviso.
THe Plaintiff must make one Default, in not carrying down the Record of Nisi
prius, before the Defendant can take it down by Proviso; except it be in
Replevyn, in which Action the Defendant may take it down the first time, and
not stay till the Plaintiff makes Default.

Of giving notice upon Writs of Inquiry, and Nisi prius.
BY the ancient course of the Court, the Plaintiff was not bound to give the
Defendant notice of the speeding a Writ of Inquiry of Damages, but the
Defendant, when there was a Judgment against him, then ought to have taken
notice at his peril: But that Course is altered by Rule of Court, and now the
Plaintiff must give the Defendant eight days notice.

The Plaintiff ought to give the Defendant or his Attorney notice of every
Trial by Nisi prius, before it be Tried: But if the Record has been once
carried down, and notice given, then the Plaintiff carrying it down the second
time (or if the Defendant carries it down by Proviso) there needs no notice.

Of Declaring upon Reversal of Vtlaries, and Bayl to Writs of Habeas corpus.
IF the Plaintiff do not Declare within two Terms after the Utlary reversed, or
Bayl put in upon a Removal by Habeas corpus, etc. the Defendant is not bound to
accept the Declaration afterward. But in such case, the Defendant cannot Non
pros. the Plaintiff, and have costs for want of Declaring, because the
Defendant was not Arrested upon a Common Writ.

Of Appearing in Quare Impedit, and Wast upon the Distress.
IF the Defendant in Quare Impedit, or in a Writ of Wast do not appear upon the
Distress, it is peremptory to him, and the Judgment shall be entered against
him of course, without moving of the Court.

Of Arresting Judgment.
AFter a Verdict is given for the Plaintiff, there is four days from the
retorn of the Habeas Corpora allowed the Defendant, to make an Arrest of
Judgment, unless the Habeas Corpora be retornable the last retorn of the Term:
And in that case the Defendant has day until the last day of the Term, and no
longer: And there is no Course of the Court that gives four days after the
bringing in of the Postea, but after the retorn of the Habeas Corpora.

Of Matters concerning the Prothonotaries; and of the Clerks, and Attorneys of
this Court, and their Clyents.
EVery Attorney of this Court when he is first sworn an Attorney, has an
Election to settle himself and his business in which of the three
Prothonotaries Office he pleases; but after his Election once made, he must
continue in that Office, and may not remove from Office to Office, without the
License of the Court, upon just cause showed against that Prothonotary, from
whose Office he would remove: And for the Clerks, they have an Election to be
of which office they will, before they are admitted, but when they have made
their Election, and are once admitted in an Office, they are concluded, and may
not remove without leave of the Court.

So likewise, where a Cause is first begun, in that Office it must continue to
the end of that Cause; As where the Declaration is entered, there the Issue and
Judgment must be entered; and the Execution or Scire facias upon that Judgment,
must be in that Office where the Judgment is; and so it is for Habeas Corpus
upon Bayles, the Procedendo must go out of the same Office from whence the
Habeas Corpus went; and if there be a Scire facias upon the Bayl, it must be in
the same Office where the Record of the Bayl is.

And likewise, every Clyent has an Election to choose what Attorney he
pleases; but after he has chosen an Attorney in a Cause, he cannot change him
without leave of the Court, upon just cause showed against him.

Of Trials at Bar.
FOr Trials at the Bar, they are called in course; the chief Prothonotary
has the first turn, the second Prothonotary the second course, and the third
Prothonotary the third course: And the same course (as has been before
observed) is for reading of Records of Demurrers, and special Verdicts, and the
like for Wagers of Law, which are always called upon the Quarto die post,
after the Bar has been once heard over.

Of Declaring in Causes Removed, as well out of Inferior Courts, as otherwise.
THe Plaintiff that Declares upon a new Original, where a Cause is removed out
of an Inferior Court, must not vary from his first Action, in the Nature of
his Action in the County, or in the Sum in demand; and this New Original must
be brought within two Terms after the Bayl put in, accounting that Term wherein
the Bayl was taken, for one.

If the Defendant be Arrested by Capias out of this Court, and afterward
removed by Habeas Corpus, and committed to the Fleet, and charged with this
Capias, the Plaintiff in that Capias may by course of the Court declare against
the Prisoner in Custodia upon the Capias; and if the Defendant will not Plead,
Judgment shall be entered by Nichil dicit.

Of an Habeas corpus.
THe Habeas corpus is the Warrant to bring the Prisoner to put in Bayl, and the
Bayl must be taken upon the retorn of the Writ, or within some few days after,
and in the same Term, and then shall be intended to be taken upon the retorn of
the Writ; and therefore where the Writ is retornable upon a day certain, there
the course is to put down no day for the taking of the Bayl; but where the Writ
is retornable, immediate there must be a day of the Caption, which must be some
day before the end of that Term next after Test of the Writ.

Of Declaring upon Mesne Process.
BY the Common Practice of this Court now used, if the Defendant be Arrested
upon Mesne Process in London, or any other County or City, the Plaintiff may
declare against him in such County or City where he was so Arrested, or may lay
his Action in any other County in England at the Plaintiffs Election: And the
Defendant is bound to acept of as many Declarations, by himself or his
Attorney, in any Action whatsoever at the same Plaintiffs suit, (real Actions
only excepted) as the Plaintiff has cause to declare against him; but the
Defendant is only bound to put in Bayl to the first Action, (if the case so
require) and only to appear to all such other Actions, as shall be brought
against him by the same Plaintiff, as aforesaid, and to receive Declarations
thereupon, without putting in Bayl thereunto (except in the first Action only,
as aforesaid).

But note that the Defendant is not bound by the Rules, or Usage of this Court,
to accept of Declarations at any other persons suit, than the Plaintiffs; at
whose suit he is Arrested, as the course is in the Court of the Kings Bench;
for that there the Defendant is supposed to be in Custodia Marrescalli, and so
to answer, etc.

Of Nonsuits.
UPon any Writ sued out of this Court retornable in any Term, the Plaintiff
has that Term wherein the Writ is retornable, and until the last day of the
subsequent Term, to Declare against the Defendant, but not afterward: And if
he does not then Declare, the Defendant upon a Rule given in that Office, where
the Plaintiffs Atorney to the Writ enters, may there sign a Non prosedendum,
and take out Execution thereupon for his Costs. And there is the same time
allowed the Plaintiff, to Declare in the Kings Bench, otherwise the Defendant
may there have a Non prosedendum.

FINIS.

