R. Carpenterus Sac. Porcello cuidam Gerasonorum,
Scilicet in omnia praecipiti, fluctibusque datoto,
Eidem porro loquaii pariter et minaci mondacique,
Silentium indicit atque obmutesce.



A NEW PLAY Called The Pragmatical Jesuit New-leven'd.

A Comedy.

By Richard Carpenter.

LONDON, Printed for N. R. and are to be sold at Westminster Hall and the
New-Exchange, etc.

The Prologue.
Enter Galen Junior, a Physician. He holds up a Vrinal with water in it, and
looks on the water. Gal. IT is high-colour'd, shows the blood's inflamed,
Yet pretty clear. The Evil may well be named
Without offense. Something I find of weight
Sink to the Deep; which Mist-like, rises straight,
And clears again. I cannot rightly call
This a Distemper, when I judge of all.
Gentlemen, help a little, look with me,
Whose Water judge you this I cast to be?
You know not. No? Nor shall I tell in have,
Lest then perhaps the man himself be cast,
More than his Water. This I freely say,
The Poets Water it is that made the Play.
And yet no Water-Poets. The Play then,
Is high, and clear, and deep, and clear again,
Just as the Poets Water. Who indeed.
Had he not been a Patient forced to bleed,
Had never Poetiz'd. By this I know He looks on the Water*
He Is rendered Poet from this Comic Show.
He courts you all by me, and recommends
His Jesuit in the Play, to you as Friends.
For him abroad: He gives you notice how
The Devilish himself is turned Jesuit now.
Yet thus declares; He quarrels not with all,
Only with Devilish and Pragmatical
Church-Empericks. As he is, be you mild:
He kills the Dragon, but he spares the Child. Exit.

The Actors.
GAlen Junior, a Physician. Agrippa, a Conjurer. Lucifer, the Prince of Devils.
Lucisuga, Page to Lucifer. Aristotle Junior, a Scholar. Fear, Servant to
Devotion. Ignoro, a Lawyer. Magnifico, a Soldier. Madam Hypocrisy. Pretty,
her Maid. Mr. Complement, a Courtier. Mr. Demure, a Citizen. Gaffer High-shooe,
a Countryman. Mr. See Senior, a Spaniard. Mr. Signior See, an Italian. Monsieur
Kickshaw, a Frenchman. A Beggar, A Bag-piper. An Orange-maid. My Lord Liberal.
Mrs. Dorothy, his Nice. An Angel. F. Wallys, a Jesuit. Sr. John Wit-little. The
singing Cobbler. Pursevant. Constable. F. Tompson, a Jesuit. A poor man, as
possessed. Father John Barnes, a Benedictine. One counterfeiting a damned
Spirit. Mr. Ninny, an Anabaptist. Monks. Father Prior, Father Nelson, Father
Robert,
Key Keeper. Don Lewis, a Prisoner. A Page. A little Girl that sings. Spanish
Dancers. A Woman in a mean Habit. A Boy. Dancers Two Monks, Clement, a Jacobin
Friar, Barrier, Raviliack, Guido Vaux, Tony, A little Jesuit,
A little Monk. Drawer.
The Scene, London.

THE Pragmatical Jesuit new-leven'd.
Act 1.
Scene 1.
Enter Agrippa a Conjurer, and Lucifer the Prince of Devils. Agripp. LUcifer,
Be not retrograde to my Commands.


Lucifer. Agrippa, I must be true and constant to my self. Your Commands are
destructive of Arcana Imperii, the fundamental Secrets of our Kingdom.


Agripp. Lucifer, I presume not to refine or advance thy Knowledge; I
acknowledge the old Angel in thee. But if thou do not answer with obsequious
and rigorous obedience to these my Sacred Charms, acted on the Spire and
Pinnacle of Magic, thou will unhinge the Masterpiece of Combination betwixt
thee and the learned and high-flown part of the world, besides other evils that
are ancillary and dependent.


Lucifer. Great Sir, Speak your Commands more at large, more circumstantially.


Agripp. Give attendance. Look about thee. These are persons whom I devoutly
reverence, who sit high and enthroned in my thoughts and estimation. They hear
every day from all parts much of thee in the world, and of thy Serpentine and
Dragonish Cunning; and the reports of thy deceit, lubricity, policies,
continually crowd in their ears for entrance. Hither they have retired to
receive right, downright, and candid Information. Here stands my charge.
Discover here theatrically, the most deepbottom'd and profound contrivances, by
which thou do amuse, imperil, ensnare the world, and involve it in thy
dragonish tail. My Charge does not out-walk it to thy quotidian windings; and
petty tumbling-tricks. These Heroic Spirits are circled here, to take-a near
view of the great Wheel in its motion, upon which the lesser wheels and waights
wait and attend.


Lucifer. This would untwist my great work, unwind and unravel all.


Agripp. Thou speak under thy self. Thy Policies have been abundantly
dismantled amongst men, and yet thy Kingdom is not unbottom'd, shakes not yet;
yea, stands upon a firmer Basis and Pedestal than formerly. Howsoever most men's
understandings are illustrated, their blind Wills will always be prepossest,
obstinate and deaf to goodness. We bandy words. Thou, though the grand Emperor
of infernal Spirits, art not exotic and eccentrical from my Commands. Be
pliable, be conformable, or praestat componere fluctus.


Lucifer. Mighty Sir, I compose my troubled and tempestuous thoughts: I strike
sail, and submit.


Agripp. Enough. I go. I have omitted no tittle of observance in the steerige
of my Charge, no sacred Character, Word, Ceremony. Slignot thou in the least
Atome or Punctisio of performance. Exit Agrippa.


Lucifer. This proud Agrippa fancies he wields and commands me by a Magical
power merely natural, as a Prince his Slave by a Despotical Dominion. There is
no such power in Rerum Natura. I hold him by the secret Nerves and Ligaments of
a traditional and implicit Compact: and therefore must obey, or discharge my
Hold, damp and dead my Title. Lucifuga.


Enter Lucifuge, a little Devil, like a Blackamore Boy. Lucifug. Your Pleasure,
great Prince of Night.


Lucifer. I am engaged by some Reasons of State, for a time here at London.
Follow me in the dress of a Page, and be ready to be visible or invisible as I
shall design.


Lucifug. I am, high Sir, your both visible and invisible Servant, to be seen
and not heard, heard and not seen, neither heard nor seen, both seen and heard;
to be felt and not smelt, smelt and not felt, both felt and smelt, neither
smelt nor felt; when, where, how, or in what shape you shall direct. Exeunt.


Act 1. Scen. 2.
Enter Aristotle junior, a young Scholar. Arist. This is the Sacred Grove, this
the newest Spring-Garden: Here she dwells. A solitary place, shaped and carved
by Nature into a fit Receptade for such and so sublime a person. Surely, she
understands the language of Birds, the Songs of the Wood-Quiristers, and is
promoted in her Knowledge by them. And here the free and open Air allows her
a more liberal Prospect toward Heaven, when she looks beyond the Birds, and
the Sea-Stargazer the Vranoscopus. Who gives Answer here?

Enter Fear, a Manservant. I most humbly desire access to the Lady of this
Place.


Fear. How do you call her?


Arist. She is universally known by the name of Lady Devotion.


Fear. Here she resides indeed. But access to her is not rashly and suddenly
granted. You must begin at me: my name is Fear. When you are initiated by
sufficient and inward acquaintance with me, I shall with due Fear give you up
into the chaste hands of Innocence; Innocence will innocently endear you to
Simplicity; Simplicity with an unleven'd Simplicity will resign you to
Knowledge; Knowledge will knowingly prefer you to Prudence; and Prudence will
prudently conduct you to the Lady Devotion, who will devoutly receive you.


Arist. I most humbly desire admittance.


Fear. What is your Name?


Arist. Aristotle Junior. I am a Graduate in the University, intending by a
right Line forward.


Fear. You may enter: But first, with a reverent Fear hear your Welcome.

A Song.
Welcome, Scholar, whose Desire, One sings in the music room.
Kindled with Celestial Fire,
Prompts thee to a Pious Motion
In quest of sublime Devotion.
And points with Pyramidal Love
(Flame-like) to the things above.
Leave thy Body where thou art:
Enter thy Spiritual Part.
Then shall then be installed Angelical, These 4 Verses are the Burden, and
sung by many together.
Above thy mortal self, Seraphical.
After, the Virtues here, composed into a Ring,
Shall all encircle thee, and to thy Laurels sing.
First, Fear lays thee in the dust,
And presents a Power just:
Which awes, and commands thy Soul
Not to act without control:
Bends thee to a Law that binds,
And a chiding Conscience finds,
If ought b' indirect: and so
Humbles thee thy self to know.
Then shall thou be --
After, the Virtues --
Innocence stamps thee good,
Checks the Sallies of thy Blood:
Signs thee moral; and refers
Thee to him that never errs,
Moving him to recommend
Thee to the sublimest End.
And the Means in their Degrees,
As he most expedient sees.
Then shall thou be --
After, the Virtues --
Simplicity states thee pure
From false-dealing, and the lure
Of base Lucre, singles Tongue,
Gesture, Forehead, Hands from wrong.
Tutours thy Life; guards all free
From taint of Hypocrisy:
Renders all thy doings even,
Clean as Flower untouched of Leven.
Then shall then be --
After, the Virtues --
Knowledge does adorn and clear
The Soul in her highest Sphere:
Brings high things near to our sight,
Sees the darkest things in light;
Solves doubts, and removes offenses,
Our greatest of Goods commences:
Teaches us what should be done
To end where we first begun.
Then shall thou be --
After, the Virtues --
Prudence, salt-like, seasons Life,
Parting, as the Surgeons Knife,
Sound and unsound: holds the Reins
Of Virtues: holds Vice in chains.
To Practicks allowance brings,
Prescribes manner, measure, things.
Enter then, as you desire, Exeunt.
Toward the Queen your Thoughts admire.
Then shall thou be --
After, the Virtues --

Act 1. Scen. 3.
Enter Galen Junior, Ignoro a Lawyer, Magnifico a Soldier. Gal. Ignoro, Our
very knowing (if I may so speak without prejudice to your Name) and
long-sleev'd Lawyer by Statute; and Magnifico, our magnifying and multiplying
Soldier, be not so readyfooted. By Justice, which you ought to maintain with
your Tongue, and you defend with your Sword, the Precedence belongs to me. It
is my part; first to salute the Lady.


Ign. Gal. jun. I am the right owner though not in possession. My very Vocation
gives it me to have and to hold by firm Tenure. I defend man, and his Heir,
and his heirs heirs to the worlds end in their just and lawful Rights, secundum
aquum and bonum, with respect to all their outward Goods.


Gal. You deal abroad. I come near to him: I maintain him in his inward health,
and soulder up his Body in case of sickness.


Magn. And I defend and maintain the Commonwealth, and general Good. By how
much therefore the General Good is more divine than a Good which is particular
and private, by so much is my Work and Employment more worthy, more noble, and
more exceilent than yours or yours. Upon this your Ground I challenge both the
Place, and him that claims it before me. And my Sword shall uphold my Right
founded upon the public Good. Stand off.


Gal. The second Place is due to me. I am sure I am the better man of the two.
Ignoro, stand thou off. Lawyers of all others are farthest from Devotion.


Ign. Gal. Jun. Unhand me. Gentlemen, bear witness: A mere Action of Battery
secundum statuta. The next Water is brought to thee to be cast, in my own
defense I will break the Urinal about thy head, yea though it contain the Poets
Water. For the present, I am a Sufferer.


Magn. Within there.


Enter Fear. Fear. What demand you, Gentlemen?


Magn. Hither we have marched to visit the Lady Devotion. My name is Magnifico.
I am a Soldier. Little Devotion will serve my turn.


Gal. My name is Galen junior, I am a Physician; and though most of us be
Atheists, a little Devotion is a healthsom Ingredient in some kind of Medicine.


Ign. My name is Ignoro, I am a Lawyer, I desire to take all my Fees, lawful,
or unlawful, a little devoutly.


Fear. Gentlemen, True Devotion is not little. But as Wheat passes through many
hands and offices before it comes to the Table in pure Manchet: So before ye
can be admitted into the Royal presence of Lady Devotion, ye must here employ
some time in learning and imbibing the directions and documents, first, of
Fear, afterward of Innocence, then of Simplicity, then again of Knowledge, and
lastly, of Prudence.


Magn. How? Gentlemen, Heard ye this Lecture? Have we Novitiats and Pupillages
to undergo? We must be set back to School again. A Soldier should not fear,
neither be innocent, much less simple.


Ign. Sir, Once more, My name is Ignoro. A Lawyer is the Phoenix of his age, if
he be knowing above the common level of Noverint Vniversi and false Latin.


Gal. Nor should a Physician be prudent. I must kill unadvisedly, and without
justifying what I do with a Probatum est.


Magn. Adieu Friend; Tell your Lady we return, and go in search of another
Mistress. Exit Fear.

Gentlemen, Let Us be Friends, and hew out our way to better Fortunes. Devotion.
does not become us: It is not in fashion within our Territories.


Gal. The first thing I do, shall be this: I Will take a Vomit, and fetch her out
of my Stomach, that I may have no more appetite to her.


Ign. And thou shall give me a scowring Purge, and I Will send her nimbly going
(...)there way, that I may take Bribes cleanly, nimbly, and with activity.
Exeunt.


Act 1. Scene 4.
Enter Madam Hypocrisy, and Pretty her Maid. Hyp. Pretty.


Prett. Madam.


Hyp. Well and wittily answered: That put together, is Pretty Madam. Thou art
Pretty and witty too. I know that I am beautiful, and I know thee to be Pretty.


Prett. I am your Servant Pretty, Madam.


Hyp. Good again. I am pretty outwardly, and inwardly pretty. I am pretty and
holy too.


Prett. Madam, you are more than pretty and holy, you are exceedingly holy.


Hyp. Girl, thou say truth: I exceed in my kind of Holiness, or I should not
be the Lady I am, Madam Hypocrisy. Well: Call my three English Scholars forth,
that I may see what Progress they have made in my kind of Holiness. Exit Pretty.

Yonder peevish Lady Devotion lives retired, as if she feared Mankind, or that
a Kiss would blast her. I am hospitable: I reject no man. She prepares all
persons by Influence from her inferior Servants: for her presence; as men are
prepared in Turkey for the Baths: I receive all at their first entrance, into my
near Embraces.


Enter Mr. Complement, a Courtier, Mr. Demure, a Citizen, Gaffer Highshooe.
Prett. Here they are, Madam.


Hyp. It Is well. Mr. Complement my both stately and Coutreous Courtier, Mr.
Demure my moraliz'd and civil Citizen, and Gaffer Highshooe my bondst
Countreyman, or Countreyman of the honest party: I am desirous to behold some
fait fruits of your Proficiency in my School. First, Should your Affairs urge
you to profess love where ye do not, or cannot love, to countenance your
profession, how would ye look in such a case, how behave your selves, with what
sweet words would ye accost the person, what would ye say?


Comp. Our honorable Mistress, I would look thus.


Them. And I thus, or thus.


High. And I thus, and thus, and thus again.


Comp. My behavior should be this.


Them. And this mine.


High. And mine as you zee.


Comp. And I would say, Noble Sir, I do love you beyond the faint apprehension
of humane capacity, beyond what all Orators can speak, and beyond what any man
can do but my self; and then in an holy manner, I would swear toot, and second
my Oath with ar eye toward Heaven.


Them. I would say, Dear Brother, I do love you with as much zeal as my poor
heart is able to hold without breaking: my love to you, is just weight
according to the balance of sincerity: yea, I profess, and again profess, and
profess again, that I love you without the Leven or taint of any kind of
Impurity.


High. And I would zay, Master, indeed and in truth now I do love your Worship:
In good sooth I do. I have loved you, I do love you, and I will love you now
and anon too.


Hyp. This is Scholar-like. If your necessities should require that ye cheat a
man, how then?


Comp. Then would I look him in the face with a smiling and amiable
countenance, with all the Graces dancing on my Forehead and Cheeks: I would
join eye to eye; I would open my cherry lips, and show him my white and ivory
teeth in token of my innocence: I would salute him with an earthquake of my
head: and afterward, bow my body to him thus low, and speak all the fairest
words that Cicero could have uttered when his wits were most fresh in a
Sun-shiny morning.


Them. I would embrace him, and gently pull his body close to my heart-side; I
woul music this action with a groan, after the accent of He groans. the Dove
when he courts his Mistress: I would stoop, and hold my ear upwards toward his
mouth, as if I did expect Mahomets Pigeon: I would speak whiningly, and be
ready to weep, and then wipe-mine eyes very painfully and industriously from
the tears which were not. Afterward, I would conscientiously do my best
endeavor, as your Ladyship fables it, to cheat him.


High. And I would first stand aloof off, and strive to look paleas if I feared
him, and send half a score of long-Legs before me: then would I move devoutly
by little and little, every step should zignifie a man of Worship, toward him:
I would no go close, but hold off, as if he were zome fine thing that had
wrought false Miracles: I would look very simply and innocently, after the
manner of us honest Countrymen, or like our country Lombs: I would scratch my
head on this side and on the the other; as if I had a mind to dig up a nest of
good words with my nails: And then, acting prettily with my right hand betwixt
my mouth and my heart, I would say something which I neither meant nor
understood; and cheat him purely.


Hyp. Your Judgment of this, Pretty.


Pret. It Is pretty well, Madam.


Hyp. Superlatively well: I my self could not soar higher. How would ye walk
the streets in a City as this is? Have ye learned all your postures of
Godliness, all your traverses of Salutation, your pious Gestures of
Reprehension, that ye may be thought irreproveably holy, to be performed, as ye
go, on every side?


Comp. I would walk, salute, and reprehend thus.


Them. I after this manner.


High. And I zo, in City and Country.


Hyp. Excellently! Ye all in your kinds, merit a Garland of Preferment. Pretty;
Introduce my three Out-landers: If they have thrived as thoroughly, I am rich in
Agents and Exit Pretty. Emissaries: I shall be able to delude the whole world:
The Devil will hardly keep himself out of the Snare.

Enter Pretty, Mr. See Senior, a Spaniard, Mr. Signior See, an Italian;
Monsieur Kickshaw, a Erenchman. Mr. See Senior, my Spanish Scholar; Mr. Signior
See, my pure Italy; and Monsieur Kickshaw, my Scholar from France; My thoughts
triumph in the Climax, to the top of which my English Scholars have risen:
there wants but the other Wing on your side, and I fly.


See Sen. Madam, See Senior will not be dropping or dropping on his part. I
have learned exactly to kneel upon one Knee, and to draw part of my long Rapier
in my public Devotions, to signify my readiness to defend the truth: to
praise the mildness and modesty of the Inquisition, though it be cruel above
the Galleys: to pretend fullness from a Bunch of Grapes, and a Clove of Garlic,
beyond what all the varieties of England afford. I often pray to the powers in
Heaven, but I swear by them oftener. My heart is most zealous toward the
She-Saints above; but I am yet more servent toward the pretty hearts beneath,
and if they fail, the Beast falls even to my desires. I more love the Image in
holy things, than the Substance: I can be cruel to the raising of horror and
trembling in the hearers, as I have been in the Indies: and leave the Jesuits
to color and cover it with a godly reason; as something may be studied in the
favor of all things, though never so barbarous and horrid: I can bring
torturing whips for England in a Navy, and delegate the Jesuits to forge that I
brought them to whip and discipline my self in the Raptures and Ecstasies of my
Devotion: I am a true servant to the Jesuits in the promotnig of their ends;
but I falsely forget that the end should be good, and the action agreeable: I
work mischief slowly, but surely: I shall perform incomparably more: Let this
suffice to be spoken.


Sign. See. Madam, you will not find me empty; a man so near the Fountainhead
and so wax-like to the Impression of high things: I abound with all the
possible garbs of Devotion, and with Bell-conceptos to garnish them: My Soul is
enticed forth every day at my ears, and I am carried wholly out of my self,
with the Music of the Churches; but I direct little attention to the thing
signified: I have a Seraglio of women in my thoughts: but the for Boy waits
there as most delicious: May it please your Madam-ship; the Turk himself is not
so frolic in this kind of Devotion as I am. I style my self much an admirer
and honourer of the Jesuits: but for the ancient Father of the Society in the
casa professa; he is the man in my breast: I dure let him loose to combat with
the old Devil himself in Matchevelism: I own the holy Monuments of the good men
in old time; and those are abundantly sufficient to save me: to the which I add
a few dull and scanty Devotions; As, once in a hundred years I convert a Jew,
and perhaps a whore when she is rotten, old, and past pleasure: I pass and
repass many godly Legerdemains in the Inquisition; but I seldom convert any
there, except it be into ashes by fire: and if any man prevent me by death, I
make a flame-offering of his carcass, as I did of Spalato's in Campo di fiori;
and that believe me, Madam, was a fat one, I had a godly English Friend, who
came from England to Rome, the other day, and there mournfully complained with
much of your spirit, that he had been horribly persecuted by the wild and
savage English: and in the Rant of his Tavern-devotion, came headlong down the
Tavern Stairs, and broke his neck, beyond the skill of the Bone-setter, and so
his hypocritical mouth was stopped. It belongs to this Story, Madam, that a
devout Spaniard came a while ago into England with intention to convert it, as
having heard that the people were wild, and lived in Woods, and Caves of the
earth: but arriving at Canterbury, and by most plain and manifold experience
finding it otherwise, he fairly, but not softly, returned from thence wiser
than he came. Truly, Madam; we do hatch and patch together many precious and
godly Stories in Italy, which though they be somewhat near to good ends, are
very wide of truth; and yet good Ends must be fought by proportionable means,
and Truth wants not the helping hand of Falsehood to support it: I am your
Vassal at hand to act the rest.


Mr. Kick. Madam, I do not implunge my self over head and ears into Devotion;
because as the Veretians and other high-moving and Eagle-wing'd Italians, I
have a noble part of the Atheist within me: but I can play the devout fool
prettily and modishly at set times: And of all Nations, I do you most humble
service, Madam. For, such a monstrous and long-sided: P(...), such a changeling
and fantastical dress, such a Pedlars-pack of Ribbands, concurring with an
outward form of Devotion, is the top and top-gallant of Hypocrisy. Besides,
the modes and numberless number of Fashions, that never Flanders-Horse was sick
of so many, in benevolous Conjunction with Godliness, pencil forth and give
Hypocrisy in her full splendour. Afterward, the Complements a la mode de
France, which multiply words beyond limit, and above Arithmetic, and recount
to a Lady her both invisible and impossible Perfections, when they meet in the
same point with a scarlet Tincture of Piety, degenerate into perfect
Hypocrisy. Madam, I pretend to Valor and a generous heart: and indeed, when I
was a Boy in long coats, I rode upon a Bear, as our honorable custom is in
Paris, led by the Bear-hood to my Fathers Door; and thence it came, as the
speech of the Vulgar goes, that I could never be afraid afterward of man or
beast. And in Paris, the Captains of our Trained Bands are for the greatest
part Tailors, Madam, as I am, not only because they rode upon Bears when they
were in Coats and bare behind, but also because they are nimble at their
weapon, and to put them in mind of going through-stitch with their work when
they fight: And yet, I confess to you, Madam, that when I am well beaten by a
Spaniard or an Englishman, I cry Mon dieu, Mon dieu: and this is Hypocrisy
too, though of a lower Orb. We plead all with one mouth against the
Inquisition; but par ma Foy, we have a French Inquisition in Paris, otherwise
called the Bastille, which is not paralleled by either Italian or Spanish
Inquisition: And is it not exalted and sublimated Hypocrisy, when we bear a
superlative name near to him above the world, as if we were most abstracted
from the world; and yet we teach the world, and all the Phantasmes and lying
Legends of the world to all the world. Madam, I am old excellent in the
practice of a singular virtue which the precise part of people call Lying:
Indeed I can scarce tune my mouth to speak Truth: And I can swear such Oaths,
as would blister an ordinary man's ears: I am very quick and pliable at
stealing: and then I can salve it, daub it, and guild it over with a Lie: To
tell all, is beyond all my power: For the rest, I rest your Tres-humble and
restless Serviteur, Monsieur Kickshaw, of Paris, Tailor.


Hyp. Europe is mine; the other three Parts are within my Verge: My hopes are
high as the Firmament. My Servants, hombred and foreign, are men of all hours,
weigh all the moments and niceties of Policy, know all the private Overtures
and Inclinations of Opportunity, all the knacks of Hypocrisy; and are able to
vie cunning with all the simple, lean, and fagg end of the world. Scholars and
Friends; howsoever we must bear before us a plausible outside, a fair Forehead
of Carriage, a Gloss of Demeanor; yet inwardly, amongst our selves, we may be
free and jolly; and as the Brethren in private, turn Wine down by the Tail into
the belly of a fat Capon, at a Merchants Table, to compose good Sauce; in like
manner, we may rejoice at due times, with, in, and over the Creature. Let Us
have a Dance in the venturous aspirings of our Hopes, and the soarings of our
present Joys.


They Dance. After the Dance. Prett. Madam, I hear the motion of some
approaching persons.


Hyp. Let Us withdraw. Exeunt Omnes.


Act 1. Scen. 5.
Enter Galen Junior, Ignoro and Magnifico. Gal. Still my Stomach is upon a
blabbing account, it utters all: It disburses faster than it receives: I think
my Vomit will never leave giving, till it gives up stomach and all. I mixed it
very high, and it works accordingly.


He strains, seems ready to vomit, and goes forth. Ign. And my Belly tumbles
and tumbles without end, after this puissant Chemical Purge: I fear, I shall
purge my guts forth. Certainly, I was full of Devotion: I had more matter in me
than I was aware of: O, I must go. Exit.


Magn. The Lawyer has a motion. This false right: Now we cannot jarre in contest
for precedence: the place is peaceably delivered up to me: and I will not
disband, or give a pass to the present opportunity. He knockes.


Enter Pretty, with a Book in her hand. Prett. Good Sir, speak not except your
business be both weighty and godly; I am engaged in my Devotions.


Magn. A Maid as fair as may be, as fair as May is, as fair as a Morning in
May: I am sorry she is bookish: yet our most free, blithe and buxom Girls here,
expose commonly a godly Book on the Cupbards head in their Chambers, where they
continually sacrifice to Venus. Sweet Maid, are you the Lady of this fair
Building? If it were assigned to the fairest of Maids, it would be yours.


Prett. Sir, I may not dispense with my mouth to answer your vain and
impertinent discourse otherwise than thus: You style me Sweet; this Book is
sweeter than all Nature's Wardrobe of sweet things; and for the fair building,
this little Book builds fairer. The fairest of Maids is Virtue; here she dwells,
and here. She point's to her Book and her Heart.


Magn. This Maid transports me. Sweet and fair, beyond compare.


Prett. I beseech you, Sir, be not grievous to me. Music.


Hark: The Music invites me: I must sit down, hood mine eyes, and set my
thoughts flying upon high things, with my Arms pleated in this devout Knot.


After a while. Magn. Having transported me, her self is now transported.

Some while after. Sans doubt, this holy Creature lives many degrees above
mortality.

Yet a while after. I have met with one in History, that desired, and very much
endeavored to see himself sleep; but could never bring both ends of his desire
together. Such a sleep as this in such a Creature, would keep me awake without
sleeping. The Music ceases.


Enter Galen Junior. Gal. O, I am heart-sick still. And no marvel: For the
Intention of the Vomit was, to fetch all Devotion out of my heart. But the
sight of this pretty Heart somewhat eases my dull heart, and relieves me. Sleeps
she?


Magn. No. She meditates.


Enter Ignoro. Ign. I have been so liberal in purging, that I am persuaded I
have left my Soul behind me: O my sweet Soul, Have I then lost thee?


Magn. Your Soul is not so sweet, if you have left it behind you. Look hither,
Lawyer, the sweet Soul's before you.


Ign. She is an Angel.


Magn. Lawyer, You are without circumlocutions, a Dunce. Who ever read of a
She-Angel? or, of an Angel that put on the shape of a woman? I is enough, that
an Angel and a woman concur in some point of similitude.


Ign. She is such an Angel that I should not refuse for a Fee.


Gal. She is warm, as we are: and soft as the finest Persian Silk. She starts
up.


Prett. Be not rude, Gentlemen: Ye have chas't away my purest and divinest
thoughts. Now I am bold, with direct language to demand your business.


Magn. Our business, Fair-one, is; we are ambitious to submit our selves to
your Tuition, and enter here as Scholars.


Pret. Say ye so? Then I in the Madams name, pronounce your Welcome: Pray,
enter. Exeunt.


Act 1. Scen. 6.
Enter Lucifer in the dress of the Jesuits here, and Lucifuga as his Page.
Lucifer. My Charge sits heavy on my heart; but I must amand it to execution:
The grand Machin by which the world wheels toward me, is; when the leading
Clerks abandon candor, plain-dealing, and simplicity, and evade profoundly
hypocritical. For they governing others as the Shrubs of people, by virtue of
the reverent opinion which men have traditionally received, concerning their
Power, Holiness, Abilities, draw them like inferior wheels into a combination
and subordinate motion, conformably to their Ends. The Habit I wear, is the
Dress of an English Jesuit, as he commonly appears in his Country. I will not
delegate the acting of the Part, to any: I scarce presume upon my own
sufficiency, as equal to the Magisterial height of their Performance: Page,
Give notice to Madam Hypocrisy, that I come to take a sensible view of her
Scholars, and adopt the ripest of them into my Service. If all things fall
pliable, because I greatly cover Honor and Adoration, let me be honored
before these people with her loudest Music in my entrance: I follow
immediately. Exit Lucifuga.

No Power so mighty, where their Lore is Law,
As this of Jesuits. They hold men in awe,
As thought, thoughfalsly, wiser than the rest,
More learned, more Scholastic, and the best
Of mortal men. It follows what what they do
Must have the Plaudit of all others too. Loud Music.

Exit Finis Actus primi.
Act. 2.
Scen. 1.
Enter Fear, and Aristotle Junior. Fear. HAving orderly performed the
Injunctions prescribed to you according to the Method and Economy of this
House, I am ordered, as you have heard, by Lady Devotion, to render you to the
place where I first received you. We all hope, that you will retain the scarlet
Dye wherewith you are imbued: Besides, It is our order, that as we sing the
Introit of him that enters, so we give a Musical Farewell to him agreeably in
his dismission. I take my leave, and leave you to your attention.


Exit Fear. Arist. I am humbly thankful.

A Song.
Scholar: although you do depart, One sings.
Carry us with you in your heart
For after practice: Have a care
That you remember who you are,
What you have learned, and how you may
Stand ever steadfast in the way,
Which we have taught: Those gradual stairs
Well practiced, will adorn your hairs
When white with Age, and bring your head
With solace to your earthy Bed.
Then will the joyful Angels Three sing, one after another
Then will the joyful Angels
Then will the joyful Angels meet you They join voices
And with their Songs of triumph greet you.
Then will the joyful Angels
Then will the joyful Angels
Then will the joyful Angels say
Welcome to our endless Holyday.
Snares will be laid on every side:
Be sure that Prudence be your guide
In all your motions. Look before
You place your foot on any shore.
In every place the Net is near:
It will be needful that you fear.
In every place Hypocrisy
Seeming far off, is then most nigh
In real Truth. By a right line
You shall attain to things Divine.
Then will the joyful Angels --
The real Good must first be known,
Then the apparent to disown
Evil completely, and assent
To Virtues crown us innocent
In perfect Morals. When you spy
The first approaches of a Lie,
Step back, then fly for Virtues sake,
As if y' had trod upon a Snake.
Go on with Courage: and your youth,
As with a Gemme, enrich with Truth.
Then will the joyful Angels --

Arist. The blessed Angels constellate here: Yea Heaven it self is translated
hither: Nothing sublunary is more divine: I owe my true life, and all that is
consequent to it, to this place: I must now think my self the last, and least,
and lowest of all men: Speak in the abstract from the Lists, Lines, and Limits
of all Hypocrisy; and act agreeably to the Commutations and Distributions of
Aristotelical Justice: It remains, that I wait continually the falling of the
Dew: The Shell wherein the Orient Pearl is born, opens it self toward Heaven,
begging as it were, one clean drop of prolisical and procreating Dew: which
having obtained, it presently shuts, keeps the door against all outward things,
and secretly transforms and ripens that heavenly drop into a precious Margarite.

May all my Reason owns, hereafter show
The Orient Pearl born of Celestial Dew.

Exit. Act 2. Scen. 2.
Enter Lucifer as a Jesuit, Madam Hypocrisy, Pretty, Lucifuga. Lucifer.
Devotion has been long filing and polishing him: Madam, you must needs intend
and bend your utmost skill to reduce him.


Hyp. Sir, I shall walk up close to what your Commands impose upon me: I will
not lagg behind them, if my power faints not, and except I be arrested by
necessity.


Lucifer. Devotion in all her aims drives at this, to bring you and your Art
and Power to nothing. A thing will run away through many changes, and put on
many strange shapes if the Chemist or Alchymist pursues it, and endeavors the
reduction of it to nothing: This way he comes: I will be near in ambush, that
if your Plot flagg and hang down the head, I may discharge my strongest Machin
upon him. Lucifuga, Wait you invisibly at his Elbow, on his heart-side.


Lucifug. Sir, I will have him on the left side, the right side, the
wrong-side, the inside, the outside, the fore-side, the backside, every side.
Exit Lucifer.


Hyp. Pretty, Let us now sweetly touch all the most Musical strings of
Hypocrisy.


Prett. Madam, Pretty will do all things handsomely.


Enter Aristotle Junior. Hyp. Maid, durst I be angry, I would chide you.


Prett. Madam, durst I be stubborn or proud, I would excuse my fault: yet,
prompted from within, I humbly say, that when I omitted my duty toward you, I
was otherwise busied.


Hyp. How mean you busied?


Prett. I am very loath to answer, lest I should seem vain.


Hyp. I charge you, answer me.


Prett. It comes with leaden heels from my own mouth. In the contemplation of
heavenly things.


Hyp. I forgive you. Thou art as virtuous as fair.


Prett. Now Madam, durst I be angry, I would chide you.


Hyp. Why, prithee?


Prett. You call me virtuous: a name which unbecomes you to badge me with, or
me to hear assigned to my self without a deluge of tears. O Madam, what have
you done?


Hyp. Amiss, dear Maid: I can mingle an Ocean of Tears with your Deluge, in
expiation of my Crime: Forgive me Maid.


Pret. Forgive me, Madam.


Hyp. Your ear: Pretty, Do thou act the Crocodile best now, or I?


Prett. Both are as like to the Crocodile as the Crocodile is like to himself:
All Preambles to the devouring of this Scholar.


Hyp. Let Us change the Humor: Maid, where shall we select and pick forth a
Meditation for the present?


Prett. We have Matter enough every where, Madam. Those two Turtles that stand
billing yonder, are an Emblem of chaste Love.


Hyp. A most happy Subject: Let Us part a little, and retrait inwardly. They
walk apart.


Arist. I have discovered their several glances toward me: Prudence, assist me
farther. Yonder pretty party-colored Adder, watching in the greenest grass, is
truly emblematical to me: I like not these affected Pageants of Devotion, these
painted Sepulchers, these Dunghils covered with Snow as with a fair sheet.
Devotion in the Majesty and Royalty of it, is inward: In the outside, it is like
a modest face, abused if painted: The more sublime the Star is, it appears the
lesser: Deep waters are silent: The rich Ears of Corn, and the Boughs
heavy-laden with fruit, bow and humble their heads toward the earth that bears
them. Chafe and Straw ride upon the Superfice of the waters to be seen, when
heavy things sink, hide, and conceal themselves: The Silkworm folds up and
houses it self in the little Ball of Silk which it makes, and that from its
inwards: Gold is modest in its shining: Jewels, though shining, are small: The
Air is that by which ut medium diaphanum, all things here are seen, but the Air
it self is not seen. The Empyreal Heaven, though so shining, that it is able to
make a continual day amongst us, is hidden: Nihil in mari eminet praeter saxa:
Nothing holds up the head at Sea, but Rocks. The Sun declining, the shadows
increase: Cernendi vis in albugine sita non est: the white of the Eye sees not.
The Seminal and Medicinal Virtues are inward: The Soul is invisible.


Enter a Beggar, leaning upon his Crutches. Beg. Good Mistress, assist with
your Charity a poor, old, lame man.


Hyp. A poor man. A meditation of chaste Love, is agreeably perfected by the
practice of Charity: Old man, I am tender-ear'd: You must not beg of me twice
at the same time. Because you are poor, I give you this; because you are old,
this; and this, because you are lame.


Prett. Alas poor man! I have no worldly goods to give you: I am a Servant.
Yet, because you are poor, I give you readiness of good will, and compassion;
because you are old, and suburb'd near your grave, you shall partake of my best
Devotions: and because you are lame, I give you tears, weep over you, cry with
you.


Beg. God bless you both, good Mistresses I thank you. Exit Beggar.


Arist. Methinks, this Charity is too full of words, too circumstantial.


Enter a Bagpiper. He plays. Hyp. O profane! This is the Music of the
Bear-Garden, and of the Counttey-Alehouse: not heavenly Music: Maid, chide him
hence.


Prett. Depart, O thou profane Person.


Hyp. Desist: It may be this is his way of begging. Sometimes the poor call at
the doors of rich men after this Piping manner: Give him this Alms.


Prett. Friend: Madam gives you a liberal Alms. He both plays and dances now.
He doubles his Profaneness.


Hyp. Let him alone. Having received a large Alms, the poor man is overjoyed.
We may stop our ears, and look another way. After a little while exit.


Arist. In rich-furred beasts their Cases are far better than their Bodies: and
in the Cinnamon-Tree the Bark is much dearer than the Bulk: Suavius olet flos,
cum folia nihil oleant: The Flower is more sweetsented, where the Leaves cannot
be sented, as in the Violet, the Rose; scarlet, purple, or the fine
crimson-Violet, is a royal Cloth, not by reason of the Wool but the Dye: In
our actions the Byas wheels the other way. These hypocritical Juggles are
execrable in themselves, and adverse to me: I cannot endure the presentation of
them longer.


Enter Lucifer. Lucifer. Now the grand Genius of our Society be propitious, or
I forfeit my much desired Prey. Honored Sir, what do you here? This Woman is
no suitable Consort for you. Madam, I know you, and your fair Fairy
Waiting-maid. Quit the Place. Exeunt Hypocrisy and Pretty.

Sir, This was Madam Hypocrisy, her own and very self; and the other was her
acting Girl, her play-maid.


Arist. I divined some such thing: Truly Sir, whosoever you are, I have a
reserve of Honor for you as you profess against Hypocrisy. But pray Sir, let
not my question be unpardonable: who are you?


Lu. I am forsooth, a Father of the Society. You see forsooth, what Swarms of
Schismatics we have in these parts; and how forsooth, that in all Meetings
scarce two men appear, as the Schools speak, of the same numerical Judgment.
Forsooth, the Truth is, the Nation is like a Forest on the Coasts of Barbary;
where every Beast proudly forrageth for himself according to the latitude of
his strength, and combats with every living thing he comes near, either upon
the account of Offense or Defense: So that forsooth, this may truly be called,
and in civil terms, as the Civilians speak, Religio Deserti, the Religion of
the Forest or Wilderness, or the wild Boar's and Bear's Religion.


Arist. Sir, I find you are knowing: Hither I subscribe to your Discourse: And
indeed I would steer any Discourse, that I might be set in as much distance
from Hypocrisy as the Globe of the earth would permit. But you know how
harshly and untuneably change sounds in the ears of all men.


Lu. Pray forsooth, courteously lend an ear: Then only Change is a Defect, when
it is opposite or falls cross to the well-being or perfection of the thing
changed, and is in some kind a degradation of it: This is forsooth, as the
Rhetoritians speak, ipsa luce lucidius, clearer than the light or Sun: because
the Heavens and heavenly Bodies are incessantly changed in their motions: We
are changed for the better in our growings outward and inward: Every season of
the year revels, and causes many changes in the world: which forsooth, cannot
be imputed to the things changed as defects, but adhere to them as legitimate
perfections of their Natures and Beings.


Arist. Holy Sir, I do most highly value your Holiness, and your Learning: and
humbly require of you more particular Information.


Lucifer. Child, give me leave, forsooth, to call you so: For now forsooth, you
are, and shall be my Ghostly Child: I see forsooth, you are ingenious. I will
send you first to Flanders; afterward to Spain; then to Italy; to sublimate
and heighten your Learning and Experience; and that you may learn the Arts and
Sciences where they are best taught. More of this betwixt us in private. Exeunt.


Lucifug. The Field is ours: We have at last wrought him to us: Open
Hypocrisy, Strumpet-like, is too palpable. I am now visible to you.

The Stratagem is then exalted high,
When the Hypocrite reviles Hypocrisy.

Exit. Act 2. Scene 3.
Enter Agrippa. Agrip. I have bound him by Command, and by Promise I my self am
bound to secure with my presence the execution. Anguilla est, elabitur: If we
give him his head, he slips. My Presence will keep him fixed.

Enter an Orange-Maid, like those in the Pit. What seeks this Maid here? Fie on
you; so bold? It Is a Spirit: and I must lay it.


Maid. The Affair refers me to you: and you are here.


Agrip. Be thou Spirit, or Flesh, thou have no part in the Comedy.


Maid. But I have Sir. No long part you would say; but a necessary part I have.


Agrip. Your place is the Pit: and your Business is to wait there.


Maid. And from thence I came.

The Gentlemen there are perplex't and troubled: They complain, that your
Jesuit sends a chief Actour beyond the Seas; and that either your Scene must be
preposterously changed, or they shall be deprived of the principal Occurrences
which happen to him.


Agrip. Neither: by virtue of my first and fundamentel Promise, my power shall
bring him hither at due times, to act over again the most remarkable
Occurrences: and he shall neither know where he is, nor what befalls him. Return
this Answer, with my devoutest Respects. She was going forth, and returns.


Maid. I shall. If you will civilly take your leave of me, I shall present you
with a Sevil-Orange.


Agrip. Is this your custom? He salutes her.


Exit Maid. Maid. No, Sir: but it was in my desires to teach you manners.


Agrip. The Matter partly travels: you shall find,
As Friends, all brought before you to your mind. Exit.

Act 2. Scen. 4.
Enter Lucifer, Lucifuga, Madam Hypocrisy, Pretty, Mr. Complement, Mr. Demure,
Gaffer Highshooe, Galen Junior, Ignore, Magnifico, See Senior, Signior See, Mr.
Kickshaw. Lucifer. Well, Madam; I have dispatched my Scholar to St. Omers, you
may now enter your whole Tribe. Every one shall receive his Charge, and I will
discharge you of their persons. Mr. Complement, your charge is, that you stow
fire in the Court: Speak every where of Abuses; and of a singular discerning
Spirit, and a Holiness which you have, but others are naked of, as profane:
Turn up the white of your eye, and show it, as if that were the outside of your
Soul, according to the Naturalist, Profecto in oculis animus inhabitat; truly
the Soul dwells in the eyes: Draw every word through your Nose, as if it past
through a middle sort of cracked Organ-Pipe: and lift up your hands toward
that which scrupulous men call Heaven, and close them when they are extended,
as if you had fast hold of Heaven. Pretend always like an Apton in the first
onset, true things, and such as are in use with holy men: those delude
irrefragably: The people regard not the tail of the Business: The Snake having
past his head, draws his body after him into the Faction. Tell the people, that
by how much an Element is more near to Heaven, it is by so much the more pure,
^ctive, noble: that the Water is more pure than the Earth, the Air than the
Water; and Elementary Fire than the Air: That the higher the Air is, it is the
purer still, and more subtle: That in a Limbeck the things of greatest purity
and virtue, are sublimated, that is, have to the top of the Limbeck; the drossy
matter falls. Let there be a new shaped Achates in every period. It is not
necessary, that one experiencing if Seawater be salt, should drink up: the
whole Sea: nor that I should foot it over every particular: your own Genius
will direct you forward. There is no more excellent manner of cozening and
gu^ling the simple Herd of people, than with the specious Mantle of Religion,
because Religion out-powers, and, overswaies all in mankind. Mr. Demure, and
Gaffer High-shooe; you for the City, and you for the Country, are charged
accordingly. Galen junior, when you are called to sick persons, and find that
their sicknesses lay close siege to their bodies, first prepare them by some
eloquent Preamble. Say, if you see the water in a calm Ser troubled, and rise
high into the Air, take heed, there is a Whale near. Turn it homwards thus;
Sickness disturbing so highly the peace and tranquillity of the Body, Death is
imminent. Then make reverend mention of the Society, and recount the numerous
Conversions that we have wrought in the world, and press it home to their
Consciences, that they leave us honorable Legacies according to their
Conditions, yea though they beggar and leave succourless their own dear
children: We are not their Heirs at Common Law, but upon a higher account: Tell
them, otherwise they are near to a Gulf, a Precipice: Then while the Iron is
hot, and upon the Anvile, send for us. If need urge, we shall use you in
Deletories, vulgarly called poisons, when we prosecute a pious End. But if any
of our holy Society be sick, they pay you not, because they pray for you: The
Prayers of the Society are above price, and cannot be valued. Ignora, you must
wirebind and enchain your self to the common Rabble in the Decisions of
Law-cases: affect the names of popular and Patriot: desert noble Interests,
though never so just: and though you take Fees on both sides, be sure you herd
it with the Rascal Deer; they couch the safest; they are the more numerous, and
clamorous. If any case offer it self, wherein the religious profit and
emolument of the Society is involved, take all shapes, as the Cameleon at Land,
the Polypus in the sea; all colors, as the Tarrand in the Garden; before you
let your Cause fall: Regard not the poor standing in competition with us; in
balance with us, they are the German Bishops Rats: We are poor, and entangled
in debt; though in truth we were never yet acquainted with debt; that is our
Pretense, enfranchised, guided and guarded with a religious Equivocation; as
far as you know to the contrary, we are in debt. Magnifico, Your charge is
clear: you know your ma^ch: The Word is enough to a Soldier. My three
outlandish Imps, ye must away, each with all expedition to his Country. Your
Business wherein ye concenter, is, to debase and vilify the English Nation in
all your Discourses, all places: Tell your Countries, that they are a people of
degenerous and ungarrison'd Souls, Adamites in understanding; and if they have
any, have but a surface-knowledge, and that most paradox to Truth: That they
live altogether in Forests and Caves, and in the white Rocks from which
England was named Albion; and eat raw flesh, and oftentimes the flesh of
Children: That they are a timorous and soft-fac'd people, unapt for wars; yea
ready to entertain a conquest with most humble submission. Mr. See Senior, Give
your people to understand, that they are the most credulous, and the most
noble-soul'd Nation of all others: That if at any time they design another
Armado for England, they take a special care they do not provide such an other
holy Nun to give a solemn blessing to it; she was afterward solemnly proved to
be a Witch. Pray them, that when they work their false Miracles, they will
carry their hands, and their invisible juggling-Hair more covertly and
cleverly: The falsehood of some these times, has been Chrystal-clear in the
view of Reason: the most learned Laureat's of Spain it self, were confounded in
the sight of them; and the Inquisition it self was angry, because they were not
acted with more nimbleness. Tell them, their most profane and bawdy Comedies
in their Processions on their greatest days, are not convenient. I cannot be
infinite. Commend my brotherly Respects to Father Escobar at Valladolid: Tell
him, his Morals thrive wonderfully: The Mystery of Jesuitisme is little
availeable against them: they have overturned all Law, Right, Honesty, and
deified the Jesuit, made him the great God of Nature, all cases of Conscience
answering, turning, and returning to him, whenas they should return, turn, and
answer to him above. Mr. Signior See, Recommend my most humble Vassallage to
the grand Signior at Rome: Pray his Holiness, that there be sudden provision by
pension made here, for the poorer and scab'd sort of Priests; they are in the
Antecamera to a falling condition: Ascertain to him, that some of the most
active and unquiet Spirits amongst them, have taken Pensions here, to discover
the Mysterious Intentions and Actions of Rome and Spain, and at the same time,
the very very same, have remained pension'd by his Holiness to betray the
Affairs of their own Country to him: Insomuch that of late, one of them heated
and heightened in his Cups at a Tavern, and his Friend desiring to depart, said
with Cynick Modesty, Stay, Friend, the Pope and the Rebel in England (he named
him) shall pay for all: Fail not to lay this at his Holiness his Feet when you
kiss them. We of the Society are glewed by a particular vow of Obedience to his
Holiness: It was the Wisdom of our Patron did it, that our advancements might
be jointly conserved: our Interest is closely twisted and pleaced with his.
Signify to his Holiness, that his wicked Priests get Bastards a pace here; and
then, having been overdoers, and overdone themselves, pretend to be only
Overseems to the Children: So far forth, that one being demanded why he knav'd
it for a Bastard, defended his Act and Monument scholastically with Aristotle's
Ipse dixit; who says, that then a living thing is perfect, quando general sibi
simile in Natura, when it begets a like to it self in Nature. Pray him to keep
the Rithm if not the reason, and uphold constantly the Jews and the Stews; that
we may have more honorable Examples of Jewish women turned Christians, to the
end they may turn whores; which amongst the Jews is highly punishable. Tell him
likewise that false Miracles are greatly advantageous to the Cause, if they be
done as the Roman Schoolmen speak, et si non cast, tamen caute; although not
chastely and truly, yet warily to prevent scandal; wherein our own Honor is
more considered, than the Honor of him who is most honorable. Monsieur
Kickshaw; Load and physic this Nation as far as possibly you can, with the
pretty Muld-sack or Don Quickshot, of your new Fashions: And as old Rome did
abound with the gods of all the Countries they conquered, introduce the Folsies
and Drolleries of all the world hither: That best suits with you, that have the
best name in the superlative degree: And still wiredraw the people here, with
forestalling and diverting their Trade. Forgive my length: My Matter, like an
Ocean, had I given way, had over-towr'd me. Let Us privately rejoice a while, as
Witches have their private Revellings, and then we will take our Leaves.


Hyp. Most gladly, Reverend Father.

They Dance. Reverend Father, they all crave your holy Benediction, in lieu of
a choice Viaricum before they depart.


Lucifer. O, I give it most willingly. Go, my Children, and may your Foreheads
be as walls of Corinthian Brass, and may your tuus lead all Europe. Exeunt all
the Scholars.

Madam, In certain concurrences of particulars, to prevent suspicion, I shall
need a Lady to sustain the person of my Wife: Therefore to palliate my own
Person, I retain you and your Maid.


Hyp. You honor us, Reverend Father.


He whispers to his Page. Exeunt. Act 2. Scen. 5.
Enter my Lord Liberal, and Mrs. Dorothy his Nice. L. Lib. Sweet Nice, unhinge
your heart from that low-orb'd Religion of Popery, which thus imperils both
your Soul and Body.


Dor. My Lord, I cannot. All which that Religion proposes, goes parallel with
the most pure, chaste, and refined Truths. If you do not relinquish me to my own
liberty, I shall weep, until I have not another little drop to stagnate in my
eyes as wanting strength to follow the rest.


L. Lib. What a deep-wrought and rooted Delusion is this? If Ignorance has not
uncoyn'd your Soul, and rendered you unreasonably renacious of your own
Judgment; If your heart be not in a total Eclipse and Epilepse by the vigorous
reverberations of self-Opinion, you will book it there, that all your noble
friends are otherwise devoted.


Dor. My Friends are not competent Presidents to me for the carriage of my own
heart. Noble Uncle, If you take me off from this divine foundation, I shall
ever be in a rolling condition, ever like a floating Island, or the Sea-weed,
and never securely know where to take or keep root.


L. Lib. They are the Jesuits that have done this: they have out-channel'd
their Talents; led them through all the Meanders and Labyrinths of Error, and
stated them incompatible and inconsistent with Truth. Dear Cozen, I pity you;
you have taken a wandering Star for the Pole.


Dor. Noble Sir, you borrow your name from the Nobleness of our Family: I
conjure you by all the lineal and collateral descents of it, to allow me
liberty of Conscience.


L. Lib. I may not: My Conscience swaies me the other way. You want nothing: No
Pleasures are denied to you; of which my House flows with Variety. you are in
the Milky way to peace of mind, if you can bend your heart to walk in it.


Dor. There is no peace without the quiet enjoyment and exercise of Religion.


Enter Lucifuga. Lucif. Madam, I belong to a most Reverend Father of the
Society, to whom your most distressed condition is made known. He will be here
quickly, and you may have the benefit of Confession.


Dor. Dear Boy, that cannot be; I am not permitted to speak with any person in
private.


Lucif. Madam, the Father is wise: he will find a way.


L. Lib. Poor Girl! I bleed inwardly for her: Before she fell into this Trance,
her Soul was encaged and engaged like a Bird of Paradise in a pure Body; like
the Bird which the Indians call in their Language Manuco Diata, Aviculam Dei,
the little Bird of God, because it is never seen on the ground, but dead: She
was dressed modestly, and like one of the Sister-hood: Now her hair is
mathematically trimmed, curled figure-fashion, and with exquisite Artifice woven
into Nets and Snares. Howsoever her heart is qualified, she has more of the
world upon her back, than formerly. It is a notorious folly, to be proud of a
rich Scarf holding up a lame Arm, or of a gay Garment covering our Nakedness.
Escobar the Spanish Jesuit has opened a broad way to these loose and
heathenish Dresses. O the Jesuits! Surgeons are modest-handed, wary, and soft
in their touches, but Murderers care not where they strike, cut, wound. What Is
he? A little Devil. Cozen, are you a Witch too, Do you deal with the Devil and
all? What are you, Sirrah? Whence came you? and to whom do you pertain?


Dor. Good my Lord, Speak not so much beneath your Blood and Education. It is a
Blackamore Boy: Do not such obtrude themselves to us every day in the Streets?


L. Lib. O Cozen: the Jesuits have bemir'd your Affections: and the Will being
surpised with a Passion (be it Love, Anger, or any other) the Understanding in
a Soul divested of Prudence, easily condescends, and represents all things of
the same color, the same dimensions with the passion. Troubled water renders
not the Sunbeams, though most right and pure in themselves, but distorted. The
Chrystalline humor wherein the visive power is Queen Regent, is ^ot colored.
Winnow and sift your heart, to find and single out that which threw you into
this Abyss. He that falls into the water by the breaking of the Ice, must rise
where he fell, or he is lost beyond recovery.


Dor. My Lord, I am your Votary, but I am grounded; I stick close to my Root.


L. Lib. Pray come up to my Proposals: I will send for one who shall free the
Honor of all our Doctrines, which your fancy either from the multiplying or
extenuating Glass, mishapes to you.


Dor. Your Lordship may send for him, but I shall not entertain him: He will be
as unwelcom unto me as a Spectre.


L. Lib. Then let some of your own Learned Acquaintance be called, to plain as
with a Roller, a Cylinder, the way before you: or, be your own Physician:
Cozen, clean the Gold and keep it: Select the Gold, and throw aside the drossie
part: and amongst other things you find, find your Error: You see, sweet
Cozen, that I desire to descend into your heart gently, as the Sunbeams into a
Chamber through the window, without opening the Casement, or breaking the Glass.


Dor. My Lord, you miscenter your hopes. Your Lordship will never be able to
pull the Thorn of scruple out of my Conscience. Good my Lord, surrender me to
my Meditations. Solitariness is my best Companion.


L. Lib. I do, but with some kind of Regret. Exit L. Liberal.


Dor. We who are upon the earth, determining and sentencing from the verdict of
Sense, fancy, at the least in our first Apprehensions, these things below to be
great, and the glorious and shining Bodies above, to be small: If we were
advanced to the place where the Stars are, these things would appear to us very
small, if seen at all, and those would show themselves: It sticks in the
narrowness of my mouth; I put it over to my thoughts. O the littleness and
vileness of these inferior things! In natural things, the higher the Sun
mounts, the less shadows it casts: and in artificial things, the Pyramid
ascending higher and higher, is lesser still and lesser: So manner'd ought we
to be in our outward deportment.


Enter Lucifuga, and one like an Angel. Music. Lucif. Act it to the life now,
and you fasten her. A young Maid believes and loves with equal readiness. Exit
Lucif.


Aug. Maid: Heaven greets you: I come not to way-lay your Devotions, but so
raise and perpetuate them. Let not your Uncle with his out-stretch't
persuasions lay or alhy your Zeal. Heretics are merciless, Iron-breasted,
Rock-hearted, and people of hardened and petrified Bowels: There is no seed, no
footstep of Mercy in then; only perhaps now and then certain arreptitious
emications and Star-twincklings of natural, moral, and old- Roman tenderness.
If any of these, walking in the painted Galleries of their Imagination, fancy
they do works of mercy, when they do thus and thus because others have done so
and so before them, they miscarry; For their Mercy is as their Belief, is
beleper'd by it; and the stream cannot be cleaner, clearer, higher than the
Fountain, or the Branch purer and more generous than the Root. The Magnetisme
of Piery has wrought upon you; and the Torpedo and Remora, the World and
Heresy, the Devils Factors, should act no farther by their secret Influx upon
your Breast: You have given your Faith to the Firmament, and you must not
follow in the train of the Planets; that is, move on, and retrait in the same
Line, and in going forward be sometimes periodical and stationary. You are
Heaven-sixt: beware of sublunary Divinity. Relapses are dangerous: because
Nature after a sickness is unarmed, and left unable to resist their Assaults.
You must pass as a beloved Mirror of Patience, through all the Topics and
Tacticks of Affliction: which like Galilaeus his Glass, brings most remote
things near to you.

Fear not: He that exhorts to what you do,
Joins two in one, exhorts and praises too. Exit.

Dor. I am scarce yet recollected. O now for an eye-cataclysme, till I go to
the place where this Angel dwells, by water in mine own Tears.

Religion that calls Angels from above,
Shows the divinest Intercourse of Love. Exit Dorothy.

Act 2. Scen. 6.
Enter Agrippa. Agr. I present my self now, that I may begin to fall quadrate
or into a punctual Cone with my promise. I have brought St. Omers hither; Here
you shall see deciphered and shadowed what was there actually and substantially
done: We will not miss in an Hebrew Point or Tittle of Truth. I should
afterward translate our Scholar hither from Spain, but I cannot: Time out-runs
us. Where our Matter is infinite, we must circumscribe our selves. Howsoever, as
in the turning of an Artificial Globe, new shapes and Figures continually
appear, so Changes and Varieties encounter you continually. The Poet has
encharged upon us to make have, or you would see nothing answerable to such a
vast Orb of Matter. Exit.


Aristotle Junior, in a Chair. Arist. The Jesuits here have set me under Lock
and Key, and curtain'd all the Windows. I have no benefit of Light, but in one
corner, where a little Ray peeps in upon a Picture. And the Picture represents
the Hollanders as having taken a Ship, wherein were many Jesuits, and thrown
them overboard into the Sea: but in vain, for the Jesuits lie all upon the
Surface of the water, with their faces looking comfortably toward Heaven, and
cannot sink, but are all sustained by Miracle: It is strange that the Jesuits
being men so weighty in worth, should now be so light, and not worth their
weight either in Gold or ought else. I hear likewise, that they use dark
Chambers, and Pictures presenting Homicides, to sad and tragical ends: It is
whispered by their own Pupils here. This my present Employment they call their
exercise: And it was imposed upon me in my entrance, to search my Inwards
whether I have a Call to be a Jesuit or no. I do not like these quotidian and
ubiquetary Miracles; nor this warping of divine things to self ends. Hypocrisy
haunts me still: The Picture, Image, or the Representation in a Looking-glass,
that shows a Face less than it is, may happily be like the Face it shows, and
symmetrical with it; but the Representation, Image, or Picture that swells up
the Face, and allows it greater, except it be wrough so for the suppliance of
what is lost by distance, attempts above it self, is monstr ous, and cannot be
like its Archetype; because Proportion is retained in Representations which are
lesser than the life, but in such as are greater, the Composition is
discomposed, and the Proportion seatter'd. He opens the Lock.


Enter Father Wallis, a Jesuit, in his Habit. F. Wallis. I wish forsooth all
happiness to you: Child, how fare you forsooth in your heavenly Meditations? I
have brought you a Relick here of most high consideration; a, Feather forsooth
of the wing of an Archangel. Look not upon it but with due reverence.


Arist. Father forsooth, my Meditations gain and win much upon me: But when I
was a Cantabrigian, as having been matriculated in that University, my Master
taught me that Angels were immaterial and incorporeal; and that they appear in
the shapes of young men, to signify their strength, virtue, and power, and
that they are winged in the Picture, to set in view their readiness and
quickness in their moving from one place to another.


F. Wallis. Your Cantabrigians forsooth, are fallen as from Religion, so from
Learning. We of the Society are Antistites, Atlantes, and Heroes Literarum, the
most learned of all the world.


Arist. This is a Feather from a West-Indian Bird, which the good Father would
entitle to Heaven.


F. Wallis. And Child forsooth, how stand you affected to our Vocation?


Arist. Father, I have a special observance for your Order (I must speak here
after this Dialect) but I desire to be more experience-proof, before I
determine upon a settlement.


F. Wallis, Child forsooth, you fear want perhaps, because we are vowed away to
poverty. We have always a secular Priest attending upon us, that purchases
Lands for us in his own name.


Arist. And is not this Hypocrisy, which put me upon the wing, and engaged me
to fly our of England?


F. Wallis. Besides, we of the English Society, have a Ship that trades betwixt
London and Flanders; in the which we continually receive and return the best
Goods at the best advantage: and we in these parts, receive ten thousand Pounds
in ready coin every year out of England. You stand upon a broad bottom, if you
join with us: We are above him that wrote, Ego and Rex meus; I and my King:
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Cardinals, Dukes, Generals of Armies by Land and
Sea, fear us, and therefore court us: We are furnished with secret Engines,
able with ease to subdue them and their Families: The Pope himself in the
traverse of the Business, is our Vassal: he loves us outwardly above all
others, because he inwardly fears us more than he fears all others. If any
Cardinal or other person grow into a Favorite, we send from some part of the
world, one of our Order that is allied to him, to reside near him in his Orb,
and maintain him ours. No Prince in the world feeds fuller and higher than we,
if you consider Nature in her ordinary Demands: Be ours Child, and we will hugg
thee thus, and thus.


Arist. Father, I am yours; though not declaratively, yet affectionately: I
humbly desire to remain free a while.


F. Wallis. Be it so. You are ours then, in Affection, not in present
manifestation, implicitly, not explicitly, as the Schoolmen speak. Forsooth, I
set you free. I forsooth, will call a Council of our Fathers, who shall dispose
of you ad melius esse, that you may return to us in the Rebound. Exeunt.


Finis Actus Secundi.
Act. 3.
Scen. 1.
Enter Lucifer, and Lucifuga. Lucifer. NOw the many-wir'd Plot works. My
Engineers from the School of Vainglory, have wild-fir'd all Places. The
Soldier shines gloriously in the Field under my Standard: The Lawyer tongue;
it nimbly at the Bar in my Cause: The Physician gains upon dying people, and
extorts Moneys and Gifts to foment the Combustion: The Preacher is altogether
declamatory and fulminating against mine and his Enemies. The Courtier,
Citizen, Countreyman nobly maintain their Triangle. My Out-landers have spurred
up the Spirits of neighboring Nations, from the earth into theayr, where they
sly (like the Vulture hovering over the Lion and the wild-Boar in their
combatings, as hoping to devour the Carcases of both.) In this Tropic of
things, I have seated the Provincial of our Society here with his Council, in a
Noble House near to London-Wall; whence they dispatch every day the most
nimble-witted Members of our Society, into the Conventicles, and Army. When the
people are pulled up by the root from Religion, they must needs fall back upon
ours.

Enter Madam Vainglory, and Pretty. Come, come: Are ye fitted in all Points?


Vaing. We are, Most Reverend Father.


Lucifer. Thou and thy Maid look as innocently as a placid and fair Child
pressing the Teat. Let Us away. Exeunt.


Act 3. Scen. 2.
Enter Lord Liberal, Sr. John Wit-little, Mrs. Dorothy. L. Lib. Come, Sr. John
Wit-little; This is always the merriest day of the week with us; though indeed
mirth cannot well attemper it self to these newborn Troubles: but we hope the
storm will not long rage, it is so violent. The Transision in Music from a
Discord to a Concord, is very swee^: from a Concord to a Discord, harsh and
unpleasant.


S. John. My Lord: I could wish you would conclude a final and happy Concord
betwixt me and Mrs. Dorothy.


Dor. That will never be concluded, Sir John Wit-little.


Sr. John. And pray, why, fair Mrs. Dorothy?


Dor. Because you are Sir John Wit-little.


Sr. John. I am sure, there is not only Wit-little, but also little Wit in that
Answer.


L. Lib. Let her be as free as Air in her Speeches: you shall have her in the
Exit of the Business.


Dor. But he shall never hold her.


S. John. Mrs. Dorothy, it will be your securest way to take me. I Will be a
Papist or Atheist or any thing to please you.


Dor. You have not understanding enough to be a Papist, nor sufficient Wit to
be an Atheist.


S. John. I have understanding enough, to adore you as my Saint, wit enough to
worship you as my Image.


Dor. Fie, fie, Sr. John; You are profane.


S. John. I will not be profane to please you: and to please you, I will be
profane again; if you please, that I will.


L. Lib. Sr. John, Let her abound in her own sense.


S. John. Sense! I am almost in a mind, she is deprived of all her Senses, that
cannot see, nor hear, nor smell, nor taste nor touch enough in me to make her
love me: Madam, Speak punctually, and to the Needle's point, Will you have me?


Dor. I shall then speak sharply: No.


S. John. Why then, I Will marry thy Wir.


Dor. Sr. John, you must first find another Wit to match it.


Sr. John. Must I, whether I can or no?


Enter Lucifer, Madam Hypocrisy, Pretty, Lucifuga. Lucifer. Where Is this Noble
Lord, whose nature so perfectly consorts with his name? and who is so
large-handed and boundless in his Entertainments, the Lord Liberal?


L. Lib. Sir, I am the Master of this Place.


Lucifer. In a good and auspicious hour you speak it: My Lord, we understood,
that this was your weekly day of Jollity, and I was bold to bring my wife in my
hand with me; that we might ^ive up the rich experience of your Noble
Entertainment.


L. Lib. Ye are welcome. This can be no Priest or Jesuit, he has a Wife. We
stand out of the Gunshot of danger. Sir, our Manner and Economy is, first to
dance, and then to banquet. We excuse no Gentile Person that enters.


Lucifer. My Lord, I run all honorable hazards among Friends.


Vaing. Madam, This is a good man, as they are called, a Priest, and Father of
the Society: now time, and opportunity invite you to Confession.


Dor. But I want the coveniency of privacy.


Vaing. Madam, you may do it in the Dance: It has been practiced by the
Learned Society, in case of Necessity.


Dor. I thank you: I shall not fail to embrace the present occasion.


L. Lib. Come, Gentlemen, and Ladies, sort your selves.


In the Dance she meets him often, often turns with him, and lays, her mouth
to his ear. In the end of the dance she gives him Gold. Lucifer. This is a
Child worth Gold: Her hand was double-pav'd with twenty Shilling Pieces: This
Golden Girl must not be neglected: Give her notice, that I will visit her
often: the manner thus.


L. Lib. Friends, and Strangers, the Banquet attends you within. Exeunt.


Act 3. Scen. 3.
The Singing Cobbler in his Shop at work. He Sings. Cobl. In eighty eight (mark
well my Song,)
The Spaniards were so bold a,
They came with an Armado strong,
To kill both young and old a,
They brought their Swords, Guns, Pikes, and whips,
To make us all confess a,
Our hidden Gold, to load their Ships,
Then kill us nevertheless a:
Take heed, poor Spaniards, stay and muse,
The water's not your Friend a,
Ye will be used as ye use,
If you with us contend a:
This failing, Jesuits laid a Plot,
To blow up Parliament a,
A thing can never be forgot,
That was so bloodily meant a,
They thought to roast us all alive,
And send us to Heaven flying a:
But we it seems do them survive
Here miserably dying a:
Take heed; poor Jesuits, stay and muse,
The Fire is not your Friend a,
Ye will be used as ye use,
If you with us contend a:
At length all Priests become so rude,
So fraught with Spirit and life a,
That they mix with the multitude,
And blow the Coals of strife a:
They babble in the Conventicle,
And Quake it in the Field a,
To make the minds of men so fickle,
Resign to them and yield a:
Take heyd, poor Priestlings, stay and muse,
The Field is not your Friend a,
Ye will be used as ye use,
If you with us contend a.

Enter Lucifer and Lucifuga. Lucifug. Sir, a Pursevant having received
Information that you are a Jesuit, pursues you neat at hand: You are visible,
though I am not.


Lucifer. Inspire me, thou quodlibetical Spirit of our Society:


Lucifug. Sir: You must be as quick as Lightning: he is very near: I almost see
his shadow.


Lucifer. What shop is that?


Lucifug. A Cobblers: they call him the singing Cobbler: and most commonly his
Songs inveigh against the Papists.


Lucifer. Friend, There Is an Angel for thee, lend me thy Apron, Cap, and Tools;
and stand thou aside a little: I am in danger to be arrested.

Alas poor Gentleman!


He sings. Lucifer. The English Monks are merry men,
They drink till they are dry a,
They laugh at the poor women then.
that gave them Charity a:
The Pursevant passes with a Constable:
They are so drunk they cannot say,
Their Vespers in the Quire a;
So drunk they cannot find the way,
From Dinner to the Fire a:
Ye Monks for sooth, reform your lives,
And now more sober grow a;
Leave Cups of crimson, and men's wives.
And let the Maidens go a:
Good Father Elpheg was so drunk,
He could not find his Bed a,
Beneath his Bedsted there he sunk,
There lay all night and bled a,
Peer Boniface strong water sups,
Three or four times a day a,
Until h'as often in his Cups
Be carried drunk away a:
Ye Monks for sooth --
These Monks ambitious to be rich,
Do silver falsify a,
How ill becomes this covetous Itch
Those that vow Poverty a?
In public they look like their Sables
They meditate all kneeling a:
In private, play at Cards and Tables,
Fight, curse, swear, and go reeling a:
Ye Monks for footh -- --
Are they past beyond ken?

Lucifug. They are.


Lucifer. Friend, Happiness attend you.


Cobl. Many Thanks to your Worship: What pity it is, so proper a Gentleman
should be arrested? Exeunt.


Act 3. Scen. 4.
Enter Agrippa. Agrip. Gentlemen, I have now cited Rome hither, the seven Hills
and all: when you have seen our Scholar there; my helm will be needless; he
will presently do his own Arrint, and himself return to you. Observe him with a
near eye; because the place is esteemed as Caput Orbis, the Head of the world.
Exit.


Enter Fa. Tompson, a Jesuit, and Aristotle Junior. Tom. Child, forsooth,
Approach not too near; that Image works Miracles: It has cured the lame and
the blind, indeed all kinds of Infirmities: and which is most miraculous, it
has spoken like one of us.


Arist. Father Tompson, This puts my Belief upon the Rack: And I will
ingenuously give you my Reason; because the devil spoke first in the old
heathenish Images, and this is faced like an apish Imitation of the Devil.


Tom. Pray forsooth, Child, doubt not: you must believe it.


Arist. It stands out of the Zodiac of Reason, out of the Horizon of Science.


Tom. Forsooth, so do all Miracles: If you were not Aristotle Junior, and a
Philosophical Pygmie, but the Aristotle and a Giant amongst Philosophers, you
must immoveably believe what we reach you. This Backwardness attests to a
Dyscrasie in your Soul, a Peacokness in your heart; we may not pride it,
especially in matters concerning our adhesion to Religion. Aristotle's Image in
the Vatican, is more obedient than you.


Arist. But less intelligent. Father Tompson, I put upon me the name of
Aristotle Junior, only to plain it, that I was a young Aristotelian in the
University of Cambridge, and opposite to the Ramists.


Tom. I see forsooth, that you have Paroxysmes still with reference to the old
Heretic in you; We of the Society, in whom Learning and Industry, as necessary
searchers into the Languages Oriental and Occidental, the Heptarchy of Liberal
Sciences, Arts, and all the rich Armories, Closets, and Cabinets of Knowledge,
are met and married, believe it. And I desire, that your heart be fidus
Achates, a faithful Achates to the Cause you have undertaken.


Arist. And I desire, that solid Truth remain implanted in me. Truly, Father,
it was reported in England by our Miraclemongers there, that all the Pictures
in a Priests Chamber, the night before he was taken, sweat; and it made me
sweat ever after when I thought on it.


Tom. Child forsooth, I fear that you will miscarry hereafter: The Sieve put
into the water, is full: Remove the Sieve out of the water, and the water is
out of the Sieve. I know not, with what heart you have come amongst us. The
Abyssin or Ethiopian goes into the Bath black, and black returns out of it.


Arist. Father, I did not take up this Religion, as those who were born of
Parents steering this way; and agreeably educated; who therefore suck so
strongly, that they draw blood in place of Milk, and promiscuously swallow all,
because their Friends were all of the same Feather. I embraced it upon a pious
and virtuous account. I may as well bring the Arctick and the Antartick, the
two Poles of the world together, as enforce my heart to close with impudent
Falsehood, with fallacy that is pellucid and transparent. You may drop this, if
you please, into your own heart like Arabian Gum, and let it congeal and
stick there, that your Soul may be there entoom'd, as the Fly or Spider in the
Gum or Amber. My heart will not receive it: May that be always deep-inlaid
and enameled with known truth: I Will tell you, Father; I saw an Image the other
day, that was removed with a Procession, to a better lodging, because it
wrought infinite Miracles; and the Image was all over most miserably
worm-eaten. Me thinks the Power, if it be a good one, that works these wnoders
with reflection upon the Image, should also preserve the miraculous Image from
Rottenness, and from the Common people of Creepers the worms. I speak the
Dictats of an unbyassed heart; pray interpret all according to the Algebra of
Candout.


Image. Chrissime fili mi, Creed.


Tom. It speaks: A Miracle, a Miracle, in a fit time, in its proper season.


Arist. Dear Father, what said it?


Tom. Chrissime fili mi, Creed: my most dear Child, believe: You believe now, I
hope. O, I am rapt, I am in a Trance.


He sits down. Arist. The good old Father is transported in earnest, or he
deeply dissembles. Whosoever thou art, if thou will gain me, speak my Language:
He cannot. This Image is back-fastned to the Wall: I have read of private doors
in the old Paganish Images. He knocks at it. It is hollow. Who Is within there?
The Tongue within, cannot speak English; and perhaps no more Latin. Still I am
Pearl-and-Coral seeking in the bottom of the Ser.


Tom. A Cunning Youth! What a precious Father of the Society would this man
make? I will hereafter deal more heartily with him.


Arist. O Father, I am abundantly satisfied.


Tom. I am abundantly glad of it, my most dear Child; that is your Name now: We
consume our selves like Candles, in our giving light unto others.


Enter a poor man, as possessed. Arist. Father, what man is this that so
strangely varies and multiplies his faces, and Postures?


Tom. It is, my most dear Child, a man possess't with a Devil: The virtue of
the Image works this extravagant effect upon him. But I shall be plain with
you: I have something within me; it burns and moves like Thunder in my Breast,
and I cannot hold it from you, except I should cry fire. These dirty people
that receive Alms under the name of people possessed with Devils, are most
exact Counterfeits: if they were truly possess't, they would speak all
Languages: The Devil is a prime Master of Languages: He is no Alien from any
kind of natural Knowledge. The permission of these, and the like, are piae
frauds, pious and holy Cousenages; Thus Images and Relics are worshipped
with a more large measure both of inward and outward Worship. We have here in
the Market, Relique-sellers; and they are continually in fee with such a man as
this, who by his Mimical, Antic, and Tragical Gestures, reconciles those
vendible Relics with the Belief of the People, before whom they are exposed
to sale. A thing being set like a Pillar, supposed like a Mathematical
Principle or Postulate, and granted as undeniably true, we may defend and
uphold it by all kind of means.


Arist. But, Father, this is not ut Scholastici loquuntur, as the Schoolmen
speak, who always prescribe, that we should proportion the Means to the End,
and that Bonum ex integra causa, Good is from an entire Cause, sejoyn'd from
all admixtion of evil.


Tom. My most dear Child: The Books of the ancient Schoolmen are crowded with
polygeneous, impertinent and impervious Doctrines of no worth or weight, not
one Grain heavy, as being mere ebullitions of over-wrought, and Feaver-tired
Brains: from the which our modern Divinity is separated by an Ecliptic, as
being transacted in Regulam Plumbeam or Lesbiam, a Leaden Rule; and bowed
appliably to all our purposes: This Rule then obtains, when the Judge bends the
Law to the Cause, and not the Cause to the Law: The things we believe and do,
are infallibly true and good: and the Law must be bended to them by a pliable
Interpretation.


Arist. This Divinity is not divine.


He roares. Tom. My most dear Child: The posses't man expects an Alms: Give him
one.


Arist. Notwithstanding all his various and indefinite Motions, his right hand
balanced with an Alms, finds the way readily to his Pocket. How comes it that
he foames at the mouth so liberally?


Tom. That Legerdemain is advanced from the Apothecaries Shop: And use has
apted his Face, Eyes and Mouth to these horrid Representations. He roars only,
when the holy thing is near, or set in view; and then he expects to be loaded
with Alms. Exit.

Having all he can expect, he is gone. My most dear Child: You have seen Mrs.
Ward and her Jesuitrices, as tender-headed people call them.


Arist. I have Father. We were six Scholars of us; and they set us at a round
Table, so placed, that we sat a Scholar and a Maid, a Scholar and a Maid: and
which way soever we turned our faces, to the right, or to the left, we had a
pretty Maid, a Quicksilver-tongu'd Girl to face us. They told: us in the Crowd
of other things, that they wrought Miracles in Germany, a great way off.


Tom. Maids do you call them? They were English Chambermaids indeed. And the
Miracles they wrought in Germany, were, Three or four of them were there got
with child, and afterward, they miraculously became Maids again. But there is
a Bull in agitation, to come forth with a roaring and raging noise, in
opposition to Mrs. Ward and her licentious Crew, against which there is no Ward
nor Guard. My most dear Child, I am forsooth, very desirous, that because you
are upon your Mission for England, you should see Father John Barnes, a Learned
Englishman, and a Benedictine Monk, sent to Rome, and committed to the
Inquisition here, by his own Order and Countrymen. This place belongs to the
Inquisition: I will presently speak with the Fathers of the Inquisition, and
give you a call from yonder Window. Exit.


Arist. The Sun in Egypt after the Inundation of Nile, heating the Mud,
quartermakes, and half-makes, and when it perfectly makes, makes but imperfect
Creatures, as Frogs, Serpents, and such like. I have read in my Namesake,
every man by nature desires to know: This muddy forging of Miracles will never
promote a desiring heart to perfect Knowledge. The Naturalists have found by
curious Inquisition, that if a Pearl which is foul, be swallowed into the womb
of a Dove, and remain there some while; the Dove will give it again most pure
and orient: Every thing must be tried and examined, according to my Lesson
treasured up from the School of Devotion, in the womb of devout Simplicity,
which womb will free it from spots, clouds, deformity. Yet I find that in all
these erroneous deviations, there is some color or semblance of Truth, or
something like an Asteriske, or finger pointing to past truths. Thus did the
Devils Oracles deliver many sound Truths, the better, under such palliations,
to disseminate and publish their most unsound Errors: Thus does a stink offend
us more, when concomitant with some weak Perfume which it has pro vehiculo,
than if it singly sets upon us; the perfume procuring for the stink, easier
admittance into our sense: Thus Poisons are most dangerous and irremediable,
when joined in commission with a Cordial that is not able to resist them; it
serving to conduct them to the heart, and being unable to vanquish their
malignity: Thus the old Fowlers deceived Pigeons by showing an exoculated
Pigeon leaping and dancing in a Net.


F. Tompson from above. Exit Arist, Tom. St. From the other He changes Windows.
Window I called him: but this is the window from whence we must be Spectators.
It is the Ring-dove that builds her Nest early, and unplumes her skin to soften
it with her own Feathers, when oftentimes her self dies of cold. I would
endanger my life to write this man ours. The turning Pictures show oftentimes a
Lion on the one side, and a Lamb on the other: I have great hopes, that he
carries a Lamb inwardly. Love and hatred are like the two ends of a
Perspective-Glass, the one multiplies, the other makes less: I would gladly
settle him in a Mean betwixt both.

Aristotle Junior, above. My most dear Child, I have procured a Convenience
from the good Fathers here: and we shall see more than ordinary.


F. John Barnes, chained with a Collar of Iron about his Neck. Barnes. The
better to discern the Arteries and the Vital Spirits in them, Vesalius the
Anatomist was wont to cut up men alive: in these they observe the beating of
the Pulse. My torturers are more cruel: they search me through and through
every day, and yet, I live to see my self outlive my self.


Alex. Father, I hear him, but, I see him not: Darkness interposes it self; the
place is as dark as Hell.


Tom. You shall see him presently.


Barnes. Some hold that the soul is extraduce; and that one man begets another,
Body and Soul; and that the Soul is enlightened from the Father, as a Candle
from a Candle; otherwise, say they, a man begets but half a man, and stands
many stairs lower than a Beast, that begets the whole Beast; and that the three
Faculties of the Soul should be infused in man, whereof the two inferior are
begot in Beasts, seems not to be a well-cemented Truth.


Alex. He talks idly.


Tom. They have designed him for madness; because he was Master of a dangerous
Headpiece.


Enter one with a Torch, like a Damned Spirit. Spirit. O Barnes, Barnes, The
torments that I feel, are most unsufferable: and outstrip, outrun, out-fly
humane Apprehension. Thou will quickly be in the same Circle of Condition with
me.


Barnes. Who art thou?


Spirit. A Damned Spirit; who when I was a Passenger in the world, was affected
as thou art, and affianced to the Religion of wicked and abominable England. I
was commanded to tell thee, that two deaths stand gaping for thee with open
jaws in thy way; and it is recorded in the black and fatal Volume of Destiny,
that both shall swallow thee: The Funeral fire shall resolve thy Body into
ashes; and thy soul widdow'd of understanding, shall everlastingly be bedded
with me in Hell. Hogs and Dogs, Cats and Rats are more happy than thou and I. I
must not stay longer, for fear of discovery. I go: my Tormentor calls. Exit
Spirit.


Barnes. All things fall out perpendicularly to my fears. I shall be burnt here
at Rome: and I shall be damned hereafter in Hell: These two, like malevolous
and malignant Planets, are in conjunction: I have oculos pumiceos, eyes of
Pumice-stone: I cannot weep. These desperate Tormentors have sunk me into
desperation: O!


Exit Barnes. Arist. The wise Alchymist, in the whole progress of his Art,
extracts things purer and purer from grosser things. Exeunt.


Act 3. Scen. 5.
Enter Lord Liberal, and Sir John Wit-little. S. John. My Lord, the Gentleman's
Wife that yesterday was your Guest, promised me the sight of a Quaker this day:
I have a great mind to see a Quaker. Their outward appearance is highly
commended.


L. Lib. Sr. John: Toads and Serpents have been found in the midst and heart of
the fairest-colour'd Stone or Marble being hollow. I love to be like the Pearl,
which is united in it self, and called Vnio. If I should put my heart upon the
Wheel, to run round, the sequel would be dangerous, and perhaps like the
famous, or infamous rather, motion of the Wheel, which was first set on going,
and then carried about and about, round and round, with Bags of Sand tide to
the Wheel, and falling still as the wheel moved more and more forcibly, until
the violent motion kindled fire in it, and burnt it out of all Motion, but what
the sporting wind bestowed upon the cold ashes.


Enter Vainglory, Pretty, Lucifer like a Quaker, Lucifuga. S. John. Madam: You
are welcome to my Father-in-Law's house: by that name I commonly style him: I
see you stand close to your word.


Mad. Else I were not enstated in that Honesty which I pretend to.


S. John. Is this your Quaker?


Mad. Yes, Sr. John: This is the Mufty and Head of the Sect.


S. John. My Lord, pray speak to him: I am not wife enough.


L. Lib. Friend: What is your Judgment concerning Religion!


Lucifer. Thou man, who gave thee Authority, thus to question me, thy
Fellow Creature? I am free, and unquestionable in the matter of Religion.


S. John. Quaker, You should uncover your head: This is a Lord.


Lucifer. Man, thou art deceived: I will not put off my Hat, though he be a
Lord: He is but a man as I am, and my Fellow by Birth.


L. Lib. What is your Profession?


Lucifer. I am a poor ingerant Countreyman, a Cobbler by Trade, that profess the
knowledge of Truth in a larger size, than ordinary.


L. Lib. How attained you to this Knowledge of so large a Circumference, if you
be ignorant of Learning?


Lucifer. By Inspiration.


Vaing. My Lord, he is inspirited of entimes, and speaks beyond a man.


L. Lib. The Comet is perfectly circular, except where it blazes: yet wants the
Perfection and perfect Influence of a star: though because it is nearer, it
seems fairer: Besides, it is an Upstare, and risen out of gross Matter. Our
Quaker blazes only in the business of Religion.


Vaing. Now his Fit enters upon him. Maid, give him a Chair. He trembles.


S. John. This is fine sport.


L. Lib. The Ague shakes him.


Vaing. He returns to himself. Exit


Lucifuga. Lucifer. The Nightingale growing fat, cannot sing: I have long
fasted. According to the multitude of Operations (be they of the same or a
different nature) in which the Soul does busy her self, she performs each
particular Operation with less obsequiousness and ability, and therefore less
perfectly. Because the Soul being finite and limited, her active virtue is also
limited and finite; and so fitting and applying her activity to diverse
operations, she gives the cause that each participateth a less portion thereof.
It is not within the Sphere of humane power, that one should at the same very
time, observingly contemplate the Feature of a man's face, beheld with his eyes,
and judiciously bend his Thoughts to the curious and bewitching Strains of
Music intruding upon his Ears; nor in the same instant attentively discern the
Differences and several Garbs of Color and Figure. Had I a hundred
Understandings, and as many Tongues, I have Matter wherewith to lade and load
them. Man, there is yet Terra Incognita, a Land unknown to thee, with respect
unto knowledge and Religion. The truly knowing people, wheresoever they are,
are infallible. He that thinks such a People can fall, fears the ruin of the
Firmament, and is more than somewhat like him, who-being Galens Patient, and
very sick, told him demanding in the morning how he did; that he had been
restless and without sleep all the nigh^; heaving himself from side to side,
and heavily groaning; and had been grievously troubled in seriously thinking,
what should become of him (sick man) if Atlas, weary now at last, should steal
away his out-worn shoulder, and Heaven, with all the Larks in the Air, fall
upon him lying weak in his Bed. Without Infallibility, there is no certainty,
no security. And what are all Professors, compared to us? They are decked like
heathenish Indians, with fine Feathers; filch't from Birds, that when they were
alive, flew near Heaven; while these, because their feathers are ascititious,
cannot fly, can scarcely creep. If they raise an old Truth, like the shape of a
fair plant or flower in a Glass, they suddenly draw the flame or Candle away,
and let it fall to dull Ashes again. Other men are petty Chapmen, and Pedlers
of Divinity: Man, if thou will know, know that I am the knowing man: And man,
thou may know it by this: of a simple and ignorant man, I am suddenly
exalted above my self by Rapture. Persons ill-affected in their eyes, many
times see two things, when but one presents it self: every man in their seeing,
has two heads, four eyes, two Mouths, two Bodies, four hands, as many feet;
and is twice himself, and a double man. Man, thou may think me double and
deceitful, but the fault is in thy Eyes, not in me. He trembles again.


Vaing. Now he goes back to the simple man he was.


L. Lib. This begets wonder. But he that is red through blushing, cannot be
said to have a red face: He that is pale through fear, cannot be said to have a
pale Countenance. As one good or evil Act renders not a man morally and
thoroughly good or evil: we being truly named good or evil, just or unjust, from
the Habits and the multiplication of Acts issuing from them: so a Fit of
Knowledge, fits not a man for the Name of a knowing man.


Enter Mrs. Dorothy, and Lucifuga. S. John. O Sweetheart, Had you been here,
you had seen a Quaker in his Fit: He quakes and shakes like the Leaves of a
tree in a fresh wind.


Dor. Such sights are not pleasant to me, Sr. John Little-Wit.


Sr. John. My Lord, she speaks with the Quaker.


L. Lib. It matters not: I had rather she were a Quaker than a Papist. Tender
Infants are most subject to fascination; she has Age.


Lucifer. Madam, Your Portion being in your own hands; bagg it; and I will find
ways to fetch it: Afterward, I shall convey you to a Nunnery.


Dor. You will make me happy.


L. Lib. Come, loving Guests, receive the Civility of the House.


Sr. John. Madam: You have signed us yours by this Favor: How does your
husband?


Vaing. Well, I hope, Sr. John.


Sr. John. Come Quaker, go with us.


Lucifer. Man, I follow thee. Exeunt.


Act 3. Scen. 6.
Enter Mr. Ninny, an Anabaptist. Nin. I was directed hither by a Friend
belonging to the House, to see a Jesuit in his Habit, who will presently pass
this way. I am an Exerciser amongst the Brethren of the Separation: My Name is
Abram Ninny: and it would be a consolation to me, to know by sight of the eye,
what manner of man a Jesuit is, and how he goes orderly dressed in private.

Enter Aristotle Junior. This is not he.


Arist. I am newly returned from Rome by Sea to London; and I would fain see
the Father that sent me over, and debate the business with him, because it
answered not in all Angles to my Expectation. This is the Jesuits House in the
Savoy, that secretly beats the name of their Founder. One thing more, lies
gnawing at my heart: I find a strange fall of the Leaf in my own Country:
Every man has molded a new Religion to himself. I have a Vision: I am haunted
with Visions, being newly come from Rome: Me thinks, this House is like a
Theater, and thronged with people. Gentlemen: I Will open to you a Secret, locked
up in the close Cabinet of my Thoughts. But, I pray, keep it as a Secret, and
tell it not abroad: neither let it pass into the cold air: We experimentally
find in the world, that Princes have their Jayle; for Offenders, and their
Bedlams for mad people: And I know, that -- I dare better show toward him with
my hand, than name him here, is the greatest of Princes; and that Hell is his
Jayle. And in good sooth I never heard or read of storied forth, never beheld a
place, which can now more appliably be called his Bedlam than England. But ye
will say, How so? England a Bedlam? the great Bedlam of the world? Are all the
people of England mad? Soft and fair. I Answer: No. For in a Bedlam-house, the
mad people have their sober Keepers, their wise Physicians, their civil Waiters
and Servants; and also those, whose Office it is to whip them, and thereby to
awake and recall their senses; and one of the last, I hope I shall be. Thet's
the Secret.


Enter Lucifer, in the Habit of a Jesuit. Lucif. O I am robbed, I am robbed; I
had a Purse of Gold given me this morning by a Noble woman-penitent, which she
stole from her Husband; and another he-penitent coming afterward, has picked my
pocket and robbed me of it; O Villain, Miscreant, Caitiffe! According to Learned
Father Escobar, he is damned already. The Rogue came to Confession to me,
kneeled humbly at my feet, confessed with a sad voice, an humble mouth, sighed,
sob'd, groaned, shak'd his head, looked like a Carcass, and with a face equally
divided and shared betwixt sorrow and care: he cried too; the vile Knave wept,
as I thought, heartily; the tears ran hastily down his Cheeks, as if there were
a modest contention, or striving betwixt his Cheeks, which should* deliver his
tears soonest to his bosom: he kept his Right and righteous hand acting and
tabering at his heart, while with his other hand, his unrighteous hand,
left handed Rascal, he picked my Pocket, and got away my Purse, my Purse of
Gold, containing as much pure Gold, as being well husbanded by our secular
Procurator, would have given our Body here a full and copious Dinner every
Thursday at our Garden-house of Recreation, I mean, every one six Dishes,
whereof one should have been a fat plump Partridge, or something, as the
Logicians speak, equipollent, to the worlds end. The Curse of our General, and
of all our Sociey be upon him: The Curse and the Firebrand thrown down from the
top of the Great Church at Rome, follow him.


Arist. Father, Father, this Passion does not become you, sits not well upon
your forehead.


Lucif. Are not you the Thief? you are like him.


Arist. Look upon me well, good Father, and with unpassion'd eyes.


Lucif. O my good Child, are you come again? Forsooth, I am glad to see you.
How relish you the good things in foreign Parts?


Arist, Father, tanquam in tabella, in brief. First, you sent your Letter of
commendations by me, and it had certain private Marks in the bottom, according
to your private Book of Rules, Politic rules, printed at Rome, and no where
else, which I have now seen; and this was to signify to the Jesuits, that if I
refused to be a member of your Society, they might use me ad libitum, at their
pleasure. Secondly, You sent Letters every Month to the English Colleges at
S. Omers, at Valladolid in Spain, and at Rome where I was, to be read in the
hearing of all the Scholars; and these Letters recounted wondrous things as
done in England, disgraceful to the English, though conducing to the
confirmation of the Scholars in their Judgments, which things were neither
done, nor feasible. The Business of Garnets Straw was meet Forgery; the Painter
afterward discovered his own Folly, and yours; and your different Pictures of
the Straw (I have seen them) gave evidence against you. Fox, the Author of the
famous Martyrology, never believed his Head was an Urinal. The Learned
Churchman of England, did not die a Papist. I could exasperate your ears with
a thousand of these. Thirdly, I never yet saw a Jesuit or other Priest, of whom
I could honestly say, this is a just man, his Heart and his Tongue concur,
Truth and his Tongue are Unison: They are Mountebanks in Religion, and have
Spawns of Deceit and Equivocation in their Mouths: they religiously keep
Matchavels Rule; Bespatter thy Adversary with all sorts of Dirt and filth,
aliquid for sit an adhaerebit; it is likely that somewhat of it will stick close
to him. Fourthly, --


Nin. This is the Jesuit, in the Habit of his Order: a very passionate man: And
now I look better upon him, this man exercised in our Chair the other day,
habited as I am. Jesuit, I defy thee.


Lucif. Who are you?


Nin. A Brother of the Separation. I defy thee, Jesuit.


Lucif. How came you hither?


Nin. Upon my Legs. Jesuit, I defy thee. Thou art an Impostor, a Deluder: thou
have polluted and contaminated our Chair, and I will burn it. I defy thee,
Jesuit.


Lucif. Cnipperdoling, vanish. Thee I defy.


Nin. Romes Janizary, I defy thee.


Arist. Gentlemen, I defy you both. But you two are not so tender-hoof'd, but
you may stable closer together, if you please. You both know, or have reason to
know, that I know you both. Come, come, stand as far off as you can one from
the other: I Will bring you together, I warrant you. Jesuit, and Brother of the
Separation: First, Are ye not both wild-fire-heated, and contemners of
Government, if heteroclite from your Designs? This cannot be denied: the
meridian Sun is not more visible. Come both a little nearer, for this first
reason. Again, you brother of the Separation, have not you kicked against
lawful Government, instigated by the Grounds and Reasons of the Jesuits, their
Schoolmen, Controvertists, Casuists; have you not copied your Motives and
Arguments out of their Champions? do not I know you have? Nearer now on each
side. Yet again. Do you not both in all Nations, where there is an overswaying
and prevalent party, consociate, side, vote, and dance in the same Fairy Ring,
against the party authorized by the swaying Power? Ye do, ye do: Nearer, nearer
yet. I have brought you to halfway Tree on both sides. Still on. Vox populi,
the voice of the people who best know you, as with an irresistible charm will
bring you nearer on both quarters. Are not you named the Puritanical Jesuit,
and you the Jesuitical Puritan? Nearer again. I follow the chase. Are ye not
both so fevere and rigid in your Directions, Instructions, Counsils, as if ye
were both Enthusiasm'd with a singular spirit above all others? Now ye are
within the stretch of arms. Do ye not both with the same quibble of cunning
insinuate into houses by men's wives, and there Lord it over their Husbands and
the whole Family? I must not exceed my portion of time, and speak from the
Center beyond the Periphery. Now come close together, join hands, embrace
according to the Jesuitical Hugg. Why now ye are friends. O let poor deluded
England, be now ashamed of what is past, be provident and circumspect for
hereafter. All was Jesuitical: the Jesuit as the evil Genius, was the true and
only Malignant: In all the combination and complication of the many-headed
Factions, he had access by him self or his Agents to the chief Actours while he
blew the coals, with Julian, at the Devil's Altar. And now ye are coupled I Will
tell you a Story; it has, Janus-like, two faces, as looking Romeward and
hitherward. Rome was with Child, and she brought forth her eldest Son, the
Benedictine; to him as the Heir she gave her Lands: She remained free a while;
at length was with child again, and brought into the light two children, the
Dominican and the Franciscan; to the first, having given away her Lands, she
gave certain Houses and moneys in a Pensionary manner; to the other, having
nothing left, the Wallet, and set him out of doors a beging. She stood clear
again, till at last she was mountain-big with child; She longed, she groaned,
she drew her breath short, she made store of outlandish faces: In the
conclusion she gave into the world a lusty Boy, who being newly born uttered
from behind the Midwifes lapfull, a sign of good luck; this was the Jesuit: His
Mother having given away Lands, Houses, Wallet, took him up, gave him a smart
clap on the right buttock, and said, My dearling, shift for thy self; and he
did so most accurately. Turn the story hither: Our Mother here was with child,
and with child, again, and again. I so much honor the firstborn children,
that I shall not name them in this Comical Air; the Presbyterian himself shall
pass by me, without a glance upon him: questionless he means well, though he
deserves not this Elogy from me, yet I am so sick of the Jesuit and Monk, that
I must praise him. But Brother of the Separation, you were the last-born, have
run with the Torrent, and shifted for your self, to rejoice over the Creature^;
and therein you and the Jesuit are uniform. This is all, I take my leave. Exit.


Nin. And I likewise. Farewell Brother. Exit.


Lucif. Brother, Farewell. I must proceed to a new leven. The name of Jesuit is
now grown ragged, rugged, odious. His murders, equivocations, coosenages, and
the like, are over-palpable. I must translate my Crown, Empire, and Person to
an Order, having more of pious outside. Let me see: there it is: the blessed
Benedictine is the man: he that in public looks not beyond the length of his
grave. His antiquity, and the opinion of the people will assist me.

The Principle stands firm, nothing more neat,
Than to delude you with a holy Cheat.

Exit. Finis Actus terty.
Act. 4.
Scene I.
Enter Agrippa. Agrip. YOur Scholar and ours has put to Sea again for France,
Mr. Hugh the Comedian-Preacher, came from his Master Fieri-facias to him with
such a hanging message, that it discomposed and tempested his thoughts, put him
into a shaking fit: and not without right reason: for one of his Coat and
Constitution was left shorter by the head the other day. He has desired of me
to render him once again to you from Paris; and I shall do it Presto. But I
promised him to present you first with a Dance of Spanish Clowns, as he has seen
them Dance in the Church, by Order from the Inquisition, and as the manner is,
upon the most festival Days, in the Spanish-Churches, before the highest
Altar: this passing with them for a part of devout Worship, and a most
excellent work of Devotion. They come: judge you. Exit.


Enter the Spanish Dancers: they make reverence to the Altar, both before the
Dance and after: they Dance with their Hats off. Exeunt. Act 4. Scene 2.
A little Bell Rings. Enter Father Nelson, F. Robert, F. Prior, Monks, one
after the other. F. Nelson. This Bell calls us to Counsil. Come Father Robert:
but where is F. Prior?


F. Rob. He comes.


Nels. Reverend Father Prior, having lodged this Meteor of a man in the
Bastille, we must secure him there by plausible reasons dispersed amongst the
people.


Rob. Yes, Father Prior, our soundest and profoundest way of proceeding will
be, to give amongst the people, that he is an Intelligencer and Spy from the
Rebels in England, and that there has been a continual intercourse of Letters
betwixt them and him.


Pri. But Fathers, I have heard from persons of untainted reputation that he
has been seven times Imprisoned, and twice Plundered to the last farthing, in
the defense and favor of the Royal Party.


Nels. It slenders not our cause. The business is agitated here, whither such a
report can not easily reach; I have otherwise posses't and filled the
Chancellor; and ordained by his Order and Sanction, that besides his being
Dungeon'd, he shall be punished beyond humane sufferance; for, as the honest
English Tailor holily and cross-legg'd says: he deserves to be stabbed or have
his throat cut.


Rob. Reverend F. Prior, you have Capitulum lepidissimum, a notable headpiece;
and you look so like a carcass, and with such a mortified countenance, so like
the ghost of Godliness, that whatsoever you countenance, will pass for pure
and holy. License me to speak a free word: you remember, that a Noble Frenchman
said to you, Had he but your face in the forefront of his head, he should be
able to cozen the whole world.


Pri. Verily, I was made for my Priorship: I am called to it, and my parts are
consonant and agreeable. I look like an Anatomy, I speak humbly and with a
dying man's voice, like a Saint, and I do like my self. I declare to you,
Fathers, I love not the Prisoner, because my Brother the Franciscan conspired
with him in England, professing, that had he been enabled with his parts, he
would have turned heretic as he did.


Nels. Fathers, I am your Definitor: let me define for you. We will out-wait
this hard Winter. If there be not a settlement in England before the Summer
visit us, we will send him to the Inquisition at Rome, and there burn him alive
to vile ashes.


Rob. Father Bennet Nelson, you speak like an Orthodox Brother, rightly
descended from Bishop Bonner. I will procure in England sufficient provision of
Moneys from the Catholics there for this godly purpose, who will gladly
contribute to such a meritorious work. He is our deadly enemy: he has wrought
against us mischiefs without president, beyond example, above parallel. He
wrote a Book in England, and entitled it, The Serpent and the Dragon, or, The
Jesuit and the Monk, or, Profession and Practice: the Jesuit was but the
Serpent, and the Monk was the Dragon. Now the Author is both Serpent and
Dragon, and deserves to be burnt beyond ashes if it were possible. Plangenti
nemo condolet Draconi: No man condoles with a mourning Dragon. And before this
Book he set his Picture, fetching the Devil out of a Monk in the form of a Pig:
Hog as he was.


Pri. I received a Letter from St. Malloes, signifying, that he with certain
English Merchants visited our Fathers there, every one bringing his Bottle of
Wine, otherwise, as our Fathers there innocently call it, of Crimson; and our
holy Fathers there drank so fully, plentifully and rejoycingly of it, that they
told him in the ecstasy of their joy, he did in very deed deserve to be
Canonized by his Holiness for his charity toward them; and yet, both he and
the Merchants reported, the good men were drunk, crimsonfac'd, and drunk with
crimson: a very plot.


Nels. Truly, Father, there was a noble Personage from England here in Paris,
that numbered this Varlet amongst his Friends, he called him his Chaplain; and
one Winter night, they congealed into company with a good Father here in Town:
he had an imperfection, that he would be drunk every day: in fine, he was
overtaken with drink that night, and slept in a chair: and presently they sent
for a great Glass of Oil, (sit down here Father Robert, and I will show the
manner,) and powered it upon the bare, bald, and holiest part of his head,
saying, O Priest, we anoint thee King of drunkards; and leave thee drunk with
Wine and drowned in Oil.


Rob. Father Prior, and Father Nelson: I did but kiss a Woman in the Old Bailey
at London, and do a little something more to her; and as you shall believe me
to be a true child of the Church, I had but one child by her, a dainty Boy, and
as like my self, as if I had spat him out of my mouth; and this vile fellow set
it going upon wheels through City and Country.


Pri. He is a most pernicious man.


Nels. Fathers, this our Convent of Paris excepted, (and he has been in Paris
many times, and once resided here four years together,) he has lived in all our
Monasteries through the whole Christian world: he lived in our Abbey at
Lambspring in Germany, in our Monasteries at Doway in Artois, at Dulewart in
Lorain, at St. Malloes in Britanny: he knows all our secrets, and all the
secret conveyances betwixt the Rebels and us, and has heard from us uncomely
words lackying thereunto. None of our Fathers in their Monasteries would
receive him into the Habit, lest he should know more of our inside, and bemire
us further: Father Cressy whispered to him in his ear, that he was sick of all
our Monasteries, and he presently talked it abroad. He fancies to himself a
perfection according to the Primitive Model; and he desires and seeks according
to this his Platonical Idea. F. Prior: It is the settled doctrine of the
Jesuits, That he who threatens or intends to publish the secrets of a
Religious-House may be lawfully killed. Now there is a twofold manner of
killing: we may kill directly as the Jesuits do, (which is too public,
incurres too much upon the senses,) or indirectly as we. Let those sufferances
be multiplied upon him in the Bastille, that no ordinary man can endure without
death, (which is a kind of indirect killing:) If his body be of heart-oake, and
he scapes this, to the fire and faggot with him at Rome.


Pri. Fathers, I approve and sanctify your counsel. Here let us center: The
cause is good, the end excellent: the affair must and shall prosper.


Rob. One word in the by. We have money of his which has remained dormant in
our hands these two years: but he must not have it, lest it should serve to
manage him into England, if he should break Prison. And whereas he is upon our
account unraveld three hundred pounds and upwards, besides all sorts of
clothes and other goods which he gave us, and of which we have milkt and
gelded him, heretics would say, defrauded him; now the matter moves upon
another hinge. O the brave Goose-pies that we begged him out of.


Nels. My brain is in labor. Perhaps I shall bring forth another way, a way
more compendiary, to shorten his life in the Bastille. He is there the most
part of his time in pitchy darkness: a Spider in his salt, and there entoomb'd
in her own venom, would be thought to destroy him casually; and then we may
exalt Providence.


Pri. Fathers, It will not be cross to our design, if we likewise inform the
Chancellor that he is a Monk: The Chancellor knows a Monk should not abide
out of his Monastery: This will fortify and confirm the Chancellor in his
honorable act of imprisoning him. For set aside his Priapisme, the Chancelour
carries the face of a conscience.


Nels. It would not be amiss.


Pri. Thus then. We have decreed, and the plot is modeliz'd, let us proceed to
performance, and go on upon this Helix, wider and wider.


Rob. O Father, you have dignum caput cui posterit as devoveat capitolium,
anserina opera praeservandum, a reverend head, to the which posterity may
worthily devote a Capitol, to be preserved afterward by Geese.


Pri. F. Robert, you are always merry. Come let us go, and hammer the iron
while it is incorporated with fire.


Nels. The Monk that is most cunning, and most queint,
Our Maxim says, must be declared a Saint. Exeunt.

Act 4. Scene 3.
Aristotle Junior, lying on the ground in a Dungeon, upon a little straw
mingled with dirt. Arist. O Torment! The pangs of Death cannot be more
grievous: and my pangs are notoriously more grievous to me than the pangs of
Death, because mine are continual. The whole Fabric of my body is so stifned
and benumbed with cold, so bruised and sor'd with the hardness of the rocky
ground, that I cannot use a limb without excessive pain, and shaking of the
whole frame. They have detained me here in the Bastille the space of fifteen
Weeks, without Bed, Covering, Cap, Wastcoate, Shirt, or other Linen, (the
French, my Executioners, robbed me of all,) without Chair, Stool, Table, Fire,
Candle, Water, Knife, Spoone; without any succor for the necessities of
nature, further than the floor of this close and dark Dungeon or Cave where I
lie: and by a little peeping-hole I have discovered a Sentinel continually
standing with his Musket, to receive me, if I should appear in the least part
of me. Dare these blessed-nam'd Benedictines ever profess, that they are flesh
and blood? the wild Indian man-eaters are not more barbarous; nor the brute
beasts of the wilderness more savage. Can it now be denied from the
consequents of this cruelty, that their lives in their Monasteries are
absolutely dissolute, when they endeavor by such unhew'd and Scythian means to
forestall the discovery of them. It is likely they will pull to themselves in
the covering of their nakedness other pretenses, that as Tiberius the Emperor
abused the vestals, they may first render me dishonorable, and then miserable:
But here, two things obtain no small surplussage of confirmation; two things
which walk it and stalk it as open truths in England, though contradiction be
much obstreperous: The first, The people of this Gang, this sharppointed fang,
are most horribly Cruel: The second, Rome cannot stand without the prop of a
Lie. I never hammered any thing against them, but Truth: a Goldsmith is a
Smith, but a Goldsmiths. I wonder not now, that they are so debauched in their
Monasteries, and that their old Monks talk of the evils they committed in
their youths, with such high merriment and complacence: for cruelty supposes
many great sins, has many foul enormities that forerun it. They now act upon
the very Lifeblood of me. Nothing more puts me upon the rack, than that I
suffer all this from the immediate hand of a walking Pedlars Pack, a Periwig'd
people; a Nation of Anticks; a people terrible to none but to one another, as
fearing amongst themselves Morbum Gallicum, the French Pox; exuberant in their
outward and croutching Spaniel Complements, but wretchedly destitute of all
truly-gentile and solid civility; A barbarous extract of Gauls, Huns, Goths,
Vandals, Longobards; Men that have always their Master the Devil in their
mouths; quick to strike and kill, but slow to do it nobly. Let them go as they
are, the Indian Birds or Butterflies of men. May the noble Castilian, and brave
Englishman in a fit time revenge my wrongs upon them. Rejectus a Servis
puerulus, in Matris redit and ruit amplexus: The Child roughly treated by the
Servants whom he fondly loved, returns and runs into the embraces of his dear
Mother. O dear England! I have been so long watching and waking, that neither
my fancy nor eyes perform faithful service to my understanding. It seems to
me, that I see strange things, Pigmies, Giants, strange Birds, Beasts, Fishes,
Serpents, Monsters. All extraordinary stories that I have read or heard of,
show themselves to me, besides portents and prodigies. I hear whatsoever my
fancy delivers to be said. I dream that I sleep, sometimes bedded in Snow,
sometimes in the Waters, in the Field sometimes, where I am pelted with hail.
They will not allow me pen, ink, paper, or light: yet I have made and recorded
in my memory a Latin Epistle, which I will commend to paper, and perhaps devote
to the Press, if ever good Heaven indulge freedom to me. In this Epistle there
is a Latin Hymn: My fancy sings it oftentimes to me. I wish for symmetry-sake,
and because it contains my sad story, that some propitious and unseen mouth
might sing it, reprive and act the part of my fancy, whilst I intend a little
to slumbering.

SONG.
In stramineo and pulvereo Cumulo
Hic jaceo sine tegmine aut Tumulo:
Oblatus Morti, somno vix aut ne vix devotus,
Relatus Morti, Mortuique instar firm totus.
Supulchrum pulchrum vere putans,
Et nec id moribus refutans.
Re, ore, non sane plane idem,
More, Amore qui fui pridem.
Christo, non vero Satanae dicandus,
Huc trador, spero, sordibus purgandus.
Vna in occasum Vergens, oriensque;
Nascens, and simul denascens, moriensque.
Vt aegrotus, frigens, dolens:
Vt Cadaver, rigens, olens.
Vi ablatus, and vi delatus:
Vi Mortis Portis alligatus.
Vagari liberum non est Menti,
Ne Corpus desit revertenti.
Pulso Scabello, fluens, fruens
Augustis Throni Bonis, Donis.
Non flens ipse, video in Scala
Mentes deflintes mea Mala.
Me flente, confluunt gaudentes,
Descendentes and ascendentes.
Sublatus in Coelum, eo liber eo,
Liber in eo cum Deo-versor meo.
Ignobilis per Somnia, pariensque deformia:
Immobilis ad omnia, patiensque enormia.
Et nunc velut elatus, vermibusque rite datus,
Cum Vivendi peritis Primitivis Eremitis.

Enter a Key keeper. Key-k. Monsieur Englishman, you are free from the Dungeon,
and have the liberty of the Common Prison.


Arist. I most humbly thank you, Monsieur: you are a good Angel. Pray be a
little charitable, and help me to rise: O, gently, gently: for charity sake,
gently. O my poor legs, they refuse to support my body. I can scarce enforce
my arms to the least duty. There is a Conjuration of Aches through my whole
body.


He comes upon the Stage, holding by the wall, and sits. Exit Key-keeper. Enter
Don Lewis, an Italian. Lewis, Signior Englishman, I am glad you are dismis'd
and rescued from your Dungeon. Prisoners love here, as being in cadem navi, in
the same ship. I am a stranger as you are, a noble Italian; and therefore, more
particularly sympathiz'd with you. I am commonly called Don Lewis.


Arist. Noble Sir: I am affectionately yours. You will favor me to descend
beneath your self, and acquaint me why you are detained here.


Lewis. Precisely and nakedly, for the speaking of naked Truth: There is an
Italian Bishop here in Paris, a man of sublime power, but of a leaden heart: He
privately professes against the Immortality of the soul; and uses, against all
the Sallies of Nature, a Boy every night, (such is the vile extravagancy of our
Nation.) This I spoke into the open air: And though the Truth of it is as well
and thoroughly known to me, as that I walk and talk, yea, although they
thought so worthily of me here, as to send me their Ambassador to Naples, yet
they imprisoned me. The grand affair of your Country is settled en su ser y
puesto, (I doubt not but you understand Spanish;) or you had been sent to the
Inquisition, and your body had made a Bone-fire there: I am a Roman born, and
know the manner of it; your Ashes should have been thrown into the River Tiber,
to feed the Water-snakes. But your enemies here, were big with hopes, that the
Dungeon would have murdered you. Your own Country Monks were your Hangmen; we
know all here.


Arist. I considered them as being in the condition of Angels, that
Sun-beamlike attend to the world, as helpers of others toward Heaven, and in
themselves are separate from it, and united with Heaven as the beams with the
Sun. I fancied, that as Stars which have the least Circuit, are nearest the
Pole; so men who are least perplexed with business, are nearest to Heaven,
because we cannot remove a thing from earth, but we must exalt it nearer to
Heaven.


Lewis. You have been much entangled in the love of them: but as businesses
commonly move now, it is a putrified course of life in many parts, and
respects. A corrupted Monk is like the reflection of the great Angel-Image from
a Steepletop in Millan, which at one stroke, limbed it self on the Clouds in
the Air, of themselves prepared for such an impression, and only amazed and
amuzed the vulgar heads, who vainly took the vain reflection of an Image on the
Clouds, for a most heavenly Saint or Angel. But when the Monks come down out of
the Clouds, we know them better, because they are near to us: we never find
abroad, men so passionate, so profane: besides that they are commonly drunken
Beasts, and lazy lousie belly-gods; these their mysteries I inwardly know: in
many Monasteries they study Magical and Demoniacal Arts; they learn the Art of
compounding Philters, and thereby draw Nobles to love them above their own
children; they compose poisons of all sorts; they destroyed Henry the seventh,
Emperor, with a subtle and most sacrilegious poison in a Church, and your King
John in a Monastery; the Monk is the Jesuit's great Grandfather; the Monks coin
false money; they falsify stones of middle rank into Pearls, and Jewels; by
the transmutation of Metals, they raise them into a kind of counterfeit silver.


Arist. This I knew done by Father Broughton, an English Monk, at Lambspring in
Germany, amongst the Woods there, who, had he not been a Monk, had ended his
life at Brussels on the Gallows for the like forgery.


Lewis. They leave the Friar many akers behind them, that was the casual author
of Gunpowder: they make powders, the smell of which procures lust, and sets
body and soul on fire: they mix the purest paint for women: their abundance of
idle time incites them as to monstrous evils, so to mavelous curiosities.
Trithemius, a famous Abbot, showed Maximilian the Emperor his wife, even long
after her death, and Verrucam in collo ejus, the very Wart in her neck, by
which the Emperor particularly knew her. I could recount a hundred of these:
There was a kind of mortal punishment amongst the old Jews, badg'd with the
title of Combustio anima, the burning of the soul, wherein they powered scalding
Lead into the mouth of the condemned person, by the which his inwards were
consumed, the shape and outward bark of his body, remaining still with due
proportion. The body of the Monk is extant still, his soul is burnt forth:
Trithemius satisfied royal curiosity, and I have complied with yours. I am a
child of Rome both in birth and belief; but abuses are now grown into a wild
Forest, and men are become as the wild Beasts. It has oftentimes pleaded
against me in my heart, Are there no true worshippers in all the world, but the
three wickedest Nations of all the world? Time will open it self, that I may
happily have place to give you the Story of Rome according to my knowledge, and
the Chronicle of my own memory, from Urban the eighth, and the childehood of
his Popedom, to Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus; the Mountains bring
forth, and the ridiculous Mouse is born. I will not now disease you further;
your indisposition admonishes me. Exit Lewis.


Arist. Your servant, noble Don. The Novilships in the Monasteries, are but
idle, inauspicacious, impertinent, and trifling merriments, put in comparison
with what I have suffered; and yet they would have delivered me up for fuel to
the most implacable revenge of the Inquisition. Graft a Rose-tree, then convey
a grain of Musk into a cleft in the stock, and all the Roses that come of the
stock, will carry Musk about them. I hope that all my after-actions will be
steept in this affliction. I must withdraw. Exit.


Act. 4. Scen. 4.
Enter Sir John Wit-little, Madam Hypocrisy, Pretty, Lucifuga. Hyp. Sir John,
You gave me amongst your commands, to provide for your use a small quantity of
Love-powder; and here I present it to you in this little bag of silk.


Wit-l. Madam, You oblige me beyond world without end, but I must retaliate,
and return you satisfaction. Madam, pray what cost it?


Hyp. It will be abundant satisfaction if you shall please to accept it, and
that it will cost you if you have it.


Wit-l. Dear Madam, I would I were wiser and more knowing, that I might thank
you more learnedly; but I will give your Boy something, and something to your
Maid. And how must I use this Love-powder, Madam?


Hyp. Sir, You must apply the Bag a few minutes, to the Nose of the person whom
you desire to fire with the love of you.


Wit-l. Very good: this I shall dexterously do.


Lucifug. That Powder has no such power attending upon it; my Mistress
trifles with him: but I have a perfume here, sufficiently operative,
accordingly as it is presented. Noble Sir, Pray license a poor servant from the
Blacks, to present a poor something to you as an Emblem, Flag, Ensign, Obelisk,
Pyramid, Trophy, of his most humble service; and vaslalage. You were pleased
even now to give me gold; and I desire to be your grateful servant, and return
your gold presently in a Present.


Wit-l. O brave black Boy! What have thou there that thou would sacrifice to
me?


Lucifug. Only a pair of Gloves, Sir.


Wit-l. A fair pair indeed.


Lucifug. Their greatest fairness is, that they were presented with a grateful
heart.


Wit-l. Where were these Gloves made, Boy?


Lucifug. In Italy, Sir John, and there perfumed in a Monastery.


Wit-l. I know not what a Monastery is, but I believe it is a sweet place, for
the Gloves are wondrous sweet.


Lucifug. The more you acquaint them with your Nose, and smell of them, Sir
John, if my Augury deceive me not, the sweeter you will find them.


Wit-l. Boy, I would fain put my powder upon experience, before I prove it on
my Mistress.


Lucifug. You may, Sir, with expedition. Which of these, my Mistress of her
Maid, do you desire should love you?


Wit-l. I know not which, they are both comely. I could love them both: let
them both love me.


Lucifug. Why then it shall be so.


Wit-l. But how shall I apply the Bag to their Noses?


Lucifug. O Sir, I can lay them both to sleep in a moment.


Wit-l. That will be fine indeed. But how, prithee?


Lucifug. By murmuring a certain magical word in their ears. I shall effect all
this presently. Madam, The fat Vallyes are low and humble: I humbly desire
leave to deliver an humble word to you in your ear.


Vaing. Do so, Boy.


Lucifug. And another to you, Mistress Pretty, preambled with a loving kiss.


Pret. Contented, so that you leave behind you, none of your Blackamoreship
upon my lips.


Lucifug. Fear not; I Will not part from any of it.


Vaing. Sleep takes me by storm. She sits, and sleeps. Pretty yawns.


Pret. That Is my first and last Peal to sleep. She fits, and sleeps.


Lucifug. Now Sir John, use your silken Bag.


Wit-l. Thou art a rare black Boy. My House here in London shall be prefac'd
with the Sign of the black Boy, for thy sake.


Lucifug. I shall be rarer presently, if I fail not in my Prognostics. Sir
John, with your other hand ward the sent from your own Nose, by applying your
Gloves to it.


Wit-l. Thy counsel's seasonable. I am tickled with the thought, how vehemently
these two fair-ones, this pair of Beauties will love me.


Lucifug. Now remove your siege to the other. Sir John, they will love you most
amorously; love you above themselves; above whatsoever is most dear to them, or
the world calls precious Enough; now conceal your Bag. They both start, one
after the other, as out of a dream, and wake.

On with your Gloves Sir John, and avert the smell of the Powder.


Vaing. Sir John, you are natures Masterpiece, the world's chief Jewel, and
earth's prime Perfection; the Sun it self is not more radiant.


Wit-l. Egregious Powder; pure Italy.


Prett. Sir John, This Lady is my Mistress indeed; but you are the grand Duke
and Master of my affections.


Wit'l. Poor Heart. I have powdered you both.


Vaing. Sir John, you are like the Herb called the Tartar-Lamb, that with
secret pullings attracts the juice and virtue of, and seems, like our Lamb in
the fields, to put a mouth to, and openly feed upon the Plants and Herbs on
every side of it. You have attracted both our loves to your self, and we fade
and wither, as being so near you without enjoyment.


Prett. A certain learned Physician was of the mind, that the world would
thrive better, if none but young, strong, and healthful persons should be
parents, and procreate children. Sir John and I are healthful, strong, and
young.


Wit-l. Distressed Girl.


Vaing. I hope and fear, and after the first lineaments of my fear, wipe all
away and hope again, and in the strength and puissance of this last hope, I
will go to him courageously. Pray Sir John, salute me.


Wit-l. Most willingly, sweet Lady.


Prett. His language is direct, and has no enormous obliquity in it; it is of
the finest silk, the softest feather. I presume he will answer me with like
civility. Sir John, I am my Mistresses Ape, and would fain imitate her: pray
give me your blessing, I mean the blessing of your warm lips.


Wit-l. Sweet Maid, I bless thee. O Paragons, thou of Women, she of Maids! In
my Fancy, I am now kingdom'd, crowned, sceptered, throned, and footstool'd. He
starts.

What means this? My Heart, and Head are both dart-wounded together.


Vaing. My love of Sr John, is not an earthy passion, it is rather a celestial
flame kindled at the Planet Venus. Prett. Every thing grows vile when it is
joined with a thing beneath it self, as silver combined with lead: but a thing
is dignified and exalted, when united with a better thing, as lead commixed
with silver. I should receive worth, luster, and splendor, if joined with Sir
John Wit-little; and I should be the Lady Wit-little.


Wit-l. Dregs of women-kind, I abhor you both: I abominate all your sex: the
Toad is not so loathsome to me. Here is my Joy: most beauteous Boy, my only
Joy, I love thee; love thee with weight, and without measure.


Vaing. Now you are fast, Ha ha he. Laugh Pretty, Ha ha he.


Prett. Ha ha he. My Mistress laughs so heartily, that I am her Echo.


Vaing. Had we brought him true love-powder, he would have played false with
his Mistress, whom we destin and shall quickly make over to a Nunnery. Now he
feels the virtue of Italian Gloves.


Wit-l. Who stuck those Lillies in thy face? What Artist so knowingly mingled
the Lillies and Roses there? O my white Boy, my Angelical Boy, I have a
triangular glass in my Fancy, and mine eyes act after it, and behold all rich
colors in thy face. Thy face is like, and not like the Rainbow; in thy face,
there is both Bow and Arrow; from thy face I am shot; I am on fire with such a
conflagration of love toward thee, that I can scarcely contain my self from
falling down before thee and adoring thee.


Lucifug. If you love me, follow me.


Wit-l. He must follow thee who cannot live without thee, or love any but thee?
Exeunt those two.


Vaing. Now the work is upon the wheel, and runs on apace, It grows high, a
short time will ripen it.

She whispers to Pretty. Exit Pretty.


Enter Lord Liberal and Mrs Dorothy. L. Lib. Sir John Wit-little, where is he?
Where is Sir John, Madam?


Vaing. He was here, my Lord, and here he walked and talked, and
all-bepassion'd himself in the uproar of his own thoughts, as pretending that
your Noble Kinswoman did not look favorably upon him: on a sudden, he caught
himself away, without any civil adieu, vowing at the threshold, that he would
immediately travel beyond the bounds of this Island, and never turn his foot
again toward this House, or Country.


L. Lib. Upon my Honor, I am sorry. This is your fault, Nice.


Dor. My Lord, It is my happiness that I am delivered from a Fool.


L Lib. But Nice, That Fool came of wise parents, and is a large-landed Fool;
he is worth a thousand-wise-men of ordinary condition.


Dor. True worth, my Lord, is not measured by the false rule of Riches.


L. Lib. Cozen, Cozen, Where there are riches without measure, education will
fashion a child begotten by a Fool, into a person of true worth.


Dor. The short and the long is, If I should have loved him in short for your
sake, for my own sake I could not have loved him long.


Enter Pretty, smiling. Vaing. Why smile you, Maid?


Prett. There is a Changeling at the door, who begs with a basket hooked on his
arm: He talks and behaves himself so strangely, that he would raise a spirit of
laughter in a stone.


Dor. My Lord, pray let me see him. A little Recreation unbends, and eases me.


L. Lib. Let him be called hither.


Vaing. Maid, call him. Exit Pretty.


Madam Dorothy. This Changeling is your Ghostly Father: from a Jesuit he is
new-alchymiz'd into a Benedictine: such a Gradation being lawful, because the
Benedictine is the more perfect. And your experience will plain it to you, that
he is the far more perfect, I dare say to my self, Knave. He brings the Basket,
therein to carry away part of your portion.


L. Lib. A Changeling cannot endanger my Cozen within the circle of my fears.


Enter Lucifer like a Changeling, and Pretty. Lucifer. O rich Cozens, rich
Cozens, how do ye all here? how do you? Rich Cozens, give something to your
poor Cozen; some bread and cheese, or eggs, or pie, or bacon, or what ye
please, rich Cozen. Ha, ha, he. O, that is my Lord-Cozen: what an unmannerly
fool am I? I should stand a great away off, I should not come near my Lord
Cozen. Good day to you, Lord Cozen. My Lord Cozen is a jolly fine old man: Ha,
ha, he.


L. Lib. Friend, come near, what have thou in thy basket?


Lucifer. My basket is therefore shut, because you should not see what I have
there, Lord Cozen: Ha, ha, he. But in earnest Lord Cozen, I have nothing there
yet, I thank you.


L. Lib. Do thou thank me, that thou have nothing there?


Lucif. I, Lord Cozen, I thank you for nothing, Ha, ha, he.


L. Lib. You shall thank me for something, anon.


Lucif. So I will when I have it, Lord Cozen, Ha, ha, he.


L. Lib. Nice, I commit the storing of his basket to you: let it be well filled.


Dor. I undertake it as a work of Charity.


Lucif. Thank you heartily, pretty Cozen: you are a very pretty Cozen: and I
love a pretty Cozen heartily: Ha, ha, he. And Cozens all, if you be good
Cozens, help me to a Wife amongst you. Lord Cozen, I want a Wife: Ha, ha, he.


L. Lib. Thou know not how to use a Wife.


Lucif. To use a Wife is a natural work, Lord Cozen: and a Natural knows it
best. Ha, ha, he.


L. Lib. He says true. But why does he pull up his right leg hastily in that
manner?


Vain-gl. My Lord, it is the custom of Changelings. I should think it were,
because he belongs to other Parents, and his right foot intends a nimble motion
toward them.


Lucif. Pretty Cozen, Is that your Mother?


Dor. No: She is a Gentleman's Wife in the City here.


Lucif. Gentleman's Wife, and my loving Cozen, how do you? Ha, ha, he.


Vaing. Well I thank you, fool.


Lucif. Cozen, Cozen; have you made a fool of me, that you call me so? Ha, ha,
he.


Vaing. No, no: I am thy Friend. I shall help to the filling of thy Basket.


Lucif. I thank you, Cozen Fool.


Vaing. I perceive, we must not call him fool.


L. Lib. No. The veriest Fools think themselves the wisest.


Lucif. I, I, Lord Cozen; that is the reason that so many rich and great men
think themselves so wise. Lord Cozen, let me ask you a simple question without
offense.


L. Lib. Speak freely.


Lucif. I will, Lord Cozen. My simple question is: whether it be possible to
make a fool of a Lord? Ha, ha, he.


L. Lib. Why truly, a man may make a Lord of a Fool: But it is not ordinary to
make a Fool of a Lord, except it be of such a Lord as was made a Lord of a Fool.


Lucif. Right, Lord Cozen, very right. My back-part itches, Lord Cozen: some
good is coming toward me.


L. Lib. Thou art a Fool in grain, an unmannerly Fool. He comes a gooding.
Nice, Take in the fool with you, and load his basket with good Provision; then
send him packing. Madam, pray refresh your self a little farther before you
leave us.


Vaing. My Lord, you are noble.


Dor. Come, Cozen.


Lucif. I, I, pretty Cozen. Pretty Cozen, I will follow you close. Mrs Dorothy,
a word of advertisement: the next time, I come as a Chimny-sweeper; afterward
as a Tinker.


Dor. I understand you. And you shall only sweep my Chimny, mend and scour my
Kettel. Exeunt.


Act. 4. Scene 5.
Sr John Wit-little a sleep on a Couch: the Boy standing by. Enter F. Robert in
his habit of a Monk, with writings. Rob. I am restored hither from Paris. And
though the Jesuits, Jesuitically call me the Benedictines Carrier; because I
convey Boys and Maids out of England to holy places, that is, Monasteries and
Nunneries, yet in truth I am an honorable Procuratour for the Benedictines. I
have put on my habit here, that I might appear the more venerable to this
Knight, whose vast Estate we sit brooding upon, that we may bring it into the
light ours. The Writings are here drawn, and he is answerable to us, by the
procuration of this good Boy, both in Religion, and all our other Desires. We
intend him for one of our Monasteries abroad: that he, like the Eagle hovering
over the Emperor's Corpse, yielded up and exposed to the funeral Flames, may be
elevated from the Earth toward Heaven, while his Estate perishes from him
under him. It will suit more analogically, according to Logic with us, than
with him. Our Vocation is more high, our lives are more holy, our Persons are
sacred. Besides, we have reformed his Soul; for the which, his Estate, though
great, is but a small payment: If he were able to exonerate both the Indies
into our laps, he could not require us worthily. Our Abbey of Lambspring we
subtly recovered from the Lutherans: we fooled a doting old Abbot with false
Alarums out of England, till he invested us in our College at Doway: Our
Parisian House we purchased by setting a Death's Head, or the Head of a carrion
Calf, upon a Man's Body: Our House at Dulewort we bought with a portion of a
Ghost-led Maid, who now lives near us there, afflictedly upon our alms, and
repents of her mistaken Charity. Our Priory at St Malloes came feathered by a
French Merchant, whom we piously inveigled to his undoing, and afterward
inserted, though aforreign Plant, into our holy Congregation. And if this fair
Estate be added upon a particular and enclosed account, it will nobly support
us in England: and we shall be congenerous and homogeneous (I never went beyond
Logic) with our selves. He wakes.


Lucifug. Sr John, you have well slept.


Wit-l. My Angel-fac'd Boy, I dreamt of thee; thou take up all my Thoughts;
thou begin'st, thou endest, and thou art my whole Business.


Lucifug. Reverend Father, pray show Sr John the Writings.


Rob. Here they are, Sr John.


Wit-l. I, I, I, take all, and more than all. I Will set my Hand and Seal to the
Writings.


Rob. Good Sr John grants all, while you syllogize: I speak not beyond Logic;
when I had learned the Fallacies, I had learned enough.


Wit-l. My only bliss is to move after the steerige of my dear Boy.


Rob. Sr John, when you are dead, you will find your Lands again in another
Country with advantage.


Wit-l. I doubt it not, Reverend Father; you speak Oracles, I sacrifice to you.
Take all, reserved that I may not dis-anchor from the love of my snow and
milky-fac'd Boy: His face is the milky way that leads to Jupiter's Throne.


Rob. Sr John, our most charitable, and our most noble Benefactour, by virtue
of these writings, when they have their Pass from your hand and seal, your
whole Estate is by you given and made over to a faithful friend of ours, that
negotiates for us.


Wit-l. Even to whom you please.


Rob. Had I the least dram or grain of Conscience, this should not be done. The
man is Civiliter mortuus, as the Lawyers tongue it, defunct and dead in Law: he
is not himself. If one write a Will or Testament, and hold the Pen with a dead
Man's hand, that Will will not hold in Law: It was not his Will; because it was
not written by him, with Virtue derived from any principle of life in him. Some
Law I have: No man can cheat ad unguem, quickly and neatly, without a little
knowledge of Law. But peace barking Dog, Conscience, Peace; check me not.
Quodibetical Brains have Consciences of all sorts and sizes, large, little,
short-wasted. Then Sr John, you will ratify and confirm these Writings before
witnesses.


Wit-l. Yes, if my dear Boy speak Angel-lik, and say I.


Rob. And you will retire immediately to a Monastery.


Wit-l. I remit all to my fair Poy's can, did Breast.


Rob. Then I have well preached: enough for this time. As the great
Scarlet-traind Cardinal at Rome, the Son of a Fisherman, when he had gained
possession of the Porphiry-Chair, removed the Net, which he had formerly set in
view, as a Memorial of his low Parentages mottoing his action with these pithy
words, The Fish is caught. Exeunt.


Act. 4. Scene 6.
Enter Aristotle Junior with a long Beard and poor in Apparel. Arist. Delicious
London, once more I salute thee. Thy buildings are now glorionsly beautiful,
if my eyes may sentence for thee. Here dwells Simplicity, here Justice is
enthroned. O People of England, learn your own Happiness, your earthly
Happiness drops and distills from your own hands. Be obedient, and conform to
the good and easy Laws here; and you comprize more than the Happiness of all
the other Fortunate Islands; Arabia the Happy is not so happy, and fragrant as
your Country. Knew ye the slavish condition of France, the beggary of Spain,
the buggery of Italy, Spain, and France, the general wickedness of all the
world, ye would quietly sit down, every one at his own Door, and calmly say,
Heaven be blessed that I was born in little England. Here all Persons are free,
breathe freely, eat comfortably, use freely and fully their own. Where is it so
besides here? Now ye are in joint again, stand Atlas-firm, bear up your little
Heaven of quiet here: or as ye are now the most happy, ye will be otherwise the
most despicable and most unhappy of all Nations. The natural desire a man has
of self-preservation, like adverse Wind and Tide, lately cast me back into
France, and the English Monks there, the sordid idle Monks, more than impaled
me in the Bastille, because I threatened to impound them here, as detaining from
me a fair Sum of my own Monys most due to me. And to guild, to varnish, to
burnish this their unhew'd, ragged, and ragged Action, they plyde my story with
lies of Defense, lies of Offense, lies with heads, but not with feet, lies with
feet, but not with heads; lies with neither head nor foot; lies whispered, and
loud lies. Oye Scholars of our most renowned Universities, set bounds to your
feet, and limits to your Thoughts: I was my Fathers eldest Son, and Heir to a
comfortable Estate of Houses and Lands; and I threw all behind me, to be
cheated, most religiously cheated by secular Priests, Jesuits, Monks, Friars;
but amongst all these godly Cheaters, the Monk is the Grandee, the Pontifex
maximus, the first and Universal Bishop. Two years he held me now fast in
Prison, in a loathed Prison: and after the Business was made public here by my
private Letters, cleared me of the Prison, but unwillingly, but conditionally
that I should be confined there all my life: I consented in the lip: Afterward
pleading that my Body was greatly disordered in respect of health, desired a
few days wherein to physic it (I meant with a better Air;) and in that little
Tract of Time wherein it was supposed I took Physic, hasted privately to Diep,
a Port-Town in France, where I found sixteen English Monks attending the
Passage-Boat: they prevented my Passage with them, and posted away Letters to
Paris, soliciting that I should be stopped; but the Hugonots of Diep past me
over the night following. In all their Houses in those transmarine parts, there
are none left but boys and old Men; hither they are all come. The greatest
Crocodile was at first harbored in an Egg, which is Paulo majus anserino, a
little bigger than a Goose-egg. And yet, the Crocodile is a Devourer of Men:
and when, being horrour-struck, these cannot weep for themselves, mockingly
weeps over them; grows huge, and on to the last period of life; and is
different, not a little from the Goose, in shape, substance, color, manners;
though they favor one another in the Egg. No sensual Creature spreads to so
vast a bigness, from so small beginnings, as this Egg-Crocodile. In two years I
had not the benefit of a fresh Shirt. I had preserved some rich Goods from the
ravenous Officers who took me: And John Baptista Palliot, the President of
Noury in France, my fellow-prisoner, who desired and undertook to secure them
for me at his own house, secured them there indeed, but from me, and for
himself, he, being in account a person of Honor, and I indeed a wrongfully and
poor imprisoned stranger. Another French Prisoner wearied me oftentimes, with
desiring me that he might use my body Sodomitically. The Frenchmen say: Omnis
Jesuita aut Magus aut Sodomita, Every Jesuit is a Magitian or a Sodomite: This
I know not; the other, experience brought home to me. Upon composed and most
deliberate thoughts, I set up this resolution like a Colossus: I will yield up
my life on a Gallows here, before I will set my foot again where proud Rome
does Mistress it: because her Vassals are more than heathenishly cruel, more
unclean than Turks and Indians. London, I joyfully kiss thy ground, which
others kick and tread upon: allow me a Grave here: Thy air seems to me
perfumed: and I am now, as it were, born again.

Distressed Body, Rack of the Bastille,
Now ware the Monks and Jesuits that kill. Exit.

Finis Actus quarti.
Act 5.
Scene 1.
Mrs. Dorothy at the Window. Dor. THe good man, and my blessed Father, now a
Benedictine, has been twice more with me, first Chimney-sweeper, then
Tinker-like; he has performed his part to the last and least point of Action;
and all the money is gone with him, by a most cleanly conveyance. In my
thinking, since he went Benedictine, he has publicly more of of Saint in his
face, and reaches farther and is more active privately. This is the Now of
Time, wherein he promised to come, and divert our household here, that they
being held by the eyes, and amused in their Fancies, I might make my escape,
and steer toward a Nunnery.

Enter Lucifer, leading an Ape. There he comes. Blessed Man, he keeps close to
his Time.


Lucifer. The Silkworm, They make signs. She departs. and the Spider, both
work; and both, out of their own bowels and substance. So far they work
together. Now they differ in their working. One of them only works
substantially. The Spider works for his own private end and gain, (great gain
to gain a little Fly;) The Silk-Worme for others. The Spider works a poor,
thin, weak, black, idle Web; the Silkworm a rich, fair, Silken Substance. The
conclusion falls thus, The Spiders work is swept, and swept; swept down, and
swept away; the work of the Silkworm is a Courtier, and acceptable to Princes.
I deal in Thousands; I work for the Religious Brethren in our Abbey of
Lambspring, and in our Monasteries of Doway, Paris, Dulewart, St. Malloes:
These will feed fat, and pray for me when I am lean and rotten.


Enter L. Liberal, with a staff in his hand, and a Page after him. L. Lib. A
walk to the Royal Exchange and home again, will beget me a good appetite to my
supper. Now Friend, what is your business here?


Lucifer. My very good Lord, no great business: But, if it please you, my Lord:
that is: if it be not offensive to your Lordship: that is: if your good
Lordship thinks it convenient: that is: if your Honor deem honorably of it:
that is.


L. Lib. Speak, friend, leave shaking of thy head, and speak.


Lucifer. That is.


L. Lib. Away with that That is, do not retard your business.


Lucifer. I would make your Honors Servants a little Pastime, my Lord: I, and
my bonny Beast here. An old Ape has an old eye, my Lord.


L. Lib. Well, well, if this be all, we shall agree. The Times are now quiet
again, I thank Heaven: and my House is a house of singular freedom, and of
Entertainment as free as Noble. But what can you and your Ape do?


Lucifer. Do? Rather, what can we not do, my Lord? We can Dance, Caper, Curvet,
show Tricks of all sorts, fashions, conditions; drink whole Boles, play at
Cards, Dice, Tables; fight at back-Sword, single-Rapier, at Sword and Dagger,
quarter-Staff; (my Ape's an expert Fencer, my Lord;) run a Tilt; sing
Prick't-Song; show you a Maid (and that is a wonder, my Lord,) and show you a
Maid that goes for a Maid, and is not a Maid, (and my Lord, that is no wonder at
all:) If your Lordship has a Thief or a Drunkard amongst your Servants, my Ape
will bring him forth. An old Ape has an old eye, my Lord.


L. Lib. A nimble-pated Fellow. Go in, Friend: Tell my Servants I gave you
leave to enter my house. I intended a walk: but if I hear my Servants are
pleased with your Pastime, I Will come and be your Spectator my self.


Lucifer. My Lord, your more than thrice humble servants, I and my Ape. An old
Ape has an old eye, my Lord. Exit Lucifer.


L. Lib. Go thy way: thou do outwit the Ape, I warrant thee. O my poor Nice,
if she were reduced, I should be mertier, more debonnaire, and more delighted
with such sights than I am. Men have learned the way of changing bitter
Almond-trees into sweet ones: which is: they pierce them near to the root, and
let forth the bitter juice: so these bitter-hearted Romanists should let their
perverse and sower inclinations forth, at the root of their Hearts; and become
of bitter, better. The Priests, whose actions are as dirty as their thoughts
are foul, have wrought this irrecoverable mischief in my house. The Physicians,
that they may draw the vapors from the head of the Patient, apply Pigeons to
the soles of his feet: If these seven-hill'd Saints would walk innocently, and
with Pigeons at their feet; they would not be troubled with such gross and idle
fumes in their Brains as they are. They do not consider, that the Life of man
is a very Bubble: A Bubble puts on the form of an Hemisphere: And shadowing
half the world, as being an Hemisphere; it accordingly consists of two
Elements; It is Air within, which is invisible for its Rarity; and without, a
thinne-shap'd Skin of Water: and there is all the Bubble. The Air deciphers
our soul; and the watery skin, our body: the skin presently breaks: the Air as
presently breaks loose; and there is a present end of the Bubble. A shouting
and laughing within of men and women.

There Is my invitation. I would not let desire loose to range through the
world, like a wilde-Ass in the Arabian Desert; but honest recreations are the
Didacticks of humane providence. Exit L. Liberal.


Page. The servants are all met to view the Sport which the Ape and his Master
make; and I must be their Ape, imitate them, and add to the number.

Enter Mrs. Dorothy.
Dor. This idle Page obstructs my way.


Page, Mrs. Dorothy, with your fair leave, you know that all the Servants are
charged to acquaint my Lord, if you stir out of the house, as now you have, or
beyond the Garden.


Dor. Pretty Boy hold thy peace, thou were always my friend, there is a piece
for thee. Delay the search after me, till I have passed this street and the
next.


Page, Madam, I shall not be wanting to your design. Exit Mrs. Dor.

She Is gone. I must keep silence now, or go too. A loud laughing within.


My Lord Liberal at the Door. L. Lib. Page, where are you?


Page, Here, my Lord.


L. Lib. Call my Nice down: tell her, here is very pretty sport. He disappears.


Page, I go, my Lord, I move as quick as lightning. I have read in an English
Author of a melancholy-she that thought she could break to pieces, the whole
world with the motion of one short finger; and crush it into a Miscellany with
the clintching of her little hand. Mrs. Dorothy thinks now, that she has the
great world in her little maiden hands, to dispose of as she list. Liberty is
sweet, especially after a long and tedious time of restraint. The Bird out of
the Cage, is like the Bird that saw the Sea, turned and made a long flight the
clean contrary way: she wings it in the Air, at length, weary, pearches upon a
Bough, and sings for joy, she is not bounded. Alaughing within, yet louder.


Lord Within, Page, why Page, Page I say.


Page, My Lord.


Lord, Where Is my Nice? why comes she not?


Page, She is not in her Chamber, my Lord. I am going to the Garden: she is
there, my Lord, I think.


Lord, Make have, Page.


Page, All the have I make, shall not overtake Mrs. Dorothy. And have thou
given me a twenty shilling piece, sweet Virgin? I Will keep it for thy sake: and
it shall conserve the Idea of thee in my thoughts. She must be now out of
reach, or in some nearness to it. Laughing and shouting within.


Lord within. Page.


Page, Let him call again, 'twill open his pipes.


Lord, Page you Rogue.


Page, I will not answer to the name of Rogue: let him call once more.


Lord, Page, my Nice.


Page, My Lord, I cannot see her in the Garden. The Privy door is shut. But I
shut it.


Enter Lord Liberal. L. Lib. How? is she not in her Chamber? nor to be seen in
the Garden? She never staid so long in the little House there, Servants, search
all the house. Go page, kick forth that rascal-fellow with the Ape O my Nice,
my Nice. A noise within of searching. Exit Page.

Servants, search every corner, every Ratand Mouse-hole.


Enter Lucifer, and the Page kicking him. Lucifer, Good Mr. Page, kick not so
hard.


Page. Not just so hard, but harder if I can. Out, you ditch and dunghill
rascal; foh; I have kicked him till he stinks again.


L. Lib. Let me give him one kick. He is a Rogue by Act of Parliament: foh: He
or his Ape stinks, or both.


Luoifer. Good my Lord, spare me. Why then did your Lordship admit a Rogue into
your house.


L. Lib. Take another kick for that, you profes't Rogue.


Page, I must bid you farewell with a parting kick. Exit Lucifer.

From within three several ways. From within, She is not in this Chamber. Here
she is not. I cannot find her this way.


L. Lib. Poyse her Trunks, and answer presently what weight they bear.


Within, That Is done already, my Lord: there is nothing in them.


L. Lib. I am undone: my Nice is lost, she is lost. Had she the invisible Ring?
or did she send her money away by night through the Air, as Witches ride? I Will
search all the house my self, and add the evidence of my own senses. O this
cursed Ape-Carrier; he has embroiled us all; he was at least the occasion of
her escape, if she be gone. Exeunt.


Act 5. Scene 2.
Enter Madam Hypocrisy, Mrs. Dorothy, Pretty. Hyp. Mrs. Dorothy, I speak your
welcome to this house, I dare say, with a matchless affection. Here you may
dilate your heart. Such dangers as you fear, cannot reach hither. And you will
find no rigid Uncle here.


Dor. Madam, I equally rejoice in my own liberty and your love. But whereas I
had so much of the Scholar given to me in my breeding, that I understand above
the plain of learning, and therefore have long ago done with legitimating
heresy, or crutching it up, or skinning it over with hypocrisy; whereas I
cannot converse with Blackamore-soul'd Atheists, or with Dwarf-devotion'd
Hypocrites: cannot attend to Pulpit-Cymbalists, (let them stand for me in a
perpetual Pancrasie, in the Solstice of their Honor;) nor to the Tub-Prophets,
living under the Meridian of bitter-sweet, under the Equinoctial of good and
evil; nor disquiet the Crasis of my Soul with the newfangled Presbyter and his
painted Pageantry, and manifold Anticks: Whereas I cannot embalm him, nor pity
and condole with his surviving Amorosos and Fantasticks: it rests in the
Repository, that I give life to my zealous Determinations, and repair to a
Nunnery, to the which the beauty of that state lures me.


Hyp. Mrs. Dorothy, The Angels sit on your lips, and speak from your mouth, or
the Nightingale sings there. Bring your thoughts forth, while they are warm.
The image of a Prince is then impressed upon the Gold, when it is melting soft.
I see, that you are excellently skilled in the sacred Optics; and have a
seeing soul, that hever knows night. A Looking-Glass set against the Sun, not
only receives the Beams of the Sun, but also the Image of it.


Dor. Madam, the Ostrich leaves her Eggs on the Libyan-shore, to be hatched by
the Sun, but I must concur to my own happiness. Besides, In the Nunnery I
shall be wholly disenchanted from these fears, and from communication with
those heady people, who precipitate themselves into more changes than the Beast
and Herb-Chameleons in the Naturalist, or Proteus in the Fiction; yea, become
as the soul of man in the opinion of some great Pretenders to learning; which
is, say they, round and globous in the head, long in the arms, broad in the
breast; and as the light is indeed, round in the Sun, in the fire Pyramidal. Now
they have no reason to object change against me, because they have so often
changed from themselves.


Hyp. Mistress, There are in view as many subjects of change, as there are
creatures under the Moon: Because earthly and inferior bodies are by the Laws
of nature, subjected to the bodies that are superior and heavenly: which being
in continual Motion and Revolution, and continually changing in their Positions
and Aspects; and moreover, darting as they move with and in their spheres, new
influences upon the Sublunaries, make new impresses upon them accordingly. But
your change was effected from above the Moon, and was Heavenly in the highest
degree.


Dor. Madam, I perceive that our breeding has incircled us in a like
proportion of knowledge. The soul it self is changed from without by the
presentation of external and occasional Objects; and from within by the
Passions, and is driven every way by them, as the Waves by the Winds; indeed,
primordially and principally by love, the Amazon-Queen of the Passions;
afterward by her Bridemaids, Desire and Hope; yea, by Anger Love's-Champion.
And then the changes are good or evil, as the objects are evil or good,
concerning which these Passions are excited; and as the carriage of the
Passions in their tendencies, is ordinate, (managed by a prudent and pious
Ordination) or disordinate: The Sea breaking its bounds, is boundless in
mischief. To wade nearer our affair: The best change of the soul, answerable to
man as a reasonable creature, and within the Dominions of nature; is, when the
moral virtues in it, are directed and guided by Prudence, and every Action
tutour'd by some virtue, because the Passions are obedient to reason. Nature is
higher perfected by degrees: but of that I will speak in the Nunnery.


Hyp. You give plentiful testimony, that you understand the business before
you, and that you are well rooted and grounded in it.


Enter Lucifer in a gentile Habit. Lucifer. O my most sugar and honychild, my
spirit leaps in my body like the Lambs in a good Pasture, to find thee here.
Thy Gold is all safe: The entire sum, my pretty Duckling, amounts to five
thousand pounds. But I have a request to thee, Fair one; a most humble request,
imcomperable beauty. (It is a Rule we have, and we act by it, good words put us
to no charge: hence we get all we can, but we part from nothing.) What say
thou, fairest of Maids, Saint upon earth, can thou grant me a reasonable
request?


Dor. Reverend Father, I shall grant it, if it fall within my Verge: I am ready
to give it passage by my ears to my willing soul.


Lucifer. Why this it is then, devout Mrs. Dorothy, (that name most proportions
your condition, (you go now to undergo a poor life; and it is essential to
your future state, that you vow poverty: The Nuns seldom receive with a Novice
above five hundred Pounds, (it is a great sum for them) you have five
thousand: Divine Mrs. Dorothy, give us the rest: and we will found a new
Monastery; you shall be set up before the Gate as the Foundresse of it, I mean
your Image; and the Monks there shall continually pray for zealous Mrs.
Dorothy, now, hereafter, and to the worlds end.


Dor. Reverend Father, your Request is, as you languag'd it, reasonable: it is
granted.


Lucifer. O heavenly creature, I adore thy Devotion. O that we were all, or the
best of us, so devout as thou art. Thou make the tears go ambling down my
ctheeks: tears of Comfort. I am comforted, that thou have one foot in Heaven
already. I am Mathematically certain, as the Schools speak, that the the other
will follow; I am more than morally certain, and almost certain by physical
certitude; and I cannot but leap for joy, for joy that the the other foot will
certainly follow. To Heaven, to Heaven, it is even so, a Maid to Heaven dos
easily go, for joy what I say I scarcely know. I forget. Mistress of my heart,
give way to my expression, I have given order to Father Robert to go to your
Uncle in the disguise of a Seaman; and to say that he saw you take Shipping at
Gravesend, and Sail under the Conduct of a good Wind for France: Otherwise,
Sweetheart, pardon my boldness, he will lay wait for you at the Port-Towns:
when he shall believe, and is satisfied, that you are gone, and the search is
blown over, you shall away indeed with safety.


Dor. This invention is steeped in Prudence. Reverend Father, I am a great
admirer of your wisdom.


Lucifer. In fine: We must now be merry. It is reckoned amongst our customs,
that when we send any to Monasteries, Nunneries, or the like, they take their
last leaves of the world with extraordinary jollity; and so must you: We Will be
jovially merry before we part. Madam, where is your little Cozen? (the Girl
that I begot of thy body, when I kept my Rule, and looked not beyond my own
length, or the length of my Grave;) let us begin our Carnival with a Song.


Hyp. Pretty, Call my Cozen. Exit Pretty.


Lucifer. They may honestly be merry, who afterward presently renounce all
mirth. He who says, that fraud cannot be pious, nor piety fraudulent, is an
Ass, a short eared Ass, and was never bottomed in School Divinity.

Enter a young Maid, and Pretty. My little Cozen, pleasure us now with a Song,
and you bind us over to kiss your hands. (She sings.) As much to the purpose as
you can.

Farewell
Vain pleasures, and short lasting joys farewell,
The sacred Bell
Calls to repair unto the holy Place.
The Peace
Of quiet Conscience gives a full release
From Care. Then cease
To love the Things, have nothing but a face.
Hear how
The blessed Angels sing, and us invite
To their desire.
The Birds are here, yea, very near,
And call us to the Quire*
For if
We are estranged from these earthly Things,
Our Hearts will rise,
Our Hands
Will also move and raise our Love
Above the starry Skies.
All Things are fading here, even as the Flower,
In one short hour.
And glide away: but Heaven does not so.
There look:
There read as in a golden-letter'd Book,
How you mistock,
And did misconster all the Things below
You know.
Then better mind your lessen here on earth,
That you may see,
How vain they are, who only care
For this mortality.
And now
Examins all your Actions from your Birth,
With joy, with grief:
It is a Heart, that feels some smart,
Which farther seeks, relief.
Hence Cares.
Go search into the Secrets of Affairs:
No man more shares
Of Heaven and Things above the Firmament,
Than those
Who do themselves within themselves enclose,
As the Chaste Rose:
Blushing outright even when no ill is meant,
Or said;
Feuring to be beheld in open Air:
And therefore shut
Abroad all sin; themselves within,
As Kernel in the Nut.
And thus,
Such souls and Heaven aspiring people are,
An^e^'r will be,
Like Pearls in Shells: in Churches Bells.
Be heard, not seen, or see.

Lucifer. Directly to the purpose.

Mistress Dorothy, England's Helen for beauty: my Cozen levels at your favor.


Dor. She has her aim. She sings like a little Nun.


Lucifer. Three or four days we consecrate to mirth.


Dor. Our Prologue to it has been sweet.


Lucifer. To singing, dancing, feasting.


Vaing. Betwixt fasting and feasting, there is but the difference of one poor
letter; we may readily slip out of one into the other.


Lucifer. Come dear Friends, follow me merrily, merrily. He leaps and laughs.
Exeunt.


Act. 5. Scen. 3.
Enter L. Liberal. L. Lib. My Cozen is uncag'd, and I fear flown beyond catch,
beyond recovery. Had she been within my Walls, and but as big as a newborn
child, or a childe's Baby, I had found her; but she cannot here be found, who
is not here. What shall I do? No, that will be to Inn at the Labor in vain:
Something I have brought forth; under what Star I know not: I will send to all
the Port-Towns that are near, chance may be so gracious to me, that I may take
her in one of them at the rebound, at the second run. If I catch her, I shall
cage her companions.


Enter Page. Page. My Lord, A poor Seaman at the door, is very earnest to
speak with your Lordship. He talks of business, and that of no small
importance; and he says, he must not, as being a poor man, send his business
by an Interpreter.


L. Lib. A Seaman? and with important business? send him to me.

Exit Page. Most certainly, my Cozen cannot reach the Sea so soon: she is not
winged at her feet like Mercury. He may be a poor man, that has had great
losses at Sea, and comes a begging; if so, he will be a fit Subject of charity,
and liberality: indeed the winds have chid and bellowed loud alate.

Enter F. Robert, like a Seaman. Seaman, What wind blew you hither?


Rob. May it please your Lordship, an angry wind, may it please your Lordship;
a roaring and raging wind, may it please your Lordship, may it please your
Lordship.


L. Lib. I thought so, I did imagine it was a begging business: it pleases not
me, that you were molested with an angry wind, endamag'd by a roaring and
raging wind. But what is your present condition?


Rob. May it please your Lordship, I did belong, may it please your Lordship,
to a Vessel called the Virgin, may it please your Lordship, may it please your
Lordship.


L. Lib. The Virgin? 'Twas not the Virgin Martyr, her name was not Dorothy, was
it?


Rob. May it please your Lordship, no, not so, may it please your Lordship.


L. Lib. O, on with your Story. The fellow's distracted with his losses, or
very sick of the Simples.


Rob. May it please your Lordship, In this weak Vessel called the Virgin, may
it please your Lordship, we made notwithstanding a Voyage to the West Indies,
may it please your Lordship, may it please your Lordship; and after some length
of time, may it please your Lordship, we returned in due time, may it please
your Lordship, rich-laden, may it please your Lordship. We were bound, may it
please your Lordship, I say, may it please your Lordship, we were bound in our
return for London, may it please your Lordship, and at the River's mouth, may
it please your Lordship, our weak Vessel known by the name of Virgin, may it
please your Lordship, by reason of that angry, roaring, and raging wind, may it
please your Lordship, I cannot tell it without weeping, may it please your
Lordship, foundred like a tired Mare, like old Hobson's Mare, may it please
your Lordship, and we all that were in the Vessel named the Virgin, were cast
away and lost, may it please your Lordship, may it please your Lordship. I my
self was quite cast away with the rest, may it please your Lordship, as far as
I can remember, may it please your Lordship, but here I am again, I think, may
it please your Lordship, or, I am sure, my Ghost, may it (...) your Lordship,
to beg your be(...), may it please your Lordship, may it please your Lordship.


L. Lib. But how came thou to shore?


Rob. May it please your Lordship, I know not whether I am at shore yet or no,
may it please your Lordship, but if I am at shore, may it please your Lordship,
I came to shore, like Bacchus astride upon a Hogshead, may it please your
Lordship, may it please your Lordship.


L. Lib. Were none saved but thee?


Rob. May it please your Lordship, again I say as I said before, I do not as
yet well know whether I am saved or no, may it please your Lordship, may it
please your Lordship.


L. Lib. Alas poor simple fellow, the fright his dazzled his understanding.
There are twenty shillings for thee, to recruit and refresh thee after thy
sorrows and losses.


Rob. May it please your Lordship, I thank your Lordship, may it please your
Lordship, may it please your Lordship, may it please your Lordship, may it
please --


L. Lib. No more of that, may it please your Lordship.


Rob. Pardon me, my Lord, my purpose was to say it twenty times over, because
your Lordship gave me twenty shillings, and I desire to be hired so, may it
please or not please your Lordship.


L. Lib. Seaman, you have your alms.


Rob. May it, or may it not please your Lordship, if you are pleased, I am
pleased, pleased I am not if you are not pleased, may it please or not please
your Lordship, twenty-score thanks for your twenty shillings, may it please or
not please your most liberal Lordship. He returns.

I had forgot half my Arrant, may it please your Lordship. I lost my memory
when I was cast away, may it please your Lordship. We having lost one Virgin at
the Rivers mouth, may it please your Lordship, I found another at the tail of
the salt water, may it please your Lordship. Now I come to Mistress Dorothy,
may --


L. Lib. My Cozen Dorothy, what of her?


Rob. May it please your Lordship.


L. Lib. No, no, she does not please my Lordship. Once more I tell you, lop
that off.


Rob. Then I shall speak no more of her, may it please your Lordship.


L. Lib. Again? yes, yes, on with Mistress Dorothy.


Rob. Why then, may it please your Lordship.


L. Lib. Yet again?


Rob. My Lord, in good earnest, my Lord, I am but a simple Idiot: I cannot tell
you the Story, except you suffer me to tell it after my manner: I must go in my
beaten road, steer my own course, my Lord.


L. Lib. Tell it then after thy manner.


Rob. May it please your Lordship, Mrs Dorothy took shipping at Gravesend,
yesterday morning at five of the Clock, may it please your Lordship. The
Seamen, my Brethren that belonged to the vessel, presently weighed Anchor; the
wind was fair for her, as fair as she, may it please your Lordship; and so it
has held; and by this time she must needs be in Holland, or in France, may it
please your Lordship, may it please your Lordship.


L. Lib. But how came thou to know she was my Nice Dorothy, and to be
directed hither?


Rob. May it please your Lordship, I begged of her, as I now do of your
Lordship, and told her I was going beyond London a great way to my Friends in
the Country, may it please your Lordship; and presently she put her white hand
into her pocket, and pulled forth two half crowns, and gave them to me, may it
please your Lordship, and made me promise her, that I would bring hither her
Duty to your Lordship, and this news with it, may it please your Lordship, may
it please your Lordship. Moreover, she gave me a Token for your Lordship.


L. Lib. A Token? thou gav'st me no Token: where is the Token?


Rob. May it please your Lordship: a Token, by the which your Lordship should
know, that it was she, concerning a strange man and an Ape, but that I have
almost forgot, because the best part of my memory was cast away when I was
drowned, may it please your Worship, Lordship I should have said. Now you have
both ends of my Story, there is all, if it like your Lordship, if it like your
Lordship.


L. Lib. None of it likes me. By all signs and tokens this must be she. Then
all farther enquiry will be vain, and run upon a false Bias. Seaman, here, I
give thee a Crown more for thy fidelity.


Rob. May it please your Lordship, I came with Fidelity, and I shall depart
with Fidelity, and perhaps that will deserve a Crown more, may it please your
Lordship, and it like your Lordship. My Lord frowns. I must be gone. Exit
Seaman.


L. Lib. My Cozens last from me, found by a Sect:
I Will live hereafter my own Recollect.

Fxit. L. Lib Act. 5. Scen. 4.
Enter Aristotle Junior well-apparel'd. Arist. I have seen a Sight here,
perhaps not unusual, yet strange to me: a Mountebank in this blind and uncouth
part of the Suburbs, upon a common Stall. I took him for a Ballad-singer, till
I came near him: but finding him afterward to be a Mountebank, I waited upon
the sequel. He had his paints, his white and red for women; his powders of all
colors; his perfumes, mixed and simple; his salves for all fores and griefs; he
could abate the Drunkards redness, and fire in his face, and raise a pale
color to beauty, from within: he could awake Appetite, set a man to sleep,
byasse nature as he pleased: He could furnish a man or woman with new teeth,
new eyes, new ears, new noses, new arms, new legs: I expected when he would
have said, new Heads, new Hearts. If my Ears scout it rightly for my Soul, I
heard him say, that he could restore a lost Maidenhead. He spoke contemptibly
of drinking poisons: that, said he, the common Rabble and Rubbish of
Mountebanks, the vile Offal of Quacksalvers can do. He suppled us with a Story
of one Barthochabas an Author of Sedition amongst the old Jews, who so
medicin'd his mouth, and managed a device in it, that he seemed to vomit fire;
and he profes't upon the Reputation of a Gentleman, that he had the Receipt: He
put on with another Example of a man at Millan an Italian City, who washed his
face and hands with scalding lead, as carelessly and as confidently, as a man
washes his hands and face with ordinary water; having first washed them with
an extraordinary, newfound, and hardening water of his own: And of this water
he protested as he was an Artist, he had a great Quantity. We had from him a
whole fardle of such stuff. To all People that bought of his Trash to the value
of Twelve-pence, he gave a printed Bill, designing the Place where he lies, and
the manifold motions and out-walkings of his skill. I stood in the crowd while
he staid upon the Stall; and when he came down and leyel'd himself with the
People, I observed that speaking with several Persons, he did insinuate these
or the like words; All men have a natural care of their Bodies, but who regards
his own Soul? If a simple Ass falls in the streets, many wise men run to lift
the simple Ass up; but if a Man's Heart or Soul lies wallowing in the dirt,
such a Soul or Heart is not regarded; pray, come to my lodging: these words had
their mysterious aim. Now this metaphysical Doctor, this all-able Mountebank
with all his packs, and his knacks, is the Benedictine-Jesuite, whom I have
used, and by whom I have been manifoldly abused. As I take it, he takes this
way. The Bastille has changed me, and I believe he knows me not. I Will toss a
word or two with him as he passes.


Enter Lucifer like a Mountebank. Lucif. Our Army is vanished, our Conventicles
are quelled and suppressed: and we must be doing, be Soul-catching: By idleness
the dead Sea has been long found dangerous. The Intelligencies always move the
Heavens: the Winds the Air and Sea: Fire is never out of Action. Besides,
Vespatian the Emperor was wise; Dule is odor lucri ex re qualibet: Thus always
something comes in; and something has some savor. The Spaniards wittily, and
with a Sarcasm call the Jesuits, Los teatinos, y los Padres Teatinos, the
Teatines, and the Teatine Fathers; from this Account: A Spanish Painter being
scandal-struck by the Covetousness of the Jesuits, drew a Picture after this
manner: He hung in the uppermost Part of his Table, a vast Purse of Money: He
set round about it, in the lower parts; one of every sort of Mendicant Friars;
who looked upwards willingly, yea devoutly upon it, but durst not touch it, as
being forbidden by the Rules of their several Orders: He painted a Jesuit in
some distance, armed with a Bow and Arrows, and looking over (and indeed
overreaching) the poor Mendicants: For, he held up his Bow, and had let his
Arrow fly, which had struck the Mark (the Purse) and now stuck in it; he still
keeping a fierce and eager eye upon the Mark: And the Painter had learnedly
derived these Latin words from his mouth, hanging, as if the cold Air had
frozen them into a Record, To attingo, o Purse, I reach thee, I hit thee, I
have thee: whence the Spaniards, being edified by the devotion of the Painter,
and the holiness of the Picture, presently called the Jesuits, Los Teatinos,
the Spanish word coming up as nearly as it may, to the Latin, from which the
Spanish Language has deviated: But the Painter had excellently completed his
Piece, had he pictured our modern English Monk catching away the Purse, for
which all the others gaped, and which the Jesuit thought he had heart-struck.


Arist. Sir, I am a most humble Petitioner to you.


Lucif. Where Is your Petition?


Arist. My mouth presents it, Sir.


Lucif. My ears are open to receive it.


Arist. That I may have leave to love you, and be your Scholar. I have been
your Hearer, and you have transformed me into a great Lover and Honourer of you.


Lucif. What are your wants?


Arist. I am wanting both in Soul and Body, Sir.


Lucif. I can supply the wants of both: both I cure.


Arist. Divine Mountebank!


Lucif. Come to my Chamber.


Arist. Pray, favor me with leave to wait upon you thither.


Lucif. Most willingly. Exeunt.


Act. 5. Scene 5.
Enter F. Robert, a Woman, a Boy. Rob. Ye are both apt Scholars. But you, Boy,
must learn to open your mouth wider, when the fit's upon you.


Boy. I open it as wide as I can, good Father.


Rob. Take this Apple, and extend your mouth to the wideness of the Apple: It Is
of a fit bigness. And you, Woman, when you act the possessed person, do not stare
enough: your eyes must always be rounded into a larger Circle, but then
especially. And if any be immodest toward you, you must not take notice of it,
at such a time, but rather show willingness, because the Devil, under whose
power you are then conceived to groan and lie grave^'d, is delighted with
wantonness.


Woe. Reverend Father, you have taught me obedience, and I shall practice it.


Rob. Boy, I am very much pleased with your vomiting of nails, crooked pins,
needles, hair, pibble stones, and the like: Your conveyance is nimble. Both of
you must be careful, that ye do not go aside into any strangeness of Action,
except a Priest, or at least some devout Person of our Religion offer himself.
The Devil is not roused up with the presence of Heretics. In the company of
such, and none but such, you should demean your selves quietly and cheerfully.


Enter Lucifer and Aristotle Junior. Lucif. I understand your condition. You
are an Heretic: you shall know better within a Cubit of Time. This is my
dwelling; and that my loving Brother. Father Robert, this Gentleman is an
Heretic, and a Scholar, but a kind of Seeker.


Rob. Woman, Boy, the Stranger is an Heretic: while we are here, you know your
parts.


Arist. This is Father Robert: but I thank the Bastille (against my will) he
knows me not. What strange and unreasonable carriage have this Woman and Boy.


Lucif. Alas, miserable and unhappy Creatures, they are possessed.


Arist. How possessed?


Rob. Possessed with Devils.


Lucif. Sir, you seem in the shell, in the face or forehead, to be well
affected toward us, or at least less ill-affected, and less indisposed to
Goodness. I confess to you, as to a Friend, prompted by the Bird of good Omen
within me, that I and my Brother there, have been eatechiz'd at Rome, and that
we are Benedictine Priests. Sir, our Order is the most ancient, and most holy
of all others: the Devil is troubled that we are station'd so near him: If you
were here alone, the Devil would lie down, leave barking, and be quiet as a
Lamb, because you are yet abstracted from the lines of Communication with us.


Arist. I am as much Priest as they; for Priesthood cannot be lost, but they
are ignorant of it, because they have lost my face out of their remembrance. In
good time, Sir. But under favor, I have read in your Authors, that the
occasion other Orders rose, was, because the Monks were defective in that part,
which the new rising Order most professed: as that the Dominicans rose, because
the Monks were Kitchin-bound, and their mouths were stopped, they became dumb
and muzzl'd in public; good men, they dealt out their time in eating, hunting
both Hare and Fox, and purging their reins according to lease: The Franciscans
came, because the Monks were proud; and the Bernardines for the same reason,
because the Monks were fat and stately: the Jesuits came shoving in at last,
because the Monks had long desisted from the teaching of Children, and thereby
engaging rich Parents, and from the recovering of Nations, and thereby obliging
the most rich Parent of all at Rome: and so in others. Whom did, or do the
Jesuits and they love, but in order to their own ends, and for gain-sake? Who
have been more scandalous in all the wanderings of wickedness, than the Monks
with their poatch'd Eyes in their Meditations? The worst of Geneva-Jesuites
might better and more justly be canonized after the Age is passed wherein he
lived, than the best of Monks in these parts. And I have read in a learned
Monk, that as Rivers after long running run slender and muddy, so the best
things gather dust, and contract corruption in length of Time. Your Pontifices
maximi, grand Fathers at Rome, have commonly most excellent Resolutions and
Actions at their first entrance into their Irish-wooden Chair; but they soon
Reed-like hold down their Heads: The Italians jest it notably, though
profanely. If you censure me, that I whip the Monks too hard, blame me, scourge
me; but then, you must blame and scourge with me holy Writers in all Ages, the
learned Angel of Hippo, divine Salvianus, our English Gildas, and a thousand
worthy Rabbis more. Had they seen our days: --


Lucif. They are Scandals you stumble at.


Rob. You must abjure those, if you enter our list.


Lucif. Father Robert, let us leave him: that the Miracle of the Woman and Boy
may further convince him.


Rob. Sir, you may repose your self, if you please, a while here. A little
remnant of business in the house, summons us. Our stay shall be short.


Arist. I shall patiently wait your leisure. How now? Exeunt Luc. and Rob. A
clear case, The Devil dreads not me. A sudden change indeed: This Miracle is
but of the lower Classis. Woman and Boy, away with this Hocus and Pocus his
Kinsman, let them praesto be gone, this thread bare kind of Juggling; (I have
been used to this Pass and Repass-Part of Bartholmew Fair:) Let me tell you in
a single Word, if you do not both confess to me your double-dealing, I Will
instantly fetch a Constable, and ye shall be soundly whipped in Bridewell till ye
do confess, and perhaps Justice will not stop or pause there. I Will do it
immediately.


Woe. O good Sir, come back. I am a poor Widow, and have nothing wherewith to
keep life and soul together.


Boy. And I am a very poor Boy. Sir, I was a Beggar-Boy, and begged from door
to door.


Arist. I am satisfied. Not a word of what has happened, as you love your own
safeties. Exit. Arist.


Woe. Boy, we must not say a word of this to the Fathers: if we do, we shall be
turned forth a begging.


Enter Lucifer and Father Robert. Lucif. Is the Gentleman gone?


Woe. Yes, reverend Father: but thunderstruck with the Miracle: He will, he
says, wait upon you an other time.


Lucif. So, so: come, supper attends us. Exeunt.


Act 5. Scene 6.
Enter Agrippa. Agrip. They within depend upon me to begin this last Scene with
a Dance fashionable to our Matter: and they will not be denied. The Dancers
commence their entrance.

Enter a Monk. This is the Monk that Poisoned Henry the seventh Emperor, in a
Church, being devoutly on his knees: In what manner he poisoned him, it is
profane to name, and therefore was most impious and most execrable to do.
Andreas Lampugnanus, a Courtier of Millan, nearly followed him, in Time, with
respect unto the Place, and in the substance of Practice; but the Devil could
not have scrued a Wickedness higher than the Monk did. Rottennes follow both
their memories.

Enter an other Monk. This is the Monk that Poisoned John King of England in a
Monastery, and that he might accomplish his mischievous work without suspicion,
first poisoned himself, drinking a health to the King in a poisoned Cup. Let
his Name be thought as poisonous as his Poison.

Enter Clement. This is Clement the Jacobin Friar, that murdered Henry the
third, King of France, by searching into his body with a sanctified Knife; to
whose Pralse Sice Cinque, the great Caliph at Rome, a kind of almighty
Favourer and Patron of the Jesuits, dedicated a Panegyricall Oration; May he
and his Patron be never remembered, but under the notion that the Devil was
Patron to both.

Enter Barrier. This is Barrier, that attempted the murder of Henry the
fourth, the late famous King of France, with a poisoned Altar-Dagger, a
Poisoned Dagger consecrated on the Altar. May he and his Dagger be odious to
the whole Mass of Mankind.

Enter Raviliack. This is Raviliack, Barriers Executor; animated thereunto by
Varad a Jesuit: Let him and his Counsel our be so loathed and abhorred by all
men, that afterward the very Toad may seem amiable to us.

Enter Vaux. This with his dark Lanthorn is Guido Vaux. His horrid attempt and
compliance with Garnet and Oldcorn Jesuits, and others is not forgotten; though
the Age now declining, the Friends of that Faction report it a mere Fable: In
the Age following, they will infallibly declare it a Fable ex Gathedra. Father
Tompson, our Scholars Ghostly Father at Rome, boasted that he was an Actor in
the Powder Treason, and that he then dug many times under our
Parliament House till every thread of his shirt was wet. All those horrid
Plotters were afterward chronicled for Martyrs, in the English Martyrologie
printed Anno Dom. 1608, and Garnets Picture exposed to sale, was adorned with
Rays about the Head, signifying his Glory and Saintship. May all good People
lay the memories of these Saints beneath them, when they go to the little House
in the Garden.

Enter Tony. This is Tony, a young extract of Romish blood, that wounded our
Poet in the face with a Knife of the Dagger-Fashion, intending to kill him. Let
him pass as the simple Tony, and Fool of the Company. If any one has incurred
that wicked Name of Rebel, let him behold here with horror, whom he has
imitated: The Monks have imitated the Devil, the first and grand Rebel; the
Jesuits have imitated the Monks, and the Devil; and Rebels imitate the Jesuits,
the Monks, and the Devil. They dance. Exeunt.


Enter F. Robert with Books. Rob. Sir, will you buy a Book, a Godly Book?


Agr. What Books have you?


Rob. Books of Devotion, Sir: you may take your choice of English or Latin.


Agr. Are you a Booksellour?


Rob. Yes, Sir, a poor one: but my Books are not sold publicly.


Agr. Your Books, I see, belong to the the other side of the great Pond.


Rob. They do, Sir: therefore they bear the higher price here.

Enter Madam Hypocrisy and Pretty. Madam, will your Ladyship be pleased to buy
a Book?

Enter Aristotle Junior. Sir, I have good Books to sell.


Arist. Are you there again. He sells his Books as a Pedling sort of men sell
base Tobacco; in the streets, but without public notice.


Enter Lucifer. Lucif. One short word with you, Sir: You remember the most
heavy charge you laid upon me.


Agr. I do.


Lucif. I have done what lies on my part. If there were an Ocean of Time, I
could meet it with a Sea of Matter: But all things have their assigned limits:
and by the foot of Hercules, Pythagoras his Scholar may proportion the whole
Body. I have carried you up to the highest Orb of my Policies: which is: to
disguise the most innocent and most simple Persons into the most busie-witted
and most pragmaticall: and thereby, to turn virtue in her native white, and her
unmingled color, forth into contempt: So that all true Piety comes into the
gripe of Scorn; and all Truth within the censure of Suspicion: only Politic
Knaves thrive, and poor Honesty is neglected and rejected. Now Sir, having done
my work I expect my wages.


Agr. What wages?


Lucif. Your self.


Agr. I renounce you.


Lucif. I shall not easily renounce my Right in you. Look you, Sir. I can
appear like my self at my pleasure.


Hypr. Heaven shield us: Is our most reverend Father turned Devil? Father
Robert help us. Lend me a godly Book.


Prett. And me another. O good lack, I have been at confession with the devil
many a time. I fear he will not keep counsel.


Arist. This is strange in a high and mighty measure. Yet Mistress. Few there
are of your reverend Fathers, that would not shrink into Devils, if they should
appear in their own likeness.


Rob. I am amazed. What! Is my reverend Brother a Devil? Thou foul fin:
would thou be so limit-less, as to take our holy Habit upon thee? how durst
thou presume to touch it?


Agr. Sir, he claims me too; because I commanded him by the Power of natural
Magic: and for this he would spoil our Comedy.


Lucif. I have rather conserved your Comedy: who should otherwise have
introduced the Monks poisoning their Adversaries, and the Jesuits lessoning
their Scholars at the sight of Pictures, and the stabbing of Images, to stab
and kill.


Rob. Let me see, where is my Flagellum Daemonum? Thou hellish Dog, Depart, or
I will amand, ablegate, and send thee to some vast and horrid Desert, where in
all thy Apparitions thou shall fright nothing but contemptible Flies, ignoble
Serpents, and the like. Thou have long been wandering, and here thou art out of
thy proper Place, and I arrest thee. Thou go: I have it here. Ego te,
Bestiam infernalem --.


Lucifer. The Magitian is but one. I may gain thousands by relinquishing him,
and plying the credulous world with a belief that I fear such bug bears. O, O.
He shakes.


Rob. Once I have said, and I say the second time, Ego te Bestiam infernalem --.


Lucif. O, no more of that, good Sir: I Will leave the Magitian behind me, and go
quietly away, if you please to loose me.


Hyp. Well done, Reverend Father: your Books are formidable: the Devil fears
you, and them.


Arist. I fear not this Monkish Devil. Sir, what shall I give you for your
Flagellum Daemonum? It will be helpful to me in scourging the Monks: I doubt
not but I shall find more Devils amongst them.


Lucif. How say you, good Sir, shall I depart quietly?


Rob. Quietly, and quickly.


Lucif. Wife, shall I not kiss before I go?


Hyp. I abhor thee. I confess I had a child by thee thou cursed Incubus, but I
was never married to thee. The name of Husband and Wife with us, were but
words, I abbor thee.


Prett. As my Mistress abhors thee, so do I abhor thee. Whatsoever I confes't to
thee, I Will confess again to a lawful Priest.


Enter Lucifuga, running as a Devil. Hyp. And I.


Lucifug. My Lord, O my Lord Lucifen: Order you had, or you could not have
conserved your Government: now All Is out of all Order. The Monks and Jesuits
in your long absence have set all Hell on fire: they differed at first amongst
themselves, and now they have stirred up, and set all Hell against you. Your
very Seraglio of Vestals are wrought and brought into the Combustion.


Lucifer. O, Now am I sick indeed, and beyond Legerdemain. You are the sinister
cause of all this, Agrippa.


Rob. Touch him not. Ego te, Bestiam infernalem --.


Lucifer. I swell into the Mountain Olympus. O, how I swell! I shall burst
asunder: And there is a dreadful tempest in my stomach. How, and where shall I
empty my self? I know not where to bestow my troubled stomach, and my seditious
belly. O good Females help me. O some kind body, point me to a secret place. O.


Vaing. Help the Devil? Not I.


Lucifer. Your helping hand Lucifuga.


Exeunt Lucifer, and Lucifuga. From within. O Juno Lucina fer opem. Noise of
straining.


Agr. Sir: I admonish you in private, to guard your Person: the Monks and
Jesuits cannot observe a distance; they will endanger your life by themselves
or their Abettors.


Arist. I am in your opinion: but if they kill me, they will immortalize the
settled opinion the world has of them; and I shall appear before him who knows
that in all the story, I have kept the path of substantial Truth; and always
like Timanthes the Painter, covered more than I showed. I may have misplaced
and miscenter'd an Action, but in the substance I have been quadrate with
Truth. Beyond this, These Renegadoes expose our Nation, being also their own,
ridiculous in their Colledg-Comedies beyond the Seas: why should not we then,
within our own Sphere and Region, pay them with the Law of Talion, especially
after such most abusive, and most injurious Transactions?


Agrip. I side with you.


Arist. And now, if Archimedes were alive, be would sooner undertake to number
the sands of the Sea, than to sum up the lies that will Epilogize to the
Epilogue of this Comedy.


Enter Lucifuga. Lucifug. My Lord's well amended. He has both vomited and gone
to the stool. He spewed a proud Jesuit: and was brought to bed backwards of a
drunken Monk. Here he comes in the midst of them.


Enter Lucifer, a little Jesuit with his Arms a kembole, and a little Monk
reeling. Vaing. The Jesuire is as like him as if he spat him out of his mouth.


Agr. The Monk is a Reverend Monk of a little one.


Arist. A Sir Reverence Monk, you should have said.


Rob. I have suffered thee too long. Depart: Ego te --


Lucifug. Lord, and Prince: your presence in Hell will soon allay this
Insurrection.


Rob. Be gone. Ego te Bestiam --


Lucifer. I go.

Jesuits and Monks: within I take an oath,
I Will lay you low, and be revenged of both.

Exeunt Lucifer, and Lucifuga, with the two Boys. Arist. Farewell, Agrippa:
I Will weave out the little parcel of my life, in the good old Garden-house of
Devotion. Exit Arist.


Hyp. I and my Maid will setup School again: we shall never want Scholars. But
Pretty, we must have a special care to keep the Devil out of our Quarters.


Prett. Madam, every man that offers himself at the Door, shall there bare his
feet: we will see if he be cloven-sooted or no. Exeunt Hyp. and Pretty.


Agrip. I Will join my forces with Father Robert, my zealous Defender against the
Devil. Sir, I shall buy Books of you.


Rob. And I shall further instruct you.


Exeunt. The Epilogue.
Enter Galen Junior with his Vrinal. He holds it up. Enter a Drawer liastily.
Draw. Vrinal, stand by: the Mark's out of your Mouth.
Gentlemen: Did ye call? The Author's near,
And Drinks your Healths. His Epilogue is here.
Welcome Men here is, and if our lang be soamy,
The Italian Tongue welcoms you tuttie quanti.
He humbly throws himself beneath your feet;
Believe it, pray, although you do not see it.
Accept his first poor Industry: and know it.
Your kind Acceptance may create a Poet.
A Jesuit he regards as Garnet's Straw,
A Monk as Sergius, who proud Mahomet's Law
Did first invent: He was a Monk, and yet
To the Alcron he shared his hot-cold Wit,
What such do mouth, our Author will not mind:
He fears least Beaux Espirits be unkind.
Obedience is a virtue, low in show,
The worth of which we cannot see, but know.
Good Men good Subjects were, the Field is ample:
The Monk or Jesuite's no good example.
Now Peace and Plenty sing a Requiem to us,
Nothing but Disobedience can undo us.
May then all honest Hearts or say or sing,
Vivat Rex, Viva le Roy, God save the King.
All Is paid, and ye are most kindly welcome, Gentlemen. Exeunt.

FINIS.

