Stafford's Memoires: OR, A Brief and Impartial Account OF THE BIRTH and
QUALITY, Imprisonment, Trial, Principles, Declaration, Comportment, Devotion,
Last Speech, and FINAL END, OF WILLIAM, LATE Lord Viscount STAFFORD. Beheaded
on Tower Hill Wednesday the 29. of December. 1680.

Whereunto is annexed a short APPENDIX concerning some Passages in STEPHEN
COLLEGES TRIAL.

The whole now again set forth, for a more ample Illustration of that so
wonderfuly Zealous Pamphlet, Entitled; The Papists Bloody After-Game; writ in
Answer to the said MEMOIRS, And Published by Langley Curtis, 1682.

Contraria juxta se posita magis elucescunt.

London: Printed in the Year, 1682.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
IT is the Common Fate of all Treatises writ in Matters of Contest by Opposite
Parties; That whilst the One is read without the other, neither of both are
rightly understood. There came forth, not long since, in Answer to this
Treatise called Stafford^s Memoires, a Pamphlet Entitled, The Papists Bloody
After-game, Composed by a zealous Protestant-Dissenter, and obtruded upon the
Vulgar, (even to Nauseousness,) on every Bookseller's Stall. This Pamphlet, (we
confess,) has had the misfortune to be generally reguarded no otherwise then
as a mere Bundle of Hideously Rude, and Scurrilous Barbarismes and Calumnies,
proceeding from the Malice and Fury of a Man, baffled in Judgment, and
despairing of success from Sense and Reason; Whilst on the other side the
Memoires, though they hardly appeared in open view, have yet gained the
Reputation of Modest in expression; Impartial in Matter; Convincing in Proof;
and Innoffensive in Style. It is true these so differrent Characters seem to
the Godly Party no wise applicable to the desert of either of the Authors: The
rather because the One, of them though abounding (alas) in Passion and Cholor,
is yet to be Commended for his exceeding zeal against the Popish Plot; And the
Other by his reservedness in being exposed, and shrewd Arguments, made in
defense of the Papists Innocence, has given no small umbrage of Suspicion; he
yeildeth, not that Implicit Faith* and deference to the Testimony of the Kings
Witnesses, as may clear, him from the Imputation of Popishly affected.
Nevertheless, so it is, (we know not how,) the Memoires are grateful, and the
Pamphlet odious to all indifferent Readers: Nay some will needs say (though we
piously believe otherwise) The framing of this Pamphlet was a mere Sham-Plot,
contrived by the Jesuits on purpose to advance the Credit of the Memoires, and
Prejudice a good Cause by an Ill Vindication. But it is hoped there will shortly
be Printed something by way of an Apology in behalf of the Pamphleteer. In the
mean while That the two Antagonists may stand in equal Balance, and both be
impartially submitted to each judicious Censure; (see the scope of our Present
Design) The Memoires are here made Public; The Pamphlet being already obvious
to every Eye and Ear.

THE Introduction.
IT is a wonder to see how Passion and Interest predominate over Reason in
Mankind; Nothing is done, nothing said, without some tincture of either, or
both. Even common Occurrences are usually related as Men would have them to be,
rather then as they are. Plain-dealing is almost fled: And and all things now a
days, whether Private or Public, Sacred or Profane, are according to
different Inclinations, without regard to Truth promiscuously made the Subject
of a Satyr or Panegirick.

An obvious example of this we have in the several Accounts given of the Trial,
Declaration, Demeanor, and Death of the late Lord Stafford; concerning whose
Tragedy, though acted for the most part in the face of the whole Nation, yet
there have flown about in a manner as many, and those contradictory Stories, as
there are Relaters; and such as know least, commonly talk most, to complete the
Error.

It is true, the Printed Trial set forth by Authority is no wise liable to
these gross mistakes; But it has swelled in the Press, by forms, etc. To so
vast a volumn, that few can spare either money to buy it, or time to read it.
Besides, it is in a manner silent of matters chiefly designed for the Subject
of this Treatise, (viz.) My Lords Comportment, Declaration, Devotion, Last
Speech, and other Occurrences, which happened inclusively from the time of his
Trial, to his final End.

Having therefore attained to a most exact and certain knowledge of these
particulars, I shall for the satisfaction of the curious, and manifestation of
Truth, give (together with an abstract of the whole Trial, and some occurrences
concerning it) a plain and sincere relation of what I know, and can by
unquestionable Evidence justify to be true. And herein I shall also totally
abstain from any the least moralizing upon transactions, whereby to forestal
the Readers Judgment. But contenting my self with a plain and candid Relation
of things, as I find them, leave every one to the freedom of his own censure
and verdict upon them.

SECT. I. My Lord's BIRTH, Education, QUALITY, etc.
WIlliam Howard, Viscount Stafford, was second Son to Thomas Earl of Arundel,
and Uncle to the now Duke of Norfolk. In his youth he was Educated with all
Care and Industry imaginable to improve in him the Endowments of Nature and
Grace. And to speak truth, he was ever held to be of a Generous Disposition,
very Charitable, Devout, addicted to Sobriety, inoffensive in his words, and a
lover of Justice.

When he arrived to years of maturity, he married Mary, descended from the
ancient Dukes of Buckingham, Grandchild to Edward, and Sister, and sole
Heiress to Henry Lord Stafford; To whose Title he succeeded (being created by
the late King Charles of Glorious Memory) Baron. Anno 1640. And soon after
Viscount Stafford.

During the time of the late bloody Rebellion, he suffered much for his Loyalty
to the King; Always behaving himself with that courage and constancy, as became
a Nobleman, a good Christian, and a faithful Subject. After His present
Majesty's joyful Restoration, he lived in Peace, Plenty, and Happiness, Being
blessed with a most virtuous Lady to his Wife, and many pious and dutiful
Children. In which state he remained till the 66. year of his age, when
happened this Revolution of his fortune, as follows.

SECT. II. My Lords Imprisonment, Charge and Arraignment, etc.
ABout Michaelmas Anno 1678. Mr. Titus Oats (formerly a Minister of the Church
of England) accused upon Oath, before the King and Council, (and not long after
also before the two Houses of Parliament) several Roman Catholics: some
Persons of Quality; (and amongst the rest, the Lord Viscount Stafford,) of High
Treason, for intending and designing the Death of the King, the introducing of
Popery, and subversion of the Government, etc.

My Lord, though he immediately heard of this Impeachment, yet relying (as he
said) on his own Innocence, never left his Family, nor withdrew himself from
his ordinary known Acquaintance and Affairs till the 25 th. of October, (78.)
when by Warrant from the Lord Chief Justice, he was sent Prisoner to the Kings
Bench, and from thence, soon after to the Tower, where he remained above two
years before he could be admitted to Trial.

During this interval, the whole Nation was surpised and alarmed with the
noise of an horrid Plot, contrived by the Pope, Priests, and Jesuits, wherein,
the King was to be Murdered, Armies raised, Protestants Massacr'd, and the
three Kingdoms destroyed, by Fire and Sword: the people were affrighted,
searches made, Guards doubled, and all in an uproar. The King hereupon
consulted the Parliament, and both Houses declared it a Plot: Yet to strengthen
the Evidence (as yet but weak) and make farther discoveries; Indempnities are
promised, Rewards proposed, and encouragments, given by Proclamation to any who
would make out upon Oath the particulars of what in substance was already
declared. By this, and the like sedulity of the King, and three succeeding
Parliaments, several new Witnesses came in; First, Captain Bedlow. Next
Dugdale, Prance, and two others, Bolron and Mowbray, out of the North; Then Mr.
Jennison, Smith, Seigneur Francisco, Dangerfield, Zeile, Lewis, etc. Lastly one
Mr. Turbervile, who, (together with Oats and Dugdale,) gave Evidence against
this Lord Stafford, of whom we now treat.

Trial, p 4.
After two years Imprisonment, when many Roman Catholics, both Priests and
others, had been Executed, and most of the rest Imprisoned or fled; At length
my Lord was brought to his Trial, on the 30 th. day of November. 1680. at the
Peers Bar in Westminster Hall, the House of Commons being present, and the Lord
Chancellor High-Steward of England. The Impeachment was drawn in the name of
the Commons of England; wherein my Lord was charged, together with other
Papists, for having imagined and contrived to murder the King, introduce
Popery, and subvert the good Government of Church and State established by Law.

To this Impeachment my Lord, being thereupon arraigned, pleaded Not Guilty.

Allegations in proof of the Plot in general. 1.
THen the Cause was opened, and the Commons Learned Counsel, Page 7. etc.
(who were appointed Managers of the Trial*) set forth the Charge in most
Copious and Eloquent Language; And beginning first with the Plot in general,
they shew^d to the life the Wickedness, the Malice, the Horror of so Dreadful,
Bloody and Hellish a Design. They strongly insisted on the express positive
Oaths of the Witnesses upon whose Testimony the credit of this Plot chiefly
depended. They amply dilated upon the Letters of Coleman, and others, clearly
demonstrating the busy Designs and Activity of the Writers, They pressed home
the execrable Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, charged upon the Papists, as
well by the Oaths of Captain Bedlow and Mr. Prance, self-acknowledged Partners
in the Assasination, as also by a certain Letter sent from London to Tixal,
intimating the Murder of a Justice of Peace, and communicated by Dugdale to
diverse Gentlemen in Staffordshire, the third day after the Murder was committed
They displayed to the full view the Sham-Plots and Counter-Contrivances,
whereby ('it is said) the Papists would have subborned the King's Evidence, and
turned all their Guilt upon His Majesty's known and well-experienced Loyal
Protestant Subjects. They urged the Firing the City, the burning the Navy, the
calling in French-Armies, Wild Irish, Spanish-Pilgrims, etc. Asserted in the
several Depositions and Narratives of Dr. Oats, Captain Bedlow, Mr.
Dangerfield, etc. They re-capitulated the several Trials of Ireland,
Whitebread, Langhorn, etc. And alleged the Votes of both Houses of Parliament
declaring it a Plot. To strengthen all this: They ripped up the Cruelties of
Queen Mary, the French and Irish Massacres, the Powder Plot, etc. They
anatomized the wicked Principles (from whence spring evil Practices) of
Murdering, Lying, Swearing, Faith-breaking, Equivocating, etc. Imputed to the
Papists, as held by them Lawful, and matters of Faith. In short, nothing was
omitted, nothing neglected throughout the whole Process; But every the least
Circumstance enforced and advanced to its full proportion, with such vigor of
Wit and Industry as fitly corresponded to so great a Cause, prosecuted by so
high an Authority, before so Illustrious Judges, and August an Assembly.

When the Managers themselves had made these efforts to show the Universal
Conspiracy, (as they termed it) they produced six Witnesses to the same effect,
whereby to second and confirm what they had thus in general asserted.

Mr. Smith's Deposition.
THe first was Mr. Smith, who deposed, Page 17. etc.
That going into France, he became aquainted with Abbot Montague and one Father
Bennet; These persons, to induce him to be a Catholic, told him he should have
an Employment among them; and that in a few years they would bring in their
Religion into England, right or wrong; But this was not sufficiently prevalent
with him to turn Papist; yet he lived with them several years. That at last he
went into Italy, where the Jesuits persuaded him to discourse with Cardinal
Grimaldi; the which he did: The motives of his Perversion.
That the Cardinal made much of him; and he it was perverted him to the Romish
Religion; That, upon occasion of showing him a pair of Hangings, this Cardinal
told him, He had great assurance the Popish Religion would prevail in England;
That there was but one in the way; And that, (to accomplish their Designs,)
they must take him out of the way. That the Jesuits there also publicly
preached, and privately taught, That the King of England being an Heretic,
whoever took him out of the way would do a meritorious act. That after this, he
studied several years at Rome; And that, whilst he was in the College, he saw
several of Coleman's Letters. That, being made a Priest, he was sent into
England with instructions to inform the Papists, They were not obliged to obey
the King, but that they should endeavor to promote the Popish Religion. That
upon his arrival in England, His Employment in Eng.
he was placed with one Mr. Jenison in the Bishopric of Durham, where his main
Employment was to root out the Jesuits, (as men ill-principled) and to dissuade
the Papists from sending Money to Colleges beyond seas. That one Thomas Smith
told him he received a Letter from the Lord Stafford, wherein my Lord said, He
expected some sudden Change.

Dugdale's Deposition.
NExt to Mr. Smith was Stephen Dugdale, who deposed, That for about 15 or 16
years together, Page 21, etc.
he had been acquainted, by several Letters, and other means, there was a
Design carried on for the bringing in of the Romish Religion. That the Papists
were to have Money and Arms ready against the King's Death, (for he said he
heard nothing of killing the King till the year 78) That in October (78.) my
Lord Aston and others should go to dispose of certain Arms they received to the
value of 30000 l. That the King of France was acquainted with all these
Designs; and that he would furnish the Papists with Men, and afford them other
Aid and assistance, if the King should die, or be taken away. That he saw a
Letter writ to Mr. Evers, (for all the Jesuits Letters were returned to him)
wherein were these words, This night Sir Edmundbury Godfrey is dispatched. His
Contribution for Arms, etc. 500 l.
That he himself had contributed 500 l. for Arms, etc. to carry on the Design.
That about the year 78. there was an Indulgence published at all private
Chapels, wherein, whosoever was active for killing the King, should have a
free Pardon of all their Sins. That he was told at Meetings, That the King
being an Heretic, it was Lawful to kill him; And that it was no more then to
kill a Dog; That he had heard, That about the time the King should be killed,
several Parties should be provided with Arms, and rise all on a sudden at an
hours warning, and so come in upon the Protestants, Armies ready at an hours
warning.
and cut their Throats; And if any did escape, there should be an Army to cut
them off in their Flight; That he heard the Pope's daily In-come was 24000 l. a
day. And that the same Pope (as he thought) had promised to contribute in the
whole 1000 l. for the raising Armies, The Popes contribution 1000 l*
and carrying on the above mentioned Design.

Mr. Prance his Deposition.
THen Mr. Prance was produced, who deposed, Page 25. etc.
That one Mr. Singleton a Priest told him, He would make no more to stab forty
Parliament Men, then to eat his Dinner, which he was then at.

Dr. Oats his Deposition.
NExt Dr. Oats gave Evidence, That in the year (76) he being then a
Protestant, Page 25. etc.
and Chaplain in the Duke of Norfolk's Family, One Mr. Kemish and one Mr.
Singleton Priests, advised him to hasten betimes to the Church of Rome, for
that the Protestant Religion was now upon its last legs. That hereupon (having
had before some suspicion of the designs of the Papists, and growth of Popery)
to satisfy his curiosity, he feigned himself a Convert: his feigned Conversion.
was seemingly reconciled; presently admitted by the Jesuits to do their
business, entrusted in their secrets; and sent by them in April (77) with
Treasonable Letters into Spain That e're he ar^rived at Validolid, there were
Letters got before him from England, wherein was expressed; That the King was
dispatched, which was a cause of great joy to the Fathers there; But that this
proved a mistake. That during his abode in Spain, he found the Ministers of
that Court were very ready to advance Money, which Money was returned into
England; And that the Provincial of the Jesuits of Castile had also advanced
10000 l. The Provincial of Castile contribution 10000 l.
That soon after this, he was present at a Sermon Preached to some Students,
against the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, wherein likewise the King's
Legitimacy was villified and abused; And it was declared, that his Religion
entitled him to nothing but Sudden Death and Destruction That returning into
England in November following, and bringing Letters for Mr. Strange, he heard
Mr. Keines say in Mr. Strange's Chamber; he was mighty sorry for honest Will
(meaning the Ruffian that was to kill the King) that he had missed in his
enterprise. [Here Mr. Oats thought good to tell their Lordships. That the
Papists were not so Zealous for the destruction of the King, till the King had
refused Coleman the Dissolving the long Parliament: Then he went on to aquaint
them,] That in December he departed from London to St. Omers, loaded with
Letters from Strange and others, importing the hope they had the next year to
effect their Design. That being at St. Omers he saw Letters out of Ireland,
whereby he found that there, the Talbots and other persons were very zealous in
raising of Forces, and resolving to let in the French King. That in February,
several of St Omers were employed to several places in Germany and Flanders, to
fetch and carry correspondencies. That in March, Pickering attempting to kill
the King, the Flint of his Gun was loose, and the King escaped, for which
Pickering received a Discipline, and the other ( viz. William Groves) a
Chiding. That in April he returned to London; And that there was then a Consult
held, first at the White-horse-Tavern, and thence afterward adjourned into
particular Clubs, where the Confederates did resolve on the death of the King;
Afterward a Promise of 30000 Masses.
And that Groves should have 500 l for his pains; And Pickering (being a
Religious man) should have 30000 Masses. That in June he saw more Letters, and
heard new Proposals, wherein a Reward of 15000 l. was offered to Sir George
Wakeman for poisoning the King. That in July Mr. Strange very frankly told him
how London was fired, and how many of those concerned were seized, and
afterward discharged by the Duke's Guards, and Order.

Mr. Jennison's Deposition.
Page 32.
AFter Oats, Mr Jennison was called in, who deposed: That in frequent
discourses with Mr. Ireland (now Executed) he heard him often say, That it was
necessary, for the introducing of the Catholic Religion, that the Government
should be changed; And that it was an easy matter to Kill or Poison the King.
That he answered, God forbid. That hereupon Ireland told him he would remit the
Twenty pounds he owed him, A Twenty pound Debt remitted for a reward to kill
the King.
if he would go to Windsor, to assist to take off the King; But he expressed a
great detestation of it. Then Ireland desired him to name some Stout Courageous
Irish-men, proper for the Assassination; which he did, and Ireland approved of
them. That he heard one Mr. Thomas Jennison, a Jesuit, say, If C. R would not
be R. C. he should not be long C. R. And that the said Jesuit added, If the
King were Excommunicated or Deposed, he was no longer King; and it was no great
Sin to take him off. That about two months after, the said Jesuit told him,
there was a Design on foot, and that the Queen, Duke of York, the Lords in the
Tower, and the greatest Papists in England were in It. That there was a new
Army to be raised, to bring in Catholic Religion; And that he (the said
Jesuit) would procure him from the Duke a Commission in it, when the King was
taken off. That he being surpised hereat, the Jesuit told him he should
receive the Sacrament of Secrecy.

Mr. Dennis his Deposition.
THe last Witness was Mr. Dennis, Page 30.
who deposed, That he saw Dr. Oats in Spain, where he seemed to be a man of
very much business, and had a Bag of Money, some of which he lent to Him. That
the Archbishop of Tuam told him in the presence of Dr. Oats, That Mr. O.
Plunket, Primate of Ireland, was resolved to bring the French Power into
Ireland; And that there were several Collections of Money made in Ireland to
support the Plot.

This is the sum of what the six Witnesses deposed; to whose Depositions were
annexed, and produced in Court (in order to the same end) the several Records
of Attainder of Coleman, Ireland, Whitebread, Langhorn, etc. That of Coleman
was read at length, and the others deposited on the Clerks Table, to be made
use of as occasion should serve.

The Papists Plea to the above-specified Allegations. 2.
Page 17.
THus far has been (as I may say) Indicted, Arraigned, and Tried, the Plot in
general. My Lord Stafford (as the Managers declared) is not hitherto proved,
but only supposed a Party in the Conspiracy; The Plot in general is directly
charged upon the Papists in general, and they must answer to the general
Indictment; wherefore though it be not my Design to defend Popery, yet I think
it very pertinent and necessary, before we enter upon my Lord's special Charge
and Defension, to insert here some of those many things the Papists in general
often did, and still do constantly allege against the Premises, in
vindication of their Innocence. If in this I shall be accounted a Papist or
Popishly affected, it will only be amongst those who love not to see Truth,
contrary to their Interest; nor to do Justice, though to an Adversary. To
proceed then.

^e Papists (...) against (...) Plot in ^eral.
The Papists plead, that it is not the Clamor of the hainousness and horror of
a Crime imputed, but the Gu^lt and clear Conviction of a Crime proved, that
renders a man accountable to Justice, and punishable by the Law.

That as Treason is the worst of Crimes, so is the stain of Innocent Blood
(shed by Perjury) hard to be washed off.

That the bare positive Swearing of every person in every matter or manner,
hand over head, is no sufficient Conviction of another Guilt; for if so, it
would be in the Power of any six Knights of the Post to kill whomsoever they
pleased, though never so Innocent; and for what they pleased, though never so
absurd or impossible, by mere dint of Affidavit.

That false Accusations may be so laid, as that the contrary cannot possibly be
demonstrated by the Party accused; seeing no mortal man can distinctly prove
where he was, and what he did, said, or heard, every day and every hour of his
whole Life; Wherefore, to make justly valid an Accusation against another, the
Laws of God and Man require,

First, That the Accuser be a Credible Witness, that is, not tainted with
notorious Crimes or Villainies; for he that has lost a sense of moral Honesty,
has lost his right to moral Credit, and may be indifferently presumed to Swear
any thing.

Secondly, That the Accusation be strengthened with probable Circumstances;
Circumstances which bring along with them some appearance of Truth, d^stinct
from the bare Accusation it self; for otherwise, where the Balance is equal in
point of repute, between the Accuser and the Accused, it is as presumptive that
the one should be guilty of Perjury, as the other of the Crimes charged upon
him, And herein, the weaker the Credit of the Accusers are, the stronger ought
the presumption of Circumstances to be, as natural Reason and Justice dictate.

Now neither of these two Essential Conditions are found in the Evidence given
of this pretended Plot.

As for the first Condition; What manner of men the Witnesses are who make
these Discoveries; how notoriously Infafamous; how stigmatized with all sorts
of Felonies, Forgeries, Cheats, Debaucheries and Wickedness, many Intelligent
Protestants in their Consciences know; the Witnesses themselves have been often
forced to acknowledge, and several Courts of Judicature, can upon Record give
public Testimony.

As for the second condition; there are not only no Circumstances confirming
the said Oaths; But the whole series of the Evidence, is a mere bundle of Moral
impossibilities, contradictions, and nonsense. Here is a Plot (forsooth)
contrived by the Papists, at a time when they had least, or rather no reason,
to seek a Change; To kill the King, by whose merciful Indulgence they liv^d in
Peace; To wade through Blood to an uncertain Liberty, which they already
sufficiently enjoyed; To overthrow the Government for the reestablishing of
which they so frankly in the late Wars exposed their lives and fortunes; This
Plot must be managed by Persons of Quality, most remarkable peradventure of all
others for firmness of Loyalty, and now through age and infirmities, retired
from public business, and weary of the world; The whole body of Roman
Catholics, (men, before this hour, of known worth, virtue, integrity, and
unblemished Reputation,) must all be involved by Vows, and Sacraments, in a
design so black, and execrable, That God and nature abhor to think on it. They
must hazard their Honor, their Estates, their Families, their Bodies, their
Souls, their All, in an enterprise, so desperate and sottish, that none but mad
men would attempt it, and nothing but a miracle could either effect, or conceal
it

In this Plot are said to have been engaged for several years together diverse
Nations; England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Italy, Spain, Germany, etc. (an
affront, shame and scandal unto the greatest Part of Christendom,) wherein many
thousands of both Sexes, of different Interests, of all sorts, states and
conditions, must necessarily have been privy to, and partners in the Villainy.
Now, that none of this vast number should have any remorse for so Bloody a
Treason; None all this while the Worth, Wit or Grace to reveal it, No
intervening accident, no Levity, no dissagreement of Parties, happen to detect
it, till at last, Dr. Oats Capt. Bedlow, and by degrees their other Companions
raked out of Goals, Whipped, Pillory'd, and one way or other branded with Infamy,
made this Grand Doscovery, (good men) out of tenderness of Conscience. This is
somewhat hard to believe.

To prosecute this Plot the Witnesses attest there were huge Armies of Papists
( Dugdale mention's two hundred thousand,) immediately to be raised; These
numberless Swarms, were to be provided with proportionable stores of Weapons,
Ammunitions, etc. and all in a readiness for a general Massacre of Protestants
at an hours warning; Oats and the rest likewise affirm they were well
acquainted with all the most deep, and secret Intrigues the Papists had, of
this nature; Yet after all, when it comes to it; They cannot show or direct
where these Millions of men, and Mountains of Magazines are; The Officers,
after thirty months diligent scrutiny, could never find the least footsteps of
any such thing. And it is impossible they should or could be invisibly dispersed
or conveyed away upon so sudden and unexpected a discovery, especially in the
very nick of time when they were to be made use on.

We are farther told of hundreds of Sealed Commissions for all sorts of
Military Offices; my Lord Stafford (because no good Accountant) must be
Pay-master-General; Diverse Patents granted for Dignities of State; many Bulls
and Breves for Ecclesiastical preferments; And God knows how many, even Bushels
of Letters, and Pacquets, all containing most damnable Treason, sent
nevertheless up and down at random, some by the Common-Post. Others by such
Messengers as Oats, Bedlow, Dugdale and Dangerfield, who, as
bosom-Councellours, were still privy to the contents of what they carried to
and fro, and became so dexterous in taking remarques, That they could exactly
tell (when their memories failed, not for fear of contradictions,) the
particular Date, when, where, to whom, and from whom; Nay they could punctually
recite upon their fingers ends, the very express words of almost every Letter;
Oats moreover declares, he was never a real Catholic, but only pretended to
be so, on purpose to make Discoveries: Page 123.
And he was so successful in this Stratagem, that he gained from the Jesuits a
Patent Colemans Trial.
to be taken into the Consult. Is it possible then, that none of these men thus
circumstanced, could get or preserve one single Letter, one Sealed Commission,
one scrip of Paper, one Original Writing, (a thousand manner of ways easily
compassed in such a conjuncture,) whereby to credit their monstrous Evidence?
How came it about they did not at the first Discovery (having both time and
opportunity to do it,) seize by surprise some of these Things, together with
the Persons, where they were lodged? Did all the Plotters burn their
Commissions, Bulls, and Briefs, as well as all their Letters, as soon as they
received them? Why did not Oats show us at least his own Patent received from
the Jesuits? Surely it would have been of mighty force to strengthen his
Testimony. Why did not the other Witnesses also produce some of those
Treasonable Letters, writ, (as they said,) and directed to themselves? Nothing
appear; nothing extant; nothing feisible, but a few naked, harmless men, in
their several private Chambers? And this too, just when the Grand Design was to
break into Action? What mortal man can reconcile these endles^ Contradictions?

From these, and other the like grounds, the Papists would infer, That no
credit ought to be given to the bare Oaths of these men; swearing at this wild
incoherent rate: And they farther appeal to the Judgment of every impartial
conscientious man, Whether it be not more likely that a few Debauched Wretches,
of lost Consciences, and desperate Fortunes, allured by Gain, and encouraged by
Indempnities, should be induc^d out of Malice or Interest, to swear a Lie; then
that so many, so Noble, so Prudent, so known Loyal and Virtuous Persons, should
be guilty of so horrid, so bloody, so absurd so morally impossible, and (in all
circumstances) contradictory a Design? Nay whether, if such Evidence be allowed
and countenanced, any man, either Papist or Protestant, can be long secure of
his Reputation, Fortune, or Life.

To what was argued from the acknowledged Letters of Mr. Coleman and others; It
is answered, Coleman's Letters.
That those Letters indeed manifestly denote ^he buisie Designs and Activity of
the Writers; yet are they withal so far from confirming a Plot, such as Oats
and his Companions pretend to discover, that they directly evince the contrary.
For, the whole subject and context of those Letters bear a plain and open face
of what the Authors intended; And the Writers were Persons, who, (had there
been a Plot,) were the most likely of all others to have been the main Engines
and Contrivers of it: Nevertheless, we do not find one single word or syllable
in them from whence may be gathered any such design; The substance of them
being only some imaginable Conceits, and overweening Policies of four or five
aspiring men, willing to be Great, or at least to be thought so; and desiring
perhaps, in some measure, a liberty of Conscience; yet without confronting,
much less destroying the King or Government. Wherein also (as far as appears by
the Letters) they were no wise seconded by the Catholics in general, nor much
countenanced by those whose Favorites they pretended to be; so that, upon the
whole matter, these Letters, rightly considered, are rather (as is said
before,) a manifest Vindication of the Roman Catholics Innocence, then a
Confirmation of the Plot.

Concerning the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's
Murder.
there is nothing to fasten that Murder on the Roman Catholics, but the the
bare improbable (though gainful) Oaths of two Infamous Persons: The one (viz.)
Bedlow, notorious for Cheats and Misdemeanors: The other (viz.) Prance,
Self-condemned of Falsehood herein, by the Testimony of his own Mouth; for he
once Swore he was an Actor in the said Murder; and soon after before the King
and Council, unswore what he had said, and Protested upon his Salvation, he
knew nothing of it. There are furthermore some remarkable and pressing
circumstances, which the Papists urge in their own defense herein; One is that
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was esteemed by all, a moderate man and particularly
Indulgent to Catholics. And it is not credible the Papists would Murder their
Friends; especially in a conjuncture of time, when it was to no purpose, nor
could any way Stifle the Discovery of the Plot already made; Nay, when they
could not but see such an Horrid Action, (if known) must needs draw the wrath
and detestation of the whole Nation upon them. Another thing is, Page 20
that the whole (though premeditated) series of this Murder, as it is related
by the Witnesses, seems to be involved with innumerable Absurdities,
Contradictions, moral Impossibilities, and Pregnant appearences of Perjury. The
Scene of the Tragedy must be (forsooth) the public Yard of Somerset House (a
place, or rather thorough-fare of continual intercourse,) within twenty Paces
of the Common Guards, where Watch is kept night and day; The Assassines, to
effect their design, must feign a Quarrel, and call Justice Godfrey out of the
street (a notable Policy) to keep the Peace, though none, Passengers, Soldiers
or Neighbors, preceiv'd any thing of this Tumult. When they had him in the
Yard, they Strangled him with an Hankerchief, (a very proper Instrument,
studied and contrived beforehand, to strangle a Man.) After the buisiness was
done, they let him lie exposed in this open place, half living, half dead,
above a quarter of an hour. At length they dragged him into a Chamber in Dr.
Godwin's Lodgings, (a Room attested to be of daily use to the Servants, never
locked, but constantly obvious to all Comers and Goers;) here they kept him two
days, and then carried him through several Courts, into several Rooms, and
apartments in Somerset House; And having thus (to no purpose) tossed him up and
down from Saturday till Wednesday; they finally placed him (though stiff and
Inflexible,) in a Sedan, and carried him to the Soho, and there set him astride
on Horseback, to ride before H^ll to the place where he was afterward found.
Bedlow deposes, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was Throtl'd with a Cravat; Prance
Swears it was with a Hankerchief; The names of the Assassines cited by Bedlow
are Prichard, Welsh, Le Phaire, and other Jesuits. But the Murderers nominated
by Prance, are Green, Hill, Bury, Gyrald and Kely; And these two parties are
quite different Actors; and as far as, appears by the Evidence, neither the
Designs, nor ^ersons well known to each other. Prance says, he saw the dead
Body very plainly in a low Room, by the light of a dark Lanthorn but what was
thrown over it, he could not tell; Nor could be afterward (when required) go
to the Room where he said he saw it. Bedlow tells us he refused to have any
hand in the Murder, for which cause the Jesuits did not acquaint him who it
was; yet they showed him the dead Body in the presence of many, who neither
knew him, nor he them; Prance himself further declared, he never was in Bedlows
company, till he came to Prison. The main Assassines were ignorant of what
reward they were to have; But Bedlow (though no compartner in the Murder,)
could tell there were Four Thousand Pounds ordered, of which Two Thousand
Pounds were proffered to him alone, if he would but assist the rest to convey
away the Corpse. This Murder is affirmed to have been committed on Saturday, the
twelfth day of October (78) at nine a clock at night; and the Body conveyed
away on the Wednesday following, about Midnight. In direct opposition to which,
Hill, Green, and Bury (who were Accused, Tried and Executed for this Fact,)
produced these Witnesses. One Mrs. Tilden and Mrs. Broadstreet, attested that
Hill (who dwelt with them) never kept ill hours, but always came in by Eight of
the Clock; That he could not go out afterward, because he waited at Table, and
the Maid Catherine Lee locked up the doors, and the Family went not to Bed till
Eleven; That particularly he was at home on Saturday night, when Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey is said to be Killed; and on Wednesday night when carried away, James
Warrier attested, That Green (his Lodger) was in his House and company on
Saturday October the 12 th. from seven till after ten at Night, and that he
exactly remembered it by his Work. Three Sentinels, who Successively kept strick
Guard on the aforesaid Wednesday Night, at the great Gate at Someset-House
(through which it is affirmed the Body was carried out in a Sedan,) declared
there went out that way no Sedan at any hour whatsoever, from seven a Clock
that Night, to four the next Morning; The Amplitude of which Testimony includes
at least three hours immediately before and after the time Sworn to by Prance
and Bedlow. Berry's Maid attested, That her Master came in that same Wednesday
in the Dusk of the Evening; went to Bed about 12. and could not well after that
go out again, without her knowledge; the passage to his Chamber being through
hers. And it is most worthy of observation, that this Bury was, and professed
himself to be (both during his Imprisonment, and at his very Death) a
Protestant of the Church of England; Yet this Man; though after Condemnation he
was proffered his Life, if he would own the Fact; Nevertheless absolutely
denied it to his last Breath. And when the very Cart was drawing away from
under him, he lifted up his Hands and said, As I am Innocent, so receive my
Soul, O Jesus; wherefore if the last words of a dying Protestant, (who might,
but would not live, by a false accusation of himself or others,) may be
credited; The Papists were Innocent of this Murder, and the forenam'd Witnesses
Perjured in their Evidence. As for what is objected about a Letter sent from
London to Tixal, etc. It is answered, (supposing such a Letter was really sent
and received,) That a Letter intimating the Murder of a Justice of the Peace,
might well be Writ from London on Saturday (when Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was
known to be missing) and arrive at Tixal in Staffordshire, by the common Post
on Monday following; Page 77. Page 136
and thereupon Dugdale might tell the news the self-same day, to diverse
Gentlemen at Tixall. What of all this? Where Is the Inferrence against the
Papists? Yet this is all some Gentlemen seemed to attest, (whilst others
denied,) and all can be necessarily deduced from the receipt of such a Letter;
But that this Justice of the Peace was Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and that the
Papists had Murdered him, is proved only by the Common tract of Dugdales
peremptory Swearing, without any rational motive of credibility. Thus much of
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

As for the Narratives, and from them deduced Stories, of Firing the City,
Fireballs, Sham-Plot: etc.
Burning the Navy, Black-Balls, Fireballs, Sham-Plots, Wild-Irish,
Spanish-Pilgrims, with other the like innumerable Fopperies, and known
contradictions to wise men; though they make a dreadful sound amongst the
Mobile; yet carry along with them such an excess of Gross and Ridiculous
Nonsense; that to sober understandings they only serve to demonstrate the
Perjury of the Witnesses, and need no Confutation in Equitable Courts (such as
ours are,) no wise disposed per fas and nefas, without appearence of Justice,
to oppress the Innocent.

The Votes of both Houses of Parliament declaring it a Plot.
And whereas it is alleged, as a main Argument of Popish Guilt, That the two
Houses of Parliament have declared it a Plot; and several Persons in several
Courts of Judicature have been Tried, Condemned, and Executed for it. The
Papists answer (with all due Submission to the Government, in defense of
Innocence,) That it is not Impossible, nor altogether without President, That a
Lawful Authority proceeding Secundum allegata and Probata; should be abused;
and consequently drawn into a mistake, by the Malice and Perjury of Wicked Men.
Those who make it their study and Trade, to frame Artificial Lies, and have
time, assistance, and all imaginable encouragement and opportunity for it, may
easily invent plausible Stories (with more coherence then any hitherto
divised,) such as may amuse and deceive the most just and prudent Persons*
especially in a conjuncture, when a transporting Zeal to the Protestant, and
(as Papists say) a misconceived prejudice to the Catholic Religion,
influenceth the Nation; Nor have all been Convicted, who were Impeached and
Tried upon the Plot, but as some have been Condemned, so others Impeached upon
the same Evidence, and in the same Courts of Judicature, have been See the
Trials of Wakeman, Corker, Marshal, Earl of Castlemain, Sir Tho. Gascoin, Lady
Powis, Tempest, etc.
acquitted, the wickedness and forgery of the Witnesses detected, and their
Depositions rejected, as unworthy of Credit. It is further hoped, the Wisdom,
Justice, and Integrity of the State, will at length discover the whole
Imposture, vindicate the Innocent, and Punish the Injury herein done, to God,
to the King, to the Nation, and to almost all Europe.

To the Instances given of Popish Malice, Gunpowder Treason, French Massacre,
etc.
and Bloodiness from former examples, ( viz.) Queen Mary's Cruelties, the
Powder Plot, the Irish Barbarisms, the French Massacre, etc. Committed by
Professed Papists. It is answered, that by the same reason, and to as good
purpose, the Traiterous Seditions, and Outrages in Germany, France, Bohemia and
Holland, Authorized and Fomented by Calvin, Swinglius, B^za, and other
Reformers; The late Bloody Wars in England, the almost yesterday's
Remonstrances, and Practices in Scotland; The even now actual Rebellion in
Hungary, raised and managed by Protestants, for Protestanizm; But above all,
that never to be paralelled, Hellish Murder of the Lords Anointed, Our
glorious Sovereign CHARLES the I. in cold Blood, by outward form of Justice, on
pretense of Reformation, might be imputed to the Protestant Religion. For all
these now mentioned Horrid Villainies were committed by Protestants; Protestants
who gloried in being more then ordinarily refined, from Popish Errors and
Superstitions. If it be said (as most justly it may) the Church of England
never taught such Practices, the same say, and protest the Papists in behalf of
their Church; But because mere recrimination is no justification on either
side; And for that, a full decision of this heavy charge, depends much on the
right understanding of Roman Catholic Principles, in matter of obedience to
God and the King; We shall treat of this Subject apart by it self, when we come
to examine the Principles of My Lords Faith and Religion.

Reflections upon the several above cited Depositions of Smith, Dugdale, Oats,
and Jenison.
LAstly, The above cited Depositions, respectively made by Smith, Dugdale,
Oats, and Jenison, in proof of the Plot in general, are liable also to diverse
remarkable Exceptions. And the Papists stick not here to say, They wonder how
so many and gross Incongruities, and Falsehoods, attested only by Infamous Men,
could pass for current Truths amongst Persons of Justice, Worth, and Prudence.
For instance,

Smith in his Deposition gives us to understand, That being as yet a
Protestant, but troubled, it seems, with some doubts in matters of Religion; He
applied himself for satisfaction to certain Priests in France; They to settle
his mind told him, They would shortly bring in their Religion into England,
Right or Wrong. (a notable argument to convince a well-meaning Protestant.) But
neither this (as you may well think,) nor all the Jesuits could say, or do,
would prevail with him; so that he lived and studied with them several years (a
likely story,) remaining still a professed Protestant. At length the Jesuits
desponding (as well they might) of their own abilities, herein, sent him to be
Converted by Cardinal Grimaldi, and he it was did the Feat, which none of the
Priests or Jesuits could compass. The Cardinal (to remove all Scruples from the
tender Conscience of his new Convert; and further to convince his Judgment in
the truth of his Religion,) entertained him one day with this Learned and Pious
discourse, (viz) That he had great assurances, the Popish Religion would
prevail in England, and that there was but one in the way, and that to
accomplish their Designs, they must take him out of the way. Thus the young Man
being now well confirmed in his Faith; was made a Priest, and sent into England
with Instructions to teach his Contrymen; They were not obliged to obey
their King; and that to Murder him was a Meritorious Act. But the misfortune
was, that arriving in England he quite mistook his Errand. And though he
continued firm in the belief of the Popish Doctrine and Principles, yet made it
his whole business to root out the Jesuits, (the Popes chief Emissaries,) and
dissuade Roman Catholics from sending Moneys to Colleges beyond Seas.

Dugdale tells us, All the Jesuits Letters containing Damnable Treason, and
sent for the most part by the Common Post, came to his hands, most of which he
saw and read, but could never produce one single Letter. He informs us also of
dreadful Oaths and Sacraments of Secrecy, administered to the Conspirators,
before they were made privy to any Dangerous Design; yet with the same breath
declares, there were whole Armies both Privy and Ready, to a Design no less
then of Cutting all the Protestants Throats, throughout the Nation at an hours
warning. Nay he assures us; there was a Free Pardon of all Sins Proclaimed
every where, at the Chapels to all Persons, Men and Women, whosoever would be
active in Killing the King, (a notable way of concealing Secrets.) Is it
possible this Fellow should find credit in such gross, such palpable Forgeries.

Oats likewise relates, How that whilst he was Chaplain to the Duke of
Norfolk, the Priests attempted the utmost of their skill, to persuade him out
of his Religion, by telling him, The Church of England was upon it is last Legs.
Surely the Priests took him to be either a notorious Fool or Knave, for
otherwise they might doubtless have devised some more plausible and less
dangerous Argument to convert a Protestant Minister; Yet he feigned to be
convinced by their reasons, and was hereupon presently entertained by the
Jesuits, (the sottish careless Jesuits,) who on a sudden entrusted this
Neophite with all their concerns, made him privy to all their most
Damnable-Intrigues; And in short it is most certain, nothing of Treason, Murder,
or Villainy, was contrived or even thought on, by them, without him. By this
means he became acquainted, not only with the strange adventures of Pickerings
loose Flint, Whipping, Thirty Thousand Masses, etc. But also with the manner of
Firing the City, Introducing Chimerical Armies, French, Irish, Spanish, etc.
Mustered up in the Deposition; Nor is it a wonder the Jesuits should be so rash
in discovering their Secrets to Oats; Seeing he himself (if you will believe
him,) here also deposes, that some of them were so desperately mad, as to
Preach a public Sermon before a company of Students; wherein the Kings
Legitimacy was vilified and abused; and it was declared, His Majesty's Religion
entitled him to nothing but sudden Death and Destruction. Is it credible a
Jesuit or any other in his Wits, should publicly Preach such Black Treason to
a Company of Boys? But what shall we say of the Doctor's tender Conscience and
Zeal, in preserving the King? He tells us here, he only seigned himself a
Catholic on purpose to make Discoveries; Alas (good Man, Ireland's Trial.
) It was to save His Majesty's l^fe, made him seem to the Papists what he
really was not. Yet (O prodigious Impudence,) he owns at the same time, he was
conscious for above a year together, of the daily attempts made by Groves and
Pickering to Shoot the King; He hourly expected for several Months the horrid
effects of Sir George Wakeman's Poison; He was privy (as he ad's elsewhere,)
to the designed Assassination of the King at Windsor; He knew the Ruffians were
actually upon the Place, and ready for the Villainy; He saw the Money sent to
them for their Encouragement, and every moment waited to hear, the Fatal stroke
was given. Nevertheless this Man of Conscience, whose watchful Eye so carefully
guarded the Kings Life, all this while made no Discovery; Though he knew for
certain, that the Pistols were already, even at the King's Breast; The Cup of
Poison at his Lip; And the Dagger almost at his very Heart; Yet he never cried
out Murder upon the Lords Anointed; never called for Immediate Succor; never
warned the King of his Imminent danger; never diverted the Impending Mischief;
never so much as opened his Mouth, to disclose any of these Horrid Treasons,
until such time as the King might have been killed a thousand times over. Is
this the Doctors Vigilance? Or rather, is it not perfect Demonstration, that
all he has Sworn of the Plot, is Damnable Perjury.

Jenison declares, That though he often expressed to Mr. Ireland, An Horrid
detestation of Treason and Bloodshed; Yet Ireland (as if he had a mind to Hang
himself,) was still urging this Conscientious Man to Murder the King; and when
he could not prevail with him herein, he would needs have him at last to
nominate some Irish Ruffians, whom he judged most proper for this Execrable
Villainy. And thus far indeed Jenison acknowledges, he condescended. Now one
would think a Man, who had taken so deep an Impression of horror and
detestation of Bloodshed, should have had some scruple in concealing so Hellish
a Design; and much more in nominating the very Persons who were to effect it.
But that which seems above all most strange, is, the mighty reward the Jesuits
proffered him, in case he would join with the Four Ruffians, in this Devilish
Enterprise. Oats informs us; Sir George Wakeman was to have Fifteen Thousand
Pounds to Poison the King; and Groves Fifteen Hundred for Shooting him. Yet
when these Jesuits come to beat the Price with Jenison (though a Man hard to be
wrought upon,) they could afford him no more then Twenty Pounds; and this only
to be remitted of an Old Debt; a wonderful encouragement to a Scrupulous Man*
for so desperate and damned an Exploit.

To conclude this whole matter, The Papists aver^, if the Justice and Equity of
their Cause be impartially considered; the Integrity of their Principles
rightly understood, their formerly experienced Loyalty regarded. The contrary
practices of their chiefest Adversaries remembered. The Infamy of the
Witnesses, and Inconsistency of their Evidence duly weighed, there will remain
no color of proof, or even Suspicion of this fatal Plot, which has already
drawn so much Innocent Blood* and brought no small confusion both to Church and
State.

The Process against my Lord in Particular. 3*
AFter a long and accurate discussion of the Plot in general, Page 40. etc.
The Court proceeded to take cognizance of what in particular affected my Lord,
the Prisoner at the Bar. In pursuance hereof, the Managers regarding in all
things a Methodical exactness, first demanded before they produced their
Evidence, That none of my Lords Council might stand near to prompt, or advise
him what he should say, or answer, as to matters of Fact, wherewith he was
charged.

Then they began by way of introduction to show, The first onset against my
Lord.
that they had made it out there was a Plot. That this Plot was a general
Design of the Popish party; That it was not likely such a design could be
carried on, without the Concurrence of Persons of great Quality. That therefore
it was to be presumed, my Lord at the Bar, a Nobleman, and a Zealous Papist had
a share in it: But what that share was, and how far my Lord was engaged, was to
appear from the positive Evidence.

IT will not be expected that my Lord, one single Person of 68. years of Age,
long Imprisoned, no great Rhetorician, nor much versed in the Law, should take
all advantages, improve favorable circumstances, and keep equal measures, in
sharpness of Wit, and effluence of Speech, with his Opponents, who were Ten or
Twelve of the greatest Lawyers, and ablest Judgments of the Nation; Nor is it
any wonder, if my Lord confounded with the multiplicity of Arguments;
astonished at the Horror of the objected Crimes, discountenanced by the
Auditory; And (as he acknowledged,) half Stupefied with continual Pleading, day
after day, without intermission; Did sometimes insist upon matters of less, and
omit matters of greater moment, in his own behalf; yet he seemed to manifest
much of Candor and Sincerity, in all his Comportment, and Addressing himself
to my Lords his Judges, before he began his Plea to the particular Evidence
against him; He spoke to this effect. That he was much afflicted to see himself
accused by so high an Authority, My Lords Address. Page ^5, etc.
for a Crime which above all others, he ever from his heart utterly abhorred;
He renounced and detested with much Exaggeration all Plots against the King and
Government; He abjured all Principles leading to such ends; And disowned all
Authority upon Earth, which might in the least pretend to absolve him from his
Allegiance. He further showed how faithful and affectionate he had been, both
to the late King in his Wars, and to this in his Exile; He declared he had
timely notice of his being Impeached, and thereupon might (if he would) have
easily fled; He likewise acknowledged, That after he was in the Tower, both the
King and the House of Lords had sent him word* That in case he would make a
Discovery, though he were never so Guilty, he should have a Pardon; If
therefore he had been really Conscious of his own Guilt, and might have secured
himself by either of these means, and would not, he ought to die for his folly,
as well as his Crime, He professed he had always a natural Abhorrence of
Bloodshed, insomuch that he could not wish the death, even of his Adversaries
that Swore against him. Lastly, He desired (as necessary to his defense,)
Copies of some Depositions made by the Witnesses before several Authorities, on
several occasions; which Copies after a long debate upon it, were granted.



NOw begin the particular Depositions, of each particular Witness directly
against my Lord, upon which the House of Commons grounded their Impeachment.

To these Depositions as they severally occur, I shall adjoyn my Lords
immediate Answer; And to his Answer, the Mannagers reply. That so both
confusion and unnecessary Repetitions, inconsistent with a Compendium, may be
avoided; Furthermore, because the Mannagers in Summing up their Evidence, made
diverse ingenious Observations, and urged many Reasons to uphold their several
Charges, not mentioned in the body of the Trial. And also for that the Papists
affirm, there was more of flourishing Rhethorick, then strength of Argument in
the said Observations; the order of Law, not permitting my Lord, in the close
of the Trial to Rejoyn upon them. I shall (to give the best satisfaction I can
to all parties,) annex here the plain Substance, both of the said Mannagers
Observations, and the Papists Answers, as they respectively occur, to each
particular Evidence.

Dugdale's Deposition against my LORD.
THe first Witness that gave Evidence to the particular Impeachment, was
Stephen Dugdale, who Swore.

That at a certain Meeting held at Tixal in Stafford shire, about the latter
end of August, or the beginning of September: (78.) My Lord did (together with
the Lord Aston and others, Pa 24. etc.
in the presence of Dugdale,) give his deliberate and full consent, To take
away the Kings Life, and Introduce the Popish Religion. That on the 20th. or
21st. of September (78.) in the forenoon, my Lord then residing at Tixal, sent
for him the said Dugdale to his Chamber, by one of his Servants, either his
Gentleman or Page, whilst he was dressing: That when he came in, my Lord sent
out his Servants, and being there alone together; my Lord offered him 500 l.
for his Charges and Encouragement, to take away the Kings Life, and further
told him, He should have free Pardon of all his Sins, and should be Sainted;
For the King had been Excommunicated, and was likewise a Traitor and a Rebel,
and an enemy to Jesus Christ.

My Lords Exceptions.
TO this Deposition my Lord made several grand Exceptions. Dugdal's Infamy and
Beggary.
The first was, That Dugdale was a Person of an Infamous Life. That he had
Cheated the Lord Aston his Master, and defrauded the Workmen and Servants of
their Wages. That by his Extravagancies and Misdemeanors, he had run himself
into several hundred pounds Debt: for which he was thrown into Goal, and
despaired of ever getting out from thence, otherwise then by making the
pretended Discoveries. For proof of all which my Lord produced these Witnesses.

Pa. 94 etc.
Mr. Sandbidge, an Old Man, and a Protestant attested, That Dugdale was a Knave,
and notorious^ known, both by him and all the Country to be a Wicked Man.

Pa. 84. etc.
Thomas Sawyer attested, Dugdale went from my Lord Astons, involved in deep
Debts: That whilst he was Bailiff to my Lord Aston, he received and placed to
my Lord's Account, several Work-mens Wages, which he never paid to the said
Workmen: Whereupon great Clamours and Complaints were made of him in the
Country; That being Arrested for Debt, my Lord Aston would not own him for his
Servant, at which Dugdale Swore, He would be revenged on him.

Pa. 87. etc.
The same thing as to Dugdal's sinister dealing, His being in Debt, Imprisoned,
and Dissown'd by the Lord Aston, were attested by Sir Walter Baggot, Mr.
Whitby, a Justice of Peace, and Mr. Phillips Minister of Tixal.

From hence my Lord drew a second Inference, (viz.) That had the Lord Aston,
and the rest been Guilty, (as Dugdale accused them,) it was highly Improbable,
the said Lord should adventure to Exasperate, Discard, and leave to Goal and
Ruin, a Man, at whose mercy they all lay, and who might to retrieve his
desperate Fortune, by making Discoveries, utterly destroy both their Designs,
and them.

To confront the Testimony of the foregoing Witnesses, the Managers produced
others in favor of Dugdale; And as to the matters of (...) Debts and Beggary.

Mr. Noble, Stephen College, Page 145. etc.
(the Protestant Joyner, lately Executed for High Treason at Oxford,) and Mr.
Boson a Lawyer, deposed, That at Dugdale's entreaty, they went with him to the
Tower, to assist him in adjusting his Accounts with the Lord Aston, but could
not accomplish it, by reason my Lord would not, (till the return of a certain
Counselor out of the Country,) let them see a Book, wherein Dugdale said his
Discharges were; And that Dugdale told them, my Lord Aston was Indebted to him
(things rightly stated,) 200 l.

To this my Lord Stafford replied, He should have something to say; And desired
the Lord Aston might be admitted to give an account of this matter; But it was
answered, That the Lord Aston stood Indicted for the same Treason, and could
not be a Witness.

Page 163.
Then my Lord desired Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower might speak what he knew.
Hereupon Mr. Lieutenant declared, That the Lord Aston would have come to an
account with Dugdale in his (the Lievtenants) presence; But that Dugdale put it
off, and said he would come some other time: But from that time to this, he
never heard of him.

Page 175.
UPon these Testimonies the Managers made these following Observations; First,
It was manifest from several Circomstances, that Dugdale went not away from
Tixall for Debt, (as seems here to be pretended,) but for fear of being
apprehended for the Plot, which argues he was then Conscious of his own Guilt
in that matter. Secondly, Whereas Sawyer attests, that Dugdale Swore he would
be revenged on my Lord Aston, because he would not own him for his Servant,
when Arrested for Debt; If this were true, yet seeing this Revenge was not
intended against my Lord Stafford, but against my Lord Aston; It is Impertinent
to be urged against Dugdale's present Evidence.

To which, the Papists Answer. To the first, It is no wonder, if at a time when
Roman Catholics were Universally suspected and persecuted on account of the
Plot; Dugdale though not Conscious of any Guilt, either in himself or others;
Yet being then a Catholic, and hitherto undetermined to set up for an
Evidence, was in some apprehension of coming into trouble, and might therefore
withdraw upon that Score. But what is that to the present purpose? Is it not
also undeniably proved here. That Dugdale was in Debt: That for Debt he was
arrested and Imprisoned; That for his Misdemeanors, and not for Religion he was
discarded by his Master; That at last Beggary had surrounded him, Revenge
possessed him, and Desperation Seizing him? If this has been clearly proved,
it is no hard matter to judge what was his End and aim in making his
Discovevies; And my Lords further Inferences hereupon are Solid and Good. To
the second, The Evidence given of Dugdale 's Revenge, was not produced as if
the said Revenge was chiefly intended against my Lord Stafford, but only to
show that Dugdale was now upon the point of bidding adieu to Conscience and
Honesty, And desirous to satisfy at once, both his Malice, and Penury; He
contrived his Plot ( after the Model given him by Oats and Bedlow) wherein he
accused some out of Revenge, and others, (amongst whom my Lord Stafford) as the
most proper Persons, to complete the Number of Actors in his Tragic Farce.

IN defense of Dugdale's Reputation in point of Honesty. Page 147.
Mr. Whitby declared, that Dugdale had been long my Lord Aston's Servant,
received my Lord's Rents, made his Bargains, and Governed the rest of the
Family: That he dealt honestly with him; That he had heard indeed some
Tradesmen complain he put them off without Money, and would not pay them: But
that my Lord would hear nothing against him.

William Southal a Coroner deposed, that he knew no ill of Mr. Dugdale; that he
was the Lord Aston's Bailiff, and had a good repute with all those People who
had dependence on the Family; But that he himself never had any business with
him. Then he (the said Southal) gave a large relation how he had persuaded
Dugdale (being then in Custody for Debt) to Discover the Plot; By putting him
in mind of his Duty and Allegiance to the King; and assuring him, if he would
make a timely Discovery, he should not only obtain His Najesty's Gracious
Pardon, but also a Reward of Two Hundred Pounds. By force of which Argument,
Dugeale at last assented to make Discoveries; and accordingly gave in his
several Depositions, first in the Country before two Justices of the Peace,
afterward before the Council; and lastly before the two Houses of Parliament.

Page 163.
Concerning this Southal, the Lord Ferrers informed the Court, That he had been
very active against the King in the late Wars, and had the Repute of a
Pernicious Man against the Government.

To Impunge which information, the Lord Brook declared in behalf of Southal,
Page 168.
that his Mother had employed him, and found him honest in their Affairs; And
Mr. Gower Farther testified, That he found Southal extraordinary zealous in
prosecuting the Papists.

UPon these Evidences, the Managers made these Observations, First, Mr. Whitby
not only declares, that Dugdale had deal^ honestly by him; But that my Lord
Aston himself would hear nothing against him. Secondly, It is not always the
Stewards fault, if workmen to great Persons sometimes want their Wages.
Thirdly, Mr. Southal an understanding zealous man, had (with much difficulty
and strong Arguments,) the good fortune at last to succeed, in persuading Mr.
Dugdale to make a fair and plain Discovery of the whole Plot, to the great
happiness, not only of Mr. Dugdale, but of the whole Nation.

To which the Papists answer. To the first, Though Dugdale perhaps dealt
honestly with Mr. Whitby yet he might be a Knave and deal dishonestly with
other People for all that. And if my Lord Aston refused to hear any thing
against him, this very refusal argues there were Complaints made of him: And my
Lord himself, in time both gave Ear to his Crimes, and Discarded him for them,
as is already proved. To the second, Those Stewards who receiving Moneys of
their Masters, to pay Poor Laborers their Wages, shall (as Dugdale did,)
Defraud them of it, the better to defray their own Extravagant Expenses, are no
honest Men. To the third, The Papists do not understand, to what purpose this
Testimony of Southal 's is here produced; for it is granted, That Dugdale being
in Goal, and brought to Extremity, did after much Struggling and Reluctance of
Conscience, abandon his Soul to Perjury: And conceiving fair hopes of Success,
by the prosperous adventures of Oats and Bedlow, by the present promise of 200
l. and by the persuasion of Southal, a notorious Cromwellian, at last plunged
himself into deep and horrid Oaths, not only Incredible, but Morally impossible
to be true.

THe second weighty Exception made by my Lord against Dugdale's Deposition was,
Dugdale's Perjury.
That he had directly and palpably Perjured himself, in diverse parts and
circumstances of his said Deposition. For instance of this.

First. Dugdale now Swears, He had an exact knowledge, and deep concern in the
Plot. He was not only a Confident, but an Assistant in raising Armies, Killing
the King, etc. Now my Lord proved by several Irrefragable Witnesses: That the
said Dugdale had before at sundry times, and on sundry occasions, with dreadful
Oaths and Execrations, professed he knew nothing of any such thing. The
Witnesses were these.

Sir Walter Baggot and Mr. Kinnersley, both Parliament Men, attested; Page 82.
etc.
That Dugdale being Examined before them, and other Justices of the Peace,
though he then took the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy in their Presence,
yet absolutely denied any knowledge of the Plot.

Mr. Whitgrave also a Justice of the Peace, attested; That he earnestly pressed
and encouraged Dugdale to make a Discovery of what he knew: telling him* Now he
had taken the Oaths, they looked upon him as one of them; and that he would do
him all the Kindness he could: To which Dugdale answered, Truly for his part,
though he had the misfortune to Live amongst Papists, yet he never liked their
Religion. Then Mr. Whitgrave urged him home, saying, Sir you may do your self a
kindness, and oblige your King and Country: I am confident you know of this
Horrid Plot: pray do not stifle your Conscience with an Oath of Secrecy: Let it
come out; Dugdale replied, As he hoped to be saved, he knew nothing of it.

Thomas Sawyer attested, That two or three days before Dugdale began to
Impeach, being then at Stafford under the Sergeants Hands for Debt, he took a
Glass of Drink in the presence of Sawyer, and said, Thomas, I wish this may be
my Damnation, and my Poison, if I know of any Plot or Priest.

Page 175.
UPon these Evidences the Mannagers made this Observation, viz. That Dugdale's
denying, and with Execrations Forswearing any knowledge of the Plot, is no
manner of Objection; for he Forswore it at a time, when he never intended to
reveal it, and was in danger of his own Life; but afterward he changed his
mind, and discovered all to Southal, and others.

To which the Papists answer: It is very strange, so palpable a Perjury proved
upon Dugdale by so Substantial Witnesses, in the whole System and Essence of
his Testimony, should be so slightly evaded. Is it no manner of Objection to
prove that Dugdale is Forsworn in his whole Discovery? Must Credit be given to
the Depositions of a Man, in a matter, whereof he himself with dreadful Oaths
and Execrations has often protested the contrary? Is the Conviction of Perjury
by the Testimony of his own Mouth nothing? Why? because out of fear in his
former Oaths, he never intended to Swear Truth. Is this a Rational answer? Nay
is it not rather perfectly demonstrative from what is already proved; that for
Fear, for Lucre, for Revenge, for Liberty, this Man has actually Sworn to
express Contradictions, and will not stick upon the same motives to Swear any
thing.

SEcondly, Page 74.
Dugdale had determinately Sworn at Sir George Wakeman's Trial, (as my Lord
proved by two Substantial Witnesses, the Lady Marchioness of Winchester, and
Madam Howard,) that the Meeting or Consult at Tixal, mention^d in the
Deposition, wherein my Lord is said to have been present, and Consenting to the
Killing of the King; was held precisely in the Month of August (78.) Now my
Lord proved he never was at, or near Tixal during that whole Month; nor came
thither till the 12 th. of September following. This he showed by giving an
exact Account where he was, every Week and Day throughout that Month. The
Witnesses who gave respective Evidence to each particular time and place, were,
the Marquess of Worcester, the Marchioness of Winchester, Mr. Bonny, White and
Bevan, Servants to the said Marquess.

Page 147
UPon these Testimonies, the Mannagers made these Observations: First, The two
Ladies who gave Evidence to Dugdale's words spoken at Sir George Wakeman's
Trial, were Roman Catholics and Relations to my Lord. Secondly, They did not
agree in their Evidence with one another; The Lady Marchioness saying, Dugdale
Swore that my Lord Stafford was to come down into Stafford shire in June or
July, and was present at the Consult at Tixal in August. Madam Howard saying,
Dugdale Swore my Lord Stafford did come down into Staffordshire in June or
July, and was present at the Consult at Tixal in August. Thirdly, The said
Ladies having much concern upon them for Sir George Wakeman, the Popish
Physician, they might easily mistake in what they heard. Fourthly, In the
Printed Trial, there are no such words of Dugdale's mentioned.

To which the Papists answer: To the first, The two Ladies, though Roman
Catholics, are Persons o^ that Qulity* and known Virtue, as admit of no
Comparison in point of Credit with the Witnesses produced against my Lord. That
to Vilify my Lord's Witnesses because Roman Catholics, is contrary to Law, and
denotes an Exasperated mind, willing to deprive Catholics of a Just Defense.
To the second, The different manner or Phrase the Ladies used in expressing
themselves in point of Circumstance, is not at all material, seeing they both
jointly agree, and determinately attest; That Dugdale Swore my Lord was at
Tixal in August, and then and there present at the Consult: Which was the
Substantial thing wherein my Lord proves him Perjured. To the third, A deep
concern occasioneth an Attention rather then a Mistake: And a pretense of a
mistake in a positive Witness, is an Evasion, whereby any Verbal Testimony
whatsoever may be eluded. To the fourth, Catholics have Experience that many
considerable matters have been omitted, or otherwise inserted in the Printed
Trials, to the disadvantage of their Cause; And as those Printed Copies, though
Pleaded, were never allowed to be good Evidence for them, so ought they not to
be alleged against them.

THirdly, Page 83, etc.
Dugdale Swears in his Deposition; That at Tixal on the 20 th. or 21 st. of
September (78) My Lord sent for him by one of h^s Servants to his Cham^er, in
the Morning whilst he was Dressing; (which Servant also Dugdale Swears, was
either Mr. Furnesse my Lords Gentleman, or George Leigh his Page: And that when
Dugdale came into the Chamber, my Lord sent out his said Servants; and being
thus with him alone, Offered him five hundred Pounds to Kill the King. In
direct opposition to these particulars, my Lord proved, by the Attestation of
the self-same Servants, Mr. Furnesse and George Leigh; That he never sent for
Dugdale; never was with him alone in his Chamber; nor never dismissed his
Servants for that end, all that Morning. For the Evincing of which,

Page 80. etc.
Mr. Furnesse my Lords Gentleman attested: That he about eight a Clock that
Morning, coming to my Lords Chamber, met Dugdale in the Hall. Dugdale desired
him he would Entreat my Lord to Intercede to the Lord Aston his Master in his
behalf, that he might go to Etching Race: Hereupon Furnesse went into my Lords
Chamber, and having spoken to my Lord, as Dugdale desired, my Lord bid him be
called in; accordingly Furnesse conducted Dugdale into the Chamber; when he
came in, my Lord asked him several questions about the Race, telling him, he
himself would bett Twenty Pounds for Staffordshire sake, Then, after some
discourse to this purpose, my Lord Stafford told him, he would speak to his
Lord for him; during all which time Furnesse was present in the Chamber,
together with my Lord and Dugdale, and heard the di^course between them. When
Dugdale had obtained his request, he went out of my Lords Chamber, leaving
Furnesse still there; my Lord also as soon as he was dressed went out of h^s
Chamber to my Lord Aston, to ask him leave for Dugdale, bidding Furnesse make
himself ready to go to the Race. Furnesse accordingly made h^mself ready about
Nine a Clock, and coming down the Back-stairs, my Lord Stafford met him: Go
(said he) to Etching-hill, and see what Betts there are, and take Stephen
Dugdale along with you to show you the way, for I have asked his Lord leave for
him to go: Upon this Dugdale having now leave, went along with Furnesse to the
Stable, and took Horse: Furnesse his Horse was not ready but he overtook
Dugdale within half a Mile, and they arrived at the Race together about 12. a
Clock: My Lord himself (with other Persons of Quality,) came to the Race not
long after, and returned back to Tixal about seven at Night.

The same Mr. Furnesse and George Leigh both attested, That my Lord never sent
either of them for Dugdale; That he never bid them go out of the Chamber, or
absent themselves whilst Dugdale alone remained with him: No, nor did they know
that my Lord was ever alone with Dugdale, either that Morning, or in his whole
Life.

To Infringe the last Particle of this last Evidence, the Managers produced
these Witnesses.

Page 32. etc.
Mr. Hanson Deposed, That he once saw Dugdale with my Lord in the Parlour at
Tixal; but durst not be positive whether they were alone or not.

William Ansell Deposed, That passing through the Court at Tixal, he saw my
Lord walking with Dugdale; That he heard no Discourse between them; That there
might be more in the Company, but he saw no more: And lastly added, that
talking one day with Dugdale about the Plot, Dugdale answered: God Blast him if
he knew any thing of it.

Page 174.
UPon these Evidences the Managers made these Observations. First, My Lords two
Witnesses, Furnesse and Leigh, were his own Servants. Secondly, They were very
positive in a matter hard to remember, ( viz.) That Dugdale never was in my
Lords Company: And therefore that easy Credit should not be given to them, but
rather to Hanson and Ansell, who both Swear, that they have seen my Lord and
Dugdale together.

To which the Papists answer: These common Sophisms and weak Objections made to
the Convincing Evidence here given by my Lord in Confutation of the main matter
laid to his Charge, argue the Managers at a loss for an Answer. To the first,
Whom could my Lord produce but his Servants, to contradict the Falsities of a
man that pretends to have heard him speak Treason whilst he was Dressing in his
Bedchamber? Are Honest Servants, because Servants, no good Witnesses? To the
second; Though it should be granted that at other times and upon other
occasions, Dugdale might have been in my Lord's Company, either unknown to his
Servants, or not remembered by them, or even by my Lord himself, (which is the
utmost of what the Testimony of Hanson and Ansell can amount to) yet this does
not at all weaken my Lord's Evidence, nor clear Dugdale from Perjury herein:
For the chief things which my Lord's two Servants well remembered, distinctly
Attested, and by most remarkable Circumstances fully proved; was, That my Lord
did not send either of them for Dugdale; nor was Dugdale* alone with my Lord in
his Chamber, on the 21 st of September in the Morning; On all which particulars
Dugdale laid the ^tress of his Evidence; and here it is, he is directly
Perjured.

FOurthly Dugdale at the forenamed Trial of Sir George Wakeman positively Swore
(as my Lord proved by two Witnesses, Mr. Gyfford and Mr. ^ydcot, both present
at the said Trial,) That he the said Dugdale, having received a Letter on the
14th of October, which mentioned the death of a Justice of Peace, did the same
day at an Alehouse in Tixal, impart the Contents of the said Letter to Mr.
Sambidge, Kinsman to my Lord Aston, And Mr Philips, Minister of Tixal, And that
they answered, They heard nothing of it before Now to confute this my Lord
produc^d for Witnesses the same Mr. Sambidge and Mr. Philips.

Mr. Sambidge protested upon his Sala^, Dugdale never told him any such (...)
Nor did he ever hear of it, till (...) ^y or Saturday Sir Edmund^ ^frey was
found at Bury Hill. ^ilips attested* That he never heard of it, either by
Letter or Word of Mouth, from Dugdale or any other, till the death of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey was publicly known. To balance this Evidence, the Managers
produced these Witnesses.

Mr. Ansel deposed, That at the Alehouse and day abovenamed, he heard Mr.
Dugdale mention the death of a Justice of Peace; Mr. Sambidge and Mr. Philips
being then both in the House, but not in the same Room with Ansel, when Dugdale
told the News.

William Hanson deposed, That at the time and place aforesaid, he heard Dugdale
say. There was a Justice of the Peace Murdered, that lived at Westminster; And
that when Dugdale told this News, Mr. Sambidge, and Mr. Philips were by, and
might have heard it, if they would.

Mr Birch and Mr. Turton, both attested, That about the fifteenth or sixteenth
of the same October, the News of Sir Edmundbury Godfreys Death was spread about
the Country, and seemed to take it is first rice from Tixal.

UPon these several Evidences, Page 117.
the Managers made these Observation^, First, Mr. Sambidge was something D^a^
and might (...) hear when Dugdale told^ him the News of the Death of a Justice
of Peace. Secondly, Mr. Philips the Parson, being perhaps very Studious in his
Employment, might be wanting in point of Memory; Thirdly, Page 175.
The other Witnesses produced in Confirmation of Dugdale's Evidence, make it
out, that he did impart the News at the time, place, and in the presence of the
parties abovementioned.

To which the Papists answer: To the first, If what the Managers allege be
true, then is Dugdale here also proved Perjured by the Managers themselves; For
he expressly Swore at the said Trial of Sir George Wakeman, That Mr. Sambidge
both heard and answered him. Saying, He heard nothing of the News before. To
the second, No honest man affirms or denies any past words or actions, but
according as he remembers; and to pretend want of Memory in a direct Evidence,
is the common Road, whereby to evade all humane Testimony. To the third, The
other Witnesses on behalf of Dugdale, do in no sort make out the thing for
which they are produced; For Ansel does not own, that Philips and Sambigde were
so much as in the same Room with Dugdale, when he mentioned the death of a
Justice of Peace Hanson indeed (herein contradicting Ansel) tells us they were
in the Room, but could not say they heard, must less answered, to the discourse
of Dugdale; which is the chief matter of Perjury here charged upon him. As for
what Mr. Birch and Turton declared, concerning the Rumor soon after spread of
the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, it nothing at all Enervates the present
proof of Perjury, seeing it may well be true, there was such a report, and yet
false, that Dugdale had such a discourse with Sambidge and Philips, as he
positively Swears, and they both as positively deny. But enough has been
already said upon this Subject, where we treated of the Death of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey.

Fifthly, Dugdale in an Information given upon Oath, Swore; That presently
after one Howard, Almoner to the Queen, went beyond the Seas, he was told by
George Hobson, then Servant to the Lord Aston, That there was a Design intended
for the Reformation of the Government to the Popish Religion. Now it was owned
and acknowledged in Court, point blank contrary to this Information: That the
said Hobson was not Servant to the Lord Aston, nor known by Dugdale, three
years after the departure of the said Almoner out of England.

Page 178.
UPon this proof of Dugdale's Perjury the Managers made this Observation, (viz)
That Dugdale 's words cited in the Information, are capable of two senses,
either they may import, Hobson told him there was a Design ever since the
Almoner went away; Or they may import, Hobson told him presently after the
Almoner went away, there was a Design. The first sense may refer to the matter
told; The second, to the time when old: The words taken in the first sense,
argue no contradiction in Dugdale's Testimony.

To which the Papists answer: The words of the Information taken in their
plain, obvious and connatural sense, clearly import; Hobson related to Dugdale,
there was a Design, which relation Hobson made to Dugdale presently after the
time one Howard went beyond the Seas; Nor can any other construction be put
upon the wo^, without manifestly wresting hem^m their Genuine signification, as
every impartial Reader may see; So that the proof here given of Du^da^e's
Perjury is unanswerable.

Dugdale's Subornation of Oaths.
THe third ma^n Exception made by my Lord against Dugdale's Deposition, was,
That he, being conscious of his ill grounded Evidence, had endeavored to
Suborn diverse Persons, to make false Oaths; That so he might strengthen his
own, by others Perjury. To make good this Exception.

Samuel Holt a Protestant attested, Pa. 93. etc.
That Dugdale desiring to speak privately with him, told him, If he would Swear
that Walter Moore carried Mr. Evers away, he would give him Forty Pounds;
bidding him not be afraid to Swear for fear of my Lord Aston, for he would
hire him an Horse to get to London, and place him so, that where he now got one
Shilling; he should th^n get Five.

William Robinson attested, That meeting with Dugdale about a twelve month ago,
he the said Dugdale perceiving Robinson to be then Dejected and Poor;
endeavored to corrupt him, by giving him a Treat, and assuring him, H^ should
not want Money, if he would please to be ruled by him. Then he ^ook an
Handkerchief out of his Pocket, wherein there seemed to be about ten Pounds and
bid him, If he wanted, take Money there. and lastly told him, He could furnish
^n wi^h Money, and put him in a way to get Money, if he would come in a^ ^dence
against my lord Stafford. When Robinson refused ^o ^o (...) knowing my Lord, or
any thing of him.

John Morral a Barber, gave attestation in these words, Mr. Dugdale, the 6th.
of August last was twelve month, sent for me to the White Horse in Ridgley; and
there when I came to him, he told me I knew as much of the Plot as he: I told
him, I was Innocent of the thing; He Swore, God dam him, I knew as much as he.
Then I told him, If he knew no more of it then I did, he knew no more then my
Lord Mayors great Horse did. Then he took me aside; Come ( said he) you are a
poor Man, and live poorly, I can put you in a way whereby you may live
Gallantly; I will give you Fifty pounds in hand, if so be you will Swear
against Mr. Howard, Sir James Simmons, Mr. Herbert Aston, and other Gentlemen
of the Country; that they were at such Meetings, at Mr. Herbert Astons upon
the Conspiracy of the Plot.

To take off the Credit of the two first Witnesses in this matter, ( viz) Holt
and Robinson (nothing material being objected against Morral or his Evidence,)
the Managers produced Witnesses to prove they were Persons of evil reputation.

Against Holt, one Sampson Rawlins a Tailor deposed, That Holt was a Drunken
lewd Fellow; That he heard him say, There were none but Rogues would take
Dugdale's part; That he stole some Bottles of Wine out of my Lord Astons
Celler; That he called him (the said Kawlins) Rogue; because he came up in His
Majesty's Service; and would have Murdered him, because he took Dugdales part.

Against Robinson, Page 138. etc.
the Earl of Macklesfield, and Mr. Booth a Parliament Man, both deposed, That
Robinson was a Person of Evil and Profane Conversation, making a practice of
Cheating at Dice, Cock-fighting, etc. That he owned himself, upon Examination,
to be a Rogue; And had no other Employment or Livlyhood.

To these unquestionable Evidences against Robinson, my Lord replied, He knew
nothing of Robinson before, and added, (it was very observable,) That Dugdale
knowing, it seems his Friend and Comrade Robinson to be a Cheat, and then in
want, thought him a tool fittest for his purpose, the most easily prevailed
upon, and most proper to make a Knight of the Post. So that the two last worthy
Witnesses, did by their Evidence, rather confirm, then lessen the belief of
Dugdale's Tampering with Robinson herein.

UPon these several Evidences, the Managers made these Observations, First, It
was not likely, that Dugdale a stranger to Robinson should attempt to Suborn
him to Swear against a Person he knew not, and in a matter whereof he was wholly
Ignorant ^dly, It does not appear, that Dugdale had any ill will to Moor, that
should induce him to Suborn Pol^ to Swear against him. Thirdly, Both (...) and
^ol^ were Infamous men; (...) being a Common Cheat, the other a Drunken
Quarrelsom Fellow, and seeming to favor the Plotters. Fourthly, Morral was but
a Poor Barber, of no Reputation, and one who might easily be brought to say
what he did.

To which the Papists answer: To the first, Robinson was no Stranger to
Dugdale, He was (as the Earl of Macklesfield and Mr. Booth attested,) every
where about Staffordshire, remarkably known for Cheating a Dice, Cockfightings,
Races, etc. (exercises also frequent with Dugdale himself;) Nor is it material
that Robinson knew not my Lord Stafford, nor any thing of him: It was not
Dugdale's business to find out a Man, who to discharge a good Conscience would
Swear what he knew; But who to get Money would Swear what he knew not; For
which purpose Dugdale had good reason to think Robinson a very proper
Instrument. To the Second, It is plain matter of Fact, that Dugdale having
accused and Imprisoned Moore for carrying away Evers, but not able to prove it,
he would have hired Holt to make out his False Accusation. To the third, If
Robinson and Holt were Cheats and Rogues, my Lord well inferred, they were the
more likely to be chosen by Dugdale for such Employments as he had for them,
Though for Holt, the greatest offense laid to his Charge seems to be, that he
Quarrelled with Dugdale's Witnesses, as thinking no honest man would take his
part. To the fourth, Though Morral was Poor, yet it does not appear but that he
was so honest, as not to be Suborned to Perjury by Dugdale; And therefore his
clear and positive Evidence in this matter ought to stand good. But let it be
granted, what the Managers contest for, (viz.) That because Morral was poor,
Holt Quarrelsome, and Robinson Infamous; none of these three Witnesses ought to
be believed; What then will become of all the Kings Evidence? (as they term
them*) What shall we believe or say of them? Are they Persons of Repute,
Riches, and Honor? Are they not rather the Scum and Refuse of the Nation? Why
must credit be denied to Beggars or Knaves, when they accuse their Co-equals in
probable matters? without hopes of Gain? And yet the same credit be allowed to
the like Beggars and Knaves, when they Swear against Persons of Honor, Moral
Impossibilities and Contradictions upon large hopes and promises of reward?
This the Papists take to be hard measure.

TO Counterpoise in some sort this charge of Subornation laid to Dugdale. The
Managers alleged the like proceedings on my Lords side: To prove which,

Thomas Launder deposed, That my Lord Aston^s Friends had Summoned him up to my
Lord Aston's Trial, to give Evidence against Ansel and Dugdale; and that he was
to have an Horse to ride on, and money in his Pocket.

Simon Wright, Barber to Dugdale, deposed, That Mr. Plessington told him, If he
could find a way to take off Dugdale's Evidence, or destroy him, he should have
seven hundred Pounds. And that the said Plessington and others, would have had
him. Swear point blank, That Dugdale would have hired him to give Evidence
against Mrs. Price, and Mr. Tasborough.

My Lord at once to confound this Man, by his own Testimony, and further to
detect the Subornation of Dugdale also in this matter; produced a Letter or
Paper, Writ and Signed by Wright himself to Sir James Simmons, In these words;
I can, I bless God, with a safe conscience declare, upon Oath; That Mr. Dugdale
has been unkind to me, in taking his opportunity of my Poverty; By reason of a
private meeting of us two by his appointment; He did at that time proffer, If I
would Swear against You, and Mr. Gerrard, he would Protect me as one of the
Kings Evidence; and I should not want money. And in the Hall at Westminster, he
said, If I did discover it that day at Mrs. Price's Trial, he would set me in
the Pillory. This I have owned to his Face, and shall not go back from this,
and more, for fear, nor favor. So I rest as you shall find by your Servant:

Simon Wright.




This Letter Wright acknowledged to be his own Hand word for word. But said
Plessington and others had persuaded him to write it. Thus the Man Swearing and
Vnswearing contradictions against himself; My Lord only replied, See what you
have under his own hand, I have no more to say to him.

Page 186.
UPon this diversity of Evidence, the Managers made this Observation: That the
Attempts made to Suborn Launder and Wright, were manifest Signs my Lords Agents
endeavored by Sinister ways to Vindicate his Cause.

To which the Papists answer: It is not conceivable how the Evidence given by
Launder and Wright, can draw the least suspicion of Subornation on my Lord or
his Friends; For the proposal made to Launder was by my Lord Aston's Friends,
and in behalf of my Lord Aston, and not of my Lord Stafford; Besides the words
understood with that Candor and Sincerity they seem to have been spoken by my
Lord Aston's Friends, import no more then this. That if Launder would like an
Honest Man, give true Testimony of what he knew against Ansel and Dugdale, at
my Lord Aston's intended Trial at London; his necessary Expenses should be
born, and the convenience of an Horse provided for his Journey thither. Where Is
the Subornation here? As for Wright indeed, he is a person of that Matchless
worth, and has given so clear proofs, both of his own unshaken Integrity, and
Dugdale's Innocence; that he has highly deserved the Title, Credit, Dignity,
and other the Emoluments of an Associate to the Kings Evidence. In fine, he
has said so much both for himself and Dugdale, the Papists know not what, or
how to say more.

THe last great Exception made by my Lord against Dugdale's Deposition was,
Dugdale's Improbable manner of Swearing. Page ^2.
That Dugdale Swore in this very Trial, the Jesuits had Entrusted him with all
their Letters, that there came to his Hands whole Packets to, and from several
Persons, in several places, all containing most Damnable Treason; many of
which, he said, he opened, Read, and knew the Contents; Yet though the
preserving two or three; nay, even one single Letter, under the Authors hand,
might have been so highly advantageous to the proving the Truth, both of his
own Evidence, and the whole Plot in general; Nevertheless he could not produce
one Scrip or Line to back his Assertion, or clear himself from the Forgeries
laid to his charge.

To obviate this Exception, the Managers brought in two Sisters, Elizabeth and
Anne Elder; These Sisters deposed, That Dugdale coming one day to their House
with several Bundles of Papers in his Pockets and Breeches, desired them to
Burn them; saying, the Times were troublesome, and he being to Travel to diverse
places, if he were taken, People would think him a Plotter, having all those
Papers about him; That hereupon Elizabeth Burnt all the Papers, except one
Book, concerning which Anne asked Dugdale whether or no that also should be
Burnt? He answered no, lay that by, it may do good seven years hence; There is
no Treason in it; Elizabeth replied, Is there any thing of Treason in the
others? He said, Do you think there is? Elizabeth further Deposed, She did see
Mr. Dugdale take a Glass of Sider, and hear him say, and Wish it might be his
Damnation; and he might Sink in the place where he stood, if he knew any thing
of the Plot.

FRom the Testimony of these two Sisters, the Managers drew these Inferences.
First Dugdale 's Fears and Apprehensions in Burning so many Bundles of Papers,
denotes there were matters contained in them, which if known, would have
discovered the Plot. Secondly, When the Question was proposed to Dugdale,
whether his little Book should be Burnt or no; He answered, No, There was no
Treason in it; which Ambiguous manner of Expression, argues there was something
of Treason in the other Bundles.

To which the Papists answer; To the first, It is not Credible, that Dugdale as
yet a Catholic should bring to an Alehouse, and deliver to two Women, in the
very heat of the Discovery of the Plot, his Pockets and Breeches full of
Papers, containing High Treason: Surely he might with more Secrecy and Safety,
have Burnt them in his Chamber; But if what the Women attest be true; it is
very easy to learn from the very words of Dugdale himself, the reason why he
brought, and caused to be Burnt those useless Writings, ( viz.) Not because
there was any Treason in them, but because the Times, (as he said) being
Troublesome, such Bundles of Papers found about a Traveling Papist, though
never so Innocent, would afford matter of Search, and Suspicion of his being a
Plotter. To the second, Why should we amuse our selves, or others with extorted
Inferences drawn from Ambiguous Expressions here? none surely knows Dugdale's
mind better then Dugdale himself; we have his words attested by this very
Witness, to declare his meaning, let him tell us in plain English his own
Sentiment in this Affair. I wish (says he) this may be my Damnation, and that
I may sink in the place where I stand, if I know any thing of the Plot. Now let
the World judge of Dugdale and his meaning.

Titus Oates's Deposition against My LORD.
Pa. 46. etc.
THe next Witness that gave Evidence to the Impeachment, against my Lord, was
Titus Oats, who Swore, That in the year (77.) whilst he remained in Spain, and
at St. Omers, he saw several Letters Signed Stafford, wherein my Lord assured
the Jesuits of his Fidelity and Zeal, in promoting the Catholic Design. That
in the year (78.) The said Oats being then in London, my Lord came to the
Chamber of one Fenwick a Jesuit, now Executed, and there received a Commission
from him in Oates's presence, to be Pay- Master-General to the Army; That upon
a Discourse with the said Fenwick, my Lord said, he was of necessity to go down
into the Country to take account how Affairs stood there; And did not doubt,
but at his return Groves should do the business. And further added, speaking of
the King; He has deceived us a great while, and we can bear no longer.

My Lords Exceptions.
AGainst these Depositions, my Lord made these several Exceptions. The first
was grounded thus; It was not to be imagined, that so many and great
Conspirators, so well provided with Moneys, and Preferments* as Oats pretends;
all engaged in a Design so dangerous, so important to them to keep Secret,
would, or durst permit Doctor Oats their Cabinet Counselor, and Main Engine,
to be reduced to such an Extremity of Want and Penury, that he had not Bread to
put in his Mouth. Yet my Lord was ready to prove in open Court, that at the
very nick of time, when this Oats would have men believe, he was most
Entrusted and Employed in carrying on the Conspiracy, just then he was in so
Poor and Despicable a condition, P. 728 etc*
so forsaken and contemned by all, for his Debauched Life; that he Begged at
doors for Sixpence.

To this Doctor Oats himself answered, Page 130* etc.
he would save my Lord the trouble of proving any such thing; saying, a man's
Poverty was no objection against his Honesty* and as he had not Sixpence in
his Pocket when he began the Discovery, so has he often wanted Twopence since
the same Discovery; having Expended several hundreds of Pounds in His Majesty's
Service, more then he had received. To prove this he made a Calculation of Sums
given him by Great Persons, Sums allowed for taking of Jesuits, and Sums gained
by Printing of Narratives, of all which he said, he had nothing left.

UPon this Argument of my Lords drawn from Oates's Beggary, etc. The Managers
made no Observations. Why they did not? is a question, some say because the
Doctor himself undertook to answer it; Others affirm, because they knew the
more they stirred in it, the worse it would be, and so thought best to Bury it
in Silence and Oblivion.

To the answer therefore given by Dr. Oats, the Papists reply: Poverty is an
Objection against Honesty in a person addicted (as Oats was) to Idleness, Vice,
and Debauchery; And though a man may be Poor and Honest too, yet the same man,
at the same time, and in the same Circumstances Oats pretends to have been in,
could never be Poor and a Plotter too: Could he be privy to all the Grand
Commissions? Could he be employed in all the deep and Damnable Consults? Could
he have at his mercy the Lives and Fortunes of all the Chief Conspirators? Men
stocked with Banks of Money, sufficient (if we will believe him,) to raise
Armies, and provide for two hundred thousand Soldiers? Could this man
nevertheless Starve in a manner for Bread? Could he Beg for an Alms at the
Papists Doors? Could he be rejected and contemned as an Idle Vagabond, by the
very Persons who thus had put their Lives into his Hand? This is such a Paradox
as none in their Senses will ever believe. But the most pleasant passage (if
there could be any pleasure in Bloody Perjury,) is his Miraculous way of
spending Great Sums out of Nothing, in His Majesty's Service; He confesses he
had not Sixpence at the breaking forth of the Plot; yet he Swears he is
several hundreds of pounds worse since the Discovery of it. How came he then by
all this Money? Why, This Oats affirms in Langhorns Trial.
He got it by way of Presents from some great Persons, by taking of Jesuits,
and Printing of Narratives: But did not all these Gains accrue unto him on the
account of the Plot? On what other score were these Presents made by Great
Persons? Had he any other Trade or Livelihood then that of the Kings Evidence?
Is it not too manifest those Gifts were bestowed on him as a Reward of Past,
and Encouragement of Future Swearing? Would to God such great Persons would
duly consider the Dismal Consequences which necessarily follow such Rewards.

Page 101.
THe second Exception made by my Lord against Oates's Evidence, was, That the
said Oats had Perjured himself in two Depositions, directly contradictory to
each other: For proof of this, my Lord appealed to diverse of the Lords
themselves, who were present at both the said Depositions; amongst whom the
Earl of Berkley being required to speak what he knew; Attested, That my Lord
Chancellor did ask Dr. Oats at the Bar of the House this Question, ( viz.) My
Lords desire to know if you can accuse any other Person or Persons of what
quality soever? And you are encouraged by their Lordships to Accuse them. Oats
his answer was, My Lords, I have no more to Accuse in Relation to England:
Notwithstanding which Deposition, he afterward in another (with unspeakable
Insolence) expressly Accused the Queen in a matter (as he thought) of no less
then High Treason; From hence my Lord concluded, if the first Deposition was
True, Oats was Perjured in the Latter; If the Latter was True, he was Perjured
in the First; So that which of the two soever is True or False, he is guilty of
Perjury.

UPon this proof, the Managers made these Observations. First, Page 1^9.
Doctor Oats having said much, and having many things in his Head, could
peradventure not remember on a sudden this particular of the Queen. Secondly.
The Evidence which Doctor Oats gave afterward of the Queen was not positive,
nor of his own knowledge, but words which he heard spoken in a Room in which he
was not himself; but coming in afterward, he saw the Queen there. Thirdly, It
might not be so clear to Dr. Oats whether the Queen was a Person capable of an
Accusation, so as to be Tried for Treason.

To which the Papists answer, To the first, It Is an evasion contradictory to
common Sense; that a Man whose Business and Study it was to Discover a Plot
against the Life of the King, and who by several long premeditated Depositions,
had (as he said) discharged himself of all he knew, should notwithstanding all
this while never remember the most Essential part, ( viz) The Inhumane Murder
of the King, Designed and Consented to by his own Royal Consort. To the second,
Oats Deposed upon Oath he heard such words, and circumstanced them with such
particulars of Time and Place, as plainly denote he intended a full and home
Accusation against the Queen. And granted, his Evidence was not positive, yet
the matter was of such dangerous consequence, as ought not to be concealed,
especially, at a time when he was upon his Oath, to speak all he knew, and when
he pretended by Discoveries to Save the Life of the King. To the third, Though
Oats (left to himself) be very Stupid; yet he could not be so Ignorant us not
to know, that a Queen designing to Murder the King her Husband, is guilty of
Treason; And whether She was liable to a Trial or no. Oats was guilty of
Perjury; In that being Commanded and Encouraged by the Lords to make an entire
Discovery of all he knew against any Person of what Degree or Quality soever;
he expressly Swore, He had no more to Accuse in England. Indeed the Transcendent
Luster of the Queens Virtue, Innocence and Endeared Affection to His Majesty,
leaves no place for Calumny to fix upon. And the bare Charge of so soul a
Crime, upon so Renowned a Goodness, is of it self Independent of other
Contradictions, a more then sufficient Conviction of Oates's Perjury.

Oates's new Forgeries. Page 102.
THe third Exception made by my Lord against Oate's Evidence was; That though
Oats in his several Depositions (particularly those taken before the Privy
Council, and House of Lords) did often affirm he had given an entire and
Faithful account, to the best of his rememberance, Of all whatsoever he knew,
as to the matters and Persons concerned in the Plot: And though he had then
also time and opportunity to reflect and deliberate upon what might any wise
relate to my Lord Stafford in that affair: yet he never accused him of any
other thing, then only, That he had seen beyond the Seas some Letters Signed
Stafford, wherein the Writer had testified his Zeal for the Catholic Design:
But when afterward consulting with himself, and possibly with some others, he
found this slam of his would not amount to any thing material, whereon to
ground an Impeachment, he Invented and Imposed upon my Lord a Commission of
Pay-Master-General to the Army; a device he never once thought on before. From
which proceeding my Lord argued; If there were such a Commission, received by
my Lord at Fenwick's Chamber, in such a manner as Oats relates; this
Commission being a matter of so grand Importance, and the Delivery of it
accompanied with so many remarkable circumstances, in the very presence of
Oats. Page 25.
It is impossible that the said Oats, who (as he said) on purpose for
Discovery, had taken Notes and Memorials, even of Trivial Occurrences, should
forget, and by consequence omit a thing of this high concern in his former
Depositions. Page 126.
But if there were no such Commission, (as most assuredly there was none) then
is Oats Perjured in his present Evidence: And verily (added my Lord) if it be
permitted to this man daily to frame New Accusations; If easy credit be given
to all his Fables, and whatsoever he shall from time to time Invent, may pass
for good Evidence; Who can be secure? At this rate, he may by degrees Impeach
the whole Nation, for Crimes which neither he, nor any man else ever yet
dreamed on.

UPon these Arguments and Inferences made by my Lord; the Managers would not;
and the Papists say, They need not make any Remarks.

Oats his Apostasy and Sacrilege.
THe fourth Exception made by my Lord against Oats his Evidence, was: Page 123.
That whereas Oats now declares, He never was really a Roman Catholic, but
only Feigned himself to be so; My Lord often and strongly insisted, That a
Protestant of the Church of England, who convinced in his Judgment of the Truth
of his Religion, shall nevertheless, on what pretense soever Provoke God, belie
his own Conscience, and violate all Sacred things; So as to make a solemn
Abre^untiation of his Faith and Church; to profess himself a Roman Catholic;
to live amongst them; to practice Religious duties with them, for three years
together; and this to such an height of Sacrilege, as frequently to receive
the Sacrament, and perform daily external Worship to it, (which in the Judgment
both of Protestants and Catholics was to him, so believing, direct and gross
Idolatry) cannot rationally be supposed to stick at Perjury, when advantageous
to him; And ought not by the Law of God or Man, to be credited or admitted for
an Evidence against any one; But rather detested and abhorred, by all good Men,
as undeserving the name of a Christian.

UPon this pressing Inference the Managers made this following Observation:
Suppose Dr. Oats did out of Levity, or for want of being well grounded in his
own, turn to another Religion. It is hard, That the matter of changing his
Religion, when nothing else is laid to his charge, should disparage his
Testimony, seeing many who have changed their Religion more then once (Example
Mr. Chillingworth) are yet esteemed credible Persons.

To which the Papists answer: To change from a wrong to a right Religion, is no
disparagement: but Protestants will hardly allow Oates's first pretended change
to be such. However my Lord insisted not upon the changing, but the feigning
Religion. Oats did not out of Levity or Conviction of Judgment (as Mr.
Chillingworth) turn from his own to another Religion; but remaining interiourly
of the same belief, he exteriourly renounced what he so believed, and
Sacrilegiously practiced the direct contrary, than which nothing can be more
detestable. Nay he affirms, He often received the Sacrament, and took
Dreadful Oaths of Secrecy in pursuance of most Bloody and Hellish Designs. If
this be true, what credit can be given to a Monster accustomed and inured (by
his own confession) to such Damnable Oaths. But if it be False (as indeed it
is) then is he Perjured in his Evidence.

Edward Turbervil's Deposition against my LORD.
THe last Witness that gave direct Evidence to my Lords Impeachment, was Edward
Turbervil, who Swore, That in the year (75*) he was persuaded by his Friends,
to take upon him the Friars habit at Doway: That being weary of that state, he
left it, and came into England, for which he incurred the displeasure of his
Friends, and Relations, who (he said) discountenanced him, and could not endure
to see him; That hereupon he went into France, and Arrived at Paris, and became
acquainted with the now Prisoner, my Lord Stafford, by means of two Priests,
Father Nelson, and Father Turbervil; That after a fortnights acquaintance, and
promise of Secrecy, my Lord proposed unto him a way, whereby (as he said,) he
might not only retrieve his credit with his Relations, but also make himself an
happy Man; which way, at last my Lord told him in direct terms, was, To take
away the Life of the King of England, who was an Heretic, and consequently a
Rebel against God Almighty; For circumstantial instances of this, Turbervil
Swore, That he had, during that fortnights acquaintance, frequent access to my
Lord at his Lodgings; That when he took leave of him to come for England, his
Lordship was troubled with the Gout, and had his Foot on a Stool; That my Lord
had appointed him to wait for him at Diep, in order to his coming over with him
in a Yacht; That accordingly Turbervil went to Diep, but that being there, my
Lord writ him word, He had altered his resolution, and would take his Journey
by the way of Callais, and that he should hasten to attend his Lordship at
London; That hereupon he came into England, but soon after returned again into
France, because not being willing to undertake my Lords proposals, he was
discountenanced by his Friends, reduced to poverty, and thought himself not
safe, even amongst his own Relations.

My Lord's Exceptions.
Turbervil's Perjury in seven Particulars.
TO this Deposition my Lord pleaded in his defense, That Turbervil had Perjured
himself in several parts of this, and other his Depositions.

First, Turbervil here Swears my Lord made a Proposal to him in direct terms,
To take away the Life of the King. Now my Lord proved, That since the Discovery
of the Plot, the said Turbervil did absolutely Forswear any knowledge he ever
had of any Design, or Plot whatsoever against the King's Person, Life or
Government; The Witnesses were these.

John Porter, a Protestant attested, Page 120. etc.
That Turbervil told him several times, He did verily believe, neither the Lord
Powis, nor the rest of the Lords were in the Plot; And the Witnesses that Swore
against them, he believed were all Perjured, and could not believe any thing of
it. Porter answered, If there was such a thing, He ( Turbervil) having been
beyond Seas, must certainly know of it; Turbervil replied, As he hoped for
Salvation, he knew nothing of it, neither directly nor indirectly, against the
Kings Sacred Person, nor Subversion of the Government. And he further added,
Although I am a little low at present, and my Friends will not look upon me,
yet I hope God Almighty will never leave me so much, as to let me Swear against
Innocent Persons, and Forswear and Damn my self.

Mr. Yalden, Page 122.
a Protestant and Barrister at Law, attested, That he heard Turbervil say, in
an heat, these words, ( viz.) God damn me, now there is no Trade good, but that
of a Discoverer; But the Devil take the Duke of York, Monmouth, Plot and all,
for I know nothing of it.

To Confront these Testimonies, Page 152.
the Managers produced one Mr. Powel and Mr. Arnold, who deposed, That
Turbervil told them, He had much to say in relation to the Plot, but did not
name any particulars, fearing (he said) he might be discouraged in it.

UPon these Testimonies of Mr. Porter and Mr Yalden, The Managers made these
Observations. First, It is not probable, that Turbervil designing to be a
Discoverer, should disable himself ever to be so, by Swearing Horrid Oaths, He
knew nothing of the Plot. Secondly, The Testimony of Porter and Yalden are
opposed by the contrary Testimony of Powel and Arnold.

To which the Papists answer: To the first, It is not improbable, but very
likely, that Turbervil as yet not fully resolved, to make Shipwreck of his
Conscience and Honesty, did often protest, He knew nothing of the Plot; And if
the positive attestation of two credible Witnesses may be admitted for good
Evidence; It is not bare probability, but just and solid proof that he did so;
And by consequence, his present Discoveries ought not to be regarded, otherwise
then as the New and Gainful Inventions of a Perjured Man. To the second, The
Testimony of Powel and Arnold, has no manner of weight against my Lord's
Evidence, but rather compleats the charge of Perjury against Turbervil. For it
is granted, that Turbervil has said and Sworn, both to Powel, Arnold, and the
whole Houses of Parliament, He knew much of the Plot* but this being directly
contradictory to the dreadful Oaths here attested by Porter and Yalden, and no
wise denied by Powel and Arnold; It follows by the Testimony of all the four
Witnesses, that Turbervil is guilty of Perjury.

SEcondly, Turbervil Swears: Page 109.
That during the Fortnights acquaintance with my Lord at Paris, he had, by
means of the Priests, frequent access to him, at his Lodgings there. Now my
Lords Gentleman and Page, who both then constantly waited on him, attested,
They never once saw Turbervil there; And Turbervil himself acknowledged in
Court, He knew them not.

To qualify this Evidence, Thomas Mort was called, who deposed, Page 131.
That he being at Paris and desirous to return into England, Turbervil told
him, his Brother the Monk, had introduced him into the Favor of a Lord, by
which means they might both of them have the convenience of passage in a Yacht,
which staid for my Lord at Diep. That hereupon they went to Diep, but finding
no Yacht there, Turbervil told him, If they went to Calais, they might go over
with my Lord from thence in the Yacht. At last they lighted on a Fisher-Boat at
Diep, and so came over in it; But that this forementioned Lord was my Lord
Stafford, or that he ever saw Turbervil in my Lords Lodgings, or Company at
Paris, or elsewhere, he could not say*

UPon these Testimonies, the Managers made this Observation, viz. The Priests
had such a transcendent Influence over my Lord, as might gain admittance for
any whom they pleased, not only into my Lords House, but also into my Lords
Heart, without the privity or knowledge of his Servants. Now it plainly appears
by the attestation of Mort, that Turbervil, through his Brothers the Monk's
means, was become my Lords Favorite.

To which the Papists answer: It is not proved, either that the Priests had
such a transcendent Influence over my Lords House and Heart, or that Turbervil
through their means, became a Favorite. Mort indeed tells us, Turbervil told
him, His Brother the Monk had Introduced him into the Favor of a Lord; And
this Favor only, to come over with him in a Yacht. For the Truth of which also
he had only Turbervil's word, and the thing it self never performed. Must we
from hence infer, My Lord had given his Heart to the Priests, and they had
Introduced Turbervil into it; A strange Inference: But let it be granted, my
Lord had a real Friendship and Kindness for the Monks; what then? How is it
proved, they employed their Interest with him, in Traiterous Designs? Why,
Turbervil Swears it. Thus one Forgery is made use of to support another, and
nothing but proofless Fictions to make all out: Yet to come more close to the
present Evidence. Had the Papists Introduced Turbervil into my Lords
acquaintance and favor; this could not be done Invisibly to the Servants; some
body must needs see, and know, when they came in, and out; My Lord was then in
Lodgings, and had none but two Servants about him; Turbervil never pretends
either the Priests, or he, made a secret of their visits; Their accesses to my
Lord (he said) were very frequent, as the nature of the business, and pretended
intimacy with my Lord, seemed to require. The condition of Turbervil was also
such, as might well render him desirous of the Servants acquaintance and
Friendship; especially being then (as he said) immediately to go over in the
Yacht with them, and to continue employed in my Lords Designs and Service at
London. Now that a Man in these Circumstances should not know these Servants,
nor be known, or so much as once seen by them; is Morally Impossible.

THirdly Turbervil Swears, That when he took leave of my Lord at Paris, to come
for England, his Lordship was troubled with the Gout in his Foot. Now my Lord
protested in the presence of all that knew him, Page 108.
he never had the Gout in all his life; his Servants also who then lived with
him, viz. Mr. Furness and Mr. Leigh gave attestation, They never knew him
subject to that Infirmity; only several years since, he had been troubled with
the Sciatica, which my Lord confessed, and the Earl of Stamford testified; made
him sometimes formerly (though never at Paris) walk with a Staff.

UPon these Testimonies, the Managers made no Observations. But the Papists
Avouch, here is also direct Perjury proved upon Turbervil, by two credible
Witnesses. And though the subject of the Perjury seems not to be material to
the main Accusation, yet he that shall wilfully Perjure himself in any one
Circumstance; ought not to be credited in the whole; Seeing Nature it self,
abhors the Testimony of a Man, who has once Invoked Almighty God to bear
Witness to a Lie.

FOurthly Turbervil Swears, That after his refusing to be a Friar, he was
discountenanced by the Lord Powis, and others of his Friends and Relations, so
that he durst not appear amongst them. Now my Lord proved, by several
Witnesses. That after his return from the said Frjers, he was civilly treated,
and charitably entertained, by his said Friends and Relations. To make this
good,

John Minehead attested, That Turbervil after his coming from Doway, Page 113.
lay in the House of the Earl of Powis, his former Master; and was courteously
entertained, both by my Lord, and the whole Family.

John Turbervil, Brother to the Deponent, attested, He never knew that any of
his Relations gave him an angry word; but on the contrary, when he went to
Paris, his Sister bestowed on him Seven Pounds to bear his Charges; Upon which
he said, He would never trouble them more.

Page 181.
UPon these Testimonies, the Managers made these Observations, First, Though
Turbervil might per adventure (as Minehead attests) be civily treated by my
Lord Powis in public, yet what Reproaches or unkind words might pass between
my Lord and him in private, Minehead might not hear. Secondly, It was no great
Kindness in Turbervil 's Relations, to give him Seven Pounds (as his Brother
attests,) never to see him more; They rather purchased his absence, then did
him a Kindness by such a Favor.

To which the Papists answer: To the first, Groundless Surmises of private
unkindnesses, which none ever yet came to the knowledge of, nor Turbervil
himself so much as pretends, is a strange way of clearing a Man in open Court
from the guilt of Perjury, to frame and fancy things that possibly might be,
and draw prejudicial Inferences from thence, as if they actually had been, is
unjust proceeding. To the second, Turbervil (as his Brother attests) never had
one angry word from his Relations; and when his Sister gave him Seven Pounds,
it was not to purchase his absence, nor did they turn him away. But he himself,
ashamed it seems of his past misdemeanors, and confounded at the goodness of
his Friends. Said, He would never trouble them more.

FIfthly, Page 106.
Turbervil in his Information given to the House of Commons Swore: That he came
to Live with the Lord Powis in the year (73.) and came into England in the year
(76.) But the next day after he had given in his Information, he altered the
aforenamed Date, and instead of (73.) caused to be inserted (72.) And instead
of (76.) caused to be inserted (75.) which Alteration, my Lord affirmed, Page
180.
included Perjury.

UPon this proof the Managers made this Observation; An honest man may mistake
as to point of time in an Evidence given even upon Oath: And to Rectify such a
mistake the very next day after it was committed, denotes rather Tenderness of
Conscience then Perjury in Turbervil.

To which ihe Papists answer. No honest man will positively Swear to what he
knows not: And it is argued, Turbervil when he gave in his Information,
certainly knew whether the matters and circumstances he then Swore to, were
true, or false, or Dubious: If the first, he is Perjured in the Alteration; If
the second, he is Perjured in the Information; If the third, he is not a person
of Honesty and Credit, who will positively Swear without Hesitation to a thing
of which he is ignorant whether true or false* And therefore the Alteration
made upon second Thoughts, cannot in such a case be justly imputed to
Tenderness of Conscience, but to some, not before conceived Apprehensions, of
being taken Tardy in a Lie.

Page 112
SIxthly, Turbervil in the Information given to the said House of Commons, and
Exhibited in Court, Peremptorily Swore: That my Lord came over out of France in
the Company of Count Gramount, by the way of Calais. In direct opposition to
this Information, my Lord proved, that he neither came out of France in the
Company of Count Gramount, nor by the way of Calais; But by the way of Diep, a
Month after Count Gramount was in England*

Page 110.
The Witnesses who gave Attestation of this, were Mr. Wyborne, who went over
from England to Diep in the same Yacht which fetched my Lord; And Mr. Furness
and George Leigh my Lords Servants, who came with my Lord in the said Yacht
from Diep to England.

UPon these proofs of Perjury, the Managers made this Observation. Page 182.
When Mr: Turbervil Deposed, That My Lord came over by the way of Calais in
Company of Count Gramount; it could not be his Intention to say this as a
matter of his own knowledge, seeing he himself in the same Affidavit tells us,
He came away before my Lord, and had not his passage with him: But the words
Heartily taken, are to be understood; That he was informed, my Lord came over
by the way of Calais in the Company of Count Gramount: Now that Mr. Turbervil
was thus informed, is evident, as well by the Letter which (he says) he
received at Diep from my Lord, as also by the aforementioned Attestation of
Mort who says, that being at Diep, Tubervil told him, if they went to Calais,
they might go over with my Lord in the Yacht; So that in the whole, Mr.
Turbervil may be said to have been peradventure something unwary in expressing
himself, but not Perjured in his Evidence.

To which the Papists answer: To excuse a man from Perjury, by pretending an
occult meaning and intention in the Swearer, not expressed in the words of his
Oath, is such an Evasion, as if admitted, would destroy the Integrity of an
Oath, and elude all proof of Perjury whatsoever: Mr. Turbervil Swears in
downright Terms, my Lord came over by the way of Calais in the Company of
Count Gramount, without any addition, That he was informed so. In which Oath he
is directly Perjured; for he Swears as an absolute Truth, and without
Restriction, what of it self is an absolute Lie, and what at best he could but
Guess at, by report and hearsay. It is true indeed, he contradicts himself in
the sequel of his Information, by saying He came away before my Lord, and had
not his passage with him; but it is connatural to Perjury, to include
contradictions; Wicked men are often blinded with Malice, Passion, or Interest;
And no wonder to find Incoherence of parts, in a Story divested of Truth. The
only thing can be collected of Probability in this whole matter, is, That
Turbervil being at Paris, in an Indigent condition, and desirous to return
home, got imperfect Intelligence that an English Lord (whose name as yet he
knew not) and a French Count called Gramount, had a Yacht waited for them at
Diep. And having also a Brother then in Paris, he sought by his means to gain
admittance for a Passage in the said Yacht. This Design of his he imparts to
Mort, a Person in the same condition, and who, had the same purpose with
himself. Hereupon Mort and he goes to Diep, in hopes to find the Yacht there,
but they, failed of their expectation, and Turbervil missing the Yacht, would
have persuaded Mort to go in the search of it to Calais; Whilst they were in
this debate, they lighted on a Fisher-Boat, and so came over in it into
England. Thus much may be conjectured from the Relation of Mort. But that
Turbervil during his stay at Diep, received a Letter from my Lord, intimating
his intention of coming for England, by the way of Calais, and that he should
hasten to meet him at London, is a most palpable Forgery, For neither could
Turbervil, (when required) produce any such Letter, nor did my Lord come over
by the way of Calais, as Turbervil would have us believe that Letter Imported.
And indeed who can imagine, my Lord should send word to his new Consederate at
Diep, to hasten to meet him at London, when he himself remained at Paris (as
has been proved) above a Month after; and at length also came not to Calais,
but to Diep, and from thence home; So that ^here is nothing but contradictions
in ^he whole course of Turbervil's Evidence.

Page 101.
SEventhly, Turbervil in the last mentioned Information positively Swore: That
the Lord Castlemain was present at certain Traitorous Consults at Powis Castle,
several times within the years (72) or (73.) Now my Lord proved, that the said
Earl of Castlemain was never at Powis Castle within the compass of that whole
time.

This was demonstrated by the Attestation of Mr. Lidcot a Protestant, and
Fellow of Kings-Colledge in Cambridge, who having lived with the Earl Nine
years, and particularly Accompanied him in all his Journeys and Residences,
during those two abovenamed years; gave this distinct account out of his Book
of Journals, ( viz) My Lord set forth from Liege to Paris, January 1 st. (72.
Page 116.
) Stilo novo, where he remained three Weeks; and from thence arrived at London,
January 24. Stil' ver', there he staid till May (73.) from thence he went to
Liege again in June, and from Liege he set forth to London in August, and
returned back to Liege October the 3. Stilo novo (73) where he remained till
January (74.) etc. Thus much to the charge of Perjury.

UPon this proof of Perjury the Managers made this Observation Mr. Lydcot the
Fellow of Kings College (as he called himself) was indeed so out in his
Arithmetic, so mistaken in the year; And used the Roman style (or date) so
much more then the English. That they suspected he was not so great a
Protestant as he pretended to be.

To which the Papists answer: That a Solid Witness ought not to be Ralyed out
of his Evidence, in a matter of Life and Death; Mr. Lydcot, (however skilled in
Arithmetic, however great or little Protestant,) substantially proved the Earl
of Castlemain, never was at, or near Powis-Castle, from the first of January
(72.) till past December. (73.) The inclusive time wherein Turbervil Swears, He
was at a Consult there. And it is strange, so weighty and convincing a proof of
Perjury, in a matter of so high and serious a concern, should be shifted off by
a trifling Jest.

LAstly, Turbervil's loose manner of Life.
My Lord upon, occasion made some Remarks upon Turbervil's Beggary, Loose
manner of Life, and diverse, odd Circumstances in the course of his Evidence;
which much reflected upon his Reputation: To support it therefore, the Managers
produced these Witnesses.

Mr. Arnold, Jones, Page 154.
Hobby and Scudamore, Deposed; That they knew Turbervil, but for their parts
never heard, or saw any evil by him.

Mr. Matthews a Minister Deposed the same, as to Turbervil's Reputation; and
added: That Turbervil a little before he made his Discovery, owned himself a
Roman Catholic; but seemed to have a mind to quit that Religion, being
convinced by the Arguments Matthews gave him, of the Excellency of the
Principles and Practices of the Protestant Church; yet would never acknowledge
he knew one Syllable of the Plot.

UPon these several Remarques, the Managers made this Observation: The good
Character here given of Turbervil, by four Witnesses, show him a Man of much
Virtue and Integrity; And it ought to be considered as a farther addition to
his Praise, that he had the grace (though indigent) to refuse the proposal made
to him by my Lord, of Killing the King.

To which the Papists answer: It is no sufficient proof of Turbervil^s Virtue
and Integrity, that four Persons say, They know no ill of him; He may be guilty
nevertheless of a Thousand Crimes unknown to them; few or none are so entirely
abandoned and detested by all Mankind, as not to find four Persons in the World
who will make a favorable report of them. But it is evident from what has
been already proved; That Turbervil was a Man in all points completely equipped
for a Knight of the Post; For first, He was Indigent, Secondly, He was horridly
addicted to Cursing and Swearing; Thirdly, He looked upon feigning Discoveries,
as the only way to get Moneys. All this is manifested by his own Words and
Conversation, with Mr. Yalden and Mr. Porter beforementioned; As I hope for
Salvation (said he,) I know nothing of the Plot. The Devil take the Duke of
York, Monmouth, and all. God damn me, there is now no Trade good but that of a
Discoverer. Who shall ever want Witnesses, that can find men thus qualified?
And whereas it is said, he had the grace to refuse the proposal made to him, of
Killing the King. It ought first to be proved, otherwise then by his own
assertion; He had such a proposal made, before the refusal of it can be Justly
alleged as an argument of grace in him. Finally, It is very remarkable what
Parson Matthews the last of the Witnesses here Deposes, ( viz.) That though
Turbervil had a mind to quit the Roman Catholic Religion, being (as he said)
convinced by the Arguments Matthews gave him, of the excellency of the
Principles and Practices of the Protestant Church; yet he would never
acknowledge to the said Matthews, his new Ghostly Father, That he knew one
syllable of the Plot.

The sum of the whole Evidence, both for, and against my LORD. 4.
IN this sort passed and ended the Particular Evidence, given as well by the
Managers against my Lord, as by my Lord in his own defense. After this the
Court required each Party to sum up their respective Evidence; And it being by
course of Law, my Lord's turn to begin; He performed it to this purpose.

Page 163. The sum of my Lord's Plea as to matters of Fact.
First, He pleaded his Age, his want of Endowments, his Exhausted Spirits and
strength in his long Trial; In consideration of which he hoped their Lordships
(who were both his Judges and Council,) would Pardon the many defects, he must
needs commit in Summing up his defense: Then he Recapitulated the whole
Evidence (already specified) as well as his weak memory, and discomposed
condition would permit. He reminded their Lordships of the several points
wherein he had proved the Witnesses Forsworn: He recounted their sayings, and
unsayings to the same things. The various Contradictions, the moral
Impossibilities, and Absurdities, as to diverse (though beforehand studied)
parts of their Evidence; Inferring from hence, That he who will Forswear
himself in one thing, is not to be credited in any. He insisted upon the Infamy
of the Witnesses and Wickedness of their Lives, especially the more the
Atheistical Sacrilege of some of them, acknowledged in open Court; He
Inculcated their former Beggary, compared to the present Encouragement,
Caresses, and Allurements of Gain, and Applause, they find in their new
Employment. He alleged their Subornation of others, to make good their
Forgeries; Their baere Oaths without any Corroborating circumstances, but what
depended on the same Oaths; Concluding, that such as will Swear Lies, will
never stick at Swearing of false Circumstances, to handle those Lies together.

And having thus summed up his Defense, as well as a weak Old Man, Page 167. etc.
harrassed and spent with five days Pleading. And (as he said) depriv^d of
Sleep, could do on a sudden; He cast himself into their Lordships hands
desiring them to remember how faithfully he had served the King in the late
Wars; How much himself, his Wife, and Family had suffered on that account; How
easily he might have prevented those Miseries, if he would, as others did, have
turned a Rebel; And consequently, how unlikely it is, he should now in his Old
Age, and settled contented State, be guilty of so horrid a Crime, proved only
against him by the Incredible Stories of three Infamous Men.

Then he proceeded to propose certain Points or Doubts in Law, which occurred
in his case, concerning the manner of his Impeachment; the continuance of it
from Parliament to Parliament; Whether the Indictment contained an Overt Act,
necessary to a Conviction of Treason? Whether Men, who Swear for Money, ought
to be credited, or admitted for Witnesses? Whether the Plot, being supposed a
Plot of the Papists, was as yet legally proved so? Lastly, Whether there being
but one particular Witness to any one particular point, such an Evidence be
sufficient in Law?

P 199. etc. The sum of the Evidence against my Lord.
WHen my Lord had ended his Queries, the Learned Managers those dexterous
Masters of Law and Eloquence, addressed themselves, to sum up the Evidence, and
Illustrate the Proofs on their side.

That part which regards the especial matters charged by the Witnesses upon my
Lord in particular, I have already incerted in the body of the Trial, as the
said several matters respectively occurred; The other Arguments made use of to
enforce a belief of my Lord's Guilt, and advance the credit of the Witnesses:
Take here (together with the Papists Answers,) in short, as follows.

THe Managers therefore argued, They had made it plain and apparent in the
beginning of the Trial, by the Testimonies of six positive Witnesses; by the
Declaration of both Houses of Parliament; by Coleman's Letters; by the Trial
and Conviction of other Traitors; that there was a general Design amongst the
Papists, to introduce their Religion, By raising of Armies, Murdering the King,
and subverting the Government.

THE Papists answer: It is clear and manifest from the Reasons given, and
Arguments answered, in the Preamble of this Trial; That there never was any
such general Design* any such Armies raised, etc. amongst the Papists. These
being the mere groundless Suggestions of Infamous Men, whom Lucre and Malice
instigated to Perjury against Innocent Catholics.

THe Managers further argued, It was necessary this great Design of the Papists
should be managed by the g^atest Persons amongst them; Now my Lord Stafford was
a Man whose Quality and Merit might well Entitle him to an Office as great as
Pay-Master-General to the Army; From whence they infered, That the particular
Evidence given herein against my Lord, was highly credible.

THe Papists answer: It is a wrested Inference, and that also bottomed upon a
false Supposition; For first, There never was (as is said before,) any such
Design, nor by consequence any Armies or Officers, other then what were the
Chymerical product of Perjured Men. Secondly, Though there had been such a
Design in general, as is here pretended; it is a strangely far fetched
conjecture, (surely not allowable in a case of Life and Death,) that my Lord
Stafford because a Nobleman, must needs have a great, or indeed any part in it.
Great Offices (especially amongst Traitors,) are not usually committed to the
best Born, but to the best Qualified for such employments. Now all the world
that knew my Lord, his Humor, his Condition, his Economy in Money-matters,
will avouch, (so incongruous are the Witnesses in their Lies,) there was not
peradventure amongst all the Persons of Quality, Catholics in England, one
less proper then he for Pay master General to an Army. In fine, If there were a
Plot in general, it is no necessary consequence my Lord was Guilty. But if there
were none (as most certainly there was not) it is absolute demonstration my Lord
was Innocent.

THe Managers argued, They had amply proved by their Witnesses, Page 17^.
That the Priests and Jesuits, in their Sermons and Discourses, had justified
the lawfulnes, and incited their Votaries, to the practice of Treason,
Rebellion, and Murder of Heretic Princes; Conformably hereunto, whenever my
Lord undertook any Treasonable Design, it was still when the Priests and
Jesuits were at his Elbow; still when they were egging him on; still when they
were giving him Ghostly Counsel; When my Lord was amongst them, or but newly
come from them, then it was he uttered the Treason of Killing the King. These
notable Circumstances must needs (said they) render credible the Testimony of
the Witnesses against my Lord.

THe Papists answer: Here are Traiterous Sermons and Discourses alleged; How
are they proved? Why, by the Oaths of the Witnesses that heard them. But the
Credit of these Witnesses are questioned; How is that made out? Why, by the
Traiterous Sermons and Discourses which they heard. Thus still the Question is
begged, and nothing proved but by bare Swearing, peremptory swearing, of
Infamous men, without any face of one single Circumstance to support their
Evidence, other than what depends on the same Swearing; As if those that
stick not to Swear a false Oath, should stick at Circumstances to second their
Perjury. Had the Managers flourished upon the Honesty of the Witnesses; the
Vprightness of their Lives; the Integrity of their Manners; their
dis-engagement from Self-interest; the Circumstances inducing a probability,
distinct from the bare Oaths, (things necessary to a legal Conviction,) the
Trial would have had another appearence. It is therefore again urged, That
there are such Wretches as Knights of the Post; That men may, (and often do)
break God's great Commandment, Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy
Neighbor. That wicked Persons, of lost Consciences and desperate Fortunes, are
most propense to commit this Crime. That this Propension is much augmented by
an assured prospect of Indempnities from Punishment, and advantage of Gain. And
consequently, the bare, and otherwise improbable Oaths of such men, so
circumstanced, cannot (especially in matters of Life and Death,) be credited
against honest and virtuous Persons; nay against whole Nations, without a
dreadful hazard of Injustice. But there will be a further occasion to speak of
these alleged Traiterous Sermons and Discourses, when we come to treat of my
Lord's Principles.

THe Managers still argued, Page 171* etc.
The three Witnesses were all express and positive in their Evidence against my
Lord.

THe Papists still answer, It is not positive Swearing of evil, but probable
Swearing of good men, should convict my Lord, or any other, of guilt,
especially in matters of High Treason.

Page 184.
THe Managers likewise argued, It was impossible there could be a Contrivance
amongst the Witnesses themselves, to depose the same Crimes against my Lord,
seeing there was no intercourse between Oats and Dugdale; nor did they know
each other till long after Oats 's accusation of my Lord; And it is as little
credible, they could concur in the same thing, unless the Evidence of both were
true.

THe Papists answer, Though there were no Contrivance arising from any
acquaintance or intercourse had between Oats and Dugdale, before their several
Discoveries, yet the latter might well take example and encouragement from the
practice of the former; and so indeed it was: For Dugdale being involved in
Debts, and thrown into Gaol, cast about how to retrieve his desperate Fortune;
and hearing that Oats and Bedlow (men before sunk to the bottom of Reproach
and Beggary) had by Perjury and Impudence freed themselves from the Punishment
of the Laws, gained immense rewards, and now lived in a degree above the port
and expense of ordinary Gentlemen* he at last (yet not without frequent
anguish, and reluctance of Conscience,) swallowed the alluring bait; and
knowing my Lord Stafford (whom he had seen at Tixal,) was already in the Tower,
and accused by Oats of the Plot, he devised a like fabulous story of the Plot
also, making my Lord, and other Gentlemen, where he lived and served in
Staffordshire, the chief Actors in it. By which means Dugdale became Partner
with Oats and Bedlow, both in the Title and Profit of the King's Evidence.

THe Managers argued, Page 151.
Oats and Dugdale were so ready in their Answers, when any Question was asked
them, and confirmed still their precedent discourses by their subsequent
Replies; Nay, the whole frame and series of the Plot, though consisting of many
particulars, and attested by Persons of no great natural capacities, is yet so
coherent in every part of it, that it is impossible the same should be false.

THe Papists answer, Oats and Bedlow were often so confounded, when any
Question was asked them out of the road; and their precedent discourses were
usually so inconsistent with their subsequent Replies; Nay, the whole story
(though studied beforehand, and the Authors all manner of ways encouraged and
assisted in their Invention) is yet stuffed and involved with so many
absurdities, contradictions, and impracticable Chymaera's, (as has been already
often and fully proved,) that it is impossible the same should be true; for
Falsehood may, but Truth cannot be inconsistent of parts.

LAstly, the Managers having amply dilated and discanted upon each particular
Evidence and Argument, alleged, as well against my Lord, as in his defense;
and making even critical remarks upon whatever might be drawn, either to the
advantage of the one, or prejudice of the other, (the substance of all which
has been already specified in its proper place.) At length they concluded,
with sharp and moving Aggravations against the Popish Principles, (whereof also
we shall by and by, according to promise, give a distinct account;) And
insisting a while on this Subject, with much accuteness of Wit, and seeming
applause, they closed up their Evidence.

Answer to my Lord's Plea in matters of Law.
THus, when there was a period put to proof in matters of Fact, there began a
debate as to matter of Law, concerning a doubt proposed by my Lord, (the other
of his Queries not being admitted disputable,) viz. Whether two Witnesses be
necessary to every Overt Act, in point of Treason? This Question being referred
to the Judges, they determined it to the Negative.

After this, My Lord's particular Address.
my Lord petitioned the Court (as a peculiar favor) That he might offer some
things to their Lordships Consideration, the purport of which was: That he had
proved direct Perjury upon all the three Witnesses against him; That, Page 198.
as well at the instance of his Wife, Daughter and Friends, as out of sincerity
of Conscience, he would, in the presence of Almighty God, declare to them, All
that he knew: That he verily believed there had been in former times Plots and
Designs against the Crown and Government, (as the Gun-powder-Treason, etc.
owned by the Traitors themselves at their death,) wherein some Roman
Catholics, as well as others, might be concerned: which Plots he from his
heart (as both his Duty and Religion taught him) detested and abhorred: That it
was ever indeed his opinion, That An Act of Comprehension for Dissenting
Protestants, and a Tolleration for Roman Catholics (yet so as not to admit
them into any Office of Profit or Dignity) would much conduce to the happiness
of the Nation: But this not otherwise to be procured or desired, then by a free
consent of the King, Lords, and Commons, in Parliament assembled: That he never
read or knew of Coleman's Letters, or Consultations for Tolleration, till he
saw the Letters themselves in the Printed Trial: How far Coleman was Criminal
he did not know, but he believed he did that which was not justifiable by Law;
That, as to the damnable Doctrine of King killing, If he were of any Church
whatsoever, and found that to be its Principle, he would leave it. That he knew
the disadvantage he was under, in being forced, alone, to stand a contest with
the Learned Gentlemen the Managers, who have those great helps of Memory,
Parts, and understanding in the Law, all which he wanted. That therefore he
hoped their Lordships would not conclude barely upon the manner, either of his,
or their expressions. But seriously debating the merits of the Cause in it
self, would please to be his Council, as well as his Judges. That seeing he was
to be Acquitted, or Condemned by their Lordships Judgments; He knew they would
lay their hands upon their Heart, Consult their Consciences, and their Honors;
And then he doubted not, they would do what was just and equitable; That (with
submission to their Lordships) he thought it hard measure, and contrary to Law,
that any one should be Imprisoned above two years, without being admitted to
Trial; And that it was of evil consequence for any one to have Justice denied
him, so long till his Opponents had found occasion to gain their ends; That
however those large Allowances, and Rewards granted to the Witnesses, for
Swearing, might peradventure be an effect of His Majesty's Grace and Bounty;
yet it was not easily conceivable, how the hopes and promises of so great Sums
should not prove to dissolute, indigent Persons, ^ong Allurements and
temptations to Perjury Finally, That the defense* he had made, he owed it to
the worth and dignity of his Family; He owed it to his dear Wife and Children;
(at which words he was observed to weep) He owed it to his Innocence; He owed
it to God, the Author of Life. That he confided, their Lordships would duly
reflect, what a dreadful thing Murder is, and the Blood of Innocents: And that
he verily believed none of the House of Commons, desired his Death for a Crime
of which he was not Guilty. That he hoped their Lordships would not permit him
to be run down by the shouts of the Rabble (the Emblem of our past Calamity.) It
began in the late times with the Lord Strafford, and so continued, till it
ended in the Death of the King, the most execrable Murder, that ever was
committed; And where this will end (said he) God knows. To conclude, He again
declared in the presence of God, of his Angels, of their Lordships, and all who
heard him, That he was entirely Innocent of what was laid to his charge, That
he left it to their Lordships to do Justice, and with all submission resigned
himself to them.

To this discourse of my Lord's, the Managers returned for answer: That his
Lordship's last Address was not regular, nor according to the due method of
proceedings; for if after his Lordship had summed up his Evidence, and the
Prosecutors had concluded theirs, he should begin that work again, and they by
consequence be admitted to reply, he might still rejoyn upon them, and so there
would be no end of proceedings. They therefore desired this Indulgence granted
to my Lord, might not serve for a future Precedent.

The Conclusion of the Trial 5.
HEre then the Lord High Steward wholly terminating all further process on
either side; The Court gave final Judgment; And the Lord High Steward
collecting the Votes, my Lord Stafford was Pronounced Guilty, by fifty five
Votes against thirty one.

When the Votes were passed, the Lord High Steward, declared to the Prisoner,
He was found Guilty of High Treason, whereof he was Impeached. To which my Lord
Stafford answered, God's holy name he praised my Lord for it. Then the Lord
High Steward asked him, What he could say for himself, why Judgment of Death
should not be given upon him according to Law? He reply^d, My Lord, I have very
little to say; I confess I am surprised at it, for I did not expect it. But
Gods will be done, and your Lordships; I will not murmer at it. God forgive
those who have Falsely Sworn against me.

WE are now come to the final Sentence of Death, Page 212. My Lord High
Steward's Speech.
For a Prologue to which the Lord High Steward made a short ^athetick Speech;
wherein after some reflections upon the Plot in General, he descended to my
Lords Case in particular; And then advised his Lordship (as now a supposed
guilty Person,) to bethink himself of the State and Condition he was in* Of his
Religion and Guides, His Relations imputed to him as the Cause of his Guilt.
that (it is said) had seduced him: Of the repentance due to so heinous Crimes:
And concluded with an assurance to his Lordship, That a true Penitential Sorrow
joined with an humble and hearty Confession, was of mighty power and efficacy,
both with God and Man. He then pronounced Sentence upon him, in these words.
Page 214. The Sentence:
THe Judgment of the Law is, and the Court does award it, That you go to the
place from whence you came, from thence you must be draw upon an Hurdle to the
place of Execution; when you come there, you must be Hanged up by the Neck, but
not till you are Dead, for you must be cut down Alive; your Privy Members must
be cut off; And your Bowels Ripped up before your Face, and thrown into the Fire:
Then your Head must be severed from your Body, and your Body divided into four
Quarters. And these must be at the disposal of the King.

And God Almighty have mercy on you SOUL.



MY Lord received this dismal Sentence, with a meek and resigned Countenance:
He declared in the presence of Almighty God, he had no malice in his Heart to
them that had Condemned him: But freely forgave them all:

He made one, and only one humble request to their Lordships, ( viz) That for
the short time he had to Live a Prisoner, his Wife, Children, and Friends might
be permitted to come at him. My Lord High Steward told him, Their Lordships had
so far a Compassion for him, they would be humble suitors to the King; That he
will remit all the punishments, but the taking off his Head.

Thus Sentence being passed the Lord High Steward broke his Staff, and my Lord
Stafford was led bak from the Bar to the Tower. The Ax being carried before him
(as the Custom is in such cases) with the Edge toward him.

SECT. III. My Lords Peincples of Faith and LOYALTY.
DOubtless the thing which most weighed to my Lords prejudice; most advanced
the credit of the Evidence; And most influenced both his Prosecutors and Judges
against him, was a pre possessed Opinion of wicked Principles, supposed to be
held and practiced by my Lord, as the matter of his Faith and Religion. It is
by many taken for granted, The Papists hold it an Article of Faith, That to
Depose and Murder Kings, to Massacre their Neighbors, and Destroy their Native
Country by Fire and Sword (when the interest of their Religion requires it)
are Acts dispensable by the Pope, and meritorious of Heaven. Now what thing so
wicked, however slenderly proved, will not easily be believed against Men so
Principled. My Lord therefore to clear himself, and his Religion from this
heavy, and his Religion from (as the Papists say) injurious Aspersion,
Protested and Declared in the ple^ence of Almighty God, and their Lordships his
Judges; Page 54.
That he hated and detested such Principles, as he did Damnation to himself;
And that he could not be more desirous of Salvation, then he was cordial in
hating such Principles. That he ever held Treason to be the worst of Crimes,
Page 53.
and knew no term ill enough to express it. That he heard with horror the late
wicked practices in Scotland. That he acknowledged the King to be his lawful
Sovereign, and knew no Person or Authority on Earth, could absolve him from his
Allegiance.

And least this might seem a merely extorted profession of a despairing Man; My
Lord endeavored to prove by several convincing Testimonies, he had ever been
Instructed and Educated in the same Sentiments, as the Established Doctrine of
the Roman Catholic Church.

His first Testimony was taken from places of Holy Scripture, Ibid.
particularly that of St. Math. 22. v. 21. Render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, etc. From the plain and clear sense of which, and other Texts of Holy
Writ, nothing (he said) in this world was able to remove him.

His second Testimony was taken from the Authority of the General Council of
Constance, Ibid.
(to which all Roman Catholics are obliged to submit;) The 15 th. Cannon and
Definition of which Council is this: Quilibit Tyrannus potest and debet licite
and meritorie occidi per quemcunque Vasallum suum vel Subditum, etiam per
clanculares insidias, and subtiles blanditias vel adulationes non obstante
quocunque Praestito juramento seu confoederatione factis cum eo, non expectata
sententia vel mandato judicis cujuscunque Adversus hunc errorem Satagens haec
Sancta Synodus, exurgere, and ipsum jundit us tollere, declarat and definit,
hujusmodi Doctrinam erroneam esse in side, and in moribus, ipsamque tanquam
Haereticam, Scandalosam, and ad Frauds, Deceptiones, Mendacia, Proditiones,
Perjuria, vias dantem, reprobat, and condemnat. Declarat insuper and decernit
quod pertinaciter Doctrinam hanc perniciocissimam asserentes sunt Haeretici,
and tanquam tales jnxta Canonicas Sanctiones puniendi. Englished thus, Every
Tyrant lawfully and meritoriously, may and ought to be killed by any Vassal or
Subject whatsoever; even by hidden Treacheries and subtle Flatteries or
Adulations, notwithstanding any Oath given, or confederation made with him;
Without expecting the Sentence or Command of any Judge whatsoever, ( which
clause is added in regard of the right of Supreme Temporal Monarchs, over
Inferior Princes Subordinate to them.) Against which Error this Holy Synod
(industrious to withstand, and utterly to extirpate it) does declare and
define* That this Doctrine is Erroneous in Faith and Manners, and the same as
Heretical, Scandalous, and opening a way to Frauds, Deceipts, Lies, Treasons
and Perjuries does dissaprove and condemn; It farther declares and decrees,
that those who obstinately maintain this most pernicious Doctrine, are
Heretics, and as such ought to be punished, according to Canonical Sanctions.

My Lords third Testimony was taken from the Annotations upon the 13 th.
Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, Ibid.
in the English Catholic Edition of the new Testament, set forth by the
College of Divines at Rhemes. The words are these (upon the Text, He that
resists, etc. v. 2.) Whosoever resists, or obeys not his lawful Superior,
in those causes wherein he is subject to him, resists Gods appointment, and
sins deadly, and is worthy to be punished both in this World by his
Superior, and by God in the next Life. For in Temporal Government and Causes,
the Christians were bound in Conscience to obey, even their Heathen Emperors.
And (Upon the Text, Bears not the Sword, etc. v. 4) There were certain
Heretics called Begardi, that took away all Rule and Superiority; The
Wicklesfists also would obey no Prince nor Prelate, if he were once in deadly
sin: Some Protestants of our time, care neither for the one, nor for the other;
though they extol only Secular Power, when it makes for them. The Catholics
only most humbly obey both, according to Gods Ordinance; the one in Temporal
Causes, and the other in Spiritual; in which order both these States have
blessedly flourished in all Christian Countries ever since Christ's time.

^bid.
My Lords 4 th. Testimony, was taken from the Censure of the Doctors of the
famous Faculty of Sorbon, in the University of Paris, against a Book of Anthony
Sanctarelus, treating of Heresy, Schism, etc. Particularly against the 30 th.
and 31 st. Chapters of the said Book. The Censure of the Faculty my Lord
produced in Court, and is as follows. Upon the first of April in the year of
our Lord 1626. after Mass of the Holy Ghost; the usual Assembly of Doctors
being met in Solemn manner, in the Hall of the Sorbon College, was heard the
relation of the Masters of the same Faculty deputed for that end, who declared,
That in those two abovementioned Chapters, these propositions were contained,
That the Pope can punish Kings and Princes, with Temporal Penalties, and Depose
and Deprive them, of their Kingdoms for the crime of Heresy, and free their
Subjects from their obedience; And that it had been always the custom in the
Church; And for other causes also, as for faults, if it le expedient; If the
Princes be negligent; For the insufficiency, and unprofitableness of their
Persons; Likewise that the Pope has right and power over Spirituals, and all
Temporals also, and that both the Powers, Spiritual and Temporal are in him by
Divine right; That it was to be believed, that Power was granted to the Church
and its Chief Pastors, to punish with Temporal Penalties (Princes) the
transgressors of Divine and Humane Laws, especially if the Crime be Heresy.
They said likewise, that the same Sanctarelus did affirm, That the Apostles
were subject to secular Princes, de facto, non de jure; by Fact, not by Right;
Moreover, That as soon as the Pope is installed, all Princes begin to be
subject unto him. Lastly, they related that he* ( Sanctarelus) expounded the
words of Christ, Whatsoever ye shall bind upon Earth, etc. To be understood not
only of the Spiritual, but of the Temporal Power: That he imposes upon St.
Paul, changing his words, by withdrawing the Negation; and upon many Authors
cited by him. They related many other things out of the said Sanctarelus, which
seemed to them very well to deserve the grave Animadversions and Censure of the
Faculty. The matter therefore being brought in to debate by the Dean, the
mature deliberations of all and every Master being heard, the Faculty has
dissapproved and condemned the Doctrine contained in these propositions, and
other like expressions in the same Chapters, as new, false, Erroneous, contrary
to the word of God: drawing hatred upon the Pontificial Dignity; giving
occasion to Schism; Derogatory from the Supreme authority of Kings dependent on
God alone, hindering the conversion of Heathen and Heretical Princes;
disturbing the public Peace; Destructive to Kingdoms, States, and
Commonwealths; withdrawing Subjects from Obedience and Subjection; and
exciting to Factions, Rebellions, Seditions, and Murder of Princes. Given in
the Sorban the 4 th. of April 1626.

Taken out of the Archives of the aforesaid Faculty, by me Secretary thereof,
the 26th. of September, 1679. MASSIN.


MY Lords fifth Testimony was taken from a little Treatise, Ibid.
writ (as my Lord said) by a Priest of the Church of Rome, and entitled,
Roman Catholic Principles, in Reference to God and the King. The chief
Contents of which Treatise; Because it in short explains the abovenamed
Principles, and clears the Objections usually made on this Subject. I shall
here insert in the Authors own Words, for the Readers more ample satisfaction.

IS it not strange and severe, ( says this Author) That Principles, (of
Treason, Rebellion, Murder, etc.) and those pretended of Faith too, should be
imposed upon Men, which they themselves renounce and detest? If the Tu^k's
Alcoran should in like manner be urged upon us and we hanged up for Mahometans,
all we could do, or say in such a Case, would be patiently to die, with
Protestation of our own Innocence. And this is the posture of our present
Condition; We abhor, we renounce, we abominate such Principles; We protest
against them, and Seal our Protestations with our Dying Breaths. What shall we
say? What can we do more? To accuse Men as guilty in matters of Faith, which
they never owned, is the same thing, as to condemn them for matters of Fact,
which they never did.

You press the Question, and say, some of our General Councils, several Papal
Decrees, and many of our Doctors and Divines, assert the forementioned
Principles. Sir, I have been instructed in the Articles of my Faith, and I
acknowledge the lawful Authority of General Councils: Yet I profess I never
learnt, or found asserted in any of them, any such Principles. And I propose
unto you this plain and short Dilemma; Either the abovenamed Principles are
esteemed by us as matters of Faith, or not: If they be, what further can be
required of us, then to deny and forsake such a Faith? And this we constantly
do. But if they be not matters of Catholic Faith, nor owned by us as such, why
are Catholics, as Catholics, punished for them? why is our Religion
persecuted on that account? Let those, in God's Name, if any there be, of what
Religion soever, who hold such Tenants, suffer for them: Why should the
Innocent be involved with the Guilty? there is neither Reason nor Justice in it.

An Objection.
Hereunto some Persons (I hope out of zeal and misinformation, rather than
malice) stick not to say, that Dispensations, and I know not what Indulgences
and Pardons, whereby to legitimate the Crimes of Lying and Forswearing, when
the Interest of our Church requires it, is a main part of our Religion: and by
consequence, the denial of our Principles, is no sufficient Justification of
our Innocence. I answer; Answered.
First, It is in the highest measure censorious in any one, to impose upon all
our Ancestors, and the greatest part of mankind, who are, or have been so long
together Members of our Religion, such an excess of Folly and Wickedness, as
must needs have perverted all Humane Society. Secondly, If we could lawfully
deny the Principles of our Faith when Interest requires, why have we lost our
Estates, our Liberties, our Lives for the profession of it? To what purpose are
Oaths and Tests devised to entangle us? How impertinently is the frequenting
the Protestant Church, and Receiving the Communion, proposed unto us, and
refused by us? Thirdly, Though many men may be induced to Lie, and Forswear,
when they have some hopes or prospect thereby of Temporal Advantage; yet, that
Persons dying for their Conscience and Religion (as diverse have done, and those
no Fools, even by the Confession of our Adversaries) should be so stupendiously
sottish and mad, either to imagine, that Lies and Perjuries, for concealment of
Treason, Murder, Massacre, and Destruction of others by Fire and Sword, should
be Acts of Virtue, pleasing to God, dispensable by the Pope, and Meritorious of
Heaven; or that, on the contrary, knowing and believing (as needs they must)
such Monsters and Horrors to be odious and detestable in the sight both of God
and Man, they should nevertheless, upon the very brink of Eternity, wittingly
and willingly cast themselves headlong into an assured Damnation; and this at a
time when they might have saved both Bodies and Souls, by merely discharging a
good Conscience, in acknowledging the Truth, and becoming honest men. This, I
say, is Inhumane, and contradictory to all sense and reason to believe.

Now therefore, I come to what you so often, and so earnestly press me to, viz.
The intent of this Epistle.
To satisfy the world, and clear myself, my Fellow Sufferers, and my Religion,
from the imputation laid upon us, on pretense of such Principles, by a true and
candid Explanation of my Belief and Judgment in the main points of Faith and
Loyalty, controverted between Catholics and Protestants, as they severally
relate to God and the King.

PARAGRAPH I. Of the Catholic Faith, and Church in General.
Redemption in Christ,
1. THe Fruition of God, and Remission of Sin, is not attainable by man,
otherwise then Ephesians. 2.8. 1 Cor. 15.22.
in, and by the Merits of Jesus Christ, who ( gratis) purchased it for us.

applicable by Faith.
2. These Merits of Christ are not applied to us, otherwise that by a Right Mar.
16.16. Heb. 11.6.
Faith in Christ.

Which is but one*
3. This Faith is but Ephesians. 4.4. etc.
One, entire and conformable to its Object, being Divine Revelations; to all
which Jam. 2.10.
Faith gives an undoubted assent.

Supernatural.
4. These Revelations contain many Mysteries 1 Cor. 1.20. Mat. 16.17.
transcending the natural reach of Humane Wit and Industry: Wherefore,

By the Divine Providence to be learnt.
5. It became the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, to provide Man of some Isai. 35.8.
way or means whereby he might arrive to the knowledge of these Mysteries;
Means Joh. 9.41.
visible and apparent to all; Means Mat. 11.25.
proportionable to the Capacities of all; Means John 15.22.
sure and certain to all.

Not from private Interpretation of Scripture.
6. This way or means is not the reading of Scripture, interpreted according to
the private 2 Pet. 3 16. Pro. 14. 12. Mat. 22.29.
Reason or 1 Jo. 4.1. and 6. Prove. 12.16.
Spirit of every disjunctive Person, or Nation in particular; But,

7 It is an Attention and Mat. 18.17. Luke 10.16.
Submission to the Doctrine of the Catholic or Universal Church, but from the
Universal Church, dilated, continued and guided by the Holy Ghost for that end.
established by Christ for the Instruction of all; Psalm. 2 8. Isa. 2 2. etc.
49.6.
Spread for that end throughout all Nations; and visibly continued in a
Succession of Pastors, and People throughout all Ages: From which Ghurch Mat.
5.14. Isai. 59.21. Joh. 16 13. Ezekiel. 37.26. Ephesians. 5.25. etc. 1 Timothy 3 15. Mat.
16.18.
Guided in Truth, and secured from Error in Matters of Faith, by the Mat. 28
20. Joh. 14 16.
promised Assistance of the Holy Ghost, every one may, and ought to Deuteronomy. 17 8.
etc. Mat. 23 2.
Learn both the Right Sense of Scripture, and all other Christian Mysteries and
Duties, respectively necessary to Salvation

This Church is the same with the Roman Catholic.
8. This Church, thus Spread, thus Guided, thus visibly Continued, Can. 6 8. Joh
10.16. Romans 15 5. Joh. 17 22. Philip 2.2.
in One Uniform Faith, and Subordination of Government, is that self same which
is termed the Roman Catholic Church; The Qualifications abovementioned, ( viz.
Unity, Indeficiency, Visibility, Succession, and Universality,) being
applicable to no other Church, or Assembly whatsoever.

From the Testimony of which, we believe the Scripture to be Gods word.
9. From the Testimony and Authority of This Church, it is, that We Receive, and
Believe the Scriptures to be God's Word: And as She can Mat. 16.18. 1 Timothy
3.15. Mat. 18, 17.
assuredly tell Us, This or That Book is God's Word; so can she with the like
Assurance, tell us also the True Sense and Meaning of it, in Controverted
Points of Faith; The same Spirit that Writ the Scripture, Isai. 59.21 Joh. 14.26
Enlightening Her to Understand, both It, and all Matters Necessary to
Salvation. From These Grounds it Follows,

Divine Revelations only Matters of Faith.
10. All* and only Divine Revelations delivered by God unto the Church, and
proposed by Her to be Believed as such, are, and ought to be esteemed Articles
of Faith; and the contrary Opinions, Heresy. And,

What Heresy and what Schism!
11. As an Obstinate Separation from the Unity of the Church, in known declared
Matters of Faith, is formal 1 Cor. 11.19. Mat. 18.17.
Heresy; So a wilful Separation from the Visible Unity of the same Church, in
Matters of Subordination and Government, is formal Tit. 3.10. 1 Cor. 1.10. cap.
12.25.
Schism.

12. The Church proposes unto Us matters of Faith: How Matters of Faith are
proposed by the Church.
First, and chiefly, By the Joh. 5.39.
Holy Scripture, in Points plain and Intelligible in it. Secondly, By Acts 15.
per toto.
Definitions of General Councils, in Points not sufficiently Explained in
Scripture. Thirdly, By 2 These. 2.15. cap. 3.6. 2 Timothy 2.2.
Apostolical Traditions, derived from Christ and his Apostles, to all
Succeeding ages. Fourthly, By her J^m. 2* 18.
Practice, Worship, and Ceremonies, Confirming her Doctrine.

PARAGRAPH II. Of Spiritual and Temporal Authority.
1. GEneral Councils (which are the Church of God, What is the Authority of
General Councels.
Representative) have no Commission from Christ to Frame new matters of Faith,
(these being sole Divine Revelations) but only to Deuteronomy. 17.8. Mat. 18.17. Acts
15. per toto. Luke 10.16. Hebr. 13.7.17.
explain and ascertain unto us, Gal. 1.7.8.
what anciently was, and is received and retained, as of Faith in the Church,
upon arising Debates and Controversies about them. The Definitions of which,
General Councils, in matters of Faith only, and proposed as such, oblige, under
pain of Heresy, all the Faithful, to a Submission of Judgment. But,

An Explanation of the same Authority.
2. It is no Article of Faith to believe, That General Councils cannot Err.
either in matters of Fact or Discipline, alterably by circumstances of time and
place; or in matters of Speculation or Civil Policy, depending on mere humane
Judgment, or Testimony. Neither of those being Divine Revelations 1 Timothy 6* 20.
deposited in the Catholic Church; in regard to which alone, she has the Joh.
14 16.
promised Assistance of the Holy Ghost. Hence it is deduced,

A Deduction from thence concerning Allegiance.
3* If a General Council (much less a Papal Consistory) should undertake to
depose a King, and absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance; no Catholic, as
Catholic, is bound to submit to such a Decree. Hence also it follows:

A second Deduct on concerning the same.
4. The Subjects of the King of England lawfully may, without the least breach
of any Catholic Principle, Renounce, even upon Oath, the Teaching, Mantaining,
or Practicing the Doctrine of Deposing Kings Excommunicated for Heresy, by any
Authority whatsoever, as Repugnant to the Fundamental Laws of the Nation,
Injurious to Sovereign Power, Destructive to the Peace and Government; and by
consequence, in His Majesty's Subjects, Impious and Damnable. Yet not properly
Heretical, taking the Word Heretical in that connatural, genuine sense, it is
usually understood in the Catholic Church; on account of which, and other
Expressions (no wise appertaining to Loyalty) it is, that Catholics of tender
Consciences refuse the Oath commonly called the Oath of Allegiance. Of the Oath
of Allegiance.


The Bishop of Rome Supreme Head of the Church but not Infallible.
5. Catholics believe, That the Bishop of Rome is the Successor of St. Peter,
Mat. 16.17. Luke 22.31. Joh. 21.17.
Vicar of Jesus Christ upon Earth, and Head of the whole Catholic, Church;
which Church is therefore fitly styled Roman Catholic, being an universal Body
Ephesians. 4.11^ etc.
united under one visible Head. Nevertheless,

6. It is no matter of Faith to be believe, That the Pope is in himself
Infallible, separate from a General Council, even in Expounding the Faith: By
consequence Papal Definitions or Decrees, though ex Cathedra, as they term them
(taken exclusively from a General Council, or Universal Acceptance of the
Church) oblige none under Pain of Heresy, to an interior Assent.

7. Nor do Catholics as Catholics believe, Nor has any Temporal Authority
over Princes.
that the Pope has any direct, or indirect Authority over the Temporal Power
and Jurisdiction of Princes. Hence, If the Pope should pretend to Absolve or
Dispense with His Majesty's Subjects from their Allegiance, upon account of
Heresy or Schism* such Dispensation would be Vain, and Null; and all Catholic
Subjects (notwithstanding such Dispensation or Absolution) would be still bound
in Conscience to defend their King and Country, at the hazard of their Lives
and Fortunes, 1 Pet. 2. v. 17, etc.
even against the Pope himself, in case he should invade the Nation.

8. And as for Problematical Disputes, The Church not responsible for the
Errors of particular Divines.
or Errors of particular Divines, in this, or any other matter whatsoever, the
Catholic Church is no wise responsible for them: Nor are Catholics as
Catholics, justly punishable on their Account. But,

9: As for the King-Killing Doctrine, King-Killing Doctrine Damnable Heresy.
or Murder of Princes, Excomunicated for Heresy; It is an Article of Faith in
the Catholic Church, and expressly declared in the General Council of
Constance, Conc. Constable. Sess, 15.
That such Doctrine is Damnable and Heretical, being contrary to the known Laws
of God, and Nature.

Personal misdemeanors not to be imputed to the Church.
10. Personal Misdemeanors of what Nature soever, ought not to be Imputed to the
Catholic Church, when not Justifiable by the Tenants of her Faith and
Doctrine, For which Reason, though the Stories of the Paris Massacre; the Irish
Cruelties; Or Powder Plot, had been exactly true [which yet for the most part
are Notoriously mis-related] nevertheless Catholics as Catholics, ought not
to Suffer for such Offenses, any more then the Eleven Apostles ought to have
Suffered for Judas's Treachery.

No Power on Earth can authorize Men to Lie, Forswear, Murder, etc.
11. It is an Article of the Catholic Faith to believe, That no Power on Earth
can License Men to Lie, to Forswear, and Perjure themselves, to Massacre their
Neighbors, or destroy their Native Country, on pretense of promoting the
Catholic Cause, or Religion; Furthermore, all Pardons and Dispensations
granted, or pretended to be granted, in order to any such ends or Designs, have
no other validity or Effect, then to add Sacrilege and Blasphemy to the
abovementioned Crimes.

Equivocation not allowed in the Church.
12. The Doctrine of Equivocation or Mental Reservation, however wrongfully
Imposed on the Catholic Religion, is notwithstanding, neither taught, nor
approved by the Church, as any part of her Belief. On the contrary, Simplicity,
and Godly Sincerity, are constantly recomended by her, as truly Christian
Virtues, necessary to the Conservation of Justice, Truth, and Common Society.

PARAGRAPH III. Of some Particular controverted Points of Faith.
1. EVery Catholic is obliged to believe, Of Sacramental Absolution.
that when a Sinner Ex. 18.21. 2 Cor. 7.10.
Repents him of his Sins from the bottom of his Heart, and Psa 32.5. Pro.
28.13.
Acknowledges his Transgressions to God and his Act. 19.18. 1 Cor. 4.1. Jam.
5.16.
Ministers, the Dispensers of the Mysteries of Christ resolving to turn from
his evil ways, Luke 3.8.
and bring forth Fruits worthy of Penance, there is (then and (...) otherwise)
an Authority left by Christ to Absolve such a Penitent Sinner from his Sins:
which Authority Christ gave to his John 20:21, etc. Mat. 18.18.
apostles, and their Successors, the Bishops and Priests of the Catholic
Church, in those words, when he said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose Sins you
shall ^orgive, they are forgiven unto them, etc.

Of Satisfaction by penitential Works.
2. Though no Creature whatsoever can make Tit. 3.5.
Condign satisfaction, either for the Guilt of Sin, or the Pain Eternal due to
it; 2 Cor. 3.5
This satisfaction being proper to Christ our Savior only; yet Penitent
Sinners Redeemed by Christ, may, as members of Christ, in some measure Act.
26.20. Jonas 3.5, etc. Psalm. 102.9. etc. Psa. 109.23. Dan. 9.3. Joel. 2.12.
Luke 11.41. Acts 10.4.
satisfy by Prayer, Fasting, Alms Deeds, and other works of Piety, for the
Temporal Pain, which by order of Divine Justice sometimes remains due, after
the guilt of Sin, and Pains Eternal are [gratis] remitted. These Penitential
Works are notwithstanding satisfactory no otherwise, than as joined and applied
to that satisfaction, which Jesus made upon the Cross; in virtue of which
alone, all our good Works find a grateful 1 Pet. 2.5.
acceptance in God's Sight.

Indulgences are not Remission of Sins, but only of Canonical Penance.
3. The Guilt of Sin, or Pain Eternal due to it, is never remitted by
Indulgences: but only such 1 Cor. 5.3, etc.
Temporal Punishments as remain due after the Guilt is remitted; These
Indulgences being nothing else than a 2 Cor. 2.6, etc.
Mitigation or Relaxation upon just causes, of Canonical Penances, enjoined by
the Pastors of the Church on Penitent Sinners, according to their several
Degrees of Demerit. And if any abuses or mistakes be sometimes committed, in
point either of Granting or Gaining Indulgences, through the Remisness, or
Ignorance of particular Persons, contrary to the ancient Custom and Discipline
of the Church; such Abuses or Mistakes cannot rationally be charged on the
Church, Abuses herein not to be charged on the Church.
nor render matter of Derision, in prejudice to her Faith and Doctrine.

There is a Purgatory or State, where ^ouls departing this Life with some
blemish are purified.
4. Catholics hold there is a Purgatory, that is to say, a Place, or State,
where Souls departing this Life, with Remission of their Sins, as to the
Eternal Guilt or Pain, Number. 14.20, etc. 2 Samuel 12.13. etc.
yet Obnoxious to some Temporal Punishment still Remaining due; Or not
perfectly freed from the Blemish of some Pro. 24.6. Man. 12.36, and cap 5.22.26.
venial Defects or Deordinations, [as Idle Words, etc. not liable to
Damnation,] are Mat. 5 26. 1 Cor. 3.15.
purged before their Admittance into Heaven; where nothing that is Rev. 21 27.
defiled can enter. Furthermore,

5. Catholics also hold, That such Souls so detained in Purgatory, Prayers for
the Dead available to them.
being the Living Members of Christ Jesus, are Relieved by the 1 Cor. 15.29.
Coll. 1.24. 2 Mac. 12.42, etc. 1 Jo. 5.16.
Prayers and Suffrages of their Fellow Members here on Earth: But where this
place is? Of what nature or quality the Pains are? How long each Soul is
detained there? After what manner the Suffrages made in their behalf are
applied? Whether by way of Satisfaction or Intercession? etc. are Questions
Superfluous, Superfluous Questions about Purgatory.
and Impertinent as to Faith.

Of the merit of good Works, through the merits of Christ.
6. No Man, though just Jo. 15.51
can Merit either an Increase of Sanctity or Happiness in this Life, or Eternal
Glory in the next, Independent on the Merits and Passion of Christ:
Nevertheless in, and by the Merits of Christ Jesus Mat. 16.^ Cap. 5.1^ Cap.
10.^ 2 Cor. 5.^ 2 Timothy 4^
the good Works of a Just Man, proceed^ng from Grace and Charity, are
acceptable to God, so far forth as to be, through his Goodness, and Sacred
Promise, Truly Meritorious of Eternal Life.

Christ really present in the Sacrament of the Evcharist.
7. It is an Article of the Catholic Faith: That in the most Holy Sacrament of
the Eucharist, there is Truly, and Really contained the Mat. 26 26. Mark 14 22.
Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.23, etc. Cap. 10.16.
Body of Christ, which was delivered for us, and his Blood, which was shed for
the Remission of Sins: The substance of Bread and Wine, being by the powerful
Words of Christ, changed into the Substance of his Blessed Body and Blood, the
Species or Accidents of Bread and Wine still remaining. Thus,

8. Christ is not present in this Sacrament, But after a supernatural manner.
according to his natural way of Existence, that is, with extension of parts,
in order to place, etc. but after a Supernatural manner, one and the same, in
many places, and whole in every part of the Symbols. This therefore is a Real,
Substantial, yet Sacramental Presence of Christ's Body and Blood, not exposed
to the external Senses, nor Obnoxious to corporeal Contingences.

Whole Christ in either species.
9. Neither is the Body of Christ in this Holy Sacrament, Separated from his
Blood, or his Blood from his Body, or either of both disjoined from his Soul
and Divinity, but all and whole Jo. 6.48.50, 51.57, 58. Acts 2.42.
living Jesus is entirely contained under either Species; Hence Communicants
under one kind, are no wise deprived either of the Body or Blood of Christ.
so that whosoever receives under one kind, is truly partaker of the whole
Sacrament, and no wise deprived either of the Body or Blood of Christ. True it
is,

Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
10. Our Savior Jesus Christ left unto us his Body and Blood, under two
distinct Species or Kinds; in doing of which, he instituted not only a
Sacrament, but also a Sacrifice; Luke 22.19, etc.
a Commemorative Sacrifice distinctly 1 Cor. 11.26.
showing his Death or Bloody Passion, until he come. For as the Sacrifice of
the Cross was performed by a distinct Effusion of Blood, so is the same
Sacrifice Commemorated in that of the He. 13.10.
Altar, by a distinction of the Symbols. Jesus therefore is here given not only
to us, but Luke 22.19.
for us: and the Church thereby enriched with a true, proper, and propitiatory
Mal. 1.11.
Sacrifice, usually termed Mass.

Worship of Images wrongfully Imposed on Catholics.
11. Catholics Renounce all Divine Worship, and Adoration of Images or Pictures
Luke 4.8.
God alone we Worship and Adore; nevertheless we make use of Pictures, and
place them in Ex. 25.18. 1 Kin. 6.35. Luke 3.22. Numb. 21.8. Acts 5.15.
Churches and Oratories, to reduce our wandering thoughts, and Enliven our
Memories toward Heavenly things. And farther, we allow a certain Honor and
Veneration to the Picture of Christ, of the Virgin Mary, Yet there is some
Veneration due both to Pictures,
etc. beyond what is due to every Profane Figure; not that we believe any
Divinity, or Virtue in the Pictures themselves, for which they ought to be
Honored, but because the Honor given to the Pictures is referred to the
Prototypes, or things represented. In like manner,

12. There is a kind of Honor and Veneration Respectively due to the Bible:
And other sacred things
to the Cross, to the Name of Jesus, to Churches, to the Sacraments, etc. as
Jos. 7.6. Exo. 3.5. Psalm. 99.5. Phi. 2.10. Luke 3.16. Acts 19.12.
things peculiarly appertaining to God; also to the Jo. 12.26.
glorified Saints in Heaven, as the Domestic Friends of God; yea, 1 Pet. 2.17.
Romans 13.7.
to Kings, Magistrates, and Superiors on Earth, as the Vicegerents of God; To
whom Honor is due, Honor may be given, without any Derogation to the Majesty
of God, or that Divine Worship appropriate to him. Furthermore,

Prayers to Saints lawful.
13. Catholics believe, That the blessed Saints in Heaven replenished with
Charity, Rev. 5.8.
pray for us their Fellow Members here on Earth; that they Luke 15.7.
Rejoice at our Conversion; that seeing God, they 1 Co. 13 12.
see and know in him all things suitable to their happy state; that God is
Inclinable to hear their Requests made in our behalf: Ex. 32.13. 2 Chro. 6.42.
and for their sakes, grants Us many Favors: That therefore it is good, and
Profitable to Desire their Intercession: And that this manner of Invocation is
no more Injurious to Christ our Mediator, nor Superabundant in it self, then it
is for one Christian to beg the Prayers and Assistance of To. 15.30.
another in this World. Notwithstanding all which, Catholics are taught not so
to Rely on the Prayers of others, as to neglect their own James 2.17.30, etc.
Duty to God: In Imploring his Divine Mercy and Goodness: Yet so as not to
neglect our Duties.
To. 13.14.
in Mortifying the Deeds of the Flesh: in Romans 12 2.
Despising the World: in Loving and Gal. 5.6.
Serving God, and their Neighbors: in Following the Footsteps of Christ our
Lord, who is the John 14.6.
Way, the Truth, and the Life: To whom be Honor and Glory for ever and ever,
Amen.

A conclusion from the premises.
THese are the Principles, These the Treasons, These the Idolatries, and
Superstitions, which, though no other then what We have Received of our
Forefathers, and what the greatest part of the Christian World now profess:
yet have drawn upon Us poor Catholics in England such Dreadful Punishments. I
beseech you Sir, consider our Cause, without Passion or Prejudice, and I am
confident you will see, We are not such Monsters, as our Adversaries Represent
Us to be: nor entertain such Principles, as are Inconsistent with our Duty to
God and the King.

An Objection Answered
You seem to say, This very Plot, with which We are charged, proves Us guilty
of wicked Principles. But, under Favor, You here commit a Vicious Circle in
way of Arguing: For first, here are wicked Principles alleged to make good the
Proof of a Plot: And these being denied, the Plot is introduced to make out the
wicked Principles; As if a man should say a thing, because he thought so: and
give no Reason why he thought so, but only because he said so; which instead of
Proof, is to beg the Question. Certain I am, Catholics both Taught and
Practiced Principles of Loyalty, at a Time, when the King and Kingdom felt the
Dire Effects of contrary Persuasions.

Catholics suffer for the^r Religion: Their Sufferings not unlike to those of
Christ our Lord.
In Fine, whatsoever is pretended against Us, it is manifest We suffer for our
Religion, and for our Religion wrongfully traduced. It is a farther Comfort to
Us, that our Sufferings [God be praised] are in some measure, not unlike to
those of Christ our Lord: For it was laid to his Charge, as it is to Ours, that
he was a Traitor to Luke 23.2
Caesar; That he perverted the People, and endeavored the John 11.48.
Destruction of Church and State: Nor were there wanting, then as now, an Oats
and Bedloe, Mat. 26.60.
two false Witnesses to Swear all this.

Thus God, I hope, Romans 8.29. Verse 17.
has Predestined Us, (as the Apostle says) to be conform to the Image of
his Son: to the end, that Suffering with Him, We may (through his Mercy) be
Glorified together with him.

Sweet Jesus Bless our Sovereign: Pardon our Enemies: Grant Us Patience: and
Establish Peace, and Charity in our Nation.

THus much of my Lord's Principles in Reference to God and the King; Whether
they be agreeable to Reason, and Conformable to the Law and Ghospel of Christ, I
leave to the Impartial Reader to Judge.

SECT. IV. My Lord's Declaration before the House of Lords after his
Condemnation.
SOon after my Lords Trial, several of his Relations and Acquaintance, (some
out of zeal against Popery, and others out of kindness to my Lord,) were daily
urgent with him to make Discoveries of all he knew, as the only remaining
remedy whereby to save his Life, regain the Kings favor, and attract the
applause of the whole Nation. My Lord always replied, He was most willing and
ready out of a mere sense of Duty and Conscience (independent of any Temporal
advantage to himself) to discover with all imaginable Sincerity, the utmost of
what he knew, either to the King or House of Lords, when ever they required it.
The Lords being informed hereof, Ordered his appearance before them the next
day. When he came, and had audience granted, he made his acknowledgments to
this effect. That he thought it no crime in any Man to wish his Neighbors
might be of the same Religion wherein he himself hoped to be saved; Nay to
seek, and promote it by such ways and means, as the Laws of God, and the Nation
allow. That there had been at diverse times, and on sundry occasions, endeavors
used, and overtures made to obtain an Abrogation, or at least a Mitigation of
Severities against Catholics: But this to be procured no otherwise then by
Legal and Parliamentary means. That he himself went to Breda, whilst the King
was there, and propounded 100000 l. in behalf of the Catholics, to take off
the penal Laws. That after the King came in, there was a Bill brought into the
House, in favor of Catholics, but it was opposed by my Lord Chancellor Hide.
That there had likewise been framed by the Lord Bristol and others (in order to
the proposing of them in Parliament) several forms of Oaths, conceived in such
terms as might fully express all Duty and Allegiance to the King: yet not
entangle tender Consciences with Clauses and Provisoes, disagreeable to Faith,
and no wise appertaining to Loyalty; but neither did this succeed. That
afterward he had offered some proposals, as well to the Lord Chancellor at
his House at Kensington, as to the Duke of York, concerning some lawful
expedients, conducing to the good (as he thought) both of Catholics and the
whole Nation. And also about Dissolving the long Parliament; the substance of
which he likewise communicated to my Lord Shaftsbury, who said, He doubted not,
but that there would come great advantages to the King by it. These he avouched
were the chief, and only Designs he ever had, or knew of amongst Catholics,
for promoting their Religion: Of more then these he protested before Almighty
God and their Lordships, he was wholly Ignorant. But this Declaration not being
satisfactory toward the detecting any Damnable Conspiracy, the Lords thought
fit without any further Examination to remand him back to the Tower.

On this occasion, there run about both Town and Country an universal Rumor,
That the Lord Stafford had now made a full and perfect Discovery of the whole
Plot; And that the Papists could not for the future have the Impudence to deny
it, after the Confession (though to save his Life) of so Honorable a Person;
But this proved a mistake. And by the way it was very observable, My Lords
Adversaries took this false Alarm with so much eagerness and joy, as
sufficiently denoted, they were not well assured of the truth of the former
Evidence given against him.

SECT. V. My Lord's Comportment and Exercise after Sentence.
THe greatest part of his time from his last Sentence to his final End, he
employed in serious Recolection and fervent Prayer, wherein he seemed to
receive a daily increase, both of Courage and Comfort, as if the Divine
goodness (say the Papists) intended to ripen him for Martyrdom, and give him a
taste of Heaven beforehand. Indeed he behaved himself in all things like a
Man, whose Innocence had banished the Fear and horror of Death.

Some few days before his Execution he received a Letter, which because it is
foully suspected to have come from some College or Seminary beyond Seas, I
shall here set it down verbatim, to the end every one may see how the Priests
treat their Penitents, in the condition and circumstances my Lord was in.

My Lord,
THe Character I bear, gives me some Title, And the singular esteem I have for
your Noble and Truly virtuous Person and Family, gives me Confidence to present
your Lordship, in this your last and Grand Affair, with a Consolatory or rather
Congratulatory Letter. As I daily make my Supplication to God on your behalf;
so I hope I may make my Addresses to you on Gods behalf. You are chosen by the
King of Kings, to share with him in Immortal Crowns: You are called from an
Abyss of misery to the top of Felicity: You now pay a debt on the score of
Grace, which is due, and which you must shortly have paid to the course of
Nature. And herein my Lord, you are adorned with all the Trophies of Jesus's
Victory, He was Condemned of Luke 23. Mat. 26,
High Treason by false Witnesses for the love of you: And you stand Condemned
of the same Crimes, by the like Evidence for the love of him. Yet you shall not
die my Lord: It Is a mistake of this blind World, you shall only pass from a
state of Romans 7.
Death to a state of Life; True Life Eternal Life; you shall be Transformed
into him, whose Ex. 3.14.
essence is to live* Coll. ^.
In whom, with whom, and by whom; you shall enjoy all that is Exodus 33.
good; all that is lovely; all that is pleasant: And this enjoyment shall be in
all its fulness', altogether, all at once; without Interuption, without Bound,
Limit, or End.

The Omnipotent Creator of Heaven and Earth; The searcher of Hearts; The
dreadful Judge of Men and Angels: He who justly might otherwise peradventure
have cast you into Eternal Fire; From whose Sentence there is no Appeal. He, I
say, will now forgetful of past Frailties, regard you with a merciful Eye, with
a pleasing Countenance, a loving heart, an open Arm, an endeared affection;
Millions of Laurels hang over your Head; Thousands of Millions of Glories and
Sweets, attend you, which neither 1 Cor. 2.
Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, nor has entered into the heart of man. The
Virgin Mother shall meet and conduct you to her beloved Son; The Apostles,
Martyrs, and Confessors, shall receive and accompany you; And all the blessed
Choirs of Saints and Angels shall Celebrate your victory, and Luke 15.
Sing Halleluja's to their Celestial King for his unspeakable goodness to you.

My Lord, You were made for the enjoyment of God, and now you arrive at the
accomplishment of that End; you owe to God all you have, and all you are; And
now you restore to him all, both what you have, and what you are. O happy
Restoration, where the advantage is wholly yours, where Misery is turned into
Bliss, where Temporal into Eternal, where God is found, where Death (as the
Apostle says) is Phil. 1.21.
Gain. The Innocence of your Cause, The Dignity of your Religion for which you
Suffer, entitles you to the merits of the Cross, and Incorporates You to the
Blood and Passion of Jesus your Savior. 2 Timothy 2.12.
If we shall be dead with him (says St. Paul) we shall live together with him;
If we suffer with him, we shall Reign with him. Hence our Savior himself; He
Luke 9.24.
that loses his Life for me, shall save it. Again, If John 12.26.
any Man will serve me, let him follow me. And where I am, there shall my
Servant be also. You are going to the Apoc. 19.
Nuptials of the Lamb. God who is all good, is pleased to 1 John 3 2.
Impart himself entirely to you. Love has made him wholly yours; What need you
fear? What can you desire? He that dyed for the love of you, will now reap the
Fruits of his pains, and joy himself in you, with delights proportionable to
his own Goodness and Merits. You are Select from amongst Cant. 5.
Thousands for the Espousals of Love; Let nothing either past or present deject
you: nothing disturb you, nothing retard you: Joh. 14 1.
Let not your Heart be troubled [saith our Saviour] nor let it be afraid.

As for the Crimes for which you stand Condemned, God and your own Conscience
knows you are Innocent; All un-interested Men believe you so; Passion and
prejudice against your Religion, has advanced the credit of Perjured Persons,
and influenced your Adversaries to carry on your Death. Had you been no
Catholic, we all know, you had never been a Condemned Man; So that it is
palpably manifest you Die for your Religion, and for your Religion wrongfully
traduced. What greater comfort? What greater glory? What greater happiness, can
arrive to a true Christian? Mat. 5.11.
Blessed shall you be [saith our Saviour] when Men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you Falsely for my sake;
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in Heaven.

Concerning your real defects and frailties; Take courage; take confidence in
God, my Lord; I have already told you, what right you have to the Passion of
Christ; Your present Death, is more then a Pledge of future Pardon. Luke 7.47.
Many sins are forgiven her [saith our Savior to Magdalen] because she loved
much; to him that loves less, less it forgiven. Now what it is to love much,
he himself shows, saying, Joh. 15.13.
No Man has greater Love then this; That a Man lay down his Life for his
Friend. Hence the Spouse in the Canticles. Cant. 8.6.
Love is strong as death, etc. And our Savior in express terms assures us.
Mat. 10.39.
He that loses his Life for me, shall find it.

First therefore, acknowledge your faults, with a Penitent heart, and firmly
believe what the Scripture avoucheth. 1 John 1.9.
If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our Sins, and
cleanse us from all Iniquity. Next offer with a cheerful Heart your Life to
God; In satisfaction for your offenses; In union of the Sufferings of Jesus
Christ; In a Sacrifice of Love. And then doubt not in the least but that Dying,
as you do, in, and for the Profession of your Faith: Jesus has signed your
Pardon, and pronounced upon your Soul, those Life-giving words. Thy Sins are
forgiven thee, Luke 7 48, and 50.
Thy Faith has saved thee; Go in Peace.

Neither let any endearments toward your Wife, Children, Friends or Family
enfeeble your mind, check your Love, or imbitter your Joy. Remember that
Sentence of our Savior. Mat. 10.37.
He that loves Son or Daughter above me, is not worthy of me. Again, Cap.
19.29.
Every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Wife, or
Children, or Lands, for my names sake shall receive an hundred fold, and
possess eternal Life; You cannot give God too much; You can bestow nothing on
him, but what you have received of him; and what, upon many accounts, is
infinitely due to him. But in reality, my Lord, you do not desert your Friends,
nor they you, by rendering your self and them to God; Suffering for Jesus, He it
is stands Charged with the care of your Wife, Children, and Family; He
styles himself, Psa. 68.5.
The Father of Orphans, and Judge of Widows. As he Exodus 20 5.
punishes to the fourth Generation of then that hate him; So he blesses, unto
thousands of them love and follow him. Assure your self, my Lord, That for this
one Heroic Act, of giving your Life Mat. 5.10.
for Justice, for Innocence, for God, and Religion; you will not only secure
your self everlasting Salvation, but draw upon your Family and Posterity,
Thousands of Benedictions. The Justice of our Lord (says David, Psalm. 103 17
upon the Childrens Children, of them that keep his Covenant. Again, Psalm.
112.1.
Blessed is the Man that fears the Lord, that delights in his Precepts, his
Seed shall be powerful on Earth; the generation of the just shall be Blessed.
Lastly, That Sentence of Ecclesiastes will fittly appertain to you; Eccle. 39.
His memory shall not pass away, and his name shall be preserved from
Generation to Generation. Nations shall declare his Wisdom, and the Church show
forth his Praise.

I shall not undertake to dictate unto your Lordship, what Prayers or
Elevations of Heart, are most proper on this occasion; The Holy Ghost, whose
Spouse, whose Son, whose Temple, whose Victim you are, will inspire you with
better thoughts then I can suggest; I shall therefore here content my self with
some few Citations of sacred Texts, out of which you may upon occasion draw the
comfort of Devotion. Psalm. 27.12.
Evil Witnesses have risen up against me; and iniquity has belyed it self; I
believe to see the goods of our Lord in the Land of the Living. Joh. 11.25.
I am the Resurrection and the Life; He that believes in me, shall not dye for
ever. Isai. 43.1.
Fear not, for I have redeemed thee; I have called thee by thy name, thou art
mine; Cap. 41.10.
Do not fear, for I am with thee, do not decline, for my right hand has
sustained thee. Psalm. 91.14.
Because he has trusted in me, I will deliver him; I will protect him, because
he has known my name; He shall cry unto me, and I will hear him. I am with him
in Tribulation, I will deliver him, and will glorify him, with length of days
will I replenish him, and will show him my Salvation. Jer. 31.3
In perpetual charity have I loved thee; therefore I have drawn thee to me,
taking Compassion on thee. Psalm. 73 26.
My heart and my flesh has fainted. O God of my heart, my inheritance, God for
ever. Joh. 16.20.
The World shall rejoice, and you shall be sorrowful; But your sorrow shall be
turned into Joy, and your Joy none shall take from you Verse 33.
Be confident, I have overcome the World. Psalm. 27.9.
Be thou my helper, do not forsake me, neither despise me, O God my Savior.
Psalm. 31.1.
In thee O Lord have I trusted, let me not be confounded. Joh. 14.19.
I live and you shall live; You shall know that I am in my Father, and you in
me, and I in you. Romans 8.38,
Certain I am, that neither Death nor Life, etc. can separate us from the Love
of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans 14.8.
Whether we Live or Die, We are our Lords. Phil. 1.21.
To me, to Live is Christ, and to Die is gain. Verse 23.
I desire to be Dissolved, and to be with Christ. Psalm. 30.5.
Into thy hand O Lord I commend my Spirit. Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the Kingdom prepared for you. Luke 23 43.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Romans 15.13.
The God of hope fill you with all Joy, and Peace in believing, that you may
abound in hope and virtue of the Holy Ghost.

Your Lordships most devoted Servant in our Lord. N. N.


THose hours he spared from Prayer or necessary repos^, he bestowed part in the
enterta^nment of his Friends [though indeed none were permitted to come at him,
but under severe Provisoes and Restrictions] amongst whom he demeaned himself
with exceeding Sweetness, Candor and Alacrity of Spirit, Connatural to him
always, but more especially after he had an assurance of his Death; Insomuch
that he could not endure to see any in grief or dejected on his account. For
this reason his sad and disconsolate Lady (w^o alone touched his heart, and who
could no longer support the weight of her affliction) was forced entirely to
absent herself, from him the day before his Passage out of this World.

Some moments likewise he allowed to give his Adieu by Letters to his nearest
Relations; particularly to his aforesaid most Dear Lady, whose incomparable
virtue, and above forty years experienced, constant affection to him, had taken
a deep impression in his Soul; But because the Letters themselves express his
mind and disposition better then I can describe it: Read here these few Copies,
which good fortune brought authentic to my hands.

To my most Dear and Kind Wife.
My Dear and most Kind Wife.
GOD of his Mercy and Goodness, The first Letter to his Lady.
I most humbly beseech him to reward you for your extraordinary Kindness and
Love to me, I am sure, no Man ever had a better Wife in all kinds, then you
have been unto me: I am most heartily sorry, that I have not been able to show
hew happy I have held my self, in the great blessing which God was pleased to
afford me in having you, not only for the great Family to which you are the
undoubted Heir, and Estate you brought me and mine* but for the great Love you
have always born me. I sincerly ask you Pardon with all my heart, for all that
I have done to give you any dislike; I know you will forgive me out of your
kindness and affection, you have so often shown unto me more then I deserved:
If I should repeat all the kindness and affection you have shown unto me, and
of all which I am most sensible, I should not know when to end: God reward you.
You were present this day when Mr. Lieutenant brought me word of the day of my
Death, I know the trouble it brought unto you. I do most willingly submit my
self to Gods Holy will, and since he knows how Innocent I am, and how Falsely I
am Sworn against, I am most confident, that the most Blessed Trinity will,
through the Merits and Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, grant me a place in
Heaven of happiness, to glorify God to all Eternity amongst his Angels and
Saints: the lowest place in Heaven being an happiness above all the Kingdoms of
the Earth. I give God most humble thanks, that I am absolutely quiet within my
self from being guilty even so much as in a thought, of that Treason I am
accused of, and never had a thought of any thing against the Person or
Government of his Majesty. And what I did toward the introducing of the
Catholic Religion, was no way but that which I thought to be for the good of
the Kingdom by Act of Parliament. I do ask of the Eternal and Merciful God,
most humble Pardon for all my great Sins, hoping in the mercy of Christ Jesus,
through his most sacred Passion, to obtain remission of my Sins, and Life
everlasting in Heaven. God protect and keep you, and ours, in his Holy Grace.
My dear I beseech you, by the love you always bore me, afflict your self as
little as you can, for the unexpected, (yet I doubt not,) but blessed end of

Yours, etc.


To my dear and entirely loving and beloved WIFE. The second Letter to his Lady.

My most dear and loving Wife,
IT has pleased God of his infinite mercy, to bring me into the condition I am
in; I take it for a mercy much greater then I could deserve or expect. I am
heartily sorry, That I have not been so sensible of the blessing God was
pleased to bestow on me, by giving you unto me, as I should have been; for I do
from my heart acknowledge, that you have been a most kind loving Wife, as any
man could have; and I was not worthy of you; I pray forgive me of any and all
things that I have ever done to displease you. I have not now many hours to
live, God send me to make a good end; I humbly thank him, I have a great
confidence in his mercy; And I do hope through the merits and Passion of Jesus
Christ our Savior, to obtain everlasting happiness. I beseech God to reward
you, and bless you, and send you all happiness. I beseech you by the love you
have always born me, to bear this my end as well as possibly you can: And put
my Innocence into the balance of my Death. I pray God to bless all our
Children, who I hope will be obedient to you. I must not forget the Pains and
Care, that my Daughter Winchester has taken, in an extraordinary kind, and
discreet way; I must likewise own, how groundless that report was, that has
been Spread abroad, That you, and she, by your entreaty and persuasions, have
kept me from Discovering my knowledge of the Plot so much spoken of; when God
knows I know nothing to Discover, and shall as totally Die Innocent, as any Man
ever did, not having in the least ever had a Disloyal heart to His Majesty. God
Preserve you, and ours, and send us an happy meeting in Heaven, which is the
hearty Prayer of him that Forty Years had the Honor to bear your name, and now
is returned unto the name of

My dear Mistress, Your most affectionate loving Husband. William Howard
St. Stephen's day, 1680,

Dear Harry,
GOD of his mercy, Another to his Son Henery now L. Stafford.
I am confident has brought me hither to let me see how vain all worldly
things are, and how we deceive our selves* when we think of any thing, but how
with Devotion we may duly serve him; I hope by the mercy of God to obtain
everlasting Salvation: The All-knowing God sees how Innocent I am, from the
Crimes I am charged with: It is a comfort unto me, that none of all my Estate
will in any way be Forfeited, but all comes unto you, as if I had Died a
natural Death I beseech God to Bless you, and make you happy in this World, and
the World to come: And the only way to be so, is never to leave truly serving
God upon no account whatsoever. I know you will carry your self with that duty
to your Mother, and love and kindness to your Brothers, as is fit for you to
do: So again beseeching God to Protect you and Govern you in Righteousness, I
am

Your most loving Father. William Howard.


Good Child,
For my Son Francis.
THe Condition I am in is such, as I doubt not but that God has brought me into
it for the good of my Soul, his Holy Name be praised for it; I willingly and
cheerfully submit unto it. I beseech God to bless you, and send you eternal
Happiness, which is the Prayer of

Your affectionate Father, William Howard.


Good Daughter,
For my Daughter Vrsula.
I Know you will bear what happens unto me with Patience and Resignation: I
thank God that I know my self in every kind Innocent; and that I have
confidence in Gods Mercies, and doubt not but through the Mercy and Passion of
our Savior, to obtain everlasting happiness. I pray God bless you. I am

Your affectionate Father, William Howard.


My good Child,
THis is the last time I shall Write unto you, I Pray God bless you. For My
Daughter Delphina.
Your poor Old Father has this comfort, that he is totally Innocent of what he
was accused of, and confident of Gods Mercy; and through the Merits of our
Savior, I hope for Salvation, I take great content in my Innocence, and
willingly resign my self to Gods Holy Will I am very much troubled to leave my
Wife, who has been so extraordinary a good and kind Wife unto me, more then I
could deserve: God reward her. So with my blessing unto you, I am

Your most loving Father, William Howard.


HE Writ also upon occasion, several little Papers or Notes, whereof I have
only these two or three Copies.

1680.
IN the Name of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Upon Tuesday
the 30 th. of November the Feast of St. Andrew, I was brought to my Trial in
Westminster Hall before the Peers, Lord Chancellor being High Steward; my
Trial continued until that day, seven-night the 7 th. of December; upon that
day I was found Guilty of High Treason, and condemned to die. I give God thanks
for his great mercy and goodness that he has been pleased to think me worthy
of this Sentence, in satisfaction for my other great and heinous offenses which
I have committed; And I hope that through the glorious Passion of our Savior
Christ Jesus, and through his precious Blood and Merits, he will be mercifully
pleased to receive my Soul into eternal Happiness, in his presence amongst his
Angels and Saints. I conceive this Sentence is fallen upon me upon the account
of the Religion that I am of; If I had numbers of Lives, I would lose them all,
rather then forsake that Church, that I am of; and which I am well assured that
it maintains nothing but what is well warranted by the word of God. I do with
my whole heart forgive those Perjured men that Swore so Falsely against me; I
wish them no greater Punishment then to repent, and to acknowledge the wrong
they have done me; I do also heartily forgive my Judges; and if any of them
have given their Votes contrary to their Consciences, God forgive them, I do it
willingly.

HOw extremly should I think my self bound to the King, Another No^e.
if in this Condition that I am brought into by the Perjury of Villains that
Swore falsely for Gain, His Majesty should be graciously pleased to grant me my
Life: But how infinitely beyond that has His Divine Majesty showed his mercy
and goodness to me, so many times pardoning those great and many offenses,
which the least of them deserved an Eternal Punishment. And of his infinite
mercy has been pleased to preserve me thus long from his just Judgment: And
has brought me hither first a Prisoner, when I had not done any thing in the
least by the Law to deserve it; and now has pleased to bring me to my
Condemnation: How inexplicable are his Mercies unto me; And if I do not
cordially and really repent, having this great time to recollect my self,
nothing can excuse me. Nay even at this time when I am hourly looking to hear
of the hour of my Execution, I have time by his Omnipotent mercy to lay my
Heart prostrate on the ground, to beg his Pardon, and acknowledge his infinite
mercy and goodness; God grant me grace to reflect as I ought on all these
assurances, and as I ought to do, love his Divinity, and nothing created
independently on him: Nothing in this World but the Holy Trinity deserving the
whole Love and Adoration of Mankind. God give me grace to love him, and only
him; And though I cannot do it so well as otherwise I ought, yet I hope I do it
what I can: And do firmly resolve by his Holy Grace I will to the uttermost of
my power, so long as it shall please him to give me my Life, wholly and
willingly to resign my self to his Holy will; and doubt not by his Grace but to
find more true delight in serving him, then ever I did in the Vanities of the
World. All Glory Praise and Honor be given unto him for all Eternity, Amen.

THere was likewise found in his Chamber, this following Prayer or Resignation.
Thou have said O Lord, he that loves Father or Mother, etc. more then me, is
not worthy of me. I acknowledge most dear Lord, that I love my Wjfe and
Children, as much as a loving Husband and tender Father can love a most
deserving Wife, and most dutiful Children: But to show that I love thy Divine
Majesty more then them, and my own Life to boot; I willingly render up, and
forsake both for the love of thee; and rather then to offend thee, though by
the contrary I may have Life and all worldly advantages both for my self and
them. Receive therefore Dear Jesus; this voluntary Oblation of both. Take us
into thy protection O Helper in opportunities, in Tribulation. Be thou a Judge
and Spouse to the Widow; a Father to the Orphans, Psalm. 9.9.
and Salvation to all our Souls. I rejoice to have so dear a Pledge to Offer
and present thee, for all thy blessings, and benefits bestowed upon Us; and for
thy sake, who off e^dst thy self for us to Death, to the most ignominious Death
of the Cross. Receive therefore Sweet Jesus, this poor Oblation of mine (though
all I am able to offer thee) in union of all the Oblations of thy most Sacred
Life, Death and Passion, and of all those Divine Oblations, which have been,
are, and ever shall be offered upon thine Altar, All which I Offer thee, and by
thy hands to thy eternal Father. O Father, look upon the face of thy Christ,
and turn away thy Face from my Sins, O Holy Mary Mother of God; all ye Holy
Angels and Saints in Heaven make Intercession for me, that what I deserve not
of my self, may by your Intercession be bestowed upon me. Amen, Jesus. Amen.
Psalm. 84.9. Psalm. 51.10.
Grant and ratify what I ask, for thy Names sake, Amen.

ON Sunday the 19 th. of December Mr. Lieutenant of the Tower, came to him, and
told him, He was sorry, he must bring him the ill news that he must dye on the
29th. of this Month. To which dismal Message he undauntedly replied, I must
obey; Then added in Latin that Text of the Psalm Haec dies, etc. This is the
day which our Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it; Psalm. 181.24.
After which turning himself to his almost dead-struck Lady, he said, Let us go
to our Prayers.

UPon this occasion also he writ a little Schedule containing these words:
Another Note.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. This day Mr.
Lieutenant came and told me, I must dye. God's Holy name be praised; and I
prostrate beseech him, to have mercy on my sinful Soul; And deal with me, as
his Omnipotence knows I am Innocent, of what was falsely Sworn against me; I do
not doubt of Salvation through the Passion of our most blessed Savior.

IT was truly a matter of wonder and astonishment to those who lived and were
conversant with him during this short remnant of his Life, to see with what
Constancy and equal temper of mind he comported himself. What interior Quiet,
and serenity he seemed to enjoy: What confidence he expressed in God: What
Charity to all, even to the worst of his Enemies. Death has usually an aspect
formidable to nature, especially when Treason and Murder fly in the face of a
guilty Conscience. A man who has warning and leisure deliberately to consider,
he is now upon the point of being justly dragged out of this mortal State,
before the dreadful Tribunal of a severe Judge, who knows the Secrets of his
Heart; there to receive an Eternal Doom of Hell and Damnation for crimes
detested by God and Nature. This man surely can never die, without such
Conflicts of horror and despair as will almost prevent the hand of the
Executioner; yet there appeared in my Lord no other Symptoms, then those of a
most pleasing Tranquillity, as if Innocence had Guarded him; As if the Injustice
of others had secured him; As if the Holy Ghost had fortified him. As if Christ
Jesus had united him to his Sufferings, and undertaken his conduct and defense.

THat very morning he was to dye, he writ a Letter to his Lady which afterward
he delivered on the Scaffold to a Friend there present, the contents whereof
are these.

My Dear Wife,
I Have, I give God humble thanks, slept this night some hours very quietly, I
would not dress me until I had by this given you thanks for all your great Love
and Kindness unto me, I am very sorry, that I have not deserved it from you*
God reward you; Were I to live numbers of years, I assure you I would never
omit any occasion to let you know the Love I bear you: I cannot say what I
would, nor how well and many ways you have deserved. God of His most infinite
mercy send us an happy meeting in Heaven. My last request unto you, is, that
you will bear my Death as well as you can, for my sake. I have now no more to
do but as well as I can (though not so well as I would,) to recommend my sinful
Soul unto the mercy of the Holy Trinity who through the Passion, Blood and
Merits of our Savior, I hope will mercifully grant me a place* (though the
lowest) in Heaven, God grant it; And bless you, and Ours.

Your truly loving Husband, W. H.
St Thomas of Canterbury 's day 1680. past six in the Morning.

The Manner and Circumstances of my Lord's Final End.
WHen the hour appointed for his Death drew near, he expected with some
impatience the arrival of Mr. Lieutenant, telling his Friends that were about
him, he ought not to hasten his own Death, yet he thought the time long till
they came for him. A Gentleman then with him in his Chamber put him in mind,
that it was a cold day, and that his Lordship would do well to put on a Cloak
or Coat to keep him warm; He answered, He would; For (said he) I may perhaps
shake for cold, but I trust in God, never for fear. After some time spent in
Spiritual discourses, at length about Ten a Clock, word was brought him, That
Mr. Lieutenant waited for him below: upon which he sweetly saluted his Friends,
bidding them not to grieve for him* for this was the happiest day of all his
Life; then he immediately went down, and walked along by the Lieutenants Chair
(who had the Gout) through a lane of Soldiers to the Bars without the Tower.
There the Lieutenant delivered him to the Sheriff^, and they from thence
Guarded him to the Scaffold erected on Tower Hill. All the way as he passed,
several thousands of People crowded to see him* many civilly saluted him; and
few there were, amongst that vast ^ber, whose hearts were not a li^ ^ched and
mollified with Compassion for him. Having mounted the Scaffold, there appeared
in his Countenance such an unusual vivacity* such a Cheerfulness, such a
Confidence, such a Candor, as if the Innocence of his Soul had shined through
his Body. Nothing of that Mortal paleness, Nothing of those Reluctances,
Convulsions, and Agonies, incident to persons in his condition, could in the
least be perceived in him. He looked death in the ^a^e with so undaunted a
Resolution, as gave many occasion to say; Gr^e had left in him, no Resentment^
^f nature. After a short pause, viewing the People, and finding them attend^ ^o
what he should say, he step^ to one side of the Scaffold, and with a Graceful
Air, and intelligible Voice pronounced his last Speech as follows.

My Lord's last Speech.
BY the permission of Almighty God, I am this day brought hither to Suffer
Death, as if I were Guilty of High Treason. I do most truly in the presence of
the Eternal, Omnipotent, and All-knowing God, protest upon my Salvation, that I
am as Innocent as it is possible for any Man to be, so much as in a thought, of
the Crimes laid to my Charge.

I acknowledge it to be a particular Grace and Favor of the Holy Trinity, to
have given me this Long time to prepare my self for Eternity, I have not made
so good use of that Grace as I ought to have done; partly because not only my
Friends, but my Wife and Children, have for several days been forbidden to see
me, but in the presence of one of my Warders. This has been a great trouble
and distraction unto me, but I hope God of his Infinite Mercy will Pardon my
Defects, and accept of my good Intentions.

Since my long Imprisonment I have considered often what could be the Original
Cause of my being thus Accused, since I knew my self not Culpable, so much as
in a thought, and I cannot believe it to be upon any other account then my
being of the Church of Rome. I have no reason to be ashamed of my Religion, for
it Teaches nothing but the Right Worship of God, Obedience to the King, and
due Subordination to the Temporal Laws of the Kingdom. And I do submit to all
Articles of Faith believed and taught in the Catholic Church, believing them
to be most consonant to the Word of God. And whereas it has so much and often
been objected, That the Church holds that Sovereign Princes, Excommunicated by
the Pope, may by their Subjects be Deposed or Murdered: As to the Murder of
Princes, I have been taught as a Matter of Faith in the Catholic Church, That
such Doctrine is Diabolical, Horrid, Detestable, and contrary to the Law of God
Nature, and Nations: As for the Doctrine of Deposing Princes, I know some
Divines of the Catholic Church hold it, but as able and Learned as they have
Written against it: But it was not pretended to be the Doctrine of the Church,
that is, any Point of Catholic Faith* Wherefore I do here in my Conscience
declare, that it is my true and (...) Judgment, That the same Doctrine of
Deposing King^ is contrary to the (...) a^ Lawpunc; of this Kingdom, Injurious
to Sovereign Power, and consequently would be in me or any other of his
Majesty's Subjects, Impious and Damnable. I believe and profess, That there is
One God, One Savior, One Holy Catholic, Church, of which through the Mercy,
Grace, and Goodness of God, I die a member.

To my great and unspeakable grief, I have offended God in many things, by many
great Offenses, but I give him most humble thanks, not in any of those Crimes
of which I was Accused.

All the Members of either House having liberty to propose in the House what
they think fit for the good of the Kingdom, accordingly I proposed what I
thought fit, the House is Judge of the fitness or unfitness of it; and I think
I never said any thing that was unfitting there, or contrary to the Law and Use
of Parliaments: For certainly if I had, the Lords would (as they might) have
punished me: So I am not culpable before God or Man:

It is much reported of Indulgences, Dispensations, and Pardons, to Murder,
Rebel, Lie, Forswear, and Commit such other Crimes held and given in the
Church; I do here profess in the presence of God, I never Learned, Believed, or
Practiced any such thing, but the contrary; And I speak this without any
Equivocation, or Reservation whatsoever, And certainly were I guilty, either my
self, or knew of any one that were Guilty, whosoever, that were so, of any of
those Crimes of which I am accused, I were not only the greatest Fool
imaginable, but a perfect Madman, and as wicked as any of those, that so
falsely have accused me; If I should not discover any ill Design I knew in any
kind, and so upon Discovery save my Life; I have so often had so fair occasions
proposed unto me; And so am guilty of Self-murder, which is a most grievous
and heinous Sin; and though I was last Impeached at the Lords Bar, yet I have
great grounds to believe, that I was first brought to Trial, on the belief,
that to save my Life, I would make some great Discovery; And truly so I would,
had I known any such thing of any ill Design or Illegal Dangerous Plot, either
of my self or any other Person whatsoever, without any Exception. But had I a
thousand Lives, I would loose them all, rather then Falsely accuse, either my
self or any other whatsoever. And if I had known of any Treason, and should
thus deny it, as I do now upon my Salvation, at this time, I should have no
hope of Salvation, which now I have through the Merits of Christ Jesus.

I do beseech God to bless his Majesty, who is my Lawful King and Sovereign,
whom I was always by all Laws Humane and Divine, bound to Obey, and I am sure
that no power upon Earth, either singly or altogether, can legally allow me, or
any body else, to lift up a hand against him, or his Legal Authority. I do hold
that the Constitution of the Government of this Kingdom, is the only way to
continue peace and quietness; which God long continue.

Next to Treason, I hold Murder in Abhorrence, and have ever done, and do; And
I do sincerely profess, that if I could at this time free my self immediately,
and Establish what Religion I would, and what Government I would, and make my
self as great as I could wish, and all by the Death of one of those Fellows,
that by their Perjuries have brought me to the place where I am, I so much
abhor to be the cause of any Man's death, that I would not any way be the cause
of their Murder; how much less would I endeavor the Assassination of his
Majesty, whom I hold to be as Gracious a King as ever this or any other Nation
had; And under whom the People may enjoy their Liberties, as much as ever any
did, And if it please God to grant him Life and Happiness, according as I have
always Wished and Prayed for, I am morally persuaded, that he, and all his
Dominions, will be as happy and prosperous as ever People were; Which I beseech
God grant.

I do most humbly ask Pardon of the Almighty and All-merciful God, for all the
great Offenses I have committed against his Divine Majesty, and I know he would
not have the Death and Confusion of a Sinner, but that he may Repent and Live;
In that assurance I hope, knowing he never despises a Contrite Heart; And
though I have not so feeling a Contrition as I would, yet I have it as well as
I can; and I doubt not but that God will accept of the Good Will.

I do desire that all People will forgive me any Injury that I have done them
in any thing, either Wilfully or by Chance, and I do heartily forgive all
People in this World that have Injured me; I forgive even those Perjured Men,
that so Falsely have brought me hither by their Perjuries.

I do now upon my Death and Salvation aver* That I never spoke one word either
to Oats or Turbervil, or to my knowledge ever saw them, until my Trial; And
for Dugdale I never spoke unto him of any thing but about a Footboy, or
Footman, or Foot-race* and never was then alone with him; All the Punishment
that I wish them, is, that they may repent and acknowledge the Wrong that they
have done me; then it will appear how Innocent I am: God forgive them! I have a
great Confidence that it please Almighty God, and that he will in a short time
bring Truth to Light; then You, and all the World will see, and know what
Injury they have done me.

I hope that I have made it appear, that I have some Conscience; for if I had
none, certainly I would have saved my Life by acknowledging my self Guilty;
which I could have done, though I know I am not in the least Guilty* And I
having some Conscience, make very ill use of it; for I throw my self into
Eternal Pain, by thus plainly and constantly denying thus at my Death, the
knowledge of what I am accused of in the least.

I have said thus much in discharge of my Concience, and do aver upon my
Salvation, what I have said to be really true.

I shall say little of my Trial; and whether it were all according to the known
Law, I am two much a Party to say much of it; if it were not so, God forgive
him or them that were the cause of it.

My Judges were all Persons of Honor, who were all as much bound to Judge
rightly, as if they had been upon Oath upon what was legally proved; And not to
Vote but according as in their Consciences they were satisfied; And if any of
them did otherwise, upon any account whatsoever, I beseech God to forgive them;
I do heartily.

I shall end with my hearty Prayers for the happiness of His Majesty, that he
may enjoy all happiness in this World, and the World to come; and Govern his
People according to the Laws of God, and that the People may be sensible what a
Blessing God has so miraculously given them, and obey him as they ought. I ask
Pardon with a prostrate Heart of Almighty God, for all the great Offenses that
I have committed against his Divine Majesty, and hope through the Merits and
Passion of Christ Jesus, to obtain everlasting Happiness, into whose hands I
commit my Spirit, asking Pardon of every Person that I have done any wrong to;
I do freely for give all that have any ways wronged me; I do with all the
Devotion and Repentance that I can, humbly invoke the mercy of our Blessed
Savior.

I beseech God not to Revenge my Innocent Blood upon the Nation, or on those
that were the cause of it, with my last Breath. I do with my last Breath truly
assert my Innocence, and hope the Omnipotent All-seeing Just God will deal with
me accordingly.

HIS Speech being ended, he delivered several Written Copies of it to the
Sheriffs and others near him, (one of which, Writ with his own hand, he sent to
the King,) Then he returned to the middle of the Scaffold, where, encompassed
by his Catholic Friends: He kneeled down, and reverently making the Sign of
the Cross, pronounced aloud, with exceeding Devotion, this following Prayer.
AGnosco (Domine Jesu) peccata mea, multa and magna, pro quibus timeo; sed spero
in misericordia and miserationibus tuis, quarum non est numerus; Secundum
igitur magnam misericordiam tuam miserere m^i, and secundum multitudinem
miserationum tuarum dele iniquitatem meam. Si Peccata mea magna sunt, major est
misericordia tua: Si mult^ae, inf^itae sunt miserationes tuae: Si ego commisi,
unde me possis condemnare, Tunon amisisti, unde potes, and soles salvare.
Credenti in potentia tua, and dicenti, Domine si vis, potes me mundare, tu
statim respondisti: Volo; mundare: Credo, quod ipse credidit: Spero quod ipse
speravit: Imploro quod ipse imploravit. Dic igitur animae meae, Salus tua ego
sum: Sana me, Domine Jesu, and sanabor: Salvum me fac, and salvus ero, and
misericordias tuas in aeternum cantabo. Ne projicias me igitur a facie tua, and
Spiritum sanctum tuum ne auferas a me: Sed read mihi laetitiam Salutaris tui,
and Spiritu principali confirma me. Tu dixisti, dulcissime Jesu, Convertimini
ad me, and ego convertar ad vos: Ego me, ex toto cord meo, ex tota anima, ex
tota mente me a, converto ad te: Converte te igitur misericordissime, ad
indignum samulum tuum quem pretioso sanguine redemisti. Tu dixisti, Omnis qui
confitebitur me, coram hominibus confitebor, and ego eum coram Patre meo, qui
in coelis est. Ego te, and sanctam tuam Religionem Catholicam vivens confiteor,
and moriens, adjuvante gratia tua, confitebor: dignare me igitur suscipere, and
confiteri coram patre tuo, qui in Coelis est. In tua promissione, non in mea
justitia confido. Vitam quam dedisti mihi, libenter tibi reddo secundum
beneplacitum tuum: In manus tuas commendo Spiritum meum, qui moriens Spiritum
tuum in aeterni Patris manus commendasti. In face igitur, in id ipsum dormiam
and requiescam, quoniam tu Domine, singulariter in spe constituisti me. Amen,
Jesu, Amen.



Englished thus. I Acknowledge (O Lord Jesus) my Sins to be many, and great,
for which I am afraid; but I hope in thy mercy, and commiserations which are
without number. Have mercy therefore on me according to thy great mercy, Psalm.
51.12.
and according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out mine iniquity.
If my Sins be great, thy mercy is greater; If many, thy Commiserations are
infinite. If I have committed that, for which thou may Condemn me, thou have
not lost that, by which thou can, and art accustomed to Save. To him, that
believed in thy Power, Math 8.23.
and said, O Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean; Thou presently
answeredst, I will; Be thou clean: I believe, what he believed, I hope, for
what he hoped, I Implore, what he Implored. Psalm. 36.3. Jer. 17.14.
Say therefore to my Soul, I am thy Salvation; Heal Me, O Lord Jesus, and I
shall be healed; Save Me, and I shall be saved, Psalm. 89.2 Ps. 50.13.14
and I will Sing forth thy Mercy for all Eternity. Cast me not therefore away
from thy Face, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me, But render me the joy of
thy Salvation, and with thy Principal Spirit Confirm Me. Thou have said, O most
Sweet Jesus, Turn to Me, Zach. 1.3.
and I will turn to You: I turn myself to Thee with my whole Heart, with my
whole Soul, with my whole Mind; Turn thy self therefore (O most Merciful) unto
me, thy unworthy Servant, 1 Pet. 1.19. 1 Jo. 1.7.
whom thou have redeemed with thy most Precious Blood. Thou have said, Mat.
10.32.
Every one who shall confess me before Men, I will confess him before my Father
which is in Heaven. I, Living Confess thee, and thy Holy Catholic Religion,
and through thy Holy Grace will confess thee Dying; Vouchsafe therefore to
Receive and Confess me before thy Father which is in Heaven. I confide in thy
Promise, not in my own Justice; The Life, thou have given me, I willingly
render thee according to thy good pleasure. Into thy Hands I commend my Spirit,
Luke 23 46.
who dying did commend thy Spirit into the Hands of thy Eternal Father In
peace therefore, Psalm. 4.9. and 10.
in that one thing, will I Sleep and Rest; because thou, O Lord, have
singularly Established me in hope. Amen, JESUS, Amen.



TO this Prayer he adjoined several other Pious Ejaculations, wherein with
singular Compunction, and abundance of Tears; he Implored the Divine Mercy and
Pardon for his Sins past; He recommended his Soul to his dear Redeemer Jesus;
He blessed his Holy Name: And offered his Life to him, a w^lling Sacrifice of
Gratitude, Piety, and Love.

Remaining still on his knees, he again protested his Innocence with all the
asseverations a dying Christian is capable to make. Then rising up, he a second
time saluted the People, and walking to each side of the Scaffold, told them:
They had as good and gracious a King as ever Reigned. He earnestly exhorted
them to be faithful and constant in their Allegiance to him. And that no
pretense whatsoever should withdraw them from their Duty. He wished with a
feeling resentment, that none might be less Loyal to his Majesty then he had
been. And it was very remarkable in him: He never seemed transported with any
fervours, or Ecstasies, but either in his Prayers to God, or in his expressions
of Loyalty to the King; Then indeed he was all Flame, and you might read in his
very Eyes, the tender Emotions, and Zeal of his heart: He likewise assured them
upon his Salvation, he knew no design the Duke of York ever had against the
King, But that he had behaved himself for ought he knew, as a loving Loyal
Brother ought to do; Then he again declared his own Innocence, and desired the
Prayers of all good Christians for him; He Prayed to God heartily to bless the
King, and preserve him from his Enemies; To bless the Nation; To bless, and be
with them all there present, especially the Kings Loyal Subjects; He begged
Gods Mercy and Pardon for his Sins; He asked forgiveness of all, and forgave
all; beseeching the Divine goodness not to Revenge his Innocent Blood upon the
whole Kingdom; No, not upon those by whose Perjuries he was brought thither, to
whom he wished from his Heart no other hurt, then that they should repent, and
tell truth.

Whilst he thus professed his Loyalty, his Innocence, his Piety; Most that
heard him were touched with a sensible Compassion for him; Some, as he Spoke,
put off their Hats, and Bowed to him, in sign they Accorded to what he said*
Others by distinct Acclamations answered, We believe you my Lord; God bless you
my Lord: Pray God forgive him his Sins, etc.

In this conjuncture a Protestant Minister accosted him, saying, Have you
received no Indulgences from the Romish-Church? Have you received no
Absolution? To which my Lord answered* What have you to do with my Religion?
However I do say, the Roman Catholic Church allows of no Indulgences or
Dispensations, Authorizing Treason, Murder, Lying, or Forswearing; Nor have I
received any Absolution for such ends. Pray do not trouble your self, nor me.

Then turning from the Parson, he applied himself to his Friends about him,
whom he lovingly embraced, and with a pleasant Voice and Aspect, Bid them
adieu, for this World. Next he delivered his Watch, two Rings off his Fingers,
his Staff, and his Crucifix about his Neck, as Legacies to several Friends; He
desired the Sheriffs that such Persons as he nominated might have leave
(without the Executioners Intermeddling) to assist him, and to take care of his
Body, which was accordingly done: And his Gentleman Stripping him of his Coat
and Peruke, put on his head a Silk Cap, and accommodated his Hair, Shirt, and
Waistcoat, for the Execution. And he now being ready for Death, both in Body
and Mind, he cheerfully submitted himself to the Block, before which first
kneeling down, and making the Sign of the Cross, he recommended himself with
raptures of Devotion to the Divine Mercy and Goodness: After this, he lay down
as it were to try the Block. And then (who could imagine it?) with a
Stupendous Courage, embraced the fatal Wood, as the dear Basis, or Point, from
whence his Soul was now to take its flight to Immortal Glory. The Heads-man put
him in mind, that his Shirt and Waistcoat came too high: Whereupon he raised
himself up upon his Knees, and bid his Gentleman cut them lower. Whilst this
was p^rforming, he was heard continually to breath forth several Acts of
Prayer, as Sweet Jesus receive my Soul; Into thy hands O Lord I commend my
Spirit, etc. When his Gentleman had finished; He again laid down his head upon
the Block, persevering still his Prayer, and expecting the sudden and dismal
arrest of Death, with a courage (say the Papists) Divinely Elevated, a
constancy more then humane. No change in his Countenance; no Quaking, or
Trembling in any one Joint of his Body, could be discerned. Thus he lay, or
rather quietly rested, upon the very Brink, between Time and Eternity, a good
space; Till at length finding the Head's man delayed the Execution of his
Office; He once more raised himself up upon his Knees, and with an aspect,
Grave, (but still serene and lively) asked, Why they staid? It was answered,
For a Sign; What Sign will you give Sir? He replied, None at all; Take your own
time; God^s will he done, I am ready. The Head's man said, I hope you will
forgive me, He answered, I do. Then Blessing himself again with the Sign of the
Cross, he reposed his Head upon the Block, never more to lift it up, in this
Mortal State.

The Head's man took the Ax in his hand, and after a short pause, Elevated it
on high, as it were to take aim, and set it down again. A second time he did
so, and Sighed. The third time he gave the Fatal Blow, which severed my Lords
Head from his Body, save only a small part of the Skin and Windpipe, which was
immediately cut off with a Knife.

The Body after Separation from the Head, Trembled a little, and Stirred no
more. The Head was received into a Black Silk Scarf, by two of my Lord's
Friends, and retained by them, till the Sheriff called for it, and commanded
the Executioner to hold it up to the view of the Multitude; The which he did,
at the four Corners of the Scaffold; Crying aloud, This is the Head of a
Traitor. But however, the People had been formerly possessed with prejudice
both against my Lord's Practices and Principles; Yet now, they made no
Acclamations at the sight of the Ploud-droping Head, nor seemed much taken with
the Jollity of the Spectacle; Some went away with Confusion and Remorse, for
their past hard censure of him; Others conceived strange apprehensions and
fears of God's Judgments ensuing Perjury, and Bloodshed. Some again said, My
Lord was Drunk with Brandy; Others said; Verily This was a just Man. Luke 23.48.
The Papists who best knew his Innocence; And who looking upon themselves as in
some measure Parties in his Sufferings; beheld this whole Tragedy with most
tender Resentments. They regarded him as a Victim of Religion and Innocence.
They mutually accompanied him with their Prayers, and Supplications to God in
his behalf. They seemed to receive new Comfort and Courage from his Christian
Magnanimity. They Wept; They Smiled; They Sympathized with him, both in his
Dolours and Joye^. They Blessed and Praised Almighty God for his goodness to
Him, and to Them, in Him. They Glorified his Holy Name, who often shows the
strength of his Power, in the weakest Subjects. In fine, many did, (and still
do.) believe, the peculiar grace, and presence of Cod's Spirit, had some
Effect, and Influence upon all in a manner that saw him; And few there were of
his Religion, who did not wish themselves in his Place.

No sooner was Execution done, but the Sun, (which before was obscured, and
secluded from our sight,) on a sudden dissipating the Clouds, sent forth it is
Clear and Illustrious Beams; Upon which accident, different Parties have since
made different Reflections; My Lord's Adversaries say, The Sun before frowned
at Popish Guilt, but seemed pleased when Justice was done. The Papists say, The
Heavens Mourned and were ashamed, and unwilling to be Spectators at the
Shedding of Innocent Blood; but appeared in Joy, and Splendor, at the
Reception of a New and Glorious Inhabitant into their Celestial Mansions.

When the Head had been publicly exposed, it was returned back into the Silk
Scarf, held by a Youth that had waited upon my Lord, and so laid into the
Coffin together with the Body vested. (For out of Modesty my Lord had desired
he might not be stripped naked on the Scaffold.) In the interim, diverse Persons
threw up their Handkerchiefs, to have them dipped in my Lords Blood, wherein some
were Gratified, and others had their Handkerchiefs thrown with Derision over
the Scaffold^.

After this the Coffin was taken down from off the Scaffold by several Bearers,
and by them carried to the Bounds of the Tower, where a Velvet Herse-cloath
being spread over it, It was carried in order to its Interment into the Tower;
A place (say the Papists) as it has been Enobled by his Sufferings, so will it
remain to future Ages, a Triumphal Monument of his Fortitude, and Victory.

Thus Lived, thus Dyed this Famous Nobleman, to whose Memory I shall only add,
of my own, That if his Cause was Innocent, and his Religion wrongfully
Traduced, He is Happy, and we unfortunate by his untimely Death.

1 Ep. Cor. Cap. 15. Verse 54. Absorpta est Mors in Victoria.


AN APPENDIX. Containing some Remarques upon the late TRIAL OF STEPHEN
COLLEGE, In Relation to the Chief Witnesses against my Lord Stafford: Here
annexed for the more Ample Satisfaction of the Reader in that Particular.
HAving in some measure performed what I purposed, and promised in the front of
this Treatise; I might well have here put a stop to my Pen, had not an
extraordinary Accident, raised new matter of Reflections upon the King's
Evidence in point of Credit, and seemed to call me to a short Survey of it, in
the close of my Discourse.

The Judgments of the Almighty are incomprehensible; And St. Paul had good
reason to Cry out, as it were in an Ecstasy, O the depth of the riches both of
the Wisdom and Knowledge of God; Romans 11.33.
How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out; Who could
ever have imagined, That the three direct and main Witnesses against my Lord
Stafford at his Trial, should all convene together, at another of a quite
contrary stamp; And this is in so fatal a conjuncture, as to confound, and
destroy by open Perjury each others Testimony? My Lord (as you have seen)
endeavored to show the Infamy of the Witnesses: The Contradictions in their
Evidence: The Incoherence of parts: And Incredibility of Circumstances,
throughout the whole Charge. To make out which he alleged many pressing
Arguments, and produced many Substantial Witnesses, both Catholics and
Protestants in his behalf: Nothing seemed wanting, save only his Adversaries
themselves, against themselves, to complete his Evidence. And here it is the
Divine Goodness (say the Papists) who is the Defender of Innocence, and
Fountain of Truth, has wonderfully manifested what manner of Men, my Lord's
Accusers were, and what credit ought to be given them, Even by the proper
Testimony of their own Mouths; Herein also fulfilling in some sort, what my
Lord himself (Prophetically) foretold in his last Speech (viz) I have a great
confidence that it will please Almighty God; And that he will in a short time
bring Truth to Light. Then all the World will see and know, what Injury they
(Oats, Dugdale, and Turbervil) have done me.

TO give a brief account of this affair, There are few who have not heard of
the late Trial of Stephen College, Surnamed the Protestant Joyner (a man very
active in the Death of my Lord Stafford, and a zealous defender of Dugdales
Honesty*) He was Impeached, Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed for High
Treason; In speaking Treasonable Words: And having by a designed combination
with others, appeard in Arms to Seize the Kings Person at Oxford. The Witnesses
against him were, Smith, Dugdale, Turbervil, Haines, Mr. Masters, and Sir
William Jennings.

It is not my intent here, to Epitomize Colleges whole Trial; Nor to give my
Censure or Verdict upon it, But only to inform the Reader of some Passages
which chiefly relate to the main Witnesses against my Lord Stafford: And which
are now become the Subject of Surprise, and Astonishment to all Considering
Persons.

Please then to note, That Stephen Dugdale, and Edward Turbervil, (two of the
Principal Witnesses upon whose Testimony my Lord was Found Guilty,) and John
Smith, otherwise called Narrative Smith (who at my Lords Trial seemed the only
plausible Deponent, as to the Plot in General) gave respective Evidence against
this College at Oxford, as follows.

Page 18. etc.
Stephen Dugdale Swore, 1 st. Mr. College told him, That the King was a
Papist; That he was as deep in the Plot as any Papist of them all (which the
Papists themselves also confess*) That he had an hand in Sir E. Godfreys death.
That he was a Rogue; That nothing was to be expected from him but Popery, and
Arbitrary Government* And that the Clergy of England were Papists in
Masquerade. 2ly. That College had framed several notorious Libels against the
King to render him contemptible, and raised Arms with intent to seize His
Sacred Person at Oxford, etc.

Page 23 etc.
Turbervil Swore, He heard College say; 1 st. That there was no good to be
expected from the King; For that he and his Family were Papists, and had ever
been such 2 ly. That his Party would Seize the King, and secure him, till he
came to those terms they would have of him. 3 ly. That the Parliament which cut
off the late King's Head, did nothing but what they had just cause for, etc.

Page 27.
Smith Swore, 1 st That College told him, There were Moneys collected to buy
Arms and Ammunition to bring the King to Submission to his People; Adding
thereunto, That he wondered. Old Rowley ( meaning the King) did not consider
how easily his Fathers Head came to the Block, which he doubted not would be
the End of Rowley at last. 2 ly. That College had provided himself of a great
Sword; Pistols, Blunderbuss, with Back, Breast, and Head-peice. And that he
heard him say, The City was provided, and ready with Powder and Bullets; That
he would be one who should Seize the King in case he secured any of the Members
of Parliament. And that if any man, nay even Rowley himself should attempt to
Seize upon his Arms, He would be the death of him, etc.

In direct opposition to these Witnesses, College produced Titus Oats (the
third principal Witness against my Lord Stafford. And first Grand Discoverer of
the Popish Plot,) who gave attestation against the said several Witnesses,
after this manner.

AGainst Dugdale, Oats deposed; Page 49. etc.
That the said Oats discoursing upon occasion with Dugdale concerning his
being an intended Evidence against my Lord Shaftsbury and others* Duglale
replied, There is no body has any cause to make any such report of me; For I
call God to Witness I know nothing against any Protestant in England. But
afterward Dugdale having Sworn matters of High Treason against College,
before the Grand Jury at the Old Baily; and being hereupon charged by Oats, as
having gone against his Conscience, and contrary to what he had declared to
him. Dugdale answered, It was all long of Colonel Warcup, for (said he) I
could get no Money else; And he promised I should have a place in the
Custom-House.

Page 50.
In opposition to this Testimony Dugdale Swore, Upon the Oath he had taken, and
As he hoped for Salvation, It was not true.

Against the same Dugdale, Oats farther deposed, That Dugdale did confess he
had an old Clap; yet gave out he was Poisoned; By the Papists.
which sham passed throughout the Kingdom in our Intelligences; But in Truth
(said Oats) it was the Pox: As I will make appear by the Dr. Lower.
Physician that cured him.

Page 50,
In opposition to which Dugdale protested, If any Doctor would come forth, and
say he cured him of a Clap, or any such thing; He would stand Guilty of all
that is imputed to him.

Page 48.
AGainst Turbervil also, Oats gave Ev^dence in these words* A little before the
Witnesses were Sworn against College at the Old Baily, I (Oats) met with Mr.
Turbervil* I was in a Coach; But seeing Mr. Turbervil; I stepped out of the
Coach, and spoke with him, For hearing that he was a Witness, I did ask him,
whether he was a Witness or no against College? Mr. Turbervil said, He would
break any ones head, that should say so against him; for he neither was a
Witness; nor could give any Evidence against him So after he came from Oxon, I
met with Mr* Turbervil again; And hearing he had been there, I asked him, if he
had Sworn any thing against College? He said, Yes, He had been sworn before
the Grand Jury. Said I, Did not you tell me so and so? Why (said he) the
Protestant Citizens have deserted us; And God Damn him, He would not starve.
These very words he several times repeated; But when I asked him, what he had
sworn? he said, I am not bound to satisfy Peoples curiosities. Upon the words
of a Priest said Oats) what I say is true; as I am a Minister, I speak it
sincerely; In the presence of God, this Gentleman did say these words to me;
Which made me afraid of the man, And I went my ways, and never spoke with him
afterward, nor durst I; For I thought, He that would Swear and Curse, after
that rate, was not fit to be talked with.

In opposition to all which, Turbervil Swore, That he met Dr. Oats just at his
Lodgings, And the Dr. alighted out of his Coach, and spoke to him, and invited
him to come to his old Friends. For he told him, They had some Jealousy that
he was not true to them; and he farther told him, If he would come to the
King's-Head-Club, he should be received with a great deal of kindness But never
afterward (said Turbervil) did I speak with the Dr. a tittle about any
Evidence; Upon my Oath (added he) I did not; And truly I always looked upon Dr.
Oats, as a very Ill man, and never would converse much with him.

AGainst Smith, Oats gave this attestation, Page 49
viz To my knowledge Mr. College and Mr. Smith had some provoking words past
betwixt them at Rich. Coffee-house. And Mr. Smith comes out, and swears, God
Damn him he would have Colleges Blood; So when I met him, said I, Mr. Smith,
you profess your self to be a Priest, and have stood at the Altar: And now you
intend to take upon you, the Ministry of the Church of England* And these words
do not become a Minister of the Gospel; His reply, was, God Damn the Gospel.
This is truth (said Oats) I speak it in the presence of God and Man.

The whole substance of this attestation, Smith absolutely forswore; saying,
Not one word of this is true, upon my Oath. Then addressing himself to Oats,
It Is a wonderful thing (said he) you should say this of me, but I will
sufficiently prove it against you; That you have confounded the Gospel, And
denied the Divinity t^o.

THis is the sum of the Evidence given as well by Dr. Oats against Dugdale,
Turbervil and Smith; as by Dugdale, Turbervil and Smith against Dr. Oats. From
which fatal manner of self-condemning and Perjuring each other; The Papists
(with two good consequence) draw these deductions.

Either Oats attesting these things against the aforenamed Witnesses, In the
word of a Priest; As he was a Minister of the Gospel, Sincerely; In the
presence of God and Man, etc. Did give true Evidence, or not; If he did, Then
are Dugdale, Turbervil and Smith, both in their Testimony against College, and
in their several Oaths here against Oats, doubly forsworn. But if Oats did
not give here true Evidence, (as the other three positively Swear he did not)
then is he guilty of manifest Perjury So that from the reciprocal Testimony of
each other, in this matter; It is an undeniable demonstration; Either Oats
(the Pillar of the Plot) or Dugdale, Turbervil and Smith, (the joint Supporters
of it,) or Both, and All, are Perjured men, and can justly Challenge no right
of belief, or credit to any thing, they ever did, or shall swear. Hence the
Attorney General in this very Trial ingeniously complained; It is an unhappy
thing, Page 50.
That Dr. Oats should come in, against these men that supported his Evidence
before. And Mr. Sergeant Jefferies rightly inculcated to the Jury; If Dugdale,
Smith and Turbervil, Page 94. and 97.
be not to be believed, you Perjure (said he) three men, and (in them) trip up
the Heels of all the Evidence and Discovery of the Plot. In like manner the
Papists argue: If Oats also be not to be believed, the whole Fabric of the
Plot Falls. What? Dr. Oats? the Quondam Top-Evidence, the prime Doscoverer;
the Savior of the King, and Nation from Popish Massacre; He swear false? He
not to be believed? What account shall be given to God, and the World, for the
Bloodshed, and the Severities used upon his Sole, or chief Evidence? Yet it is
impossible, if Dugdale, Smith and Turbervil, swear not false, Oats should
swear true; Or if he swear not false: They should swear true: And as it is
impossible, both should swear true: So is it next to impossible, (if either
swear false) the Plot should be true* However, most assuredly one part of the
Witnesses against my Lord Stafford (without which the other could never have
found credit,) are here, by their very Compartners, proved Perjured Men.

IT is objected: They might all of them peradventure have sworn true before,
though some of them for certain swear false now.

The Papists answer: So might they all of them for certain have sworn false
before, though some of them peradventure swear true now. We are not to Judge of
Men's past, or future proceedings in order to Justice, by what they possibly
might be, but by what they probably were, or will be; And to make a rational
Judgment herein, we have no other rule to guide us in the knowledge of covert
intentions, then the Test of Overt actions. Seeing therefore these Witnesses are
proved actually Perjured* we have no rational ground to believe, but that upon
the same motives, and in the same concurrence of circumstances, they both did,
and will commit the same Crimes.

Men of lost Consciences, and desperate Fortunes, allured by gain, and
encouraged by Indempnities, regard not what, when, nor how they swear. And my
Lord Stafford had just Cause to say, Pa^e 45.
If it be permitted these men daily to frame new accusations: If easy credit be
given to all their Fables: And whatever they shall from time to time Invent,
may pass for good Evidence: Who can be secure? At this rate they may by
degrees, Impeach the whole Nation, ( both Catholics and Protestants,) for
Crimes which neither they, nor any Man else ever yet dreamed on.

It is also objected by Colledge's Party: That Dugdale, Smith and Turbervil,
are Papists in Masquerade; and now made use on to sham off the Popish Plot, by
turning it upon the Presbyterians; Wherefore though credit may be given them
when they swear against Papists, yet the same credit ought to be denied, when
they bear Testimony against his Majesty's true Protestant Subjects.

The Papists answer: first, Granted, that Dugdale, Smith and Turbervil, be real
Papists; how is it proved they were employed to sham off the Plot? Why may not
Papists, be good Witnesses against the Presbyterians, in point of Treason,
without Suspicion of a sham? Is Treason a thing so strange, and unheard of
amongst the Presbyterians? Or why should credit be given to the Witnesses when
they swear against the Papists ( who are only charged with a Design to kill the
King) and credit be denied to the same Witnesses, when they swear against those
who actually killed the King? 2ly. What the least Argument, or Appearance, is
there, that Dugdale, Smith and Turbervil are Papists, or ^opishly affected?
They profess the Protestant Religion, they frequent the Protestant Church, they
receive the Protestant Communion, they take all Oaths, and Tests can be
required of them (as was acknowledged in this very Trial) They practice neither
Fasting Penance* nor other works of Supererogation, ( the Symptoms of Popery.
Page 88.
) They pursue their former design of swearing against the Papists, with as much
obstinacy, and violence as ever (as was likewise proved in this Trial.) And is
it possible the Papists should employ, in their shams and intrigues (if they
had any) the very Persons who at the same time make it their Trade and
Livelihood, to cut their Throats? Indeed if any of the Witnesses against my
Lord Stafford be Popishly affected, it is Dr. Oats, whose present
disparagement of his fellow Evidence, Page 90.
look^ (said Mr. Solicitor General) as if he were again returning to St. Omers.

Lastly, It is argued; The Jury bringing in College Guilty of High Treason, by
that very Verdict, cleared Dugdale, Smith, and Turbervil, of the Perjury,
charged upon them by D. Oats.

It is answered: 1 st. The Jury brought in their Verdict against College, not
upon the sole Testimony of Dugdale, Smith, and Turbervil; but more especially,
upon the Evidence given by Sir William Jennings, and Mr. Masters, Persons of
known worth and honesty; As also upon pregnant proof made, (and acknowledged in
a manner by College himself,) That he, by Combination with others appeared in
open Arms, at an appointed time, and place ready for, and designing, public
Acts of Hostility, in the very presence of the King, yet without his knowledge
or authority; which by the Law is adjudged Treason. 2 ly The Papists do not
undertake to make good Oate's Charge of Perjury against Dugdale, Smith and
Turbervil; Nor theirs, against him: But only to show, that the guilt of this
horrid crime lies amongst them; And consequently, whether it be charged upon
Oats, as the chief Swearing-Master, and Original Author of the Plot, or upon
Dugdale, Smith and Turbervil, as his Pedants and Accessaries in the Imposture;
Or (as is most rational) upon both, and all of them: It follows, That the Lord
Stafford dyed by Perjury: And Roman Catholics have wrongfully suffered by
their Villainies, the loss of their Fortunes: their Estates, their Liberties,
their Lives.

Luke 29 Verse 22. Out of thine own Mouth will I Judge thee Thou Wicked
Servant.
THus I have here Briefly and Impartially set down, what occurs to me on this
occasion; And now for an Appology to the whole Treatise: Seeing the Papists, as
well as all other Men, have a natural right, (when Impeached,) to defend their
Innocence; I hope it will not be Imputed a fault in me, to have Rehearsed some
of their Arguments, as they lay within the Limits, and Sphere of my Design. If
any Persons of Depraved Judgments, shall from hence draw sinister Reflections
upon the Justice of the Nation. I declare they abuse both the Government,
Themselves, and Me by such their unjust Paraphrase.

FINIS.

